ENGLAND's JESTS Refined and Improved. Being a Choice COLLECTION OF THE
Merriest Jests, Smartest Repartees, Wittiest Sayings, and most Notable Bulls,
yet Extant. With many New Ones, never before Printed TO WHICH ARE ADDED, XIII.
Ingenious CHARACTERS Drawn to the Life.

The whole WORK compiled with great Care and Exactness: And may serve as the
Witty-Man's COMPANION, the Busie-Man's DIVERSION; and the Melancholy Man's
PHYSIC and RECREATION.

The Third Edition, with the Addition of several Jests, not permitted to be
Printed in the former Impressions.

Calculated for the Innocent spending of the Winter Evenings, By H. C.

Semel in Anno Ridet Apollo. Horat.. London, Printed for John Harris at the
Harrow in the Poultrey, 1693.

ENGLAND'S JESTS REFINED AND IMPROVED
Spectatum admissi Risum teneatis Amici Horat. London Printted for John Harris
at ye Harrow in ye Poultry



LICENSED, And Entered, According to Order.

The Preface to the READER.
READER,
AS I know and own Plain-Dealing to be a Jewel, so I were much too blame if I
did not use it with You: Therefore as a taste thereof, there were two Reasons
that chiefly induced me to compile this small Piece, and which I proposed to my
self as the end thereof, viz. Your Pleasure, and my own Profit. For let Men
pretend what they will for their Scribbling, as the Informa^ion, Instruction, or
Obligation of their Friends and Contrymen with Twenty other Reasons given
for it; I must beg their Pardons if I cannot screw up my Faith to believe 'em:
For it is too plain that Interest sways the World, and that all sorts and
degrees of Men, even from the Courtier to the Cobbler, are its Votaries. You
will not then admire if I proposed it to my self; nor do I think that I stood
in need of a Preface to convince you of it: But Custom calling for one, a Book
being without it (as our Modern Wits say) Like a House without a Porch, or a
Play without a Prologue, etc. Tho I must confess I am no great admirer of
Prefaces, looking upon 'em, I mean the Generality of 'em, (for there are some
that are Concise, Pithy and Instructive) to be for the most part Impertinent,
Superfluous, and little to the purpose; stuffed with Flattery and Ostentation,
and many times excessive long and tedious, like too much Ceremony before a good
Feast; which by its long detaining a Man, palls his Appetite: Notwithstanding
which, I was willing to give you some short account of tjis Book; which you
will find to be a choice Collection of the merriest Jests, etc. (as you may see
in the Title Page, to which I refer you) extracted from the several Authors
that have written on those Subjects: Wherein their Gold is separated from their
Dross, their Vnpolite ones are Refined, their long and tedious ones Retrenched,
their old ones rendered Modern, and those unworthy an ingenious Man's Reading,
wholly left out; The Composure thereof, having cost me no small Care and Pains,
as you may judge; that not only the reading over, but Critical Examination of
the several Books written (as aforesaid) on those Subjects, must needs amount
to. But perhaps some carping Zoilus, or severe Cato, will either blame the
Composure of those Jests, or utterly deny the usefulness of any. As to the
first, I leave it to your Candor to judge of it, knowing that if you come to
delight your Self with Ingenious Fancies, and not to Carp, you may find some in
this Collection that may answer your Expectation: But if there still remain any
that ought to be Expunged, pass 'em by; and let the Merits of the Majority
a^tone for their Defects. To the latter Objection against all manner of Jests,
I think Example and Authority will be a suffi^ient Apollogy, especially since
they do not interfere with Religion, or good Manners. But I leave the whole to
your Perusal; Hoping that as I have done what lay in my Power, to contribute to
your Pleasure and Delight, so you will do your part, and show your kind
acceptance thereof in buying it, especially when you may have it at so
Reasonable a Rate as One Shilling.

Farewell, H. C.

ENGLAND's JESTS Refined and Improved.
1.
APelles the Famous Painter, having drawn the Picture of Al^x^nder the Great on
Horseback, and presented it to him, he gave it not that Praise that so
exquisite a Piece deserved; whereupon Apelles desired a Living Horse might be
brought, who seeing the Picture, fell ^o ^awing and Neighing, taking it to be a
real Rival: Upon which Apelles ingeniously told that Great Emper^u^, That his
Horse understood Painting better than He.

2.
An Ignorant Countryman coming to Town, went to Covent Garden, to a Gentleman
to whom he was directed; who out of civility to the Country man, showed him
what was remarkable thereabouts, as the Piazza's, and several Persons of
Quaities stately Houses: At length he came to the Church, and the Countryman
pointing to it, asked the Gentleman whose House that was? He told him it was
the Lord of Hosts: The Countryman having never heard of such a Lord before,
replied, It was some Scotch Lord, he would warrant him.

3.
A Gentleman of Gray's Inn last Winter desired another of the same Inn to lend
him Bakers Chronicle for an hour or two: He sent him word* That he could not
spare it out of his Chamber, but if he pleased to come thither, he might use it
all day there. Not long after, the other Gentleman desired him to lend him his
Bellows: he sent him word, He could not spare them out of his Chamber, but if
he pleased to come thither he might use them all day long there.

4.
A Mayor of a certain Corporation dining with the Aldermen his Brethren; after
Dinner, to show his Loyalty, began his Majesty's health on one Knee, and
presented it to one of the Aldermen, whom he imagined to be no great Admirer of
Health-Drinking; The Alderman took the Glass, and pledged him on both Knees:
which the rest of his Brethren observing, the Loyal Mayor was not a little
concerned to be outdone (as he thought) by the Alderman, and asked him why he
did it not as he had begun it, on one Knee? Why truly (says the Alderman) one
Knee was in Honor of the King, and the other to ask God Forgiveness for so
doing: What ( says the Mayor) for doing the King Honor? No (says he) not for
that, but because I pledged a Health on that which I ought to pray on.

5.
A Spaniard and a Frenchman meeting in Covent Garden, after the usual
Complements passed between them, fell to disputing about Religion; Why (quoth
the Spaniard) will you contend with us about Religion? There are more Saints in
Spain then I have Hairs on my Beard: And there are more in France (said the
Frenchman) then I have Hairs on my Head and Beard too. Then said the Spaniard,
let the contest be thus decided, I will pull a Hair off your Beard, for every
Saint I name; an^ ^ou shall pluck one off mine, for every Saint you name: So
the Frenchman began, and pulled one off the Spaniards Beard, crying St. Dennis;
then the Spaniard doing the like, said St. Ignace: The Frenchman pulling
another, cry^d St. Martin; the Spaniard, St. Xavier; The Frenchman, St. Lovis;
the Spaniard, St. Terese; the Frenchman, St. Clotilde; the Spaniard, St.
Isidore; the Frenchman, St. Bun; the Spaniard pulling two at once, cried, St.
Cosme and St. Phillip; the Frenchman resolving to be revenged, plucked off a
whole Mustache, saying, The Eleven Thousand Virgins: Upon this, the Contest
ended; the Spaniard not being able to endure or parallel so great a number.

6.
A Countrey-fellow Thatching a House, had an arch Boy to serve him with Straw;
now there comes by a great Hog, and turns up his Head, as is he were listening:
says the Thatcher ^hen to the Boy, What does that Hog think now? O (says the
Witty Rogue) I Will warrant you he is hatching of Mischief. And while he was busy
at his Work on the Ladder, the Boy hunted the Hog just toward it, and justling
against it, down came the Ladder, and Man and all: Pox on you, says this
Blockhead to the Hog, it is true as the honest Boy said, you were hatching of
Mischief indeed; for I think my Shoulders out: And if ever I thatch for any
Body hereafter, I Will make my Bargain with them, that they shall all tie up
their Hogs.

7.
Two young Scholars traveling from Roan to Paris, mit a Countrey-fellow riding
upon an Ass, which brayed in such a manner, as if he had been overjoyed to be
in such learned Company: These Students thinking to put a trick on the Fellow,
said, Friend, why do you let your Brother cry so? Cannot you find out some way
to still and quiet him? The Fellow, who was none of the dullest of the Parish
that he dwelt in, answered, My Ass, Sirs, is so extremely pleased to meet with
his Relations and Old Acquaintance, that he could do no less than sing a Song
of mirth and merry glee, in testimony of your hearty Welcome to him.

8.
One told a Gentleman, That he would willingly marry, but he would have a Wife
that is perfectly good: To whom the Gentleman replied, That if none but such a
one would serve his turn, he must bespeak her, for there was no such ready made.

9.
Two young Students were in a deep dispute about the Man in the Moon, whether
he was a Gentleman or a Citi^en: and after a great many Pro's and Con's between
them, one of them very wittily solved it thus: When the Moon was at Full, then
there was a Gentleman in her; but when she appeared with two Horns, then he
might swear there was a Citizen in her.

10.
Three Soldiers talking together, were overheard by a Courtier to say thus:
One said, Had he a Thousand Pounds; he should be happier than the King, the
other said, Were he a Captain under the King, he should be happier than he: the
third said, That had he one Nights Lodging with the Queen, he should be the
happiest Man in the World. The Courtier related this to the King, and his
Majesty, for Divertisement, sent for the three Soldiers the next day before
him, and commanded them to tell him what they said the night before at such a
time. The first, fearing the Kings Displeasure, said, That he had indeed rashly
said, That if he had a thousand Pounds, he should be as happy as the King: so
the King commanded a thousand Pounds should be given him. The Second begged his
Majesty's Pardon for his bold saying, That had he a Captains Command under him,
he should be as happy as he: then the King conferred that honorable Office upon
him. Then the third fell upon his Knees, imploring his Majesty's Pardon for
that he had said, That if he lay one Night with the Queen, he should be the
happiest man in the World. Well, said the King, that is not in my power to
grant; but if you can get her consent, you shall have mine: So he brought him
before his Queen, and told his Petition; but the Queen, to show that our
desires ought to be placed on suitable Objects, caused him to be soundly whipped.

11.
A Witty Young Fellow was tried for his Life, since his Majesty's Restoration,
and being cast, they told him he must be hanged: But he pleaded in his own
defense a long time? at last desired the Judge, That if he must be hanged, he
might be hanged after the new way that Oliver was, three or four years after h^
(...) dead.

12.
One that was advised to marry a Widow, replied, That they were too Politic a
Generation for him; which he proved by Similies: Many Voyages, said he, make an
expert Seaman; many Offices, a Crafty Knave; and many Marriages, a Cunning
False Widow.

13,
A Justice of Peace overtaking a Parson upon the Road, between London and ^ow,
told his Company that he would put a Trick upon him: and so coming up to him,
said, Sir, You don't follow your Masters Rule, for he was content with an Ass,
but you have a very fine Horse: The Parson replied, the reason was, because the
King had made so many Asses Justices, that a Clergyman could not get one to
Ride on.

14.
A young Gentleman of the Temple, left a Note in the Key hole of his
Chamber Door, thus, I am gone to the Devil; but if you cannot Read, carry it to
the Stationers at the Gate, and he will do it for you.

15.
A Rich Man, in the Country, who was never thought to be one of Solomon's
Offspring, went with his Wife to see a Child of his at Nurse: when he came, he
very wisely asked the Nurse whether she was a Maid or Married? she replied, she
was Married: says he, I Will have no Married Woman, I Will have a Maid to be my
Child's Wet-Nurse; Truly Sir, says she, then you had best bespeak one at London,
for we have no such ready made here in the Country.

16.
A Valiant Fellow who had been in the West, was met by a Gentleman here, who
asked him what Exploit he had done there? he answered, That he had cut off one
of the Rebels Arms: the Gentleman replied, That it had been something if he had
cut off his Head, O said he, you must consider his Head was off before.

17.
When Metellus Nepos asked the famous Roman Orator, in a jearing way, who was
his Father? he replied, Your Mother has made that Question harder for you to
Answer,

18.
A Rich Blade, that was a very great Eater, came to a Gentleman's House to
Court his Daughter: the Gentleman out of Civility, desired him to stay and Dine
with him, which he did, and Eat very heartily: After Dinner, he began to speak
to the Lady about the matter, and having uttered several Expressions of his
Passion; he protested that he loved her as his own Soul; to whom she wittily
replied, But not so well as your Body, Sir.

19.
A Gentleman coming into London out of the Country, as he came by Stepny
Church his Horse threw him, which a young Gentlewoman seeing, fell a Laughing:
the Gentleman being angry that she jeered him, said: Pray admire not at this,
Madam, my Horse always stumbles when he sees a Whore. To which she answered
merrily, Have a care then, Sir; for if you ride into the City, you will break
your Neck.

20.
A sharping Scholar of King's College in Oxford, being in the Kitchen, and
seeing the Cook take up a Plumb-pudding out of the Pot, watching his
opportunity, while the Cook's back was turned; he whipped up the Pudding into his
own Chamber: which the Cook presently missing, runs up into the Scholars
Chamber, and searched all about for it, but could not find it; the Scholar
swore it was not in his Chamber (though the Cook smelt it) for he had
ingeniously hung it out of his Window, which when the Cook was gone, he pull^d
in, and eat as ingeniously.

21.
One desiring a pretty Maid to go to a Gentleman and Kiss him, Nay Sir (says
she very wittily) I Will nev're go to Market for that Ware which I can have
brought home to my Door.

22.
At the Battle of Newport, the Prince of Orange having the Spanish Army before
him, and the Sea behind him, said to his Soldiers, Gentlemen, if you have a
mind to live, you must do one of these two things; either eat those Spaniards,
or drink up this Sea.

23.
A London Serivener dying in Cambridg, a merry Fellow writ thus over him: Know
all Men by these presents, That I that have bound so many, am now bound fast my
self, by a Gentleman of an Ancient Family, whose Name's Mr. Death, who brought
me my last Sheet, and to my last full Point. And though I was never Guilty of
any great Wickedness, yet I often made many a Blot, which my Daughter Pen was
the occasion of: I gave no bad Example to any, but good Copies to all: I was
not unlearned neither, because I always dealt in good Letters, and was a
Justice of Peace in my own Dominions; and though I could not hang (except an
Arse sometimes, when my own money was to be Paid) yet I could draw: I made all
Bondmen but my Apprentices, for those I made Free: And after I had finished
all my Letters, this Mr. Death threw some dust upon 'em, and as I was making
Bonds, assaulted me with Bills, and at last Seal^d the Letters of my Eyes quite
up, and then sent me away to my long-home.

24.
A Welsh-man that was condemned to be Hanged, just before he was to be turned
off, the Hangman asked him if he had any thing to say; he answered he had a
desire to speak with some of his Contrymen, before he died (if there were
any there) so the Hangman called to know if there were any there he should hold
up his Hand. It so happened that there was one there, so the Hangman told him
that the poor Man would speak with him; so he drew near, and the Welsh-man
asked him if he knew such and such in Wales, he replied he did; Then, says the
Welsh-man, You know my Father and Mother, who I am certain will be very sorry
to hear of my Misfortune; but pray, to comfort them, tell them that I dye a
^ery good Christian, and am informed that I shall go to Heaven, and I hope they
will follow me thither the same way.

25.
When Charles the Bald was Emperor and King of France, one Johannes Eringen, a
Scotch-man, for his great Learning had the honor to sit at Table with the
Emperor; but being very ungentiel in his behavior, the Emperor asked him,
Quid interest inter Scotum and Sotum? Which in English is, What Is the
difference between a Scot, and a Sot? To which he readily, (but rudely)
answered, Mensa, that is, The Table: thereby calling the King Sot, by craft.

26.
Another time this Johannes, who was but of little Stature, dined at the King's
Table, with two other Scholars who were tall men. The Emperor set him a Dish
with two great Fishes, and one small one, bidding him divide them between
himself and the two Scholars; whereupon Johannes took the two large Fishes,
and laid them on his own Plate, and gave the small one to the two Scholars. The
Emperor smiling, said, In says, Mr. Johannes you are no equal Divider: That Is
your Highnesses mistake (said he) and pointing to himself and the two great
^^shes, said, Here are two great, and one ^^ttle; and on the other side, is one
little, and two great.

27.
One going in the dark, held both ^is Arms out to save his face, and co^ing
accidentally against the Door, which it seems stood slanting out, he ^it his
Nose a good blow against it, ^ey ho, says he, I never thought my Nose ^as
longer than my Arms till now; but if ^ver I go in the Dark again, I Will have a
^andle in my hand.

28.
A noted Country Gentleman bla^ing a Comical Poet for bringing a ^eud
debauched Ruffian on the Stage, and so gave bad Example to young ^en, Truly,
Sir, said he, I brought such man on, but I hanged him before he went ^ff, and
so gave them a good example.

29.
An Englishman and his Wife lodg^ng at a French-mans House in Paris, ^he
Englishman's Wife cried out in the ^ight; so he ran up stairs to acquaint ^he
Midwife who lay there, of his ^ives Condition, and went down to ^^form his
Landlord and Landlady of it; so he stood by their bedside shivering in his
shirt, for it was in a cold winter night; but could not speak F^ench and so had
much a do to make them understand him; at last he did: his Landlady pitying
him, said to her Husband, Prithee, my Dear, let him come into Bed to us, and
lie till day light, seeing it is so cold, and that he cannot in Civility go
into his own Chamber; you need not fear any thing since you are in Bed with me:
so he consented to it, and the Englishman came and lay down on the other side
of the Woman; the Frenchman being tired soon fell fast asleep, the Englishman
presently grew warm, and began to Caress the French-woman; the motion of the
Bed, which was caused by their amorous Engagement, wak^d her Husband, he called
out, Wife, Wife, What are you doing? Why, what would you have me do, said she,
if I should speak to him, you know he cannot understand a word of our Language.

30.
A Country Gentleman being at Dinner in London, with several Gentlemen of his
acquaintance, one of them whose Name was Chambers, thinking to put a Joque upon
him, asked him why he wou^d not live in London in the Winter, where he might
find all sorts of Company to fit his Humor, I would Sir, says he, if I could
find a House fit for my turn. Says Chambers, I can help you to one that has
three Rooms of a Floor, but it is built of Wood. Where is it, says the
Gentleman? Says he, at Tyburn; It Is true indeed, says the Gentleman, it is a
convenient House, and stands in a good Air; for it will quickly Cure a Man of
all Diseases, and for a House that is but one Storyhigh, it is a very good one,
and wants nothing in it but Chambers.

31.
An extravagant young Heir, having sold all his Lands to maintain his
Debauchery, fell Sick and sent for a Physician; who perceiving that his
Distemper arose from ill Humors, contracted by his Intemperunce, ordered him
to be let Blood, and coming to see it, he told him it was very green. Alas Sir,
says he, how can it be otherwise, when I have Eaten up all my Meadows and
Cornfieldsd.

32.
A Doctor of Divinity that had a good Estate, and no Child, resolved to make
himself memorable to posterity, by some public Charity; and so ordered a
Cau^-way to be made to a Market Town, for the secu^ity of Travelers in the
Fenny Country. As the Laborers were at Work, the Doctor being there to
oversee them, a Nobleman came by, who had no great esteem for Men of his Coat,
and said jearingly, Doctor, for all the Cost you have been at, I don't think
this is the way to Heaven. I am of your Mind (quoth the Doctor) for then I
could not have expected to meet your Lordship here.

33.
A Quaker being in Bed with his Wife, in the middle of the Night she pulled
him, saying thus, Awake, Ebenezer, awake: What say thou the Wife of my
Bosom, says he? Arise quickly, says she, and go into the next Room, and nigh
unto the place that pays Tribute to Caesar, there stands a Wicker-Chair,
thereon hangs my Red Petticoat; take from thence two Fart^ings, and go to our
Friend Theophilus, the Tallow-Chandler, and buy therewith two Candles; light
one of them, and spring in hastily, for I fear our youngest Son Aminadab has
Beshit himself.

24.
A Nun reading at the bottom of a Book, it is good to know all things, was
resolved to try a Man; but turning over she found, but not to use them, at
which she was not a little troubled to be so soon deprived of her so delectable
expected enjoyment.

25.
A Constable carrying a big bellied wench before a Justice, said to him; An't
please your Worship I have brought you a Maid-with Child: whereupon the wench
called him Fool and Knave; being reproved by the Justice, she answered thus:
Sir, this Constable must be one of them; for if I am a M^id, he is a Fool to
think I can be with Child: and if I am not with Child, he is a Knave f^r saying
so.

36.
Two Gentlemen quarrelling, the one gave the other a Challenge to meet him at
six a Clock the next morning at such a pla^^ upon his Honor: Hang Honor, says
the other, for we both are but Worshipful; and you know '^is not my custom, and
I know it is not yours neither, to rise before Eleven or Twelve a Clock;
therefore pray let us consider whether we should break our Rest to break our
Limbs. The other told him, If he did not meet him, he would Post him: Well, said he
to him, if you do, I Will ride Post out of Town, and stay there till your furie's
over.

37.
An Oxford Scholar going along Fleetstreet, was met by a huffing Fop, who
thrusting between the wall and him, jostl'd him almost to the Kennel, saying
(with a no Sir Courtly-Face) I don't use to give the Wall to every Sawcey
Loggerhead: To whom the Scholar, with Cap in hand, replied smartly, But I do.

38.
A Proper Tall Gentleman that had married a very little Woman to his Wife,
being asked the reason of it, he replied, That of all Evils, it was always the
best to choose the least.

39.
A Sergeant kneeling before the King, to have a Bill si^^'d, being troubled
with the Wind Chollick; gave vent to his Posteriors in three or four loud
Vollys: the King hearing, smileingly says: I never understood till now that a
Sergeant had authority to let go a Prisoner, it being against the Law. An't
please your Majesty, says the Sergeant, he was a turbulent Rogue, and crept
through the Keyhole, and necessity has no Law.

40.
A Country man coming up to London, a little after the rebuilding of it, to
see a Friend who made great Complaint of his own particular loss, as well as of
the loss of so stately a City: As for your own loss, says the Country man, I
am very sorry for it, but as for the loss of your City, I cannot tell what to
say; for who would be troubled to have a good new suit for an old one?

41.
Cardinal Woolsey being to pa^s through St. Paul's Church, his Gentleman went
before, to make a way for him, and coming to a poor Priest kneeling at Prayers
in the way, he said to him, Room for my Lord Cardinal's Grace: No says he, the
Pope is not dead yet, what should he do there? remove out of your place, says
he, to make way, why says he? do you think My Lord will take my place.

An Arch Wag speaking of the late dreadful Fire of London, said, Cannon-street
roared, Wood-street was burnt to Ashes, Bread-street was burnt to a Coal,
Pie-Corner was over-bak'd, and Snow-hill was melted down.

43.
A Man Thatching a House in the Country, and the Thatch being loose under him,
his Feet slipped, and still as he found himself falling, catching hold of the
Thatch which failed him, he cried Lord bless me, Lord help me, etc. but coming
to the Ridge of the House, and seeing what a great way it was to the ground; Z
-- ds, says he, what a confounded fall am I like to have.

44.
An old Gentleman was chid by a neighbor for marrying a young Girl; to whom
he replied, She Will be a Woman to morrow; for, says he, Wives are young men's
Mistresses, Middled-ag'd men's Companions, and old men's Nurses; and will you
blame a man to have a Nurse in his old Age? No, says he, I don't blame you for
having a Nurse, but for your not Providing for Heaven; but that your Wife must
do, for says he, Don't you know whether all Cuckolds go? O, says the old
Gentleman, Now you put me in mind on it, it is true; for I have heard your Wife
say some years ago, That she was sure her husband would go to Heaven; and now I
find which way; and mum for that, my dear neighbor too.

45.
A certain Woman brought a man before the Duke of Millan, and accused him for
killing her Son, complaining of her great loss by it, saying that nothing in
the World was so dear to her; The poor man excused himself as well as he could,
telling his Excellency that he did not design to hurt her Son; but that the
head of his Hatchet flew off, as he was cleaving some Wood, and bit him
accidentally on the head, and proved his Death: Well says the Duke to the
Woman, I am willing that thou should have all the reasonable satisfaction in
the World, therefore, for repairing thy loss: he shall lie with Thee and get
thee such another Son: which stopped the woman's mouth, that s^e went away without
speaking a word more, and never troubled the man after* wards.

46.
A Highway-man being to be hanged in a Country Town, Order was sent to the
Carpenter to make a Gallows; which he neglecting to do, the Execution was
forced to be deferred, for which the Judge was not a little angry, who sending
for the Carpenter, asked him why he had not done it? Why Sir, said he, I have
done two or three already, but was never paid for them; but had I known it had
been for your Worship, I would have left all other business to have done it.

47.
A Scotchman going along the street, jostles a Gentleman, The Gentleman said to
him, Goddamn you. The Scotchman replied, God bless you Sir, may neither of them
light.

48.
One asked a Gentleman if he would venture any thing at the Lottery this Fair, and
what he won, his Wife should have for her fairing? No, says the Gentlemen, for
there is not one in forty has any luck but Cuckolds; which his sweet Wife
hearing, said, Dear Husband, p^ay venture, for I Am sure you will have good luck.

49.
A Cambridge Scholar crossing King James's Steed, when he was riding a
Hunting: The King was in a great Passion at it, and rid after him with his
drawn Sword, and being going to cut him over the Pate: the Scholar said to
him, Pray Sir, don't Knight me till my Elder Brothers Dead: for I am but a
younger Brother: at which witty saying, the King was pacified and pleased, and
gave him a Guinney for his ingenuity.

50.
A silly Fellow hearing a Ladys servants call her Madam, at every word, he
thought to be more mannerly than they, and therefore made an Addition of
Mistress, to it, saying, Mistress Madam, an't please your Ladyship.

51.
The late engenious Bishop Wilkins having in his juvinal days written a Book,
inti^uled the World in the Moon, wherein he allotted Land to several Princes in
the World, and particularly a considerable quantity to our late King. After
Dinner one day the K. having a mind to be merry, said to the Bishop, I have
seen a Book of yours wherein you allot me a great deal of Land in the World in
the Moon; now it being so far off, and troublesome to look after, I will sell
it you if you please; to whom the Bishop repli^d, I thank your Majesty, but I
don't care to meddle with Crown Lands.

52.
At another time the Countess of Newcastle being a whimsical Lady, asked this
Bishop Wilkins, how she should get up into the World in the Moon which he had
discovered: For say^ she, it must certainly be a very great Iourny thither, and
unless one can rest by the way, it is impossible to get thither: Oh Madam says
the Bishop, your Ladyship has built so many Castles in the Air, that you may
rest in one of them.

53.
One that had a confounded Scold to his Wife, being continually tromented with
the perpetual Clack of her Tongue, wished one day, That she was in Heaven; she
knowing thereby that he had a mind to be rid of her, in a great rage told him,
she had rather see him hanged first.

54.
A Lords Son in the North, that was much addicted to the Pleasures of Venus,
haunted all the pretty Girls thereabouts, but especially one above the rest,
that was a very handsome Maid, and a Farmers Daughter who was his Fathers
Tenent; which gave him the more liberty of Courting her; and having inpertuned
her very much, yet she would not grant: At last he promised her Marriage, and
thereby had the pleasure of Enjoyment: But his Father and Mother fearing that
he would make up a Match with the Farmers Daughter, by going so often thither,
sent to another Lord that lived five Miles off, to Treat with him for his
Daughter, who was a pretty Woman also, for his Son. So they soon agreed, and
the Marriage day was appointed, and the Young Blade was Riding with his Man to
the Bride-House; but the Farmer and his Daughter had way laid him. The Farmer
asked him, What satisfaction he should have for the wrong he had done his
Daughter? Well, says he, There Is forty Guinneys for you, and I Will give you a
Bond, to make it up a hundred Pounds, to be paid in three Months, if you will be
contended. So the Bond was making under the Hedge, and the People at the
Bride-House admiring at his stay, sent one to see; who when he came, found him
Indenting with the Farmer and his Daughter under the Hedge. So when he had do^e^
(...) Rid away to the Bride-House as fast as he could Gallop, and soon afte^
was Ma^^^^ to the Lady; and when they were a bed together, he began to Kiss
her: Pray, says she, resolve me one Question first: What made you under the
Hegd with the Farmer and his Daughter so long? Why^ says he, that does not
concern you at all Well, says she, I will know, or else you and I shall be at a
distance. Why then, says he, if you will not be angry, I Will tell you. Well, I will
not, says she, let it be what it will. Why then, says he, I got the Farmers
Daughter with Child, and she was such a Fool to tell her Father of it. So she
was by my Troth, says she, for my Fathers Man got me with Child above a
Twelvemonth ago, and you are the first that ever I told of it.

55.
The Bishop of Mentz, had a merry Fellow to his Tenant, who was deep in Arreers
for Rent, to whom the Bishop sent his Steward, who told him that unless he took
more care to pay his Rent, the Bishop would take a Course with him; to whom the
Fellow replied, he did not value the Bishop, for he knew how to keep out of his
Clutches: Why, says the Stward, you must go out of the Bishopwrick then, no
replied the Fellow, I wont; for I have forty lurking places about the Diocese
where he will never find me: where can they be, I beseech you, says the
Steward, why there is one in every Church, says he; Then he will quickly find you
out, says the other, for he is there once a Week at least. O but, says the
Fellew, I Will hide my self in one of the Pulpits, where I Am sure he will not come
in have.

56.
An Ignorant Fellow, having got in to be a Reader in a Countrey-Church; the
first Chapter of Matthew being appointed to be Read, which contains the
Genealogy, and is full of hard Names: He began with Abraham begat Isaac, and so
read on three or four more, till he was quite nonplus'd* but casting his Eyes
forward, And so, says he, they begat one another to the end of the Chapter.

57.
A Knight in North^mpton S^ire, that had three Sons, and no great Estate, told
his young^st Son that he must needs bind him an Apprentice, and bid him choose
his Trade. The Boy being of a smart and ingenious temper, told his Father he would
be a Tanner. Push, says he, that is a nasty Trady: That Is true, says he; but yet
it is the most convenient Trade for me of any; because you have but a little to
give me, and three Hides will set me up. What Hides are those, says his Father?
Why Sir, Replied the Boy, Yours and my two Brothers.

58.
An Impudent Fellow having several Indictments brought against him, the Judge
seeing the Notoriousness of his Crimes, said, Sirrah, if you ben't Hanged, I Will
be Hanged for you: To whom the Rogue replied, I thank your Honor, for your
kind Offer; pray be not out of the way when that time comes.

59.
A Gentleman of Lincoln's Inn, hearing of the Death of his Father, in the
Country was not a little concerned, as not knowing how he had left his Estate.
An I^timate F^iend of his seeing him, said, Cheer up, Jack; if your Father has
left you a good E^tate, you have no great cause to grieve; and if he has given
you nothing, who'd grieve for such a Father?

60.
A Ranting Bully Drinking a Health to a Sober Man, he refus^d to Pledge ^im;
upon which ^e wished this Curse might light upon him. That in a dark and cold
Rainy Night, he were set upon a tired Jade, bare Ridg'd, in a dirty Lane, with
a Pocky Whore behind him, and his own Bones rotten, and seven Miles from any
House, not knowing one step of the way, and with never a Penny in his Purse,
both Hungry and Thirsty. Hold Sir, says the Man, there is enough already: I
thank you for your good wishes; but hope in a little time you will enjoy 'em all
your self.

61.
An Arch Fellow in Oxford, took a great many Rams horns in his Basket, and went
about the City with them, crying, Fair Cherries in Winter; this made many
People call to him, and amongst the rest a Lawyer, who seeing his Ware, laughed
at him, saying, You Fool, who do you think will buy your Horns of you? O Sir,
replie^ he, Though you are provided, yet I may meet with some that are not.

62.
A Gentleman told his Cook that he would dine on a Venison Pasty, and so
ordered him to provide one; which he did, with two or three other dishes
preliminary to it. So when the dinner was ready, he brought it up in order; the
first dish was a good Surloin of Beef, which he set upon the Table before the
Gentleman, which as soon as the Cooks back was turned, he took and threw out of
the Window; then the Cook brought up the second Course, which was a Leg of
Mutton and Colly-flowers, which he sent out of the Window after the other; then
the Cook brought up the Venison Pasty, and threw it out of the Window, after
the other two dishes; which his Master storming at him for, asked him the
reason of it, says he, I thought your Worship intended to dine below, because
you sent the dishes down.

63.
Two Persons who had no great kindness for one another, were invited to dinner
together with a Knight, who had a mind to be merry. Now they were both pretty
witty; but one was slovenly, and the other spruce and neat: the spruce man was
the^e first, and when the other came, he ran to the door to salute him and
conduct him in, and thinking to make a Jest on his uncourtly habit, started
back, saying, I thought to have met a worthy Doctor; but I doubt in his stead I
accost a Butcher. The Doctor (who very well understood Repartees) answered,
Sir, I cannot blame you for being surprised, because it is natural for horned
Beasts to dread the Butcher: which to one married under Capricorn, was a very
close Repartee.

64.
One held a Paradox, that Wise Men were the greatest Liars; for says he, the
Proverb says, Children and Fools speak Truth.

65.
A certain Person speaking unseemly Words before a Gentlewoman, she asked him
what Profession he was of? Madam, says he, I am a Civil Lawyer. Alas, Sir,
replied she then, If Civil Lawyers are such rude People, I wonder what other
Lawyers are.

66.
Socrates being asked Why he suffere^ so much brawling from his Wife: says he,
Why do you suffer so much kackling of your Hens? Because they lay Eggs, says
he. And I from my Wife, replied Socrates, because she bears Children.

67.
At a Market Town in Somersets^ire, there lived a Quaker that was a Barber, to
whom the Parson of the Parish came, dem^nding fif^een Shilli^gs of him for
Tithe; The Quaker told him he owed him none, nor none would he pay him: He told
him it was his due, and if he would not give it him by fair means, he'^ make
him do it by foul. The Quaker asked him for what it was due? he told him for
Preaching and Reading Divine Service, and oother Ministerial Duties in the
Church: Why, says the Quaker, I never came there: You might if you would, says
the Parson, the Door stands open. Soon after the Quaker hearing that he was
s^ing him for the money, enters an Action also against the Parson for fifteen
Shillings; the Parson hearing of it, went and asked him how he came to owe him
fifteen Shillings? he told him for Trimmin^. Why, says the Parson, I was never
Trimmed by you in my life: You might if you would, said the Quaker'* my Door
stands open.

68.
A Doctor of Physic in Oxford that used to salute every one he met, with these
Words, I am very glad to see you well; A Student, a Gentleman of good quality,
whom he so greeted, told him ingeniously, He believed he lied, for the World
went ill with him when People were well.

69.
O^e persuaded a Man to hang his Dog that had done some mischief, I am loath to
hang him, says he, but I Will go amongst his Neighbors and give him an ill-name,
and that is as bad.

70.
A French Captain having been a long time closely Besieged in a place where for
four months he eat nothing but Horseflesh; at length being relieved, he
repaired to his former Mistress, thinking to enjoy the same da^liances and
caresses that he was formerly blessed with; But she having been informed how he
had fa^ed since his departure; Hold, says she, Monsieur; for though I have a
mind to be gotten with Child, yet I am resolved never to be gotten with Colt.

71.
A covetous Tradesman had a mind to be married, but was afraid of the charge of
having Children too fast; at last he resolved to be married, and agreed with
his Wife that they would lie together but once a Fortnight; and, says he, I
intend to get every Fortnight a Joy^t of the Child from Head to Foot; so by
that device we shall not have too many Children: But I do it, my Dear, to ease
thee in the bearing of them, which you know, would be no small trouble to you.
After Marriage, it seems he lay with her the first Night, and I cannot tell how
it came about, but at forty Weeks end she was brought to bed of a brave Boy.
Why how now Wife? says he, this is not according to my Expectation: Yes
Husband, says she, but I may thank good Neighbors, or else for ought I know we
might have had a deformed Child.

72.
The King of Spain coming into one of his chief Cities, the Mayor came to make
a Speech, and began thus: When the King of Peace rode to Jerusalem; but being
dashed out of Countenance, he said again, When the King of Peace rode to
Jerusalem; and so the third time, but could not proceed: Then the King turning
to his Cou^tiers, said, We may easily ima^gine this Man to be an Ass by the
Consequent.

73.
Mr. Philemo^ Holland having Translated several Books, as Plutarch, Pliny,
Livy, Cambden, etc. at length he Translated S^etonius Tranquillus into English;
upon which, an ingenious Blade writ this Distich on him: Phliemon with
Translations does so fill us.
He will not let Suetonius be Tranquillus.


74.
A Gentleman going into a Church in London* when they were chaunting
Sternhold's and Hopkin's Psalms, which are not the most Mellodious in the
World, the Words were these, Have mercy upon us Miserable Sinners: Ay, (says
he) they might as well h^ve s^id, H^ve mercy upon us Miserable Singers.

75.
Two Sparks standing together in the Cloys^ers, seeing a pretty Lady pals by,
says one of them. There goes the handsomest Lady that ever I saw in my Life:
She hearing him, turned back, and seeing him very ugly, said, Sir, I would I
could in way of Requital say as much of you: Faith, says he, so you may, and
Lie as I did.

76.
A Poor man in Smithfield having a mind to bind his Son to a Butcher; but being
^olicitous to get a Master of whom he might learn his Trade well, he asked his
Friend, who was an Ingenious Gentleman, and had great Acquaintance, to whom he
should Bind him? O, says he, there is a Physician hard by you, Bind him to him;
for he kills more than all beside in the Town.

77.
A Gallant, Dining at a Friends House, had promised a Lady to meet her in the
Afternoon; but being engaged after Dinner at Cards, could not fairly get away;
wherefore he called his Boy, and sent him to the Lady to excuse him; whispering
him in the Ear, that whatever Answer the Lady returned, he should tell it him
as if it were from a Man; that the Company might not know. So the Boy went on
his Errand, and a little after returned to his Master, who asked him aloud
before the Company* What was the Gentleman at home? Yes Sir, answered the Boy:
Well, what said he to you: He said, Sir, you might appoint any other time: What
was he doi^g, says the Gentleman? He was putting on his Hood and Scarf, to go
to Mass, says the Boy, which discovered the Intreague, and set them all a
L^ughing.

78.
A Woman asking her Husband for some Money to buy a broad Silver and Gold Lace,
to put on her Petticoat, he replied thus to her, If I once make you a
Gold-finch, you will prove a Wag-tail all your Life after.

79.
One that was a great Eater, sitting down to Supper, complained that he had
lost his Stomach, Well says a merry Fellow that was there, If a Poor Man has
found it, he will be utterly undone.

80.
A Bishop being informed by hi^ Steward of the greatness of his Expense, that
it was over proportionable to his Estate; and that particularly the number of
his Servants was too great: The Bishop ordered him to draw up a Note, of such
as were necessary, and such as were not; which being done, he Summoned all his
Servants together, and reading the Note, separated them; and then said, These I
have need of, and therefore they must continue; those have need of me, and
therefore they must continue also.

81.
Just after the late Kings Restoration, when going to Church came to be in
fashion, an old Woman was advised by her Neighbors to go to Church; for fear
of being Presented, she was resolved to go once a month to save her Bacon: So
Dressing her self very fine, she came into the Church just at the Expiration of
the Letany, and the Parson having said, Lord have Mercy upon us, and then the
People Responding thereunto; she Cried out aloud, I never was here before in my
Life, an^ since you make such a Wonderment at it, I will never come again.

82.
Two Gentlemen walking in Cheapside, in Oliver's time, saw the Sign of the
Golden-Cross; One of them proffered to lay two Bottles of Wine with the other,
that he would make the master of the Shop pull down the Sign: The Wager being
laid, he pulls off his Hat, and makes half a dozen Legs to the Sign, first on
one side, and then on the other, which the Master of the Shop seeking, thinking
to prevent his future Superstition, suddenly pulled down his Sign, whereby the
Gentleman won his two Bottles of Wine.

83.
A Minister finding his Parishioners to be Ignorant, was resolved to Examine
and Instruct them at home; so going to an Ancient Woman's House, amongst other
Questions, he asked her how many Commandments there were? She told him she
could not tell: He told her there were Ten: Whereat she replied, A Jolly
Company! God Bless you and them both together: Well, but Neighbor (says he) Do
you think you can keep these Commandments? Ah! God Bless you, Sir, (said she) I
am a poor Woman, and can ha^dly keep my self; I hope you will not put me to the
Charge of keeping any of the Commandments for you.

84.
Going to another of them, ^e asked her, who made her? She Replied, She did not
know: A Child standing by, he asked him the same Question, who Answered, God;
whereupon the Parson Reproving the Old Woman, told her it was a shame that she
should be so Ignorant, who had lived to those Years, and that little Child
could tell Marry, quoth she, I am old Woman, and have been made a great while,
and he was made but the other day; he may well tell who made him.

85.
A Quaker went to sell a Horse in Smithfield, a Chapman who looked on the
Horse, complained of his Head; Quoth the Quaker, He that made that Head, will not
learn of thee to make Heads. Why Friend, says the other, may I not speak of thy
Horses faults if I see them? Nay, said he* for he sees none in thee, why
should thou see any in him. The Man was so taken with the bluntness of the
Quaker, that he bought his Horse; which, as he had told him before, was stark
blind.

86.
Two Gentleman Riding on the Road, espi^d at a distance an old Woman a doing
her necessary occasion, by a Hedge side; one of them offered a Bottle of Wine,
that she would turn and see what she had done; they agreed on the Wager, and
she accordingly did. Well, says the Loser, I Will ask her why she did so when I
come to her; then Riding up to her, Well, good Woman, said he, I see you have
been Evacuating your self; Did you so? quoth she, you see no more with your
Eyes, then you may carry away in your Mouth. But pray Mrs. said the Gentle^an,
what made you look back on it, when you had done? To see if there were enough
for you Both, Sirs, replied she.

87.
A Young Esquire, who had more Money than Wit, Traveling into Spain to a
University, where a Man might be made a Doctor for Money, had a mind to take
his Degrees; so for his better Reception, he invited the Doctor of the Chair to
Supper, where being a little flushed with the expectation of his new Honor, he
asked the Doctor if he would take Money to make his Horse a Doctor too? Yes,
says he, I may make a Horse a Doctor, as well as an Ass; and so by consequence
your Horse as well as your self.

88.
An Impertinent Fellow told a Gentleman, that he was mad for doing a thing with
less Judgment then he ought to have done, and that he ought to be sent to
Bedlam to be cured of Frenzy; and went on at that rate, till the Gentleman
wittily answered, That he admired as much, why (as in every Commonwealth there
was provided a Bedlam for Madmen) there was never any place allotted for Fools.

89.
A merry Archer coming into the Market on a Market day, necked an Arrow as if
he intended to Shoot, and said, with a ^oud Voice, Now have at a Cuckold. A
Woman thinking he aimed that way, and her Husband being by her, cries out,
Stand away Husband, stand aw^y Husband: Why you silly Jade (says he) I am no
Cuckold, am I? No, no, (quoth she) but who knows how a confonnded Arrow may
glance?

90.
A Farmer in Essex, who for his Means was made a Knight, and his Wife thereby
growing very Gallant and Fine; a Jocose Gentleman told his Worship, That he did
not do well, in spoiling a Good Wife, to make a Mad-Dame.

91.
A merry Gentleman seeing a great Dish of Broth brought to the Table, with a
little Chop of Mutton in the middle of it, began hastily to unbutton his
Doublet: one asking him the meaning of it; I mean (says he) to swim through
this Sea of Pottage, to that Island of Mutton.

92.
A merry Fellow Riding with his Master, he desired to ask him a Question; his
Master knowing him to be a jocose witty Rogue, gave him leave: Why then, Sir,
said he, you see a Horse and an Ass yonder feeding together: now suppose you
were forced to be a Beast, which of those two would ^ou be? You Fool, said the
Master, I would be a Horse, as being the noble^ and more generous Creature: I
am of another Opinion, said the Man, for I would be an Ass: His Master being
pleased with the Humor, asked his reason? Why, said he, I have often seen an
Ass Ride the Great Ho^^e, strut briskly before his Company, be made a Justice,
have the honor of Knighthood conferred on him, and often Elected Mayor of a
Corporation; but I never knew a Horse capable of any of these Preferments.

92.
An Ignorant Country Fellow coming along Paternoster-Row, had occasion to
change a Half-Crown into small money, and looking over a Grate which stood on
the Stall, there sat a large Monkey, whom he prayed to change his money; the
Monkey took it, and put it into the Till of the Compter, where he had observed
money to be put, and then came and Grinn'd at the M^^; who being in a passion,
made a noise at the Door, whereat the man of the Shop, coming into the Shop,
asked him what was the matter? Sir, said he, I gave your Son half a Crown to
change, and he will not give it me again, b^t laughs at me, and will not give
me one word of answer, tho I have asked him for it many a time.

94.
Two Friends meeting, one being overjoyed to see the other* Hark you Sir, said
he, Between you and I, my Wife's with Child. Faith, cried the other, you're a
liar, for I have not seen her this twelve Months.

95.
Two Persons who had been formerly acquainted, but had not seen each other a
great while, meeting on the Road, one asked the other how he did, he told him,
He was very well, and was Married since he saw him: the other replied, That was
wel^ indeed: not so well neither, said he, for I have M^rried a Shrew. That Is
ill, said the other. Not so ill neither, said he, for I had 2000 Pounds with
her. That Is well again, said his Friend. Not so well neither, for I laid it out
in Sheep, and they died of the Rot. That was ill indeed, said the other. Not so
ill neither, said he, for I sold the Skins for more money then the Sheep cost.
That was well indeed, quoth his Friend. Not so well neither, said he, for I
laid out my money in a House and it was burned. That Is very ill, said the
other. Not so ill neither, said he, for my Wife was burned in it.

96.
One that had been very much vexed in Lawsuits, went to Tyburn one day to see
the Execution, and vowed, That 'twas better to have to do with Tyburn, then
Westminster H^ll; for there Suits hang half a year, but at Tyburn half an hours
hanging ends all.

97.
A young Country Esquire, who you must think never read Cook upon Littleton,
etc. had a mind to borrow some money privately, for which he was to give a
Bond, and hearing it run, Be it known unto all men; Hey boys! says he, if all
men must know it, then I Am sure it will come to my Fathers Ear; therefore I
will have no such Bond drawn.

98.
A Handsome young Widow having lately Bu^^ed an old grave Husband, called Old
Simon, had been so used to ^ Bedfellow, that she could not sleep without one;
but could endure the thoughts of none but her dear Husband; wherefore she
ordered a Carver to make her Husbands Statue as near as he could; which every
Night (being w^ll warmed) had a Shirt and Nightcap put on, and was laid by her
in Remembrance of her Husband, that she might, at least, embrace him in
Effigy. This Trade had lasted ever since her Husbands Death, and she would not
admit the Cour^ship of any S^iter, till at last a young Gentleman who was
inflamed with no small passion for her, had by the help of his Wit, and some
good Angels preva^led with her Maid to lay him one Night in the place of Old
Simon: So the Widow came to bed to him, and casting her hand over her dear
S^atue (as she thought) she felt a more agreeable warmth than usual; nay, she
fancied 'twas alive and had motion; She was not frighted at it (which is not a
little wonderful) but by degrees crept closer and closer to her Side-mate, till
at length they were locked in mutual embraces; by which she with pleasure found
that it was not her Wooden Bedfellow. In the Morning the Maid called at the
Chamber Door, as she u^^d to do; Madam, what will you please to have for Dinner
to Day? she replied, Roast the Goose, and the two Pheasants that were brought in
Yesterday, Boil a Leg of Mutton and Colly-flowers, and get a good Dish of Tarts
and Custards, and a Dish of good dried Fruit. Madam, says the Maid, I think we
have hardly Billers enough for a quick fire. You may burn Old Simon, says she,
burn Old Simon.

99.
A young Buxom Maid, that was newly Married to an old Man (by her covetous
Father for money (was very melancholy; which a merry Fellow seeing, to comfort
her, said, Be of good Cheer, my pretty dear Rogue, for an old Horse will
perform as good as Journey as a young one, She Smirking and Sighing said,
withal stroaking down her Belly, But not in this Road, Sir.

100.
A Gentleman that was a Lawyer, coming up to London, to the Term, met a plain
Countryman, and after the usual Complement, of well met, etc. says the
Gentleman, Pray Friend answer me this Question, Which are the greatest Wonders
in the World? To which, after a little consideration, he dryly Replied, Women's
and Lawyers Tongues; for, says he, they always lie, yet never lie still.

101.
A Gentleman Riding on the Road, overtook a young brisk Country Lass, who
after some time Traveling together, consented to his Amors; the Man being
conscious of what he had done, and how Prejudicial it might prove to the Maid;
told her, if any thing came of their Endeavors, she should hear of him at a
certain place in London: It Is no matter Sir, said she, I am to be married on
Monday.

102.
An ignorant old woman in the Country, hearing a Minister Preach on the
Passion of Christ, of the Cruel and Barbarous Death that the Jews put him to,
wept grievously; and when the Minister had done, she came to him, and asked him
how long ago it was since this sad thing was done? The Minister told her it,
was Sixteen hundred Years since: O then, says the Woman, being a little
revived, if it be so long ago, I hope in God it may not be true.

103.
A brisk young Woman going to her Husbands Funeral, a Gentleman comes and
whispers her in the Ear, proffering his Service in way of Courtship: She
thanked him very kindly, but told him, He came too late; for says she, I was
Yesterday made sure to another.

104.
A Citizen Traveling into the Country, came into a very good Inn, where the
Master of the House was Complaisant to him, showing all his conveniences;
which were so far beyond the common I^ns, that he told him, It was a House for
a Nobleman; at which the Innkeeper fell into a great Passion, calling him
Rascal, and abusive Fellow. The Gentleman not being pleased with his
Entertainment, went to the next House in the same Town; where telling his Host
the business, he informed him, That the Man had lately Broke, and Paid but a
Noble in the Pound of his Debts, which had Enabled him to Build that spacious
House.

105.
An Amorous Gentleman in Paris, Playing under his Mistresses Window with a
Lute, she commanded her Servants to throw Stones at him, which he took in good
part, and esteemed as a great Grace, fancying himself like Orpheus; saying, The
Stones danced after his Music.

106.
A Wine Cooper in Mark Lane, taking a Gentleman down into his Cellar to Treat
him, he finding no Seat there for him to sit on, asked him the reason of it:
Why, says the Wine-Cooper, I will have no Man here Drink longer than he can
stand.

107.
A Citizen of London had for a long time been Jealous of his Wife, mistrusting
her Chastity, but had no real proof of it; till at length he resolving to have
an ocular Demonstration, pretends to go into the Country, but returns the same
Night; and coming into the House, looks through the Door into his Wives
Chamber, and sees a brisk Spark Caressing her in an Amorous manner. Having thus
satisfied his Curiosity, he retires, resolving to discipline her the next day:
So he comes to her, and after some little Discourse, taxes her with the last
Nights Recreation. She denies it, and he affirms it, telling her that he saw it
with his own Eyes: to which she wittily and simperingly said, What, my Dear!
Will Not you believe your own dear Wife, before your own Eyes?

108.
Two young Fellows observing a Country man go up into the Monument, went up
after him, and when they came to the top, they bound him, and picked his Pocket:
which as soon as ever they had done, they heard some body coming up: So being
put to their Shifts, and in some danger of discovery, they made haste down, and
meeting a Man, they told him, There was a pleasant Scene acting at top, between
a young Maid and her Sweetheart: So the Man believing them, and being a merry
Fellow, went down with them, saying, That if he could make no sport, he was
resolved to spoil none, and so by this witty Stratagem the Rogues escaped with
the money and the poor Countryman was left to be relieved by the next comer.

109.
An old Bawd being brought before a Justice of Peace, in London, for keeping a
B^wdy-House, and being accused by several Witnesses, and upon probable Grounds,
the Justice said in a Passion to her, You old Hag, you do keep a Debauched
House, and I will maintain it: whereupon the old Jade dropped him a Courtesy,
saying, I most humbly thank your Worship, I desire no better Warrant.

110.
A Tinker coming through Cornhill, and sounding briskly on his Kettle, Have you
any Work for a Tinker? A Grocer that thought to put a Jest upon him (there
being a Pillory near his Door) bid him stop those two Holes, pointing to the
Pillory: to whom the Tinker smartly replied, Sir, if you will lend me your Head
and Ears, I will find a Hammer and Nails, and give you my Work into the bargain.

111.
A modest Gentlewoman being forced by her Mother to accuse her Husband of
Defect, she desired the Judge, being in Court, that she might Write her mind
for Modesties sake. So the Judge granted her request, and ordered Ink and Paper
to be given her: So she took the Pen without dipping it into the Ink, and ^ade
as if she would Write, says one of the Counselors to her, Madam, there is no
Ink in your Pen. Truly Sir, says she, that is just my Case, and therefore I
need not Explain my self any further.

112.
Queen Elizabeth coming into a School in London, and seeing a very pert Boy,
asked him how often he had been Whipped? To whom he Ingeniously answered in these
words of AEneas to Queen Dido, Infandum Regina juber removare dolorem.


For which she gave him a Reward.

113.
Another time the Queen coming into Westminster-School, had some Verses made to
her Extempore, by a poor Boy: and being pleased with his quickness, she bid him
make some Verses upon this, Pauper ubique jacet, which he did presently as
follows: In Thalamis Regina tuis hac nocte Iacerem,
Si verum hoc esset, pauper ubique jacet.


For which the Queen took special notice of him, and gave him great preferment
afterward.

114.
A Gentleman being in Mourning for his Father, was Riding out with some fine
Ladies, who seeing his Horse have a Velvet Saddle, and Embroidered Cloth,
asked him why that was not black too? O, says the Gentleman, my Horses Father
is not dead yet.

115.
A Country Farmer coming up to London, had a Token to deliver to his
Landlord's Son, a young Gentleman of the Temple: when he came to his Chamber,
he found a Note in the Keyhole, written, I am gone to the Devil: Whereupon the
poor Farmer fell into a great fright, having the sadd^st apprehensions
imaginable. Alas! said he, that ever my Landlord should send his Son to this
wicked place: a fine young Gentleman that has cost his Father many a fair pound
to bring him up to Learning, and that ever he should come to this Ungodly Town,
in two or three Months time to go to the Devil; I dare not carry this sad evil
Tidings to his Father: And as he was making these sad Lamentations, a young
Student came up and told him, that the Note only meant the Devil-Tavern hand
by, and that he believed he might find him there. So he went thither, and found
the Gentleman, and presented his Fathers Token, and then told him the
extraordinary Trouble he was in, upon Reading the Note. At which the Gentleman
laughed heartily, and gave the Farmer such an Entertainment, that when he came
down into the Country, he told his Friends, That he never fared better in his
Life, than he did at the Devil, which put them all into no small Astonishment.

116.
A Scholar of Oxford, having wore out the Heels of his Boots, brought them in
his hands to a Cobbler, and showing him them, said, O thou curious Artificer,
that have by no small pains and study, arrived to the perfection of that
exquisite Art of repairing the defects of old decayed Calcuments, affix me two
Semicircles to my Suppeditors. The Cobbler stared upon him, as if he would have
looked him through: but a little recovering himself, said, Before George Sir, I
understand not your hard Language: but if I put on two Heel-pieces, I Will have a
Groat for them.

117.
The same Scholar being asked by a Porter for a Gentleman's Chamber in the
College, he directed him thus, you must crucify the Quadrangle, and ascend the
Grades, and you will find him perambulating in his Cubicle, near the Fenkster.
Pray Sir, says the Porter, what is that Fenester? It is, replies the Scholar,
the Diaphanous part of an Edifice, erected for the Introduction of
Illumination: which so amazed the Porter, that at first he did not know what to
think, till recovering himself, he went and enquired of another, who gave him
plainer directions, in more intelligible terms.

118.
An old Usurer dying, left a good Estate to his Son, who was more lavish in the
spending of it, then his Father had been careful in scraping it up: As this
young Spark was riding in his Coach to Epsome, he was angry with his Coachman,
for not driving faster, calling to him, saying, You Dog, if you do not make
more haste, I will come and kick you to the Devil. Sir, replied the Coach man,
I swear if you do, I Will there tell your Father how extravagan^ly you have spent
his Estate.

119.
A Gentleman living in the Country, having some urgent business at London, and
his Lady at the same time being ready to Lie in, leaves order with his Servant,
a Welsh-man, that when his Lady was Delivered, if it were a Son, he should come
to London, and acquaint him, promising him for his pains a new Suit of
Clothes; the Lady was in a short time after Delivered of a Daughter; however
Jack (unwilling to lose his Suit of Clothes) goes to London, and acquain^s his
Master that his Lady was brought to Bed of a brave young Son: the Gentleman
being over-joyed at the News, performed his Promise, and Jack being well
accoutred, returns to his Mistress: and in a short time after, the Gentleman
returns; and meeting his Wife, wishes her much Joy of her Son; but she
alleging it was a Daughter, and he finding himself abused, orders Jack to be
sent for; who when he came, still continued in his former saying, that it was a
Son; whe^eupon the Child was produced, and shown to the whole Company; Jack
still avers it to be a Son: Why thou Fool, quoth the Nurse, if it were a Son it
should have a Cock here. Cotsplut, quoth the Welshman, Is hur in haste? Would
hur have a Cock there already? Let hur keep hur till hur is sixteen or
seventeen years old, and if hur have no Cock then, Hang hur.

120.
A brisk young Lady, seeing the Sheriff of a County, who was a comely young
Man, wait upon the Judge, who was an old Man, was asked by one, which she had
most mind to, the Judge, or the Sheriff? She answered, the Sheriff. He asking
the reason, she replied, That she loved Judgment well, but Execution much
better.

121.
Some Soldiers in the Camp being very Lousy, complained to their Captain, who
being a Jocose man, bid them turn their Shirts, and shake them, telling them
that the Lice would have a days March, at least, before they could come to
their Skin.

122.
A Handsome Country Maid coming to Croyden Market, and being very nimble,
leaped off her Horse, but the Pummel of her Saddle being high, caught hold of
her Petticoat, and showed almost all that Nature gave her; which a Gentleman
standing by and seeing, said, Sweetheart, you have a very clear Skin, To whom
she answered briskly, Sir, if you like it so well, why did not you come and
Kiss it, to take your leave on it, for you are not ever like to see it again?

123.
Two Scotchmen meeting about Dinner time, one asked the other to lend him
Sixpence; by my Troth, quoth he, I have but a Groat; Prithee Man, said he,
lend me that, and I will trust you for the other Two pence.

124.
A young Woman having married a great Student, who was so intent on his
Studies, that she thought her self too little regarded by him, and one day when
they were at Dinner with some Friends, she wished her self a Book, that she
might have more of her Husbands Company; If it must be so, says her Husband, I
wish thou were an Almanac, that I might change thee for a new one once a Year.

125.
A Gentleman alighting out of his Coach at White Hall, asked a F^ot-man that
stood there, what a Clock it was? Sir, says the Footman, what will you give
me? Why, replied the Gentleman, must I give you any thing to tell me that? Yes
Sir, said he, for we Courtiers do nothing without money.

126.
Two Gentlemen discoursing over a Glass of Wine, of the Affairs of England, and
of the several Classes of men therein; One of them wittily said, That in it
there were neither Scholars enough, Gentlemen enough, nor Jews enough. I can
b^^ admire at your openion in that, says the other Gentleman; for methinks
there are rather too many of those sorts than too few. To which he replied, If
there were Scholars enough, so many would not be double or treble beneficed. If
Gentlemen enough, so many Peasants would not be reckoned amongst the Gentry.
And if Jews enough, so many Christians would never profess Usury.

127.
A conceited Scholar that was lately come from Oxford, Drinking with two or
three Gentlemen at the Mitre-Tavern in the Poultrey, was very brisk and airy,
and would needs be forming of Sylogismes etc. One wise one was this, He bid
them fill two Glasses of Wine, which they did: Now, says he, I will prove those
two Glasses to be three, thus, Is not here one, says he? Yes, says the
Gentleman. And here another, that is two, says he: Yes, says the Gentleman
again. Why then, says he, one and two is three, so it is done. Very well, says
the Gentleman, I Will have one Glass, and that Gentleman shall have the other,
and you shall have the third for your pains in finding it out.

128.
One who had lain with his Female Servant, the next day asked her how many
Commandments there were? She answered nine. Thou Fool, quoth he, have thou
lived to this Age, and know no better? There are ten. I know, says she, very
well, there were ten Yesterday; but you and I broke one of them the last Night,
so that there are but nine of them left.

129.
A witty, though unfortunate Fellow, having tried several Trades, and failed in
them all, at last took an Alehouse, and set up the Sign of the Shirt; Writing
under it, This is my last Shift; which witty Device, brought him much Company
and Profit.

130.
A Gentleman that had never been used to Wounds, received a small Scratch with
a Sword in a Tavern-Fray; at which he was sadly frighted, and sent immediately
for a Chyrurgeon, who coming, and seeing the Wound but slight, and the
Gentleman in a great fear; for sports sake pretended great danger, and
therefore sends his Man with great speed to fetch him such a Plaster: Why Sir,
quoth the Gentleman, is the wound so dangerous? O Yes, replied the Arch
Chyrurgeov, for if he don't make great haste, it will heal of it self, before
he comes.

131.
A young Lady being to be sworn at Hygate; the Lord Judge asked her whether she
would have a Pr --, or a Pear? A Pr -- my Lord, says she, Well said Madam, says
he, you speak like a Modest Lady; for some of your Sex cannot be contented with
a Pr -- but they must have a pair.

132.
A Woman in the Country that had Ten Children, told her Husband that Nine of
them were his, and no more; now he mistrusting the Parson of the Parish had
been sweet upon her, said, Well, Wife, I Will keep the Nine, but I never denied
the Clergy their due, and so will not begin now; for the Parson shall have the
Tenth for his Tithe, it being rightly due to him.

133.
Parson Bull coming to visit one Mr. Hide. Hide said smileing, Bull, where are
your Horns? Sir, replied Bull, they always go with the Hide.

134.
A Country man coming through Cheapside with Hob nails in his Shoes, and
treading in a slippery place, his Heels flew up; which a Ci^izen taking notice
of in his Shop, said to the Fellow, How now, Friend? You see our City stones
are so proud, they scorn to let a Countrey-Clown tread on them. Hah! says the
Countryman, as proud as they are, I made them kiss my Arse.

135.
A Scotchman having found an extra-ordinary large Turnip in his Garden, which
is a Root that Scotchmen love very well,) came and presented it to King James;
who being pleased with the humor of the Man, gave him a hundred Pounds. A
Courtier seeing this, thought with himself, thus, if the King regards a Turnip
so much, and rewards the Giver of it so nobly, how much more nobly will he
reward me for a greater present. So he presented the King with a curious Race
Horse, which when the King received, he said to his Nobles, what shall I give
to this man for his present, and when they were all silent, says the King, By
my Soul man I will give thee the Turnip.

136.
A Welshman that was condemned to be hanged, had the benefit of the Clergy
granted to him, and so was burnt in the Hand; which when it was doing, they bid
him say, God bless the King. Nay, says he, God bless hur Father and Mother; for
if they had not taught hur to read, hur might hwve been hanged for all the King.

137.
A Lady that was going to Mass, was interrupted by a Rustical Fellow that stood
just in the Church Door, and hindered her going in. She prayed him to make a
little way, to which he gave her a Clownish Answer, which stirred up her
Passion a little, and thinking it in vain to expect any Civility from him, she
said, Sir, I perceive that the Mass for Clowns and Fools is over, so that you
having no more business here had best be gone. Yes Madam, says he, drily, that
is over, and that for Wh -- 's is just now beginning; you ha^ best make haste
in, and put in for a share.

138.
Another Lady going to Ma^s to present her Tapers, fixed one to St. Michael,
and another to the Devil that was at his Feet. The Clerk seeing her, told her
she did not do we^l to offer a a Candle to the Devil, No matter, says the Lady,
it is good to have Friends every where; for we know not where we shall g^.

139.
A ^ussing young Blade coming to E^som, cal^'d an honest plain Countryman,
that was there to hold his Hors^* Can one hold him, says he? Yes, yes, says the
Gallant. Then you may do it your self, replied the Countryman, and so went
away.

140.
A C^untrey man that was very ignorant, coming to the Archbishops House, with
his Rent, the A^ch-Bishop coming through the Hall, asked who 'twas? An't please
your Worships Honor, says the Country man, I am come to pay you your Rent; so
the Arch Bishop went out; and the Servants told him, he must say, An't please
your Grace; But the Arch-B^shop coming in again, he was at, An't please your
Worships Honor; they told him he must say Grace; Must I so? says he; then
putting his Hat before his Eyes, he said* The Eyes of all things, etc.

141.
A Q^aker having took a Lodging at the Kings-Arms Inn in Holbourne; the House
being full, a damming Blade came up into the Room, and would have hectored him
out, but the Quaker told him 'twas his Room, and by Yea, and Nay, he should not
come there. The Hector began to thunder out his Oa^hs, and to strike him; but
the Quaker being a stout Fellow, returned him his Blows with Int^rest, and at
last very fairly kicked him down stairs, upon which the Master of the House
sent up the Tapster to know what was the Cause of this noise above, he told h^^
'^was nothing ^ut that Yea, and Nay had kicked God Damme down Stairs.

142.
A Gentleman reproving h^s Friend that was a married Man, for getting a
Maidwith Child, saying, He admired that such a man as he would defile his Bed
so: You mistake, Sir, says he, there was no defiling of my Bed in the Case, for
I did it in the Fields.

143.
An Arch Wag asking why Monks, and Friars were called Holy Fathers, since they
never Married. O replied an Ingenious Gentleman, if you consider how much the
World is beholden to them for Propagation, how many swarms of young Frieslings
they supply the World with, you will see a great deal of reason for it.

144.
A conceited Fellow, that had an extraordinary good opinion of himself, asked
his Friends what others thought of him? Why, says his Friend, The Wise think
you foolish, and Fools think you wise; Now pray, What think you of your self.

145.
Pope Urban using to commend the Institution of the single Life in Priests, and
to blame their using of Concubines, was wont to say, God has forbidden (...) to
g^^ Children, and the Devil has given us Nephews.

146.
Two Gentlemen that had been a great while at Law together, and had spent a
great deal of Money at it, one of the Gentlemen's Friends told him, That his
Antagonist had removed his Suit into Chancery; Let him remove it into Hell,
says he, I don't question but to get a Lawyer to follow it for Money.

147.
A Gentleman in Brussels talking with a Priest about Religion, asked Why they
kissed the Cross more than any other p^ece of Wood? and what there was more in
that, than in any other Trees else, that they did not kiss them? Why, said the
Priest, Is not your Wife made all of the same F^^sh and Blood? and what is the
reason you don't kiss her backside, as well as her Mouth.

148.
An English Merchant at Lisbon in Spain, ^old some Jews five hundred pounds
worth o^ Gloves; but they falling off from their Bargain, would have but half
of them: Well, said the Merchant, you ^^st give me ^ometime to s^r^ them, and
then you shall have half; so he ordered his Man to put all the Right handed
Gloves in one parcel, and the Left Handed Gloves in another. Then when the Jews
came, he bid them take their Choice; which when they had do^e, and were packing
of them up, they perceived them to be all for one band; and so were glad to
take the other parcel at the M^r^hants own rate.

149.
One standing in the P^llory at the Exchange, and his Wife being by him to bear
him Company, a Gentleman that saw him, said, He believed he was a Papist,
because he had his Cross with him.

150.
Another man heari^g a Parson Preach on that Text, Take up your Cross and
follow me; took his Wife upon his Back the next Sunday, and came into the
middle of the Church, while the Pa^son was preaching, and looking up to him,
said, N^w Sir, I have brought my Cross, what must I do with it? The Minister
being a little su^p^iz'd at the humor of the Fellow, hardly knew what to say
to him, but at last he bid him set it down there: Yes, that I will, says he,
with all my heart, though it were in the middle of the Sea: But I s^^, savs he,
as well as you pretend to love the Cross, mine may lie upon my hands this forty
Years, before you will ease me of it.

151.
A Gentleman asked on of the Female Sex, Whether she was Maid, Wife, or Widow;
and bid her tell him truly: She being a little put to it, after some
consideration upon this hard question, and being above twenty years old
answered him thus, Though I was never married, Sir, yet you may write me down
Young Woman.

152.
King Henry the Eighth, going once to Gravesend, took Will. Summers his Jester
wi^h him for his diversion; the Wind being very high, it was very tempestuous;
and Summers being very fear^u^, thought himself in great danger, and said to
the King, Harry, Harry, I had rather be thy Fool by Land, than thy Companion by
Watter: At which the King laugh^'d heartily.

153.
A Nobleman having a mind to be merry, sent for his Chaplain, and tol^ him,
That unless he could resolve him these, Three Questions, he should be
discarded, and turned out of his Service; but if he could, he should have
Thirty Guinneys* and the best Horse in his Stable: So he proposed the Questions
to him, which were these; First, What compass the World was about? Secondly,
How deep the Sea was? And Thirdly, What he thought? The Poor Chaplain was in a
peck of Troubles, and did not know how to answer them, or what to say, thinking
them very unreasonable Questions; so that all he could do was to desire a
little time to consider upon them, which the Earl granted. So he going a long
the Fields one day very melancholy, a Cobbler of the Town, a merry Fellow (who
was very like the Chaplain, both in Physiognomy and Stature) met him, and asked
him the reason of his sadness; which with some Reluctance he told him: O Sir,
says the Cobbler, don't be dejected, cheer up; I Have thought of a device to save
your Place, and get you the Money and Horse too; but you shall give me Ten
Guinneys for my pains. So he agreed to it; and it was ^hus: Says he, I Will put on
your Clothes, and go to My Lord, and answer his Questions. Accordingly he went,
and when he came before him, he answered him thus: To the first Question, What
Compass the World was about? He answered, It was four and twenty hours Journey;
and if a man could keep ^pace with ^he Sun he might easily go it (...) that
^^me. To the Second, How deep ^^e Sea was? He answered, Only ^ stones throw;
for cast it into the deepest place of it, and in time it will come to the
bottom. To the th^d, (which I fancy your Lordship thinks the most difficult to
be resolved, but is indeed the easiest) which is, What your Lords^ip thinks? I
answer, That you think I am your Chaplain, when as indeed I am but the Cobbler
of Gl^^cester. The Nobleman was so pleased with his witty Answers, that he
p^rform'^ his Promise t^ his Chap^a^n, and gave the Cobbler Ten Guinneys for his
Ingenuity.

154.
Says a Glazier to a Painter, I see you do all under a Color. Get you gone,
you Rogue, r^ply'd the Painter, you're alw^ys ^icking of Quarrels.

155.
A Certain King kept a Fool in his Court, that used to write down in a Book all
the Follies of the great Men in the Court* which Book the King sometimes, when
he was disposed to be Merry, would look into. Now one day after Dinner, the
King reading of the Book, found himself in it, with a Story of five thousand
Pounds, which he gave a Jew in his Court, to go to B^rbary and buy Horses with:
So the King asked his Jester, Why he put him in, Why, says he, for giving your
Mon^y to one t^^t you may never see, again: But says the King, What if he
should return and bring the Horses, what Folly is it then? Why, if he does,
replied the Fool, I Will blot out your Name, and put in his, for a Fool, for not
keeping your Money when he had it.

156.
Two Women scolding in the Street, another of their Acquaintance came by, whom
they would refer their Cas^s to; N^, says the W^m^n, pray Excuse me, I will not
meddle in it, but will stand Neuter: How can that be, says on of them, when you
have been common to all the Town?

157.
Doctor F^l^r, overtook one Mr. Woodcock upon the Road, falling in^o D^sc^urse
in a facetious manner, asked him what diff^re^ce th^re was between a Woodcock
and an Owl, (supposing M^ Woodcock had not known him) He wittily replied, That
an Owl was Fuller in the Head, Fuller in the Face, Fuller in the Eyes, Fuller
in the Neck, and Fuller all over.

A Scholar meeting a Countreyman upon the Road, Rid up very briskly to him; but
the Countreyman out of Respect to him, was turning off his Horse to give him
the Road, when the Scholar laying his Hand upon his Sword, said, It Is well you
gave me the Way, or I Would. -- What would you have done? said the Countreyman,
holding up his Club at him: Given it you Sir, says he, pulling of his Hat to
him.

159.
One Reading in the Famous History of the S^ven Champions, how St. George
killed the Dragoon, and saved Sabra the fair Maid of Egypt, said, He admired
how Men co^'d invent such Lies; for, says he, I believe there never was any
such Dra^oon, or such a Man as St. George. O, says another, I can believe that,
better than that there was a Maid.

160.
A Tallow Chandler dying, a merry Fellow said, He wondered, that he that had
made so many Weeks, could make his Life no longer.

162.
A Lusty young Man, in Somersetshire, after he had been Married about four
Months, grew very Lean and Feeble, so that he could hardly crawl along; He one
day seeing a Butcher run over a Plough'd Field after a Mad-Bull, asked him the
reason of it? Why, says the Butcher, it is to Tame him: O, says the Fellow, Let
him be Married, let him be Married; if that don't Tame him, I Will be hanged.

163.
A Soldier, a merry Fellow, finding a Louse on his Sleave, walking to take the
Air, took him up by the Back, and said, I swear, if I catch ^ou ag^in out of
your Quarters, you shall be Hanged; and so put him into the Collar of his
Dublet.

164.
A certain Highway-man having committed a Robbery in Devonshire, was taken in
Dorsets^ire, making toward London, and brought before a Justice of Peace, who
would not meddle with him, but would send him back into the Shire where he
committed the Robbery; which a witty Country man hearing (that had been at the
trouble of taking him, and was unwilling to Guard him back into the other
County) desired leave to ask the Justice one Question, which he granted: Why
then, says the Man, I desire your Worship to tell me, if a man be taken abed
with your Wife to Night, whether ^e must be sent thither again the next night.

165.
A Gentleman ord^'d a Crane for Supper; but his Cook having a Sweetheart in a
longing condition, (...) off a Leg and sent her; so the One-Leg^'d Crane was
set on the Tab^e, which the Gentleman seeing, was enraged at his Cook; but he
being an arch Wag, readily told the Gentleman, that Cranes had but one Leg? and
avowed it with that confidence, that he gained upon his wise Masters belief;
but he resolving to observe it as he was walking in the Fields one Frosty
Morning, he saw a flock of Cranes, and sending for his Cook, they held up one
of their Legs under their Wings, as is the custom of those b^rds in the cool
weather; So, says his Cook, I hope your Worship is su^^fied that they have but
one ^eg; but the Gentleman going pretty near to them, cries Cush, and frighted
them up. wher^upon both Legs appear'^; Look, says the Gentleman, they have now
two Legs: Oh, says the Cook, if you had cried Cush to that in the Dish, it
would have had two Legs too.

166.
A Gentleman losing his Watch, Complained to his his Friend of his loss; Alas,
Sir, says he, all the World c^^'t help it, Time will away.

167.
A Bully meeting a brisk Lady in St. Iame's Park, with her naked Breasts
appearing very tempting, says to her, Madam, is that Flesh to be sold? No,
replied she, no money shall buy it: Then, says he, Madam, if you will not sell you
Ware, I Would wish you to shut up your Shop: Faith, Sir, says she, you may be sure
I Will never let you come within my Doors: ' It Is no matter, Madam, replied he,
for I am sure they a^e wicked ones.

168.
A Person of Quality in the Countre^, k^eping a Baboon at his Door with a
handsome fine Co^ton; a Country Fellow brought a Letter and gave it to the
Baboon, who tore it to pieces; and the Lord happening to come out, saw him do
it; at which he was angry with the Fellow, and asked him why he delivered it
not to him himself? Why, says the Fellow, I gave it to your Son, and he tore
it: You Fool, says he, it is a Baboon: Indeed, says the Fellow, I thought it was
your Son, he is so like you.

169.
A Woman having a mind to oblige her Husband, desired him to invite some of his
Friends to Dinner, and they would be merry, for, says she, I have provided a
curious Leg of Mutton for you: I thank you my Dear, says he, you are always
very free of your Flesh to me, and every body else that has any Appetite to it.

170.
Some S^holars having a spite against their Master, because ^of his Ha^shness
to them, resolved to play him some trick; so knowing him to be a very curious
neat Man, they daubed the Railes of the Stairs with a Sir R -- Now the Master
coming down in the dark, laid his Hands in it, which set him into a terrible
feu'd; so he called all the Scholars, and took them into strict Examination;
but suspecting one above the rest, he was very sharp upon him, urging him to
confess it, telling him he did it; the Boy utterly denied it; but the Mas^er
was the more pr^ssing upon him: Indeed, said the Lad, with all the
Asseverations imaginable, I did it not, but if you please, I Will tell you who
had a hand in it: Hereupon the Master thought to have found out the Truth, and
so very eagerly asked him who? Your Worship, Sir, says he: Whereupon he was
dismissed, with the applause of all his Fellows, for his Ingenuity.

171.
A Merry Fellow in a great Storm at Sea, when all were at Prayers, Eat heartily
on Salt-Beef; and being asked his reason, answered, He should Drink more that
day, than ever he did in his life.

172.
John Tailor the Water Poet* being aboard the Ship, called, The Hector, was so
Treated with Punch by the Captain, that it was easily perceived by the Seamen,
who began to play upon him; whereupon John in a Poetical rage, invoked the
Patron of the Ship thus, O Noble Hector* Valiant Son of Priam,
Grant all these Men may be as Drunk as I am.


173.
A certain Knave asking a virtuous Gentlewoman, Jearingly, What was honesty?
She answered, What Is that to you? Me^dle with those things that concern you.

174.
A Young Man in London being caught a bed with his Mistress, was severely
reprimanded by his Uncle, who set before him the example of Joseph: O, ^ays he,
if Joseph' s Mistress had been as handsome as mine, I doubt not b^t he would
have done as I did.

175.
A Gentleman that had many Children, was saying one day to his Friend, that his
Wife was more Fertile then his Land. I Will give you a good reason for that, says
his Friend, for if you are weary, and w^n't take pains to make her so, others
will.

176.
A Witty Fellow going along Paterno^er-Row, in a dark Winter Night, saw a
Lanthorn hang out with a Candle in it, which he had a mind to, to light him
home; b^t as he had clim'd up to it, and was just going to unty it, the Maid of
the House saw him, and asked what he meddled with the Lanthorn for? I beg your
Pardon, says he, Sweetheart, I only went to snuff the Candle, that I might see
to go along.

177.
Two Gentlemen riding from Barnet to London, met a Miller riding softly on his
Sacks; and they being merrily disposed, had a mind to abuse the Miller; so one
went on one side of him, and the other on the other, and having Rid so a little
way with him, they prayed him to resolve them one Question, Whether, says they,
art thou more Knave or Fool? Trully, replied the Miller, I don't know which I
am most, but I think I am between both.

178.
Mr. Randolph, the Great Wit of Cambridg, coming to London, had a mind to see
Ben Ioh^son, who was Drinking at the Devil Tavern with Mr. Drayton, Mr. Daniel,
and Mr. Silvester, three famous Poets of that Age; he being loath to intrude
into their Company, and yet desiring to be called in, peeped in at the Door
several times, till at last Mr. Johnson perceiving him, said, Come in, John
Bopeep: which he did: and when the Reckoning came to be said, which was Five
Shillings, they agreed among themselves that he that made the best Extempory
Verles, should be excused from paying any thing, and the other four should pay
it all; so every one made his Verses, and when it came to Mr. Randolph's turn,
he made ^hese: I John Bopeep, to you four Sheep,
With each one ^is good Fleece;
If you are willing to pay your five Shilling,
It Is fifteen Pence a piece.


179.
Ben Johnson and Silvester being very merry one day at the above named Tavern,
began to Rhi^e upon one another; so Silvester began thus: I Silvester
Lay with your Sister.


To whom Ben-Iohnson answered: I Ben Johnson
Lay with your Wife.


That, says Silvester, is no Rhym; but, Faith, it is true though, says Ben
Johnson.

180.
Mr. Noy the Attorney General making a Venison Feast in a Tavern, where Ben
Johnson and some of his Companions were Drinking* and he having a mind to some
of the Venison, wrote these Verses, and sent them to Mr. Noy: When all the
World was drowned,
No Venison could be found;
For then there was no Park:
Lo here we sit
Without e're a bit,
Noy has it all in his Ark.
For the ingenuity of which, Mr. Noy sent him a good corner of a Pasty, and
half a Dozen Bottles of Sack to wash it down.

181.
At another time, Ben Johnson intending to go through the Half-Moon-Tavern in
Aldersgate Street, was denied entrance, the D^or being shut: upon which he made
these Verses, Since the Half Moon is so unkind, to make me go about,
The Sun my Money now shall take, the Moon shall go without.
And so he went to the Sun Tavern at Long Lane end, forsaking the Half Moon,
for this affront.

182.
A fool being very sick, and like to dye, one that went to see him, went to
comfort him, bidding him cheer up, for if you dye, says he, Four proper Fellows
shall carry you to Church: Ay but, quoth he, I had rather by half go thither my
self.

183.
A Courtier importu^ing Queen Elizabeth, for a certain place that was vacant,
the Queen told him, He was not fit for it: An't please your Majes^y, says he, I
can get one to Officiate for me: Very likely, says the Queen and I can put in
one of my Maids, that can do so too.

184.
A Tutor in Oxford, reading a Lecture to his Scholars about the Virtues in
moral Philosophy, gave them this general Rule to know Virtue from Vices, The
Virtues consisted in the Middle, but Vices were Extremes. The next day he bid
his Scholars give an Example of the foregoing Rule; so one of them, being a
sharp Lad, instanced in Virginity. Why Sirrah, says the Tutor, who told you
that Virginity was a Virtue? You did, that Sir, replied the Lad, for you told
us, that all Virtues consisted in the Middle, and so does Virginity.

185.
Says a Tall Man, going along with a little Man, The People will not gaze so much
at a Pigmy, because I Am in your Company. Yes, says the little Man, they will
gaze ^he more upon me, to see me have an Ass ^n my Company, and not Ride.

186.
A Lawyer meeting a Country Fel^ow driving his Cart, asked him mer^ily, why his
Fore-Horse was so Fat, and the other so Lean? Why, says the ^ellow, my
Fore-Horse is a Lawyer, and the rest are his Clients; for which ^itty answer,
the Lawyer gave him Shilling to Drink.

187.
A Countryman coming up to London, having never been there before, star'd into
a Scriv'ners Shop; the Scriv'ner standing at a Door, asked him what he would
buy? What do you sell, says the Countryman? Why Logger-heads, says the
Scrivner, will you buy one? Yes, says he, but I see you have such a good Trade,
that you have no choice, having but one left in your Shop.

188.
One said; That no Man had a greater confidence in their Country, than Thieves,
for they put themselves upon it, though they are Hanged for their pains.

189.
One told his Wife, that there was a Law making, That all Cuckolds should be
drowned: O pray, my Dear Husband, says she, then learn to Swim.

190.
A Blunt Rustical Fellow, having been netled with a Jest that one put upon him,
resolved one way or other to be even with him; therefore having a good Cane in
his Hand, he laid him over the Pate with it saying, Every Man has his Talent;
you can break Jests, and I can break Heads.

191.
Some Thieves coming to Rob a Gentleman's House before he was asleep, he called
out of the Window, and bid them stay but one hour, and by that time he should
be a sleep; which frighted them so, that they ran away faster than they came
thither.

192.
A Gentleman having his Pocket picked whilst he was at Prayers at Church,
complained to his Friend of it; why says his Friend, If you had Watched as well
as Prayed, you would not have lost your Money.

193.
A Constable taking a pretty Wench late at Night, brought her before a Justice,
who seeing her handsome and gentilely Dreft, was very favorable to her,
winking at her fault in being out so late, and bid the Constable take her home
to his House that Night. Yes, that I will with all my heart, says the
Constable, if your Worship will be pleased to commit my Wife till the Morning.

194.
Two young Oxford Scholars agreeing together to go into an Adjacent Warren to
steal some Rabbets; one being to watch, and not to speak one word, and the
other to catch them: So they being come to the place, he that watched, cried
out, Ecce Cuniculi multi; which noise frighted all the Rabbets into their
Burrows; whereupon the other was very angry with him; Why, says he, who thought
the Rabbets had understood Latin?

195.
A Lady receiving a Letter from a Foppish Gentleman, taken verbatim out of
Cassander, which he had read, she sent it him back again, bidding the Messenger
tell him, That he was mistaken, for though the Letter was directed to her, it
was written to Madam Roxana.

196.
A Gentleman borrowed five Pounds of his Friend, and lost it at Play; thereupon
he sent to borrow five Pounds more, by the Token that he owed him five Pounds
already: Pray, said his Friend, bid your Master send me the Token, and I Will
send him the five Pounds.

197.
A Wench that was got with Child, sent her Friend to the Father of it, to tell
him that she was quick; he replied, If she be quick, I Will be as nimble, and so
run away.

198.
One seeing Doctor Mathew^, that was a very Learned man, but little of Stature,
pass by, said, There goes minimus Apostolorum; which the Doctor hearing,
merrily replied, That Matthew was Maximus Evangelistarum.

199.
A Gentleman standing in a brown Study, a Lady ask^d him, What he was thinking
of? He said Of nothing: What do you think on, says the Lady, when you think on
nothing? Faith, says he, Then I think on you, and the inconstancy of your Sex.

200.
The Lord Bacon going the Northern Circuit, a Fellow that was tried for
Robbing, was very importunate with the Judge to be favorable to him, telling
him that he was a kin to his Lordship: Why how so, said the the Judge? Why,
answered the Fellow, An't please your Lordship, your Name is Bacon, and my Name
is Hog, and those two are alike. It Is true, said the Judge; but you and I cannot
be Kindred till you are Hanged, for Hog is never good Bacon till it is Hanged.

201.
King James Riding a Hunting in Essex comes to a Gate which he must go through,
and seeing a Countrey-Clown at it, he says to him, Prithee good Pellow open the
Gate? But he knowing who it was, answered, No, an't please your Grace, I am not
worthy to be in that Office; but I Will run and fetch Mr. Johnson, who is a
Justice of Peace, and lives a Mile off, and he shall open it for your Grace;
and so he run away as fast as he could, and left the King to open it himself.

202.
When the Turks were Besieging Vienna, a Gentleman being to be sent to the
Grand-Vizier, upon some important Affair, desired to be excused; for, says he,
I Am afraid, because he is so faithless and treacherous, that he will take my
Head off: If he does, says the Governor, I Will take a Thousand of his Men's
Heads off. I, Sir, replied the Gentleman, but I question whether any of them
will fit my shoulders.

203.
A young Lad being chid by his Uncle, for lying a Bed so long in a Morning,
telling him that such a one had found a Purse of Money by rising early in the
Morning; I, says the Lad smartly, but he rose too early that lost it.

204.
A merry Gentleman, in the beginning of the late Civil Wars, being asked, if he
should dye, how he would be buried? Answered, With his Face downwards s For,
says he, in a little time England will be turned up side down, and then I shall
lie right.

205.
A man being brought before the Duke of Millan, for falling down from a House
(which he was Tiling) upon a poor man that was going by, and bruising him very
much: Look you Friend, says the Duke to the man that was hurt, I Am for the Law
of Retaliation; You shall go up to the top of the House where he was, and he
shall go along just where you did; and so you shall fall upon him, and bruise
him as much as he did you: Which unexpected piece of Justice, put an end to the
man's Prosecution.

206.
A Farmers Daughter in the Country bringing up her Fathers Cows near the House
to be Milk'd, they all run away from her down a dirty Lane; upon which the Girl
cried out, O, Mothe, the Cows are ru^ down the Lane to the Devil; shall I go
after them? No, Child, says the Mother, let your Father go, for he has high
Shoon.

207.
A Tallow-Chandler having some Candles stole, complained to his Friend: O, says
he, be patient, for I Am confident in a short Time they will all come to light.

208.
An Oxford Scholar coming up to London, went into a House of Iniquity in
Covent Garden, which had the Flower-de-Luce to its Sign, where he got a Clap:
whereupon he writ these Verses over the door at his going away: All you that
hither chance to come,
Mark well ever you go in;
For Frenchmens Arms are Signs without,
And Frenchmens Harms within.


209.
One asking a Painter how he could draw such curious Pictures, and yet get such
ugly Children? He answered, Because he drew the Pictures in the day, but got
his Children in the night.

210.
Another asking why men sooner gave to Poor People than to Scholars? was
answered, Because they think they may sooner come to be Poor, than Scholars.

211.
A Player Riding along Fleetstreet in great haste, a Gentleman of the Temple
stopped him, and asked what Play was to be acted that night? The Player was not
a little vexed at him, for hindering him on such a slight occasion; however
recovering himself, he told him he might see that on every Post: I beg your
Pardon, said the Gentleman, indeed I took you for a Post, you rid so fast.

211.
Two Gentlemen being drinking together, one of them pressed the other to drink
more then he could well bear, and therefore he refused it, desiring to be
excused; but the other being pretty well dipped, swore he should take ^ other
Glass, or else he would run him th^o'. No, says he, you shall not, I Will save you that
labor, for I Will run my self through, and Pledge you afterward; saying so, he
run through the door down stairs, and left the Spark to pay the Reckoning.

213.
Sir Thomas Moor being surveying of St. Paul's Church, as he was walking on the
Leads of it, there happened to be a Madman there, who seeing some Jack daws
flying about the Church, caught up Sir Thomas (being a little man) in his
Arms, saying, Now Sir, we will fly down as those Birds do; and so was going to
throw him over; but he cried out to him, saying, Hold Friend, let us go down,
and fly up to them, which stopped the Madmans hand.

214.
A Woman coming to a Parson, desired him to preach a Funeral Sermon on her Son
that was lately dead; the Parson promised her to do it; but she desiring to
know the Price of his Sermon, he told her it was Twenty Shillings: Twenty
Shillings! says she; An Ass spoke for and Angel, and will not you speak under
Twenty Shillings? The Parson being a little netled at her, told her she was
better fed than taught: Sir, says she, it is very true; for my Husband feeds me,
and You teach me.

215.
A Country Gentleman riding along Cheap Side, his Horse stumbled and threw him
in the Dirt; so he got a fellow to hold him, and went into the next Shop, the
Mistress of which being a pleasant Woman, smiling, (seeing he had no hurt)
asked him if his Horse used to serve him so? Yes Madam, says he, When he comes
just against a Cuckold's door. Then in truth, replied she ingeniously, You are
like to have twenty falls, before you get to the Exchange.

216.
A Gentleman riding to Epsom, overtook a handsome Country Wench jogging along
easily upon a poor dull Mare; the Gentleman being merrily disposed, asked her
how she did? and told her, if she pleased he would occupy her. O Sir, says she,
what good will that do me? Why, says he, 'twill make you brave and brisk; Pray
then Sir, says she, Occupy my Mare, for she is very dull.

217.
An Elder Brother told his younger Brother, that that White Camlet Cloak he had
on, became him extra-ordinary well: Faith Brother, says he, but a black
mourning Cloak for you, would become me a great deal better.

218.
A Great Sweater*being subpoena'd to give his Oath upon a Trial* they brought
him a Book to swear on: Faith, says he to the Clark, You may save your self
that Labor, for there is no Oath but I can Swear it without Book.

219.
A Scolding Woman used to abuse her Husband, who was pretty softly, and call
him Cuckold twenty times a day, which a silly Fellow hearing, said, He wondered
the Husband was such a fool to let his Wife know that he was a Cuckold.

220.
A Drunken Country Fellow whose name was Will Johnson, driving his Cart
between Cambridge and S^urbridg, fell fast asleep in it; and in the mean time
his two Horses were stole out of it: he awaking said, Either I am Will.
Johnson, or I am not Will. Johnson: If I am Will: Johnson, then I have lost my
two Horses: if I am not Will. Johnson, then I have found a Cart.

221.
A Gentleman discoursing of his Travels, was interrupted by a Lady in the
Company, that said she had traveled further then he: Say you so, Madam; says
the Gentleman, Then We as Travelers, may lie together with Authority.

222.
One that had been married but a Week, called her Husband Cuckold: which her
Mother hearing, reproved her? You stut, says she, do you call your Husband
Cuckold already? And I have been married this twenty years to your Father, and
never durst tell him of it yet.

223.
A Country Man going along Limestrest, saw a Rope with a handle to it hand out
of the Door; now he not knowing what was the meaning of it, went and played
with it; and pulling it a little hard, the Merchant being in the
Compting*house, came out to the door, and asked the Countryman what he would
have? He answered, nothing but he pulled the string, and the Bell rang: the
Merchant seeing him so simple, asked him what Countryman he was? I am an Essex
man, an't please you, says he: Ay, says the Merchant, I have heard that in
Essex a man cannot beat the hedge, but out comes a Calf? True, says he, and I see
that in London a man cannot ring a Bell, but out comes a Cuckold.

224.
A Drunken debauched Dyer, complaining to his Friend that was a sober man, that
whatsoever he took in hand to dye, came to some mischance or other: O, says his
Friend, The way to succeed in your Business, is to amend your Life; for a man
that does not live well, can never dye w^^^.

225.
A Fiddler boasting what a chaste Wife he had: says a Gentleman, I Will lay my
House against thy Fiddle, that if I have opportunity, I Will get her consent to
lie with her: the Wager was laid, and he had the Fiddlers consent to try; but
the Fiddler went in the mean time, and sung this Song under the Window: Hold
out, my Dear, hold o^t;
Hold out, but these two hours:
If you hold out, there is no doubt
But the House, and all is ours.
To which his Wise answered:
I Faith sweet William I cannot,
He has caught me about the Middle:
He has me Won, thou art undon,
Sweet William thou'st lost thy Fiddle.


226.
A Facetious Gentleman discoursing with a Witty Lady, who was speaking of the
Weakness of her Sex, and the vast advantage that men had above them: Hold,
Madam, said he; I beg your Pardon, if I dissent from you in this
commonl^-received-point; for it is no difficult thing to prove that your Sex is
now a days stronger than ours; for Sampson, the strongest Man, carried only the
Gates of the City upon his Shoulders; but now every little Lady of your Sex
carries a Tower upon her Forehead. To which she wittily and briskly replied,
Certainly, Sir, you have a very strong Head, to carry so many Windmils up and
down in it.

227.
One that had weak Eyes, being jear'd by a man that had clear Eyes; he told
him, They were not so di^, but he could see a Fool: It may be so, says the
other, but you must look in a Glass then.

227.
A Schoolmaster examining his Boys, and asking them several Rules for Pea^sing,
espied one to have a dirty face and hands, and asked him by what Rule it was
that he was dirty; the Boy readily answered, By de me Lavo Lavi.

228.
One telling his Friend that he saw a Man and his Wife Fighting: Why did not
you part 'em, says he? Part 'em! says the Gen^leman, I have been better bred,
then to part Man and Wife.

229.
Some Gentlemen coming into a Tavern, whose Sign was the Moon, (where for a
Fancy they sold nothing but Claret, for which they were very noted, and had
great Custom) called for a Bottle of Sack: whereupon the Drawer told him they
had none: At which, they not a little admiring; as not knowing the Humor,
asked the Drawer the reason, who told them, The Man in the Moon drinks Claret.
The Fancy of which pleased them so, that they said they were resolved ^o be
sociable; and so called for each Man his Bottle, to drink their Brothers Health
in the Moon.

230.
One being asked what he was that had a fine Wit in Jest? Answered, a Fool in
Earnest.

231.
One gave a Fellow a Box o^th' Far, upon which the Fellow whom he struck gave
him another: What do you mean, said he that gave the first Box? I did not lend
you a Box, I freely gav^ it you: No matter, says the other, I am a Gamester,
and am always used to pay the Box.

232.
Says a Gentleman to his Friend, methinks a Player, has the idlest Employment
of any: No, replied he, you are mistaken, for he is always in Action.

233.
A Gentleman was used to say of a Drunkard, That it signified not much what he
said in his Cups; for he seldom spoke any thing that he could stand to, tho he
made by Indentures.

234.
One seeing a Book that was but one sheet of Paper, said, A Man need not libel
it, for it did Penance in a sheet already.

235.
One Tom. Love, University Capper in Cambridge, ringing in one of the Belfreys,
the Clapper of the Bell fell upon his Head, and almost killed him. An arch
young Student seeing his Mischance, and thinking the Wound Mortal, writ over
against the place where he sell, these following Verses.

Here lies Tom Love, the University Capper;
That lived by the Bell, and died by the Clapper.
But Tom. Love recovering, and seeing these Verses, under-writ thus:

Tom. Love's alive, and lives in hope
To live by the Bell, when thou dy'st by the Rope.
236.
Cambden, ^n the 25th. Page of his Remains, tells you of a Friar, who Preaching
in the Country, espied a poor Woman, whispering to one that sat in the same
Pew with her, at which the Friar being enraged, called to her aloud, saying,
Hold thy Peace Babble I bid thee, thou Wife in the Red Hood; whereat the Woman
angry, started up and cried to him again that all the Church rang of her; Marry
Sir, I ^eshrew his Heart that bableth most of us two; for I do but whisper a
word with my Neighbor here, and thou have babled there a good large hour.

Witty and Grave SAYINGS.
1.
SOldiers in Peace, are like Chimneys in Summer.

2.
Painters are cunning Fellows, for they have a Color for whatever they do.

3.
Cobblers may be said to be good men because they set men upright, and are
always mending Soles.

4.
A Prison is a good Instrument of Reformation, for it makes many Lewd Fellows
staid men.

5.
Physicians, of all men, have the be^^ on it; for if they do well, the World
proclaims it; if ill, the Earth covers it.

6.
Carpenters are civil and honest Fellows, for they do all their business by
Rule.

7.
Virtue is easier than Vice; for the Essential difference between Vice and
Virtue is Truth and Falsehood; and it is easier and less pains to tell Truth
than a Lie; and for Vices of the Senses, Custom is all in all; for to one that
has lived honestly, it is as much shame to commit Sin, as for another to
abstain.

8.
At a certain Marriage, One let fall this Silver Saying, That Parents might
forbid their Children an unfit M^^ch, but may not force their Consent to a fit
one.

9.
Aristippus being accused by a Strumpet for having got her with Child,
answered, Thou may as well, going through a Thorn-Hedge, tell certainly
which Thorn pricked thee.

10.
The Merits of a deserving Lady are enough to serve her for a Protection,
amongst the Savage Indians; whilst their Rudeness and Barbarity knows not so
perfectly to hate all Virtues, as some men's Subtilty does.

11.
Carry a Watchful Eye, upon Dangers till they come to ripeness; and when they
are ripe, let loose ^ speedy hand: He that Expects them too long, meets 'em too
soon, and gives advantage to the Evil. Commit their beginnings to Argus's Eyes,
and their End to Bri^^^^'s hands, and thou art safe.

12,
Fortune has no Power over Wisdom, but of Sensuality, and of Lives that Swim
and Navigate without the Loadstone of Discretion and Judgment.

13.
Aristarchus Scoffingly said, That in old times hardly could be found seven
Wise Men throughout the World: But i^ our Days, says he, much ado there is to
find so ^any Fools.

14.
Antisthenes being asked by one, What Learning was most necessary for Man's
Life? Answered, To Vnlearn that which is Naught.

15.
Diogenes being asked in a kind of scorn, What was the Reason that Philosophers
haunted Rich Men, and not Rich Men Philosophers? Answered, Because the former
knew what they wanted, the latter did not.

16.
When it was said to Anaxagoras, The Athenians have condemned you to dye; he
said again, And Nature them.

17.
When Croesus for his Glory showed Solon his great Treasures of Gold, Solon
said to him, If another comes that has better Iron than you, he will be Master
of all this Gold.

18.
Chilon used to say, That Gold was tried with a Touchstone, and Men with Gold.

19.
Solon compared the People unto the Sea, and the Orators and Counselors unto
the Wind; for that the Sea would be calm and quiet if the Wind did not trouble
it.

20.
An Arch Blade used to say, That of all Trades the Midwives was the most
commendable: For, says he, they live not by the hurts of other men, as
Chyrurgions do; nor by the falling out of Friends, as Lawyers do; but by the
Agreement betwixt Party and Party.

Notable BULLS,
1.
A Young Country Squire riding very hard, his Horse grew very Sick upon it: he
complaining to hi^ Friend; says he, I rid my Horse har^ and he is sick; and I
fear he will never (...) his own Man again.

2.
Another being asked whether (...) Friend Tom, that was lately dead, h^^ left
him any Legacy? No Faith, says (...) Not a Tester to drink his Health.

3.
One asked a Fellow if he would into the Water with him: No, fa^ he, I Will never
go into the Water till I have learnt to Swim.

4.
Some Gentlemen being at Dinner in a Tavern, one of them that was a little
nicer than the rest, seeing the Salt look a little dirtily, called to the
Drawer, to bring up some fresh Salt.

5.
Some Gentlemen being at Dinner together, were diverting themselves with Jests
and Bulls: One among them more curious than the rest, de^ired an Oxford Scholar
in the Company, to give him the definition of a Bull; who ingeniously told him,
That a Bull was an Ox gelt.

6.
A Blind Minister coming to speak with a Gentleman, the Gentleman^s man came
running to him, and told ^im, That the blind Minister was come ^o see him.

7.
A Young Scholar was very much troubled, and did not like his Dictionary,
Praying his Father to get it changed, because, He could not find what was Latin
for Aqua-vitae in it.

8.
A Country Justice examining a poor thieving Scholar, said, Sirrrah, you are
an Arch Rogue, but take warning, for if you are once hanged, your Book cannot
save you from the Gallows.

9.
One being advised to go to Sea, No says he, I had rather travel all the World
over by Land.

10.
A certain King being sick, on^^ prayed, That he might Reign as long a^ the Sun
and Moon should endure, an^ the Prince his Son, after him.

11.
One finding his Friend abed at Ten a Clock in the Morning, asked him why he
lay so long? Why Faith, says he, I came home late last night: Why, how late was
it, says his Friend? Late! says he, 'twas three a Clock in the morning.

12.
An Ignorant Fellow complaining of the Folly of the Age, said, That men were
far wiser in future times then now.

13.
One boasting of his Credit, said, He knew a Scrivener that would lend him
Fifty Pounds at any time, on his own Bond, without either Scrip or Scrowl.

14.
One going over in the Ferry-Boat from Richmond to Twitnam, the Ferry-mans Wife
Officiating, admiring said, He never saw a Woman Ferry-man before.

15.
Two Persons going along Cheapside, a Dumb-man accidentally meeting 'em,
jostled against one of them; whereupon he held up his Stick to strike him; but
the Dumb-man making some sign, which the Person that was with him perceiving,
stop^d his Friends blow, asking him why he would strike a Dumb-man? Is he Dumb,
says the other? Why did he not tell me so.

16.
One seapking to a Gentleman of the unkindness of his supposed Friend, said, in
a Passion, That he had no sooner t^rn'd his Back, but the Rascoal abused him
before his Face.

17.
A Country Fellow passing by the Exchange, saw the Picture of a Unicorn hang
up; says he to one that stood by, I have seen several Pictures of these Beasts
with one Horn only; pray are not there some Unicorns with two Horns?

18.
One asking a certain Person how his Friend came off at the Sessions House? he
told him he was to be Burnt in the Hand; Pish, says the other, that is a small
matter; for, for a little Fee, the'll Burn him in the Hand with a cold Iron.

19.
A Sea-Captain was invited to a Hunting-Match, who when he came home related
what sport he had, after this manner: Our Horses, says he, being well Rigged,
we manned them; and the Wind being at West-South-West Fifteen of us in Company)
away we stood over the Downs; in the time of half a Watch, we spied a Hare
udner full Gale, we Tackt and stood after her, coming up close, she Tackt, and
we Tackt, upon which Tack I had like to run aground; but getting clear off, I
stood after her again, but as the Devil would have it, just as I was going to
lay her aboard, bearing too much Wind, I and my Horse over-set, and came Heel
upward.

20.
A silly old Fellow meeting his Godson, asked whether he was going? To School,
said the Boy: That Is well, said he, there is a Penny for you; Be a good Boy, and
mind your Book, and I hope I shall live to hear the Preach my Funeral-Sermon.

21.
A foolish young Esquire, being newly come to his Estate (taking after the old
Miser his Father, grew covetous.) He hearing his Steward say, he had killed him
a Bullock against Christmas. What, said he; do you mean to undo me by such
extravagant Expenses? I will have but half a one kil^ed at a time.

22.
A Parson who had not much Wit to spare, seeing his Son play roguish Tricks,
Why Sarrah, said he, did you ever see me do so, when I was a Boy, as you are.

23.
A Precise Fellow hearing much Swearing in a Bowling-Green, said, For shame
Gentlemen forbear, it is Gods great mercy the Bowling-Green does not fall on
your Heads.

24.
One sitting at Supper, his Cat part to and fro through his Arms, brushing her
Tail against his Mouth, which made him so angry, that he cut off the tip of her
Tail, saying, I think now, Mistress Puss, I have given you an Earmark: For a
little time the Cat staid away, but the next day came again, according to her
usal manner; whereupon in a rage, said he, Why, how now, you troublesome Bitch?
Are you come again? I thought I had given you your Breakfast last night.

25.
A Gentleman hiring some Laborers to pull down his old Wall, that he might
build a new one; as they were doing it, cried out to them to have a care, least
the Foundation should tumble on their Heads.

26.
When Guiennys were first Coined, they were a great rarity in the Country: A
young Fop coming from London, more Gallant than Wise, seeing the People so
earnest to see them, Alas, said he, throwing down two or three of them on the
Table, These are so common in London, that you cannot receive Forty Shillings,
but you must take five or six of them whether you will or no.

27.
One going by Water, said to another in the Boat that had affronted him, Speak
another word, and I Will knock your Head and the Wall together.

28.
One that was Born in the Parish of St. Gile's Cripplegate, said When I dye,
I Will be Buried in Cripple- Churchyard, an't please GOD I live.

29.
The same Person affirming there was two sorts of Fishes allowed to be cried on
a Sunday; being asked what Fishes they were, answered, Milk and Mackarel.

30.
One saying, That the Fenny-Countreys were very unhealthy; I am of your mind,
said another, for I lived there once, and I believe if I have lived there till
this thime, I had died seven Years ago.

Thirteen Ingenious Characters. Drawn to the Life.
I. Of a CHARACTER.
IT gives you the hint of Discourse, but Discourses not; and is that in Mass
and Ingo^, which you may Coin and Wyer-draw into infinite; 'is more Seneca than
Cicero, and speaks rather the Language of Oracles than Orators: Every Lin^'s a
Sentence, and every two a Period. It says not all, but all it says is good; and
like an Air in Music, is either full of Closes, or still driving toward a
Close: It Is no long winded Exercise of Spirit, but a forcible one, and
therefore soonest out of Breath; it is all matter, and to the matter; and has
nothing of Superfluity, nothing of. Circumlocution. So little comporting with
Mediocrity, as it extols to Heaven, or depresses unto Hell; having no mid place
for Purgatorv left. It Is that in every sort of Writing delights most; and
though the Treatise be Gold, it is the Jewel still, which the Author of
Characters, like your Lapidary, produces single, whilst others, Goldsmith like,
inchase them in their Works. It Is a Portraiture not only of the Body, but the
Soul and Mind: Whence it not only delights, but teaches and moves withal, and
is a Sermon as well as Picture to every one. In fine, it is a short Voyage; the
Writer holds out with equal force, still coming fresh unto his Journeys end,
whilst in long ones they commonly tire and faulter on their way: And to the
Reader it is a Garden, not a Journey; or a Feast, where, by reason of the
Subjects variety, he is never cloyed; but at each Character, as at a new
Service, falls too with fresh Appetite.

II. Of an Importunate Dun.
AN Importunate Dun, is the Quintessence of Vexation; a Single Plague, worse
then all Egypts Ten; a kind of Substantial Ghost, perpet^ally haunting a Man,
and sucking him as eagerly as an Hobg^blin does a Witch; an Horse-leech that
always cries, Give, give; or rather a Cuckoo, that has never but one Note, Pay,
Pay, Pay; Money, Money, Money: A tr^ublesome Devil, not to be laid with Holy
Water, and only exorcis'd by Silver Crosses, an Evil Spirit, whom no Music but
the sweet Gingling of Coin can charm.

Should we enquire his Pedigree, he seems one of Nimrod's Bastards, for he is a
Tyrant by Nature, and a mighty Hunter by Profession. A Blood-Hound of a notable
Quick Scent to discover his Game, and a deep Mouth tu pursue it; he takes upon
him a Prerogative to get, where even Kings themselves must lose their Rights;
Nay, presumes to Ape Creation, by attempting to squeez something out of
nothing, and raise a World of Cash, from the bar^en Womb of mere Vacuities.

He would make an excellent Statesman, for ^he has the best inte^ligence in
the World, and will find out a lurking Acquaintance in a City crowd, or
Countre^ corner, sooner then a purblind Astrologer, or a limping Hue and Cry;
Yet nothing lights him to you sooner, or more exasperates him against you, then
a new Suit, a good Dinner, or a merry Glas^; for he holds it for a Maxim, That
whoever owes him any thing, ought to be in Arrear likewise both to back and
belly. If the Debtor live so remote, that he cannot convenie^tly wait on him
every other day, he makes him pay Interest (even to Extortion) at the Post
Office; for he is sure of more Letters than a handsome Girl of Sixteen, that
has a great Fortune at her own Dispose; his Style in these Familiar Epistles,
is extr^amly Civil in the Front, but close and pressing in the Rear -- He would
rather lose his small concern, than put you to the least ^nconvenience -- But
must needs have hi^ Money next return, or else shall be forced to turn over the
Debt, or take his Course, Yet he attributes your Non-payment to your
unmindfulness, and desires you not to take this one more Item unkindly; He
talks much in the Language of Bacon's Brazen-Head, Time's past: and (as if you
were a second Joshua) blames you for not keeping the day; he Pretends
extraordinary kindness for you, but hates all Protections so much, that he
dares not say at the end of his Letter, He commits you to that of Heaven; but
always hoping to hear from you speedily, and with Effect, rests, Your humble
Servant.

At this rate (as the Weapon-s^lve^ heales) he wounds at a distance; but if you
are come-at able, (as he calls it) he will rack the very Soul of you; for he
attends you as duly as your Shadow, and proves as constant a Tormentor as a
Guilty Con^cience to a Murderer: You can neither eat, n^r drink, nor sl^ep nor
walk in quiet for him. Indeed the Tenter-Hooks he pu^s a Man upon, are enough
to stretch the tenderest Conscience, and warp the best Nature in the World; for
when he will not be satisfied with Truth, you are forced to tell him what is
not so, to g^t rid of him; afterward by incessant Importunities, he provokes
you to swear at him; and at last, by degrees, hardens you into a Resolution,
never to pay him. Thus we may call him the Devils Usher, that temp^s people
from Lying to Swearing, from that to Dishonestly, and so Improves them from
Form to Form, in the School of wickedness, till they are sitted for the Academy
of Hell.

Etymologists think he is called a Dunn, by Antip^rasis, because he will never
^ave d^ne bawling; or (as others write) takes the Appellation from a quondam
famous Officer or Justice of that name, with whose Nat^re he simpathizes, and
worries a poor Man with as little Remorse, as that New gate Squire could a
Traitor. His Faith is enough to make one turn I^fidel, for he u^es none so bad
as those he Trusts: Nor can he be counted a Christian, since his Charity both
begins and ends at home. And if ever he says his Prayers, he skips over that
Petition, Forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our D^btors, in the Pater N^ster,
as s^ily as a Phanatick does the Article of Believing in the Catholic Church,
in the Creed. He is commonly early up, and never the near; for he wakes a man
in a morning, before the Lark is up to ch^u^t her M^ttins, and a Guard of
Switzers cannot keep him out of ones Chamber: Alleging Business, Physic,
Sleep or Sickness, cannot divert his Persecutions: And it is happy for him that
doors cannot maintain Act^ons of Asault and Battery. He beats up your Quarters
so often, that they quickly learn to deny you at home: but if he chance to find
you at any of your Haunts, he makes you believe '^was by the meerest Acciden^,
though he have wai^ed eight and forty hours on purpose. However, he it heartily
glad to see you, (that is the only Truth you shall have of him) and shaking you
by the hand, he asks you, -- What News? But before you can answer, out comes
the little Money between us. Then, Lord bless him! Times are so hard, and Money
was never so scarce since Adam wore Fig leaved Breeches! His Creditors are so
u^gent, they will not be put off, but he must forthwith make up a Sum, and
therefore if you cannot help him to all, spare him but a little, for five pound
now will do him as much good, as fifty another time: Nay, 'twill be as great a
favor, as if vo^ gave it him out of your Purse, etc. With this rally of
Rhetoric, the b^u^hing Debtor is Non-pl^st, and Promises as many
Impossibilities, as a Quack Doctor, or a trembling Cully, under the Terrors of
a ^ully Rampant, only silently wishes, he had a handful of Guinnies to beat out
his Brains with: for he is as much afraid of him, as a saucy Pre^tice of
meeting a Gentleman at White Hall, whom he has affronted in the City: This
makes him shun the place where he lives, as bad as a Pesthouse: And (if we may
credit an experienced Author) when he is to pass from Algate to Covent Garden,
and the low ebb in his Pocket will not suffer him to go by Water, he must first
trot down to Tower hill, thence strike up to Norton-Falgate, then down again to
Queen-hive, thence up to Charter house-yard, from thence to S^lisbury Court,
and so to Red-Lyon Fields, before he can reach Drury Lane in Safety; and yet
for all this caution, his head stands awry, with continual looking about.

Yet take them both together, they are two of the greatest Hypocrites in
Nature; for though behind one another backs they rail each at other, as bad as
a Weaver against a Frenchman, yet when they m^et, they are so glad to see one
another! And truly, I have ever found you very Civil to me, says one, and I
cannot in the least question your Honesly, says the other; when the short of it
is, it is forty to one, but one of them will prove a rank Knave: The Creditor,
if ever he be paid; or the Debtor, if he never pay.

III. Of a Sergeant, or Baylif, and his Setting-Cur.
THe first, is a kind of Excrescence of the Law, like our Nails, made only to
Scratch and Claw; A sort of Bird-^ime, where he lays hold, he hangs; a Raven
that picks not out men's Eyes, as others do, but all his spite is at their
Shoulders; and you had better have the Nightmare ride you, then this Incubus.
He is one of Deucalion's By-blows, begotten of a Stone, and has taken an Oath
never to pity Widow nor Orphan. His first business is to bait you for money
for his (confounded) civility; next to call for Drink as fast as men for
Buckets of Water in a Conflagration; After which, becoming grave and serious,
he advises you in revenge to Arrest the Plantiff, and offers to do it; with or
without cause; it is all one to him, if he perceive you have money.

His Follower is an Hanger that he wears by his side; a false Dye of the small
Ball, but not the same Cut, for it runs somewhat higher, inflames the
Reckoning, and so does more michief. He Is a Tumbler that drives in all the
Coneys; but is yet but a bungler, and knows not how to Cut up a man without
Tearing, unless by a pattern. This is the Hook that hangs under water to choke
the Fish, and his Officer the Quill above, which pops down as soon as ever the
Bait is swallowed. Though differing in degree, they are both much of a
complexion, only the Teeth of this latter are more sharp, and he more hungary,
because he does but snap, and has not his full half share of the booty. A main
part of his Office is to swear and bluster at their trembling Prisoners, and
cry, Confound us! Why do we wait? Let Us Shop him: Whilst the other replies,
Jack be patient, it is a civil Gentleman, and I know will consider us: Which
spies of wheedling in Terms of their Art, is called; Sweeten and Pinch. The
Eyes of these Wolves are as quick in their Heads, as a Cutpurses in a Throng;
and as nimble are they at their business, as an Hangman at an Execution.
They Will court a broken-Pate, to heal it with a Plaster of Green-Wax, and suck
more Silver out of a Wound, than a Chyrurgeon. Yet as these Eels are generally
bred out of the mud of a Bankrupt, so they commonly dye with their Gut ripped up,
or are decently run through the Lungs; and as they lived hated, die unpitied.
We speak here of those only that abuse the intentions of the Law, and act
Oppression under the Color of serving common Justice.

IV. Of a Paun-Broker.
AN Unconscionable Paun-Broke, (for there are conscionable Dealears in that
way, that are a Relief and Comfort to the Poor, and those are not concerned in
this Character;) An unconscionable Paun-broker, I say, is Pluto's Factor, Old
Nick's Wareho^se-keeper, an English Jew, that lives and grows fat on Fraud and
Oppression, as Toads on filth and venom; whose Practice outvies Usury, as much
as Incest simple Fornication; and to call him a Tradesman, must be by the same
Figure that Pickpockets style their Legerdemain an Art and Mystery. His Shop
like Hell-Gates, is always open, where he sits at the Receipt of Custom, like
Cacas in his Den, ready to devour all that is brought him; and having gotten
your Spoils, hangs them up in Rank and File, as so many Trophies of Victory.
Hither all sorts of Garments resort in Pilgrimage, whilst he playing the Pimp,
lodges the Taby Petticoat and Russet Breeches together in the same Bed of
Lavender. He is the Treasurer of the Thieves Exchequer, the common Fender of
all Bulkers and Shop-lifts in the Town. To this purpose he keeps a private
Warehouse, and Ships away the Ill-gotten goods by wholesale; dreading nothing
so much, as that a Convict should honestly confess how he disposed the
Movables. He is a kind of Disease quite contrary to the Gout; for as that
haunts the Rich, so this mainly torments ^he Poor, and scarce leaves them so
much as a primitive Fig leaf to cover their Nakedness. Mistress Ione, when she
is minded to see her sweetheart, and Gam^er Blew-Bottle going to a Christening,
muster up the Pence ^'th' Saturday Night, to redeem their best Rigging out of
Captivity; but on Monday Morning infallibly bring them back (like Thieves that
had only made an escape) to the old Limbus; and this so often, till at last
they know the way, and can go to Pawn alone by themselves. Thus they are forced
to purchase the same Clothes seven times over; and for want of a Chest to keep
them in at home, it cost thrice as much as they are worth for their Lodging in
his Custody. When they come in like other Prisoners, they first pay Garnish,
the Two pence for Entrance money; after this, Sixpence a Month, for every
Twenty Shillings lent, (which yet indeed is but 19 s. 6 d.) that is (according
to their Reckoning of thirteen Months to the Year) Six Shillings and Sixpence
Interest for one Pound for a Year; which makes Thirty three Pounds, Six
Shillings and Eight-pence in the hundred, viz. One-third part of the Principle,
and just 27. l. 6 s. 8 d. more than the Statue allows; besides Twelve-pence for
a Bill of Sale, if the matter be considerable. So that since they never lend
half the value on any thing that is brought them; if a Paun-Broker lay out an
Hundred Pounds, he first make^ near Forty per Annum Advantage certain, ^as
aforesaid: And then considering how many Thieves, etc. (their chiefest
Customers that bring the l^mping Bargains) never intend t^ redeem, and how many
Poor are not able (especially since as soon as the Year and Day expire, they
presently dispose of their Pawns, or pretend to do so) we may reasonably
conclude, that these Horse-Leeches make Cent per Cent at least of their Money
in the Year, And all this by a course tending only to the encouragement of
Theives, and Ruin of those that are Honest but Indigent.

V. Of a PRISON.
A Prison is the Grave of the Living, where they are shut up-from the World and
their Friends! and the Worms that Gnaw upon them, are their own Thoughts and
the Jailer. It Is a House of Meagre looks, and ill smells, for Lice, Drink and
Tobacco, are the Compound; Pluto's Court was expressed from this fancy. And the
Persons are much about the same Party that is there. You may ask as Manippus in
Lucan, which is Nir^us? which Thersities? which the Beggar? which the Knight?
For they are all suited in the same form of a kind of Nasty Poverty; only to be
out at Elbows is in fashion here, and it is a great Indecorum not to be
Threadbare. Every Man shows here like so many Wrecks upon the Sea, here the
Ribs of a Thousand Pounds, and here the Relick of so many Mannours, is a
Doublet without Buttons; and it is a spectacle of more pity then Executions are.
The Company one with another is but a vying of complaints, and the causes they
have to rail on Fortune, and fool themselves; and there is a great deal of good
fellowship in this. They are commonly, next their Creditors, most bitter
against the Lawyers, as men that have had a great stroke in assigning them
thither. Mirth here is stupidity or hard heartedness, yet they feign it
sometimes, to shun Melancholy, and keep off themselves from themselves, and the
torment of thinking what they have been. Men huddle up their life here as a
thing of no use, and wear it out like an old Suit, the faster the better; and
he that deceives the Time best, best spends it. It is the place where new
comers are most welcomed, and next them ill News, as that which extends their
Fellowship in Misery, and leaves few to insult; and they breathe their
discontents more securely here, and have their Tongues a^ more liberty than
their Bodies. Men see here much Sin and Calamity, and when the la^t does not
mortify, the other hardens; and those that are wicked here, are desperately
wicked, as those from whom the horror of Sin is taken off, and the punishment
Familiar. And commonly a hard thought passes on all that come from this School;
Which though it teach much Wisdom, it is too late, and with danger: And it is
better to be a Fool, than to come here to learn it.

VI. Of a TAVERN.
A Tavern is a degree, or (if you will) a pair of Stairs above an Alehouse,
where men are Drunk with more Credit. If the Vin^ners Nose be at the door, it
is a Sign sufficient, but the absence of this is supplied by a Bush: The Rooms
are ill breathed, like the Drunkards that have been well washed over Night, and
are smelt to fasting next morning, nor furnished with Beds apt to be defiled,
but more necessary Implements, Chairs Tables, and a Chamber Pot. It is a
broacher of more News then Hogsheads, and more Jests than News; which are sucked
up here by some spungy Brain, and from thence squeezed into a Comedy. Men come
here to make merry, but indeed make a Noise, and this Music above, is
answered. with the Chat^ing below: The Drawers are the (...) ^cople in it: Men
of good bringing up; and howsoever w^ esteem o^ them, none can boast m^re
j^^tly of their High Calling. It is the b^^t Theater of Natures, where they are
truly act^d, not played: and the business, as in the rest of the World, up and
down; that is, from the bottom of the Cellar to the Great Chamber. A Melancholy
man would find matter to work upon, to see Heads as bri^^le as Glasses, and as
^ften broken. M^n come hither to qua^rel, and come hither to be made friend^.
It is the common Con^u^ption of the Afternoon, and the Murderer or Maker away
of a Rainy Day. It is the Torrid Zone that scorches the Face, and T^b^cco the
Gun powder that blows it up. A House of Sin you may call it, but not a House of
Darkness, for the Cand^es are never out; and it is like those Cou^^i^s far in
the North, where it is as clear at Midnight as at Midday. After a long
sitting, it becomes like a street in a dashing shower, where the Spouts are
flushing above, and the Conduits running below: while the Jordans, like
swelling Rivers, overflow their Banks. To give the total reckoning of it, It Is
the busy man's Recreation, the Idle man's Business, the Melancholy man's
Sanctuary, the Inns a Court-mans Entertainment, the Scholars Kindness, and the
Citizens Courtesy. It is the Study of Sparkling Wits, and a Cup of Canary
their Book, where we leave them.

VII. Of a SCOLD.
A Rank Scold is a Devil of the Female Gender; a Serpent perpe^ually a hissing
and spitting of Venom; a Composition of Ill Nature and Clamor. You may call
her animated Gun Powder, a walking Mount- AEtna, that is always belching forth
flames of Sulphur. A Burr about the Moon, is not half so certain a presage of a
Tempest at S^a, as her Brow is of a Storm on Land. And though Laurel, Hawthorn,
and Seal-Skin, are held preservatives against Thunder, Magic has not been able
to find out any Amulet so Sovereign as to still her Ragings; for like Oil
poured on flames, good words do but make her rage the faster; and when once
her-Flag of Defiance, the Tippet, is unfurled, she cares not a straw for
Constable nor Ducking-stool.

Her Tongue is the Clapper of the Devils Saints-Bell, that rings all-in to
Confusion. It runs round like a Wheel, one Spoke after another, and makes more
Noise and Jangling, than Countrey-steeples on the Fifth of November.

If she be of the preciser cast, she abuses Sacred Language in her Railing, as
Conjurers do in their Charms; calls her Neighbors Heathen ^domites, her
Husband Reprobate, or Son of Belial; and will not Cudgel her Maid without a
Text for'^. But now I speak of Husband, methinks I see the Creeping Snail,
shivering in an Ague-fir when he comes in her presence. She is worse then
Cow-itch in his Bed, and as good as a Chasing-dish at Board; But has either
quite forgot his Name, or else she likes it not; which makes her Rebaptize him
with more noble Titles, as, White-liver'd Raskal, Drunken Sot, Sneaking
Nick^^poop, or Pitiful Lowsey Tom Farthing. Thus she worries him out of his
Senses at home, and then she ferrets his Haunts abroad worse than a Needy Bawd
does a decayed Bullies. In a word, A virulent Scold is her Neighbors perpetual
Disquiet, her Families Evil Genius, her Husbands Ruin, and her own daily
Tormentor: And that you may the better know her Pedigree, I Will give you a
serious Account of the Receipt or Method made use of for her Production into
the World, lately found in a long-concealed Manuscript of Theophrastus
Bombastas Paracelsus; as follows, viz.

Nature to form a Scold, first took of the Tongues and Galls of Bulls, Bears,
Wolves, Magpies, Parrots, Cuckows, and Mightingals, of each a like number: The
Tongues and Tails of Vipers, Adders, Snakes and Lizards, seven a piece: Aurum
Fulminans, Aquafortis, and Gu^-Powder, of each one Pound: The Clappers of
Nineteen Bells, and the Pestles of a dozen Apothecaries Mortars. Which being
all mixed, she Calcined in Mount Strombello, and dissolved the Ashes in a Water
distilled just under London Bridge at three quarters Flood, and Filtrated it
through the Leaves of Calapines Dictionary, to render the Operation more
verbal. After which, she distilled it again through a Speaking-Trumpet, and
closed up the remaining Spirits in the Mouth of a Cannon. Then she opened the
Graves of all new-dec^ased Pettifoggers, Mountebanks, Barbers, Coffee
News-Mongers, and Fish Wives; and with the Skins of their Tongues made a
Bladder, covered o er with Drum-heads, and filled with Storms, Tempests, Whirle
winds, Thunders. Lightnings, etc, These for better I^corporation, she set seven
years in a Rough-Sea to Ferment, and then mixing them with the rest, rectified
the whole three times a day for a Twelve month in a Baln^a of Quicksilver.
Lastly, to Irradiate the whole Elixir, and make it more Churlish, she cut a
Vein under the Tongue of the Dog Star, drawing thence a Pound of the most
choleric Blood; from which Sublimating the Spirits, she mixed them with the
Foam of a Mad-Dog; and then putting all together in the forementioned Bladder,
stitcht it up with the Nerves of Socrates's Wife. Out of this notable
Preparatory, Dame Nature composed a Shrew.

VIII. Of a bad HUSBAND.
A Bad Husband, is an inconsiderate piece of Sottish Extravagance. For though
he consists of several ill Ingredients, yet still good Fellowship, is the Causa
fine qua non, and gives him the Ho go. He is the Wise Man's Scorn, the Shirks
Exchequer, and the wheedling Hostesses Honest Man; the Moth of an Estate, the
Shipwreck of a Family, or a mischief Three-story-high; for he scandalizes his
Ancestors, ruins himself, and strangles the hopes of all his Posterity. He
throws away his Wealth as heartily as young Heirs, or old Philosophers; and is
so eager of a Goal, or a Mumpers Wallet, that he will not wait Fo^^u^e^ leisure
to u^doe him, but Rid^s Post to Beggers-Bush; and takes more pains to spend
money, ^hen Day-Labourers to g^t it; whil^t still his word is, Let Us not pinch
while we have it, since it is time enough to w^^t when we have it not.

He knows no difference between Prodigality and Liberality, bu^ is so foolishly
free, that he dries up the Springs of Bounty, by cutting down the Banks, and
letting the Streams run at waste. If he pretends to Gentility, he thinks he can
no way make good that Title, but by paying (where ever he come^) all the whole
Reckoning; and ev^ry Rascal that can bu^ cry, My Noble M^^t^r, is Master of his
whole Purse; which sucking Vermin c^ntinu^lly fl^tter about him, as thick as
Flies in a Confectioners-shop. If he go to Market, it is but to purchase a Fox,
and two days after returns, having only Truckt away his Corn for Drink, and put
off his Cattle to make him a greater Beast.

His first business after Marriage, is to pay Ale House Scores with his Wives
Portion; and his next, to pawn her Cloa^hes for supplies of fresh Debauchery.
If he be a Citizen, he counts his Shop a Prison, till at last he is Shopped in
a Prison indeed. He pretends always extraordinary business abroad, and must
needs go to the Exchange: when he has nothing to do there, But change Shillings
into Six-pences, and reduce Guinneys into Farthings. He still cries, it is too
soon to go home yet, and will trudge a Mile about, rather than come near his
own Door, for fear he should ^e obliged to come in before his hour, which is
midnight, or past: for if he goes home before, he says, He can never sleep
well. He is an Hogshead set up upon two stumps fit for nothing but to hold
strong Drink: and i^ he be not at the Pot, is like a Fish out of Water, that
does nothing but Gape. He thinks Nature gave him a Mouth not so much to Speak,
as to take off his Liq^or: and his only e^quiry is, Where dw^lls the best Sack
and Claret? He is a passionate Lover of Morning Draugh^s, which he generally
co^tinues till Dinnertime: a rigid exact^r of Num-Groats, and
Collector-General for Foy' and Biberidg: He admires the Prudence of that
Apothegm, Let Us drink first: and would rather sell 20 per Cent to loss, than
make a dry Bargain. You shall infallibly find him and his Tribe about the
Fag-end of the day at Randezvouz, like a Constellation fixed in the lower
Region of a known Tavern, where their Noses appear like Comets, that evermore
portend excessive Draughts: They go in upon Parol not to exceed Threepence,
but seldom come out under a Half Crown Club: and their Noise (for Discourse you
cannot call it) is more Nonsensical and Impertinent than a She Quakers Sermon,
or the Tattle of an Up-sitting. As soon as they are accommodated with a private
Room, an half Pint, for so they modestly begin, some clean Pipes, and a Jordan;
their first Argument is the goodness of the Wine, which being voted a Flower,
produces next a Bottle; and then News is the Subject of D^bate, or for want of
that, who was most Drunk ^he Night before, or Reeled home with the greatest
Gravity and Decorum. Though they live like Publicans yet they im^tate Pharisees
in their Exactness of making clean the inside of the Glass: and their strict^st
Criticisms are, See it go round, and take it off Sir.

In this sweet Society, our trusty Trojan bears his part, till he has not
discretion enough left to know at which end to light his Pipe: then staggering
away, if he escape the Compter, it is forty to one, but he meets with some
little To^n-Baggage, who picks his Pocket, and in Requital, bestows upon him a
swing^ng Clap. In the mean time, the good Woman at home sits lamenting till
Twelve at Night, over a piece of moldy Bread, and a draught of Rot-g^r: and
the Children are fain to go to Bed without their Supper, because the vile
Milk-woman is grown faithless. At last, when her precious Husband comes with a
Breath that stinks with Canary and Tobacco, worse than Hell of Brimstone: he
perhaps picks a cause less quarrel, gives her a remembrance with a Bed-staff,
that she is forced to wear the N^rthumberland Arms a week after, which the good
natured Soul must excuse, by pretending an u^lucky Fall, or blaiming an
Innocent Door-latch for the I^jury. But put Case he go peaceably to Bed, what
comfort can be expected from such a Swine?

IX. Of a TOWN-FOP.
THE Town-Fop is one tha^ plays Rex wherever he comes, and makes as much hurry
as R^bin Good Fellow of old, amongst our Granums Milk-bowls; he is a kind of a
Squib on a Rope, a Meteor composed of Self-conceit and Noise, that by blazing
and cracking engages the wonder of the Ignorant, till on a ^^ddain he vanishes
and leaves a stench, if not infection behind him; he is too often the stain of
a good Family, and by his Debauched life blots the noble Coat of his Ancestors:
A wild un^acked Colt, whose Br^ins are not half codled; i^deb^ed for his
Clothes to his Tailor, and for his Wit, (such as it is) to his Company. The
School had no sooner endued him with a few Superficial besprinklings, but his
Mothers Indulgence posted him to Town for gente^ler breeding, where three or
four wild Companion^, half a dozen bottles of Burgundy, two leaves of
Leviathan, a brisk encounter with his Landlords Glass-Windows, the charms of a
little Miss, and the sight of a new Play, dubbed him at on^e both a Wi^ and a
Hero; ever since he values himself mainly for understanding the Town, and
indeed knows most things in it that are not worth knowing: The two Poles
wherein all his discourses ^^^n, are Atheism and B^wdry, bar him from being
profane and obscene, and you cramp his Ingenuity, which forthwith flags and
becomes useless, as a mere common Lawyer, when he has crossed the Channel.

He is so refractory to Divinity, that Morallity it self cannon hold him: He
affir^s humane Nature knows no such thing as Principles of good or evil; and
will swear, all Women are Whores, though his Mother and Sister stand by;
whatsoever is Sacred or Serious, he seeks to render ridiculous, and thin^s
Government and Religion fit objects for his idle and fantastic Buffoonty: His
humor is proud and assuming, as if he would Palliate his ignorance by scoffing
at what he understands not; and therefore with a pert and pragmatick scorn,
deprecates all things of nobler mom^nt, but most passionately affects pretty
All-a-mode words, and is as covetous of a new Song or Air, as an Antiquary of
Cato's Statue, with never an Arm and but half a Nose; these keep him always
employed, and f^ll up the Grotesco't of his Conversation, whilst with a stately
Galantry, once in every ^alf hour he combs out his Wig, Careens his Breeches,
and new Marshals his Garnit^re, to the Tu^e of, Methinks the poor Town has been
troubled too long.

His mind used to whistle up and down in the levities of Fancy, and effeminated
by the childish Toying of a rampant imagination, finds it self indisposed for
all solid employment, especially the serious exercises of Piety and Virtue,
which begets an Aversion to those lovely Beauties, and that prompts him on all
occasions to expose them as rediculous and vain: Hence by degrees he comes to
abuse Sacred Scripture, makes a mock of Eternal Flames, joques on the venerable
mysteries of Religion; and in fine, scoffs at that All-Glorious and Tremendous
Majesty, before whom his Brother Wits below tremble. It Is true, He will not
confess himself Atheist, yet in his heart the Fool has said it, and boasts
aloud, that he holds his Gospel from the Apostle of Malmsbury, though it is
more then probable he never read, at least understood, Ten ^eaves of that
unlucky Author. Talk of Witches and youtickle him; speak ^f Spirits, and he
tells you he knows ^one better than those of Wine; name but Immaterial Essence,
and he shall ^^out at you as a dull Fop, incapable of Sense, and unfit for
Conversation: Nor is he better pleased, then when he c^n here hedge in some Raw
Divine, t^ Bull-bait with Scurrility, and all kind ^^ Profaneness.

By means of some small scraps of Learning, matched with a far greater stock of
Confidence, a voluble Tongu^ and a bold Delivery, he has the ill luck to be
celebrated by the Vulgar, for a man of parts; which Opinion gains credit to his
Insolences, and sets him on farther Extravagancies to maintain his Title of
Wit, by continuing his practice of Fooling; whereas, all his mighty parts are
summed up in this Inventory; Imprimi^, A Pedling way of Fancy, a lucky hit at
Quibling, now and then an odd Metaphor, a ^^nceited Irony, a ridiculous Simile,
a ^^ld Fetch, an unexpected I^ference, a Mimick Gesture, a pleasing Knack in
humouring a Tale: And lastly, an irresistible Resolution of speaking last, and
never be dashed out of Countenance.

By these Arts, dexterously managed, he engrosses a vast Repute? The grave
Citizens call him shrewed man, and n^table Headpiece; the Ladies (we (...) the
things so called of his acqua^^tance) vote him a most accomplis^t Gentleman,
and the Blades swear he is a walking Comedy, the only Mer^^ Andrew in the Age,
that scatters Wi^ where ever he comes, as Beggars do Lice, or Musk-Cats
Perfumes; and (...) nothing in Nature can compare w^^h him.

You would think he had gotten the ^^^^ian Art, for he speaks Extempore on all
Subjects, and ventures his words without the relief of Sense to second them;
his thoughts start from his Imaginatiod, and he never troubles himself to
examine their decency, or solidity by Judgment; to discourse ^^m seriously, is
to read the Ethices to a Monkey, or make an Oration ^o Ca^^^^'s Horse, whence
you can only ^^^^ct a We he, or Iadish Spurn; after (...) most convincing
Arguments, if he (...) but muster up one plausible Joque, (...) are routed. For
he that under^^ood not your Logic, apprehends his Dr^ll; and though Syllogisms
may be an^wered, yet Jests and loud Laughter can never be confuted, but have
more swa^ to degrade things with the unthin^ing Crowd, then Demonstrations:
^he^^ being a Root of envy in too many ^^en, that invites the^ to applaud th^^
which exposes and villifies what the^ cannot comprehend. He pretends great
skill in curing the Te^ers and Ring-worms of State, but blows in the sores till
they ra^kle with his poisonous Breath; he shoots Libels with his forked Tongue
at his Superiors, and abuses his dearest Friends, ch^sing to forfeit his Neck
to the Gibbet, o^ his Shoulders to the Battoon, rather t^an lose the driest of
his idle Quibbles. In brief, He is the Iack-Pudding of Soci^^y* a Fleering
Bussoon; a better kind of Ape, in the Judgment of all wise (...) but an
incomparable Wit, in his ow^

XI. A Fantastique Lady.
HER Life is a perpetual Contradirction, she would, and she would not; and,
Make ready the Coach, yet let it alone too; Drive to such a place, yet do not
neither, is her ordinary Dialect: She differs from the Irresolute, in that he
is always beginning, and she ^^ver makes an end: She writes and ^lots out
again, whilst he deliberates that to write; the one being a Resty, and the other
a Restless Pain: So you ^^n tell what to make of t'one's Nega^ive, and how two
Negatives make (...) Affirmative; but of her I and No ^o^ether, you know not
what to make, (...) only that she knows not what to ^^ke of it he self. Her
Head is just (...) a Mill, or Squirrels Cage, and her ^^nd the Squirrel that
turns and ^^irls it round, and her Imagination ^^^^ers from others, as your
Grotesque ^^^ures do from Natural; and from ^^otesque, in that these have some
de^ign in them, but her Imagination has none; she never looking toward the end,
but only the beginning of things; or if she does, forgets or disapproves it
strait: For she will ca^^ ^n haste for one, and have nothing to ^a^ to him when
he is come; and long, ^ay dye, for some Toy or Trifle, which having once, she
grows weary of presently, and throws away. In fine, who are of one mind to day,
and another tomorrow, are constant, to her; and Saturn's Revolution, compared
to the Moons: For you know not where to have her a moment, and whosoever would
hit her Thoughts, must Shoot flying; and fly themselves, whoever would follow
her.

X. Of a Young Enamourist.
He Is one who as soon as he quitted his Schoolboys Toys, next Toy he gets is a
Mistress, when 'twould make you forswear Love to see how ridiculous he makes
it; and to hear him talk of Gods and Goddesses, you would take him for some
Pagan never converted to Christianity. There is nothing so cold as to hear him
talk of Flames, nor so dull as his discourse of Cupids darts; and to hear him
sigh like a dry Pump, or broken-winded Bellows, you would never wonder at
Lapland Witches affording winds so cheap. Of all Servants he is the
necessariest and easiest to content and feed, for he is his Mistresses Squire,
Dispencer, Lacquey, or Messenger, but above all, her Fool, to which he is bound
by the Proverb; It Is impossible to love and be wise: Mean time you may feed him
cheaper than a Camelion, for a good look serves him a week at least, and he is
prouder of holding his Mistresses Busk or Fan, than a Schoolboy with a Scepter
in his hand, playing the Emperors part in the School; to keep him to which, his
Mistress ^ets him know that it is with Love as it is with War, which once
declared, you are to expect nothing but Hostility; and knows her self, that
it is with Lovers as it is with Anglers, who feed the Fish e're they are caught;
but caught once, feed on them: whence she bites not greedily at the bait, but
craftily tolls him on with hopes, and like a Rope-maker goes backwards still,
the better to advance her work, and draw him on; mean while he follows her so
long, till either he wax weary and ceases his pursuit, or catches her tripping,
and then falls down on her, when fastening her in the Marriage Nooze, he carries
her away, and either turns kind Cuckold, and keeps open house for all; or
jealous Coxcomb, and shuts his door against every One.

XII. Of an Honest Drunken Cur.
He Is a Pickled Youth to be sure, for he always lies steeped in his own Liquor;
of which, like a Whale, he carries so much about him, that w^en-ever he
disgorges, he may swim away in his own Flood. Clap but a good Sucker into his
Belly, and he makes an excellent Parish Pump: And if you add but a Pipe to his
Muzzle, he may pass for a Water-Engine, a^^ do good service in time of Fire.
Yo^ need not fear drawing him dry, so long as all the Alehouses and Taver^s in
Town, like little Riv^lets, ^^pply the decrease: He contains about as much as
those in Churches; b^t (...) so unchouth a Trough, he is twice as ^^^d to be
Gaug'd: Yet by frequent ex^^rience he can guess his Measure to a (...),
especially if you expcept Leakage. His Veins are so thronged, and his Blood
(...) ^a^nted with Scurvey, Gout and Dropsy, (and a ^^natch of the French man
too boot, which he g^^ when he was Drunk, and does (...) know who to lay it to)
(...) fies the Intrusion of any other (...) per: wherefore he stalks in as
(...) State through a Pestilence, as (...) Armed Soldier through a Shower
Bullets: for his forementioned Dise^^ses have taken such large Possession (...)
his Body, that there is no room left for Infection.

He has drunk himself into a Jelly and is so moist, that if you squeeze him, he
drops like an Orange.

His Body is a perf^ct Still, wh^^^ he fuels with Brandy instead of Char-coal:
being thoroughly, heated, you may discern t^^ ^weat^ Distilation tricle from his
face, as from the Lid of a Limbeck; and if any chance to drop on his Nose, you
may hear it ^iz as if it fell upon heated Bricks. In fine though he always
lives Joakingly and Merry, be hates nothing more than a dry Jest.

Thus having acquainted you with his Constitution, I shall only consider him in
his Conversation, and ^^iendship, and so leave him to sleep o^t his Nap.

And first for his Conversation; To t^^e him in the Morning (for who can fi^^
him all the Day after? he prev^nts his Prayers with a Pipe of Tob^^co, and
Smoaks at such a Rate, as ^f ^e preferred Sacrifice to Devotion. A Tinder-Box is
as necessary to him, as a green Bagg to an Atturney's Clark, with which he
seems as ravished as Al^^ander with the Odisses, for he ca^^ot sleep unless it
lie under his Pillow* In that little night he makes, he cannot so properly be
said to sleep, as to Chew the Cudd on his Quotidian Debauchery; for he often
disturbs the repose of a Family, with Muttering a R^^e^ion of his Oaths and
Healths. When he awakes, he stares about with ^uc^ wild Curiosity, as one would
fancy ^dam did immediately after his C^e^^ion; for he generally makes him^^lf
so Drunk over Night, drowning h^s past Actions in Liquor and Ob^iv^o^, that he
scarcely knows the the Morning from the Resurrection, and is hardly persuaded
that ever he lived before.

But after he is convinced of the affirmative, spends about a quarter of an
Hour in examining the Bed-posts and Windows, before he discovers whether he be
in his own Lodging: And afterward remains as doubtful how he got thither.

Then Bed staves and Slip-shoos go to wrack, for clattering on the Bedstead,
like Bows at the Bear-Garden, he calls up the People as Country Wenches do
Swine, by knocking; and after a Petition for a Cup of Settle-Brain, begs them
to resolve his Quaery; whereupon they tell him the truth, which indeed is, that
either he came the old Porterly way, Cruch'd with a brace of Watchmen; or else
the Modern and more Genteel way, viz. On Pick-pack, instead of a Sedan.

Now although my Honest Drunken Cur be guilty of many Vices, which li^e Younger
Brothers hang on this great one, which has got possession; Yet ( Give the Devil
his due) I think the World has Sullied his Reputation with diverse Scandals of
which he is no ways Guilty: Wherefore because I only intend his Conversion, not
his Consump^^on; Like an honest Histo^ian (since I write his Life) I ought not
to sue him wronged but rather to rescue him from those Callumnies thrown o^
him, by persons in some respects ^orse then himself.

The first imputation therefore that ^^^y impose on him, is that he is proud:
^^d why for sooth? but because when (...) has a Drop in his Eye; he brags (...)
if he were a better man than his ^eighbours. A stout reason indeed! (...) if a
man might not do as much, that ^ere either Lightheaded, or in a Fe^er; Nay,
Passion alone makes the wisest of us Bedlams. But let us do as we would be done
by, and take him when he is himself, (that is, in a Morn^ing) and then I am
sure he is as free from Pride, as a Quaker from good ^anners or Ribonds: from
would Cu^^om admit, I am confident he would ^ather go to the Alehouse Naked,
^^an undergo the hard Penance of Sobriety while he dresses himself.

Secondly, They call him an Idle fellow: a good fellow all the World knows he
is, but as for idleness, let me dye if I ^now any one more free from it than
he; What would they have of him trow? he rises early, sits up late; and I dare
swear he grudges himself his very Sleep, because it keeps him from his
Business: When he is at it, no Man more expeditious than he, for as if his
Minutes, like his Estates, ran away too fast, you shall freequently see him
with an Ale Glass in one hand, and a Looking-Glass in the other, which betokens
both speed and frugality.

The third and most fallacious Accusation is, that they say, He Is Prodigal, and
Pisses his Estate against the Wall. But I am confident he Enriches or Perfumes
the Walls no more than others; only this I know he does, that whereas Usurers
use to hide their Riches in Earthen Pots, he puts his Estate in a Pewter one,
(which one would think were the safer Cabinet) so that it is not the Honest
Drunken Curr, but the Impudent Rogues, Drawers and Tappers, that imbezle and
make it away. Much more might be said of him both in his Vindication, and in
commendation also: For he is one of the quietest Subjects his Majesty has, and
most submissive to Monarchical Government. ^e would not ^e without a King, if
(...) were for no other Reason than meer^^ Drinking his Health. He hates
^offee, as Mahomatizm; and thinks (...) a lesser sin to go to Bed Drunk, than
to Drink Coffee to make him Sober.

He hates a Studious man; as Caesar ^id a lean one; and for the same Reason;
for he is so confident he is hatchi^g of Treason, that he could find in his
Heart to impeach him at advent^re.

As for his Friends, he never trou^les his Head to pick and cull them, but
takes them as superannuated Maids ^o Husbands, or Fish-women do Makarel, as
they come next to hand: For, fixing himself in the next Alehouse or Tavern he
comes at; at first he sits as sullenly as a degraded Courtier, or an ^nsurer
upon Advice of a Loss. And no less than a Quart of Purle-Royal, or Two Kicks in
the Guts, can remove his Morosity. After he has digested either of them,
perchance he will vouchsafe to bless you with a Smile, especially if you will
purchase it at the expense of a Bawdy Song; to which you shall see him turn
head, and listen ^s heedfully as a Lynnet to a Flaijolet, but infinitely more
easy to be Taught.

When you have done, it is twenty to one but he comes and hugs you; swearring
you are the best accomplished Gentleman that ever he met with in his Life; and
tho he never saw you before, from that time you may date his Friendship: He
makes Friends faster than Children do Babies; and like them too, he often
forgets where he has left them.

His Reason, like a bad Shopkeeper, is se^^om at home; or rather, like a
Country Gentleman, has left the Manor of his own Body, and is gone to dwell
in strange Lodgings: So that it is no wonder, he is Hobgoblin'd by his fiery Nose
to any Debauchery, or that Men call him Beast; since by giving Reins to ^is
Sensuality, he makes so perfect a Swine of himself, that he Drinks till he can
hardly Grunt. However, since the Church allows him Christian Burial, I Will
Hopkins and Sternhold him with.

An ^PITAPH.
Here lies Drunken Tom,
Whom Heaven in Mercy save;
He Stumbl'd over his Death,
And Reeled into his Grave.
XIII. Of a Natural Beauty.
WHether a cheerful Air 'does rise,
And Elevate her fairer Eyes;
Or a Pensive Heaviness
Her lovely Eyelids does depress,
Still the same becoming Grace
Accompanies her Eyes and Face;
Still you would think that Habit best,
In which her Countenance las^ was dre^^.
Poor Beauties! whom a Blush or Glance
Can sometimes make look fair by chance;
Or Curious Dress, or Artful Care,
Can make seem fairer than they are.
Give me the Eyes, give me the Face,
To which no Art can Add a Grace:
Give me the Looks no Garb nor Dress
Can ever make more fair, or less.
FINIS.
Books Printed for John Harris, at the Harrow, in the Poultrey.
COme and Welcome to Jesus Christ: Or a plain and profitable Disco^^se on John
6. Verse 37. Showing the Cause, Truth and Manner of the Coming of a Sinner to
Jesus Christ, with his Happy Reception, and Blessed E^tertainment, by John
Bunnyam, Author of the Pilgrims Progress.

Price Bound one Shilling.

[2.] The Saints Comfort, in all, but more especially in Evil Times. Drawn from
Twelve several Texts of Scripture; which are briefly explained in this small
Piece, By T. G. Minister of the Gospel. Price Bound one Shilling.

[3.] A Present for Ladies. The Nymphs of Diana; or the Excellencies of
Women-kind, described as well in their External Beauty, as Internal Virtue;
being an Advocate for the Fair Sex; comprised in an Illustrious History of it.
Represented not only in Lively and Pathetical Discourses grounded upon Reason,
but in sundry rare Examples of Virtuous Love, Piety, Prudence, Modest^,
Chastity, Patience, Humility, Temperace, Conduct, Constancy, and Firmness of
Mind; With what else in the like nature is necessary to the Accomplishment of
the most Celebrated Beauties. With other Examples of Woman skilled in the most
curious Arts and Sciences. To which are Added, The Examples of Warlike Women,
their Noble Exploites and Victories: With the Prophecies and Predictions of the
Sybils, in Relation to our Savior Christ, etc. And as an Apendix, the
Character of a Virtuous Woman in all her Capacites, viz. Of a Virgin, of a
Wife, and of a Widow; wherein is showed, the happiness that accrues to Man in
the possession of so great a Blessing, as a Virtuous Woman; with the Reasons
why Man's happiness is not complete on Earth, without the Charming Creatu^e
Woman. The whole Work Enri^^^^ and Intermixed with Curious (...), ^^d Delicate
Fancy, suitable ^o ^o C^arming a Subject.

Price Bound one Shilling.

[4.] The True Fortune Tellers: Or, (...) Knowledge. Discovering the whol^ Art
of Chyromancy, Physiognomy, Metoposcopy and Astrology. Containing, 1. A
description of the Planets, their power and influence over the Bodies of Men,
Women, and Children. 2. Of the several Lines, Mounts, Marks, Angels, and sacred
Characters in the Hand and Wrist; and by what Planets they are governed as to
good or bad fortune. 3. Of Physiognomy. 4. Observations on the Eyes, Eyebrows,
Nose, Chin, Neck, Hair, Beard and Face. 5. Metoposcopy, or the signification of
the Lines in the Face. 6. Of Moles, and their significations. 7. Of Dreams, and
their interpretations. 8. Of Nativities, and their calculation. 9. Of the Rod,
by which hidden Treasure is fo^nd. 10. Of Marriage, and at what time any Person
shall be Married. 11. Rules to know the danger of Death. 12. Of good and bad
Days. 13. The manner of ^esolving doubtful Questions, as to Friends, Marriages,
places of Abode, Health, Prosperity or Adversity, Love or Business. 14. Of
Pythagoras, his Wheel of Fortune. Of the good and bad Days in each Month
relating to Health. To which are Added, Aristotle's Observations on the Heavens,
their Motion. Of Fiery Meteors, Thunder, Lightning, Eclipses, Comets,
Eath-quakes and Whirl-winds. Illustrated with several proper Figures. The
Second Edition.

Price Bound one Shilling.

[5.] A Short and Plain Account of the Late-found Balsamic Wells at Hoxon. And
of their Excellent Virtues above other Mineral Waters; Which make 'em
Effectually Cure most Diseases, both Inward and Outward; With Directions how to
Use 'em. By T. Byfield, M. D.

Price Sticht 6d.

(...) Physic. ^^^wing the method of ^uring the ^ost usual ^is^ases happening
to humane Bodies. All ^^^^lated out of the best Latin editions, into En^^^sh;
and ca^efully claused, or divided into Ch^pters, and Sections, for the more
pleasant ^^^ding, and easier understanding of those Au^^ors. Together with a
singular Comment upon ^he First Book of Hermes, the most Ancient of
^^^losophers. The whole completed in three ^^oks. By William Salmon, Professor
in Physic.

Price Bound five Shillings.

The Treasury of Drugs unlocked. Or a full ^^d True Description of all sorts of
Drugs, and ^ymical Preparations, etc. Very useful for all Gentlemen Merchants,
Druggists, Doctors, A^othecaries, Surgeons, and their Apprentices: (...)
also for all Travelers, Seamen, Customhouse ^^ficers, etc. By Io. Jacob Berlu
of London Merchant in Drugs.

Price Bound one Shilling.

The Revelation Unvailed: Or, and Essay toward the discovering I. When many
Scripture Prophesies had their Accomplishment, and turn^^ into History. II.
What are now Fulfilling. (...). What rest still to be Fulfied, with a guess
(...) the time of them. With an Appendix, proving, that Pagan Rome was not
Babylon, Rev. (...), and that the Jews shall be Converted. By ^^muel Petto,
Minister of the Gospel at Sudbury in Suffolk.

Price Bound one Shilling six Pence.

FINIS.

