AN EPISTLE TO Young People Professing the TRUTH.
Dear Friends,
KNowing that many which fear the Lord, and think upon his Name, have had (for
some time) a concern upon their minds for the declining Conditions of many
Young People that are amongst us; saying often one to another, What will become
of the next Generation, considering the Youth of this are so degenerated from
those that received the Truth at the beginning. Whereupon it came into my
Heart, according to the Examples of Christ and his Apostle, who to rectify
abuses in Marriage, and other things, says, [but it was not so from the
beginning] intimating, that the best way to amend things amiss, is to bring
People to the beginning, that as they received Christ Jesus the Lord, so to
walk in him, which is the Drift and End of this Epistle to Young People, and
others professing the Truth.

Many are yet alive who from their own knowledge can testify the Humility,
Mortification and Self-denial of the Youth at the beginning, together with
their centempt of all youthful Vanities, etc. their Words Few and Savory, their
Countenances Grave and Serious, in their places Diligent and Faithful; being
Examples of Temperance and Sobriety to Neighbors and Acquaintance; in the
Worship and Service of God Attentive and Watchful, carefully improving all
opportunities to increase their Communion and Acquintance with God in Christ
Jesus the Light: All which were as blessed signs of those times of refreshment
from Gods Presence that the Souls of the Faithful were then made partakers of.

Let Children inquire of their Parents (that were Eye Witnesses from the
beginning) and they can tell them; let Servants ask their faithful Masters, and
they can inform them what manner of People the younger sort of Quakers (so
called) were at the beginning: Nay, there were few such Strangers in the places
where the Truth first took place, but they could declare these things; by all
which (as in a Glass) many now professing the same Truth may see themselves
bearing another Image; therefore ought diligently to make inquiry what is the
Cause, and whence the disparity arises, for if the Gospel at the beginning
proved it self to be preached again by the forementioned, and many more blessed
Effects upon all that received the Truth in the love of it; What is the matter?
is not the Gospel an Everlasting Gospel and Christ the Way, the Truth and the
Life, the same Yesterday to Day and forever? and does not his works still in
the hearts of the Called, Chosen and Faithful bear witness of him?

Therefore, its to be feared, those that are thus fallen, have received another
Gospel, or the Gospel perverted, or turned upside down, as the Apostle speaks,
seeing those at the beginning began in the Spirit, but since that many that
began well think to be made perfect by the Flesh, where too many hold the Truth
in unrighteousness: But my design is not to accuse, but to inform those that
are out of the way, if possible they may be reclaimed before the evil day
overtake them.

I know some of the Younger are ready to blame the Elder, and some Children
their Parents, and some Servants their Masters Examples; to all which I say,
that such as are justly guilty thereof shall bear their own Barden, and shall
not escape the Righteous Judgment of God; but you that make this Plea, know
that the Soul that sins shall dye, and the Witness of God in your own
Consciences (if hearkened unto) will convince you of the vanity of this
Fig-leaf Covering, and the deceitfulness of your own hearts in thinking that
the evil example of others will be an excuse for your backsliding.

For those that in their Youth received the Truth at the beginning, were
surrounded with Evil Examples on every hand, so that if Examples could have
prevailed to continue them in Worldly Vanities, they could never have broken
through those oppositions from Accquaintance and nearest Relations; for if they
had looked outward, all hopes of Preferment in this World were wholly gone, and
looking inward, there appeared such strong holds of Satan, as seemed
impossible ever to be overcome; the Truth it self being such a Stranger in the
Earth, that almost every Body was backward to give it Entertainment, Especially
if they had any thing in this World to loose for harboring of it.

Whereas the Youth and others of latter times found the Truth both ready
proved, and succesfully defended against the subtle Arguments and Wits of those
professing times in which it at first break forth, and that not by the might
and power of Wit, or outward Learning, but by Simplicity and Godly Sincerity,
accompanied with Holiness of Life and Conversation, which was a great
confirmation to the first publishing of it, together with the Meek and Patient,
yet Bold and Valiant suffering the loss of all for the Truth as it is in Jesus;
by which, in a great measure, the rough way was worn smooth, and the passage
made much more easy to those that followed, then it was at the beginning; for
those that were as gazing stocks at the beginning, of latter times came to be
well known, and that estrangedness to Persons and Principles came to vanish
away, and a good esteem of the Truth and of those that professed it spring up in
diverse Persons, so mightily grew the Word of God, and prospered at the
beginning.

But alas, of latter times the wild Boar of the Forest has got into the
Vineyard, and rooted up many hopeful Plants, and others are fallen into the
World, Customs, Ways and Fashions, who are become as Spots in the true
Christian Assemblies, and Blemishes to the Truth as it was at the beginning, as
if the Sins of Sodom, which were Pride, Carelessness, Excess and Contempt of the
Poor, were become the Vices of Sion, many young People and others getting into
those things again, which their Parents, Relations and Acquaintances, for good
Conscience sake, were forced to lay aside, as it in these latter times the
Efficacy of Truth was not the same as at the beginning, and as if the Cross of
Christ, that was so powerful [then] was [now] become of none Effect.

Little does the wanton Youth of this Age think what Sighs and Tears their
godly Parents, and Friends that love them, pour out in secret for them, both
because of their Eternal Estates hereafter, and the dishonor they bring here
unto the blessed Name and Truth of God; whereby its become a saying amongst
Ancient People, That the Quakers now adays are not like those at the beginning.

What Watchfulness, what Carefulness, what Diligence therefore ought every one
to use, least by bad Company and Examples, they should be ensnared before they
are aware, and so by degrees be drawn to such Inconveniences, as afterward they
will find very hard to withstand, until they are brought to that degree of
stupidity, and hardness of heart, that all Exhortations unto Virtue and
Godliness find so little entertainment, that even Strangers in our Meetings are
more serious, and tenderness of heart sooner procured in them, then in many who
have frequented our Assemblies from their Childhood unto Men and Women's
Estates, so evil and catching are the bad Examples of others to them whose
hearts are not kept tender to God.

Be serious therefore all you that make profession of the Truth in your tender
years, and examine your selves how you came to make profession of it, was it
for some by-ends and sinister respects? or was it by Education from your
Parents or others only? not regarding the good intention and end thereof, so as
to come to the root of the matter in your selves, nor heeding to be guided by
the Light in your own Consciences, but from time to time feeding only upon good
words from others, etc. as its to be feared too too many do at at this day, I
say, unto all such careless ones, I pity your Condition, for all your Goodness
will prove like the morning dew that soon vanishes when heat arises, and all
your Profession will wither like the Corn upon the house top; therefore let the
time past suffice that you have spent your precious time to no purpose, and
rest no longer in an easeful mind, above the Cross, but sink down in deep
Humility to the oppressed Seed of God in you, which he has left as a Witness
for himself, that you might not be as Sodom, and like unto Gomorrah, if you
diligently hearken to it in your own particulars.

Parents and others that fear the Lord are bound in duty to God, to use all
means they can to impress the tender minds of their Children, and Youth, with
the sense of Gods Power, and in so doing they shall not loose their reward from
God, although their Children when grown up, turn their backs upon it; for
Parents at the beginning looked upon the Truth as the best Portion for their
Children, not so much heeding their preferment in this World, if by any means
they might have an interest in that which is to come; and in order thereunto
they councelled their Children to mind the inward and spiritual Grace, that so
they might not rely upon any outward and visible thing for Preservation and
Defense, because that inward and spiritual Grace was commended to us at the
beginning, as the best Teacher to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to
live Godly, Righteously and Soberly in this present Evil Werld; but if Young
People will reject the good advice of their Parents and others, and degenerate
from their Education, their Destruction will be of themselves, and their poor
grieving Parents and others can but mourn in secret for them,

Children and others ought to know, that there is no standing at a stay or stop
in Religion, for not to go forward therein, is to go backward; hence it is is
that the Scripture says, Heb. 6. It is impossible for those who were once
enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were partakers of the
holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the World
to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto Repentance, seeing
they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to open shame.
And being a business of greatest Importance the Apostle urges it from the
Similitude following, For, says he, the Earth which drinks in the Rain that
comes often upon it, and brings forth Herbs meet for them for whom it is
Dressed, receives Blessings from God; but that which bears Thorns and Briars
is rejected, and is nigh unto Cursing, whose end is to be Burnt.

If there be therefore any Consolation in Christ the Truth, if any Comfort of
Love, if any Fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels of Mercies, you that live
carelessly and want only upon the Earth, consider your Conditions, and examine
your selves, how far the forementioned Scripture affects you, for I have a
deep concern upon my heart for you all that have forsaken your first Love, and
bear another Image then those young People I have mentioned bore at the
beginning.

Suppose by your Conformity to the Vanities of this present World you should
gain a large share therein, which but few obtain; what will it avail when
terrifying Death looks you in the Face? have you forgotten Moses's Choice, who
esteemed it greater Riches to suffer Afflictions with the People of God, then
to be related to the Court of a great Monarch? what shall I say to prevail with
you, is it not great pity, that any who in years past bore the frowns of the
great ones of the Earth Patiently, went through Reproaches Cheerfully, and many
Hardships Constantly, for some time, and doubtless such felt a Reward from God
for their encouragement, why then should you loose your Crown at last?

Come let us reason together; and let God Witness speak, Wanted you any thing
while you kept your Integrity? did you not witness one day in Gods presence
better then all the delights that ever you had since your minds by Looseness
and Vanities has been estranged from him? did your Pleasure and Companions in
Folly ever afford you that Comfort, and inward Contentment, and Peace, which
sometimes you have felt amongst Gods People? why then do you deprive your
selves by your negligence of that Sweetness and Comfort which no created
Enjoyment can recompense the loss of, besides that farther hope of Glory that
is laid up for those that walk uprightly?

Many of the youthful People and others amongst us need not say What is Truth?
because I know it has often proved it self to their Consciences beyond all
outward demonstration, and they cannot be ignorant how diverse that have
backsliden have been followed with a secret hand against them in all they have
gone about.

Come away therefore and tarry no longer in Lying Vanities, and let none say
they cannot leave them, for that is the Language of your Souls Enemy to
discourage you; wherefore resist him steadfastly in the Faith, and he will fly
from you, for he has no power but in Darkness and Unbelief; watch therefore to
the Light of Christ Jesus that discovers all the twistings of that crooked
Serpent, and take up the daily Cross to those Evils that so easily ^eset you,
and you will find, as you have often heard, the Armor of Light at hand to
defend you against all your youthful Lusts, as blessed be God there are yet a
Cloud of Witnesses alive that can from good Experience testify the same.

Postscript.
LEt none despise these Lines for their Plainness, for we were a plain People
at the beginning; I know some of the younger sort are apt to be taken with fine
Words and fashionable Language, as with other things in Fashion; but Experience
shows that that which tickles the outward Ear commonly stops there, very seldom
coming so low as to the Truth in the inward parts; therefore this Epistle is
sent abroad in so plain a dress on purpose, answerable to a plain Seed in them
that are puffed up, but ought rather to have mourned; which Seed being reached,
and their Souls relieved my end is answered.

Laton the 18th of the 6th Month 1686. John Crook

THE END.

