AN EPISTLE TO All that profess the Light of Jesus Christ WITHIN To be their
Guide.

BY JOHN CROOK.

Printed in the Year, 1678.

To all that Profess the Light of Jesus Christ (within) to be their Guide,
Greeting.
Dear Friends, Brethren, and Sisters,
THat believe in the inward, and spiritual Grace, which is the Light of our
Lord Jesus Christ, I salute you all, desiring, that as we received Christ Jesus
the Lord, we may all [so] walk in him. In order hereunto let us all watch, and
be mindful how we received the truth at the beginning, which is the subject
matter upon my heart, by this Epistle to signify unto you.

For you know, many of us before we received the Truth (as it is in Jesus) felt
some stirrings of life, and therefore separated in our Judgments, and Opinions
from the generality of our Neighbors, and Country men where we dwelt: because
of an inward cry from a deep want in our Souls, and hungering after the
constant enjoyment of [that] which [we] with many others professed; but could
not find in any thing under the Sun.

So poor and needy were we, that the dealings of God with our spirits in that
day, in some sense may be said to resemble Gods proceedings with Adam, when he
set all the creatures before him, before he gave him a meet-helper, that when
he saw he could find out no fit helper for himself amongst them all, he might
make the more account of the meet helper that was [after] given him of God.

So it was inwardly with us, until that Trumpet sounded which directed our
minds to the light of Christ Jesus in our own hearts and Consciences, which
when we believed the report, and made trial of its sufficiency, we soon found
the meet-helper for our souls (to wit) the arm of the Lord to be revealed in
[it] and made [so] bare, that we knew it to be the Lords own arm, which brought
deliverance to us.

But not from all our enemies at once, yet [so] that we understood plainly, (by
certain experience) that the tendency thereof, and the end of its being made
bare, was in order to deliver us out of the hands of [all] our enemies; that
being delivered, we might serve God without a tormenting, distrustful fear in
holiness, and righteousness before [him] all the days of our lives.

And the way thereunto, was by the working of this arm of power in our inward
parts, to make a separation [within] between the precious and the vile within,
and between our own spirits, and Gods Spirit; between our own wills, and Gods
will; between our own thoughts, and Gods thoughts; and our own ways, and Gods
ways, etc.

So that we found the great business of regeneration and restoration was to be
wrought [within us;] and what sorrow, what trouble, what horror, what distress,
what Wars, and rumor of wars, was [within us] many knows; and what
earthquakes was in diverse hearts (which might occasion the name QUAKER to be
given to some of us) those that were eyewitnesses from the beginning are not
ignorant of these things.

O what carefulness, what watchfulness, what circumspection, what awfulness of
God, and what dread of his power was upon our spirits, lest we should speak our
own words, work our own works, walk in our [own] ways, or think our [own]
thoughts; so diligently did we keep a watching, and over our own hearts, being
conscious to our selves, that we should give an account for every idle word,
which caused us to learn a bridle for our tongues, that our words might be few,
and savory, ministering grace to the hearers.

How solid were our looks? how grave were our countenances, how serious were
our carriages? and how exemplary our behaviors, and conversations amongst all
that we conversed with? lest we should give occasion for any to speak evil of
the blessed truth of the Living God.

And if any, though but newly convinced thereof, walked disorderly, or that
took up their rest in a [bare] convincement, and came not to be converted to
the life, and power of God in their own particular (which at the beginning was
soon discovered by that spirit of discerning which in the light we received
from God

How conscienciously solicitous were we, to admonish, instruct, advise and
counsel them to take heed of a false rest, or running into, or doing any thing
by [bare] imitation from others: Yet how tender were we, of bruising, hurting,
stopping, or hindering any stirrings of light and life, lest the lame should be
turned out of the way, or the seeble be left behind.

The spirit of Holy David was in our hearts, who would not consent that the
sore, and weary ones ( that could not get over the River Bezor, should lose
their part of the prey, because they tarried with the stuff; but made it a Law,
and a Statute in Israel for ever, that they should have part alike.

And how did we love, and pity those, that took pleasure in the stones of Zion,
and favored the dust thereof? what carefulness was upon us for them; and if we
found any but like the young man (in Mark 19.22) that had been religiously
inclined from their youth, how did we love them? watching for opportunities to
communicate some spiritual advice unto them.

As if the new kindred that Christ speaks of, Mat. 12. (to wit] Whosoever shall
do my Fathers will (the same is my Mother, Sister, and Brother) was now
discovered again, and the beauties of holiness were now made manifest, with the
many glorious privileges enjoyed thereby; as to see clearly, and know
certainly the living God; for hereby came we to know [that we knew him] because
of the beauties of holiness, in keeping close to [his Commandments] whereby our
love to God, and one to another was manifest unto all.

For we durst not let in distrustful thoughts of God, nor one of another, Faith
in him [then] becoming our Law; so that our care was steadfastly, and constantly
to believe in the light, by which we had seen him, and to dwell in a holy fear,
lest we should transgress the Law of Faith, by which Christ was [then] kept
dwelling in our hearts, and all boasting of SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS was utterly
excluded.

But with how much difficulty we kept [that] Faith, you only know, who like
valiant Soldiers have endured hardship in the good sight of Faith, whereby we
our selves were preserved, and kept by the power of God through Faith, that we
might (in due time) receive the end of our Faith (for we had nothing else in
our eye, but to be saved from sin) [to wit) the salvation of our souls.

And then, because we believed in the power, as we were moved of [it] we spoke
by [it] and [such words] like Jonathans bow, never returned empty, but wounded
the Hypocrites; like the man that shot the arrow out of simplicity, which smote
disguised Ahab between the harness; so that he died according to the word of
the Lord by Micaiah.

You may remember also, how like Ephraim (at first) we were as little children,
and spoke trembling; saying often in our hearts, ar Jacob did of the Mountain
where God appeared (to wit) how dreadful is this place, and [then] how quick,
and powerful were [those words] that proceeded from that dread of God in our
hearts

The great mystery of the false Prophet, that rides upon the Beast, being
[then] inwardly discovered, with the mystery of his name, and number thereof
(to wit) the number of a man; which caused us at the beginning so to cry down
vain, corrupt man, both in our selves, and others; feeling that [God] was risen
in [his] power, to confound its wisdom, and to bring his fleshly prudence and
policy to nothing: therefore we feared the getting up of that mans-part in our
selves, being so battered by the inward Judgments of God upon our selves.

That with good Jehosaphat we said in our hearts, we know not what to do, but
our eyes are toward thee, O God; then in this valley of helplesness,
straights, poverty, lowliness, and humility, God pleaded with our fleshly part;
so that in the day of our distress, although we multiplied our services, and
doubled our offerings and observations, to obtain relief; yet Christ refused
all these our works, that he might [freely] make himself known unto us (which
in due time he did) as Joseph unto his brethren (and says that Scripture)
there stood no man with him, when he made himself known unto them; to the
exalting of the riches of the glory of his grace [in us] whereby sorrow fled
away, and our own mournful spirits were now made to rejoice in God, and our
formerly troubled souls began now to magnify our Savior.

Thus former things passed away, till the tempestuous Sea was no more; but joy
and gladness was in our dwellings, and the voice of melody in all our hearts,
and in the midst of all our Assemblies.

But before we came hither, you know (fellow Travelers) that Mount Sinai was
first in our way, where we tarried a while, and felt the entertainment of her
flames, and heard the voice of words, and the sound of her trumpets, and were
witnesses of her terrible earthquakes [yet fled not] but with Moses, a remnant
drew near unto the thick darkness where God was: but others made this Mountain
the end of their journey, escaping with their lives still in their own doings:
yet these, though they might in Profession come out with us, thus far they were
not of us, and (in time) will go out from us, that it may appear they came not
through [all] the tribulations that a remnant went through.

For from thence a remnant came unto the ministration of the Prophets, where
they met with openings, and prophesies of good things [yet] to come, before
they did come: and here others fled as on the Sabbath day, as if [now] all
labor was at an end, and here they took up their rest, (but God did not
sanctify it) and therefore glorying and pride got up in these; Boasting in the
GIFTED-MAN, soon forgetting all dependence upon the opener, viz. the spirit of
truth, to exercise their hearts and tongues in the mannagement of all, for the
glory of God, and refreshment of his own seed in the hearts of his people.

But a remnant still traveled on, through John Baptists cry in the wilderness
(make straight the way of the Lord) and come to repentance for all their dead
words, and works, that every valley might be filled, and every mountain, and
hill brought low, and the crooked made straight, and the rough ways made
smooth; then came we to see the salvation of God (to wit) the Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the world, whom then we followed, leaving [John] as some
of his [own] disciples did.

Some also came with us as far as John's Baptism that washes away the filth of
the flesh; but not coming to the Baptism of Christ, which washes all
filthiness both of flesh and spirit; also they left us at John: such as these
may be compared to the King of Israel, who at the command of the Prophet smote
the ground often; but not smiting it long enough (until the enemy was consumed)
he missed of a perfect victory, and full conquest: so do all that take up their
rest in any thing short of the Lamb of God.

These things being thus witnessed in the spiritual travels of a remnant at the
beginning, let us all search and try our ways, whether we be still following
the ancient footsteps of the flocks of the companions, by keeping in the pure
separation from the fleshly part in our selves, ministering [only] from the
ability that God gives, which a remnant that have kept to their first love, and
their garments clean therein, have done to the praise of the Lord God Almighty
for ever.

My exhortation therefore is unto all, but more especially to you that are
Children of believing Parents, and Servants to believing Masters, with all the
younger men, and younger women convinced in these later times (knowing that a
remnant of these also have kept their garments clean) to examine your selves
how you came by your Profession? whether you that are Children, and Servants,
received it by tradition, only because of your outward Relations. etc. or from
the inward work of God upon your own spirits, as those did that received the
truth (in the love of God) at the beginning.

For many may endure sufferings, and undergo the reproach of a QVAKER, and all
for sinister ends; as the Shechemites endured the pain of Circumcision to
obtain Dinah, Jacobs Daughter, and to accomplish their other ends, and
interests: on these terms they were willing to be one people with the
Israelites; as too many on like conditions at this day may be willing to be
called QUAKERS; to whom I say, as Jacob did to Simeon and Levi, you have
troubled us, and (as much as in you lies) have made the truth to stink amongst
the inhabitants of the Land; (yet a remnant dare not do so, blessed be the
Lord.)

But to you that are grieved, and troubled, because of these Shechemites, I say
to you also, as the Lord on this occasion said unto troubled Jacob, Arise, let
[us] go up to Bethel (the house of God) and dwell there, Genesis 35. (where no
Shechemites can come.)

O the bemoanings of many tender souls [at the beginning] for the loss of their
conditions, sometimes through their own negligence, and sometimes through the
enemies subtilty ( weeping like Rachel for her children, and refusing to be
comforted, because they were not) are fresh in my remembrance.

But of later times many come amongst us, that in outward appearance may seem
to be of us, who as yet never truly knew the meaning of such bemoanings, nor
the bitterness of Rachels tears, but walk as if the gate of entrance into the
truth, was grown wider, and the path, and way thereof, broader than [it] was at
the beginning; for how careful were those that came to witness the [truth] at
the beginning to keep low, and humble, that they might not be drawn from their
own measures, lest their [own] words should become their burden, and they be
condemned in themselves, for uttering that (as in the name of God) which came
not from the Spirit of the living God.

Therefore it was that so mightily grew the word of God, and prospered
(bringing all down to the loathing of their persons in true humility) growing
up in every honest heart, that the fruits of the Spirit were manifest, as in
the Apostles days (to wit) love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance; against such there is no law, says the
Apostle: and they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the
affections, and lusts. If we live in the spirit, let us all so walk in the
spirit, let us not be desirous (says the Apostle) of vainglory, provoking one
another, envying one another, etc.

But like Brethren (says the same Apostle) if a man be overtaken in a fault,
ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness,
considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted, bear ye one another burdens,
and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

My heart is overcome when I take a view of Gods dealings with us from the day
that he first visited us unto this present time; My dear friends and brethren,
you know how Christ (our Joseph) knew us when we knew not him, and made himself
known to us (as Joseph did unto his brethren) while guilt, and fear; distrust,
and horror was in their spirits, and then commanded, that they should do unto,
and one for another, as he had done unto, and for them all.

Therefore set all come down to the remembrancer, the Spirit of Truth, which
will distinguish between those that are now arrayed with the beautiful garments
of their youthful days, viz. humility, meekness, righteousness, and the true
zeal of the Lord and those that have only a show of it; and there let [us]
behold one another in our comely attire, as with the lovely Coat of Joseph upon
our backs, and the glorious visions of the Almighty in our hearts, judging down
all stirrings of envyings, and evil surmisings against any; knowing right well
that all such lowings, and bleatings are commanded to be slain: for can we
consider the price we cost at first, and the love, care, and watchfulness of
our God over us unto this day, of whom a remnant can say (as Jacob did) (he
has fed us all our life long) and not be in love one with another.

Can we contemplate of the miseries we have been delivered from, and the
mercies we have been made partakers of since we were a people, and not be
humbled before our God, for any unthankfulness and distrust: Can we view the
prisons, and dungeons, the banishments, and all outward losses and spoiling of
our goods, with the reproachful scoffs, and scornful slightings, by such, that
some could say (with holy Job) they were not worthy to eat with the dogs of
their flocks, and not be molted before the Lord, and abased as unworthy of the
least of all his mercies.

And can we remember our blessed support under all those sufferings, and the
sweet presence of the Spirit of Christ in our hearts, saying in us under all
these trials and excercises, as the Disciples did, when they returned to Christ
their Master, after their weary travels (to wit) we wanted nothing, etc. we
wanted no perfumes to take away the noisome smells, we wanted nothing to make
our hard lodging easy, we wanted no pleasant walks to make our strait
confinements joyous, nor we wanted not the society of outward relations, and
former acquaintance, to pass away the time, because the Lord our God turned all
our hardships into unspeakable comfort, and true contentment.

And shall any now say, Gods arm is shortened that he cannot save, or his ear is
heavy that he cannot hear? God forbid, that all the milk, and wine, and honey,
and other fat things (with which we have been often spiritually feasted at Gods
table) should be all forgotten and buried in the Wilderness, saying in our
selves as rebellious Israel did of old (to wit) can he now prepare such a table
in the Wilderness for us?

But rather let us with Manoah's Wife, the Mother of Sampson, conclude, If the
Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt-offering, and
a meat offering at our hands; neither would he have showed us all these things,
and done so much for us as he has done from the very beginning, that we were a
people unto this day.

Therefore lift up your heads you valliants of Israel, that have come through
the dark-burning-Mountain, and through the pleasant and delightful Openings,
and Prophesies, through, and beyond all outward washings, unto the Lamb of God,
that your robes may be washed white in his Blood, that thereby you may
overcome, and then sit down in that Kingdom which cannot be shaken, with weary
Abraham, throughly-tired Isaac, and wrestling Jacob.

O how glorious are you [all] in the sight of God, and all his people, even as
an Army terrible with banners in the sight of all adversaries; therefore keep
your ranks, and march on in your heavenly way, which the Lord of Hosts himself
has set you in, and Babylon the [great] shall fall before you, more and more,
for the Lord of Hosts has spoken it; and you with all the holy Martyrs of
Jesus shall rejoice over her down-fal for ever.

These few words further and again, springs up in my heart to you all dear
Friends, Brethren, and Sisters, (to wit) that we may be always mindful how we
received the truth at the beginning, and be careful that we travel on with our
feet always shod with the same humily, and poverty of spirit [as] when we were
first shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace.

Never forgetting, nor changing the poor man's food (to wit) our old water and
pulse, for any portion of the rich man's dainties, but still waiting on God,
that in due season gives both milk to babes, and strong meat to them of riper
age; bearing in our remembrance the great execution that was done at the
beginning, by the smooth stones out of the poor Shepherds bag.

Now to the pure harmless seed (that cries in our hearts) I commend you all,
that therein (as in the cleft of [that] Rock) against which the gates of Hell
shall never prevail) we all may dwell and abide for ever; so shall the work of
the Lord prosper to his own Glory, and all our comforts for ever. Amen,

John Crook.
The 17th. of the. 6th. Month, 1678.
THE END.

