A DEFENSE OF THE True Church Called QUAKERS,

(Come and coming out of the Wilderness, Babylon, and the dark Night of the
Apostasy of Antichrist into their own Land, which is Sion the Mountain of
Holiness, there to Worship the Lord in Spirit and Truth) against the several
Sects and sorts of people, called Independants, Separatists or Brownists,
Baptists, Fifth Monarchy-men, Seekers, and High Notionists of all sorts, who by
the True Light are found and discovered to be out of the same.

Written by J. C. According to the measure of Wisdom given unto him from God,
who is the giver of every good gift.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1659.

WHen the Jews outward Returned from the Captivity of Babylon, which was the
true figure of the Saints coming out of the long and dark night of Apostasy,
from the Doctrine and Life of the Apostles in the Primitive Times, which was
the Captivity of the spiritual Seed, so great and many were their Enemies who
endeavored to cause their Work (in repairing the desolate and ruined places of
Jerusalem) to cease, that those who were employed in that Work, with one hand
wrought, and with the other held the Weapon; even so is it and must it be now
at the Return of the spiritual Seed, not only within, by exercising Faith and
Prayer upon and to him that is able to save to the uttermost, and in his
strength wrestling against the Dragon and his Angels, Principalities, Powers,
and Spiritual Wickednesses in High Places, and sundry temptations, so quenching
by the Armor of Light all the fiery Darts of the wicked one; but also without,
both by holding forth the Word of their testimony, and sealing it with their
blood and sufferings for the conviction and conversion of sinners, so fitting
stones for Gods spiritual building, and also by stopping the mouths of
gainsayers, who shall not be able to resist the Spirit by which they speak; So
standing in the gap and quitting themselves like Spiritual-men against the
Beast and false Prophet, and all the Armies of the Aliens.

Hear now therefore all ye that are called Independants, Separatists, or
Brownists, Baptists, Fifth Monarchy-men, Seekers, high Notionists of all sorts,
the Apology or Defense that I in the wisdom and strength of my God (for
without him I can do nothing) do make against you, and for the true Church
called Quakers, against whom and whose standing Profession ye variously have
prejudice and do contend.

And First for you called Independants, ye assume a great Name, but ye are not
found in the Independent nature, and so are not the true Church; for although
ye profess your selves as to the visible Administration of Church Power, not
to have dependence upon other Congregations or Churches as an inferior on a
superior; yet are there many things apparently seen amongst you which do
un-Church you and remove your Candlestick far off; for the true golden
Candlesticks among whom Christ the Son of God walks, do hold up and hold
forth the true light that it may shine before men; but ye (as do the common
multitude) reject it, slight it, and Dispute against it as invalid and
insufficient to lead in the way everlasting; and so ye would have it kept under
the bushel, yea, quite extinguished in the hearts of men, and would have the
Scriptures or Writings to be a light to it, and not it an enlightener and
opener of them, whereby ye stumble at the Scriptures themselves, and cannot
discern of the times and seasons, or of the Saints several states and
conditions to Godward, who because they sometime witnessed a war and striving
against the body of sin, therefore say you, they must always while they live
carry it about them, as though the Saints fought as those that beat the Air, or
as though their labor were in vain in the Lord: Oh! foolish people and unwise,
when will ye come to the true Teacher in your selves, that ye may believe and
know the Promise made unto the seed, That there shall be no more a pricking
Bryar unto the House of Israel, nor a grieving Thorn of all that are round
about them that despise them; and they shall know that I am the Lord: Also that
their Enemies which they have seen to day, they shall see them again no more
for ever: And that ye may see their interest in Christ's Prayer (whom the Father
heard always, because he did always the things that pleased him) who said,
Neither Pray I; for these alone (to wit, for the Apostles and Saints then in
the world, that they might be sanctified through the Truth) but for them also
who shall believe in me through their words, that they all may be one, etc. I
in them and thou in me, that hey may be made perfect in one, and that the world
may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou have loved me.
Mark, This was a state of Saints Perfection in this world, that worldly Spirits
might be convinced thereby; but ye being in the unbelief, are (even as the
multitude) always hanging upon the lips of men, whose tongues are not touched
(as the Prophets was) with a Coal from Gods Altar, who witnessed his sin
purged, and so are ever learning, and never come to the true knowledge; for the
Pastors and Teachers of your Congregations have not yet witnessed the Vrim of
the Sanctuary, I mean the true spiritual Gift, by believing and waiting on the
true light which shines in their dark hearts, that should give them power from
on high to minister in, but are either men learned with the learning of this
world, or such who through strength of Brain, and often reading of the Letter
of the Scriptures, can compose a Form of Words and deliver it unto you after a
Priestly manner; so that ye (as still unsatisfied) heap to your selves National
Priests also for Teachers, sometimes hearing the one, and sometimes the other;
Yea, some of your Pastors (so called) are National Priests also: Oh! (Friends,)
it might shame you and make you blush for shame (if ye could rightly consider)
to call your selves the Churches of Christ, and Independants, and be thus so
dependant on man's Teachings; Yea, joining with the National Priests about the
way of sending out a Ministry, and bearing the Beasts very Mark in your
Foreheads while ye are so called; owning your Baptism in your Infancy to be
true, though ministered to a blank, and by those who sprang from a Popish stock,
and sprinkling your own Infants now from a false apprehension of the Promise
made to you and your seed after the flesh, so calling that the seed; whereas
the true Churches of Christ knew no such seed, nor owned any, but that which
sprang out of Christ's womb in the Regeneration, who is a quickening Spirit: So
Christ the Cornerstone and Head of the Church, even the true and universal
Light is come to fight against you with the sword of his mouth, and to testify
to your faces, That though ye call your selves Jews, yet ye are not, but do
lie: Yea, your Conversation in the world most plainly shows that your spot is
not the spot of his Children; for we see you so mingled and interwoven in the
Pride, Covetousness, Policy and Folly of the world, that we could not by any
holy walking know you, or cull you out as the clean from the unclean, or as
Sheep from the midst of the Goats, if we did not now and then hear some of you
called Independants; Lord, how empty a thing it is to have a Name to live and
to be dead? Wherefore come to him who is the Resurrection and the life, which
life is the light of men, and becomes the light of life to all that believe
and wait in it, that they may bring forth fruit unto God, and so become living
stones built up a spiritual House; for this is the Church of the Firstborn,
whose Names are written in Heaven: For what is it for people to cry, The Temple
of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, The Church of Christ, the Church of
Christ, and to be polluted and unclean both in Worship and Practice, or to call
themselves the Children of Abraham, and not to do the Works of Abraham, for he
forsook the Idolatry of his Fathers House, and in obedience to the Lords call,
came into a Land that he showed him; so coming to the Cross to his own will,
he also saw Christ's day and was glad, and walked before the Lord and was
upright, but ye do neither of these, as being still in the abominations of the
Whore, who have made the Nations drunk, as kicking against the prick, the True
Light and Reprover for sin and evil, and living in the Detestable Ways,
Customs and Fashions of the World; so the Sunshine of the Light in this the
day of the Lords Power has put and is putting out your Candle in obscurity,
and has removed your Candlestick because ye repented not; for he has raised
up a People at last in this Nation wherein he has placed his Name that it
might not fall in the streets; who as they are faithful to the first Principle
of God in them, to wit the Light, shall outlive, outshine and eat out the
Heart and Soul of all Professors and professions in the World that are found in
the Idolatry, Pride and Vanity thereof, though under great and fair pretenses
of Christian Religion, which stands not in high words, but in loving Mercy,
doing Justice, and walking humbly with the Lord God; so every way and in every
thing keeping themselves unspotted of the World, yea hating even the garment
spotted with the flesh.

So that neither can ye Brownists or Separatists in this the Lords day, escape
his Righteous Judgment and censure, though ye seem to stand at a greater
distance from false Worship then the Independents do, but being weighed in the
equal balance are found too light to be accounted by us for the True Church of
Christ; yet I Know that because it is said in the Scripture, come out from
among them and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing and I
will receive you, etc. ye are very confident of your standing, for ye say, ye
are separated from the National Antichristian Worship, abhorring their Idol
Temples, and will not hear any of their Baals Priests, or break any Bread with
them, etc. But consider impa^^^^lly whether ye touch no unclean thing, yea
whether ye came not from them with their grand abomination in your bosoms,
which ye have ever since fostered and practiced, and that with (a seeming) no
little zeal, I mean the Sprinkling or Baptizing of your Infants, upon the
account of their being the Seed of the Covenant as they are your Children, who
say, ye are believers, a most bewiching Sorcerie this is, and an exceeding
betrayer of the Pure Life of God, and that which bears death in the very face
of it, and if ye are true to your own Principles, ye must needs be soon
un-churched hereby, and brought back to Babylon do what you can, for your
Children being hereby made Visible Members of your Body, they must needs be
accounted Brethren as they grow up in years amongst you, though Regeneration be
not witnessed by them (for by your own Approbation and Act ye received them in
before they knew their very right Hand from their left) and so they must have
all the priveledges of Brethren, though not discerning the Lords Body, or able
to separate between the Precious and the Vile, or not savouring the things of
the Spirit of God as the Natural man does not, whereby a confused medly and
mixed multitude must needs appear, yea and the tares soon overspread, and
overgrow, and overtop the Wheat if there be any; and so that which ye counted
the Churches of Christ, plainly be come, and be seen to be by those in the
Light, but the Field which is the World; is not this to mock God, and to throw
down with one hand what ye would set up with the other? Come to the Light of
Christ in your Consciences which makes manifest all things, and let True
Judgment proceed; But alas ye are as great Enemies to that Pure Principle of
God, which should reprove you for all deceitful and confused actings, and give
you a right discerning, and purge you from all sin, as any other whatsoever,
and are so rivited on the letter without, that ye will not endure to hear of
the True Light within, which enlighteneth every man that comes into the World,
without which no man's heart could be searched, or ever any man converted to
God. For I would know of you Separatists, how any of you at first came to be
troubled for sin, or to have any good desires begotten in you toward the Lord
or his Truth, which ye desired to know and w^^^ willing to suffer for? was not
this done by the Spirit of the Lord which moved and stirred in you? and whence
came this convincing and illuminating Spirit? came it from above the clouds, or
pierced it into you from without? or was the thing always within you, striving
and struggling at several times, though ye took little notice of it before ye
began to be humbled by it? can any man (even while unregenerate) flee any more
from Gods presence and Spirit, that his hand should not find him out, then
after Regeneration? or could David have done so before conversion more then
afterward? can the wicked hide themselves that the Lord should not see them
any more then the godly? I believe ye will all answer Nay; and if so, is the
Spirit of the Lord God (who fills all places and things with its presence,)
out of a wicked man, or at a greater distance (as to place) from him then from
a Righteous Man, though in the manner of its operation in them I know it is
different, judging and reproving the one, and comforting and encouraging the
other; So then the Spirit or Life being in and nigh every one, the true light
must needs be in every one, for the life is the light of men, and so whatever
good thing is wrought in man's heart, does not come from without him, or from
far, but from the word within the mouth and heart, and so arises from within
himself; for says wisdom, a good man shall be satisfied from himself; and so
did Christ promise, Whosoever, says he, drinks of the water that I shall
give him, shall never thirst, but it shall be a Well of waters springing up in
him to Eternal Life; and so did Isaiah Prophecy, As the Earth brings forth
her bud, and as the Garden causes the things that are sown in it to spring
forth, so the Lord God will cause righteousness and praise to spring forth
before all the Nations; Oh! the sweet springings and buddings of the pure Life
of God in man's heart, after a night and winter of sorrow and darkness, and
silent waiting upon that of God in him; surely by this means and no other shall
Righteousness toward man, and praise and glory to the Lord God who is worthy,
and alone worthy, spring up in the sight of others.

And oh! ye Separatists, so called, how can it be expected that ye should
Minister to each other in your Assemblies by the living Power of the Spirit of
truth (which is the Holy Anointing, and the only Exerciser of the Saints in
all their administrations) any more than others do, but that ye should be as
dead, dry and formal as they in such exercises, when as ye will not turn to the
light which is the true Teacher, and in the humility and penitency of your
spirits wait in silence for the Comforters presence; are ye not now
comprehended and discerned by (those who walk in the light as he is in the
light) to be dry, dead and unsavory, and hating reproof and your Reprover, who
now calls for more living fruit in this his day of light and truth than in the
times of more ignorance? And are ye not proud and covetous, and set down at
ease in the ways and customs of men, as respecting persons, etc. as if there
were no more cross to be taken up, when the greatest is yet behind? For the
light shining in your dark hearts, as it arises, will cross your own wills and
wisdom exceedingly, and reject your vain confidence of your being the only
true Church, and so ye will appear naked and bare, as those that have been but
in a dream, that ye were come out of Babylon, when as the Whore and Beasts mark
is discerned in your foreheads, and other of her trumpery among you; Wherefore
I exhort you in Gods love and fear to come unto the light within, which brings
out of death and deadness and all transgression, and out of all the ways of
confusion, and that abominable practice of Infant Baptism which is a chief
ground thereof; and be not deceived, God is not mocked, for such as ye sow ye
shall reap, and if ye will still sow to the flesh as ye have a long time done,
ye shall reap cor^uption, vanity and sorrow; but if ye will sow to the Spirit,
and lay your ground work there, ye shall from thence certainly reap life
Everlasting.

But what has he against us and our Profession may the B^ptists say, who have
not only renounced ou^ Infant Baptism as a gross deceit, but have practiced
in direct oppo^ition thereto by being dipped or baptized in water, and so
profess Faith and Baptism as the Apostles and Saints did before the Apostasy?

The Spirit of the Lord has enough against your Faith, for some of you are for
Free Will, which ye say is a power placed in you, whereby ye are able to stand
or fall to your own Master of your own accord, by taking heed to what the
Scriptures outwardly declare, some part whereof you call the Gospel, and own no
other, so that one of ye once declared, He knew no other Spirit now than the
Scriptures; as if the Spirit that moved the holy men of God to speak forth the
Scriptures, when it had so moved them, had done its work, and so quite forsaken
the Earth; when as the greatest glory of the Church, and purest life of the
Saints is to be brought forth in these last times, as the Prophesies of the
Scriptures do plentifully fore-shew, which cannot be brought to pass but by the
Spirit of the living God, which Spirit or Life is but one in all and in all
ages, which is a spirit of Judgment and burning, whose pure Judgments and Holy
burnings are felt in this day of the Lords winnowing by those, who every one in
their own measure and order do silently, sincerely and humbly wait for the
same; for although we say that every ones condemnation is just for loving his
evil deeds, and hating the light that shines in his heart, yet no man is able
in his own will, distinct from this light, to add one cubit unto his stature,
that is, to make one step in saving knowledge or obedience, but is to believe
in the light, and wait therein, so tarrying the Lords leisure, till he arise in
him up to the prey, leading captivity c^ptive, and bri^ging forth Judgment
unto victory; and if this seems a strange or foolish Language unto you, know
that it is because ye are in your own wills, in distinction from the light,
which is Gods faithful witness within you, which faithful witness is Christ the
Power of God unto Salvation unto every one that believes, and this is the
Gospel or glad tidings indeed, that man is not left to himself to work out his
own Salvation, but that the God of all grace has left in him a seed (which) as
a confirmation thereof was plentifully manifested in his Son made of a woman in
due time, in which he believing that it should break the serpents head, and do
all his works in him and for him; so that ye Free-willers (so called) stumbling
at this stumbling-stone, and setting up the Scriptures (which are but a wholesome
Declaration of this seed and cornerstone) in its place; I do Declare against
you and all such, that ye are Idolaters, and so out of the true Faith of Gods
Elect, and therefore not the true Church of Christ, but the synagogue of Satan.
Wherefore I exhort you to come out of your own wills and carnal wisdom, which
begets you in your Congregations into many vain janglings, rents and
disputings; and to wait in silence upon the Reprover in you for sin (which
alone is able to give you victory over sin) that your mouths may be for ever
stopped for pleading against the true light, which is the true Prophet, that ye
perish not in the gainsaying of Kore, who also stood up against the Lords
Prophet. Others deny indeed man's power, will and ability to do good, and so
deny you, as out of the Faith; but how (since they are become such disputers
against, and denyers of the true light that lightneth every man) they should
themselves be in the true Faith, or find power and ability to bring forth any
good and acceptable fruit unto God, I cannot behold; for which way should ye
feel his living Power to enable you thereunto, or which way should the Spirit
of the Lord come? Do you look for him by way of local motion, and so to enter
from without to within you, can such a thought be without setting the fancy
on work, and so making an Image of the Godhead within your selves; but if ye
will not be accounted Idolaters, then must you needs come to the light within,
which must reveal unto you the Image of the Invisible God in the still silence,
and that which can reveal the Fathers Glory, must most certainly discover sin
and evil which vails the same (while undiscovered and unjudged down and
destroyed) from the mind of man; but this also ye Baptized Persons (that say ye
deny man's Free Will) cannot believe, for ye think and say, though sin do remain
in you (as it must as long as ye live here) yet ye have an Advocate with the
Father, and so are justified by Christ's Merits and Righteousness, the which for
any one to deny, ye account a denial of Free Grace, yea and of Christ himself;
So ye think ye may behold the Fathers Presence even while sin is standing.
Alas, alas Friends, ye are much deceived (as are the common multitude) herein;
for in this day of Christ (the true light) another kind of Free Grace, and
another manner of Savior is discovered and revealed, than has been formerly
imagined; for know ye, that Gods Free Grace is his Free Gift in giving his Son
a light into the world, whereby as men come to see, confess and forsake all
evil in thought, word and deed, Justification, Reconciliation and Peace with
the Lord God they may come to witness, and no otherwise; for whosoever has at
any time seen his pure shape with a spiritual eye, cannot im^gine or desire to
have these any other way, his pure eyes beholding no Iniquity in any one
without reproof where ever he finds it, neither can his all-seeing eye but see
it where ever it is, and this is also the Savior that we believe in and
Preach, and no other, to wit a Christ to be known within, manifested in our
^^esh to destroy the works of the Devil, so saving us from the wrath to come,
for he was not at all sent to justify or save his People in their sins but
from their sins, so is judgment laid to the line and equity to the plummet;
look how far judgment has passed upon the transgressour in any one, so far is
mercy witnessed by the transgressour and no farther, and it is equity that it
should be so, yet is it most free grace, in that the Lord God Almighty freely
saves in this righteous way, by his own Almighty Arm, but so as that the
creature may remember and take notice, that if the righteous scarcely be saved,
where shall the wicked and ungodly appear? neither would this (Doctrine oh ye
Baptists) seem a hard saying unto you, if ye were not double-minded, loving the
Lords Salvation and your sins also, to wit, pride, covetousness deceit,
self-seeking, respecting of Persons, having men's Persons in admiration for
advantage sake, and such like; for if your eye were single to the Lord alone,
ye would desire no peace at his hands, but in the way of all righteousness
fulfilled in your selves, yea even to the silencing every idle and needless
word, and the removing of every vain and Aerie thought in you, as knowing that
holiness becomes his house for ever; but while ye cannot bear these true and
faithful sayings, know ye that ye are alinated in your minds by wicked works
which ye are in love with, what ever ye shall profess to the contrary, and so
are also out of the faith which gives victory over the world, and all sin.

And as for your being baptized with water, which is but an outward sign (at
the most) of your being dead and buried and risen with Christ, know ye that the
thing signified must be witnessed, before the sign can be truly applied, which
cannot be till ye come to the true faith, and so out of the pollutions of the
world, for otherwise ye set a seal to a blank, as well as those who sprinkle
infants; neither is Baptism with water Christ's proper Baptism, but was begun by
John who came but to prepare the way of the Lord Christ, who was to baptize
with the Holy Spirit and fire, who was to increase in this his proper work, and
John to decrease in his work; Now I grant that John's Baptism was not suddenly
left off, but decreased by degrees as the Saints came to eye and witness
perfection, so as to behold and hold forth Gods purity and righteousness
without a sign; so that it was practiced by the Apostles and Saints after
Christ's departure, and that sometimes by way of command, there being (for the
present) a good use ^hereof, yet Paul expressly declares (who was a Minister to
the G^ntil^s) that he was not sent to baptize but to Pr^ach glad tid^^gs,
neither was that Commission of Christ to the Apostles in Mat. 28. a Commission
to baptize with water, as I shall eviden^ly demonstrate; for thus are the words
truly to be read ou^ of the Greek; Therefore is going forth or forward,
Disciple all Nations, dipping or baptizing them into the Name of the Father,
Son and Holy Spirit, teaching them to keep all things wha^soever I have
commanded you, and behold I am with you al^ the days, even to the finishing of
the age; Hear we see, they were to proceed in their work (having first waited
for power to do it) which was to enter people into the School of Christ and
then to baptize them into the Name of the Godhead; Now the Name of the Lord is
his strength and power, whereby he is known wonderful in the hearts of his
people, so, is the Name of the Lord a strong Tower; Now into this name nothing
could bring them, but the same power from on high which the Apostles and Saints
(that had first waited for the same in themselves) received, which power was
the Baptism of the Spirit, whose effect was like unto fire, filling them with a
holy jealousy, and burning up the dross, and bringing them into unity with
the Father and the Son in the Spirit, so^ filling their hearts with joy and
gladness, and putting words into their mouths, and utterance to declare the
wondrous Works of God several ways, according to its various workings in them,
and sometimes even shaking the earthly Tabernacle, maki^g them to appear unto
the blind world like drunken men, this Baptism which was truly Christ's own,
was (and is altogether necessary in the Church of Christ, without which the
work of the Lord in his day could not, nor cannot go on, and therefore was it
an Essential part of their Commission, which they most carefully and faithfully
regarded; so that when Persons believed (being also I deny not then baptized
with water) they prayed and laid their hands on them, which was an outward sign
of the blessing, and they received the holy Spirit; now if any one shall say
how could the Apostles, who were but men, baptize with the Spirit? I answer, no
otherwise then they could at first beget faith and repentance in those so
baptized; it was the Lords work but they ministerially did it, that is, they
having felt the power in themselves, the raised life in them Ministered to the
life that lay low in others, and so brought it up; therefore that the Lord
might show he was not tied up to time or manner in the bestowing of his gift,
while Peter spoke those words to Cornelius and the rest, the holy Spirit fell
on them that heard the word, so that this was the Baptism here meant by Christ,
which was so Essential to the conversion of the world, and building up of the
Saints, in so much that Paul joins it with faith as a necessary companion,
saying there is One Lord, one Faith, and one Baptism; for by one Spirit are
the Saints baptized into one body, Christ the baptizer being the head; who
moreover told the Apostles that he would be with them all the days (that is of
their Ministry) even to the finishing of the age; mark, there was an age or
certain space of time wherein the truth of the Gospel should grow, and the
Baptism of the Spirit or the comforters presence be witnessed through Christ's
Power accompanying their Ministry; and then should the Mystery of iniquity in
false Apostles get such a head, by stealing and bringing in false Doctrines,
Traditions and inventions, that it should (God so permitting it) overtop the
life, and so the true Ministry should cease, and his living presence not be
felt and enjoyed as before; which most certainly came to pass, as we see
(whose eyes the Lord has opened) in the many hundred years Apostasy and reign
of Antichrist; now if Christ meant that He would be always with them to the end
of the world, as its falsely rendered in English Bibles, how could his words be
true, since we see by experience that the Glory of God which shined in his
Temple in the Apostles days, departed over the threshold, the Church went into
the wilderness, the Seed of God was captivated by the Whore of Babylon, and the
man-Child (Christ in his strength) taken up to God and his Throne; wherefore in
the second restoration of the spiritual Temple and re-edifying of the holy
City new Jerusalem, people must first come to the true faith, by believing in
Christ (the true light) and witness repentance from all false worships and and
dead works of the world, as those that are weary of Babylons captivity, and
that set their faces toward Sion in truth; and so must wait with the Lords
people in silence and humility for the Fathers promise, which is the Comforter,
even the Spirit of truth, which in his due time baptizeth such with fire, and
so by degrees leads them into all truth, and out of all sins and error, and so
the Church comes out of the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved, that is,
staying her mind upon the light within, and being content with her portion, be
it much or little, be it judgment or mercy, be it in a day of blackness or
gloominess, or in a day wherein it is neither dark nor light, or in the evening
time, wherein it shall be light, as says the Prophet, or in the sunshine of
the day it self; so not despising the day of small things, or overlifted up
with great things, neither must they all this while, set upon or practice any
outward thing in the worship of God, in their own wills, or by imitation of
others, or merely from a precept without, but only as Christ the light shall
lay that precept upon them; for if they do, they are will-worshippers, and so
Idolaters; for as the Son of God was once personally present in a body of
flesh, commanding the Apostles to teach the People (at the first raising of the
Gospel Church) to observe all things whatsover he had before commanded them,
and said unto them, while so present with them, which the Comforter afterward
brought to their remembrance; so in the re^toring thereof the second time, none
are to observe any thing, or teach any thing to be observed, but what Christ
(manifested in their bodies of flesh) does command them, for says he, I go
away (to wit as to his Personal body) and the world shall see me no more, but
ye shall see me, that is, in their own bodies manifested. Now by this (oh all
ye Baptists may ye try your selves) and present practice of water Baptism, and
all other Administrations and performances in your Congregations; have ye
witnessed this true faith, or are ye yet disputing against it? have ye repented
of all dead works, or are ye still wallowing in the pollutions of the world?
have ye waited or do ye wait in silence for the Fathers Promise, or do ye set
your selves on work in a formal Preaching, and dead praying, and hanging on the
lips of such Preachers and Pray-ers? Do ye (or others) keep an outward Sabbath
(whether on the seventh or first day) from men's Precepts or a Mosaical Rule, or
from a Command of life within? Do ye Baptize and are Baptized, and break Bread
from a particular Command in your selves, or because the Saints formerly so
practiced? Do ye exercise the power of the Keys from the true spiritual
discerning judgment and power, or because the Churches before the Apostasy did
so bind and loose? Ye must know that there has been a wide step between the
Apostles and our days, and that the gathering of the Church at first out of
Egypt, and the bringing it out of Babylon, are two several things, and are not
brought to pass after one and the self-same manner, as to the outward
administration of things; Also consider that John's Revelation was a Prophecy
of what things came and must come to pass after the Apostles, and not a
Relation of what was done in their days; so that in the coming out of mystical
Babylon, the Lambs followers wait on him for the opening of that mystical Book,
as that which concerns their present condition. Now when the Angel came down
from Heaven, and lightened the earth with his Glory, whereby the everlasting
Gospel came to be Preach^d, saying, Fear God and give G ory to him, for the
hour of his Judgment is come; and come out o^ Babylon my people, and partake
not of her sins lest ye receive of her plagues: Then as people came out of her
by the guidance of the light, the Temple of God, or his holy Habitation in the
Spirit was opened in Heaven; they had a sight in themselves into what state
they should be brought, even to have a habitation in God, and he in them; but
then was this Temple filled with smoke from the Glory of God and from his
power, that none was able to enter thereinto till the seven Plagues of the
seven Angels were fulfilled; none could fully behold and enjoy the Glory of the
Lord till all his Plagues and Judgments were executed upon the Transgressor
and transgression within; which being finished, an entrance was ministered into
the New Jerusalem that came down from God, whose light was clear as Crystal,
and wherein John saw no Temple, that is, he saw no outward Constitution of a
Church visible, by those two signs of Water Baptism, and Laying on of Hands,
which were called the first Beginnings, or Principles in the Hebrews, or
breaking of Corporal Bread: but the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb were the
Temple of it; that is, whosoever has a dwelling place in God who is perfectly
pure and holy, is (in this day) to be accounted a Member of this holy City,
which also had no need of the Sun to shine by day, nor the Moon by night, nor
the light of a Candle, all created helps and shadows were useless there, for
the Lord God alone and the Lamb are the light thereof; so that by this
Scripture alone are all you Baptists for ever silenced for pleading for a
necessity of Baptism, or laying on of Hands, or breaking of Bread, or Men's
Teachings, or Scripture Light, without the true light opening them; because
after the coming out of Babylon there is to be no visible Temple, so as to say
lo here, or lo there, which is by a shadow or sign; nor no need of any such
thing to distinguish the Saints from the World, or lead them up to God, for
they shall see his face even by his immediate light, and his Name shall be in
their Foreheads, even by his pure Image of Innocence and Righteousness which
shall most plainly appear to the view of the World; and so by these two things
shall the Glory of the second Temple be greater than the Glory of the former.

And if any of you shall say, This state and time is not yet come, and
therefore the s^gns and visible Administrations must be practiced.

I Answer, Those that can truly say they do believe in Christ the Light, and
have forsaken sin as aforesaid, and are purely moved to be Dipped in Water,
etc. to help their weakness, or in obedience to the inward Command, let them do
it and prosper; but let them not sit down there always, or strive to bring
back others thereto that see no need thereof, yea rather that it would be but a
hurt and cloud unto them; for although many of the Saints (the Lambs followers)
yea perhaps most do not yet witness a full entrance into the aforesaid
Condition, yet in all of them the Temple of God is opened by the light of the
Lamb, and the Vials are pouring out daily to destroy sin in them that vails the
perfect sight of God, and so now their work is to look steadfastly forward till
all impediments that hinder their perfect and continual Peace be removed, and
not to take up their time by the way, about the Exercise of those things which
must not (shortly) appear, or be of any use: Thus are your skirts also
discovered, and your House left unto you desolate; for ye have not been
faithful to that pure Principle of God which (at first) stirred in some of you,
and might then move you to be Baptized with Water, but are set down in a
fleshly rest, not waiting for the spiritual Baptism that should have made you
dead to the World, and Crucified you with Christ, and also have Exercised you
by its pure Gift in all your worshippings and goings forth; so that ye hereby
not growing up in that which is living and eternal, are grown more earthly,
sensual, dead, carnal and formal than diverse years ago when I walked among you;
yea even as dead and dry as the Priests themselves, preaching in such a method
as they; setting up your Desks, and Pulpits, and Clocks, and Hour-glasses to
see how the time goes away, and your Members sitting (some of them) in their
Pride, and all of them gazing upon an Image in a Desk or Pulpit; yea, and some
of you so degenerate from your first Principles, that ye (as do the
Independants so called) mingle your selves with the Nation about sending out a
Ministry; yea, and some of your Chief Leaders have lately not blushed openly to
declare, That you hold it your Duty to stand by, and preserve (so much as in
you lies) the public Ministry of the Nation, whom ye judge ought to have their
Liberty: So it seems ye are ready to defend them in offending and afflicting
those who in the tenderness of their Consciences, and holy Zeal for the
dreadful and pure Name of their God, cannot maintain or feed, but openly oppose
the false Prophets, the Ministers of Antichrist, the Emissaries of Satan, and
deceivers of thousands of Souls, of which sort these public National Ministers
are, as denying Christ Jesus the Son of God to be both a King, a Priest, and a
Prophet; which thing you Baptists some years ago did earnestly affirm and
declare; For take away the Law of man from maintaining them to Usurp upon,
Constrain or Punish others, and they are no more than other men: But it is no
wonder that ye so declare your selves, who are so far degenerated and leavened
with the Principles and Interests of these Pharisees who say and do not, that
ye show the greatest Opposition to the Saints holy and zealous Practices, as
irrigular or out of Rule; But ye have not declared what those Practices
particularly are, nor what rule they are out of, whether that of the Old man,
or of the New. Lord, what a Church or Spouse of Christ are these pretended
Believers Baptized become, who have not a word to plead for him (whom they own
to be their Husband) against the Beast, but would submit in silence to any
humane Government; nor against the false Prophet, but have a hand to preserve
him, accounting those that do (in this day of the Lord) oppose them both, to be
irregular, as though they thereby would cast the whole bulk of persecution, and
rage, and malice of the multitude upon the Lambs followers, who are called, and
chosen, and faithful in their measures of life, and as being themselves afraid
what man could and can do unto them: Neither would your Independent. Brethren
have us to be Countenanced or Entrusted by the Nation, when as none know aright
how to Govern others, but those that are themselves governed by the Lord Jesus,
who are anointed to Govern as well as to Preach, for the spirit of true
Government is a pure and majestical Gift of God, not consisting in whorish and
pompous state, but in the beauty and Glory of simple Truth and naked Justice,
which lays the Rod upon the back of the Transgressor, and smileth upon the
wel-doer impartially. And (O Nation) because thou considerest not this,
therefore are not thy breaches healed, but rather increased unto this day. Oh
be ye ashamed to call your s^^^es the Churches of Christ, when ye are so far
out of the Life and Practice of the Apostles and Prophets, upon whose
foundation the former Churches were builded, Jesus Christ himself the true
Light being the Head Cornerstone; For Consider whence the word Church is
derived, even from a word that signifies to Call out; so that the true Church
of Christ is a people called out of the Ways, Wickednesses, Formalities,
Customs and Fashions of the World, into the pure obedience to, and worshipping
of God in the Spirit by his own living Word which is nigh in the heart and
mouth, to which Word ye should do very well to take heed, as to a light shining
in a dark place, which is your dark hearts, that it may lead you out of all the
ways of sin, death and deceit into the paths of all Righteousness, even into
such a pure way, wherein no Ravenous Beast that fights against the witness of
God and his living truth can ever come says the Lord Almighty, and that
because of his flaming Sword which turns every way, to keep the way of the
Tree of Life from all such.

But you will object and say, The Light which thou so much speak of and
call Christ within, as the Enlightner of every man that comes into the
World, is no more but a Natural instinct or endowment, or Light of Nature,
whereby man is able to reflect upon himself when he has done good or evil, yea
and sometimes restrain from the evil, and do the good as well as commit the
evil, whereby his conscience accuses or excuses him, for Paul says in his
Epistle to the Romans, when the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by Nature
the things contained in the Law, they having not a Law are a Law unto
themselves; and again the uncircumcision which is by Nature keeping the Law
shall judge thee who through the Letter and Circumcision art a transgressor of
the law.

This one thing may for ever stop the mouths of all such Objectors, if they
would but consider that (as in the truth it is) Paul is not here speaking of
any thing, but that which justifies in the sight of God; for it was not his
work to declare to people (being an Apostle of Jesus Christ) any Faith, Peace,
Reconciliation or Obedience, but what tended to the justification of life;
therefore he says before, that he was not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for
it is the Power of God unto Salvation to every one (Jew and Greek) that
believes; and therefore he says in the thirteenth verse of the second
Chapter, that the Hearers of the Law are not just before God, but the doers of
the Law shall be justified; for when the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by
nature the things contained in the Law, these having not an outward written Law
are a Law to themselves; whereby they by the Finger of God which wrote the
effect of it in their hearts, which is the light of Christ that enlightneth
every man, are justified in the sight of the living God, or condemned in his
sight by the same Finger or Light, so that their consciences either excused
them unto the justification and salvation of their souls, or accused them unto
the damnation thereof; so it is most plain, that that Principle whereby they by
Nature or Naturally did the will of the Lord, was no other then the light and
life of Christ, without whom I believe none of you dare deny any one can be
justified.

But moreover because of your hardness of belief, Consider what ye say, when
ye speak of Nature or doing by Nature; the word Nature comes from a word that
signifies to be Born; so that whatever a man does by Nature, he does by that
which was born with him or brought forth with him into the World, as beasts
also do in their kind, yea and inanimate creatures in their kind; so moving and
rest are general works of Nature, because every Creature moves or rests from
a Principle which it had from its birth, but here men are apt to commit
idolatry in not minding and seeing whence this birth or nature, and the works
thereof proceeds and do subsist, for in the Eternal Power and Godhead who was
in himself most glorious, before any thing was born or brought forth, or before
nature was, does all things, and nature with all its works, subsist and have
their being; so that they are nothing but what he is in them, yet every thing
in its degree, measure and order, and so man is in the highest degree of
acting, from that ability which the Creator, who is the Soul of the World and
Life of all things placed in him; Now this being rightly considered, all that
which men in a sleighting manner are wont to call instincts of Nature, or
natural light or endowment, is the very effect of the Life of God himself,
stirring and moving that way; so then mankind having an ability in him from his
birth to reflect upon himself (as to Godward) when he has done good or evil
(which the beast is not capable of) so as to be accused or tormented, or
excused and comforted, this ability (call it what ye will) is from the life of
all things, and the Eternal Word of his Power which is the light and life of
men, which cannot be separated from man's understanding, whereby the Spirit of a
man becomes the Candle of the Lord; and so the effect of the Law is written in
man's heart by the Finger of God, by Nature, or from his birth, for that word
implies no more; and in this did the Gentiles differ from the Jews, in that
these had a law also outwardly declared (which was added because of the height
of transgression against the Law in the heart, till the Seed or life that there
placed it should arise to fulfill it) and the other only the Principle by
Nature or the forced ability from their birth without any outward engravement
or writing, whereupon the Jews boasted over the Gentiles, because to them were
outwardly committed the Oracles and Ordinances, etc. Wherefore Paul to stop
their mouths, (for the seed was now raised) says, for when the Gentiles which
have not a law, do by Nature, or the Principle placed by God in them from their
birth, the things contained in the law, these having not a Law outwardly
written, are a law to themselves, that is, have the Pure Principle of God in
themselves from their birth, showing them what to do, and what to abstain from,
and so, if the uncircumcision which is by Nature keep the Law, that is, if they
which are not from their birth circumcised outwardly, as not being the Seed of
Abraham according to the flesh, do keep the Law by the same pure Principle of
God, they shall judge the Jews outward, who having such a a Law and
Circumcision do yet transgress the Righteous principle of God, which shows
them that inwardly which the law outwardly declares of, and which Circumcision
outward holds forth; so ye may if ye are not wilful, see your mistake in
separating Nature from the God of Nature, and that that which naturally shows
man what is good and what is evil is the pure principle of God, or the word by
which all things were made, which is Christ the light; for says the Apostle,
whatsoever may be known of God is made manifest in them, to wit, by nature or
from their birth, for God has shown it unto them which he has not shown
unto a beast, because of the lower Region he was created in; so that men are
not in this sense (by nature) Children of Wrath, but Children of the Day, to
wit, as man was at first brought forth into that which showed him what was good
and what was evil, for so he was in the Image of God, but as going from the
good and choosing the evil, so acting in self in distinction from the power or
pure Principle of God, which inclination is since become natural, or is in him
from his birth, and so by nature is a Child of Wrath, as the inclination to
evil acts it self forth; and whereas Jude speaks of some, who in whatsoever
things they know naturally as living Creatures void of reason (for so it is in
the Greek) in those things they corrupt themselves, that is not in those things
which they know only from the Eternal light manifested in them, which is Gods
faithful Witness, which none but a Creature that has reason is capable of,
but in things pertaining to the five Senses of Seeing, Feeling, Tasteing,
Smelling and Hearing; for the Sensitive Beast knows by the instinct of Nature
or from his birth (which is also the Principle of his Creator in him, in his
kind) that he is to eat and drink to satisfy himself, as feeling when he has
enough meat and drink, to give off and chew the cud, or lie down to sleep, etc.
whereas these men (as many do now) feasted and fed without fear inordinately,
or drunk inordinately, and so corrupted themselves in such things wherein the
Beast was more moderate; and this is the Natural man that perceives not the
things of the Spirit of God, the light being obstructed by sense and sensuality
in him, and in this sense, whatsoever a man does by nature, or in his own
sensual will, distinct from the feeling of the Life and Power of God, all that
he does is rejected and accursed, though the works may be good in themselves
and shown by the Eternal Light; yet he that is charitable to the poor, which
the light shows to be good, if he give his Alms from a wrong ground or to a
wrong end, though he cannot witness acceptance in his Work with the Lord, yet
he shall judge another who is Rich; and yet so covetous that he shuts up his
bowels from the Poor and Needy; and so might the Gentiles also condemn the
Jews, though themselves sensually performing some good actions were not
accepted, because not reconciled to the light in themselves, which showed the
action to be good. But notwithstanding, this is a real and infalible Truth,
that it is no other than the pure Principle of God, or his Word in the heart
which is the true light, that shows man by nature or from his birth, what
what is good and evil; which Principle it self was never born or had a
beginning, any other-wise than was in manifestation in man, whose Soul came out
from the breath of the Almighty (who is out of time) in time.

But some may say, what great hurt or inconvenience can come unto us, though we
do not own or believe that which is nigh every man to show him sin and evil,
and which convinces in his Conscience to be Christ the true light; since we
believe Christ to be the true light in himself, and to be tbe Judge, Savior,
Teacher and Comforter of his People, according to the Scriptures.

I Answer, as Paul in another case, much every way; for first, thou shall never
come aright to know what is good and what is evil, what is sin and what is
righteousness, but wilt be ready to call good evil, and evil good, and wilt be
still in an uncertainty concerning what the good and perfect will of God is,
and how then should thou do it? for thy mind being abroad, thou art in the
wandering state, and although thou searchest the Scriptures never so narrowly
and diligently, yet therein will appear thwartings, and contradictions, and
scruples; not through default of the scriptures, but by reason that thou art
not staid in that which should reconcile them: Hence have arose (for many years
past) those which they call Casuites, who have under-took to Answer Cases of
Conscience for people from the Scriptures; when as those very Resolvers being
themselves from that which should Resolve all doubts and difficulties, have
(like unskil^^d Physicians) left tender Consciences half quieted, yea, and
oftentimes made the scruple and trouble greater than before; and so the leaders
of the people have (this way) caused them to err. Neither will thou so see the
odiousness of sin as it is in it self, and as thou ought to see it; for
that which searches and pricketh to the heart, makes men cry out, What shall
they do? they seeing sin staring them in the face with a dismal Countenance,
and how it has separated them from God the fountain of all good, they are even
at their wits end, and so their stony and stubborn heart comes to be broken,
and they are willing to deny their wills, lusts and pleasures for the enjoyment
of his favor whom they have transgressed against; but men may and do hear the
plagues and judgments of God declared against sin and sinners in the
Scriptures a long time, as God shall wound the hairie scalp of him that goes on
in his wickedness, the wicked shall be turned into hell, and all that forget
God, how that their worm shall never die nor fire never be quenched, that they
shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone which is
the second death, and such like, and yet they never be moved at it, but either
are apt not to believe it, or to put the day of evil far from them; for all
outward Declarations or threatenings without that which rips man open, and set
him naked and bare before the Lord, are but as shot that flies over the head,
but never touches the body, and so do no execution upon the transgressour. So
neither can man, if at any time he be wounded for sin, be truly healed and
comforted, because that which smites must heal, and that only: Now if any one
see his sickness as Ephraim did, and go not to the true Physician, but go to
Egypt, how should he have a true and through cure? Now at such a time, one may
fetch and gather in all the promises in the Scriptures and endeavor to apply
them or have them applied to himself, and strive to believe that they do belong
to him, and yet be never a jot the nearer to Peace with the living God; and how
many have deceived themselves this way, and like children quieted themselves a
while, but afterward conscience and they have more fallen at odds then before;
for the soul being invisible and immortal, an outward Declaration or promise
cannot satisfy it, because that is received in by the senses of seeing or
hearing, the sound and sight whereof vanishes; but the voice of the Lord in
the invisible and immortal and Eternal light and love, makes up all breaches in
the soul be they never so wide, applying unto the wounded conscience the blood
of sprinkling, and washing and cleansing, and so speaks in Truth and reality
better things then that of Abel. Neither after the work of regeneration begun
and in measurewitnessed, can any one that believes not in nor stays his mind
on the invisible immortal light within him, be preserved against the snares and
subtilties that do attend him, and the many Temptations, and sundry trials,
that do befall him, whereby he should endure to the end and be saved, for the
Light is his Armor, the Word nigh in his heart and mouth is his sword, which
are to be with him continually; the light is the leaven of the Kingdom, that
works into and preserves in the savoury Life, it is the immortal hand that
keeps the Soul fast to it self that it makes not shipwreck of Faith and a
good Conscience: and though there may be never so many opinions in the World
taken up and contended for, with or about the Scriptures, or never so many
Atheistical opinions contradicting the Scriptures, yet the immortal Eternal
light residing and and shining in the heart, being believed and waited in,
becomes the Anchor of the Soul sure and steadfast, reconciles the Scriptures,
and makes the Soul to triumph over all Ranting and Atheistical spirits, to
rejoice in the hope of the glory of God, and to strive against every thing that
may Eclips it; So shut not your eye oh ye Professors, neither cavil against the
Universal, saving, necessary light of the Lamb, for though Christ Jesus be
light and Life in himself, yet that can avail you nothing unless he be so in
you; till which time, all the light and knowledge that is in you from without,
is darkness, and then, how great is it?

And now (Oh ye Fifth Monarchy-men, as ye are called) must you be searched and
tried by the Balance of the Sanctuary, to see whether your sword of steel be
the right weapon which the man of God must use to prepare and make way for
Christ's Kingdom in the world; that ye are very great opposers of the true light
within I know, and must needs be, while ye are in this Principle; that there
were four eminent worldly Monarchies or Kingdoms (to wit) the Assyrian,
Persian, Macellonian, and Roman, I grant, who had their time to rise and fall,
so that the Tyrany of the last of these, which is the worst of these, is
drawing nigh to its period; and that in the days of these Kings, the God of
Heaven has and will set up a Kingdom that shall never be destroyed, as says
the Prophet Daniel, I know and see; but that this Kingdom shall be Ushered in,
by such gross outward observation, and Bussle, as ye imagine, or that it shall
be administered when set up, in such a way and manner as ye think, I utterly
deny; for if ye will come to the Scriptures, which ye seem much to adhere to
(though in a very literal sense) let us see what they testify both of the way
of setting it up, the nature of the King or Monarch that rules, and the manner
of his Government; when Christ the Son of God, the first born among many
brethren, was bringing into the World, before the Tyrany of Antichrist got up,
this very Kingdom was approaching, and there was a messenger sent to prepare
his way, even John the Baptist, who was a plain man, of plain raiment, and mean
fare, crying in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths
straight, which was to be done by repentance from sin; for says he, Repent for
the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; Now at that very time was the Roman Empire
or Monarchy at a great height, and Tyranized over the subdued Jews, and was
grossly and heathenishly Idolatrous, and the blind Jews thought Christ their
King, when he came would have redeemed them out of that thraldom by some
external power, so restoring (as they imagined) the Kingdom to Israel; but alas
they were much deceived in those their expectations; for his Kingdom was of
another nature, so that John his forerunner, came only Preaching Repentance,
and bearing witness to him as the true light (that lightneth every man) to be
believed in, which should lead thereunto, neither did Christ himself while on
the Earth, or any of his Disciples in that time, use any other means, or Preach
any other Doctrine in order to this Kingdom, which before some of them should
taste of death, he testified they should see it come in power; neither has
Christ two Kingdoms, the one spiritual, and the other Personal, as ye
distinguish, for in his Personal appearance he suffered and was despised, but
in his spiritual appearance he rejoices and triumphs World without end. Nor
was the Reign of Antichrist the ruin and destruction of that his Kingdom which
was set up in the Apostles days (for he still made good his Title in the
hearts of some, one way or other, in the darkest times, as he that had right to
Reign) but only was withdrawn a while that he might the second time come upon
the necks of his enemies with the greater force, but it must still be in the
same spiritual way, for the Kingdom is but one now as before; wherefore does he
now prepare his way as in times past, by calling upon all men to repent and
forsake the evil of their ways, by believing in his light within them, which
discovers it unto them, that they may feel his living power; and so says John
in his Revelation, That the Lamb makes War with the Beast by the sword which
proceeds out of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips must he slay the
wicked, so that all ye who treasure up carnal weapons, which ye say, are to be
reserved against a day of slaughter, when ye shall by the Lord (as ye suppose)
be bid to strike, are no fit instruments in Gods hand, or in his work, yea ye
have no part nor lot in this matter, but are carried on with a Jehu's zeal,
breathing out threatenings, which (if ye stop not your furious course) will end
in your destruction; for he that smites with the sword shall perish by it.
Consider also what a King or Monarch this is (who is to Reign in righteousness
over all) that ye seem to be so zealous for; I give my Testimony with Paul (as
I have felt him in my measure) thus concerning him; I charge thee, says he to
Timothy, in the sight of God who quickens all things, and before Christ
Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession, that thou keep
this Commandment (which was to fight the good fight of Faith and follow after
righteousness, godliness, patience, meekness, love, etc.) without spot
unrebukeable, till the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ; which in his times
he shall show, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings and
Lord of Lords; who only has immortality, dwelling in the light which no man
can approach unto (to wit in his own wisdom) or with his bodily eye, whom no
man has seen, nor can see (to wit with those) to whom be honor and Power
everlasting, Amen. Oh that ye swordmen had your eyes opened to behold this
King as he is here witnessed, how would you then be ashamed, and amazed at your
own folly in gazing upwards, as expecting to see him in a bodily shape and with
a corporal eye, to Reign on Earth; Here you see Paul witnesses he shall be
shown in his times, and that as the only Potentate or Monarch, and yet he
says no man can see him; what a contradiction may this seem to be to your
gross understandings; but it is really so, I aver; for his appearance in the
world in his times, must be agreeable to his nature; he only has immortality,
therefore must be seen only by that which is immortal, he dwells in the
light, and therefore must be beheld only in the light, and by an eye
internally enlightened; So that now stop your mouths for ever, and cease from
your carnal interpretations of those Scriptures which speaks of Christ's coming
to reign on earth; but turn to within, even to his light wherewith every one of
you are enlightened, that in that light ye may see him who is invisible,
dwelling in the light, whom no man has nor can see nor approach unto; for
assure your selves that the world shall see his bodily Shape and Person no
more; but the Saints do and shall see him, for because he lives they shall
live also. And as for the manner of this spiritual Kings Government, it must be
spiritually, not by an outward visible shining body, quelling and over-awing
the enemies of his Kindomg, but by his inward and invisible Power in the hearts
of his People, making the people to fall under him, or chaining them up; yea,
making all his enemies within and without to go backward and flee before him;
and although ye may look upon this as a weak and inconsiderable thing, because
it seems not pompous to your carnal eye, yet know that it is of the greatest
force that can be imagined; For is not Conscience more to a man than a thousand
witnesses? Which if it once condemn, God is greater and knows all things, and
so the comment of the wicked increases; Now that of Christ in the Saints
arising in Power, and transforming them into its own Image of Righteousness and
true Holiness, his Name is seen in their foreheads by living fruits, which
reaching to the witness of God in wicked men, they cannot stand before it; for
the wicked cannot stand in Judgment, nor sinners in the Congregation of the
Righteous, because by the Righteous Principle of God in themselves they are
Judged, which works in their guilty Consciences the fear and flashes of
Eternal vengeance, which fierce indignation of the Almighty, that they may
avoid, they also are often times brought to lay hold of eternal Life, bringing
forth fruits meet for Repentance; and so the work of the Lord prospers in
this his King immortal, his hand, in his Majesty riding prosperously, because
of Truth and Meekness and Righteousness, and his right hand teaching him
terrible things, and brings to pass greater things hereby than all outward
force, fear and violence were able to do. Now the reason why ye savor not such
things as these, is because ye (with many other Professors) are out from that
which should give you salt in your selves to savor withal, and so being buried
in the Letter of the Scriptures, do interpret them according to a mind that is
under the ministration of the Letter, and not of the Spirit; So look what
truths of God are to be spiritually understood and discerned, ye being out of
the light, do literally understand, and so are for an external or personal
appearance of Christ in his Kingdom, even as a fifth visible Monarch in the
world, and for a Holy City outward, just so long and broad, and every way
composed, as that description of it in the Revelation seems outwardly to
describe; So ye will talk, and be even very zealous for a New Heaven and a New
Earth wherein dwells Righteousness, but what fruit does the expectation of
such things (in your way expected) bring forth in you? Does it make you
diligent to be found of him in Peace, without spot and blameless, as Peter
exhorted the Saints to be, who looked for such things? Or are you in the
vanities and folly of the multitude, who are without Hope or God in the world?
How proud, rough, rugged, earthly-minded, bitter, dead, dry and unsavory do
many of you appear? Oh People, it is not a discourse of, or expectation of
great and outward changes or happiness, though for ever to endure, that will
bring to the Cross of Christ, and slay the enmity of your minds by wicked
works, but it is the knowing the Cross of Christ in your selves, which is his
living and quickening Power, felt by waiting in his light, that must bring you
to take up your own cross and follow him: else while you think to be the men
that shall Reign with Christ and Judge the world, ye your selves will be Judged
by Christ in this his day, which comes and is come as a snare upon all the
earth. Your good intentions toward the executing of Justice and Righteousness
in the earth, in opposition to Tyranny and Oppression, I confess is to be
owned, but ye take not the right course how to bring it forth; for it is not
the shaking a Weapon, or sore threatening or the like, at the Beast that will
change his nature, but it is the Life that is the light of men which will do
it, for that which alone searches the heart, can and does alone turn the same,
so that if (as the Lambs true followers) ye knew how to make War in
Righteousness with the Whore, Beast and false Prophet, through Faith and
Patience ye might and should do good; but if out of a rash and blind zeal ye
will steer an indirect course, no wonder if you arrive not at your desired
Harbor; for if ye will needs give blows, ye must expect blows again, because
this exasperates the proud and wilful nature, whose Element it is even to live
in the fire: also an outward force to an outward, is like to like; but a
spiritual Power against a carnal is altogether different, and what shall always
stand against Gods living Power in Spirit, by whom all things were made, and in
which they all subsist, and by which all hearts are bridled? Saul was a stout
and valiant Warrior, and higher than the rest by the head and shoulders, and
went in and out a notable Chieftain before the People; but when Gods witness
accused him, he was as weak as water, yea, fell down upon his face to the
ground; So now we keeping close to this, as the Head-stone in the Corner, the
Weapon we War withal, though it be managed with much Meekness and Patience (as
it ought to be) is far stronger than yours that keeps a greater clattering, for
yours has yet wrought no deliverance in the earth, nor never will; but
thousands (Glory be to the Lord God of Power) can witness deliverance from the
unjust power, and from Injustice and unrighteousness in thought, word and deed,
even by the Armor of light, which is Gods faithful witness within them, and
the Government placed upon his shoulders, who by his most powerful and good
Spirit will in due time Govern the Nations Righteously upon the earth, and in
no other way; Therefore I advise you to put up your Sword of Steel into his
Sheath for ever, yea, to break him into a Plow-share; for so he may be of some
good use among mankind; and wrestle not so against flesh and blood, as to kill
the Creature; which is Gods Workmanship, but come to know the Weapons of the
Saints Warfare, which are not carnal but spiritual, yet mighty through God to
the pulling down all the Strongholds of sin and sinners both within and
without; for says Paul, They have in readiness to revenge every disobedience,
when your obedience (speaking to the Saints) is fulfilled; So then, if ye will
be accounted of the number of the Saints that follow the Lamb in his Holy War,
wait to feel his living Power in your own Particulars, which may fulfill your
obedience toward him: and then shall the same Power (appearing in you) be able
to revenge all disobedience in others, be they Magistrates, Priests or People;
but if ye live in the disobedience your selves against Gods faithful witness,
which is his true light within you, and come not to the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which makes Humble and Meek, slays the earthly mind, and brings out
of self and all selfish ways into the true self-denial, which is to Love and
give Glory only to God, and to love ones Neighbor as ones self (which to do
aright (the light waited in in truth) will discover) your outcries against
others wickedness and injustice will be but as the espial of a Mote in another
eye, when as a Beam is still in your own.

But ye will say, That Christ Luke 22.36. a little before his suffering, bad
the Disciples, That he who had not a Sword should sell his Garment and buy one:
which could not be but for some great and necessary use, that the having of it
should be preferred before a necessary Garment.

Can ye say in truth of heart, and nothing within you tell you that ye lie,
that what Christ (in this Particular) said to the eleven, that he in them spoke
to all Saints who should come after? As he did when he exhorted them to Watch,
saying, What I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch; Or was this Sword that he
bid them to buy only for some special use at the time of his apprehension?
Which was to hold forth, that all such fighting with the Sword by the Saints
was now to take its farewell in the world: Christ was made under the Law, which
both tolerated, and often times commanded the Jews not only to defend
themselves, but to offend their enemies; so an eye for an eye, a tooth for a
tooth; and he was not yet offered up which put an end to the Law: also observe
his reason for his so speaking; for (says he) I say unto you, that this which
is written must be accomplished in me; And he was reckoned among the
transgressors: for the things concerning me have an end; intimating hereby
that the buying of the Sword was for the very forementioned purpose, and when
the things written concerning his sufferings were finished, then the outward
Sword must be put up and laid aside, as he bid Peter to do, when he had once
smitten with it, least he perished by it. Likewise mark his answer to them,
when they said there were two Swords: says he, It is enough; although he
seemed to say before, that every one should sell his Garment (that had not a
Sword) to buy one: showing thereby, that this thing was not of Universal use,
as ye would understand: therefore when Judas had betrayed him to the multitude,
and those about him said unto him, Lord shall we smite with the sword? And one
of them had smitten and cut off the High Priests servants ear; Christ answered
and said, Suffer ye thus far? Showing, that now the Sword had done his Office:
And so he touched his ear and healed him; Thus exercising his Power of love in
requiting good for evil, and even making up the breach that the Sword had made
in revenge: neither was any sign of a Sword seen in the hands of any of the
Apostles and Saints after Christ's departure, but they suffered with all
Patience through faith in the Power of God, and so must and do the Lambs true
followers in this his day of restoring the desolate Places, as John testifies
in his Book of Revelation; he that kills with the Sword, must be killed by
the Sword; here is the Patience and Faith of the Saints. And as for diverse
Scriptures that speak of the Lords overturning again and again, till he come to
Reign whose Right it is, and of punishing the stout heart of the Oppressor,
and of wasting utterly those Nations that will not serve the Church, and such
like: they must be understood of the exercising of Christ's Power in Peoples
hearts, and also of justly suffering the false and unrighteous powers of the
earth to scourge and destroy each other for their iniquity, till they come to
serve and fear the Lord in Truth, which brings into Peace and Unity, for the
Devils kingdom is divided against it self, but Jerusalem is a City in Unity
with it self; but that the Saints shall and ought to have a hand in these
outward desolations, as moved thereto by the Spirit of the Lord, I deny; for,
his Kingdom in them stands in righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit,
which they are to hold forth visibly before all men, and not their hands to act
contrary to their hearts.

Now come we to you called Seekers, to try what ye seek after, stick at, and
whether ye seek the Lord in a right way: that it is a precious thing to seek
the Lord and his Way of Righteousness in truth, all the Righteous and upright
in heart do experimentally know; for seek and ye shall find says Christ (the
true light) to his; and blessed are they that keep his Testimonies, and seek
him with the whole heart; and says David in another place, Let all those that
seek thee, rejoice and be glad in thee; and it is Prophesied by the Prophet
Jeremy, that when the Jews had been in the captivity of Babylon, they should go
and seek the Lord their God, asking their way to Sion (from which they had been
captivated) with their faces thitherward, saying, Come and let us join our
selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that shall not be forgotten; Mark,
when they were weary of their captivity, they should go and seek, not stand
still and enquire only, but ask with their faces thitherward, saying, Come
let us join to the Lord, etc. actually to set about the work; Therefore says
the Lord by the Prophet, in the 8th verse. of the 50th Chapter, Remove out of
the midst of Babylon, and go forth out of the Land of the Chaldeans, etc. which
the Prophet Zachary also secondeth, saying, Deliver thy self oh Sion that
dwells with the Daughter of Babylon; So, here is a lively representation of
the Lords bringing his spiritual Seed out of spiritual captivity, after the
long night of Apostasy; Babylon or Confusion was the state they were to depart
from, Sion or the Mountain of Holiness was the State they were to come to, and
in order hereunto, they were to move and set forward, neither was there any
station by the way where they were to set down or continue. This I speak for
your sakes who for diverse years have seemed to turn your backs upon the Whore
of Babylon, as seeing and disliking the false doctrines, ways and worships of
Antichrist, whereby you have been deceived and captivated; but (as though the
Passage to Sion or Jerusalem was stopped up) ye have sit down by the way,
saying, The Church is yet in the Wilderness, where she must abide, till God
makes way for her coming forth, which is by raising up his witnesses, who must
appear with Miracles and such signs as the Apostles did to confirm their
Ministry by, till which time there is no true Gospel Ministry, nor
Administration of Baptism, or any Ordinances of a visible Church. This seems
indeed to carry a face of truth with it, and has stumbled many; but consider
first, whether ye are not some of those false prophets which Christ said should
come and say, Lo here, and lo there: whether ye are not those that say, Christ
is in the Desert, as yet retired as to his visible appearance in the world,
whom to go forth after, the Saints must not, but must keep their own
Habitations in the light, to which they have been turned; for says he, As the
lightning rises in the East and shines even unto the West, so shall the
coming of the Son of man be; and Luke adds, in his day; So then here is a
plain token of the Day of the Son of man, or the sign of the Son of man in
Heaven (to wit, in the true Church visible, at his coming) when he comes as a
Universal light that has enlightened every man that comes into the world, by
whose guidance and direction (they believing in it) all may come out of the
false ways and worships and deceits of the Whore of Babylon, or of the whole
world, and out of all sin into the way of Truth, Purity, Peace and true
Worship, to serve the Lord in Spirit and Truth with one consent: and those (who
have believed in this true light themselves) which makes manifest all sin and
deceit, and having waited therein, have felt it to be the light of life unto
them, quickening their Souls up to God, and Baptizing them with its Holy Fire,
so making his living Word to be as fire in their bones, and putting words into
their mouths to testify and declare against the Beast and false prophet, and
against the world that their deeds are evil, and to call them to Repentance, by
believing in the same light in themselves, which is Christ the true Prophet,
Gods faithful witness, and are true and living witnesses for his Name, and such
as preach the Everlasting Gospel or glad Tidings, although they speak in no
Language but their Mother Tongue, do no outward Miracles, as to heal the sick,
cleanse the Lepers or the like; nor do at all practice Baptizing with water,
laying on of hands, or breaking of bread; And thus I plainly demonstrate it to
any that are not wilfully blind. The Jewish state of old was the true figure of
the Gospel Church, after the Son of God his being manifested in the flesh, who
was the end of all figures and shadows: look then in what manner the Lord
brought forth and led the Jew outward then, so does he bring forth and lead the
Jew inward afterward; Now when the Children of Israel came first out of
Egypt, they were brought out of that house of bondage with a high hand and
stretched-out arm, as to the outward: Moses was loath to go, as thinking they
would not believe him, therefore the Lord gave him a sign of turning the Rod
into a Serpent; which he did also before hard-hearted Pharaoh, upon whom were
ten visible Plagues also sent; the Sea was divided, the Egyptians drowned, the
Rock gushed out water, Jericho fell by the blowing of Rams Horns, and the like:
in this high manner came they to Canaan; but when they for their iniquity, were
led into captivity by the King of Babylon, at their coming out the second time,
there was no such outward sign shown, or any such visible work wrought in
order to their deliverance; but (as those who had a right to a restoration of
that which once they gained by such hardships and mighty works) this was Gods
way of proceeding toward them; he raised up Cyrus to make a Proclamation of
liberty, and to restore the treasure and vessels of the Temple, which was a
lively figure of Christ the spiritual King, Proclaming in the hearts of his
People by the true light, which is his word, that they should now leave all
false, and wicked, and deceitful ways of the Whore of Babylon, and bring back
the vessels of the spiritual Temple to serve and worship God in his holy
mountain Jerusalem, that they be no longer defiled and profaned by Idol ways
and worships; then, upon this Proclamation of Cyrus, those whose hearts were
touched, and whose spirits were stirred up, as Zerubbabel, Joshuah and others,
stood not still, but set about the work, leading many Jews to Jerusalem
without any more ado (as Nehemiah did also afterward by the permission of
Artaxerxes) and when they came thither they went to build the Temple, although
the enemies made them cease a while by force, then the Prophets Haggai and
Zechariah prophesied (but did no miracle) unto the Jews that were in Judah and
Jerusalem, in the Name of the Lord God of Israel, Ezra 5. verse. 1. whereupon
Zerubbabel, and Joshua arose up and began to build the house of God, for it is
said Hag. 1. the Lord stirred up their spirits so to do, and the spirits of all
the remnant of the People, for they were in the unbelief before (as ye are)
concerning the time, saying Hag. 2. ver. 2. the time is not come, the time that
the Lords house should be built, then the Lords Word in Haggai was this, to
convince them of the contrary; Is it time for you, oh ye, to dwell in your
sieled houses, and this house lay wast; now therefore thus says the Lord,
consider your ways, etc. And afterward when the second Temple was built, they
were apt to have low thoughts of it; who is left among you says the same
Prophet, that saw this house in the first glory, and how do ye see it now? is
it not in your eyes in comparison of it as nothing (mark) as nothing, yet says
he now be strong, oh Zerubbabel, says the Lord, and be strong oh Joshuah the
high Priest, and be strong all ye people of the Land says the Lord, and work;
for I am with you says the Lord of hosts, according to the word that I
covenanted with you, when ye came out of Egypt, so my spirit remains among
you, fear ye not; for thus says the Lord of hosts, yet once it is a little
while, and I will shake the Heavens and the Earth and the Sea, and the dry
Land; and I will shake all Nations, and the desire of all Nations shall come,
and I will fill this house with Glory says the Lord of hosts; the silver is
mine and the gold is mine says the Lord of hosts; the Glory of this latter
house shall be greater then of the former, says the Lord of hosts, and I will
give peace in this place says the Lord of hosts; are not these plain words to
him that desires to understand, the people were discouraged, because their
second Temple was not so Stately and pompous outwardly as the first built by
Solomon; yet were they bid to be strong or of a good courage, for the Lord of
hosts (strong and mighty) was with them, and the same spirit remained among
them, according to his Covenant with them when they came out of Egypt, though
there were not miracles and such visible signs showed amongst them now, as
then (for the right of building the second Temple stood in the Covenant, which
was still the same to the Seed of Israel outward, he to be their God and they
to be to him a People, whereof Circumcision in the flesh was a sign, as the
Circumcision of the heart is a sign of the spiritual and everlasting Covenant
to the spiritual Seed) saying they should not fear, for he would shortly shake
all, and all Nations by his powerful witness, which should make way for Christ
to come and fill his second house with his Glory, (for all spiritual riches and
treasures are His and in Him) so that the Glory of the latter house should be
greater then of the former, to wit, in the invisible Glory (yet visible by
fruits of all righteousness) which to bring forth, was the sum and end of all
figures, shadows, miracles, tongues and prophesies; So that they should have
peace in God which passes all Humane understanding and outward rest also when
their sufferings were fulfilled. Now consider whether it were not just so, in
the first raising up of the Gospel Church in the Apostles days, they had the
gift of tongues, they did many miracles, etc. for it was meet and needful at
the first bringing in of the first born into an unbelieving and Heathenish
world, that it should be so, as it was at the Jews coming out of Egypt to be a
visible Nation and People unto God; but at the coming out of mystical Babylon
the Spirit of Life from God entered says John into the witnesses, and they
stood upon their feet, and they prophesied, no miracle, or in what Language it
was, being mentioned, and the way that the Saints overcame was by the blood of
the Covenant; mark, the same Life of Christ which is the blood of the
everlasting Covenant which the Apostles and Saints formerly stood in was in
them, whereby they got victory every way; also they overcame by the Word of
their Testimony, declaring what they had seen and handled of the Word of Life,
and by suffering for the same, even unto death, as the Jew outward adventured
their lives in the going on with their work, against Sanballat, Tobiah and the
other their cruel enemies; neither is this second work of God to be slighted,
or little esteemed; for it is done by the pure power of the Almighty in the
Spirit, as the Prophet Zachary testified saying, not by might nor by power,
that is, so visibly appearing in strange gifts, but by my Spirit says the Lord
of hosts, even that by whom all things were made, and so is very great, and
shall bring forth the p^rest State of the Church that ever was, as in the
description of the new Jerusalem, the Holy City, does most evidently appear;
wherein shall be a new Heaven and new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness,
which Peter and the Saints in his days waited for and desired to see; where
shall be no more sorrow, nor crying, nor pain, nor night; and this is the State
after the captivity, not wrought out by outward signs and wonders, but by the
Internal light leading out of all that is unclean, into that wherein there is
no defilement, which is a glorious and all powerful work, so that the Saints
feeling of it, shall, yea and do already say, now is come Salvation and
strength, and the Kingdom of our God and the Power of his Christ, for the
accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and
night; and this purely spiritual way of proceeding, is most suitable to destroy
the mystery of iniquity, for hereby spiritual Wisdom is set in opposition, and
does discover spiritual deceit, by which the Nations have been made drunk; yet
we deny not, or limit the Power of the Holy One in this his day, to come forth
in what gifts he pleases, as sometimes he has done by healing and
extraordinary fastings amongst us; but this we say, it is not so much a seal to
the Ministry, as the Lords free working how he pleases; and how he will please
to come forth hereafter, when the Truth shall actually prevail over other
Nations that do not profess Christianity, we are not much careful, as knowing
that whatsoever is needful for the managing of the Lords own Work, himself will
freely bestow, whether it be the gift of tongues, miracles or any other.
Neither is it necessary that the true Ministry should be the Administratours of
baptism with water, laying on of hands, or breaking of bread, at their rising,
so constituting a Church (called visible) by those outward signs and shadows,
nay it is not convenient that they should do so for the reasons forementioned
to the Baptists; also, for as much as Antichrist under pretense of setting up
of outward false Administrations, called by him Ordinances, and crying them up,
has betrayed the pure life in Spirit; and seeing others also (as the Baptists
themselves) who have professed to Minister those Ordinances in a right manner
and to true Subjects thereof, have idolized the same, and become dead, dry and
barren therein, ministering out of the life and Power, and in a formality;
therefore the Lord, as he has done (in such cases) leaves them to such
Traitors, Idolaters and formalists, as going out of them, and leading his
People (in this his day) in a different manner, even in a pure path of
righteousness in the Spirit manifested by its own immediate fruits; and
bringing them into that wherein they see no Temple (besides the Lord God and
the Lamb) to dwell in, so that ye called Seekers, waiting (as ye say) for a
right Administrator of Baptism, etc. do but from the desert look for the
Kingdom to come with an outward observation, when as the Kingdom of God is
within you, as it was in the Pharisees, if ye could so see it; for the light is
that in which God dwells, and by which he dwells in man either as a
reprover and condemner, or justifier and comforter, and that by which he
Reigns in him as a Judge or Savior, which is Christ his Son given by him for
a Covenant of light to the Gentiles, which Covenant any one taking hold of, is
brought into it, and so has a right to come out of Babylon to Sion, yea, must
come out thence least he be found a transgressour against it, for that which
shows him where he has been and whither he is to go, will give him strength,
he waiting therein, to pass on, till he come to appear before God in Sion
which is the beauty of Holiness.

But to what has been said, ye will object and say, Christ Mark 16 (bidding
his Disciples that going forth into all the world they should Preach the Gospel
to every Creature, and he that believed and was baptized should be saved, but
he that believed not should be damned) said, and these signs shall follow them
that believe, in my Name they shall cast out Devils, they shall speak with new
tongues, they shall take up Serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing it
shall not hurt them, they shall lay hands on the sick and they shall be well,
or recover; So that these are the notes or marks of a true Gospel Ministry, and
therefore none may call himself an Apostle or Minister of Christ except he can
confirm his Ministry by some of these; or any call themselves the true Church,
unless such signs follow them, or are found amongst them.

It Is true, these things mentioned were signs whereby their Ministry was
propagated and confirmed; for without the gift of tongues the Gospel could not
have been so readily declared throughout the Nations into which they were to
go; nor without the other signs would they so readily have believed that which
they had never heard of before, but it does not therefore follow that every one
who went forth in the Ministry had tongues or did cast out Devils, heal the
sick, etc. For if any one were then moved by the Spirit of the Lord to Preach
but in one Language, even in his Mother tongue, he was as truly a Minister of
Christ to those to whom he spoke as those were that spoke to diverse Nations; As
Apollo, who we read not to have either spoke with any new tongue, or ever to do
a miracle, yet having received Wisdom and Power from on high, he was an eminent
Minister of the Gospel, and an instrument by whom the Corinthians believed, as
Paul witnessed; neither was always a miracle wrought by those who might
sometimes work such a thing when People were converted, nay rather oftener by
Preaching alone, without it; So the three thousand were converted by the
Preaching of Peter without a miracle done at the time of their being pricked in
heart, and gladly receiving his Word; so while Peter another time spoke to
Cornelius and his Family, the Holy Spirit fell on them, no miracle being
wrought; so Paul Preached two whole years in his own hired house, having first
declared the Truth to the Jews, some of whom believed the things that were
spoken, and others believing not, and this without a miracle; So Lydia's heart
was opened by Paul and Timotheus their speaking, without a miracle; for ye must
know that although such things were signs when the Power was pleased so to
operate, yet the living Word being declared by the living Power, was sufficient
enough (without any other sign) to prevail, and approve those so speaking to be
the Ministers of Christ to whom they spoke; so the Corinthians were the seal of
Paul's Apostleship, his Gospel coming to them in the Power and demonstration of
the Spirit; so were they his Epistle that commended his Ministry, known and
read of all men. Know also that though God did then freely come forth in such a
way, yet those who sought a sign were an Adulterous generation; for if a man
would but believe and keep to the Word nigh in his mouth and heart when
declared in him or unto him, he need not look out for any such thing. And as
for those signs following those who believed, it could not be all those who
believed, for most of the believers or members of the true Church spoke neither
with tongues, or showed any miracles, as is undeniably evident, neither could
those be Essential signs of Faith; for nothing is the proper token of that but
works of righteousness alone, as James witnesses, and none ever denied; so
then these signs following those that believed, were indeed further
confirmations that such did believe wherein they appeared, while the Essential
tokens thereof remained with them, but if they should be absent (as love which
is the fulfilling of the Law) though any one should speak with the tongue of
men and Angels, and have Faith so as to remove mountains, it would profit
nothing, and so be no sign of his being a believer. And so the false Prophets
miracles which John says he wrought before the Beast can be no sign of his
Faith or of a true Ministry, because he is an enemy of all righteousness. But
to come more home to this point, I say, that as the Commission was given to the
Apostles and Saints to Minister in that age, till the Apostacy, according to
the several gifts and operations of the Spirit, and the work they had then to
do, which was a great deal in a little time, as going far and near; and as this
Commission was declared by Christ's personal mouth before his departure, which
was terminated in them, and fulfilled in that age; so in the second
restoration, Christ the light gives a second Commission by his Spirit, to
those who have waited in his light, what to Minister with, and how to Minister,
according to their work in this his last day; which is first of all to unfold
the skirts of the great and mystical Whore, who will acknowledge Christ and the
Scriptures in words, but oppose and betray his pure Life; wherefore he
commands his wi^nesses now to fight with her with the sword of his mouth, in
the Power of Wisdom, which is better then outward strength, and so they act and
speak as he moves and enableth them, keeping to their own gift, measure and
work, as the Apostles and Saints formerly did to theirs; and not regarding how
they acted or spoke, so as to be moved or troubled at it, as to question their
call to the work of the Ministry; for they know if they receive the witness of
man, the witness of God is greater, which witness is his light within them,
which plainly shows them and seals in them (though the whole world gainsay
it) that they have felt in themselves the Baptism of the spirit and fire (whose
effects I before declared) and so the operation of his living Word, which has
brought thousands of others to believe in the same light, and many to feel also
the same living Word and spiritual Baptism, which has shaken the Earthly part
within like a cottage; and also the outward body of some, putting words in
their mouths to declare his righteousness in the great Assembly, and magnify
his Holy Name in the Congregations of his Saints; this was that greater work
that Christ said his Disciples should do then he had done, because he went to
his Father, for the Spirit was not yet given because Jesus was not yet
glorified, this is really witnessed among us, the Spirit sealing it in our
hearts; so that we witnesing the one Lord, one Faith and one Baptism, we are
thereby baptized into the one body, and being many are one bread, and so the
true Church that is come and coming out of Babylon, and out of the wilderness,
Glory be to the Lord for ever, who has thus visited and Redeemed his People;
for this living Power is the gift it self, tongues, miracles, prophecy, etc.
are but the gifts flowing as streams from this fountain; now if the Lord do
keep back some streams, and give us more of the fountain in this his day, we
are not loosers but gainers by that, and so the more to be owned as the Church
of Christ.

But ye will say, when the Church was brought out of mystical Babylon, John
declares there was an Angel who flow through the midst of heaven with an
everlasting Gospel to Preach to them that dwell on the Earth, and to all
Nations, kindreds, tongues, and People, which (since we see not how that could
be without the gift of tongues) shows us, that the true Ministry must have
the very same visible gifts now, as the Apostles had before they undertake to
go forth.

That People were never truly called out of Babylon before the Preaching of
this everlasting Gospel, is certainly true, and that it is to be Preached to
all sorts of People upon the Earth, is as cer^^in; but that this Gospel must
not be Preached to some till the gift of tongues be given, where by it might be
declared to all, is false; for the Wisdom of God teaches his People in what
manner and order he will proceed in the publishing his truth throughout the
world, it must begin first, in Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord, (Christ the
light and life) has been crucified; I mean the Antichristian State, which
under pretense of professing Christ, opposes him; this Beast indeed is many
headed, and consists of diverse Nations, but they must not all be cut off at
once, but by degrees; we know by experience (what ever ye believe) that he has
begun his work in this Isle of the North, wherein we live, and that there have
been ways made somewhat to awaken other Nations also; the pure Language being
known, a tongue has not been wanting to speak to them in; and in this one
thing do I behold Gods great Wisdom, that he has taken the wise in their own
craftiness; that whereas the Antichristian Priests have (as the Hebrew and
Greek) so especially idolized the Latin or Roman tongue, all over Europe,
whereby its become a general Language; hereby a good occasion is given to
spread the truth, throughout all these Nations of Christendom, so called; also
so much has been the mutual commerce betwixt these Antichristian People for
many years, as counting each other to be Christians, that in any of these
Nations it may be either spoken in their own Language, or by an Interpreter:
which last way is not to be despised; for the mighty God brings and will bring
to pass great things in these last times by weak beginnings, and none is to
despise the Day of small things; yea, the voice has been hard in Turkey
already: and if any of you shall say, But what had they to do to go thither,
without the gift of the Tongue? I answer, you must ask him that moved them
thereto, even by turning in to Gods witness which is his true light within
every one of you, and waiting there for Counsel, ye shall know the Lords
secrets, and feel his Power to arise, which shall bring you into Unity with
their Spirits, who knew their Call, which ye will not then dispute; but in the
mean time, him that is ignorant, let him be ignorant; but however know, that
your unbelief cannot make the truth of God of none effect. But is it not
Prophesied by Isaiah concerning the Church, that he will turn his hand upon
her, and p^rely purge away her dross, and take away all her tin, and will
restore all her Judges as at the first, and her Counselors as at the
beginning, afterward she shall be called the City of Righteousness, the
faithful City: Zion shall be Redeemed with Judgment, and her converts with
Righteousness; whereby it appears that at the Restoration of the Church the
second time (which is a very refining time, and of Redemption through Judgment
and Righteousness which ye talk so much of) the Ministry of the Church shall be
as they were at the first gathering of it by the Apostles, and so gifted just
as they were.

The endowing of the witnesses at their Resurrection, shall be with the Spirit
of life from God entering into them, and so they shall be as at the first; for
that is the gift it self, which brings into Unity of Spirit all the Prophets,
Apostles and Saints in all ages, and into Unity in Ministry, as declaring one
Everlasting Truth for substance, and from one Eternal Root; but in respect of
the gifts and operations of that one Spirit or Gift, it may be different at
sundry times and seasons, according to the work that is to be done and the
various workings of the Spirit it self; So God who at sundry times and diverse
manners spoke to the Jews by the Prophets, spoke in the last times by his Son,
by whom also he speaks sundry ways, at sundry times, though not a sundry
truth; for the Apostles bare witness to the true light that lightneth every
man, and to the Word nigh in the mouth and heart, as Moses also witnessed; and
so do we now by the same Spirit: they were for taking up and standing in the
Cross, fulfilling of all Righteousness, and for separation from every Idol, and
all Idolatrous ways, and so are we now, and that not only in word, but in deed
and in truth: they would not go forth to speak and suffer in their own strength
without power from above felt to enable them thereunto, neither dare we the
like without the same Power; so then here are now Judges as at the first, the
same Spirit of Judgment proceeding (yea, the Lord in his People rather coming
more near to Judgment) and Counselors as at the beginning, those that exhort
and reprove in the same Authority, whose words the earthly mind is even less
able to bear than formerly, for Plagues and Woes unsufferable: and so scorching
vials are now pouring forth upon the seat of the Beast and the Whore, and
hailstones fall from Heaven upon the wicked like the weight of a talent; and
those who speak in all wisdom to the Saints themselves, are seen, so ministering
from the life to the same immortal life, whereby they are built up unto a
perfect man; so that neither are they to be denied to be Counselors as at the
beginning, because they do not exhort People to be Baptized with water, etc.
for they find not that in their spiritual Commission; yea, see by the internal
light, the end of all shadows which must and do flee away at the very dawning
of this bright day of the coming of the Son of man, which shall never set more;
for says the Lord to the Church, Thy Sun shall no more go down at noon:
increase it shall, but not decrease; So here now is the true Trial of the true
Church and Ministry, when the sign of the Son of man is seen in Heaven, even
himself appearing in his People as a universal light, enlightening every one as
the lightning which shines from one end of Heaven to the other: as also by the
Baptism of Fire and the Holy Spirit, which is felt really amongst us; for as
Eliah (in Jezabels time) said (when there was a contest about his being a true
Prophet, or whether Baals prophets (who were 450) were such or no) he that
answers by fire let him be God; so the Lord answering Eliah by fire (a lively
figure of this spiritual Baptism) it licked up the water which was in the ditch
and wood, and fleshly offering (a true representation of the consuming outward
shadows, and the hay, wood and stubble that Paul speaks of) whereby he alone
was known to be the Lords own Prophet, and the other (though many) to be false
ones, and so he had dominion over them and slew them; So say I now to all Sects
and Gatherings and Opinions in the world, where the Lord God Baptizeth with
fire, consuming and burning up the dross, filling his People that wait on him,
with a Holy Jealousy for his Holy Name, and against all evil in thought, word
and deed, where the outward earthly tabernacle (as well as the inward) is
shaken, where all shadows are made to vanish, as needless in such a day as
this, there is the true Church visible, and the true Prophets and Witnesses who
slay all false prophets with the Sword of Christ's mouth, laying them by
spiritual Judgment) under Eternal Condemnation (they repenting not) and so
casting them into the lake of fire. And in this sense is that place in Jer. 30.
to be understood (which I believe ye (called S^ekers) much stick at) where the
Prophet foretelling the Restoration of the Church after the captivity, said,
The City should be builded upon her own Heap, and the Palace remain after the
manner thereof, and that their Children should be as aforetime, and their
Congregation be established before the Lord, and their Nobles should be of
themselves, and their Governor proceed from the midst of them, etc. to wit, by
the building the Church upon the same true Foundation as formerly, even Christ
the true light, and bestowing on it the same spiritual gift, which was the
Spirit of truth, the Fathers Promise to all true believers; So establishing
them upon the Rock of ages, against which the Gates of Hell shall not prevail;
out of whom should go forth such Ministers who should be Noble and Valiant for
the Truth, Christ himself, the Head of the Church, being their Governor; who
from the midst of them arises in his strength to scatter all their enemies,
and to punish all that oppress them, as the Lord has said (he will do) by the
same Prophet; so that the Palace remains after the manner of the former, as
enjoying the substance, though the shadows and same gifts in all things be not
practiced by the Saints, or found amongst them; for the Prophet Amos Chap. 9.
foretelling of the raising up of the Tabernacle of Dav^d that was fallen down,
etc. said, That the Lord would build it as in the days of old; Now we find
that the Apostle James in Acts 15. applies this Prophecy to the raising up of
the Gentile Church in those days; which was truly applied thereunto, because
(although the Jewish Church of old was very far different, both in matter and
manner of Administration, from the Churches of Christ then) yet it was builded
as in the days of old, because it was established upon the Foundation of
Abraham, with whom the Covenant was made both to the carnal and spiritual seed,
and because the substance was felt and witnessed, which was the same in the
Saints in all ages. Wherefore I exhort ye all (called Seekers) if ye will find
what ye say ye se^k after, to come to the light in your own selves, and wait
low in it, so shall you find the vail to remove from off your understandings,
whereby the true and faithful witness Christ Jesus will be seen to stand up;
and so all impediments and stumbling blocks taken up from the Letter without
will be removed, and a right understanding of the Scriptures be given, so as to
discern of the times and seasons; but ye must first come to the Cross by owning
your Reprover for sin, and deny the pride, pleasures, interests, folly and
vanities of this world, so as not the longer ye seek, the worse ye grow (as
it is too manifest some of you have done) for it is the humble that he will
teach, and his secret is with them that fear him, so as to show them his
Covenant (for so have I found it by experience) which Covenant of light being
witnessed, ye will easily see your way to Sion, and your Leader thither, not
standing still for lack of gifts in others, or wanting an Administrator of
external ordinances, but will keep to your own, and find in due time such pure
Power to arise, as will administer to you in his own Sanctuary, and make you
Minister that to others, which will plainly show that ye are those who are
called and chosen and faithful, though ye never speak with any other Tongue
than your Mother Tongue, or do any outward Miracle; yet speaking and declaring
of all his wonderful works.

Now come I to stand up in defense of the Truth and true Church of the first
born, against all you of what sort soever you be, or under what name soever ye
go who being out of all those aforenamed Sects, lift your heads on high,
snuffing up the wind, and think it too low a condition for you to believe in
the true light within you, which secretly reproves for all sin and evil, and
so to wait humbly and silently therein, with the People of God (called Quakers
in derision, because they tremble at the Word of the Lord, and are afraid to
offend (in the least thing) that of God in them) for so must you much deny your
selves, both in wisdom, talking and behavior amongst men with whom ye
converse, which Cross would to them seem a ridiculous and foolish thing in you:
Ye will say perhaps ye are above Ordinances or shadows, and can live satisfied
of your selves by that which ye know and are taught of God, without joining to,
or walking with any; But consider Friends, there is one great Ordinance which
ye must never get above, but be in subjection to, if ever ye will have true
Peace with the living God, and that is Christ the true light, who shines in
every ones heart, either as a Justifier or Condemner, who is the great gift of
the Father to the Sons of men, and him whom he has ordained to save or destroy
for ever. Now (whatever men may talk or tattle, or boast of themselves) this is
a more certain truth, sealed in me by the Spirit of the Lord God, that
whosoever he be that truly believes in Christ the light, does whatsoever the
light leads unto, and that one special thing which it leads unto, is to bring
the Creature, Soul, Body and Spirit into a right frame and order, out of its
own will into the Will of its guide, which is the light; so as that man shall
not walk at random, speak or do as it pleases him, but shall freely and
naturally love the Society, and join visibly in the bond of Amity with those
that believe and walk in the light, knowing a time of silence, as they do, and
a bridle for the tongue, so as to keep his mouth as with a bit, and this is to
walk in the foot-st^ps of the Flock; for in this manner does the good shepherd
put his sheep forth, and go before them in this his day, the states and
conditions of all those who have been in spiritual captivity, so requiring it;
nor is it enough for any of you to say, is God tied up to a Form? For we know
this is no form or frame of man's devising, but what the light naturally and
man's condition necessarily calls him into; for if his delight be with the
Saints and those that excel in virtue, as David's was who had a sincere heart,
he cannot but come amongst them in love, and if they there wait on the Lord, he
to wait with them, if they seek the Lord, he to seek him with them, if they
love the Lords Judgments and Reproofs, he to love them also, and if they
rejoice in the Lord, he to rejoice also; this is to be like minded and
affectionate one to another, hereby does the pure and unfeigned love appear,
and the Unity or the Onety in the Spirit is witnessed, here is a Church visible
in a sweet and spiritual order, and yet out of any invented or humane form; for
although we know and say that man's order is confusion, yet we also know and say
that God is a God of order not of confusion; Now what is more comely than for
Friends and Brethren in the truth to live together in Unity, and in what way
can this Unity be more shown, than by meeting and assembling together to wait
upon the Lord, to know his Counsel, to feel his Teachings, to speak when he
speaks, to move when he moves, and to rest when he rests; Is not this Gods
way of leading his People to Canaan, yea, and in Canaan, is not this one part
of walking in the light of the Lamb, is not this a part of that one heart and
one way that the Lord has promised to lead his People in? is not here a
spiritual Harmony, and hereby, does not the Saints (in a great measure) appear
to be a City set on (...) Hill that cannot be hid? Let that of God answer in
every one of you, and not your own high conceivings.

But ye will be ready to say, What difference is there betwixt you and other
Sects in this? they meet together (as you do) in an appointed place, and at a
set hour, they pray, sit and hear one speak to them, etc. and you do the like.

Does not right reason (unless any be past reason) tell you, that if Persons
meet they must have a Place to meet at or in, and that they must also know the
time of their so assembling, why then do you argue against necessity it self?
But if the end of your so objecting be to destroy all general Assemblings of
the Saints together, then I say you speak not in Gods Wisdom, nor know not the
thoughts of his heart; for the Apostle who was in the Wisdom of God, and had
received the Spirit of Truth to guide him, says, Exhort ye one another daily,
least any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin; and whereas
perhaps ye may think such Meetings are needless, because of this day of the
Lord that is risen and arising; the same Apostle argues quite contrary, saying,
Not forsaking the Assembling of your selves together (as the manner of some is)
but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as ye see the day approaching;
Oh! People consider, that the perfect day of the Lord is most exceeding
desirable of all the Children of light; therefore the more they espy it, the
more they seek after it; Now Exhortations or other Declarations that come from
the light of life, raises the light of life in others, and so brings on the
day; for it is like fire begetting fire, or like face answering to face in a
glass, not like the dead and dry words of other Assemblies, where there is no
waiting in the light (first) to feel the life, but a continual trading and
going on in self-strength; but ye cannot nor dare not deny but that we do so
wait, and all words spoken out of that are judged by the same: and if any one
among us look out after words, and is not as well satisfied without them as
with them, if the Lord will have all flesh keep silence before him, that
dissatisfaction is Judged also. Besides, if ye were in that which gives a
right discerning, ye would see that words spoken from the life are altogether
^eedful for the conjviction and conversion of the world, (...) directing their
minds to the true light their guide; and would also see that most words that
are spoken are for their sakes, as taking compassion on the multitude, who are
wandering like sheep without a shepherd; and the Lord God will have all this so
to be for Jerusalems sake, which he will make the praise of the whole earth;
therefore shall not his Watchmen keep silence night nor day till her
brightness go forth as the light, and her Righteousness as the Lamp that
burns; Wherefore if ye knew what this means, ye would not condemn the
guiltless, yea, the faithful for doing their duty, for which they so suffer by
the hands of wicked men; but it is no wonder that ye do so, for ye being in a
too loose liberty, under pretense of Christian Liberty, despise and shun the
Cross as foolishness, which to us is the Power of God.

But perhaps ye will further say, Although words may be useful to the world, as
also to build up those who are weak, or that are not come to perfection; yet to
those who have attained, they are useless, according to thy own Doctrine, who
have said before that the Holy City had no need of the Sun, Moon or light of a
Candle, etc.

It Is one thing to hear words that come from the life out of necessity, and
another thing to hear them in the Unity; now the Saints who walk in the Lambs
immediate light alone, may hear the Bride-grooms voice in others, and have
great joy therein, though they are not spoken to their particular conditions,
or have no need at all of any outward Declaration to build them up; so John his
joy was fulfilled, in hearing what Christ preached to others; Therefore the
Assembly of all Saints is still needful, both to rejoice together in the Truth,
and to witness the same in the sight of others.

But some of you may say, Though we are not of the number of any of those Sects
thou have mentioned, nor walk with you (yet we do meet together at certain
times) and pray and preach; yea, and sing also (and are therefore called the
singing People) and professing the Virgin life, as those who live in the
highest Region of Light and Truth.

Friends, consider seriously with your selves what you do, least ye deceive
your own Souls; for it is not in words, no nor the highest words that can be
uttered (nor those in the highest manner) that Gods Kingdom does consist;
therefore examine your selves whether ye are yet come to the first Principle of
God in your selves, which is the true light within, that searches the heart,
judges the deceit thereof, makes humble and meek, pulls down pride within and
without, roots out the covetousness, denies respect of or from persons, brings
to the Cross every way, and into the true silence, before the mouth is opened
by the Power; for who shall take his Word or Covenant into his mouth, that is
not Reformed? Or how can the dead praise the living? Now those marks of
Non-reformation by the light, are too visible upon you; Wherefore stop your
mouths ye Preaching and Praying lumenaries that are found in the pollutions of
the world, that flee the Cross, and love not to come to the light that ye may
be Judged; but will be ready to be angry or touchy at such words as these,
saying, We are too censorious, or the like; when as they are but the words of
truth and soberness, for truth and sobriety consists in plain dealing, which ye
all will confess is a Jewel, and yet do not desire to be plainly dealt withal;
ye are they that cause divisions and rents, professing to be taught of God, and
yet stand at a distance from those who by his true Teachings take up the Cross
and stand in it; Wherefore sink down I charge you all such, and come to the
light, believing and waiting in it with us, and let not the glory of this
world, or any other interest, pleasure or lust hinder you from so doing, so
shall ye be called the Repairers of the breaches, and those that follow Love
and Peace aright, which is shown in nothing more than by having one heart and
one way with Gods People (who ye will not deny many of us to be) to serve him
(with them) with one consent; for we know that ye ought to return to us, and
that we must not return to you.

And as for you Singers, consider whether ye have not rather cause to mourn and
lament, since those things which are the proper causes of sorrow are found in
and among you? Will ye be covetous, proud and lofty, self-seeking, dissemble
for advantage sake, respect and court persons, and the like, and come before
the Lord with a Song? Can such sing the New Song as Redeemed from the earth?
Nay, they that live in pleasure are dead while they live, and so are in the
grave of sin, in which there is no true remembrance of the Lord God of Life and
Power, and far from the undefiled Virginity of the Lambs Wife. Wherefore be not
deceived, God is not mocked, for this is but a mockery, and except ye come
first to the house of mourning, and bid Adieu to all your lovers, and pass
under the Rod, ye cannot be brought into the bond of the Covenant of Light,
Life and Peace, but your Harps must needs be (ere long) hanged upon the
Willowes; For how should ye sing the Song of the Lord in a strange Land?

But I hear some of you retorting, and saying, Thou have judged all but your
selves, as living in sin, and diverse lusts and idolatry, etc. but we see the
same things among you, that thou chargest us with and deniest us for; Is not
covetousness idolatry, and unmercifulness a fruit of unrighteousness? are not
some of you also in the pride in your house, and in the fullness of bread, when
some are pinched? are ye not too partial in looking upon one more than another?
does not anger and emulation and judging one another wrongfully, and rash
speaking appear among you? do we not see these things, and why then should ye
be accounted more the Church of Christ than any other People; for the Kingdom
of God stands not in yea and nay, pulling or not pulling off a hat, saying thou
to any one, or wearing of apparel, or taking by the hand, but in Righteousness
and all the fruits thereof, as thou thy self have said.

If I speak of my self my witness is not true, I judge you not out of that
light which judges all things, which ye either call natural and insufficient,
or slight as a little, low and weak thing, and so are out of that which should
make all works acceptable to the Lord, and which should discover and destroy
all unri^^^^ousness; so that ye are not only denied because of your b^^^
fruits, but as being out from that which would make you bring forth good
fruits, for make the tree good, and the fruit shall be good, says Christ the
light, in whom the tree is made good, as acting from a living Principle, yet
that the tree is known by its fruit I grant and affirm and have affirmed
against all loose and ranting spirits in the world, who would have no outward
action to be a mark or token of the good or evil tree; but the light, Life or
Principle must not be separated from the action, nor the action from it, for if
so, all a man's righteousness becomes unrighteousness, as acted from self, in
the wrong ground, and his knowledge like a cloud without water. But as for your
objecting against our conversation in the world; I say, we judge our selves
(first) and epsy the beam in our own eye; for being turned to the light which
makes manifest, the least thing that appears in us contrary thereto, is as a
beam, which (while standing) clouds and overspreads the pure presence of God;
wherefore we are not at rest day or night, till the beam be be plucked out, and
so do we epsy and reprove the faults of others who either plead for sin as
long as they live, or excuse their own iniquity by others failings, and yet
think themselves safe. And this I would have none of you be ignorant of, that
although we believe perfection to be attainable in this world, yet we are very
sensible, that it is not the work of a day, month, or year, but that there
must be much waiting, many a sigh and groan, a great spiritual combat with the
Dragon and his Angels within, a diligent and expert exercising of the whole
Armor of light, ere such a State be witnessed; but this is our comfort, that
we are truly turned to that which gives the victory in the end, and so are not
faithless but believe, as also, that the Lambs War is truly begun in us, who
fights our battles for us, while we stand still and behold his Salvation; with
which Salvation, some are already saved, and others saving; so every one in his
own measure and order, so that (in few words) if any or all of those things by
you objected should sometime appear in or among some of us, yet know they are
not ours, but the evil ones to whom they belong; for when we speak of our
selves as Saints, we mind that which is born of God which cannot sin, for that
is the Elect Seed, which is for ever joined to the Lord, and takes his part
against the transgressour; and this I will say, not only for my self, but in
the behalf of other brethren and friends (in whose defense I have been moved to
make this Apology) that there is never a one amongst us, who are truly and
sincerely come to the light, but do love judgment, yea wait for his judgments
to be brought to light, and forth to victory, even as the watchman watches for
the morning; and so far are any such from pleading for any one sin in thought
word or deed, that it is their meat and drink to do the will of the Father; and
like gall and wormwood to the pure thing of God in them, when it is not
fulfilled, neither can they be (in the least) content to shroud themselves
under a Profession of truth, so as the more freely to act deceit thereby, but
both desire and witness a growth in truth and righteousness, as knowing that
not to go forward is to go backward; And as for any that come amongst us, and
seem to walk with us, that are otherwise minded and conditioned then I have
declared, by the light they are judged, and by the truth denied, and by the fan
winnowed, and in themselves condemned; wherefore stumble not at the light and
truth because of offenses, for that causes not the offense, but by degrees
gathers all things that do offend out of the Fathers Kingdom, and makes
fearfulness in due time to surprise the Hypocrite; so God is glorified, and his
truth vindicated thereby. Thus the foundation of God stands sure to the Seed,
notwithstanding all such objections, and the true Church which is the pillar
and ground of truth is appeared in this our day, so that none has any more
just cause to disown it for some faults and failings that may yet be found
among us, then the heathen had just cause to deny the Jews outward, to be the
Lords people, when they came out of Babylon to build the Temple, because of
some things that were not right and comely amongst them, against which Nehemiah
contested, and which were also rectified, which was a figure of Christ Jesus
the spiritual King, the Rectifier, reformer and perfecter of his People.

And as for some outward gestures and behavior among men, which ye account as
trivial and indifferent things, know that though they are little in themselves,
yet as they flow from a pure Principle of God in us, which makes us outwardly
to testify against the pride and loftiness of man, which is to be brought down
in this the day of the Lords exaltation, they are of great and necessary use,
and as for taking by the hand, it is a manifestation of equality and unity
among friends in the life, and to be done from a pure moving, and not from a
tie or custom; but as for yea and nay, whatever is more either in word or work
comes of evil; And so I shall conclude with prayer to the God of all Grace,
that as he which has called us by his Son, is holy, so we may be holy in all
manner of conversation more and more, till every thing that offends within or
without be taken away, that so the new Heavens and new Earth, wherein dwells
all righteousness, may be enjoyed, wherein love (which the fulfilling thereof)
does plentifully flow and not wax cold, that the Lord God may be glorified in
us and we in him, and his Name be written in our foreheads, to the stopping of
the mouths of all that oppose the truth, to him be praise, and glory and
everlasting Dominion now and for evermore.

THE END.

