THE CASE OF SWEARING (AT ALL) DISCUSSED.

WITH Several Objections answered, the Primitive Practices therein asserted out
of several Ancient Authors; together with several Presiden^s out of the Book of
Martyrs.

The inconveniences that follows the present practice of swearing, which might
easily be prevented, by a Law to punish, false Witnesse-bearing, and lying, as
well as other evils.

ALSO, A Word to all People that are zealous for the Commands of CHRIST,
recorded in the Scripture.

By a friend of Truth and Righteousness, John Crook.

Because of Oaths the Land mourns. And for want of truth and righteousness in
the Land, the innocent and uppright are made a prey. LONDON, Printed for Robert
Wilson, at the sign of the Black-Spread-Eagle, and Windmill in Martins, near
Aldersgate, 1660.

The Case of swearing discussed.
MAn was planted a Noble Vine, wholly a right seed, but he is turned into the
degenerated plant of a strange Vine, more degenerate than the Ox or the Ass;
he is fallen from the uprightness, sincerity, and simplicity, into the
invention, subtilty, and fleshly wisdom, where he lies grovelling upon the
earth, thinking by the multitude of his inventions, to recover himself, and to
come to life again; but he is fenced out with a flaming Sword, so that to life
he cannot come, but through death, which he seeks to avoid, by following the
counsel of the Evil-One, who says (in this) as he did formerly to the woman,
Thou shall not surely dye; though God had said, (as it is written) Of the tree
of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it, for in the day thou
eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye: And also that which the Apostle feared
might come upon some of the Corinthians, is come upon all the world, viz. The
Serpent that beguiled Eve, has beguiled men and women in this age, through his
subtilty, by corrupting their minds from the simplicity that is in Christ; and
as the Deceiver then denied what God had spoken, and not only so, but also put
his own meaning and exposition upon Gods Command, that so he might accomplish
his end; for said the Perverter then, God does know that in the day thou eatest
thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and
evil. And has not the same Serpent beguiled the people of this age, from the
naked simplicity, to hearken to the disguized subtilty and fleshly wisdom, not
only to deny that Christ has given out an absolute Command, that his
followers should not swear at all, (by any Oath) but also as he did then, so he
has done since, and does do now in this age, put his exposition and meaning to
Christ's commands, in saying in some men, that it is not all swearing that is
forbidden, but swearing in men's ordinary communication: This exposition, the
subtilty in some men puts upon Christ's Command, whereupon the^ conclude, that
notwithstanding Christ's command not to swear at all, yet when any man is called
before a Magistrate, if the Magistrate require it, he ought to swear, etc.

To which it is said, Christ's own words at the 33 Verse of the fifth of
Matthew, answers this objection, in these words: Again it has been said in old
time, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform to the Lord thy
Oaths; but I say unto you, Swear not at all, etc. (Mark) Thou shall not
forswear thy self, etc. The Law in old time did not allow of swearing in their
ordinary communication, and dealing, for that was taking Gods Name in vain,
Exodus 20.7. which was forbidden from the beg^nning, but in that case wherein
they were allowed to swear, they were not to forswear themselves: But Christ
Jesus the Son, by whom the Father speaks in these last times, (who is the end
of the Law for righteousness) to all that believe in him, who is the truth and
substance of all, says, Swea^ not at all. (Mark) the truth says, swear not at
all, for whatever is more then yea, and nay, comes of evil. Now if Christ, the
Truth, had spoken no more in these words, Swear not at all, etc. then to forbid
profane swearing (as they call it) or not swea^i^g in men's ordinary
communication, what does he forbid ^ore then was forbidden in old time? seeing,
as before is proved, that all profane swearing, which is a taking of Gods Name
in vain, or swearing in ordinary communication, or dealing, was forbidden from
the beginning. And again, how does this hold parallel with the rest of Christ's
sayings and comparisons, viz. What was said in the old time by the Law, and is
now said by himself, who is the sum and end of the Law for righteousness, etc.
and whether they who thus reason, do not by their Traditions make Christ's
Command of none effect? And do not all those that plead that the Saints ought
and may swear, when they are called to it by a Magistrate, not onel^ break
Christ's Commands themselves, but teaches others so to do? whose portion may be
read in Matthew 5*19. and by their thus ^^asoning in their dark minds, make
Christ to speak nothing further, nor fuller, then was spoken in old time,
though in old time it was said, Thou shall not forswear thy self but shall
perform unto the Lord thy Oaths, etc. But says Christ, I say unto you, swear
not at all: Now let all judge, who are not blinded, through gain or tradition,
whether those that say the Saints ought to swear (when called to it as
aforesaid) do not wholly make void these words, viz. Whatsoever is more then
these comes of evil; and so they being in the evil, are blinded, and hate the
light that would let them see, and speak evil of it because it would reprove
them, and being in darkness, they know not whither they go; but as says the
Prophet, ^say, 5 20. call ^arkness light, and light darkness, and good evil,
and evil good. And it is further manifest to all that have an e^e to see, that
Christ, the substance and the truth, in ended as he spoke, when he said, Swear
not at all; which was to forbid all ^anner of swearing, without exception;
because when Christ inten^ed an exception at the 32 Verse, he ex^ressed it in
these words: But I say unto you, Whosoever shall put awa^ his ^ife, saving for
the cause of Adultery. (Mark) saving for the cause of Adultery; Where Christ
plainly expres^eth the exception: But for proud men to make exceptions, where
Christ has made none, is to set Self on the Throne. And again, at the 28 Verse
the exception is expressed, viz. Whosoever shall look upon a woman, and lust
after her. Mark) to lust after her, and is not lest to vain man to put his
meaning to it.

It is further objected by some, that by those of old time is meant the
Expositors of the Law, who said, If men swear truth, that was no^ evil, but
only they were not to swear to that which was false, etc.

To which it is answered, that this being an invention of the Objector, and no
where so said in the Scripture of t^u^h, it needs no other answer then a
denial, but the word in the Greek reads it thus, It was said to them of old
time, thereby implying those to whom and by whom God spoke, etc. (...) ant quis.

But it is st^ongly ob^ected, That the Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
allows of swearing before a Magistrate; as in Hebrews 6.16. in these words, For
men verily swears by the greater, and an Oath for confirmation, is to them an
end of all strife, etc.

To which is replied, there the Apostle by a similitude makes it out to the
Hebrews; how that God swear by himself, because he could not swear by a
greater, to confirm the Promise, That by two immutable things, by which it was
not possible for God to lie, that they might have strong consolation, who have
fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before them; and God being more
abundantly willing to show to the Heirs of the promise the immutability of his
Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath, which thing was used among men that lived in
strife, to put an end to strife, they used an Oath, and they swear by the
greater, an Oath for confirmation was to them an end of all strife, and because
God could not swear by a greater, he swear by himself, and by the Oath of God
is the promise confirmed to the righteous seed, that they might have strong
consolation, no more to suffer strife, and fears, and doubts, to enter upon
them; but that they all might witness in themselves, an end put to all strife
and contention, etc. as truly and really in the inward man, by Christ Jesus,
Gods Oath, and Covenant, as an outward Oath used among men (that live in
strife) was to them for confirmation the end of all strife: And in this case
under the Law was an Oath required, Exodus 22.10. If a man deliver unto his
neighbor an Ox, or an Ass, or a sheep, or any beast to keep, and it die, or
be hurt, or driven away, no man seeing it, then shall an Oath of the Lord be
between them both, that he has not put his hand to his neighbors goods, and
the Owner of it shall accept thereof, and he shall not make it good. (Mark) the
Owner of the goods was to accept thereof, and he shall not make it good: so an
Oath for confirmation was an end to the controversy, and in this old time
under the Law, they were not to forswear themselves, but Christ says, Swear
not at all, who is the end of the Law for Righteousness, etc. Now the Apostle
never intended (by that which was used in old time, and among men that lived in
strife, all which he brings in as a comparison and a fimilitude to confirm the
promise, etc.) and not to encourage men to break Christ's Commands, who says,
Swear not at all, nor to give any sort of men encouragement to walk contrary to
the Apostles Doctrine, who said, Above all things my Brethren swear not, etc.
Neither that they should take encouragement from his comparison to live in
strife, because men that used swearing at all, did so; neither did the Apostle
any more intend to lay a foundation for swearing, or for men to impose Oaths
upon others, by his similitude of what was used among strifeful men, then he
intended that the Ministers of Christ should bring a Heathen Poet to prove
their Doctrine, because he says, Acts 17.28. As certain also of your own Poets
have said, etc. And may it not be as justly concluded that Parents should take
encouragement to correct their children after their own pleasure, because he
says, Heb. 12.9.10. We have had Fathers of our flesh, who for a few days
chastised us after their own pleasures, etc. And as honestly as it may or ought
to be concluded, that the Apostle intended that men should either swear
themselves at all, or compel others so to do. from these words, viz. For verily
menswears by the greater, and an Oath for confirmation is to them an end of all
strife. And further, is there any more ground given by the Apostle for the
Saints to swear at all, by any Oath from the words beforementioned, then there
is ground from Christ's words to the Saints to exercise Lord^hip one over
another, because he says, Mark 10.42. the Gentiles do so: Besides, did not
those that used swearing, use it only in those cases where an Oath would put
an end to all strifes? But is not Oaths imposed at this day where no strife is?
Nay, are they not imposed for the beginning of strife? Let the righteous judge
how far those that would be accouned Saints, are fallen, that they are short in
their practices of those men that lived in strife in ages past.

Again, to impose Oaths upon others from the Apostles words, is to make the
Apostle a Transgressor; for he says, Galathians 2.18. If I build again the
things that I destroyed, am I not a Transgressor? Now he condemned some among
the Corinthians, for walking as men, 1 Cor. 3.3. For ye are yet carnal, whereas
there is envying among you, division and strife; are you not carnal, and walk
as men? (Mark) there was strife and division among them, and from thence he
proves them carnal, and therefore they walk as men, which the Apostle condemns;
whereas they should walk as became Saints, who are redeemed from among men,
Revel. 14.14. out of envy, strife, and division, and are called unto love,
righteousness, and peace, which all who walk as becomes Saints witness.

Object. That an oath cannot be bad, because even God himself did often use
swearing in Scripture etc.

Answ. That it may become God alone to swear, because he alone is true, and
cannot lie, but all men a^e liars, as says the Apostle; And the Lord has
sworn, and will not repent, Psa. 110.4. Let him then swear that cannot repent
of his Oath, and he is not to be imitated in swearing by that man, who cannot
imitate him in fulfilling.

It is again objec^^^ by some, that all proceedings at Law depends upon
swearing therefore they conclude that all men must swear, etc.

Answ. That the foundation of the Law of England, and the present practice and
proceedings thereupon, do not agree; as may appea^ by the^e instances
following, viz. One main and principal foundation of the Law of England, is the
Law of God; so says the Law-book, Docter and Student, Chapter 2. page 4. in
these words, There is a Law written in the heart of man, which is man created
in the Image of God; and this Law is always good and righteous, stirring up
the man to do the goo^, and abhor the evil; and therefore against this Law
(says the book) Prescription, Statute, Custom, may not prevail; and if any be
brought in against it, they be void, and against Justice. Now consider,
according to your Law, how few proceedings are according to Justice, and
instead of being made void, as being against Justice, they are encouraged, and
has been.

Again, it is the Law of England, 9. Hen. 3.29. That Right and justice should
neither be sold, deferred, nor denie^ to any man, etc. But let those that have
to do at Courts, speak and bear witness, whether both denying and delaying,
both of Law and Right, be not that which they meet withal, and for selling and
buying of it, let the great and excessive Fees which some Lawyers take for
pleading speak, who are in repute; and as the people say, if you can but retain
such a man, you need not fear your Cause, etc.

Again, it is the Law of England, that none should be put into Office upon
suit, or for favor or affection, but upon desert; 12 Rich. 2.2. 5. Edw. 6.16.
The first part of Cooks Institutes, page 2.34. A Law (says Cook) worthy to be
written in letters of Gold. But how contrary to these Statutes the present
practices are, let the righteous judge.

Further, both by the Common Law, and Statute law, the Judges were not to hear
the Plantiffs Cause, if he first put not in security to answer his Adversaries
damages, if he complained of him wrongfully, Mirror. page 64. 37 Edw. 3. 18. 38
Edw. 3. 9. And he that charge a man with any accusation, ought to put in
Security to make good his accusation; and the Law has previded a punishment
for him, that makes not his accusation good; But how contrary the present
practices and proceedings of Courts are at this day, let the Causes that comes
into them speak: Do not they issue out their Writs, grounded upon diverse plain
and notorious lies? As that they have sent to the Sheriff of Middlesex, (which
they have not done) and that he has returned, that the Party is not within his
Liberty, (which he has not done) but lies lurking in another County, (which is
most commonly false, the man going up and down as at other times) and the
Sheriff of Middlesex knowing nothing of it. Again, They say, they have taken
Pledges to prosecute, viz; John Do, and Richard Roe, which is also a Deceit,
and a Lie, those being common feigned names put into all Writs, and these Writs
made up of so many lies, (being framed by any Clerk, and given forth in the
chief Magistrates name) is borne witness to be the Chief Justice of England, is
the ground and foundation of all proceedings at Law; whereby the known Law of
England, in Cases of Debt, men ought to be first summoned to appear to answer
the Plantiff before they be arrested; but how contrary the present proceedings
are, let all sober men judge.

Again, the Law saves, Mirror. page 2. 49. It is an abuse of the Common Law, to
appear or answer by an Attorney: But the present practice is quite contrary;
for they have, and do deny, to accept of a man's Appearance in person, although
the words of their own Writs are so, In these words, So that we may have his
body before us at our Court at Westminster, such a day, etc. And it is further
evidenced, that the Appearing by an Attorney was first in favor, and in ease
of the Subject, that so they might depute one for their ease; as in the book De
Atturnati Faciendo; but now so is Justice and Judgment turned backward, that
that which was for the ease of the people, is now made use of, to maintain a
trade of deceit. It is written in Cooks Reports, in Richard Go frey's Case,
that Excessus in re qualibet, jure reprobatur communi; as excessive distresses,
excessive aids, excessive ame^ciaments, are against the Common Law. And how
contrary the present practices is, let the proceedings against the innocent
people (called Quakers) bear witness in d verse Counties in England, who have
been fined more then they have been worth, some it may be for not swearing, and
others for not respecting of men's persons; but Presidents enough may be seen of
their cruel Oppressions in this kind, in a book in Print, called, The Record
of the sufferings for Tithes, and in most Prisons in England, examples of
excessive cruelty may be found exercised upon poor innocent people, because
they cannot submit to pay these excessive Fines imposed on them, contrary to
any known Law, and the practices of Ages past; but such men fly to Custom,
when no known Law can be found, and abuse the word Custom as many Justices do,
and have done the word Discretion; neither of them warranting the practices of
proud self-willed men, there being Customs that are evil, which ought to be
abolished, as says the Law; and Cook in his Reports in Gatewards Cause, says,
Custom ought to be reasonable, Et excerta Causa rationab^li usitata; as
Littleton says: and if every Custom should be a Law, because Judges calls
them so, surely it may be said, that King and Bishops would have been still
standing in England; and the word Discretion, is as much abused by corrupt men,
they making it a Cloak to cover their deceitful Actings, when they have no Law
to warrant their practices: But Discretion, as Cook says, is a knowledge or
understanding to discern betwixt truth and falsehood, and between right and
wrong, between shadows and substance, and between equity, and colorable
glosses and pretenses, and not to do according to our wills, and private
affections; For, says he, Talis discretio, discessionem confundit, and has
been adjudged in the ^a^e of Commission of Suers, Discretion is to be bounded
with Reason, Law, and Justice; and so the word Custom is abus^^ (...) urged by
corrupt men, in opposition to the express Command of Christ, Who says, Swear
not at all.

By these Exam^les the honest-hearted may see, how contrary the p^e^en^
practices of the Law is to the foundation of the Law; and to that which is
good, being used lawfully, is beco^e a dead thing, execution being the Life of
the Law; and hereby the ^^ghteous, that it is not made for, is most hurt by it,
and the Flatterer and Evil-doer encouraged; therefore their reasoning is not
good, who say all men ought to swear, because of long time they have used to do
so, and continue still to do so; therefore the question is not, what men do
practice, but what men ought to practice, according to a true Rule, and Line.
For we read not (that I remember) among all Isreal's Laws, that any of their
Officers were made by an Oath, as Judges, Rulers, Kings, or Priests, or
Prophets, or required to swear, before they took the work or Office upon them:
But we read, Deuter. 19.15. At the mouth of two, or at the mouth of three
Witnesses, shall the matter be established. (Mark) the matter was to be
established without swearing: For if they should have been first sworn, it
would have been so written, it being a Command to Israel; and in the case of
Life and Death, At the mouth of two or three Witnesses, shall he that is worthy
of Death be put to Death; but at the mouth of one Witness he shall not be put
to Death. In this case of Life and Death, no Oath was used that we read of,
Deuter. 17.6. And if any false Witn ss did arise, he, and the party he
witnessed against, was to stand befo e the Lord, and before the Priest, and
Judges which should be in those days, and the Judges were to make diligent
inquisition, And if the Witness be a false Witness, and have testified falsely
against his Brother, then shall ye ^o unto him, as he had thought to have done
unto his Brother, so shall you put away the evil from among you, Deuteronomy. 1916,
17, 18. But no swearing is mentioned; and if any matter did arise too hard for
them in judgment between blood and blood, between plea and plea, and stroke
and stroke, being matters of controversy within their gate, they were not to
swear men to find it out, neither were they to act presumptiously their own
passion and wills, and then cover it, with saying they were Judges of the Law,
and they judged it so, and many things being left to discretion; and therefore
says wilful men, in the stoutness of they hearts, If we do what we cannot
answer, take your course against us: And thus presumptiously do they act their
own wills upon the innocent, but Israel was not to do so; but in cases too hard
for them in judgment, they were to arise and go up to the place, which the Lo
d God should choose, and they were to come to the Priest and Levite, and unto
the Judges which should be in those days, and enquire, and they were to show
the Sentence of Judgment, and they were to do according to the Sentence which
they of the place, which the Lord should choose, should show therein; And thou
shall observe to do according to all that they shall inform thee, etc. And the
man that will do presumptiously, and will not hearken to the Priests that
stands up there, to minister before the Lord thy God or unto the Judges, even
that man shall die, and thou shall put away the evil from Israel, Deuteronomy. 17.8,
9, 10, 11, 12. This was Gods Law to Israel, that the Presumptious that would
not wait upon the Lord to receive a Law where there was none, should be put to
death.

Was it an offense of old to act presumptiously? And is it not now a crime
worthy to be taken notice of by the chief in power in these days? Or are there
none that have done presumptiously? in casting innocent people into prison,
when they have done no offense, nor broken no known Law, except it is become an
offense to wait upon the Lord, and to pray unto him, for which cause, and none
other, the innocent have been cast into prison by the presumptious and
self-willed men, who when they had no Law, have acted in their wills, contrary
to ^^w; let such remember that by Gods Law, they that would not wait upon the
Lord for a Law, but would act presumptiously without a Law, were to be put to
death.

Objection. That by not swearing at all, we are to understand by any creature,
and not by God the Creator, for they were commanded to swear by God, Thou shall
swear by the Lord; as in Deuteronomy. 10. etc.

Answer. That according to Christ's own words, Swear not at all, without any
exception, as before has been proved, and is expounded in the large Bible in
Quarto, in the Margent, on Matthew 5.37. in these words, Whatsoever you vouch,
vouch it barely; and whatsoever you deny, deny it barely, without any more
words; for whatsoever is more then these, comes of the Devil: And also in the
sa^e book it is said, on James 5.12. That what you have to say, or affirm,
speak or affirm it simply, and without any Oath, and that that you will deny,
deny simply and flatly. And again, this Objection is more fully answered in
Matthew 23.21, 22. Whosoever swears by the Temple, swears by it, and by him
that dwells therein; and whosoever swears by heaven, swea s by the Throne of
God, and him that sits thereon: So that he that swears by the creature, shall
not be exempted by the Creator from profaning his name; for now it is said,
Swear not at all.

Again, it is objected by the former Objectors, (who says all proceedings at
Law depends upon swearing) that if we should take every man's word, when they
are called to give their testimony in all cases, it might be of dangerous
consequence both to men's lives, liberties, and estates, etc.

To which it is answered, That if the same Law, or a stricter, were made
against lying, and bearing false witness, in all cases, as against men's
swearing, false swearing, or for-swearing themselves, and that Law t^ul and
constantly executed, without respect of persons, it would then be of no more
danger to believe a man's yea or nay to the questions that are asked him by the
Magistrate, whatever they be, then if they had kissed the book, or used any
other posture with the hand, or spoken never so many words (his affirming or
denying to the case in question, being his testimony) I say the truth of these
men's testimonies may as easily, plainly, and fully be discerned, and punished,
according to the Law in that case provided, if it be false as if the had used
never so many words, or postures, as aforesaid; a d therefore men's lives,
liberties, and estates, may every way be as well secured by a Law provided to
punish lying and bea ing false witness, as by any Law that is made, or can be
made, to punish swearing, or false-swearing, so called. Again, as to the
present state of things, because there is no Law in being, as some say, to
punish lying, therefore we must swear, etc.

What Law is there to force men to swear, or to punish those that swear falsely,
or against their knowledge, to their Answers to Bills in Chancery and Chequor?
And is it not common and ordinary for men so to do? If there be a Law, why is
it not put in execution? or does Custom make swearing falsely (and against a
man's knowledge) no offense; and a man's speaking truly, without swearing, an
offense punishable with imprisonment? Who has given this authority to Custom?
Let Equity answer: But of this more may be spoken afterward in its place.

Objection. That an Oath is a solemn thing, and that when people are called
before a Magistrate to swear, there is an awe upon them; and therefore those
that are wicked, and Liars, etc. are afraid to forswear themselves, when called
before a Magistrate.

This Objection is for what answered in the preceding Objection: But further it
is answered, That the fear upon People when they come to swear, is either the
fear of God, which is good, or some other fear which is evil, as the fear of
man only, and his punishment; this last fear is not to be feared by those that
fear the Lord; Fear ye not their fear, but fear him that can destroy both soul
and bo^y; and this fear is pure, and keeps the heart clean, whereby ^od is
seen, and deceit and guile is kept out, a ditruth is spoken in all cases; and
he that abides in the fear of the Lord, stands in awe, and sins nor, and is
kept not only from wearing, but lying also: but he that only fears man, and
his punishment, when he comes to know and understand that there is as great or
greater punishment to be inflicted upon him for his lying, as for his false
swearing, or forswearing himself, or bearing false witness; then he also will
stand in as much fear of a Lie, as of an Oath; (or that which is called so)
besides, it is commonly seen by experience, that those who care not what they
speak, matters not much what they swear, if so be they can but keep from the
punishment of the Law; but it is not so with the Righteous, for the fear of the
Lord makes them sober and solid, and their words to be few and savoury,
seasoned with truth; but those that fear man, and his displeasure and
punishment only, when they know the same Law to be in force again lying, as
against swearing, or swearing falsely, they will then be as solemn, and as
afraid to lie, as now to forswear themselves.

It is objected by others, who say the Scripture is their rule, that the holy
men in old time did swear, as we may read under the Law, as Abraham swear, and
David, and Solomon: to all which it is said, Christ is the end of the Law; and
he who is the Oath of God, by whom God speaks in these last days, says, Swear
not at all; and he that is greater then Solomon, whose day Abraham saw; but he
himself is now come, and says, Swear not at all; and he who is David's Lord
says, Swear not at all, who is the end of the Prophets, the everlasting
High Priest and Covenant of God, the sum and substance of all the things, the
Law was but a shadow of; Who is the Truth, the Life, and the Way to the Father,
and teaches all his followers to speak truth to their neighbor, and to walk in
the truth, (which makes free from swearing at all) notwithstanding the
traditions of their Fathers in the flesh, or the practices of strifeful men;
for by Christ the Truth, they are taught to speak truth, and not to fear them
that can but kill the body, but to fear him that can cast both soul and body
into hell, which fear he has placed in their hearts, that they might not
depart from him, but abide in his Doctrine, which says, Swear not all.

It is further objected by some, that the Angel swear in the Revelations, and
that Paul swear, as may be read in his Epistles, in saying, I protest before
God; and in often saying, I call the Lord God to Witness, which is said to be
an Oath, etc.

To the first that the Angel swear, it is said, Let all the Angels worship him,
Who has said, Swear not at all. And to that that Paul protested before God, it
is the intrusion of the Translator, it being neither in the Greek Copies, nor
Latin, nor some English Copies.

To the second, That he calls God to Witness, that is no Oath, but only an
earnest attestation, an Oath being that whereby by something is sworn by, (as
Israel was to swear by the Name of the Lord) and calling God to witness, or
saying, God is my Witness, is no more then to say, I speak in Gods presence, or
before him who knows the hearts and thoughts of all men, and is no formal Oath
(as it is called, or commonly used in opposition to a plain and earnest
expression of a man's mind.)

Again, it is objected, that not to swear at all is only Evangelical counsel,
and not an absolute prohibition of all swearing in all cases, though it be
said, Swear not at all; so it is said, Thou shall not kill, and yet in some
cases it is lawful to kill.

Answer. That forbidding to swear at all, is no where in Scripture called
Evangelical Counsel; but such an Absolute and Positive Command, and backed with
the Apostles Doctrine, that I know not any Command fuller in the Scripture of
truth: And whereas it is said, That to kill, is a prohibition, and yet in some
cases allowable yet it is no where so said of swearing, (in the New Testament,
or) since the time of its prohibition, that it is lawful in any case to swear;
neither was it practiced in the first ages of the true Church, as may a^pear
hereafter in its proper place, under the head of Presidents of them who denied
swearing; and though it be lawful in some cases to kill, (though it be said,
Thou shall not kill) yet ^t is no where said, it is lawful to swear in any
case, as aforesaid, but on the contrary, Woe be unto them that brings a
Christian to such a necessity, that he must swear, as woe attends them that
necessitates a Christian to kill.

Now follows several Presidents, or Examples, both out of Holy W^it, and
Ancient Authors of the best repute among them that are called learned.
FIrst, in the Scripture of truth in the Old Testament, where in the several
cases wherein swearing was used, is recorded; as Genesis 24.3. Exodus 22.11. Numb.
5.21. Levit. 19.12. Deuter. 6.13. and 10.20. Jeremy 12.16. Amos 8.14. Zepha.
1.5. (these being the particular cases and occasions wherein swea^ing is
mentioned) where the Reader may observe at his leisure the cases in which
swearing is used, and the ground, and cause, and end of it; but neither was the
Judges, nor Rulers, nor Prophets, nor Priests, nor Kings, nor any other Officer
that we read of, constituted or made by an oath, as necessary to let him into
his work, or office, or place, or employment, or that without which he could
not so officiate, or be employed; but on the contrary, an oath was not so much
as tendered to them, or required at their hands; neither in the greatest
accidents or cases that fell out in Israel, was it to be determined by those
which were sworn, or took an oath, except before excepted in the case of goods
committed to his Neighbor to keep, etc. Exodus 22.11. and the woman in case of
Adultery, Numb. 5.21. who was to purge her self by an oath, and so was
determined by a signal and eminent judgment upon her: but in all other cases,
as in particular, between stroke and stroke, and plea and plea; and in cases of
greatest moment, as of life and death, they were all to be determined without
an oath, and the false witness on either side was to be punished, according to
the appointment of the Law: And in the New Testament, by Christ (the great
Prophet and High Priest of our profession) it is so fully and absolutely
forbidden, and bound up with this word, Not at all, that nothing is plainer
either in the Old or New Testament, and this continued in, and preached by his
Apostles particularly by James, who gives this the pre-eminence, in a peculiar
manner, above all other things, that those whom he wrote to should be careful
to keep and observe, saying, Above all things my Brethren swear not; neither by
Heaven nor Earth, nor any other oath. (which is an absolute negative exclusion
of all swearing in all cases.) And Eusebius, an Ancient Writer of no mean
esteem among the learned, writes in his sixth book, Chapter 4 page 98. about
the year 200. that Basilides, a Soldier, unto wh^m the Virgin Potamioena was
committed, as one appointed for Marty^dome: But not long after, the same
Basilides being required by his fellow soldiers to swear upon some occasion
(that fell out) affirmed plainly, it was not lawful for him to swear, for he
said he was a Christian, and that he would in very deed protest the same; who
afterward was beheaded as a Martyr: And of the Waldenses, of whom the first
Book of Martyrs makes much mention, and are said by some immediately to succeed
the Apostles, and were dispersed into most parts of the world, and to be the
most ancient and true Protestants,, (as may be seen by what Fox records of them
in the Book of Martyrs) and this they maintained among other things, that all
manner of swearing was unlawful; as may appear by Parsons, Sanders, ^occius,
and others; and by Bishop U^her (a late Writer, and a man reputed for learning)
who has by way of Apology for the Waldenses, in this case of swearing, seemed
to justify them therein; as in his book De Succes. Cap. 6. And the said Usher
further says in his eighth Chap. (quoting some ancient Authors) that the
Waldenses, as well as Anabaptists of late, did profess it to be no way lawful
for a Christian to swear, upon any occasion; And Theophil^te upon Matthew 5.37.
Says, that though in the time of the Old Law it was not ev^l to swear; but
since the coming of Christ it is evil, as is Circumcision, and in sum, whatever
is judaical, for it may become a Child to suck, but not a man.

And further in the Book of Martyrs, 1 Voll. page 701. it is charged against
William Thorp, in his Sermon that he preached at Shrewsbury, that it is not
lawful to swear in any case: To which he answered, he denied to swear by a
book, as being made up of creatures and quoats; Chrysostom in these words, who
blamed them greatly, who brought forth books to swear, whether they think a man
to swear true or false, etc.

The Archbishop and his Clarks scorned this saying of Thorp, and the Bishop
manaced him with great punishment, except he left this opinion of swearing; to
which Thorp answered, it was not his Opinion, but the opinion of Christ, and of
Saint James, and of Chrysostom, and of other diverse Saints and Doctors: The
Archbishop caused to be read this Homily of Chrysostom, which the Clark did
accordingly, until he came to a Clause where Chrysostom says, That it is sin
to swear well, etc. And again in Fox, Voll. 1. pa. 527. in the Ploughmans
prayer, in these words, Thou gave us a Commandment in truth, in bidding us
say yea, yea, nay, nay, and swear for nothing: Thou gave us also a
Commandment of meekness, and another of poorness; but Lord he that cleepeth
himself thy Vickar on earth, has both broken these Commandments, for he makes
a Law to compel men to swear, and by his Law he teaches, that a man to save
his life, may forswear and lie; and so Lord, through comfort of him, and his
Law, the people ne dreadeth not to swear, and to liven ought time to forswear
them; Lord here is little truth, etc. Again, William Swinderby, an Article
charged against him, that no man owns to swear for any thing, but simply
without an Oath, to affirm or deny, and if he swears, he sins.

And those that are conversant in our Law, (what was the practice in ancient
time) where they testify that Oaths anciently were not called imprecations,
but attestations: And by the Statute Law, an Act of Parliament made 28 Hen.
8.7. in these words, it is said, No man, of what esta^e degree, or condition
soever he be, has power to dispense with Gods Law, as all the Clergy of this
Realm in the said Convocation, and most part of all the Universiteis of
Christendom; and we also do affirm and think, etc. which makes void all Laws,
and practices, and customs, that are contrary to Christ's Law, and the Apostles
Doctrine, which says Swear not at all; and above all things, my Brethren,
swear not, neither by heaven nor earth, nor any other Oath, etc. And to
conclude this head, a lively Emblem we have this day practiced in England,
where it is practiced, that those who are called Noblemen of England, are not
put to their oaths (as it is said) in any case, but only their testimony is
taken upon their words, affirming or denying upon their Honors: And is there
nothing left among Christians in these our days, or the people of the Lord,
that is as dear unto them, as an earthly great man's repute, and honor in the
world is unto him? Blush for shame; and let it not be told in Gath, nor
published in Askelon, that Christianity is grown out of repute, or that a true
Christian may not be believed when he speaks in the presence and fear of the
Lord, although at the same time, and in the same case, he shall be believed,
that testifies only upon his earthly honor. And to this Courts Martial may
not be an unfit president, who proceeds both to the trial and condemnation of
persons without an Oath, (taken by those that sit as Judges) and that upon this
ground also, because a Soldier is supposed to be so tender of his honor, that
he will not impeach it by injuring another, or advantaging himself. So let all
these things be put together, and what can be more clear, then that Oaths, or
swearing men since the coming of Christ (before either they can be capable of
office, or serving their Country, or their testimony be received in cases of
difference before Courts of Judicature) is a Popish Institution, and has no
foundation or footing in the Scripture of truth, nor in the practice of the
Primitive Christians; nor has not been without a testimony against it, by some
in all ages, even down to this day?

Now follows the several inconveniences, that necessarily follow the
imposition of Oaths which might be prevented, if swearing were not compelled.
BEsides all that has been said, do not these inconveniences and mischiefs
necessa^ily follow the imposition of Oaths, or determining things by swearing?
etc.

Is not that which is called an Oath, (in many cases) once taken untraversable?
As for instance, one man having sworn against another positively, is not he
that is sworn against left without remedy? and do not those before whom the
oath is taken (in some cases) take themselves concluded, and bound up by that
oath, without any further examining witnesses on the other side? or at least if
witnesses be examined, of what force is their testimony, one or two men having
sworn positively the contrary? where often time the innocent are punished, and
the guilty go free, and the Author of evil undiscovered: May it not be queried,
Whether the Judge before whom the oath is taken, as aforesaid, be clear of the
blood of the innocent, in this case, although or because a Law made in the will
of man requires it, contrary to the Law of Christ? if he or they be clear, was
not Queen Mary as clear of the blood of the Martyrs, upon the same account, she
being a lawful Magistrate in that sense? etc.

Again, is it not unequal and unjust, that all men (in some cases) should be
punishable for swearing, (though ignorantly and unawares and yet no man (in
other cases) to be punishable at all, though they swear against their own
knowledge, and that wilfully to, and this to be ordinary and common, as in the
answers to the Bills in Chancery and Chequer? Which Bills will not be received
without an oath; and they that dare not swear in obedience to Christ's Command,
has been, and are imprisoned for contempt: so that he which departs from evil,
makes himself a prey, and the keeping of Christ's Commands are become a
contempt: Do not these things make the times ^eri^lous? (let the upright judge)
when on the contrary, he ^^at swea s to his answer, though never so false, and
against hs knowledge, and that to his own benefit (sometimes) and pre^udice of
another, yet these men go unpunished for their e^il, because they care not what
they swear; and the other is punished by imprisonment, because the^ fear an
oath, and yet dare not but speak the truth in their answers: So one man is
punished because he cannot swear at all, (though his answer be true) and
another man goes free, (though his answer be safe) because he swears (although
it ^e) to a lie, and that aganst his own knowledge, as many who are now in
prison for contempt, (so called) which contempt is only because they cannot
swear at all: So that in short, one man is punished when his answer is true,
only because he dare not swear, another man escapes whenas his answer is
false, because he dare swear to a lie, (and the other dare not swear at all) as
many prisons, Bills and Answers in Chancery and Chequor, may witness. Again, if
a man swear to an Indictment, though never so false, yet it is commonly found
upon that oath, when as the man sworn against, knows not of it; yet that man,
which (it may be) both maliciously and knowingly swears against his neighbor
to his hurt, (it is said) is not liable to be punished by the Statute of
Perjury, which mischief might be prevented by Witnesses without swearing.
Further, is not the way of determining of things by oath, not only injurious
and unequal, but also attended with great and necessary inconveniences and
evils, both to those that command swearing, and to those that do swear, as to
those that cannot swear at all for conscience sake?

To those that command swearing, who do not only break Christ's Commands
themselves, but commands others so to do; but also are they not guilty of the
forswearing of others, whenas they command men to take such oaths, as (before
they give them) they themselves know it is impossible to keep and observe, and
yet do compel the taking of them, or punish the neglect? as in the oaths of
Offices and Officers, as Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and others, besides
the oath^ of Freemen of Cities and Corporations, etc. And in many other cases
and employments, before entrance upon them, oaths are required to be taken,
when in deed and in truth, bot^ those that give them, and those that take them,
knows that little or nothing is intended to be done or looked after, more then
the title of honor, and profit, and gain, that comes ^y them; though they swear
to discharge their trust, and to (...) such and such things, which he that
swears many times knows not what belongs to them, neither intends to trouble
himself about them; as in several Offices relating to the Law, and Courts of
Justice, and other places in the Commonwealth: Again, is not swearing made use
of as a seal to hypocri^e, both to him that commands it, and to him that obeys?
Because he that commands it, would not do it, but in order to his end, and the
other would not take it, but for fear of a penalty, and because he cannot avoid
it, he takes it, but in his own sense, and to his own end, and it may be quite
contrary to the end of him that commanded it, or obtained to have it imposed,
and so both of them are deceived, and deciving one another: Presidents for
this, our days, as well as times past, may afford not a few; witness the
several Oaths occasioned by the several changes of late.

Secondly, The inconveniences and mischief that follow them that do swear: As
first, many people that do swear they understand not what an Ooth is, neither
of that which is called an Oath, many times they hear not one word that he
which swears them, says unto them, he speaks them over so fast; and the man
knows nothing sometimes until a book be put to his lips, and yet what this poor
ignorant man, (having kissed the book) shall say, shall be of more force then
diverse witnesses, that have not yet sworn, or kissed the book; and it may be
that he being on the affirmative, shall be more then two or three on the
negative, who have better understood their Oaths, and spoken more to the
purpose upon their oaths (as it is called) and so he that is sworn on the
affirmative, having once spoken a word, or sworn to it, he dares not go back
because of his Oath; though upon hearing other witnesses speak to the same
thing he may be better informed, but dare not own any information, because
sworn already to a contrary thing; which inconvenience would not be, if every
man might witness forth his own knowledge without swearing, and yet to be
punished for a false testimony, as much as if he had sworn false. Do not many
mourn, and go heavily, because of oaths in this and other cases of the like
nature?

Again, Do not much hurt and mischief come to many Swearers, because they know
the force of an Oath (taken before a Justice of Peace, or other Magistrate) to
bind a man to the good Behavior, or to the Peace, or to do him some other
displeasure, when indeed it is only revenge and malice, though he takes his
Oath (that speaks) that it is for neither; and it may be that he that is sworn
against, will be as ready to swear against the Complainant, and that upon the
same ground? Now does not this gratify the lust and wickedness in people, and
so much the more, because a single Oath will accomplish his wicked end of
evenge, without any other restimony, which would not be gratined, if so be that
witnesses were to prove the thing, or that a ^an deliver his knowledge of such
things without an Oath; otherwise how can the Magistrate be clear from guilt,
not only of the Planti^^s swearing, but also of his swea^ing maliciously and
falsely? And also the same temptation is in an Indictment, which one Party
waiting to do his neighbor a mischief may swear to, and the Indictment upon
that Oath must be found, and that in the absence of him that is indicted, as
before has been said; and this Indictment (sworn to by a malicious man) shall
be the foundation to take away his life, if the Crime be of that nature: So
that here also is another mischief, whereby the lusts of wicked men are
gratified with other cases of the like nature, which might be instanced.

Thirdly, The inconveniences that follows those that cannot swear at all for
conscience sake, whereby many are made incapable of being made Free of Cities
and Corportations, and others are made un^apable of being serviceable in the
Commonwealth, in any place or office of trust; and others also are made
unserviceable as to give their testimony and evidence in cases of difference
between man and man; besides many, who in diverse cases loses the benefit of the
Law of the Nation, because that they cannot swear, and so by that means suffer
the spoiling of their goods, and ungodly men make a prey upon them, knowing
they cannot swear at all; which thing might be prevented, if according to the
righteous Law of God, all things were established out of the mouth of two or
three Witnesses, and those that bore false witness, to be punished as he should
have been against whom they have witnessed, if their testimony had been true)
which Law is equal and just.

Fourthly, This NATION which now mourns because of Oaths, might be preserved
from the Wrath and Indignation of God that hangs over this Nation, not only
because of those that command men to swear contrary to Christ's Command; (and
that, for to establish cruelty and injustice) but also because of those that
swear falsely, and that against their knowledge for their own profit, and
disadvantage of others, to accomplish their wicked, malicious, and revengeful
designs against the innocent, who dare not swear at all, and thereby are made a
prey to the teeths of the Wolves, and to the wills of corrupt men, who take
occasion (as it were) to plough furrows upon the back of the poor, and to
oppress the needy, for which thing sake, the Wrath of God shall be poured out
upon the head of the wicked, and the Nations shall be on heaps, and the wise
men shall be turned backward, and their table shall be a snare, and the curse
shall be upon the rebellious, and they shall fall, and be broken, and rise no
more: And this may justly befall this Nation, because of Oaths, and because of
oppression.

Now follows a word of Advice to all those who say the Scripture is their rule,
and are zealous for the things contained therein, etc.
NOw all you that are seeking the Kingdom of Heaven in outward observations,
(by which it comes not) and are taking up practices, by imitation from Commands
laid down in the letter: Let me demand of you, Do you not find this Command to
proceed out of the mouth of Christ, viz. But I say unto you, swear not at all?
And do not you find the Apostle James abiding in this Doctrine? and has it no
room in your hearts? has the traditions of your Fathers made it void to you?
o^ is it because it cannot be practiced without reproach, Fines and
Imprisonment, and so will cost you something which you cannot tell how to
undergo, or part with, (you having not received the gift to suffer for his
Names sake?) or is your spirit different from David's, (who would not offer an
offering to the Lord his ^od of that which cost him nothing?) in the fear of
the Lord God of heaven and earth, (I beseech you) consider, is there not a Vail
over your hearts untaken away to this day, that you cannot see nor understand
this to be a Command of Christ's, with diverse others, as plainly and as fully
laid down in the letter, as those you contend so much for? And may you not be
as justly numbered amongst those that make their boast of the Law, and yet
through breaking of the Law dishonor God? Do ye think that the Lord will not
arise to Judgment, and make you know that he is the Lord, and that you have
not walked in his Statutes, neither executed his Judgments, but have done
after the manner of the Heathen, that are round about, (whose ways Israel was
not to learn, for their Customs were vain) Jeremiah 10.23. Ezekiel 11.12. And
upon a true and thorough search, (when the hidden things of Esau shall be
searched out) will you not be found walking in the way of the Heathen,
(speaking their unclean words, contrary to the language of the Scripture) and
following their customs, (which are vain) in respecting of men's persons which
the Apostle James says, ( James 2.9, 10.) whoever do, commits sin, and are
convinced of the Law as transgressors; For whosoever shall keep the whole Law,
and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all. Mark that, and think not to
cover your selves with saying it is meant of persons in Judgment, for here is
not a word spoken of Magistrates, but the words are general, and concerns all
that regards Gods Law, as appears by the next words, viz. For whosoever shall
keep the whole, and yet offend in one point, etc. And are not they out of the
Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, who respect persons? who says, How can ye
believe, while ye receive honor one of another, and seeks not the honor that
comes from God only. (John 5.44. Matthew 22.16.) God only. Mark, from God
only; and he himself practiced this Doctrine for he neither received honor
from man, nor regarded any man's person, as his very enemies bore testimony of
him, that he taught the way of God truly, and regarded no man's person. But is
not this Command also too dear for you? Will it not cost you too much to
practice? Do you not know it will hinder your promotion in the world? Are you
not more afraid (that if you should refuse to respect men's persons, and to give
slattering titles to men, ( Job. 32.21, 22.) the Jailer would take you away,
then that your Maker would soon take you away, if you did do it; and is not
this a Command, that you should not be conformed to this world? Romans 12.2.16.
and that you should not conform to men of high degree, but condescend to men of
low degree? are not these, with others, the Commands of Christ? and are not you
too much like the professing Jews herein, who had plentiful knowledge of the
letter without them, but had not his word abiding in them? Though they could
dispute and reason with Christ, and against his Apostles, with the word of
truth, yet Christ tells them plainly, his Word was not abiding in them, which
the Saints had received from Christ, whereby they were made clean, and by it
(which dwells richly in them) they made melody in their hearts to God; and
David the Servant of the Lord, Psalm 119.6.11. by the word which he had in his
heart, he was kept from sin against God, and thereby had respect to all Gods
Commands. Now examine your selves, and try your own selves, whether you be in
the Faith, and the same Word of Life be in you, and whose steps you walk in,
and whom you are found imitators of; whether Abraham, who forsook his Country
to go to the Land which the Lord had showed him? and Moses steps, who chose
rather to suffer with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasure of sin for
a season? or whether you do not walk in the steps of him whom you so often
upbraid others with, namely Naaman, the Assyrian, who spoke good words, and yet
could not forsake his old Master, to serve the Lord fully, 2 Kings 5.18. But
when he went into the house of Rimmon, his Master leaning on his hand, and he
bowed down himself, in that thing he would be pardoned. Mark, In this thing
pardon thy Servant; he knew it was evil, and desired pardon for it; and yet
when his Master leaned upon his hand, he must bow, least he should lose his
place, and gain his Masters displeasure. Now examine your selves, does not
something let you see, (that notwithstanding all the Lord has done for you,
and all that you have ever tasted or enjoyed from him) yet there is this thing,
or the other thing, that you continue in the practice of, for one end o^ other,
which you know you should not do; and in words you desire pardon for them, but
you still continue in the same practice, your very prayers witnessing against
you; and like those, James 4.3. you are still asking, but receive not, becauss
you ask amiss, to spend it upon your Lusts; still to continue in your Masters
service, in conforming to the customs and fashions of the world, and in
walking after the traditions of your Fathers, as in particular in this case of
swearing, which Christ has so plainly and sully forbidden; and therefore your
prayers return as dung in your faces, your consciences condemning of you, the
which if you did regard to keep void of offense, both toward God and toward
men, (in the light of Christ) you would have confidence toward God, and
whatsoever you asked of him, you would receive, because you keep his
Commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight, John 3.22.
But now is blindness, barrenness, and leanness of soul upon you, and yet you
cry you are rich, and you see, and have need of nothing, and hates and
disputes against that which lets you see the things which have need of
pardon, and so you are laden with Sin, and led away with diverse Lusts, always
learning, never able to come to the knowledge of the truth; and therefore are
not free, and in your principles conclude never can be, while you are in this
world; and so by what has been said, you may see, (your own condition as a man
sees his face in a Glass) how that you not only respect men's persons,
preferring one before another, but also Christ's Commands, picking out what you
like, and what may keep you in the repute of the world, and preserve you in the
preferment thereof, but those that may expose you to hazard, or make you
liable to the worlds scorn, though as fully and expressly required by Christ (of
all his followe^s) to be kept and observed, you let slip, and pass by, as a
thing of naught: But be not deceived, God will not be mocked, for what a man
sows, that shall he reap; he that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh
reap Corruption: And this shall you assure^l^ receive at his hand, (if you
repent not of your double min^) you shall lie down in sorrow, and he shall
laugh at your Calamity, and mock when your fear comes.

Now follows some reasons or grounds, whereby the Spiritual eye, or the man
whose understanding is opened, may come to see the necessity of the ab^l^shing
of swearing, since the days of Christ's coming in the flesh.
FIrst, Because all the things of the Law were but shadows of the good things
to come, Heb. 12.1. But Christ is the substance of all those types and sha^ows,
and is come into the world, and is manifest in his Saints, and true Christians,
and has given them an understanding whereby they know him that is true, and
are in him that is true, and he in them, and he works all their works for them,
and in them, and teaches them to speak truth simply, without guile or fraud,
and as he is, so are they in this world, and believes in him, and follows his
steps, who is the truth, and in whose mouth there was found no guile.

Secondly, Because swearing implies unbelief, to be either in the person
swearing, or in him for whose sake the oath is taken or sworn; which is not to
be supposed to be in those (as predominant or ruling) who are Saints, or true
Christians, who are redeemed not only from a vile, but a vain conversation
also, and from the traditions of their Fathers, (that are not after Christ) and
from fear and unbelief also, and every evil word and way, and are called unto
holiness and truth, and are without fault before the Throne of God, which
things are found in the new heart, that is Gods gift, and in the new man that
is created after God, and renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that
created him, and so they are come to the end of all oaths, and out of fears,
and doubts, and unbelief, to have strong consolation through Christ Jesus, the
way to the Father.

Thirdly, Because herein; namely, by the abolishing of swearing, do the
excellency, precedence, and eminency of the New Covenant, exceed the Old; for
the Old in this was faulty, viz. that it made nothing perfect, but this New
Covenant and better hope does; for in this Covenant all the Children of the
Lord are taught of the Lord, and great is their peace, and out of strife and
contention, and the use of Oaths are they come; into the Covenant of Light and
Peace, in which they rest with God, in the sense of the forgiveness of their
fins, and the blessedness of their state, wherein their iniquity is remembered
no more; for their Tents are beautiful, and their habitations are pleasant:
And here is Jacob inheriting the blessing, in whom God sees no sin; and the
true Israelites indeed, who walks according to the rule, and in whom he sees no
iniquity, but peace is his portion for ever. Of what has been spoken, thi^ is
the sum, that Christ has forbid all manner of swea^^ng in all cases
whatsoever; and this Doctrine was continued in b^ his Apostles, and practiced
by the true Christians in the first ages of the Church, and has been sealed
with the blood of Martyrs, and borne witness to by some in all ages, down to
this day, and the contrary practice is a Popish Innovation, and a Jesuiticall
design to keep down the true headship of the Church, and to set up him, and to
keep his Authority afoot, wh^m the Lord is a^ising to destroy with the Spirit
of his mouth, (and to consume with the brightness of his coming) who has been,
and is the cause of so much bloodshed, and discord, and variance, among the
Children of men, whereb^ Self has kept the Thro^e, and Equity and
Righteousness has fallen in the streets, and he that departs from iniquity,
has made himself a prey, and the manner and customs of the Heathen has been
followed, even by those who have professed a zeal for Christ and his Commands,
who while they have been professing of them, have made them void by the
traditions of men, and true Christianity with Saintship, (by their means) is
become a reproach, and the Name of the Lord has been Blasphemed among the
Heathen, because of these things; but the lord is arising, (as a Giant
refreshed with Wine) who has seen the desolate state of his Spouse, and is
saying to Son, Arise shine thy light is come, for the Glory of the Lord is
risen upon thee, shake off the dust from thy feet, put on thy beautiful
garment for thou shall be no more termed desolute, or forsaken, and to the
brightness of thy rising shall Nations come, and Princes to thy beauty, and the
glory and the riches of the Nations shall be laid down at thy feet, and thou
shall be crowned with renown for ever, and the everlasting gates shall be
opened, and the righteous Nation that keeps the truth, shall enter in; and none
shall be able to make them afraid, (but the swearers and liars shall be shut
out) and this is the Heritage of the Servants of the Lord foreve^.

But because of swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring,
they break out, and blood touches blood, therefore shall the Land mourn, and
every one that dwells therein shall be cut off, Hosea 4.2.3.

From henceforth let no man think it strange, that any denies to swear at all,
but rather wonder, that the God of this world should so long have blinded the
minds of them that believe not, (in the light of the Son of God) least by the
shining of the light in their hearts, they should come to the knowledge of the
Glory of God in the Face of Christ, and by him should be taught to speak truth
without swearing, and so he become the Head over all things to the Church, who
is God over all, blessed for evermore. Amen.

THE END.

