Truth's Principles: OR, Those Things about DOCTRINE and WORSHIP, which are
most surely believed and received amongst the People of GOD, called QUAKERS:
VIZ. Concerning the Man CHRIST, his Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, Faith in
his Blood, the imputation of his Righteousness, Sanctification, Justification,
etc.

Written, to stop the mouth of Clamor, and to inform all who desire to know
the Truth as it is in Jesus; By the Servant of the Lord, John Crook.

To which is added, Somewhat Concerning the Difference between the Persuasions
of REASON, and the Persuasions of FAITH.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662.

TRUTH'S PRINCIPLES: OR, Those things about Doctrine and Worship, which are
most surely believed and received amongst the People of God, called QUAKERS.
MAny are the Reports that are abroad concerning this People, not only as to
their Practices and Deportments, but also as to their Doctrines and Beliefs.
The former, time having in a great measure resolved and worn out, as being the
refuge of lies for the ignorant and unrighteous to fly unto; but that stormy
and wintry appearance is well nigh over and gone, because the Sun is so far
risen, and the true Light so shines, that most begin to see, that those
reports were but lies and scandals, raised as Fig Leaves to cover the nakedness
of other Professions, that begun so manifestly to appear, through the Light
that shined in these Peoples Lives and Conversations. But though the first be
gone, yet the latter still sticks with many, as not knowing what they hold, as
to Doctrine, some saying they deny the Scripture, and the Resurrection of the
body, and all Ordinances, with the Man Christ, and his Death and Sufferings,
and imputation of his Righteousness, and faith in his Blood, etc. Wherefore,
for the satisfaction of all that would willingly be resolved, and know the
Truth as it is in Jesus, I have written this short Account of their Faith and
Belief; and if it were possible to stop the mouth of clamorous tongues, before
Sentence be given against them by some signal stroke of the Lord from Heaven,
which he will undoubtedly in his appointed time reveal and make manifest, to
the trembling of all hearts concerned therein, and tingling of all ears that
shall hear thereof, when it shall be said to them, The holy shall be holy
still; and be that is filthy, let him be filthy still, Rev. 22. 11.

We believe, that the God of all Grace, has given a measure of Grace, or some
manifestation of his Spirit and Light thereof unto all men, according unto
these Scriptures; John 1. 9. Tit. 2. 11. 1 Cor. 12. 7. Nehem. 9. 20. and
experiences of all men, who (at some time or other do feel something in their
Hearts and Consciences, that does lust against the flesh, and the flesh against
it, and that these two are contrary the one to the other, one lusting after
evil, which is evil, and the other after good, which is good; the one carnal,
the other spiritual; the one from the Earth, the other from Heaven, Gal. 5. 16,
17.

We believe, By this Gift, Grace and Inspiration of the Almighty, man only can
come to know the true God truly; What he is, and how he works in the Hearts and
Consciences of People, to regenerate them and make them bear his Image,
according unto 1 Cor. 1. 19, 20, 21. Luke 10. 21. and experiences of all that
ever were regenerate and born again.

We believe, that all the Errors and mistakes about God, and the things
relating to his Kingdom, sprang and arose from men's wandering from this Gift of
God into their own Imaginations; whereby, though they thought themselves wise,
yet they became fools and erred, their foolish hearts being darkened, according
to Romans 1. not knowing the Scriptures nor the Power of God, as it is written,
Mat. 22. 29.

We believe and know, that this Gift and Grace of God appears in and unto all
men, that all may be without excuse, accusing for the evil, and excusing for
the good, according to Romans 2. 15, 16. showing unto man what is good, and
reproving of him in his own Conscience for the evil, whether thoughts, words or
deeds; and that this reproof of Instruction is the way of Life, Prove. 6. 23.

We believe, that as the true God and Eternal Life is known only by the light
of this Gift and Grace, according unto the Scriptures, from which Light and
Spirit of God came the Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament, as it is
written, 2 Pet. 1. 21. so can they only be read, as truly to be believed,
fulfilled and practiced, in the Light and Power of the same; and all that are
out of this Spirit, must needs be ignorant and unlearned in the Apostle's
sense, who wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction, as it is written: for
Peter and John were unlearned men outwardly, not knowing letters, but inwardly
read in the knowledge of this Light and Spirit of God, and wrested not the
SCRIPTURES, Acts 4. 13. 2 Pet. 3. 16.

We believe, according to the Scriptures, 2 Cor. 4. 3. that wheresoever the
Power of God is not known within, there the Gospel is hid and unknown unto them
that are lost, in whom the god of this world has blinded the minds of them
that believe not, lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the
Image of God, should shine unto them, and God should heal them; because it is
only by the Light of Christ, the Power of God, that the Creature comes truly to
see himself in his lost and undone estate; from which sight arises the true
sense in the heart of the Creature, that makes him cry out of his wretchedness
by reason of the body of sin and death, which necessitates him to look out for
a Savior, whom God manifests in and by the same Light, that shines in the
heart, on purpose to give the light of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ, God's Image, whereby God heals the soul. And therefore
does the Devil, the god of the world, strive so much by the gifts of the
pleasures, profits, vanities, and lusts that are in the world, which he
presents to men and women now, as he did to Christ in the days of his flesh,
when he showed to him all the world, with its glory; which glory is, the lust
of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, whatever may make
this life happy (as it were) in the things that may pride it, or lift it up to
sit as Queen. And as men and women take and receive these gifts from the god of
this world, their minds are blinded, because they believe not in the Light,
which shows them the vanities of all the gifts of the god of this world;
which gifts the Devil knows (if they be received) will so blind the minds of
them that receive them, that they will not come to be sensible in the true
Light of their lost conditions, so as to cry unto God from the deep and true
sense; for then God, out of the depths of his Love and Mercy, could not but
heal them: and therefore, lest the true Light should shine into them, to give
them the sensible knowledge of themselves, and God should heal them, the Devil
(as god of the world, by the things of the world) endeavors to blind the mind
(not the brain-knowledge, but the hearty feeling sense within in the mind) lest
the Light within should so shine, as God should heal them; and all the
busslings of Satan with his gifts, are but to blind the mind within, lest God
should heal the soul, that complains to him from the true sight and sense of
his misery, as in himself.

By this Grace and Gift within, we believe, that to us (though in the world
there be Lords many, and Gods many) there is but ONE GOD, the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, witnessed within man only by the Spirit of Truth, that
manifests both the Father and the Son; and yet these three are one, and agree
in one; and he that honors the Father, honors the Son that proceeds from him;
and he that denies the Spirit, denies both the Father and the Son, and is
Antichrist; but he that believes in the Spirit, and is led by it, is the Son
of God, Romans 8. 14. As many as are the Sons of God, are led by the Spirit of
God.

We believe, the Scriptures bear witness unto, and testify of Christ; but they
say the Witness of God is greater than them, the Spirit it self bearing witness
with our spirits, that we are the Sons of God: for it is not the Scriptures
without the Spirit, nor the Spirit contrary to the Scriptures, but the Spirit's
discovering the Will of God in the heart, or opening of the Scriptures in its
own time and way, and not in or by the will of man, but as it self pleases
(who searches all things, even the deep things of God, and manifests them unto
the soul) which gives the perfect sound and saving knowledge: for said Christ,
the Spirit shall take of mine, and show them unto you. And as holy men gave
forth the Scriptures, 2 Pet. 1. 21. so holy men, and they only, come truly to
understand them, and not proud or ungodly men; because their hearts and lives
do not answer the hearts and lives of those that gave them forth, as face
answers face in a glass. And this we believe to be the reason, why so long
preaching (by men of corrupt minds, who have and do handle the words
deceitfully for selfish ends and filthy lucre sake) has brought forth so
little fruit, and been to so little purpose, except to their purses and
bellies: for bad they believed, and therefore spoken, and stood in God's
counsel, they should have profited their hearers, Jer. 23. 21, 22, 23. to the
end.

Through this Gift we believe, that Christ Jesus (the Son of God) was manifest
in the flesh, in the fullness of time. And this we know by the same Spirit, by
which our Fathers believed he should come; and Abraham saw his day; by the same
do we believe he is come, and do see his day; as also by the Prophets and
Apostles Writings, which twofold cord is not easily broken.

We believe also, according to the Scriptures of truth, that this same Jesus
has God highly exalted, and given him a Name above every Name, that whosoever
believes in him shall not perish, but have Everlasting Life; and that there is
not another Name whereby man can be saved, than this Name of Jesus Christ; nor
is Remission of Sins to be Preached by any other Name. But as we do not believe
that the outward letters and syllables are that Name, that are to be bowed to
by the outward knee, no more than the letters or syllables in the words, God,
or Spirit, seeing the (...) God, who is a Spirit, (...) 45. 23. but that Name
which saves, is the Power and Arm of God, that brings Salvation from Sin, and
makes every soul that names it, to depart from Iniquity. This is that Name
which was preached, and which is preached through Faith, in which Name
remission of sin is obtained: Therefore was the outward word Jesus given him,
as his outward name; Thou shall call his name JESUS, for he shall save his
People from their Sins. [Mark] for he shall save, etc. So that which saves, is
the Name which is to be believed in, which is that Arm of God that brings
Salvation, when no eye pitties, neither is there any to help; the Power of God
that then saves, is that Grace that comes from the fullness of Christ the
Savior. And without this virtue, Christ and Jesus are but empty names, 1 Cor.
12. 3. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost.

We believe also, that this Jesus died for, or because of Sin, and rose again
for the Justification of those that believe in him, as well as to manifest to
all the world, that he was the Son of God, and that he thereby spoiled
Principalities and Powers, and triumphed over them openly, and led captivity
captive in his own person; yet we believe and know, by his Grace in our hearts,
that as his name Jesus, without virtue and Power is but an empty word; so his
Dying, without man's Conformity to his Death, or being planted into the
likeness thereof, or being crucified with Christ (as says the Scripture, Romans
6. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Gal. 2. 20.) will not profit man, as unto the salvation of
his soul, no more than the naming of his outward name [Jesus] does at this day
make people to depart from iniquity. For we believe and are sure that man must
dye inwardly, as well as Christ died outwardly; and must be put to death in his
flesh, as Christ was in his: for he that is in the flesh, cannot please God,
Romans 8. 8. neither cease from sin; but he that is dead, is freed from sin, Romans
6. 7. And yet man's dying unto sin, and the root and principle of it in himself,
is so far from making void Christ's Death in his own person, that it
establishes it to all those ends and purposes, for which it was intended of
the Father. As the cures which the Physician does, manifest and establish his
skill and ability; so does man's dying unto sin and self, and living unto God,
manifest and establish the virtue and power of Christ's Death: for as man
manifests his being risen with Christ, by his seeking the things that are
above, Col. 3. 1, 2. so does he manifest his knowledge of the Death of Christ,
by his being crucified with Christ, and bearing about in his body the dyings of
the Lord Jesus; for as it is not an outward belief, gathered from the letter,
that will change the heart and life (though the judgment and opinion it may) so
is it not a belief from the history, or letter only, that can give man a saving
knowledge of the Death of Christ; but he must have the same glory and power of
the Father in measure, working in him there, to beget Faith in his heart, that
he may believe unto Salvation from his own filthiness and righteousness, as
well as confess with his mouth, Romans 10. and must have that Spirit in him
quickening his mortal body, as well as to believe that it was in Christ, and
raised up him from the dead, Romans 8. 11. And this man, whoever he be, bond or
free, that thus believes the Death of Christ, and its satisfaction to God, as
well as its usefulness to man, cannot make it void, nor divide it and its
virtue upon the soul that thus knows it, but will say, here is a dying man,
witnessing the Death of Christ, and nevertheless the same man living with
Christ, and concluding if Christ had not died, man must have perished in his
sin; this being the way found out by God to recover him, whereby he knows
Christ and him crucified, and what the preaching of the Cross of Christ is,
which is foolishness to them that perish, but to them that are saved, the
Wisdom of God, and the Power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 18.

By this Gift of God in our hearts, we further believe, That Christ Jesus rose
again from the dead, according unto the Scriptures, and sits at God's right
hand in a glorious body; and we believe that our low estates and humbled bodies
shall be made like unto his glorious Body, through the working of his mighty
Power, whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself; and that this
mortality shall put on immortality. For though we believe that Christ Jesus
has lighted every man with his Light, whereby man may come to know himself
lost and undone, as before is said; yet therefore is not every man saved,
though the Grace that appears to all men is sufficient in it self; but some
have the Grace of God bestowed on them in vain, not liking to retain God in
their knowledge, though something within them shows them what is good; but
they reject the Counsel of God within, or against themselves, to their own
destruction, Luke 7. 30. (see the Margent) and yet it does not follow that the
Grace is insufficient of it self, no more than it follows that Christ's Death
is insufficient, because he tasted death for every man, and yet every man is
not saved. Neither does Regeneration, or the believing in the Light of Christ
within, make void the Death and Sufferings of Christ without at Jerusalem, no
more than believing the Scripture-testimony without concerning Christ's Death,
makes void the work of Regeneration and Mortification within; but as the
Apostle says in another case, so say I in this, For as the man is not without
the woman, neither is the woman without the man in the Lord; even so is not the
Death and Sufferings of Christ without at Jerusalem, to be made void and of
none effect by any thing within, neither does the Light within make that of
none effect without, but both in the Lord answers his will; for though there is
and may be a knowledge and belief of what Christ did and suffered without the
Gates, in his own body, upon the Tree, and yet sin alive in the heart, and the
work of Regeneration not known; yet it cannot be so where the Light within is
believed on, and obeyed so as to have its perfect work in the heart, to
regenerate and make all things new and to be of God; this man can never make
void what Christ has done and suffered without. And yet this new birth, or
Christ formed within and dwelling in the heart by Faith, does not limit or
consine Christ to be only within, and not without also; but both within and
without, according to the good pleasure of the Father to reveal and make him
known; for he fills all things, and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him,
and yet is he at God's right hand far above all Heavens in a glorious body.

And we also believe the Resurrection of the Just and Unjust, the one to
Salvation, and the other to Condemnation, according unto the Judgment of the
great Day; and then shall every Seed have its own body, according to 1 Cor. 15.
36, 37, 38. which we verily believe: for if the dead arise not, we are of all
men most miserable. But because we dare not be so foolishly inquisitive, as to
say, With what bodies shall they arise? therefore do some say, we deny both the
Resurrection of the Body of Christ, and of all that are or shall be dead: But
this also is false; for every man shall be raised in his own order; but Christ
the first fruits, 1 Cor. 15. 23. And we believe, they shall be raised with the
same bodies, so far as a natural and spiritual, corruptible and incorruptible,
terrestrial and celestial can be the same.

We further believe, according unto the Scriptures, concerning Faith, that that
Faith is only true, which is God's gift, and has Christ Jesus the Power of God
for its author and object, and is distinguished from the dead Faith by its
fruits: for though in description and definition they may carry a resemblance,
yet in nature are as different as a living man is from a dead, which wants not
form or shape, but life and power. So says the Apostle James, As the body
without a spirit is dead, so is Faith without Works; even so is that Faith
which stands in the wisdom of words, and not in the Power of God: by the one,
man is kept in captivity to the world and the things of it, but by the other he
has victory over the world, 1 John 5. 4. and the Seal and Witness thereof in
his own heart, whereby it is purified, and God is seen; for the pure in heart
see God, Mat. 5. 8. This Faith differs men now, and their Worships, as it did
Cain and Abel; for, by Faith Abel offered a more excellent Sacrifice than Cain,
Heb. 11. By this living Faith, Abel saw beyond the Sacrifice unto Christ the
firstborn of God, beyond the firstling of the flock, which he offered, and
therefore God had respect unto Abel and his Offering; but God rejected Cain and
his Offering, though he had Faith to believe it to be his duty, yet sticking in
the Form, and not flying on the wing of Faith unto Christ the One Offering, he
missed the mark, as all have done ever since that have gone in Cain's way of
worshipping, as well as killing men about Worship. But we believe that Faith to
be only true and saving, that slyes over self-righteousness, as well as
filthiness, unto the Fountain of Life in Christ; which Faith has nothing of
man in it, but is as the breath of Life by which the Soul lives; not a bare
assent to the truth of a proposition in the natural understanding, but the
Soul's cleaving unto God, out of a naturalness between Christ and the Soul; and
so lives rather by relation, than bare credit or desperate adventure and
hazard; not looking at its doing to commend it, but God's love and bounty in
Christ the Light, to receive it; and yet Holiness is its delight, and he can no
more live out of it, than the fish upon the dry land.

We believe that this Faith keeps the mind pure and the heart clean, through
the sprinkling of the heart, from an evil conscience, by the Blood of Jesus,
which remits the Sin and justifies the Soul, through the virtue of this Blood
received into the heart by this living Faith, which receives all its power and
virtue from Christ, in whom it abides as its root and object, whereby
Justification is witnessed from Sin, not in Sin, Romans 6. 22. But now being made
free from Sin, and become servants unto God, you have your fruits unto
Holiness, and the end Everlasting Life.

We believe that Justification and Sanctification are distinguished, but not
divided: for as he that sanctifies and justifies is one, so do these go
together; and when the Soul has the greatest sense of Justification upon it,
through the virtue of the Blood of Jesus by the living Faith, then is it most
in love with Holiness, and at the greatest distance from Sin and Evil; and
whenever there is a failing in Sanctification, there is also some eclipse of
Justification in the eye of the Soul, until Faith has recovered its strength
again, which it lost by Sin's prevailing. For, as the furthest and clearest
sight is in the brightest day; so is it with the Soul, when it is most in the
brightness and beauty of Holiness, its Justification appears most glorious, and
its Union and Communion most sweet and lasting; and so, like two twins, as they
are much of an age, so they are like one to the other; and what God has joined
together, let no man put assunder.

We also by this Light believe, that acceptance with the Father is only in
Christ; and by his Righteousness made ours, or imputed unto us: not by the
creaturely skill, but by the applicatory act of God's gift of Grace, whereby the
soul feels the difference between self-applying by its own Faith, and God
applying by his Spirit, and so making Christ unto the Soul, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption: So that we believe and are sure,
that there is a great difference between Imputation, as it is the act of man's
spirit, and as it is the act of free Grace, without man's forcing. And so we
distinguish between Imagination and Imputation, between reckoning or imputing
that is real, and reckoning or imputation that is not real, but a fiction and
imagination in the creaturely will and power. And because we are against the
latter, we are clamoured upon, as if we denied the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness; when it is only unto those, that are not made righteous by it,
to walk as he also walked: For, as the Scripture says, Is it not he that says
he is righteous by the imputation of Christ's Righteousness, but he that does
Righteousness is righteous, as Christ is righteous, 1 John 3. 7. he that
believes otherwise is deceived. And yet it is not Acts of Righteousness, as
done by us, nor as inherent in us, as acts, by which we are accepted of God,
and justified before him; but by Christ the Author and Worker of those acts in
us and for us; whereby we know that we are in him, and he in us, and we hold
him as our Head, into whom all things are gathered together in one, even in him.

We further believe, that God is only to be worshipped, and not any likeness
that man makes unto himself of God, from any view, sight or knowledge that he
has had of him; but in every act and service, man is to know what
substantially, as well as whom speculatively or notionally he worshippeth, as
it is written, Joh. 4. 22. Ye worship ye know not what: we know what we
worship; for Salvation is of the Jews. And he that thus worships the Father,
honors the Son by the same Spirit, which is one with the Father and the Son;
in which Spirit only God is worshipped, according to the form of its own
choosing and manifesting of it self in and by, according unto the good pleasure
of the Father, who is a Spirit, and limits man unto the Spirit's form, but
allows not man to limit the Spirit unto his form, though it be not of his
inventing originally, but of the Father; yet man must no more limit God unto
it, than he could command God to appear in it at first: For as he chose it
himself, so he has reserved liberty to leave it at his pleasure, who works all
things after the counsel of his own Will, which he has purposed in himself,
that the gift of the knowledge of the Mystery of his Will, might for ever be
acknowledged to be of his Grace, and from the Riches of the Glory thereof,
according to Ephesians. 1. and man be bound, but God free; man bound to wait in the
Light for God's Movings, but God free to move in whom, to what, and when he
pleases: then man is to go when he says go, and come when he says come; and
such Servants do serve him; and then there is no more curse, as in the days of
willworship and voluntary humility, but the Throne of God and of the Lamb, Col.
2. 18, 23. Rev. 22. 3, 4. and they shall see his Face, and his Name shall be on
their foreheads.

We believe also, that this Worship is spiritual (and not carnal) in all its
Parts and Ordinances, and not to be imposed by any outward force, but performed
by the inward leadings of God's Spirit, according as the holy men of God were
led and guided in the days past, who gave forth the Scriptures; all
impositions of Worship outward, being only enjoined under the first Covenant,
that made nothing perfect, until the time of Reformation, spoken of, Heb. 9.
10. But Christ being come, there is an end as well of such Impositions, as of
the Meats and Drinks, and diverse Baptisms and carnal Ordinances, they being all
but temporary, and in order unto an end; but all to vail to Christ, the sum and
substance of all, [the first] pointed at by all, and [the last] ending of all,
the Amen. And he that thus worships God in Christ, his Ordinances are spiritual
and not carnal, and his Faith carries him beyond his Works, with righteous
Abel, and preserves him that he is not drowned in the form, like Cain; neither
falls he short of the Glory of God, nor of his assurance of Acceptance with him.

We believe there is one Baptism necessary unto Salvation, Ephesians. 4. 5. One
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. And this Baptism is Spiritual, of which John's
Water was but a figure, Joh. 1. 31. That he should be made manifest to Israel,
therefore am I come, baptizing with Water, says John: and 1 Pet. 3. 21. The
like figure whereunto, even Baptism, does also now save us; not the putting
away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience toward
God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. This one spiritual Baptism into the
Name of Jesus Christ, is that which saves; the Water being but a figure, that
Christ might be manifest to Israel, who had diverse Baptisms imposed on them,
until the time of Reformation; but Christ the Substance being come, the Shadows
fly away. And yet where ever any are commanded now by the same Spirit that
commanded the Believers to be Baptized in the days past, either for the
furtherance of the Gospel, or trial of their Faith, we judge them not. But this
obedience is very rare to be found, and we could heartily desire, that all
would consider seriously, whether Litteral sayings observed only by outward
reading, hearing by the ear, or inward impulses upon the heart by the Divine
power, are the motives unto obediences in this kind. And if honesty and
uprightness of heart may be heard, we believe and know, the many dead souls
every where, notwithstanding their Baptisms, will be as so many witnesses
against them, by their grovelling upon the earth, as so many slain and killed
men by the Letter, while the Spirit's quickenings have not been known in the
true Baptism into death. For we find by daily experiences, that most men and
women live like Pharaoh's lean kine, only to eat up the fat, and to envy those
that are not so lean-soul'd as themselves.

We believe also, that as there is one true saving Baptism, so is there one
Bread or Body of Christ, which all the Saints do feed upon; and though they be
many as to persons, yet their Bread is but one, and they all in it but one
Bread. And this we believe is the flesh that came down from heaven, Joh. 6. 33.
Though the outward Jews now, as then, murmur at him because he said, I am the
Bread which came down from heaven, verse. 41, 42. But Christ, (verse. 45.) to
stop their murmuring, tells them, that the knowledge of this mystery was only
revealed unto them whom God (and not man) teaches; and no more than are taught
of God, can set seal and subscribe unto this truth in Jesus: though we believe
also, that Jesus did take outward Bread and brake it, and gave it to the
Disciples, as the Scripture says; and this was a figure of his Body (that was
to be pierced and broken upon the Tree) and a show, to show forth his death
until he came. And we believe he did arise again, and appear unto his
Disciples; And all that believed were together and had all things common, etc.
And they continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, breaking bread from
house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart,
praising God, and having favor with all the People, Act. 2. 44, 45, 46. 47.
And we believe that the Apostle in 1 Cor. 11. 20. says true, where he says,
When ye come together therefore in one place, this is not to eat the Lord's
Supper. And all that he speaks in that Chapter, is not to perpetuate that
outward breaking of Bread, otherwise than as the Believers did, that were
filled with the Holy Ghost in singleness of Heart, as before is said; and yet
we judge not those who break outward Bread and drink outward Wine, being
commanded so to do; and put in remembrance thereby of the body and blood of
Jesus Christ, by the remembrancer, the spirit of truth, which is appointed by
the Father to lead into all truth. But to do it by imitation, or tradition
only, (as most do it, if not all at this day) we know it is not an offering
unto God in righteousness, neither do we believe this to be the communion of
the body and blood of Christ; and yet, the eating of the flesh, and drinking of
the blood of Christ, we believe man must know and witness, or he has no life
in him, Joh. 6. 53, 54, 55. And we believe that many are striving now in their
Spirits as the Jews did, verse. 52. saying, how can this man give us his flesh
to eat? And not only the Jews but many of his disciples said, This is an hard
saying, who can bear it? verse. 60. and at verse. 63. he tells them, It is the
Spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing; the words that I speak unto
you, they are Spirit, and they are Life; and he that hears and understands
these words, that are Spirit and Life, will not be offended at what I have
spoken of the flesh and blood of Christ.

By the same Spirit and Grace we believe, that Prayer is an Ordinance of God
when performed by his Spirit, in its words (and not those which man's wisdom
teaches) or without words, by sighs and groans which cannot be uttered, and
these so often as the spirit it self pleases. But the Form without the Spirit,
whether it be by words of other men's framing, or words of a man's own spirit,
according to his will, time and manner, this is not the Prayer that prevails
with God. And we believe there is none so weak and infirm, but this Spirit
profers its help at some time or other, though man regards it not. And the
more man's mind is gathered within from all visibles, the more he comes to be
sensible of the movings and stirrings of this Spirit, in its secret cries to
God, answerable to the wants of that man or woman, in whom it moves and cries.
And by due watching thereunto, we believe and know, the Spirit of prayer and of
adoption, that cries unto God, comes to be discerned and distinguished from a
man's own spirit and will.

We believe by the same gift of Grace, that there are several Ministrations,
and several Operations, according to 1 Cor. 12. and all by the same Spirit, as
before the Law, and after the Law, by Moses, and after by John the Baptist, and
Christ, and his Apostles; and in all these, the Ministration had acceptance
with God through the management of the Spirit, and its rejection and dislike of
God for the want thereof. And by this Spirit were the Scriptures given forth,
and did the holy men of God Speak, Prophecy, Preach and Pray as they were
moved; and for want of it, the Letter did, and does kill. And for the further
appearance and pouring out of this Spirit, answerable unto the work and service
that God had for them to do, they were to wait, as Christ commanded his
Disciples to do at Jerusalem, to receive the Promise of the Father: For, by
this Spirit he that speaks, speaks as the Oracle of God. And therefore, as it
was the practice of the People of God in old time, to wait for the moving and
stirring of this Spirit, that they might speak, as it gave them utterance, in
the evidence and demonstration thereof; so do this People (called Quakers) now;
and according to its moving in their hearts, they minister, according to the
signification of the Spirit, whereby they understand, both what and when to
speak, and when to be silent; as also, who they are that minister and speak in
their own wills, above the Cross of Christ, which the Apostle was careful
always to be in subjection to, lest he should make it void, by speaking the
words which man's wisdom teaches; and therefore as the Saints did, so we do
believe, and therefore we speak: and such Preaching and Speaking in faith, as
well as Praying in faith, is acceptable unto God as his Worship, and not
otherwise.

And we further believe by the same spirit, That the sum of all Religion,
according to truth, and the signification of the word [Religion] is, Man not at
liberty in his will, but bound again unto God by his having given to him, by
the light of Christ within, the true sight and knowledge of himself as in
himself, as lost and undone for ever, and from this sight a true sense to arise
upon and remain with him; from whence spring unutterable groans and cries unto
God, under the weight of the burden and wretchedness, by reason of the body of
sin and death; and then when there was none to help or pity in this state,
then is Mercy showed in Christ the Arm of God, which is revealed as an help,
neither seen, nor known, where, how or when to come at it, or meet with it: And
this begets in the heart of that man and woman, in, and unto whom it is thus
revealed, thanks and praises unto God, for this gift and revelation of his Son,
in this needful time, whom the soul sees to be the gift of eternal Love.

And we believe and know, upon this love and faithfulness of God, is founded,
built and established the everlasting Covenant (whereby not only all men may
be saved, for its ability, but some shall be saved because of its prevalency)
which is not like to the Covenant which he made with our Fathers. And although
all mankind is not saved, yet it is not because either of insufficiency in this
Covenant, or because of the weakness of the grace that appears in and unto all
men; but because of man's will, loving death and choosing his own delusions,
whereby his destruction is of himself, and God clear of his blood in the free
tender of his grace, gift and striving of his Spirit within him. For we know
assuredly, according to the Scriptures of Truth, and experience of all souls
that ever were truly converted to God, that though by Grace man is saved, not
of himself, but by the free gift, yet as the old world did, and those
rebellious Jews spoken of Acts 7. who, as did their Fathers, so did they,
always resist the holy Ghost, so do men now. And yet in the tender of this
grace and striving of his Spirit, the Lord is a God so hiding himself in the
management of this striving and ministration of his spirit, as if it wholly
depended upon man's choice and consenting, that man's will, as to him, is (as
it were) free in rejecting or accepting, Life and death being set before him;
whereby in the wisdom of God, the propensity of his Nature, as it came out of
the hands of his Maker, has an advantage by this dealing of God, to put forth
it self; so that man is as free in the choice, as he is in the refusal of the
tender of mercy and help, and that with an equal indifferency, as it appears to
him in this state; notwithstanding afterward, in the further growth in this
grace, and knowledge of Christ, he sees clearly and convincingly, that the
Grace (that wrought hiddenly from his sight and knowledge in the first working,
tender, and ministration of God toward him) gained his consent through its own
prevalency in the Love of God; by which sight and sense self comes to be
abhorred, and the free Love so admired, that he knows from first to last, all
was of Grace, and that free; that self is not able to challenge any thing as
due from what it had done, but all of gift, and yet as before, with such an
equal indifferency on man's account; so that God may and will appear to be
just, both in condemning and saving, and the Justifier freely of all that
believe in Jesus, the Light of the World.

Therefore, let all take heed, how they dislike this Ministration of God, and
striving of his Spirit in their hearts and consciences, under color and
pretense of its insufficiency, and therefore they will not come to him, because
his drawings and strivings are not so strong as they would have them to be;
looking for such an overpowering and irresistiblness, as they are not able to
withstand and gainsay; lest such perish through a wilful neglect, and for want
of stretching out their hand, when the Lord holds out his; and so they perish
in the ditch, with a vain expectation of further power or cry in their mouths,
Lord have mercy on us: and so with the sluggard, while they cry, yet a little
more slumber and folding of the hands to sleep, their Garden is overgrown with
weeds, and their backs clothed with rags, and they beg in harvest; whilst
others that have sown in tears, not fainting, do in due time reap in joy, and
not despising the crumbs that fell from the table, nor the day of small things,
witness the presence of their Beloved, come down into his Garden, and walking
among the Lillies.

Let these things be truly considered, pondred and weighed in the true balance
of Light and Righteousness, lest any soul perish through the false weight and
measure; so shall my soul rejoice that any have escaped the Net of the Fowler,
through the discovery of the true Light, and God have all the glory, unto whom
alone it belongs, and man ashamed, confounded, his mouth stopped, and he laid
in the dust for ever; and then shall my end be answered in writing these things.

THE END.
Concerning Persuasions in Matters of Religion.
THere is the Natural man and the Spiritual man, and there are the Persuasions
of each in and about matters of Religion. There is the Persuasion of Reason,
and the Persuasion of Faith.

The Persuasion of Reason is that belief which man receives into his mind or
heart from the exercise of the Reasoning Faculty: and this Persuasion in
Matters of Religion is but Man's Opinion or Judgment, which how certain or
infallible soever it appear to him, yet may be shaken by a demonstration or
evidence of an higher kind and nature.

The Persuasion of Faith is that Belief, which the New Creature receives into
the renewed mind, from the Evidence and Demonstration of the Spirit, which
opens and manifests the things of the Spirit, unto that mind which is
begotten and renewed by it. And this Persuasion is certain and infallible,
however it may be struck at and battered, by the reasonings of the wise earthly
part, even in that very man, whose heart is thus persuaded, by the Light of the
Spirit of God, concerning the things of God's Kingdom.

Now the lowest Persuasion of Faith is higher and of a more noble nature than
the highest Persuasion of Reason: because Faith is of an higher Principle, and
of a deeper nature and ground, than Man's Reason is. But this (because it
appears not in Man's sphere, but rather out of it, and is contrary to the line
and reach of his wisdom) is accounted by him foolishness and madness. Thus is
the Wisdom of God (and the Children thereof) judged and condemned by Man in his
day.

And how can it be otherwise? How can the wisdom of Man but judge that as
foolishness, whose beauty and excellency is hid from its eye? But this is,
because the wisdom of Man is out of its place, not subjected to the Wisdom of
God, but exalted above it; therefore (as a curse unto it) is it suffered to
lift up it self in its conceitedness against, and so to persecute the pure
Wisdom of God and the births thereof, that it might fall, and be broken, and
snared, and taken, and its day deservedly come to an end, and be shut up in the
shadows and chambers of eternal darkness.

But what ear of Man can hear this! Surely none that is whole in the line of
Man's wisdom, reason and understanding, but that alone which is bruised, broken
and in some measure dashed to pieces, by the inroads of a diviner Life and
Nature. This, in the leadings of that Life which has broken it, and in the
shinings of the Light Eternal upon it and into it, may be enabled to take up
the Cross to the natural part, and to die that Death with Christ, which
preserves from the second Death, with the misery thereof.

Happy is he, who knows and hearkens to the Persuasions of God's Spirit, who is
born of God, and taught to wait upon him and worship him in Spirit, who
receives his Religion from the Light of Faith, into the renewed Nature and
Mind, and not from the Reason of Man into the natural understanding, which is
easily corrupted and cannot be kept pure, but alone by the indwelling of the
Principle of Eternal Life in it.

For though such may suffer very deeply in this world, from the men of this
world (as the Subjects and Servants to the Principle of Life have done in all
Ages and Generations) yet their Principle will bear them out, in which God will
appear to strengthen and refresh their spirits, and carry them up above all
their Sufferings in the Patience, Meekness, and Faith of the Lamb. And keeping
to their Principle, they cannot be overcome, but must either live or die
Conquerors, according to the Will and good Pleasure of Him who orders and
disposes of all things well, and brings good out of every evil, in despite
of all the powers of darkness. And he that overcomes (whether by life or
death) in the Lamb's Spirit, shall wear the Lamb's Crown, and sit down in that
perfect Rest in the Kingdom of the Father, which will give the hearts of all
his Children full Satisfaction. In which assured hope (Life stirring in our
bosoms, and quickening our hearts with Love unto our God, and Zeal for his
Truth) we can freely give up all that is near and dear unto us in this world,
and lay down our heads in inward Peace, in the midst of the greatest outward
Persecution and Trouble. Even so, O Lord, thy Will be done concerning this
Generation of thy People, whom thou have begotten to thy self, and brought
forth by thy mighty Power, to testify to thy Truth in this present day.
Dispose of them as it pleases Thee, and let not their Faith in Thee, nor thy
Faithfulness to Them fail, but let them be a Praise to thy Name throughout all
Generations, and tendered by Thee as the First Fruits of thine Appearance, in
the glorious Light of the everlasting Day, after this great, long, thick and
dark night of Apostasy from the Life and Spirit of the Apostles, which has so
long eclipsed and covered the brightness of thy Beauty from the sight of the
Earth.

Isaac Penington.


