Great Britain's TEARS, Humbly offered to the Consideration OF THE LORDS and
COMMONS in Parliament Assembled.

London, Printed in the Year 1695.

To the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament Assembled.
IF we look into the World, and but view the Actions of Men, and see what
violent Oppression there is of the Poor, and the eager pursuit after Riches; we
shall be apt to conclude Men are become lunatic, or infected with the gross
Errors of the Sadduces of old: otherways one would think they would never dare
to break through the Laws of God and Man at the rate they do; so much the more,
considering the Nation has so lately received such a signal Deliverance, and
has ever since been in imminent Peril: yet these things have made no
Impression on the Minds of some Men, but only served to heighten and increase
their Ambition and Covetousness, which has been the occasion of many Evils,
for which the Land mourns, as will appear by the ensuing Matter; but it must
with all due Acknowledgment be confessed, that in Parliament there has been all
imaginable Care taken to prevent Frauds, and the Imbezlement of the Public
Money (but all has not been sufficient). Yet there has been one thing
wanting, that is, the inspecting into the Actions of the Court, from whence the
greatest of our Evils have sprung: Our Forefathers ever looked upon them with
a jealous Eye, as being sensible what Temptations they lay under, and what
great Opportunities they had of in^^^hing themselves (especially in the time of
War) to the Prejudice of the Nation, and how prone and apt they were to pursue
their own Interest, notwithstanding their great Pretensions to Loyalty; and
this is certainly a sore and great Evil the Nation now labors under: Therefore
vain and fruitless will all Endeavors be, as long as there is so many great and
various Corruptions in the Government; and we can expect nothing but Poverty
and Misery to attend. There are many Instances both in Holy Writ and History,
wherein God has been pleased to make use of weak and mean Instruments for the
bringing his Purposes to pass; and finding a general Silence, the sense of my
Duty, and the Apprehension how fatal these things may prove to the Kingdom, is
that which has made me thus presume to address my self to this most August
Assembly, from whom alone it is (under God) the Nation can expect Relief. We
are happy in a good Prince, who will deny nothing that is fit for good Subjects
to ask, and who will be very ready and willing to remove all Grievances, or any
thing else that may obstruct the Glory of his Actions, or the happy Settlement
of the Kingdom in Peace.

I am, my Lords and Gentlemen, your Honors most humble, faithful and obedient
Servant, Robert Crosfeild.

GREAT BRITAIN's Tears.
THIS Nation has long lain under a great and dangerous War, His Majesty's
Royal Person exposed to the greatest Hazards, and vast Sums of Money raised for
carrying on the same; yet we have not made use of those Opportunities God has
put into our Hands of improving them to the Advantage of the Kingdom, but have
all along taken quite different Measures from what our Forefathers have done
under the like Circumstances of Affairs: which is obvious and plain to the Eye
of any intelligible Man; and there is a general Complaint thereof through the
Kingdom, but I find none inquisitive after the Causes from whence these Evils
should arise: therefore I conceive it would highly conduce to His Majesty's and
the Nation's Interest if we could discover the Fountain from whence they
spring, which I shall endeavor to do, and hope my Labor will not be
altogether in vain, but shall forbear all Personal Reflections, as knowing many
honest and worthy Persons may be engaged, who have not been able to withstand
the Current and Course of things, but been obliged to go with the Stream;
neither press harder upon any, than what the natural Construction may be upon
such and such Actions. And when the Kingdom is engaged in War, all Men well
know, that the great Affairs of the Kingdom pass through the Hands of the Right
Honorable the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, the Admiralty, and the
Commissioners of the Navy; and so long as the War's on foot, it makes those
Employments (as likewise many others at Court) much more advantageous than in
the times of Peace, and it must be allowed they have a very great Influence
upon the Government; so that as they are inclined they may be the Authors of
much Good or Evil. By which it appears of what mighty Importance it is to the
Happiness and Well-being of the Kingdom, to have Persons of Honor and
Integrity in those Stations, to whom his Majesty commits so great a Trust: we
can no ways better judge of things present, than by looking back to those which
are past; and it can be no Crime (but a Duty) in me to make some Inspection
into the Public Actions of the Nation during this War.

God, among many other Blessings, has surrounded us with the Sea, as with a
Wall, (whereby we are not exposed to the Insults of the common Enemy and the
Oppressor) and has also given us great and numerous Shipping, more than ever
our Forefathers could boast of, who notwithstanding performed great Actions,
(which sounded into all Parts of the World) and by the Power thereof, for many
Ages gave Law to Europe, and were properly and truly the Balance thereof. Now
it is highly worth the Enquiry to see whether we have followed their Footsteps,
and made a right Use of that Blessing we have and do enjoy; and upon View it
will be found that we have fallen far short of their Actions, and greatly
blemished the Glory of them; which cannot be attributed to our Pusianimity,
(for the same Native Courage remains) but to other Causes, which I shall
endeavor to demonstrate, and then leave the Nation to judge.

Upon the first breaking out of this War, his Majesty by his great Prudence and
Industry, had drawn most of the considerable Kingdoms and States of Europe into
an Alliance, thereby to put a stop to the growing Greatness of the French King,
and has to the highest degree exposed his Royal Person to the greatest of
Dangers; and by reason of this Alliance (hardly to be paralleled) gave this
Nation a mighty Opportunity of humbling that proud Monarch, who (by reason of
drawing so great Armies into the Field) could not spare any great number of
Troops for the Guard of his Maritime Coast; by which means it lay exposed, and
we might have done him infinite Damage, and committed great Spoil and Waste,
which had not possibly been in his Power to have prevented; for where there is a
commanding Fleet at Sea, and a competent Army on Board ready to make a Descent
when and where they shall see fit, (and not send Men to a Slaughterhouse) it
could no way possibly be in the Power of the Enemy to prevent their landing,
and making great Depradations, before they could draw a Strength together able
to oppose them; but yet before that could be done, they might (if they saw it
requisite) retire and be gone: by such like means the Enemy might have been
driven to the greatest Extremity; and this has always been the Opinion and
Practice of all Ages and Nations that have been strong at Sea.

But unhappy poor England, during this War, has fallen from the common Notions
of Men, and at that time when in the greatest Danger! and this has not only
been an Error of one Year or two, but many: Nay, have we not seen the Enemy's
Fleet in the Straits, and their Coast left naked, (their Troops being drawn to
the Siege of Charleroy) and we at the same time lay with a great Fleet almost
all the Summer in Torbay, and yet made no Attempt upon their Coast? Let us but
suppose we had lain under the same Circumstance: What a miserable Condition we
should have been in, we may judge by what a Consternation the Nation was in the
last Summer, for fear the French Fleet should be out before ours. It Is seen the
Venetians can make a good use of their Shipping, as appears by their taking the
Morea, Ciclut and Scio: and why not we, who are able to perform greater Actions
than they are capable of? And no doubt we might and should have done it, had we
not been prevented through the sordid Covetousness of some Persons, who, to
enrich themselves, have basely kept the Nation in a lingering War. This will not
appear to be a hard and unjust Censure, when I have laid open what I have
further to offer. The next thing therefore I shall proceed upon shall be, to
enquire how it came to pass that there were Embargo's laid upon Shipping from
Year to Year for several Years together, to the great Prejudice of His Majesty
and the whole Kingdom. Some Men did and do conjecture that it was carried on by
Interest, and to satisfy the avaritious Temper of some Persons belonging to the
Admiralty, (for it brought vast Sums of Money to their Hands) and their Opinion
in that matter seems to be justly grounded; for being done (as before is said)
for several Years, there must have been some very urgent Cause for so doing,
and none so great as the King's want of Men (as indeed nothing else could be
rendered a sufficient Cause for so violent an Action, and of so pernicious
Consequence to the King and Kingdom.) The same Cause still remains, and has
been all this last Summer more pressing than ever; yet we see there has been no
Embargo laid: You will then say, How comes there to be so great a Change? It
was because the last Session of Parliament this Matter was exploded and laid
open (by me) in Print, how pernicious the laying Embargo's was to his Majesty's
and the Kingdom's Interest, and undeniable Reasons given to prove, that there
was no manner of Cause for so doing; which in short overthrew that Business,
and the Nation has heard no more of it since.

And there has been Application made to the Lords of the Admiralty, wherein
has been laid open what vile Corruptions were and are committed in his
Majesty's Yards, in the Imbezlement of his Majesty's Stores, and the great
Destruction made of Timber and Plank in the building and repairing the Royal
Navy, and the irregular Proceedings in the said Yards; which has amounted to
vast Sums of Money which might have been saved: and the Matter has had the
Approbation of almost all Persons that have seen it; but notwithstanding this
has made no Impression on their Lordships, who have delayed the Person that
made the Proposal, but promised him from time to time to bring his Matter to an
Issue, but never performed it. The Commissioners of the Navy (to whom it was
referred) treated the Proposer rudely, and never would make a just Report of
the Matter to them referred, but endeavored to evade and ridicule what they
were not able to answer or confute. This Affair has lain for near this two
Years, and lies still undetermined, although it be of such vast Importance to the
King and Kingdom; and there are seventeen have made Oath of these things, who
are no loose idle Persons, but Men living in good Repute, that have even an
Horror upon them to consider that these things are practiced: and those that do
it are countenanced and supported in it by those who should redress them, and
which might have been long since done, and may yet this Session of Parliament
(if honest Men are employed) by appropriating such a Sum of Money to that very
use, and making a borrowing Clause, by which means there would be ready Money
to pay the Workmen; the want of which is alleged to be the great Cause of all
these Abuses: then that Money that has been hitherto so basely wasted and
misspent, may be employed toward the Payment of the Sailers, whose Case truly
is very deplorable, and would even move a stony Heart to Compassion; who are
made a Prey of on every hand, I need not particularize wherein, it having been
already done by others, and it is no more than what is generally known: but it is
contrary to common Policy and Honesty to oppress Men to such a degree, who are
of such great use to the Public; and no doubt their Sighs and Tears have long
since pierced the Clouds, and call aloud to Heaven for Vengeance, and there is
no one Sin whatever sooner brings Judgments upon a Nation, than the violent
Oppression of the Poor. His Majesty has been graciously pleased to issue out
his Royal Proclamation for to encourage the Sailers to come into his Service,
by giving them three Months Pay advance, which I wish may have the desired
Effect: but there is little appearance of it; for it is frequently seen, that the
Sailers leave their Ships many times when they have six or nine Months Pay due
to them: the Promise therefore of three Months Advance cannot be a sufficient
Inducement for them to come into the Service; the reason of it is, because they
are as it were eaten up by others; and we see that even a Dog will shun that
Room in which he has been often beat: therefore it is no wonder the Sailers have
so great an Aversion to the Public Service; and as they are Men and Rational
Creatures they will always decline it as long as they are so ill treated.
Therefore until the Cause be removed, the Effects will never cease; but these
Regulations must not be expected to come from the Admiralty or Navy-board,
unless a Reform be first made among them. His Majesty of his Princely
Compassion has been pleased to recommend the Sailers Case to the Parliament,
and many Proposals have been offered, whereby to encourage and enduce them to
come into his Service: among others some have proposed to register them in the
several Ports, with such Clauses and Restrictions, as may oblige them to it:
but I humbly conceive all of those Methods will be found to be defective, and
not answer the End thereby intended; for there must not be a stop put to our
outward or coasting Trade: so that if a Sailer comes to enter himself on Board
any of these Ships, he may take what Name he pleases upon him, or at least name
a wrong Port to which he belongs, (which the Master will wink at, if he knows
it, rather than want Men) and he cannot easily be confuted in either; and
Recourse must be made to the Register upon the account of every Ship that
moves, which will be endless and uncertain; and withal, it will be found to be
as difficult and as unlikely to make the Sailers regular, as to tame a wild
Bull: so that at last his Majesty will be obliged to impress Men as formerly:
Therefore there must be some better Method taken than these. In short, if the
Sailers be justly paid, and their Wages somewhat advanced, and better Provision
made for them in case they are wounded or maimed, then his Majesty will never
want Men, tho there be no impressing them, which I humbly cenceive may be done
by these means.

That all Coasters whatever of an hundred Tun, do pay 1 s. each Voyage they
shall make, and so proportionable according to the Burden of each Ship; and all
outward-bound Shipping to pay agreeable to their Burden and Voyage, according
to the Proposal I made the last Session of Parliament; this Money to be
employed only to the Use and Benefit of such Sailers as shall be wounded or
maimed in the Public Service, which may be collected without any Charge; and
this to continue as well in Peace as War, which would fully answer all the Ends
proposed: and if it be charged upon Sailers and Bottom, (as the Parliament
shall see fit) neither of them would grumble at it; or if it be charged only
upon the Sailers, there is none of them would grudg to pay it, by reason it is so
small a matter, and they know not how soon they may be in his Majesty's
Service; then if they have the Misfortune to be maimed they are sure to be
provided for; the very Apprehension of which will make all Sailers extreme
willing to pay the Money.

And as the Affair may be ordered, it may be of good use to such of them as may
happen to be wounded on Board Merchant Ships: As for Instance,

The Lame Hospitals of this Town do admit into them many sick, poor and lame
Persons; but in case there happens any Action at Sea, whereby many Sailers are
wounded, then those poor Persons are turned out, and forced to make room for
the Sailers; yet notwithstanding it must be allowed that the Poor receive great
Relief from the said Hospitals: so by the same Rule may Sailers that are
wounded or maimed on board Merchantmen be relieved by this, as things may be
ordered by the great Wisdom and Prudence of the Parliament; and without all
doubt it would be a great Inducement to many thousands of Men to take to the
Sea more than now do, and it would be greatly to the Honor and Interest of the
Nation. And if after all, it shall be found his Majesty must have recourse to a
Press, then no doubt a Land-Press will be the most effectual, that is, to take
up the Sailers in all the out-Ports by the Customhouse Officers (with the
Assistance of the Constables, etc.) who generally know the Sailers, and not by
the Press-Ketches, which is but an absurd way, although ancient, and kept on foot
only by Interest, (upon the sight of which the Sailers abscond) which the Ports
look upon little better than Enemies, as being Obstructers to their Trade and
Business; so upon that account they would be very willing to assist in a
Land-Press (which may be done by Letter) that so they may not be plagued by the
Press-Ketches. This had been long since done, only it is against the Interest of
the Admiralty; therefore it can never be expected they will promote it, but
(underhand) oppose it to the uttermost of their Power; but at the same time
they forget the great Duty and Obligations they lie under: but what shall we
say? Interest is the God that some Men worship. And if once a Public and
National Interest comes to be but heartily and sincerely espoused, (and not be
forced to truckle to the Intrigues and Designs of private Persons, as it has
done hitherto) then no doubt but this Matter will take place, because all
Persons that are likely to be concerned in the Payment of the Money will be so
ready and willing to part with it.

I shall now give some short Account of a Matter I proposed to the Right
Honorable the Lords of the Treasury, for laying aside all the
Receiver-Generals for the Land Tax, as being a great and unnecessary Charge to
the Government, which I showed to many Persons of eminent Quality, who very
well approved on it; yet however their Lordships would never so much as
vouchsafe me a hearing: and when I petitioned his Majesty in Council that I
might be heard, I was there obstructed, and my Petition not suffered to be
read; but I find it is not my case alone, for there are four or five hundred
Petitions now lying at the Council Board, which are stifled and not suffered to
be read. It cannot be judged that the Clerks of the Council dare to act so
great a piece of Impudence of themselves, but they must be supported in it by
some Persons of greater Quality, which I conceive to be a Crime of the greatest
Magnitude; for thereby his Majesty is deprived of the true Knowledge and State
of his Affairs, the Corruption and Abuses that creep into the Government, and
the Oppression his Subjects lie under; and by these means there is no
possibility of Redress so long as this Bar remains, which is an Act of the
greatest Injustice: but those Proceedings are diametrically opposite to his
Majesty's Goodness, and tend to nothing but Ruin: All these Evils happen and
come to pass by there being a predominate Party at Court that seek themselves,
and not the Nation's Good, (being Slaves to their own Lusts) and who govern
Affairs as they please.

Therefore so long as they are in Power, there can be little reason to expect
his Majesty's Affairs should prosper, or the Nation be successful in what shall
be undertaken; for they by Interest and Policy will so clog the Wheel of
Public Affairs, that we shall even remain in the same State we were in when we
first began.

I have one Matter more to offer, (in which I shall be very brief) and do
declare I can make appear, that there have been two or three hundred thousand
Pounds of the public Money imbezled, and in whose Hands it now remains, (this
does no ways relate to any thing by me before published) if the Parliament will
be pleased but to take the same Methods that are usually taken in the like
cases; and then if I do not prove what I assert, let me be punished as an
Impostor and Incendiary.

I know it will be affirmed by what I have done, that I tax his Majesty with
want of Prudence and Conduct: I deny the Assertion; for the Glory of his
Actions shine so bright through the whole course of his Life, that even the
worst of his Enemies cannot do it; but this I presume to say, That Princes do
both see and hear with other Men's Eyes and Ears: And his Majesty by reason of
his long Absence, has not had leisure to inspect into things, his time being
wholly taken up in weighty Affairs; so that he has (in great measure) been
obliged to rely upon the Honor and Justice of others: therefore what Error may
have been committed, or Corruptions crept into the Government, they can no ways
be imputed to his Majesty.

And I think it is now very evident, that the Kingdom is highly oppressed, and as
it were fettered with its own Corruptions, that it cannot exert its Strength,
and prosecute the War with that Vigor it might; but yet it seems to be hushed
asleep and fallen into a deep Lethargy of Security in the midst of Danger: And
our Church and Nation, which has been the Glory and Bulwark of the Protestant
Religion, is like to sink under the Weight of its own Corruptions. For if we
will but look and examine into the Causes of the Decay and Downfall of the great
Empires and Kingdoms that have been in the World, and are now extinct, we shall
find their Ruin principally owing to their own Wickedness; and what reason have
we to expect God should be more merciful to us than others, to whom he has
given a greater Light and Knowledge, and saved as it were as a Brand out of the
Fire? These Mercies we have received will only serve to heighten our Guilt, and
increase our Punishment; and it is seen by Experience we know not how to prize
Mercies (as we ought) till we are deprived of them, as does appear in the Death
of the late incomparable Princess, the Queen's most excellent Majesty, who was
the Glory of her Sex, and of whom this Nation was not worthy; and I fear her
Loss to be but the Fore runner of greater Evils.

For when there is a violent Oppression of the Poor in a Land, and great
Enormities committed that have an apparent Tendency to Ruin, and that these are
laid open to the view of the World, (it matters not by what Hand) and
notwithstanding all this, these Evils shall continue and not be redrest; then
in such a case they become National Sins, for which God certainly will visit
with the Rod of his Anger. It has always been the Practice of our Forefathers
(who have carefully transmitted down to us our Religion and Law) in Parliament,
to look and inspect into the Actions of the Court (even in the times of Peace)
to correct and punish such Ministers they found to be corrupt or deficient in
their Duty, of which we have almost infinite Examples, and yet at the same time
it was never thought in the least to be a Diminution to the Honor of their
Prince.

Therefore how much does it behove the Nation to rouse it self, and consider
the Peril it now lies under? Are our Religion, Laws and Liberties valuable?
then let us show a Courage and Resolution answerable to the Danger we are in;
and, in the Name of God, take such Measures as tend to their Preservation, by
rooting out those Corruptions that are in the Government. Then may we have some
hope and prospect of a Blessing; otherways I fear the time will come, that we
shall call and cry unto the Almighty for Help when he will not hear us, but
denounce that heavy Judgment upon us he did to the Jews by the Prophet Ezekiel,
as may be seen in the 24th Chapter and the 13th and 14th Verses.

In thy Filthiness is Lewdness: because I have purged thee, and thou wast not
purged, thou shall not be purged from thy Filthiness any more, till I have
caused my Fury to rest upon thee.

I the Lord have spoken it, it shall come to pass, and I will do it; I will not
go back, neither will spare, neither will I repent: according to thy Way, and
according to thy Doings shall they judge thee, says the Lord God.

FINIS.

