THE SUM OF Two Sermons ON THE WITNESSES, AND THE EARTHQUAKE That Accompanies
their Resurrection. Occasioned from a Late EARTHQUAKE, Sept. 8. And Preached on
the FAST following, Sept. 14. By W. C. M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1692.

To his very much respected Friends, ANTHONY STEPHENS, Esquire; Cashier of the
Treasure of the Navy, and his Beloved Consort Mrs. MARGARET STEPHENS.
SIR,
NExt to that Devote Society, whose I am, and whose Desire was my Call to
publish this Discourse, it became me to pitch on you for a Theophilus, to whom
and your Second Self I might Dedicate it; it being the First Fruits of a small
Recovery of Health from a dangerous and tedious Sickness, and you being so
constant a Friend and comfortable a Visitant under it; Amicus certus in re
incerta cernitur. I hope you will not be offended that I have thus published
your Name, you being a public Person for so many Years, and it being the
Desire of all good Men that know you, that your Virtues were still in a more
public and visible Station. There are but few who have served Three such Kings
without real or reputed Blame by one Party or other, in Wisdom, Diligence or
Fidelity, as you have done; and long may you live to do so.

Madam! All things under your Care are in print; and for that Cardinal Virtue
of your Sex, Cleanliness and Neatness, you are a Pattern both at London and
Epsom. I wish all Gentlewomen would copy out the rest of your Virtues in their
Lives also. 1. In making the Pleasures and Diversions of Civil Converse wear
the Livery of Religion, recommending their Profession as that which is not only
consistent with Cheerfulness and Sociableness, but as that which refines it,
and preserves it from Extravagancy and Troublesomness. 2. In adorning
themselves in such a modest and acceptable Dress, that neither runs to the
Extreme of the Vanity or Costliness of some, who think their Habit is never
fashionable enough, except they become the Pity of Persons wise and grave, and
the Scoff and Ridicule of the Vain and Foolish like themselves, and think their
Apparel and Furniture never rich enough, except they endanger the Estates and
Credits of their Parents or Husbands, and bring them under the Curse of Woman's
ruling over them, and Childrens oppressing them; nor the singular Affectedness
of others, who think the most of Religion is wrapped up in Garments, or that a
Profession is invisible, if it have not a Badge in their Clothes; and that to
be the Duty of a Sect, that themselves think the Sin of an Office. 3. In that
Abhorrence of Idleness, not only overseeing your Household Affairs with your
own Eye, but giving an Example with your own Hand, and sometimes bearing the
heaviest part of the Burden. 4. In the charitable Improvement of a plentiful
Allowance, by which they may lay up so sure a Foundation, that no Earthquake
can shake, but may establish. 5. In a true and constant Sympathy with the
meanest and love of Acquaintance and Friends, not forgetting them in
Adversity, or slighting them whilst unserviceable.

The more of Perfection you have both obtained, the more easy the Duty of
Progress and Growth will be, and the greater Obligation lies on you for it from
him who made the difference. The Foundations of Religion are Living Roots, and
they have a Sun to shine upon them that knows neither Night nor Winter.

That you both may in this, and all other things, prosper, and that this small
Offering, and every other Providence may promote it, is, and shall be the
Prayers of

Your Faithful and very much Obliged Friend and Servant, Walter Cross.

REV. XI. xiii. And the same Hour was there a great Earthquake, etc.


THIS Book of the Revelation is not only Divine, but is a standing Witness to
the Divinity of all the rest; it is a Seal to the whole Bible both in Order and
Nature, being a Volume of Prophecies methodically digested, concerning the
Empire of the World, and the Church of God ander it is Dominion, from the End of
the Sacred History unto the End of the World, whose daily Fulfilments in the
great Revolutions of both, show him alone to be the Author that can show things
to come, and foretell what shall happen, Isa. 41.23.

The Goodness of the Author declares it to be intelligible, and the
Faithfulness of him who had Power to open the Book, has in part, and will more
particularly put the Key of actual Knowledge in the Hands of Protestants; how
else shall the Readers and Hearers obtain the promised Blessing, Rev. 1.3? The
times of the end when Knowledge should increase, Dan. 12.4. are come on us,
since the ends of the World were come on the Apostles, 1 Cor. 10.11. Shall the
Witnesses have Power to shut Heaven, and not unlock this Book? In the time of
the Sixth Trumpet the Angel stands with the Little Book open, Rev. 10.2. The
Prejudice against the Use of this Book from different Opinions, is an
unreasonable Objection, being of no less Force against the whole Body of
Divinity, and Method of Salvation by the Gospel, wherein Disputes are neither
fewer, nor of less moment.

This Portion of the Prophecy about the Witnesses, is as much enquired into,
and as much agreed about, as any in the whole Book. A Disagreement about 60 or
70 Years in an Era of nigh 1300 Years Duration, is but a small Difference. We
have no Period of Time before Christ's Incarnation of so great a quantity, that
is not liable to greater Disputes. And if Prophecy since Christ be as clear as
History before his time, the Ground of Complaint from Obscurity is not great.

The hopeful Nighness of this mystical Earthquake, with which the Witnesses
arise, the dreadful portenduousness of this Literal Earthquake we have heard of
from America, Italy, Holland, France, and felt in England, and the probability
or possibility they may be one, makes me choose this Text.

These 12 Verses, from the 3d to the 14th, contains an entire Treatise about
the Two Witnesses, and does contain twice two distinct Parts in it, viz. Two
Persons, Two Periods, Two States, and Two Consequents of the Persons last
Living and Heavenly State.

First, We have two Persons for our Pattern as well as our Subject. Sackcloth
is an Habit becoming a Fast Day, it is an Habit becoming the whole Life of a
Protestant or Witness, until the Witnesses are risen. Sackcloth is the Symbol
of Prayer and Repentance: an humbled Condition, and humble Heart, and an humble
Habit become each other.

By these Two Witnesses are represented the Universal Church under the Imperial
Jurisdiction, (there never were very considerable parts of the Church without
the Limits of the Empire) especially from the beginning of the Reformation: For,

First, These Witnesses must be Persons, Men, they cannot else be Witnesses.
Moses and Aaron, Elias and Elisha, Joshua and Zerubbabel were Persons.

Secondly, Not Individual Persons. 1260 Years are too long an Age for
Numericals, they must therefore be a kind or sort of Successions of Men.

Thirdly, They are a Church, from their Office before God, Prophets; from their
Symbols, Olive Trees, Candlesticks, from the like Couples that conducted and
presided in the Church under the Old Testament, Moses and Aaron, Elias, etc.
whose Individual Characters are here described by devouring Fire, 2 Kings 1.10.
Shutting up of the Bottles in Heaven from Rain, 1 Kings 17.1. Measuring of the
Temple, Zech. 2. and 4. Plaguing of Egypt, and turning it is Rivers into Blood,
from their Interest in Heaven, and at last going to Heaven.

Fourthly, They are a Church contemporary with, and opposite to the Beast and
his Gentilism. 1. By Beast, all over this Book is understood the Roman Empire,
under it is Eighth and last Form of Government, viz. Ten Sovereignties or
Kingdoms, Politically and Ecclesiastically united to Rome. This Beasts Body or
Subjects are the Gentiles, for the time of Duration is the same, Rev. 11.2. and
13.5. 2. The Opposites are the same, Rev. 13.6, 7. and 11.2, 7. 3. The Nature
is the same, for Popery is an Image of Paganism, Rev. 13.14. 2ly. 42 Months,
and 1260 Days are of the same Extent, so they are contemporary and opposite.

Fifthly, They are a Charch, represented by Two. 1. From the Sufficiency of
their Testimony, to have convinced the Gentiles of their Gentilism, and leave
them without Excuse if not convinced. 2. From that Famous Division of their
Testimony, the Old and New Testament. 3. From the two distinct People that make
up the New Testament Church, Jew and Gentile, Ephesians. 2.14. Two made one in their
Testimony, which Division is observed in the Scaled Servants of God, Rev. 7.3.
For Ver. 4. One Hundred Forty Four Thousand are Sealed out of the Tribes of
Israel, and a greater Number out of all the Kindreds of Gentiles, Ver. 9. These
two Bodies of Men are Sealed from the sinful Apostacies that did begin and
continue with the Trumpets.

Sixthly, They are the Representatives of the Church, especially from the
beginning of the Reformation. 1. The very Name Protestant proves it: For
Pro-testants, Witnesses and Martyrs differ only in Language, Latin, English
and Greek: The Year 1530, when they who composed and professed the Augustan
Confession of Faith, were so solemnly baptized Protestants, then did the former
Sealed Servants of God publicly commence Witnesses. 2. The Work of Reformation
was carried on by very Famous Two's: Waldus and Bruis, Wickcliff and Pourney,
Huss^ and Jerome of Pragne, Luther and Melancton, Zuinglius and Occolampadius.
3. Before the beginning of the Reformation they had another Name, and in
another Condition, Rev. 7. and 14.1, 2. Sealed Servants of God, without a
Temple or Church, scattered as the Seven Thousand in Elijah's Days, and
absconded: Here they are in a better Condition, in a Temple, and have got a new
Name, Witnesses. 4. All things spoken of in this Paragraph are Occurrences
under the time of the Sixth Trumpet, whose whole Period is but an Hour, a Day,
a Month, and a Year, that is, 396 Years: For it begins Chapter 9.14. and Chapter 10.6,
7. the Angel stands as in that Period, saying, There was no more Time to come,
but what was to be under the Seventh Trumpet: Moreover he begins no other
period until his Discourse come to the 14th verse of the 11th Chapter. 5. This
Chapter begins with Measuring of the Temple, which is an Emblem of Rebuilding
it, Zech. 2.2. to measure Jerusalem, for she shall be Inhabited as Towns
without Walls. This was the Work of Joshuah and Zerubbabel the two Olivetrees,
Zech. 4. From the certainty of this last Argument, Marckius, a late and large
Writer on this Book, draws a most Melancholy Conclusion; viz. That 1260 years
are to begin from the Reformation: But the Answer is easy, and the Cause
evident, why the Spirit of God mentions so particularly this period here, not
to give a Character of their Beginning, but to give a Reason, why the Outward
Court, and the Holy City were not Measured as well as the Temple; (i. e.) Why
the Reformation was confined to so narrow Bounds, and did not extend it self as
far as the Name and Profession of Christianity; viz. Because the Gentile or
Beasts Period of 42 Months was not yet ended. The Lease that God had given them
was not out, nor the season of sincere Saints Sufferings, though they might be
full of Expectation from what they should see at that Great Revolution. Hence
the Protestants are the VVitnesses.

The Second Two are two Periods, a Greater of 1260, and a Lesser of 3 Years and
a half: These two cannot be of equal Extent. For, First, There is no Parallel
to explain it by after that Calculation in Scripture, viz. Days for Years, and
then the Days of these Years for Years again; nor could Reason ever satisfy
her self about Rules for explaining Mystical Numbers at that rate. Secondly,
The Two States of Death and Prophesying, which are the Contents of the two
Periods, are opposite. Thirdly, The one begins when the other is about to end.
Ver. 7. And when they shall have finished, or when they are about to finish:
For the Subjunctive Mood in Greek has no other Future Tense than the Aaorist.

The first Great Period has a most visible Mark to know its beginning from;
viz. The Eighth kind of Government in the Roman Empire, Rev. 17.10, 11. But
lest only Historians should know that, the form of that last kind is described
by it is being divided into Ten several Kingdoms, Rev. 17.12. And the Ten Horns
which thou saw are the Ten Kings which have received no Kingdom as yet, but
receive Power as Kings one Hour with the Beast. Likewise in the 13 Chap. at his
first arising he has Ten Horns and Ten Crowns, from which Birth he is to
continue 42 Months, and this very Beast it is, Chap. 11.7. and 13.7. both from
his Original and his Enmity to the Saints, that is contemporary with and
opposite to the Witnesses; now this Form of Goverament was fairly visible
between 450 and 460, and consequently ends between 1710 and 1720. But there is
some ground of hope that the Resurrection of the Witnesses may be sooner:
First, Because it is not positively said, that these three years and a half
shall be the last three, but about it. Secondly, The Beast is alive after the
Witnesses are risen, for the third VVoe that then commences is inflicted on
him. Thirdly, The Witnesses period seems to begin from their being Sealed at
the beginning of the Trumpets, Rev. 7. and their entering into the Wilderness,
Rev. 12.6. both which are before the Beasts rise.

The second Little Period is little for Time, but greatest for Concern of any
mentioned in Sacred or Civil Writ, excepting the three Days and half of our
Lords Death and Sufferings. There has been no Notable Persecution since the
Reformation, but some Writer or other has referred this time to; and no great
wonder, since there are no other limits to it but indefinitely about the end of
the great Period, and no other Comment than the Aspect of the Divine
Providence, which affords us several Arguments to judge it present at this Day.

1. From the Universality of the Suffering of Protestants who are under the
Roman Beasts Jurisdiction: Some killed, some fled, some Apostatized, some
Absconded; the Authority of some whole Nations and Provinces brought under in
acknowledgment to the Papal Power, and Profession of its Religion; all this is
visible in the Savoy and French Persecution, in the prevailing of Popery in
Poland and Hungary, in a Popish Person being made Prince Palatine, and another
was King of Britain and Ireland; through all the Streets of this great City
Babylon, according to the degree of her Power has Persecution been meted out to
Protestants.

2. From the Bitterness and the grievousness of the Persecution; Daniel says it
shall be such a time of Trouble as never was since there was a Nation. The Text
represents it under the Emblem of Dead Carcasses lying in the Street; and in
the 14th Chap. 13th Verse, Death is said to be a State preferrable to it. It is
not a State of Universal Temporal Death, for Faith and Patience remains their
Duty, neither is a Resurrection so suddenly supposeable from that kind of
Death; nor could the Enemies bear the sight of so many Carcasses so long; but
an Universal Temporal Death of the Witnesses being excepted, no bitterer
Persecution can be expected than has been of late; some in England and
Scotland, where only Drops of that Shower fell, begged no greater Mercy at
their Enemies Hands than the tolerable Death of a Malefactor, but the Torments
and Temptations of the Sufferers in France has filled Volumes, and may more.

3. From the apparent Death both upon the Cause and Hearts of Protestants: some
years ago they could taste an Earnest of that Prophecy of smiting the Earth
with Plagues as often as they will, but now they can work no Deliverance in the
Earth: formerly a Harmony of Confessions was an easy and pleasant work, but
now there is Breach upon Breach; formerly there was a Spirit of Life in all
kinds of Worship, but now Deadness and Formality are Epidemical Distempers; but
when the Witnesses rise, a Spirit of Life from God will enter into them, and
they shall be called up to Heaven.

4. The present Consederate Armies seems to be a Comment on that mixture of
Tongues, Kindreds and Professions, ver. 9. that will not suffer these Dead to
be Buried, nor Public Affairs to lie in this prostrate Condition under these
Papal Feet and Toes; a Person Dead and Unburied in the Eastern Mystical Style,
to which this Book is very Conform, is a Symbol of a low and sickly, but yet
hopeful and recoverable Condition.

5. From the apparent Decay of the Turkish Empire, the sixth Trumpet and second
Woe are evidently the same, and its generally agreed they do both represent the
Turks Invasion of the Eastern Empire; the Thirteenth Hundred Year of our Lord
begins the Ottoman Era, and their Successful Invasion of the Roman
Territories. There is but then wanting four or five years to the passing away
of the second Woe; for the whole Period of the sixth Trumpet is but an Hour,
and a Day, and a Month, and a Year, that is Three Hundred Ninety six years, and
the passing away of this VVoe, ver 14. is immediately consequential to the
rising of the Witnesses. I do not enlarge upon periods of Time: 1. Being not
useful in Popular Sermons. 2. Because a Piece of great Pains is to be Published
on them quickly.

The third Two are two States, the State of the Witnesses before Death, and
after the Resurrection Christ's Witnesses appear in this state like Joshua in
filthy Garments, but in the future with a fair Mitre on his Head, and change of
Raiment, Zech. 3. They are here in Dust and Ashes, hereafter in Heaven and
Paradise; here in Sackcloth, there in Glory. This Two admits of a subdivision
into Four. 1. The state of Sackcloth. 2. The state of Death. 3. The state of
Resurrection to Life. The 4. Of Ascension to Heaven: All which I shall only
explain by some Doctrinal Propositions.

The First state is contained in the third, fourth, fifth and sixth Verses;
from which I observe,

1. Prophecy he gives Power.

2. God does not only foreknow but determine the Times of every State. For
1260 years the terrible Beast with his Ten Horns, Blasphemous Mouth, and Train
of Gentiles, cannot stop their Mouth from Prophesying, nor can they or all
their Friends, or their Interest in Heaven, change their Raiment, they shall
Prophecy 1260 years, and they shall Prophecy in Sackcloth. Acts 17.26. He
has determined the Times before appointed.

3. Prodigality in Protestants before the Resurrection, is an Heinous Crime. 1.
It is an attempt against Providence; God says ye shall not get out of a
Sackcloth condition, but you will try it, if by any means Money can be had,
therefore God looses the Beasts Chain to Rob them of it; as a Priest told a
French Lady, This Persecution is to Humble your Pride, but the next Judgment
will utterly ruin Us. 2. It is a shameless Breach of Divine Precept, 1 Timothy
2.9. Modesty and Cheapness are the two measures for Furniture and Apparel. 3.
It is out of Fashion, Unseasonable. There are two Rules to know what is
seasonable by, the one from Heaven, who makes all things Beautiful in their
Season, and appoints the Brides Ornaments, and the Sufferers Sackcloth, the
Times to mourn, and to rejoice. The other from Hell, Ephesians. 2.2. that is, to
follow the Course of the World, and be like my Neighbors. Now the time of the
Worlds Rejoicing and Feasting is the time of the Saints Death and Suffering,
ver. 8, 9. And e contra, the Saints take their Fashion and Figure (...) from
Gods Providential dealing with them. When our Husband puts a Bill of Divorce in
our Hands, and our Father threatens to disinherit us. When the Spirit of the
Lord has forsaken our Assemblies, and the Ministration of the Gospel become a
Savor of Death, shall we be pleasant and merry, and put on fine Attire, when
Antichrist prevails, and the Interest of our Lord seems to lose ground? Isa.
5.12. and 22.12. When the Lord calls to weeping and girding with Sackcloth,
shall we not regard the operation of his Hands?

4. It is unsuitable to our Brethren in a Day of Affliction: God leaves some
rich, to relieve them that are poor: 1 Timothy 6.17. And to be rich in good Works:
But how many, as the rich Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.2. rather shame them that have
not, than relieve them. The Pomp and Splendour of some Men in their Stately
Palaces, vast Revenues, Epicurean Tables, Lordly Trains and Attendants, without
remembering Joseph's Afflictions, is too sad a Witness against their
Protestantship.

Prop. 4. Romans 11.17. Christ is the Root of the Olive Tree, the Church is a
wild Branch engrafted. Hear her own Confession, Hos. 14.8. I am like the green
Fir Tree, fruitless by Nature: But Christ answers, From me is thy Fruit sound.

Prop. 5. Monstra Poenarum: God by a Visible Hand writes Mean Tekel on their
dying Carcasses. 1. If any Man hurt, great or small. If he 2. Will, when the
Power is restrained, if the Enmity remain. 3. Killed, Violence shall be
visible. 4. There is a Necessity of it, He must. All Necessity of it with God
is only a Decency, Heb. 2. It became him to make the Captain of our Salvation a
complete Sufferer. 5. After this manner, as Elijah did the Captains with their
Fifties, 2 Kings 1. And as the Earth opened and devoured Corah, Dathan and
Abiram, Numb. 16.30. so an Earthquake, ver. 13. shall devour them. Instances of
this are many. Charles the V. the first Persecutor after the Solemn assuming
that Name, died like Dioclesian. Philip the II. of Spain, the next great
Pushing Horn, set up the Inquisition, for^d the Armado, made it his Business to
root out the Reformation, was made a remarkable Spectacle of Divine
Displeasure: He was tormented two Years with Anguish and Pain in his Bowels,
and the no less loathsome and stinking Disease of Vermin crawling on him and
from him, than painful. His Country remains a Monument of the Divine Stroke in
it is Weakness unto this Day. Some complain of the want of an Historia
Nemeseos, a well-attested Account how evil has hunted the violent man to
overthrow him, Psalm. 140.11. But it is sure there is no want of matter for such
a History; for fewer Ringleaders of Persecution have escaped, than those who
have suffered, and might deservedly be Chronicled in Tabulis Parcarum. But
there is a greater Difficulty to find certain Rules of Distinction between such
Judiciary Punishments and Common Evils. I shall give a few. 1st. When the
Punishment is a Pourtraicture of the Sin, as Absalom's Incest was of David's
Adultery; and as the Dogs licking Jezabel's Blood, was of her causing Naboth's
Blood to be shed, and licked by Dogs. Isa. 33.1. When thou shall cease to spoil
thou shall be spoiled. When a Person triumphs over another's Distress, and is
smitten with the same, then the Judgment carries the Signature of the Sin, and
the Rod has an audible Voice. 2ly. When Judgments surprises the Sinner in the
Act, as it did Herod and Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.31. Acts 12.23. God executes
Sentence against an evil Work speedily, for Patterns to prevent others, Eccles.
8.11. 3ly. When the Crimes are such, as God has not only threatened Death
against, but Judiciary Death, 1 Timothy 5.4. Some Men's Sins are open before hand,
going before to Judgment: Such an one is Persecution, especially in them who
take no warning from other Men's Falls, Psalm. 10.5. His ways are always
grievous, thy Judgments are out of his sight. Jer. 2.3. All that devour him
shall offend, for mine Eyes are upon him, says the Lord. 4ly. All National or
Universal Judgments; though little in degree, they are Penal Signs of his
Displeasure; such as Famine, Sword and Plague. 5ly. When Scripture has foretold
the Judgment, as here in the Text, the Prophecy and Fulfillment make two
sufficient Witnesses. 6ly. So does the Person and the Judgment, Job 34.26. He
strikes them as wicked Men in the open sight of others, Luke 13.1. 7ly. When
many of a Company, as Four or Five of Twelve or Twenty that have been Social
Assistants of a Murder. 8ly. When the Sin lies in the Mean, and the Punishment
in the End: Unjust Means for Honor or Riches cursed with Poverty and Contempt.

Prop. Moses and Elias work the Miracles referred to in the Text; and no less
Influence has the Prayers of Saints to the Plagues Symbolized by them, though
Second Causes are more visible in producing the former Effects. The Fire,
Thundering and Lightning that brought forth the Trumpets, came out of the same
Censer from which the Saints Prayers did ascend, Rev. 8.5. So all the shutting
up of Blessings from Heaven, and turning the Benefits upon Earth into Curses;
yea, all the Plagues that fall on Babylon, comes from their Prayers. The Second
State is that of their Death, contained in other Four Verses, 7, 8, 9, 10,
which I shall sum up in Five Propositions.

Prop. 1. Roman Empire under it is last Form of Government, viz. As it is
divided in Ten several Kingdoms: For, 1. That the Four first Beasts in Daniel
signify the Four Monarchies and the Fourth Beast, the Roman Empire is an
undoubted Axiom. 2. That the Beast in the Revelation is the same with Daniel's
Fourth, is sufficiently evident. First, The Time and Duration is the same,
Times, Time, and Half a Time. Secondly, From the End thereof at the Beginning
of Christ's Kingdom. Thirdly, From the Form thereof, 10 Horns or Dominions, to
no other Kingdom in the the World can these three Characters agree. 3ly, The
constant Form under which this Book considers the Beast as it is formal Object,
is Ten Horns, Rev. 17.11, 13. and 13.1.

Prop. 2. There is necessarily supposed some great Defection and Backsliding of
the Protestants or Witesses, after their begun public Testimony before their
Death. For, 1. Sin must always go before Punishment: Though this Death is
brought for other Ends than mere punishing, yet there is no place for
Punishment where Sin does not precede. 2. Their great Interest in Heaven for
plaguing the Earth as often as they will, is supposed lost, when they fall in
War before their Enemies. 3. The Threatening or Warning given in the 9th and
10th Verses of the 14th Chapter, implies a Danger of Apostasy. Hence the very
Nature of the Sin is pointed at, viz. A returning to Babylon, and re-conforming
to her in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, Frame of Spirit, Life and
Conversation, with Politic Interest and Ends, which some think make the Number
of the Beast's Name, that is, have another Name, but may be numbered under that.

Prop. 3. A providential Work of Reformation meets with many Rubbs and
Difficulties in the way: when the Cause of Truth and Godliness does thrive and
prosper apace, of a sudden it is often blasted, some surprising adverse Wind
arises in it is Face. The Children of Israel must take many a backward turn in
the Wilderness after they are come to the Borders of Canaan; and the People of
Israel are longer in building the Second Temple than they were in Captivity: So
here the Witnesses after their great Interest in Heaven, and prosperous
Fightings with their Adversaries, are suddenly conquered, and killed, and
thrown in the open Streets. The first preaching of the Gospel met with no
greater Opposition than the Reformation has done. If we consider the Power of
the Spanish Emperor, the Author of the sad Overthrow of the Protestant
Patriots, the Duke of Saxony, and the Landgrave of Hesse, etc. the Authority of
a Council, viz. Trent, a subtle Dividing Interim, a horrid and cruel
Inquisition, a bloody French Massacre, the Succession of a Popish Queen Mary in
the room of a Protestant King, a formidable Catholic League to root out
Protestants, a Division among the Ministers of the Reformation, and a Party
arising with that Name, that were a Scandal and Reproach to the whole; and
another Party Apostatizing, and saying, Let us return to Egypt again.

Prop. 4. That the time of the War, and being Killed, is Extrinsick and
antecedent to the Three Days and a Half, and therefore might justly have all
the Sufferings and Persecutions of Protestants referred to it.

Prop. 5. The State of our Lord's Humiliatson and Suffering is an exact Pattern
of this Death-state of the Witnesses, where also our Lord was Crucified: 1. In
his preaching, or bearing Testimony to the Gospel for three years and a half,
i. e. 1260 Days. 2. At finishing his Testimony he drinks a most bitter Cup. 3.
He is killed, and lies dead threes days and a half. 4. There is a kind of utter
Death upon his Gospel, or Testimony during that time. 5. This was done under
the Romish Jurisdiction, by the same Bestial Power, and in the same Babylonian
Streets. 6. The King of France did kill the Protestants from the very same
Motive and Spring that the Pharisees did persecute Christ, viz. A Jealousy and
Fear of being suspected, as defecting and declining from the Romish Power. 7.
There are some unexpected Friends, a Joseph of Arimathea to take Care of his
Body, as here a mixed Multitude does of the Witnesses: The one to afford Decent,
the other to prevent Undecent Burial. Lastly, There are his Enemies, who cried,
Crucify him, Crucify him; rejoicing and triumphing over his Death at the
Passover; as here the Men of the Earth do, who had seized the Estates of the
Dead Witnesses.

The Two last States of Resurrection and Ascension are contained in two Verses,
viz. 11, 12. From which observe, First, That the Scheme is quite altered. For,
1. They are before Dead, now Alive. 2. Before deserted of the Spirit of God,
now they enjoy it. 3. Before they lie fallen, (...), now they are on their
Feet. 4. Before their Enemies rejoiced and triumphed over them, now they are
afraid of them. 5. Before they are as low as the Dust in the Streets, now they
ascend to Heaven. 6. Before they are contemned as unworthy of Toleration, now
they are in highest Power and Authority. 7. Before they tremble before their
Adversaries, now the Men of the Earth quake before them. 8 Before their Enemies
slay them, now their Enemies are slain, or give Glory to God with them.

Prop. 2. There is a Likeness to Christ in their Exaltation, as was in their
Humiliation. 1. In a Resurrection to Life. 2. In an Ascension to Heaven in a
Cloud. 3. In a terrible attending Earthquake. 4. In a plentiful Effusion of the
Spirit of Life from God. 5. In a constituted Church of Jew and Gentile; but
with this difference, before the Gentile was engrafted upon the Jewish Stock,
now the Jew is added to the Gentile, Romans 11.15. Rev. 16.12. 6. In a Fall of
Gentilifm, or the Roman Power in Religion before their Testimony.

IV. The last two general Heads, are the two Consequents contained in the 13th
and 14th Verses, viz. the Earthquake and the third Woe. 1. For the Earthquake,
it is confequential in Order of Position, but concomitant as to the time. For
the Text says, In the same Hour: Or as other Copies, In the same Da^. But
Grotius and Mead judge it to be an antecedent translating, (...), There had
been a great Earthquake, that is, a great Military or Civil Commotion and
Justling between the Beast and the mixed Multitude, who would not suffer them to
be put in Graves, which became a Mean of their Restoration. The rest of the
Verse favors this Sense, which is set down as a threefold Effect of this
Earthquake. 1. A Tenth part, that is, one Kingdom fallen off from the Romish
Power to the Reformed Religion. 2. A Slaughter of Seven Thousand Names of Men,
or Men of Names, Persons, or Persons in Dignity and Office. 3. The Conviction
or Conversion of all the rest of that Nation from Idolatry to the Worship of
God alone.

It is to the Earthquake that I shall confine the following Discourse, though I
doubt not it is to be understood mystically, 2d S^rn
for a Military or Civil one, an Ecclesiastical or Spiritual one; but there is
probability to include a literal one also, as a prodromical Omen or Monitory
Symbol of the former: For a Literal one did accompany Christ's Resurrection,
which is the Pattern of this. 2. It is an usual Method of Divine Providence to
send such Similary Prodigies before the Fulfillment of Prophesies, whose Terms
are borrowed from them. For Instance, The first Trumpet is said to bring Hail
and Fire mingled with Blood, which is commonly judged to be fulfilled under
Julian and Valence, Anno Christi 364. of whom Nazianzen speaks thus, Valens
insurrexit repent nebula grandine plena: A Cloud full of Hail, as much a Hater
as a Worshipper of Christ: In Persecution next to Julian; not an Apostate, but
yet no better Christian. A Shower of Hail fell in his Reign, whose Drops a
Man's Hand could hardly Grasp; that not only killed Men, but Beasts; and he
himself shed as much Blood of true Christians, being a bitter persecuting
Arrian, as might have been mingled with it: Neither was there wanting Fire by
Thunder, and Lightning, and Earthquakes in the very Letter: For Nice, where the
first Council sat, that pretended an Infallible Authority, was utterly
overthrown by one, and Ten Cities in Crete more, many Cities in Sicily; Land
and Sea changed their Stations, Ships carried to Mountains, and Mountains
dashed against each other. 2. The Second Trumpet mentions a great Mountain
burning with Fire, which some apply to the breaking forth of Vesuvius, which
made most dreadful Havoc in Italy: But if they mean it is first Eruption, that
was sooner, in Titus's time. 3. Hophmannes expounding the Locusts to be the
Jesuits, who received their Universal Diploma from the Pope, 1543. says, They
had Swarms of Locusts for their Forerunners through Germany, Italy, Poland and
Hungary, and left a double Plague behind them of Jesuit and Famine.

The Text thus explained, affords these Four Doctrines. 1. That Earthquakes are
both signal and penal Prodigies. There was a great Earthquake, and the 10th
part of the City fell. 2. Sinners Penalties are Saints Praemiums; the
Punishment of the one is accompanied with Reward to the others; nay, there is
Goodness to both: For though they suffer, their course of Sinning is stopped,
which is the worst Evil of the two. God destroys not for Destruction sake; he
lets not carelessly his Creatures fall out of his careful Hand; but the greater
Good is to the Saint, who enjoys both Deliverance, and serving his God without
Fear; and most Glory to God, who manifests his Holiness by such angry Stamps of
his Foot, such visible Threatenings. This Earthquake shakes Antichrist's
Foundation, and by it the Graves of the Dead Witnesses are opened, and many
Antichristians turned Glorifyers of God. 3. There is reason to expect signal
Earthquakes, though we dare not assert, that this which is come, is one of them
we expect, until we see more of the Event. There are three great Earthquakes
yet to come. 1. This in the Text at the Resurrection of the Witnesses. 2. One
at the opening of the Temple, ver. 19.3. The greatest of all under the 7th
Vial, at the Day of Judgment, Rev. 16. The First of these is very nigh; for
the Prophecy of the Reformation before this Earthquake, is set down in Seven
several Steps; and we can read in History, or see in Providence, six of them
fulfilled. 1. A Public Church built by the Measures of Sacred Scripture, ver.
1. a public Testimony for Christ, and a Prophesying. 2 Churches and Ministers
sill'd with Grace and Gifts, like Candlesticks and Olive Trees. Read Melchior
Adamus, Clark's Lives, and other Accounts of our Famous D vines. 3. A most
wonderful and successful spreading of the Gospel, notwithstanding all
Opposition. Satan was as busy as ever; the Pope and Emperor had neither less
Force and Power, nor less Subtilty and Enmity; nor did they use less Diligence
than the Pagan Emperors and Pharisaical Jews, did against the Preaching of the
Gospel at first. It seems no less a Miracle to see Reformed Churches now, than
Christian Churches then: Their Arms were no other but approving themselves to
Men's Consciences by manifestation of the Truth. What Arms had Luther and
Melancton, or Wickliffe or H^sse? A coming out of Babylon needs Divine Power,
as well as coming out of Egypt. In the very next Parish where I was born, 500
were converted at once. Several of themselves have given me an Account of it.
There was Power to smite the Earth. 4. Remarkable Judgments, that had a Visible
Finger of God in them, destroying the Adversaries of the Gospel, and
Persecutors of it is Witnesses, as we may read in Three King Henry's of France,
and most of the Ringleaders of the French and Irish Massacres, and Netherland
Persecutions; besides Instances at home.

V. A great Decay in Religion, Conviction and Conversion more rare than
formerly: Ministers go forth to their Work as Samson, when his Hair was cut;
Prayer less powerful, and less delighted in; strictness in Holiness, and
Conscientiousness, out of Fashion; Christian Conferences forgotten, Popish
Doctrines and Formal Superstition thought more tolerable: There is a great
Degeneracy and backsliding from the Steps of our Fathers. Pride, Luxury, Vanity
and Formality prevail too much.

VI.Hence the Beast has prevailed in War; God has been chastizing us with
inward Desertion, Leanness to our Souls, Sackcloth on our Loins; though we
endeavor to cover our Shame with outward Fig Leaves, and outward Providential
withdrawing from protecting and prospering us formerly. Our Glory is gone, our
Ark taken, our Arm feeble against the Philistines.

VII.There remains then but one Step more to the Earthquake; and we hope also
that the three days and an half is nigh an end.

Fourthly, The most terrible Judgments, even Earthquakes, have glorious
issues: The rest give Glory to God.

I shall only discourse on the first Doctrine under these Three Heads. 1. In
Explication of the Nature of an Earthquake, and of a Prodigy. 2. In proving
that an Earthquake is a Prodigy. 3. In Improvement of it, according to our old
customary Method of preaching.

The First Head has two Members to be spoken to apart. The Nature of the
Earthquake: And the Nature of a Prodigy.

The First whereof is the Nature of an Earthquake, which I sind as well
explained in 2 Samuel 22.8. and Psalm. 18.8. as in either new or late
Philosophers: Then the Earth shook and trembled, the Foundations of Heaven
moved and shook, because he was wroth: there went up a Smoke out of his
Nostrils, and sire out of his mouth devoured, Goals were kindled by it. In
which Description there is, First, It Is Protcus, or manifold Form and
Appearance. 1. It shook (...) twice. Greek, (...), either by a vibration or
trembling, or an oblique declining, which, Seneca says, of all others is most
dangerous: For if the Inclination should continue one Minute, all Hills,
Mountains, Cities, Castles, must necessarily be tumbled down: And such was that
with us without any Overthrow, by reason of the sudden recovery from the
Inclination. Philosophers call them Epiclintas and Brastas, etc. Secondly, And
trembled. The lord (...) signifies a Bellowing or a Noise; and Bruit, as it is
translated sometimes. These are called (...), A roaring and bell^g of Wind
under ground, it is Passage being strait and various^ (...) Thirdly, Moved,
(...), or removed from one place to another, as the Hill in Queen Elizabeth's
time here in England. So Josephus gives an Account of another next to
Jerusalem, removed into another place. And Amberbachius tells of another in
Helvetia, 1561. Or divides chasmatically the Earth, as when it swallowed up
Corah, etc. Numb. 16.31. And a greater shall be at the Great Day, Zach. 14.4.
when the Mount of Olives shall cleave^ toward East and West.

Secondly, The Subject of this Concussion and Commotion, the Earth, called also
the Foundation of the Heavens, it appearing to us the Center of the whole
Heavens; every thing tending to the Center of it, or from it, according to
their Weight or Levity: And some say, it is not only the Pillar and Atlas of
the Heavens by it is Solidity, but the furnished Table and Store house whence
all it is Luminaries are nourished. God lays the Beams of his Chambers in the
Water; this renders it so wonderful, that the solid Earth, whose Foundations
God lays, that it should not be removed for ever, Psalm. 104. should shake and
tremble. It is the Weight of Sin does it. God would never have altered, or
suffered to be altered, any of his Foundations to the worse, if Man had not
altered his Allegiance. That a most solid Body, 7000 Miles thick, should be
shaken like a Rod, and shattered like a tottering Fence, is a prodigious Work
of God.

Thirdly, There is the supreme and principal Cause, GOD, he was angry, his
Nostrils, his Mouth, (the very Pagans own this) who ascribed sometimes to one
God, sometimes to another. Hence Neptune is called (...), and (...), when they
think the Water is the Mean of it. They who ascribe it to the Fire, call all
second Causes Vuldan's Tools.

Ferrum exercebant vasto Cyalopes in Antro
Brontesque Steropesque and nudils membra Pyrachmon:
They who ascribe it to the Wind, call Aeolus it is Author.

Aeolus hic Clauso ventorum carcere regnat. It is a great Argument against
Seneca's Christianity, and true Piety too, that discoursing of Earthquakes, he
says, Illud quoque proderit presumere animo nihil horum Deos facere nec ira
numinum, aut Coelum aut Terram concuti: It will be our certain Advantage to
take it for granted, that God is neither Author of Thunder nor Earthquakes. But
we have a more sure Word of Prophecy, that says, God is he who removes the
Mountains and they know not; who overturneth them in his Anger, who shakes the
Earth out of her place, and the Pillans thereof tremble, Job. 9.6. Also Nahum.
1.5. The Mountains quake at him, and the Hills melt, and the Rocks are thrown
down by him. So Psalm. 97.3. etc. Reason also assents, and says Amen to
Scripture. 1. From it is own Weariedness in the greatest Philosphers, in it is
searching after another Cause. The usual Return is, Non est inventus. We do not
know, after all Seneca's great Search in his Old Age, and second Attempt upon
the Earthquake in Campania. He brings forth Six May Be's at a Breath. 2. From
the greatness of the Effect? A moving of that which has the whole Heavens
pressing it down, and 3000 Miles of Foundation solid as Marble to support it;
and the greatness of God's Concern in the various Effects of its 3. From the
Irregularness as to Time, Place, Manner or Mean. We must either put it under
the Conduct of Divine Wisdom, or set up Fortune or Chance for another God.

A gradual Preparation of the very Entrails of the Earth for the Conflagration
of the Earth at the great Day, does not prove the Orderliness of the Progress:
For when the Caverns are widened by Earthquake, it is done violently and not
gradually. So when burning Mountains, Sulphurous Lakes, Oleous Springs take
their Rise, it is not by little and little, but a powerful Violence. 4. It is
such an immediate and extraordinary Judgment or Mercy, that Reason presently
attributes it to the Sovereign Distributer of Rewards and Punishments. Hence he
sets forth himself in his Word as an immediate Disposer of all those Meteors,
wherein the Comfort or Ruin of our Life very immediately does consist. He is
the Father of the Rain, and he begets the Drops of Dew: The Clouds are his
Bottles, at his Voice they are open: He has Treasures for Snow and Hail; he
parts the Light, and scatters the Wind, Job 38. Psalm. 147. He has his Coals and
Furnaces in the Earth, Psalm. 18.8.

3ly. The Means by which he does it, Smoke, Fire and Coals. If according to our
new Philosophers, Scripture speaks in things Natural, according to the commonly
received Opinion of that Time it was wrote in, they lose the Honor of New
Invention; who say the Cause is an Exhalation, or a Wind in some Cavern of the
Earth, penned up and rarified by the heat of some Sulphurous or combustible
matter kindled by accidental Motion, which they illustrate by their Copper
Globe, for this is very Old Philosophy.

But no doubt the Second Causes or Means are as various as the Forms or
Effects, though the Variety of the one does not always flow from the Variety of
the other. 1. Some [as Thales] think the Earth a great Ship sailing in a vast
unknown Ocean, either meeting with a cross Wave, is disturbed in it is easy
Motion, or by it is Weight so presses down the Water, that it pierces through
it is Chinks and Crevices, and disturbs the Burden or Loading of the Vessel;
yea, breaks forth into great Rivers from the very tops of Mountains. 2. Others
impute it only to that last Branch, viz. The Rivers and Lakes within the Body
of the Earth, from whence our Rivers above Ground rise. These Rivers sometimes
leaving their sormer Channel, or over-swell'd with Water, break down their
Banks, which produces a Motion in the Earth above them. 3. Some Copernicans,
and others also, think the Earth a great Animal, and that an Earthquake is a
Fever, or a Fit of Vapors by which it is distempered, which may be allowed
metaphorically, Romans 8.22. The whole Creation roaneth and travaileth in pain
waiting for the Manifestation of the Sons of God. So it is like a Pang of a
Travailing Woman, in order to the Birth of a New Earth, 2 Pet. 3.4. Straton and
his Followers call it a Fight between Cold and Heat. Hence they are frequent in
Spring and Autumn, at which time these Particles pass by one another on the
outward Crust of the Earth. 5. Very many call it a Wind penned up. And
Histories record Wind to have blown out of it is Eruptions and Gulphs that it
has made for several Days, as it did at Chalcis, according to Seneca out of
Asclepeadotus, and also at Herculea in Pontus. Moreover, great Winds are
frequent after, though we know not their Passage, and a Calmness usually
precedes them: Which is a very plausible Account, adding Heat to rarifie the
Vapor: Psalm. 135.7. He causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the
Earth, he makes Lightnings for the Rain, he brings the Wind out of his
Treasuries. And this he does in the Seas, and all deep places, Job 38.24. By
what way is the Light parted which scatters the East Wind upon the Earth. 6.
Some impute it to Old Age, Terra superna tremit magnis concussa rui nis
Subter ubi ingentes speluncas subruit Aetas.
As in old Buildings, when there is more Weight above than Strength in the
Pillars below, occasions either a rebounding Fall from some Rock, or some
surrounding trembling from a Lake. 7. Some to a great Mass of Chemical Spirits
fettered in some mashy matter like the Distillers Tunn, or in some close Cave
where the Pores are too narrow for the Particles. 8. Vanhelmont refers it to an
Eccentration of the Earth; but then all Earthquakes should be universal, which
is both contrary to Scripture and Experience.

The Effect is solvable by most of these as Means, by none as total Cause,
especially universal ones. For if the Caverns be but half a Mile or a Mile
deep, an Earthquake of an Hundred Miles is impossible without vast Eruptions.
2. The removing of Mountains leisurely for two or three Miles space. The
contemplative Poieret says, the Study of Natural Causes, without their
relations to to their Creator, 1st. As their Author, 2ly. As their Pattern,
3ly. As their Governor, makes but half Philosphers. And we find the end of
Scripture treating of these, is to make us see a God in them and from them:
Psalm. 29.6. He makes Lebanon and Syrion to skip as a young Unicorn. And Job
37. speaking of the Fiery Meteors, says, They are turned round about by his
Councils, that they may do what soever he commands them upon the Face of the
World, or in the Earth: He causes it to come, whether for Correction or for
Mercy, etc.

4ly: The moving Cause, which supposes the demeriting, because he was wroth,
who can be angry at nothing but Sin; Isa. 13.13. I will shake the Heavens, and
the Earth shall remove out of it is place, in the Wrath of the Lord of Hosts,
and in the day of his fierce Anger; and it shall be as the chased Roc. Our Sin,
and God's Anger for it, is a Burden the Earth cannot bear. Hence are it is
Groans and Travailings in Pam: Man is punished in the Earth, as a King in his
Subjects, or a rich Man in his Poslessions.

Three remarkable Degrees of Punishment the Earth undergoes for Man's Sin. 1.
The Curse in Adam's time, Genesis 3.17. Cursed is the ground for thy sake, which
we may compare with the 7th Verse. The Natively consequential Punishment on
Man's Body, they both were naked: The nearness of the Union and Relation
between his Soul and his Body, brought the Curse there before the other, and
without a positive Infliction. There was a capacity of ever-living from that
harmonious Constitution in his Body; but his Constitution is now mortal, not
only a Disease, as Physicians say, but Mortality it self is a preternatural
state: For Perpetuity is a Print, or a stroke of Divine Image that became him
to put on the Substance of every Creature he made: For he cannot deny himself
in his Works or in his Word: All he does must have a fittedness to represent
him; and what became him to make, became him to continue: And Aeviternity of
Creatures is the Image of the Eternity of God. Death was a conditional
Threathing; Life was an absolute natural Promise. Man had nothing to do but to
continue yielding himself to that Inclination that was from the Image of God in
him, without attempting to do any thing of himself, by which he might be
something by himself. Self denial, which is a Negative Term, was the principal
Duty. 2. There could not but arise from this Immortal Constitution an
unspeakable Beauty, The most fresh, healthy, young and vigorous Constitution is
like wrinkled old Age, in comparison of an Immortal one: Old and Young,
Sickness and Health in a Mortal, differs but in Degree; but that is a natural
capacity of ever living. Mortality and Immortality differ like Sin and
Holiness, Death and Life. So much must the greatest Beauty of Mortals sall
short of Eve's.

Secondly, If we take measures of this Beauty from what the meanest Man shall
be when sinless; and the Beauty was a Glory; for our very Bodies shall be
fashioned like to his Glorious Body, and the very reason of it flows from it is
incorruptibleness, 1 Cor. 15.32. The first Property being always the eminent
and emanent Cause of the rest. Adam's Immortality was a proper Incorruptibility.

Thirdly, If we compare this Beauty with the remaining Relicts in Plants and
Fowls (for we cannot suppose the Curse to sall so heavy, or to last so long
upon any body, as the Body of Man; for their union with the Soul is nighest,
and the Property and Dominion greatest) it is a kind of Covering; for such are
their Feathers and Flowers that excells all the Glorious Ornaments that a
Solomon could array himself with, by reason of their Nativeness, flowing from
the Constitution of the Creature it adorns, Matthew. 6.28, 29, 30.

The Privation of this Covering, that did consist of Glory, or radiant Beams of
Light, was literally Adam's and Eve's Nakedness, which did flow from the Souls
Nakedness of the Objective Image of God, and the inherent qualitative Image
that did flow from it: For Man in Regeneration is in part restored to what he
was when sinless; and this is a changing into a glorious Image, by beholding
the glorious Image of the Lord in the Glass of our Souls, formed there by the
Spirit of the Lord.

The Curse of Barrenness upon the Earth must be some way proportioned unto
this. An inward change of the Contexture and Particles, at least of the Surface
and Crust of the Earth above the great Deep, which would necessarily cause an
Alteration in the Air, the Constitution thereof being ruled by the Vapors and
Exhalations of the Earth, if it reached no higher: We may see this from the
vast difference of Soils, their Barrenness or Fertility arises from the
Disposition of the Earth, and Position of the Sun.

The Second Degree of Punishment was in Noah's time, by the great Deluge, where
there was made not only a Change of Particles, or composure of the Earth, but
the whole uppermost Sphere or Crust broke in pieces, and laid like an Heap of
Rubbish or Shipwreck; and from this Constitution of it arises it is fitness for
Conflagration, it is Liableness to Earthquakes, Thunder and Lightning, Storms
and Tempests: So that Philosophers ought not only to study it is relation to
God, but it is relation to Sin and Punishment, it is constant or natural
Constitution is preternatural, like a crazy Person Hectic and Consumptive.

The Third Punishment is yet to come, when it shall be wholly burnt up by Fire,
2 Pet. 3. And if we may take Measures of what it was before Sin, from what it
will be after, it must certainly have been a glorious Globe: When the most
solid Gold shall be transparent, and the whole new Earth, the Foundation of the
New Jerusalem, more precious and Diaphanous than the most precious Stones; some
Rudera of this appears in the Chrystalline Stones, and other things under
Ground; and that vast Fire in which all will be burnt up, has an evident
Virtue to render it vitrial: So much for the Nature of an Earthquake.

The Second thing to be explained, is, the Nature of a Prodigy, which is
superior to a Sign, and is a Miracles Fellow. These three explain one another,
(...), a Sign, (...), a Prodigy, (...), a Miracle, Heb. 2.4. Signs, Wonders,
and diverse Miracles. 1. Signs are Naral, as Genesis 1.14. We know how long to
Night or Darkness by the place we see the Sun in, or to Morning by other Stars:
So when Spring and Harvest, etc. When an Eclipse, when the Tides, when
seasonable to Sail, to Fish, to Plow, to Sow, etc. The Lights of Heaven are
given for Signs of these things. So Mat. 16.2. A red Sky is a sign of fair
Weather, because the Sun shining through it, demonstrates it to be thin; but if
the Clouds in our Horizon be black and lowering, implies it to be full of thick
Exhalations, on which the Sun beating and piercing for a whole Day, dissolves
into Wind or Rain. A third Instance is in Luke 12.54. A South Wind is a sign of
Heat, because the Exhalations come from the Torrid Zone, Job 37.27. and the
West rainy, because the more Humid Vapors come from the Sea. This is less
sensible to us, who are surrounded by Sea.

2. There are Signs that signify by Virtue of Institution, as the Bow in the
Cloud, Genesis 9.13. Naturally it signifies a small Shower past or to come; for it
is in a Cloud that in part reflects, and in part is penetrated by the Sun; but
by Divine Institution it signifies the universal absolute Mercy of safety from
a Deluge. Hence Christ is represented, Rev. 4. and 10. with a Rainbow about his
Head.

2ly. On the other Superior Hand stand Miracles, that have God alone for their
Author. Psalm. 72.18. Who only does wondrous things: And 86.10. To which Four
Qualifications are requisite. 1. That the Effect be above the Power of Natural
Causes; though we know not her certain Limits, we know some things to be
certainly beyond her Limits, as raising the Dead. 2. That the Effect be visibly
so, all kind of Juggle or mean of Deception of our Senses be removed, that it
be beyond Dispute to an unprejudiced Mind: The born Blind could say, Know ye
not whence he is, and yet he has opened mine Eyes? 3. Suddenly. It is beyond
Nature's Power to cure of a Fever in an Instant. 4. Perfectly. The Effect must
be complete at once. The Fever may be stopped by Physic, and return again. But a
Miracle cures perfectly.

3ly. Prodigies being in the middle, sometimes seem to partake more of the one
Extreme, sometimes more of the other; sometimes they seem to stand neutral, as
the Rarities of Nature, boiling Springs, flaming Mountains, petrifying Waters,
Ants as big as Oxen, monstrous Births, that are not so much as Signs, but only
fill up their own absolute places, for Nature's Variety or Defect. Hence we may
divide Prodigies into Four kinds.

I. Those that are only nick named so, and owe their High Title unto our Low
Intellects; as, Eclipses, the turning of Men's shadows who pass the Tropic, the
appearance of two or three Suns at once, or of some new Star:

II. There are Prodigies truly preternatural; that is, such as hold of no
steady Causes, nor are produced by any regular Motion, and that seem to require
at least an Angelical Power; as those that the Magicians in Egypt produced, the
Turning of Rods into Serpents, Rivers into Blood, and such Wonders as may be
wrought to deceive. Deuteronomy. 13.2. Rev. 13.13. Such Christ and his Disciples not
only did, but were. Isa. 8.17. I and the Children whom the Lord has given me,
are for Signs and Wonders in Israel. Under this Head may be reckoned spots of
Blood appearing in Leaves of Trees, Stones, Statues.

III. Those that are not only preternatural and significant, but also of a
determinate signification, about which there is a great need of Skill, Prudence
and Prayer, in order to draw positive Conclusions: For the Righteous Man's
Trials look as prodigious, like as the Wicked's penal strokes; and the Wicked's
sudden Prosperity is often very observable. The Earthquake that threatened
Ruin to the Prison, spoke Mercy to the Jailer.

1. In not being over-obstinate Infidels; for by reason of this the Jews
rejected the Messiah, and were rejected by him; they would be satisfied with no
other Prodigy as a mark of his first coming, but such as were to be Fore tokens
of his second coming, to wit, A glorious Appearance of a Man coming from
Heaven, Matthew. 24.29, 30. which, they expected from that Prophecy of him in the
7th of Daniel: And yet such an one as may be would have satisfied them, would
have been far less miraculous than those he wrought.

It is probable that Sign of a Flaming Sword hanging over Jerusalem for a whole
Year together, and the Vision of Chariots, Horsemen, Armies and Arms filling a
vast compass of the Air, was taken for an occasion of their embracing False
Christ's afterward; being a Type of the Son of Man's second coming.

2. We would not be over-obstinate, because God has not said, that he would
reveal no more Oracles, nor work no more Miracles; this Scripture rather seems
to promise some at some extraordinary occasions, Rev. 11.6.

3. We are commanded to take notice of prodigious Appearances, Psalm. 9.16. God
is known by the Judgment which he executes. Psalm. 10.5. It is a mark of the
wicked, that his Judgments are far above out of their sight, and that they
regard not the Oporations of his Hands; Rev. 15.4. All Nations shall worship
before thee, for thy Judgments are made manifest.

Secondly, We ought nor to be over-credulous, since Nature is so full of Power.
1. Matter set on motion by our own Arts, amaze our selves; and not only full of
Power, but full of Rarities; and sometimes Discords, to recommend the Harmony
of the whole: Besides, Satan is not only full of Power, but full of Cunning and
Malice too, and the length of his Chain we know not; we see at once his Power
over the Sabeans and Chaldeans, and over the Wind too, Job 1. and over the Body
of Man, to smite it with Diseases; and over the Soul of Man, to tempt it with
Prodigies and Wonders, Deuteronomy. 1 8.2. 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. We find the Nature of our own
Minds as weak in discerning, as their Power is to give occasion of mistake. Our
very natural Principles are sullied, and our Ratiocination slow and uncertain.
Our Wills incline more to Curiosity than useful Knowledge, and to Superstition
more than to Religion (...). Many actually have been deceived with Sophistical
Wonders, pretended Prophesies, inexplicable Impressions, natural E^usiasms,
turgent Imaginations, Astrological Conclusions, melancholy Dreams and wanton
Fancies.

I shall therefore lay down these Prudential Rules about them.

I. That Judiciary Astrology about Men's Lots and Future Contingents is a mere
Lie. Isa. 44.25. God frustrateth the token of the Liars, and makes the
Diviners mad. Jer. 17.9. The Lord forbids us to hearken to these Prophets and
Diviners.

II. We find the Lots of Men as different as Heaven and Hell, who have been
born at the same place, in the same time, and from the same Womb.

III. Where there is no certain Premises, there can be no sure Conclusion.
Astrologers can neither produce History for unerring Observations, nor can they
produce rational Axioms, how a Body infallibly should govern a Spirit: The very
Government it self is unnatural; but Rules of the constant Method are
impossible.

IV. Where many more as powerful Causes concur, the Effect can never be
concluded from one. 1. Free Grace. 2. Free Will. 3. The Constitution of the
Body or Csimate.

V. The greatest of the Art never drew One true Conclusion of Twenty.

2. Eventually. Accidental Omens are as false as the other, to wit, A stumbling
in the Threshold, a Hare crossing one's way; it neither becomes a prudent Man
to mind, or take pains to refute, were it not for the Sin that ignorant
supestitious Minds may contract by their Use, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. The Instances in
Scripture that are brought for a Proof for them, are, 1. Personal, not standing
Rules instituted for a common Standard to judge by. 2. They are begged, as
Signs from God to determine them about some extraordinary Service, as
Jonathan's Sign of the Philistines, bidding him come up, 1 Samuel 14.10. Or
Eliezers Sign of the Woman that should be Isaac's Wife. 3. The being of them
lay doubtful, whether God would condescend to grant or no. 4. They were often
miraculous, as Gideons Fleece, Josh. 6.7. There is a secret Touchstone in a
prudent sagacious Christian to discern, between a Divine Lot and a natural
Accident, or Satanical Delusion. 1. From the deepness of Impression it makes,
the Power and Influence it has on them for attempting or persevering in a known
Duty or good Cause. 2. The momentuousness of the matter, and greatness of the
Concern. 3. The tendency it has to Piety, or other Circumstances, as may be
observed in many Instances. (1) The Evening Lesson after the Earthquake, being
a providential Exposition of it, Jonah 3. Within Forty Days and Nineve shall be
destroyed. I hope as sure an Interpreter of the Event, Nineve was not
destroyed, as of the Duty; Ninove repented; it was an Accident or Lot to the
Composers of the Book, but none to the Disposers of Lots. Clodov^us thought it
a Divine Encouragement to War, when he heard they sung at Church, Psalm. 144. He
teaches my Fingers to fight. The Consul of Roscius, a Persecutor, convinced on
his Deathbed by a Divine Sortilegium that fell on Psalm. 32.2. and made him
confess his Sin. M^ldacion foretold the Recovery of his only Child from Psalm.
103.3.

3. The Rarities of Nature, or ruch new things as natural Reasons may be
clearly given for, are not to be concluded Prodigies.

4. There can be no Danger, but rather a Duty of suffering every extraordinary
Appearance to awaken us to what Duties we knew before: For that which is the
End of common Providence, must be much more the end of extraordinary. Beside,
the very Word Mophath signifies a powerful Persuasive; and in this it differs
both from Signs and Miracles; that Signs are instructive Prodigies, to excite
and stir up to what we know; Miracles are for certain Confirmations of
particular Truths, Persons Offices before manifested; but Prodigies are chiefly
designed against Security, and for making Man humble under the Sense of new
Impressions of God from new Appearances. Isa. 48.6, 7. They are created new,
lest thou should say, Behold, I knew them. Eccles. 8.17. Though a wise Man
think to know it, y^ shall he not be able to find it. So though it owe the Name
of Prodigy merely to our Ignorance, yet this general moral use of it is our
Duty. Joel 2.30. I will show Wonders in the Heaven and in the Earth, etc.
before the great and terrible Day of the Lord; and whosoever shall call on his
Name shall be saved. So whatever great Day such Appearances impress on us, if
they bring us to call on the Name of the Lord, the Effect is saving. Suppose
they were done by Satan permitted to try us, as in Job's Case, when they bring
forth this effect upon us, Satan is disappointed of his Designs, Deuteronomy. 13.3.
Moreover, such kind of Appearances being of a threatening Nature, are of
themselves more indefinite and conditional; so that such an Improvement removes
their relative signalness.

5. We are to reckon them Prodigies determined, 1st. When we see the Event
correspond, and the likeness between them, an Expository Gloss. 2ly. When
Scripture has mixed a Prophecy and Prodigy together, and limited the Time
either by Quantity or Characters, as the Destruction of Jerusalem, the Day of
Judgment, and this in the Text, then we may determine the Event when the
Prodigy appears, Rev. 15.4. 3ly. When the Prodigy is very great: As the Text
says, a great Earthquake, Rev. 16. the greatest that ever was, and the Concern
very great which is signified: For God sends no extraordinary Ambassadors on
mean sleeveless Errands: Greatness and Goodness are the Standard of Divine
Effects. We have very good Testimony that a Herald from Heaven came to King
James the Fourth of Scotland, to forbid him the intended War against the
English in the midst of his Court: On this the Nations Happiness depended. 4ly.
When Prodigies are crowded together in multitudes, as was before Jerusalem's
Destruction, Luke 21. and before the Division of the Empire into Ten Kingdoms,
there were frequent Earthquakes and Eclipses, Bearded Comets, Armies appearing
in Fiery Figures, with Bloody Rivers, wild Beasts coming tamely into Crowds of
People. 5ly. When the same Prodigy is often repeated, which has very evident
Signatures of the Effect, as Luke 20.30. Earthquakes in diverse places: Or if it
has been an usual Presage of like Judgments. 6. If it be a Foretaste of
Judgment upon a whole Nation, that are afterward destroyed by a fuller measure
of the same Cup, Matthew. 24.7. Those Prodigies before Jerusalem's Destruction,
are called the Beginning of Sorrows, which are completed Luke 22.26. at the
Destruction of the World. Lastly, Where ever we are sure to make Scripture the
other Witness, there we may be sure to determine the Event, and be among the
Wise Men that can discern the Signs of the times, Matthew. 16.3.

There are a Fourth kind of Prodigies that are Judicial, being extraordinary
Punishments in themselves: But all Temporal Judgments being Signs and Warnings
to others that are guilty of the like Crimes, of the like Punishments, and to
themselves of greater Judgments to come, Luke 13. John 5.14. Thou art made
whole, sin no more, etc. They differ only from signal Prodigies in their
absolute not formal and relative Nature.

The Third Head was the Proof of an Earthquakes being a Prodigy. 1. It is
evident from it is being the Prince of Prodigies. A Prodigy is (...), a terrible
thing. There is nothing terrible, if this be not. The sad and lowering Face of
the Heavens gives some warning of Thunder, but Death's the first Presage of
Earthquakes. Dat signum ruina. From Storms in the Air, or Tempests in the Sea,
we fly to the Land or Houses: But if the Earth it self fail us, and the
Foundations of the Houses shake, whither can we then run for Refuge? Riches or
Power, Strength or Wit, can save from many Dangers, but none of them prevalent
against an Earthquake. A Cave in the Earth will save from Thunder, the Walls
and Coverings of our Houses can save from Wind and Hail; but all these Shelters
are dissipate, when the Earth is dissolved. We can change the Air in time of a
Plague, and the Country in time of Famine; but the gaping Earth stops all
Passage. Sword and Sickness have laid some Cities waste, but they never
overthrew in a moment, and buried them under ground. When the devouring Fire
burns up Cities, we can leave our Houses to the Flame; but here is neither time
for Flight, nor place for Safety. The greatest of Moralists have made it their
business to look out for some Comfort against this Evil that admits of no
Remedy; but all the Light of Nature in it is highest Improvement has found
none. They tell us, Since we must die, it is great to die by a great Cause.

Si cadendum est mihi Coelo cecidisse velim. They tell us, it is great to die
revenged of our Adversaries; since the Earth destroys us, the Earth perishes
with us. They tell us, We ought not fear, where there can be no help; that is,
we should despair, that we may not fear. They tell us, Why should we fear that
so much, since far less things may destroy us. But what Comfort is there in
hearing of the Increase of our Enemies? All the Fruit of their Consolations is,
to drive us into Despair, or to harden us; but neither of these can save us. Si
fractus illabatur orbis impavidum ferient ruinae: The Secure is as soon
destroyed as the Fearful. This discovers the Terribleness of this Prodigy, that
nothing can comfort under it, or support against it, but what is able to
support against the Gates of Hell: There is no remedy to the Men of the Earth,
when the Earth fails. Heaven is only a place of Refuge, when the Earth shakes:
That is the only City, whose Foundations never move. The Gospel that brought to
light a Savior from Sin, has brought to light Salvation from an Earthquake.
This is sufficient Evidence that the Earthquake is a Prodigy, since it is an
incomparable one. What are Visions in the Air, or Spectrums on the Earth? What
are monstrous Births, or fortuitous Omens? What are Blazing Stars or Bearded
Comets? Nay, Thunder and Lightning are nothing to this. The very Judgments
other Prodigies prognosticate, are not so bad as this Prodigy. Some Men have
hardened themselves, or have been hearte^ against the worst of others; but the
Prince and the Peasant, the Young and the Old, the Man and the Beast, the
Atheist and the Christian, all are afraid of this; even a Moses did exceedingly
fear and shake. How can an earthy Man but tremble, when his Earth shakes?

2 Argument. Is from the Multitude, Variety and Dreadfulness of it is Effects.
It was one of these Prodigies by which the Apostles were confirmed in their
Work and Office, Acts 4.31. and by which others were persuaded of the
Divineness of their Call and Doctrine, Acts 16.26. To these the Apostle appeals
to, 2 Cor. 12.12. 2ly. The Destruction of Men and Beasts, Villages, Cities,
Countries, which is attested by all Historians. Herodotus, Thucydides, Livius,
each asserting none so terrible as that they described. 3ly. Islands turned
into Sea, and Sea into Islands; as Greenland, Sicily, some say America and
Britain too. Seneca mentions Tharsia or Thea, which in his Day the Mariners saw
rise out of the Sea: And several Historians mention Islands we cannot now find.
4ly. Burning Mountains, as Aetna, Strumbolo, and many others. Vesuvius is
sufficiently attested by Historians to have risen by an Earthquake in Titus's
Time, after the Destruction of Jerusalem. 5ly. The Convulsion, Collision and
Transportation of Mountains in 1584. in the Dominion of Bernat there was a
Mountain removed over several other Mountains, and covered a whole Village of
90 Families, excepting the half of one House, where the Master of the Family,
Wife and Children were at Prayers. Pliny 2d. reports, in the last Year of Nero,
two Mountains to have rushed so against one another with such great Noise and
Force, that they tore in pieces all the Villages between them. 6ly. Famins,
Pestilences, and other Diseases, the Springs and Airs being infected with its
Exhalations. 7ly. The change of the Channels of Rivers, the turning the Sea
into Land, and Land into Sea, as was by the dreadful Earthquake under Valence,
by which the Plowed Land became Navigable, and the Ships were found on dry Land
Lastly, It was the great second Cause by which Korah, Dathan and Abiram were
swallowed up, by which the Mountain of Sinai did shake, by which the great Deep
was broke up at the Deluge, and by which the Earth shall be torn in pieces at
the Day of Judgment, Zech. 14.4.

The Third Argument is from Scripture, that testifies Earthquakes to be one of
the greatest Prodigies that ever was, or shall be in the World, whether it
discourses of it Historically, Prophetically or Doctrinally.

1. The great Deluge was by an Earthquake, dividing and breaking asunder the
upper Sphere of the Earth above the Deep, Genesis 7.11. 2. That extraordinary
Visitation of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, when the Earth opened her Mouth and
swallowed them, their Houses, their Goods, and all that appertained to them,
Numb. 16.31. it was done by some Sulphurous Fire under Ground, where God has
his Furnaces as well as his Treasures, Ver. 35. And that is the very Cause of
an Earthquake. Psalm. 18.8. The Earth shook and trembled by devouring Fire, and
Fire was made by God's kindling the Coals in his Anger. 3. An Earthquake bore
no small share of that dreadful and prodigious Appearance on Mount Sinai at the
giving of the Law, the Smoke thereof ascended as the Smoke of a Furnace, and
the whole Mount quaked greatly. 4. It was none of the least of the Miracles
that was wrought in that miraculous Period of Moses. Psalm. 1 14 4. The
Mountains skip like Rams, and the little Hills like Lambs: Tremble thou Earth
at the Presence of the Lord. Psalm. 78.15. He clave the Rocks in the Wilderness.
5. The great Revolutions in David's time had Earthquakes as their Signals, and
as their Causes. Psalm. 18.8. My Cry came before him, then the Earth shock. 6.
In the days of Vzziah there was so famous an one, that gave Birth to a Period,
Amos 1.2. and was a joint Prophet with Amos, of the Judgment, persuing those
Eight Neighboring Nations, as ^e metaphorical Phrases of his Prophecy witness.
I will smite the great House with Breaches, and the little House with Clefts.
God called to contend by Fire, and it devoured the great Deep, and did eat up a
part. He calls for the waters of the Sea, and pours them out on the Face of
the Earth. It Is Terribleness we read in Zech. 14.5. As you fled before the
Earthquake in the Days of Vzziah. 7. Before Christ's Birth in Herod's Reign,
Zonar gives you an Account of an Earthquake in Judea wherein Thirty Thousand
Men perished. But we have aninfallible Historian giving an Account of two, one
at his Death, Matthew. 27.51. and 28.2. another at his Resurrection. To which
also Phlegon gives his Testimony, referring it to the same Year in which the
universal Eclipse of the Sun was: And Didymus, with Twenty Four Greek Doctors
after him, on the 9th of Job, relates that Earthquake to have been Universal;
Mei autem Christi tempore non privatus fuit aliquis terrae-motus sed tota ipsa
terra conquassata est and centro convulsa. This Didymus lived about 380.
Phlegon relates it is Extension to reach Bythinia, where many Houses were shaken
with it. 8. It is prophesied of in Scripture as a Signal of Jerusalem's
Destruction, Matthew. 24. and also of the universal Destruction of the World,
Luke 21.26. Rev. 16.18. There was a great Earthquake, such as was not since Men
were upon the Earth; so myhty an Earthquake, and so great. This being the last
of the last Plagues, must be the Day of Judgment. There are other Prophetical
Periods, as the Sixth Seal, Rev. 6. The Beginning of the Trumpets, Rev. 8. The
opening of the Temple, Rev. 11.18. And this in the Text, The Rise of two
Witnesses, that have Earthquakes for their Forerunners.

The Fourth Argument is from History, wherein sometimes the Terribleness of the
Relation renders the Relators Testimony doubtful. At Venice, in 1342. there was
a very dreadful Earthquake, after which followed such a Plague, that scarce one
of an Hanored who fell sick escaped Death. The Venetians published an Edict,
That whosoever would come and live there with Wife and Children for two Years,
should receive the Privilege of a Citizen.

In 1348. Aventinus, a faithful and diligent Historian, singular for Piety and
Learning, born in 1466. relates this most dismal Story of an Earthquake, whose
extent reached from Constantinople to Hungary and Italy, and it is time endured
for Forty Days; 26 Cities were overthrown by it, Men and Beasts, Walls,
Temples, Castles, Towns were swallowed down at one Mouthful; the Mountains were
torn up by the Roots and thrown on the tops of Cities, or ^thing against one
another, were broken in pieces; Fifty Men, with Women and Beasts, by that
strange Exhalation were congealed and turned into Statues of Salt. Conrades of
Ma^denburgh, a famous Philosopher, and the Chancellor of Austria, attest they
have seen them. In the year 1300, which bagan the Turkish Empire, or the
Ottoman Era, and as interpreters, ^y, the 6th Trumpet, ^na in the Life of
Boniface the Eighth, relates such an Earthquake at Rome, as the like never was
before; besides the Appearance of a Comet, both Presages of a future Calamity.
In Constantine the Great's Time, when the great Revolution was of a Pagan
Empire into a Christian, commonly interpreted the Sixth Vial, great Erthquakes
did proceed, by one whereof 13 Cities in Campania were overthrown. About 450,
under Valentinian the Third, when the Empire put on it is last and Ten Horned
Form, which is by some interpreted the beginning of the Trumpets, Prodigies, of
Comets, Eclipses, Fiery Visions in the Air, were frequent, among which
Earthquakes were numerous. For Dyrrachim in Dalmatia perished by one;
Neocaesaria was swallowed up, the Island Rhodes dreadfully shaken, Twelve
Cities in Campania overthrown, Rome trembled three days.

About the beginning of the Reformation there were very many Prodigies: Yea, in
that very Year the Name Protestant or Witness was assumed by the Reformers,
both Sabbelicus and Jovius relate a most dreadful Earthquake in Portugal,
wherein Lisbon was terribly shaken, 1500 Houses ruined, all the Temples turned
into Rubbish, the Ships swallowed up in the Ocean, the River thrown out of his
Channel, and the very same Earthquake brought no less Destruction to the
Netherlands, causing great Inundations of the Sea: It lasted about 7 or 8 Days,
usually returning about 7 or 8 times in a Day. And the Year before, 1569. there
was one not much less in Ferraria, that had been lately given to the Pope,
wherein there was vast loss of Land, Men and Goods, it returned 140 times in 40
hours, and was again repeated after two Months.

Providence is the Pagan's Bible. A great Divine calls it, The first Edition of
the Covenant of Grace: But it is surely not to be neglected by us. He that
studies not the Text well, can never be a great Divine by reading Commentaries
and Systems. The Works of God are our Text; he is an Atheist that does not
regard the Operation of his Hand; the Word of God is a Commentary on it.
Whether we read it, or Pagans own Opinions over it, we shall still conclude an
Earthquake a Prodigy. Petrusloycks relates one in the Ninth Year of Constantine
Copronymus, by which in Syria some Cities were exterminated, others much
damaged, others carried 6 or 7 Miles safe from the Mountains to the Plains with
their Walls, Houses and Inhabitants entire.

Can we impute this to Fortune or Chance, or disown such a distinguishing
Providence in the Destruction or Safety of Men? In 1509. there was one at
Constantinople, wherein 13000 Men perished: Many of the Turkish Moschets fell
to the Ground, but the Christian Temple stood firm. Was there no Evidence given
to God's Care of, and Love to the Christian Religion by this? Had it not a
speaking Voice that Christ, not Mahomet, was Governor of the World, and could
save or destroy.

The last proposed Head of this Discourse was the Improvement of it. Which may
be

1. For Information, about the Being, Nature and Government of God. For an
Earthquake is (...), a proper Work of God's. He is (...), the only Author of
Prodigies. There are three ways to know the Being of a God, beside Tradition or
Universal Testimony! 1st. From the Being of Creatures, and the orderly Course
of Providence and disposal of them. This is a very solid way, but it requires a
very solid Mind, and very accurate in pursuing the Current of Thoughts, the
Connection and Chain of Truths, and but very few that have given up themselves
to Study and Ratiocination, have obtained a demonstrative Satisfaction in it.
2ly. By Grace, which is the most comfortable way. When God draws his own Image
on the Glass of the Soul, by the immediate Finger of his own Spirit, that
immediately at once both gains our Assent to his Being, and our Consent to his
Government. But this is not the common way of Persuasion. The 3d way is, by
some extraordinary Providence, that strikes the very Senses of the poor
Sensitive Creature, throws down all the Batteries that the Atheist by pains of
corrupt Reasoning, or more corrupt Living, has built against the Faith and the
Fear of a God. Such means God uses with a poor rude unthinking stupid People,
to keep alive the Acknowledgment of himself in their Minds, and to defend that
universal Light that shines in the Principles of Natural Religion, from being
quite extinct by the Subtilty of Satan, and poisonous Exhalations from our
earthly Minds. How visible is this in Persons of whom it may be too truly said,
God is not in all their Thoughts; their Soul, like the Serpent, living upon the
Dust of the Earth! Some carnal Profit or Pleasure perpetually possessing their
Thoughts, all of a sudden, when Thunder from above, or Earthquakes from below,
shakes the Foundation of their Hopes and Joys, they cry out, Lord, have mercy
upon us! will the Earth swallow us up? I am unfit to die: Does the Judge of the
World come to call me to an Account? Woe is me, I have not minded a God more!

2. It serves for our Conviction, not only of being sinful, but of Sin's being
rooted in us, and reigning over us. When God fills a Land with Prodigies, it
argues it guilty of Atheistical Unbelief, carnal Security, Earthly-mindedness,
Hard-heartedness, and mere Formalness in Religion. For, 1st. God does nothing
in vain, he does not use extraordinary Means, when ordinary Means can prevail.
Isa. 5.4. What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done
in it? I have used all ordinary means of Conviction and Conversion; but yet
they remain Covetous: Por their Work is to join House to House: They remain
profane, for they rise early to follow strong Drink; they remain hypocritical,
therefore follows prodigious and extraordinary Methods; Their Hills shall
tremble, and their Carcases shall be torn in the Streets. After the same
manner, and with the very same People, does Christ deal in his time, Matthew.
11.17. They would neither dance to Piping, nor would they lament to Mourning,
therefore prodigious Judgments destroys the People, and lays their City
desolate. 2ly. We find all these People toward whom God used miraculous
Dispensations, to have been an unbelieving, carnal, secure People. We find
three Seasons of Prodigies, Moses's time, Christ's time, and Elijah's time, in
all of which we have the evident Discoveries of the most rude, heard-hearted
People that ever was on the Earth; after their safe Passage through the Red
Sea, it is said, The People feared the Lord, and believed him. But it is added,
They soon forgot his Word: Ezekiel. 16. They were as unteachable as Newborn Babes,
that were neither salted nor swadled. 1 Cor. 14.22. Signs are only given for
them that believe not; hence God did not work Miracles in bringing his People
out of Babylon, as he did in bringing them out of Egypt. 4ly. If all Punishment
suppose Sin, extraordinary Punishment presupposes extraordinary Guilt. One of
these two we must conclude, when God exercises a Land with extraordinary
Prodigies, that all Sin is very vile and hateful in his sight, which a carnal
Sinner is very unwilling to believe, seeing a pure eternal Mind only in the
spotted Glass of his own corrupt Mind: Or we must conclude, that there is a
great deal of Sin in us, when we see a God of all Grace and all Consolation, a
Father of Mercies, whose very Being is Love, unto whose natural Actions
Judgment is a Foreign thing; to see such an one Thundering in his Power from
Heaven, and stamping in his Anger upon the Earth, until the Dust of his
Footstool full the Air with Clouds: When we see him either visibly threatening by
Prodigies, and only beating the Ground before us with his Rod of Iron, or more
surprizingly punishing us, as he did Corah, Dathan and Abiram, we cannot but
conclude we have highly offended him. An Instance of the latter kind we have
heard of with Terror from Jamaica, and one of the former we have gently felt,
according to God's usual Method of patient and merciful dealing with England.
We have usually but some drops of the Hail that destroys our Neighbors; the
Rod is but shaken over our Heads, while their Backs are severely smitten; he
deals with us as a Father with his Children, to let the Blow fall on the
Ground, that he seemed to level at our Face. While we behold these things, and
consider the Nature of God, we cannot but conclude, Sin is a very evil thing,
or that we are very guilty.

3d Use, That prodigious Presages serve for, is to raise our Expectations about
great future Judgments or Mercies. 1st. It puts us in expectation of the great
Day of Judgment; an Earthquake being one of it is Forerunners, Rev. 16.18. Luke
21.26. There are considerable Reasons to persuade us of the Nighness of it,
though we know not the Year or the Day. 1. Because the New Heaven and Earth
(which is to be the Foundation of that long looked for 1000 years) is to come
after the Dissolution of the World by Fire, 2 Pet. 3.7. The Heavens and the
Earth which are now, are reserved unto Fire against the Day of Judgment, and
perdition of ungodly Men: ver. 13. Nevertheless we look for a new Heaven and a
new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness. Romans 8.21. The Creature it self also
shall be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption into the glorious Liberty of
the Sons of God. So the Day of Judgment is nearer by a 1000 Years than many
expect. 2. The Day of Judgment seems partially to begin with the utter ruin of
Antichristianism. 2 These. 2.8. The Lord shall destroy him with the brightness
of his coming. Rev. 19.3. Before the Marriage Supper of the Lamb, it is said,
Her smoke rose up fir ever and ever; ver. 20. The Beast and the false Prophet
are to be cast alive into the Lake of Fire burning with Brimstone. Dan. 7.12.
After the Body or Nation of the Beast is given to the burning Flame, Greece and
Asia with it is Inhabitants continue preserved, though without Dominion, until
Christ's everlasting Dominion begins, which is the second coming without Sin
unto Salvation. 3. After the Rise of the Witnesses, there is but only one Woe
to come, and one Trumpet to sound, Rev. 10.7. The Angel swore, that there
should be Time no longer, but in the Days of the Voice of the 7th Angel. 2ly.
It ought far more to put us in Expectation of the great Revolutions that must
be before then; Earthquakes also being Forerunners of them, as we see in the
Text, and ver. 19. in the opening of the Temple. There are Seven Great
Kevolutions at hand. 1. The Rise of the Witnesses. 2. A plentiful Effusion of
the Spirit. 3. The Reformation of a Nation or Kingdom. 4. A great Military
Slaughter of Persons, or Civil Death of Papal Dignities. 5. An utter Ruin of
the Turkish Empire, which is a passing away of the Second Woe. 6. The
Conversion of the Jews, which is to be by the coming of the third Woe, or
drying up the River Euphrates by the Sixth Vial. Lastly, The persecuting Arm of
the Beast broken, though his Life shall be longer continued. 3ly. It may put
all impenitent Sinners, whose Reformation neither ordinary means, nor such
extraordinary, has produced, in far more certain expectation of dreadful
Punishments. For, 1. No impenitent Nation under such ordinary and extraordinary
means continuing impenitent, ever escaped Destruction. Pharaoh and his Kingdom
can witness this: The Jews, God's own peculiar People, can also witness this,
Matthew. 11. John 10. They would not be persuaded by the Miracles and prodigious
Signs Christ wrought; therefore he brought prodigious Desolations upon them;
and they remain Prodigies to this Day, scattered like the quartered Members of
Rebels against their King, and preserved separate from all the Nations where
they dwell, that they may be the more visible. 2. The God that has Power, and
cannot lie, has sentenced utter Ruin for their Lot; Because they regard not
the work of the Lord, nor the Operations of his Hands, he shall destroy them,
and not build them up, Psalm. 28.5. Job 9.4. Who has hardened himself against
him and prospered; who removes the Mountains, etc. No Sinner can have any
thing to plead against the prodigiousnsss of that which was here, excepting
what was from the mixture of Mercy with it; for it is Extent was extraordinary.
2ly. There was not one, but diverse, another being in Italy, and a third in
America. 3ly. The manner or kind was most dangerous: For Houses are able to
bear a direct Motion upward or downward, to a much higher Degree than they can
in an Oblique declining. 4ly. We have Scripture prophesying of such kind of
Signals about this time. 5ly. The universal Voice of Providence is a Call to
Repentance, Romans 2.4. Despisest thou his Goodness and Forbearance, not knowing
that they should lead to Repentance, but after thy impenitent Heart treasurest
up Wrath against the day of Wrath? Now such extraordinary Providence are like
Majusculis Literis in the Book of Creation. There is nothing can be said
against it is being a Prodigy, but that we are not destroyed by it; and then it
had not been the Signal, but the Judgment: For it is a thing rare with us; the
Constitution of this Island, whether as to Air or Land, is not liable to it. We
may say of it, as Herodotus said of the Scythians, Thunder in Winter, and
Earthquakes at any time, are Prodigies among them.

4th Use, May be of Exhortation to all the Duties we know our selves tardy in.
An Earthquake is a Mophath, a Perswasory, not a Directory; not so much to give
Light about what we know not, as to awaken us to what we know. 2 Pet. 3.11.
Seeing then that these things shall be dissolved, what manner of Persons ought
ye to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness. It says to the covetous
Earthworm, Put not thy Trust in uncertain Riches, lay up a good Foundation for
time to come; for this Foundation is to be dissolved, which shakes already.
Stultum e spem firmam in re tremula ponere. It says, to the backsliding
Apostate, Why do thou leave the Foundations of the Apostles and Prophets, and
Jesus Christ that precious and Cornerstone, who is a tried Stone by Heaven and
Hell, who has born the Weight of Sin and Punishment, and has neither shrunk nor
been shaken; who has neither split nor given way, but has been found a sure
Foundation to all that worship him? But read thy own Lot, with these splinting
Reeds thou leanest on, Rev. 14.10. If any man receive the mark of the Beast, he
shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God, which is poured out without
mixture into the Cup of Indignation. It is a Threatening against them that
persevere in Popish Doctrines after the Light of everlasting Gospel has shined
in a Work of Reformation, but especially against Backsliders. The first Vial or
Cup of that Indignation, brings a Pestilential Vapor out of the Earth upon
those that receive the Mark of the Beast, Rev. 16.2. It says to the profane
Person, The Earth is utterly broken down, the Earth is clean dissolved, the
Earth is moved exceedingly, the Earth reels to and fro, because the
transgression of Man is very heavy upon it: The treacherous Dealers have dealt
treacherously, they have transgressed the Laws, changed the Ordinances, and
broken the everlasting Covenant, Isa. 24. It is a Midnight Cry to the sleepy
Virgins, and a Reproof to the Madness of the poor empty and vain Heart, that is
set upon the Toys and Shadows of earthly Things, when the Earth it sell is not
a solid Bottom for our Hopes. It is a great Motive to Humility; if we cannot
understand the Thunder of his Power, how much less the Power that is exerted in
shaking of such a solid Body as the Earth. What little Ants on our dusty
Molehill are we, in comparison of him! If we improve it aright, it will be a
Spur to duty, a Wall of Brass against Temptations: Who would not fear him that
shakes Heaven and Earth, and a strong Battery against our Lusts? We ought to
inculcate it more, because it is of so hardening a Nature. Pharaoh's Mistake of
Divine Prodigies for Natural Effects, made him a Pattern of Hard-heartedness.
2ly. It speaks our Case yet hopeful, when God gives us any Means, especially
when he falls upon a new Method. It speaks our Case yet hopeful, because it is
a Threatening in it is Nature, not a Punishment; it is a Threatntng, not of the
Nature of a Promise, that binds and obliges the Person to fulfill. We ought the
more to hearken to it, because it is a God that speaks, and speaks with so loud
a Voice, that implies a dullness of hearing already begun. We ought to yield to
it, because it is always the last Mean and Motive God makes use of. Lastly,
Because we are sure to gain the End that God designs by it, if we receive it as
a Word of Exhortation for Amendment. If it have the same Influence that Jonah's
Prophecy had on Nineveh, we may be as sure of London's Safety.

5th Use, May be a Doxology. We ought in every thing to give Thanks, because
there is Mercy in every Dispensation that befalls us in this Life; our Diseases
are Medicines, our Poverty enricheth, our Disappointments six our Expectations
on a sure Bottom, and all our Evils work for good: There are a great many
Ingredients of Gratitude in this Dispensation.

1. That God should use extraordinary means to reclaim us from Formality and
Security, when an ordinary method proves unsuccessful.

2. That it was a mere Signal Prodigy, when we deserved it should be a Penal
one too. What was our City better than others, that have been either in half,
or in whole devoured by such a Judgment?

3. That God has given us a more sure Foundation than this Earth to trust on,
that we have the Everlasting Gospel, built upon the Foundation of the Prophets
and Apostles, by which we have a Discovery of a City that has Foundations, and
a Kingdom that cannot be moved. For want of this Knowledge the greatest Pagan
Philosophers or Moralists that ever were, were not able to fortify their own
Minds, or the Peoples, against the Terror of an Earthquake, or quiet them under
it.

4. That God gives any glorious Discovery of himself to rejoice the Hearts of
his Children, that can say of Thunder, This is the Voice of my Father: And of
an Earthquake, This is the Tread of his Foot; that he refutes Atheists, who
say, All things continue as they were; and frights the Earthworm into Religion,
that scoffed at those who look for solider Comforts than it affords.

5. That our Lot is fallen so late in the World, that Earthquakes beget rather
a prospect of Good than of Hurt to the Church; they make us look out for the
Rise of the Witnesses, the opening of the Temple, and the Second Coming of our
Lord.

6th and Last Use, Is of serious Prayer and Supplication. We ought to be
anxions and careful about nothing, but in every thing to make our Requests
known unto him. Nothing is more apt to fill us with anxious, careful and
dreadful Thoughts than an Earthquake, therefore it is a fit Season for Prayer.
(1) That God would save us: We need not doubt he can, after such great
Demonstrations of his Power: We need not doubt his Will, after the saving of us
out of such a dismal Judgment. It should then make us approach a God able and
willing to save us. He has told us in his Word, That he wills all Men to be
saved; and we will not believe him, now he gives a Miracle to confirm our
Faith. (2) Let us come earnestly beseeching him to be reconciled with us; for
we see there are no Hopes of succeeding in Enmity and War against such a mighty
Power: We see it is an unspeakable Happiness to have such a Power on our side:
We must always overcome and triumph in War, when Allied to such a Lord of
Hosts. He has made a Covenant of Reconciliation with Sinners, through a
Mediator; let us make use of such an Opportunity, while our Spirits are under
the Sense of the Danger and Evil of an unreconciled Estate, to lay hold on his
Peace-bearing Offers, (3) Let us come begging powerful and effectual Grace, to
change our Hearts and Spirits into a submissive and obedient Temper. The Reason
we are not in Friendship with God, is from a defect on our side, not on God's.
We do not love him, while he shows daily Love to us; we prefer carnal, earthly
things to him; we make Mammon our God, our Belly our God, our Fancy and
Imagination our God: Let us pray for a Christ being formed in us; for such a
discovery of his Likeness that may sully win our Love, and then we are sure
Peace will not only soon be made, but is made already. (4) Let us come praying
for the remission of our Sins, owning and acknowledging our Guilt. We first
fell out with God, therefore we ought to own a Fault. God sends no Judgments on
his side, until Sin begins on ours; therefore let us own it as becomes
disobedient Children, as becomes rebellious Subjects, as becomes betraying
Friends, as becomes an Adulterous Wife; all manner of Relations has a Sinner
violated, who has broken the Law of his God. (5) That God would prepare us for
the great Day of Judgment, for we see this Earth daily waxing old and
dissolving: For these Earthquakes have a gradual Tendency to dispose it for the
Flames: But it is all one to us, whether it or we be dissolved first; we are
sure our little pieces of Earth cannot stick long together, but either must be
deluged with a Dropsy, burnt up with a Fever, choked with Vapors, or torn in
pieces by a Paroxism: And when we are once dissolved, the Earth is dissolved to
us, and there is no entering Heaven while one spot of Sin cleaves to us. (6) To
pray that God would hasten the Rise of the Witnesses, with all the Blessings to
his Church that do accompany it; and that our Kingdom and our King may still
shine more visibly and prosperously, as the chief among the Kindreds, Tongues
and Nations that befriend the Witnesses dead Cause, and never suffer it to be
buried, until the Spirit of Life from God enter into them, and then they shall
never die more. (7) That God may grant our Hopes that are fixed on his Mercy,
and prevent our Fears of any greater future Death yet to come upon the
Witnesses. This is the greatest that ever yet has been, but a greater may be:
This is universal through the Streets that are under the Popes actual
Jurisdiction and Possession: But some fear that a Death must extend wherever
his Jurisdiction has been: For when Rome shall be destroyed, she says in her
Heart, She is no Widow. But from whence then shall come the Kindreds, Tongues
and Nations to help? In such a Case therefore let us praise his Word, hope in
his Mercy, and still beg the Glorious Days of the Church may commence in our
Day: Hence we may see these bright Dawnings of the Son of Man, and depart like
a dying Simeon with a Christ in our Arms. But let us do all this submissively,
saying, Fac Deus in nobis quid velis esse ratum.

FINIS.

