A Discourse concerning the East-India-Trade.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the East-India-Trade, Showing how it is Unprofitable to
the Kingdom of England. Being Taken out of An ESSAY on TRADE;

Written by Mr. JOHN CARRY, Merchant in Bristol, in the Year 1695.

To which are added Some Observations of Sir Jos. Child and of the Author of
the Essay on Ways and Means Relating to Trade.

AND ALSO, A Copy of the French King's Decree, Concerning Printed Callicoes.

London: Printed for E. Baldwin in Warwick Lane. 1699.

A Discourse concerning the East India Trade; showing it to be Unprofitable to
the Kingdom of England, being taken out of an Essay on Trade.
East Indies.
THE East India Trade, for many Reasons I take to be mischievours to the
Kingdom. To clear this we are to consider how a Trade may be advantageous or
detrimental to a Nation, and then to draw Inferences. I shall therefore lay
down such general Notions as may without dispute be allowed by all unbyassed
Persons, which are these.

1. That that Trade is advantageous to the Kingdom of England which Exports our
Product and Manufactures. 2. Which Imports to us such Commodities as may be
manufactured here, or to be used in making our Manufactures. 3. Which supplies
us with such things, without which we cannot carry on our Foreign Trade. 4.
Which encourages our Navigation, and increases our Seamen.
And consequently that Trade which exports little or none of our Product or
Manufactures, nor supplies us with things necessary to promote Manufactures at
home, or carry on our Trade abroad, nor encourages Navigation, cannot be
supposed to be advantageous to this Kingdom; especially when its Imports hinder
the consumption of our own Manufactures, and more especially when those Imports
are chiefly the purchase of our Bullion or Treasure.

And because I would be rightly understood in my third Proposition, I mean
those Commodities without which we are not able to fit out our Ships for a
foreign Trade, such as are Pitch, Tar, Hemp, Sail-Cloth, Masts, Timber, and
such like. These are so absolutely necessary, that we must have them, though
purchased for Bullion, as being the chief Hinges whereon Trade turns, and the
Tools by which we Mechanically navigate our Ships, those Bulky Mediums of
Foreign Trade: But for those things which are Imported, only in order to be
Exported again as Commodities to Trade on, these cannot be so advantageous to
this Kingdom as they may be to the Dutch, who having little Land, are
maintained rather by Buying and Selling than Manufacturing; whereas England
being a large spot of Ground, and having a great Product of its own, (besides
what comes from our Plantations) capable to be wrought up or manufactured here,
gets by the Employment of its People, therefore it would be the great Wisdom of
our Govenment to regulate all Foreign Trades by such Methods as may best make
them useful in the promoting our Manufactures. How England may be said to be
enricht by Trade.


Here it will not be amiss to consider again how and in what manner a Nation
may be said to be enriched by Trade, for there must be a difference made
between a Nations growing Rich, and particular Men's doing so by it. And I
humbly propose that it may be possible for private Men to be vastly improved in
their Estates, and yet at the Years end the Wealth of the Nation not to be a
whit greater than at the beginning, and this both in an Inland and Outland
Trade; for whilst the thrifty Shopkeeper buys at one Price, and sells at
another to the prodigal Beaux, and the industrious Artificer vents his Labor
to the idle Drone, and the politic Contriver out wits the unthinking Bully,
one raises his Fortunes on the others decay; the same for our Outland Trade, if
we Export the true Riches of the Nation, for that which we consume on our
Luxury, though private Men may get by each other, yet the Wealth of the Nation is
not any way increased: For suppose by one Hundred Butts of Wines the Importer
gets Five Hundred Pounds, yet when drank among our selves, the Nation is not
thereby Richer but Poorer, and so much poorer as those Wines cost at first; for
if Imported by English Men in English Ships we lose but the first Purchase, the
rest being Freights, Customs, and Profits, are divided amongst our selves, but
if they are brought in by Foreigners, the Nation loses all but the Customs; I
take the true Profits of this Kingdom to consist in that which is produced from
Earth, Sea, and Labor, and such are all our Growth and Manufactures.

To apply this now to the East India Trade, we will first consider what are its
Exports and Imports, and then inquire Cui Bono? Whether the Contest for this
Trade does proceed from a design to serve the Nation, or from Principles of
Self-Interest? Or whether the Members of that Company who strive so much about
it, would if in other Circumstances still be of the same Mind? For Principles
that are in themselves true are always so, we may change our Opinions, but they
do not change their Certainty; I confess as the state of the Nation alters, so
must our Measures in Trade, but then it must appear that the State of the
Nation and not our private Interests makes us to alter them: Now when I find
that it is not the true Interest of this Nation to advance the Product and
Manufactures thereof, I shall change my Opinion.

First then to begin with their Exports; and here I need not say much, it is
generally allowed by the Traders themselves that our Product and Manufactures
are the least part thereof, consisting chiefly in Gold and Silver.

But it is alleged that in Returns they Import such Goods which being again
Exported, do bring from Foreign parts much more Treasure in specie; which leads
me secondly to consider what those Imports are, and what becomes of them; They
chiefly are, Saltpeter, Pepper, Callicoes, Druggs, Indigo, and Silks both
wrought and raw, many of which Commodities are very necessary as well for our
Home Expense as to export again, others vastly prejudicial to us, as they
hinder the consumption of our own Manufactures both Abroad and at Home, and
this latter outweighs the former; Callicoes and wrought Silks are the things I
chiefly aim at, and hope to make it plainly appear that those two Commodities
do us more prejudice in our Manufactures, than all the Advantage they bring
either to private Purses, or to the Nation in general, and it were to be wished
the Wisdom of our Parliament would prohibit their being worn in England; else
like the ill-favored lean Kine they will destroy the use of our Manufactures,
which might be fitted to answer all the ends they serve for; Nor is the
lessening the wearing our own Manufactures at home all the Mischief Callicoes
have done us, their Importation having thrown out the wearing of Silesia, and
other German Linnens has been attended with as bad a Consequence from thence,
where those Looms which were formerly employed on weaving them, were thereon
turned to the Woollen Manufactures, wherewith they not only furnish themselves
but Poland, which has made those Countries very careful to increase and
improve their breed of Sheep, whose Wool was generally brought hither before,
and used in making Hats, but is now much of it wrought up there; for when we
slighted their Manufactures they fell on ours; whereas if we had encouraged the
Wearing their Linen, they would have still depended on us for Woollen; This
has been a means to abate the Exportation of many thousand Pieces of Cloth,
which would have brought more Advantage to the Nation than all the Trade we
have driven to the East Indies, and will never be retrieved till we return
again to the use of their Linnens.

He that considers how wonderfully Fashions prevail on this Nation may soon
satisfy himself how things of little value come to be prized, and to justle
out those of greater worth; Fashion is Fancy, which as it has of late Years
brought in a disuse of our native Commodities by Imitation, so if our Nobility
and Gentry would turn their Fancies to them again, I doubt not it would have
the same Effect, and if our Workmen could receive Encouragement, no question
the Genius of this Kingdom would soon reach to such a pitch, as to answer all
the Uses of both those Commodities, even with a Thread spun out of Sheeps Wool;
It was scarce thought about twenty Years since that we should ever see
Callicoes, the Ornaments of our greatest Gallants (for such they are, whether
we call them Muslins, Shades, or any thing else) when they were then rarely
used, save in Shrouds for the Dead, and that chiefly among the Poor, who could
not go to the Price of finer Linen, and yet were willing to imitate the Rich;
but now few think themselves well dressed till they are made up in Calicoes, both
Men and Women, Calico Shirts, Neckcloths, Cuffs, Pocket-Handkerchiefs, for the
former, Head-Dresses, Night-royls, Hoods, Sleeves, Aprons, Gowns, Petticoats,
and what not; for the latter, besides India-Stockings for both Sexes; and
indeed it will be a hard matter to put them out of this Fancy, nothing but an
Act of Parliament, or humor of the Court can do it, the latter is the most
natural means, and would easier make way to introduce the former, for besides
that 'twould bring with it the Prayers of the Poor for those who have cut them
out new Employments, it would likewise wonderfully tend to advance the
Gentlemen's Estates, first by expending their Wool, and next by keeping the Poor
at Work, who would consume more Wheat and Barley, Beef and Mutton in their
Houses, and yet they need not fear having Laborers enough in their Harvests,
though perhaps at a little higher Rates, which would be abundantly made up by
an Advance on the Product of their Lands, besides what would be saved in the
Poor's Rates, and it has been a constant Observation grounded on Reason, that
this Nation never thrives more than when the Labor of the Poor is at such
Prices as they may live comfortably by it.

We will next consider:

1. How far the Manufactures of this Kingdom have been already made to answer
the uses of Indian Silks and Calicoes, and what did encourage it. 2. What
farther Improvement may be made thereon, and the means to bring it about. 3.
Why the People of England are so much against their Native Manufactures as to
be more in love with Calicoes, and Indian Silks.
1. As to the first, I will go no farther than the Act for burying in Woolen;
how averse were the People of England to it at first; as if the Dead Could not
rest easy in their Graves, if wrapped in our Native Commodities, or that it
would trouble them inter Hades that they had occasionally given Employment to
their poor surviving Countrymen; no, the Fault was not there, Experience has
taught us that it is all one to them, and Time has more reconciled us to that
Statute, when we saw the good Effects it produced by putting our People on
making so many pretty sort of Woolen Vestments, as ornamental to the Dead, as
the other formerly were thought to be, and of such different Finenesses and
Prices, that Qualities are so easily distinguished by them; and since our dead
Friends were to be dressed in our native Wool, we thought it most seemly to
imitate them by wearing the same at their Funerals, hence it came to pass that
our Mourning Attire was made of White Crape, a Garb not only Decent and
Profitable, But Honorable to the Nation, as it both showed our esteem for our
Woolen Manufactures, and also how soon those employed therein could turn their
Hands to any sort of Work.

2. Let us consider what farther Improvements may be made on the Manufactures
of this Kingdom to answer the Ends of Indian Silks and Calicoes, and the means
to bring them about; here let us see what Progresses have already been made,
step after step by our Manufactures, to imitate, and in many things to exceed
all they have seen from abroad, witness those noble rich Silks, wherein they
have attained to so great a height; Our brave noble Arras or Tapestry of all
Prices, not to be out done by those very Nations from whom we at first learned
the Art; and this is allowed by all, that the English Workmen in great things
outdo their Patterns; and no doubt they may soon turn their Hands to a slight
Manufacture, which People do now chiefly desire, and I take to be as profitable
to the Nation; how are we come from a strong and stubborn to a slight thin
broad Cloth? from thence to Stuffs, Perpets, Says, Rashes, Shalloones, Garzes,
and lately to Antherines, which last look as handsome as Indian Silks, and serve
as well in Linings for our Clothes; also Crapes of such different sorts both of
Silk and Wool, that not only Cloths for Men and Women are made thereof, but
also Hatbands, Cuffs, Neckcloths, Hoods, Head-Dresses, etc. Now was there a Law
to encourage, or would the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom by their
Examples promote the wearing our own Manufactures, no doubt they might be soon
brought to answer all the ends of Indian Silks and Calicoes, and I cannot see
what reason may be given against a total Prohibition of their being worn in
England, which will be the quickest way to have them disused.

3. The third is to enquire why the People of England are so much against their
native Manufactures, as to be more in love with Calicoes and Indian Silks? The
chief Reason is Fashion and Imitation of one another, though many others are
alleged, as the Ruffness and ill Color of Woollen, which keeps it from
answering the ends of Calicoes, its Weight and Thickness, which renders it
improper for the ends of slight Silks in Linings; These are not substantial but
pretended Reasons, and would as well serve against Calicoes and Indian Silks
were we more used to our Native Manufactures, and they now to be introduced;
for as to the Ruffness of Woolen, may not that be helped by its fineness? and
are not course Calicoes altogether as Ruff? A fine Flannen Shirt feels soft and
pleasant to him that has been used to wear it, so strange Impressions do
Custom and Fashion make on us; and as for Color, it is only Fancy, when Yellow
is in Fashion it looks as decent as White, and as much Art is needful to strike
it well as there is Curiosity about the other, witness when Women wore Yellow
Hoods, both Men and Women Yellow Vestments; besides, no doubt ways might be
found out to add to the Native Whiteness of our Woollen Manufactures, which do
not therein fall shorter of Calicoes, than they do of Hollands and Cambriks;
and as to the ends of Silks Thinness and Likeness, I think our Workmen have
given very great Instances in their Crapes, Gauzes, and Anth^rines, what they
could do had they Encouragement.

But if a Manufacture of Wool will not please, why may not one of Cotton, the
Primum of which Calicoes are made, whereof we have great quantities imported
every Year from our own Plantations in America, and no doubt we might in a
short time attain to an excellency therein, not only to supply our selves, but
also Foreign Markets; He that considers how far we have gone in this already
will have no cause to doubt a Progress; and if Encouragements were proposed to
that Person, who should spin the finest Thread either in Cotton or Wool, to be
adjudged and paid in each County, 'twould excite Industry and Ingenuity, and no
doubt, we might in time make Calicoes equal in their sorts with those imported
from India, and afford them as cheap as that Company now sells them, enough not
only for our home Expense, but also for Exportation.

We will next see what Employment this Trade gives to Ships, as it is now
managed in a Company, and how far it promotes Navigation by making Saylors; the
number of the first is but small, and I think far from making Seamen, long
Voyages being usually their Bane, those Ships seldom bringing home so many
Saylors as they, carried forth, whereas shorter Voyages do more, made out of
Landmen, both the Imployers and the Employed being desirous to make their first
Trials on such Voyages; besides, longer require, better Saylors to provide for
the Casualties which attend them, and may be said rather to use Seamen than to
make them; and this is one great Reason why the Dutch raise them so easily,
most of their Employments being a home Trade.

If then it appears this Trade is no more profitable to the Nation in general,
we will next see how it is to that Company in particular; I do not say to the
particular Members thereof, who by ill Practices have raised their private
Fortunes, many of which have been lately laid open, but to the Company as such,
and here we find that a former failed; the last is thought to have gotten
little, considering the long time they have been a Monopoly; and what Advantage
the new Fund will make time must show, the Tricks used to engage Men therein,
causes me to doubt whether it will answer the Expectation of the Subscribers.

On the whole, let us consider what Arguments can be offered to the Wisdom of
the Nation to limit this Trade to an exclusive Company as was desired, or (as
in Truth it is) to turn it into a Monopoly by Law, a thing very contrary to the
Genius of the People of England, and seems to bar the Freedom and Liberty of
the Subject.

Were Monopolies to be allowed, it must certainly be in one of these three
Respects.

1. That me might put off our own Commodities to other Nations in Barter for
those we received from them. 2. That we might keep down the Prices of their
Commodities, whilst we advanced our own. 3. That as the Consequence of these
two we might encourage our Manufactures at home, and furnish Foreign
Commodities cheap.
But when a Monopoly shall cause quite different Effects, its not to be allowed
on any Terms.

As for the first; the East India Company takes off little of our Manufactures,
nor do I think the Trade will admit it, for I cannot see how that Nation can be
supplied with Manufactures hence sit for their Wearing, answerable in Price to
their own, except they were a Luxurious People, who cared not what they gave to
please their Fancies, which I do not take them to be, but generally very
Provident; for if we consider that when the East India Company has brought
their Calicoes and Silks hither with great Charges, and sold them at an
extraordinary advance, they find vent by their cheapness, how can we believe
that any of our Manufactures can afford them a profit in India, where they must
be sold suitable in price to the others first cost; and therefore 'twould not
be amiss if the Government were put on making a narrow Inquiry whither the
Company do bona fide export so much of the Product and Manufactures of this
Kingdom and land them in India, as they are obliged to do by their Charter,
else many ways may be found out to evade it, and the Nation be deprived of the
only Advantage expected from that Monopoly.

The Dutch and we deal not thither on the same Terms, their Manufactures are
small, and so no Matter what they Trade on; besides, their Settlements in the
East Indies are so great, that what they bring thence may almost be called
their own Product, whereof by monopolizing that Trade they make greater Prices
in Europe, which being chiefly spent either in Foreign Markets or by Temporary
Residents, brings them more Profit; They have also great Advantages above us in
their East India Trade, being possessed of the whole Traffic to Japan, whither
they carry Cloth, Lead, and other Commodities from Holland, Calicoes, Spices,
etc. from India, which they sell for Gold and Silver, increasing thereby their
Bullion as we diminish ours: Besides, their East India Company is not settled
on such a narrow Foundations as ours, which being limited to one City,
exclusive of all others, sells their Commodities for greater Advance than any
other Traders, whither we consider their Risque, or the time they are out of
their Money, which should be the standing Rules in Trade; Nor can it be
otherwise whilst they remain a Company, the Charges both abroad and at home
being much more than when managed by private Stocks, besides the affected
Grandeur in all, which must be paid by the Nation, whereon I take that Monopoly
to be a Tax, so far as it might be supplied with them on cheaper Terms if the
Trade were laid more open by a Regulation: I know there is much talked by the
Company about Forts, Castles, and Soldiers, to defend their Interest in India,
but I cannot see the use of them, for either they are thereby defended against
the Natives or the Dutch their Competitors; the former have no reason to
quarrel with them, for bringing them a Trade so highly their Advantage, as the
purchasing their Product and Manufactures with Money, especially if they pay
for what they buy; And as for their Competitors the Dutch, if they were not
better defended against them by our Fleets at home, and the Protection of the
Princes they Trade with, than by all the Force they have there, the Trade had
been ill secured, and must have sunk long ago; Only those great Words serve to
hold us amused, whilst their Guineas in the two last Reigns were the Support of
their Charter.

One thing which I aim at in this Discourse, is to persuade the Gentry of
England to be more in Love with our own Manufactures, and to encourage the
wearing them by their Examples, and not of Choice to give Employment to the
Poor of another Nation whilst ours starve at home.

A Decree of the French King's Council of State, concerning Callacoes, printed
in East India, or painted in the Kingdom, and other China and India Silks,
Stuffs, and flowred with Gold and Silver: Given the 26th of October, 1686.
THE King being informed, That the great quantities of Callicoes, Printed in
East India, or Painted in the Kingdom, and other China, and India Silks,
Stuffs, and Stuffs flowered with Gold and Silver, have not only given occasion
of Transporting many Millions, but also have diminished the Manufactures of Old
Established in France, for making of Silk, Woollen, Linen, and Hemp-Stuffs;
and, at the fame time, the Ruin and Destruction of the Working People, who, by
want of Work, having no Occupation, or Subsistence for their Families, are gone
out of the Kingdom; the which being needful to provide a Remedy for, and for
that effect to hinder the Trade and Sale in the Kingdom of the said printed
Callicoes, and India and China Silks and Stuffs, nevertheless granting to the
Owners a reasonable time to sell them in. Having heard the report of Monsieur
Pelletier, Counselor Ordinary of the King's Royal Council, and
Comptroller General of the Finances; his Majesty, in his Council has ordered,
and does order, that from the beginning of the day of the Publication of the
present Decree, all the Manufacturers Established in the Kingdom, for Painting
of the white Callicoes, shall be Abolished, and the Moulds serving to the
Printing of them shall be broke and destroyed: His Majesty does forbid most
expressly the Re-establishing thereof: Also to his Subjects the Painting of the
said Callicoes, and to the Engravers the making of any Moulds serving to the
said Impressions, under the Penalty of losing the said Callicoes, Moulds, and
other Utensils, and Three Thousand Livres Fine, to be paid without diminution,
one third part to the Informer, the second part to the Hospitals of the place,
the third to the Farmers of the Revenue. And as concerning the Painted,
Callicoes, and other China and India Silks, Stuffs, and Stuffs flowered with
Gold and Silver, his Majesty has granted, and does grant, to the last of
December 1687. next, to the Merchants, and others, the permission of selling
them as they shall think sit: The said time being expired, his Majesty does
forbid all Persons, of what Quality and Condition whatsoever they are, the
exposing and selling thereof; and to particulars, the buying thereof, does
order, That those found in all Warehouses and Shops shall be burnt, and the
Proprietors condemned to the like Fine of Three Thousand Livres, paid as
abovesaid. His Majesty does permit, nevertheless, the Entry, Sale and Retail,
of the said white Callicoes in his Kingdom, paying for them the Taxes according
to the Decree of the Council the 30th of April last which shall be Executed,
and that of the 15th of the present Month, to the last of December, 1687. next
year. His Majesty does command the Lieutenant of the Policy of the City of
Paris, and the Intendants and Commissaries of the Provinces and Generalties of
the Kingdom, to cause the present Decree to be Executed, being published and
affixed in all Places where need shall be, that no body should be ignorant
thereof.

Done in the King's State Council held at Fontainbleau. Signed, COQUILLE.

Observation of Sir Josiah Child.
THat Wool is eminently the Foundation of English Riches; and that the ways to
equalize, or overbalance our Neighbors, in our National Profit, by our
Foreign Trade, are, Disicourse of Trade, p. 127.


To prevent the Exportation of our Wool, and encourage our Woollen
Manufactures: To encourage those Foreign Trades most, that vend most of our
Manufactures, and that Supply us with Materials further to be Manufactured in
England. Page 156.


That it is our Interest, by Example, and other Means, (not distastful) above
all kind of Commodities, to prevent, as much as may be, the Importation of
Foreign Manufactures. Page 161.


That it is multitudes of People, and such Laws as cause an Increase of People,
which principally enrich any Country. Preface.


That Lands (though excellent) without hands proportionable, will not enrich any
Kingdom. That whatever tends to the Depopulating any Kingdom, tends to the
Empove rishment thereof. Page 165, and 167.


That it is our Duty to God and Nature, to Provide for, and Employ the Poor.
That such as our Employment is for the People, so many will our People be. Page
56. and 174.


That it is the Interest of a Kingdom, the Poors Wages should be high; for
wherever Wages are high throughout the whole World, it is an infallible
Evidence of the Riches of that Country; and wherever Wages for Labor runs low,
it is a proof of the Poverty of that place. Preface. Extracted out of the
Discourse of Trade writ by Sir Jos. Child.


That the Expense of Foreign Commodities, especially Foreign Manufactures, is
the worst Expense a Nation can be inclinable to, and ought to be prevented as
much as possible.

Some Observations of the Author of the Essay on Ways and Means, relating to
the East India Trade.
IT IS evident that our Woollen Goods, are sold in several Countries, namely,
Holland, Hamburgh, Germany, the Hans Towns, and all the East Countries; many of
which Places will not be able to take off our Woollen Goods, unless we deal for
their Linnens. And in Fact, and by Experience, it has been seen in the Case of
the East India Trade, since there has been Imported from thence vast quantities
of Linnens, such as Callicoes, Muslins, Romals for Handkerchiefs, which
answered the ends of Lawns, Cambricks, and other Linen Cloth, we have hot
Exported that vast quantity of Draperies to those Northern Parts, of which Sir
Walter Rawleigh makes mention. As our Call for their Linnens has diminished,
their Call for our Draperies has proportionably decreased; and not only so, but
these People have been compelled by Necessity to fall upon making course
Woollen Cloth, by which they supply themselves and other Places, which
heretofore we were wont to furnishi. Taken out of the Essay upon the probable
Methods of making a People Gainers in the Balance of Trade, page 128.

FINIS.

