AN ESSAY, ON THE Coin and Credit OF ENGLAND: As they stand with Respect to its
TRADE.

By John Carry, Merchant In Bristol.

BRISTOL: Printed by Will. Bonny, and Sold by the Booksellers of London and
Bristol. October the 22d. 1696.

To the Right Honorable, the LORDS Spiritual and Temporal, and to the
Honorable the Commons of ENGLAND, in Parliament Assembled.
May it please Your Honors,
I Humbly present You with this little Tract, the Design whereof is to set
forth how Useful and Advantageous a Well Settled redit would be to the Nation,
which, nothing but a Sense of the Calamity we labor under for want of it has
made me Undertake; It Is a Subject I Confess deserves a better Pen, but seeing
it has lain so long Neglected, I have adventured to offer my Mite toward it;
If Your Honors agree it to be Necessary, I doubt not but it may be rendered
Practicable; The settling the Coin of this Kingdom (so happily effected in your
last Sessions) has given fresh Occasions to our Money Mongers to employ their
Corrupt Wits in finding out new Ways to elude your good Intentions, who since
they cannot get Thirty per Cent by ping our Old Money, have endeavored to get
Twenty per Cent by Hoarding up our New, Things equally prejudicial in
themselves; And so far have they already advanced in these their wicked
Projects, as to make near so much Difference between our Money and our Trade;
Which Evil, if not speedily prevented, will daily Increase, and like a Leprosy
overspread this Nation, so that the very Sense of its being a Crime will wear
off, and Time will make it familiar to those, who now seem to startle at it;
Dulcis Odor Lucri ex re Qualiabet. Nor can a Stop be put thereto so well, as by
Establishing a Credit, large enough to answer all the Occasions of the Nation,
both Public and Private, without which, I humbly Conceive, other Means will
prove Ineffectual; I pray God, who is the Fountain of Wisdom, to direct you
Councels to his Glory, and the Welfare of this Kingdom.

Your Honors Most Obedient Servant, John Carry.

AN ESSAY ON Coin and Credit:
AS the Wealth and Greatness of the Kingdom of England is supported by its
Trade, so its Trade is carried on by its Credit; this being as necessary to a
Trading Nation, as Spirits are to the Circulation of the Blood in the Body
natural, when those Springs (as I may so call them) Decay, and grow Weak, the
Body languishes, the Blood Stagnates, and Symptoms of Death soon appear: Nor
can a good Credit be more useful to any Nation then it is to this, where our
Trade has at all times very much exceeded our Cash; I mean the Species of Money
has not in any Measure answered the transferring of Properties; and though
herein no Man can be at a Certainty as to the quantum, yet such probable
Conjectures Satisfaction that the Disproportion is very great. If we would make
a Judgment of the Trade of England, it cannot better be done, then by
considering what the annual Profits of that Trade may be supposed to amount
unto, and this cannot better be computed, then by making a probable Conjecture
of the Charge of its Expenses, and this by such Steps, as may tend to make as
naked a discovery thereof, as the nature of the thing will bear. Suppose then
the Number of People in England to be Eight Millions, (which is the lowest
Computation I have ever met with) and that each Person spends Eight Pounds Per
Annum for his Support, in Provisions, Clothes, and other Charges of living,
what any one pays short of this himself, is paid by another; he that is sed at
another Man's Table, or wears another Man's Clothes, must remember that those
necessaries are paid for, if not by himself, yet by his Benefactor; add to this
the Charge of supporting the Government, especially in this time of War, and
the amount will not be less then Seventy Millions per Annum, though every Man
lived but from Hand to Mouth; add to this Thirty Millions per Annum for the
Profits of Trade, which is but Twenty Pounds to each Family, supposing Six
Persons to a Family; this amounts to One Hundred Millions. Here it must be
noted, that I comprehend all transferring of Properties under this general
Notion of Trade; the Landlord, the Tenant, the Manufacturer, the Shopkeeper,
the Merchant, the Lawyer, all are Traders, so far as they live by getting from
each other, and their Profits arise from the Waxing or Waning of our Trade. We
are next to consider how the Profits of our Trade stand in Competition with
Trade it self; and I believe it will be allowed, that one with another, they do
not amount to above Ten per Cent. By this Scheme, the Trade of England must be
at least a Thousand Millions per Annum; The Money of England has generally
been supposed to be about Seven, some have thought Ten, which, at the highest
Account, stands in Competition no more then Ten does to a Thousand; this has
made Credit always so necessary our Trade, that without it the other must have
stood still.

But the usefulness thereof has never so much appeared, as now it does. Here
it will not be amiss to consider the Original design of Money, how it came at
first to be introduced into Trade, and the Reason there was for mending our
Silver Money, and falling of Guineys. Our Forefathers, whilst they kept
themselves only to the use of things necessary for the Support of Life, were
content with what they could either provide for themselves, or purchase from
their Neighbors with such things wherewith they abounded, and the others
wanted; but as Pride and Luxury grew into the World, so Men's desires became
more boundless, and their Fancies prompted them to seek after things from a
greater distance, either to please their Palates, or to set forth their
Grandeur; This brought in the Trade of Buying and Selling, whence arose a sort
of People maintained by Traffic, who soon put an end to the Trade of Barter.
And indeed it must needs be so, since 'twas impossible for them to fit every
Man's occasions, in such proportions as he required, and at the same time to
receive their Payments in the Commodities wherewith he did abound, because
these would not answer their ends in carrying on their Traffic, therefore
something must be made the Standard of Trade, which might be of equal value in
all Places, and a measure to the worth of other Commodities, the Excellency
whereof was not to arise so much from any intrinsic value in its self, as from
the usefulness of it to answer that end. Silver was at last agreed on by a
common consent, whose worth arose from its Fineness and Weight; not that this
was esteemed the richest of all Mettles, Gold standing in a very great
Disproportion with it, even as to its Weight, but that being more scarce, could
not supply all the occasions of Trade, nor indeed could it be divided into so
small parts as Silver might; On the other Side, Lead, Iron, Tin, Copper, etc.
being more common, would have been too bulky to be made the Standards of Trade;
nor could Diamonds, or other precious Stones answer the end, for besides the
abuse which might be put on the World by their Counterfeits, their value arises
only from Fancy, and from such Rules that a common Eye cannot easily
distinguish; Silver being thus settled, became by its Weight and Fineness a
Standard to the value both of these and all other Commodities, which were
purchased by a quantity set out, and measured by the Scale; and this continued
in the former Ages of the World, till the vast increase of Commerce and
Traffic made the several Princes, who found their Advantages by Trade,
endeavor to render it more easy to their Subjects; This was done by forming
Silver into lesser parts, and by their Stamp giving a Warrantie both to the
Fineness and weight of each Piece, which they guarded with Laws, equally
Sanguinary with those which secured their Crowns. The first was called the
Standard, which is a mixture of some Allay with the finest Silver; and though
it might be wished, that all Trading Nations had agreed upon the same, yet
since they have not, the Coin of each Nation stands in Competition, according
to the true Weight and Fineness of the Silver in their Money, without any
respect to the Denomination; which, were it not for other Accidents that attend
it, would be the Par and Measure of all Exchanges.

The Standard, or Sterling Silver of this Kingdom, is Eleven Ounces Two Penny
Weight Troy of the Finest Silver, mixed with Eighteen Penny weight of Fine
Copper, and according to this Proportion should all our Coin and Standard Plate
be mixed, which Composition makes it more fit, both for the Stamp, and also for
Utensils, being else too soft to be wrought up of its self, and if more
allayed, would become too Brittle, and wear like Brass, as our Workmen
generally agree.

But whatever might be the cause that persuaded our Kings to settle this Allay,
it has continued to be the Standard of England ever since the Reign of King
Richard the First, being first contrived, and brought hither by the
Easterlings, a Trading People living in the Eastern Parts of Germany, who dealt
with us for our Product. Many good Laws have been since made to keep it from
being vitiated, which were they as well put in Execution, the deceits used by
the Workers of that Commodity, to the increase of their Private Estates, by
abusing the ignorant Buyers, might soon be put to an end.

Next, to the finess, the weight of our Money was to be secured, and that to be
done in such Parts, that one Piece should answer another. Thus the English
Crown, as it comes out of the Mint, weighs Nineteen Penny weight and Eight
Grains; the Half Crown, is just one half of that Weight; the Shilling one
Fifth; and the Six Pence one Tenth; so that these pieces receive their values
from their Weights, not from their Names, though some unthinking People have
supposed otherwise; which Error has been the ground of many Disputes, and
given Opportunitys to cunning Knaves of abusing our Coin, both by adulterating
the Standard, and lessening its Weight, and others finding Advantage by this
Confusion, have devised Arguments to maintain their false Propositions; such as
these; that it has made Trade to circulate; That it past currantly from Man to
Man; That it hindered our Money from being carried abroad; and such like; never
considering that the Kingdom of England may Trade till it becomes Bankrupt;
that it is not Buying and Selling amongst our Selves which makes this Nation
Rich, or able to support its Self, but the Trade we drive with Foreign
Nations; particular Men may get, whilst the Nation in general looses by the
Trade it drives.

It is a certain and undeniable Maxim, that what is the true Interest of
England, is the Interest of every particular English Man; for though private
Men may seem to get by the ruin of the Public, this lasts but for an Age, and
their Posteritys will have cause to lament the ill Consequences a Trade so
driven will produce.

No doubt the badness of our Money was the cause of a great Circulation in our
Home Trade, but this arose from other Reasons then are commonly considered, and
the Consequence being the advance of Guinneys, caused our Product and
Manufactures to be sold to Foreigners at undervalues, who would have been
enabled thereby in a short time to have carried on the Trade of Europe on
better Terms then we could.

Which things being duly considered by our Legislative Power, 'twas thought fit
the last Sessions to call in all the debased. Money then Current, and to reduce
our Coin by Degrees to the old Standard and Weight, this gave fresh occasions
for Clamours, and the People were again furnished by the Money Jobbers, with
new Arguments against the Government. Trade it is true, was hereby put to a
stop, and this could not be helped, nothing else could be expected when ever our
Money should have come to be mended, the most clamorous thought it necessary to
be done, only desired that it might be deferred some time longer, or at least
(to express it in their own Terms) that the Money might be raised, and that the
Crown might pass for Six Shillings; this they did suppose would cause more
Silver to be brought into England, and less to be carried out, because it would
be worth more in England, then in any other part of Christendom; they argued in
all Companies, that the Trade of England was apparently slackened since the
Small Money was made unpassable, and Guineys reduced from Thirty Shillings to
Two and Twenty; whereas they did not consider, that this was Non causa Pro
causa, 'twas the Fear and constant Expectation of the calling in and mending
our Silver Money, and as a Consequence thereof the falling of Guineys, which
made every Man willing to shift off the loss, and to discharge himself of his
Money, as fast as he received it, by turning it into some Commodities which he
might part with at less loss to himself, then he supposed the Money would be if
he kept it by him, so that had the Parliament gratified these Men's desires, it
would not have had the Consequence they expected, because the Standard being
once fixed, that uncertainty had ceased, I speak thus, because I am obliged to
Answer such Arguments in the Language of the Proposer. For my own Part, I am of
Opinion, and I believe most unbyassed Men will agree with me, that Silver
cannot be raised or fallen in the Sense these Men would have it; the true value
of Silver consisting in its Weight and Fineness, cannot properly be said to
rise or fall, or to be worth more in one place then in another; if Silver
rises, it must be either with respect to its Self, or to something else; the
former is absurd, an Ounce of fine Silver cannot be worth more then an Ounce of
the same Fineness in any part of the World, nor will the Stamp make an
Alteration, especially in England, where Silver in Bullion and in Coin must be
alike, the Coynage here costing nothing; and as to the latter, its Rise and
Fall with respect to other things, this can never be limited by Law, because
the Buyer must pay for the Commodities he wants, suitable to his Necessity, and
their Scarcity; thus one Day a thing is worth an Ounce of Silver, which at
another time is not worth half so much.

Besides, I would ask these People, whether they think that a Crown or Five
Shilling piece as now Coined, can be worth any where, either at Home or Abroad,
Six single Shillings of the same Coin, or to speak plainer, Six pieces of
Silver, each one Fifth part of an Ounce of the same Standard and Fineness? if
they think it can be so at home, they may soon ruin themselves by the
Experiment; and if it cannot here, why should it be so Abroad? Does any Man
suppose that the Dutch or other Foreign Nations will make such a Change? if
they will, it is our Interest to send our Coin to them, and this will be the way
to augment, and not to lessen the quantity of our Silver.

But all this is a jest, for no Nation esteems Silver but for its Weight and
Fineness; and though the Money of some Countries may not agree with ours of the
same Denomination in either, yet the Exchange sets that right. Thus the French
Crown (called there Six Shillings, or three Livres) has not usually been worth
in Exchange above Fifty Six of our Pence; now should any Man be so imprudent to
bring it thence, and expect to pass it here for Six Shillings, because it is
called so there, he would soon see, that neither our Goldsmiths nor Traders
would take notice of the Denomination; on the other side, should any one carry
the English Crown to France, because it is there worth above Three of their
Livres, vulgarly Six Shillings, he would find no more Advantage, either in
Buying of Goods, or remitting it home again, then he might have made by
Exchange When our Coin was Corrupt and Base, all Exchange rose upon us, but now
it is returned to its ancient Standard, Exchange returns to its old Course; not
that the Standard of our Money is always the exact Rule of our Exchange, the
Balance of our Trade often causes it to alter, either to our Advantage, or to
our Loss, besides the Charge of Management; But this is little in Comparison
with the other; a familiar instance we have in the Case of Ireland, where,
whilst our Coin was Base, Seventy Pounds was worth one Hundred Pounds here,
which was in some measure proportionable with the value of Pieces of Eight,
(which they took in Ireland by weight) to our Clipped Money, and also to our
Guinneys at Thirty Shillings per piece; and how far this carried the Trade of
England into that Kingdom, the Traders to the West Indies have been too
sensible; but since the Error of our Coin has been Corrected, that very
Exchange is so much varied, that One Hundred Pounds here is worth One Hundred
and Fifteen Pounds there.

And since I have mentioned Guinneys, I cannot let them pass without some
Observations; how eager was the contest for keeping them up to that exorbitant
value? and how unwillingly did the Money Changers, and those whom they had
deceived, yield to the Alteration? whereas it was well known that the reason
why Guineys were so high was the badness of our Coin; Gold does not receive a
value from the Stamp, but whether in the Mass, or in the Coin, its Weight and
Fineness are to be regarded; the Standard of both in England is the same, being
Twenty Two Caracts of finest Gold, One Caract finest Silver, and one Caract
finest Copper; the Guinuea is Five Penny Weight and Eight Grains, which at the
price of Four Pounds per Ounce (when Money was at its full Standard and Weight)
came to One and Twenty Shillings and Four Pence, but when our Coin was so
Corrupted, that Thirty Shillings contained no more Silver then Twenty One
Shillings and Four Pence formerly did, 'twas necessary Guineys should rise, to
put them on an equal Basis with Silver; on the other side, when the Current
Coin of the Kingdom came to be rectifyed, and One and Twenty Shillings and Four
Pence contained the same quantity of Silver it formerly did, Guinneys must as
necessarily fall, because their value did not arise from their Denomination,
but from a proportionable standing of their Weight in Competition with the
Weight of Silver; and by the way, it is to be observed, That Guinneys at Twenty
two Shillings (as now allowed to pass by Act of Parliament) are worth Eight
Pence per piece, or Three per Cent, more then Standard Gold in the Mass will
yield at Four Pounds per Ounce.

Here I would ask this Question, suppose a Guiney were adulterated, and mixed
with one Sixth part Copper, or being of perfect Standard, were diminished one
sixth part in its Weight, whether such a Guinney would ever have yielded so
much Silver as another of its full weight and Fineness? if not, why then should
a good Guinney be sold for less then its value in Silver, for the sake of the
Stamp on our debased Money? or now our Silver Money is rectifyed, why should it
not stand in the same Competition with Gold, as formerly it did? if it be
answered, that Gold is dearer in Foreign Parts then it is here; I desire to
know whether Gold stands in a greater Competition there with Silver as to its
weight and Fineness? I believe upon a strict Enquiry 'twill be sound quite
contrary.

I know it is objected, that Guineys pass for Twenty Six Shillings in Ireland,
and that this advance on them there (being about Eighteen per Cent) will cause
our Guineys to be carried thither; let those Gentlemen consider, that Exchange
between London and Ireland is at Fifteen per Cent in our Favor, besides
Insurance by Sea, and risque of Carriage by Land, which cannot be reckoned less
then Six per Cent more, and they will then find on making up the Account, that
they were better leave their Guineys in London, and take Bills for their Money
payable in Ireland.

One thing more I would observe to these Gentelmen in their own Dialect, that
as our Coin grew bad, so Standard Silver rose in its Price, those who had it
demanding Six Shillings and Six Pence to Seven Shillings per Ounce of the then
current Coin of the Kingdom, the Reason of which is Plain from what has been
said before.

But to return to the Arguments brought against settling the Standard of our
Money as now it is happily done; if Silver say they had been advanced to Six
Shillings per Ounce, this would have made it more plenty amongst us, because
that would have caused more to have been brought in, and less to have been
carried out.

Here I must beg leave to dissent from their Opinion, and on the contrary to
offer it as mine, that if our Money had been advanced, less Silver had been
brought into England, and more according to that Proportion carried out.

As to the first, we must consider that Silver is not a Commodity of the growth
of this Land, nor of the Plantations belonging to it, but of a Neighboring
Nation, from whom we purchase it for our Product and Manufacturers, and
according to the price we make of them Abroad, so much more Silver do we bring
home for them; now seeing Silver could not be advanced to Six Shillings per
Ounce otherwise then by standing so in Competition with all Commodities both in
Buying and Selling, the Consequence of such an Advance had been this, that our
Manufactures would have been sold for so much less Silver in Foreign Markets,
as the Price of Silver was advanced at Home; thus the piece of Bays, which
formerly yielded Twenty Ounces of Silver, being Five Pounds whilst Silver stood
at Five Shillings per Ounce, would then have been Sold for Sixteen Ounces and
two Thirds, which, at Six Shillings per Ounce, is the same Sum* and the
Exporter would have gained as much by his Trade, because that quantity of
Silver would have stood in the same Competition with any Commodities he was to
purchase here for a New Adventure, as Twenty Ounces formerly did; but on the
other side, not one Ounce less would have been carried Abroad then now there
is, which must have been so much the greater Grievance to the Nation, as our
Imports thereof had been lessened; here we are to Consider, what it is that
causes the exporting, of our Silver, and upon a due Consideration we shall
find, that as nothing but the Balance of our Trade brings it in, so nothing
but the Balance of our Trade with particular places carries it out, neither of
them proceeding from the choice of the Merchant, who desires rather to Trade in
any other Merchandise, Silver neither answering Freights nor Insurances; and
therefore it is that our Merchants bring home from Spain, all the Wines, Fruit,
Wool, Iron, Cochineal, they can get, and whatever else is fit to Load their
Ships, before they meddle with Money; But the Balance of our Trade with Spain
being so much in our Favor, that all the Product thereof cannot make it good,
we are obliged to bring home the rest in Bullion; on the other Side, there are
some places that necessarily require Silver to be exported, but let no Man
think that the Denomination of Money will give it the greater value in those
Countries, the Silver we send thither being valuable only by its Weight and
Fineness; As for our Trade with Holland, That often varies in its Balance,
some Years it may be for us, and other Years against us, as Accidents happen,
though I am of Opinion it has generally been in our Favor; This is certain,
that if we run in Debt more then we can pay by our Product and Manufactures,
the rest must be paid in Silver, and the Receiver will take it at his own
Price, whatever value we may put on it here; it is true, Exchange is a Medium
where the Balance is variable, and that likewise must rise upon us according
to the Advance we make on our Money; but where the Balance is set against us,
there Exchange cannot keep our Silver at home, because That also must be
provided for by Shipping it out.

And as the Balance of Trade between us and Spain is in our Favor, and
thereby furnishes us with Silver, so I am of Opinion, that the Balance of the
General Trade we drive in Europe is likewise in our Favor, otherwise 'twould
be impossible to keep that Silver at home which we bring from Spain, since we
receive from abroad so great a supply of the Commodities we use, which would
necessarily draw it away, were they not the purchase of our Product and
Manufactures; therefore it appears to me, that seeing our Silver increases, the
Balance of our General Trade increases likewise in our favor; whoever will
but consider the great Consumption of Plate in England, by its being wrought up
into Utenfils for private Families, and the great quantities wherewith the
Houses of our Nobility and Gentry do abound, even in those common Masly things,
which our Forefathers made of Iron, Tin, Brass, and Wood, may rather wonder,
how our Trade supplies so much Silver, then that it brings home no more; hence
comes our want of it for the Mint; and till the People of England grow so wise,
as to set the same delight on seeing an Hundred Ounces of Silver in their
Houses in the Coin of the Nation, as they now do in Plate wrought up, we shall
be ever complaining for want of Money; though were this done, and all the Plate
of England Coined up, I am still of Opinion, that there would not be sufficient
to carry on our Trade without a Credit.

It Is our Manufastures and Product which furnish this Kingdom with Silver, and
the more they yield Abroad, the greater is our Supply; whence it is plain, that
the Trade we now drive by means of Jamaica to the Spanish West Indies, is more
profitable to us in the Sales of our Manufactures; then when we sent them
formerly to Cadiz; in the One they yielded Twenty per Cent advance, in the
other they sell for Cent per Cent, all paid in the same Specie.

But let us duly consider what had been the Consequence of raising our Money
at Home to Six Shilling the Crown, as these Men desired it; for either our
Goods would have rose suitably with it, or they would not; if they had, the
raising of our Money would have done us no Service, because it would have
purchased no greater quantities of Commodities then before, only it had been
accompanied with this ill Consequence, that the Landlords of England, the Poor,
the Usurer, and all who depend on standing Salaries, would have had their
Estates lessened a Sixth part at once, because their Housekeeping and other
Necessaries would have cost them a Sixth part more then they did before; But if
Rents, Wages, Interest, and Sallaries, must rise suitable to the Money, what
fignifies its Advance? On the other side, if Goods do not rise as our Money is
made less, Foreign Nations will be supplied with our Product and Manufactures
for Five Sixths of their true value, whilst we grow poor by our General Trade,
and yet the Expenses of every Private Family be increased, so far as they make
use of Foreign Commodities.

Money cannot be raised, it may be reduced into less Pieces, and this has been
a great Stumbling Block to many People, who have not well considered the
Difference; they tell us that a Penny in former days was the same with Three
Pence now; this must be granted, and yet it makes no difference, Twenty of
those Pence made a Crown then, and so they do now, only for the Convenience of
our Trade, later Reigns have thought fit to Coin Pieces of Silver one Third
part of their Weight, and to call them by the same Denomination, and yet those
pieces receive no value from their Name, but stand in an equal Proportion with
the other, Sixty of them making a Crown; in like manner, should the Crown be
divided into Six Parts, whatever Name we might call them by, the true value of
each would be but Ten Pence; but this being already settled by Law, it is to be
hoped that the Parliament will not easily be prevailed with to alter it.

The thing I chiefly aim at is still behind, viz. to consider how a Credit may
be settled in this Nation, as good, or rather much better then what has been
lost; That Trade cannot be driven without it, I have offered at in the
beginning of this Treatise, and that it cannot be supplied by advancing our
Money, or any thing of that Nature, seems to me out of douht; we are next to
consider, what may be done; all former Methods we see have failed, and indeed
they never had a Foundation fit to support the Building raised on them; our
Bank, and Bankers had too much of self in them, to be the Support of a National
Trade.

Credit I take to be That, which makes a smaller Sum of Money pass as far as
agreater, and serve all the ends of Trade as well, and to give Satisfaction to
every one Concerned, that he is safe in what he does, for if the least Room is
justly left for doubt, so far is the Credit weakened; It must be such a Credit,
as will answer all the occasions both of the Government, and also of the
Trader; It must be so settled, as to provide for those who are out of Trade,
such as Widows, Orphans, Gentlemen, and others, who living by Usury, care must
be taken that their Money may never lie dead on their Hands, and that their
Security be unquestionable; by which means, though they lend cheaper, yet their
Ptofit at the end of Seven Years will be greater, then it formerly was, when
the rate of Interest was higher, but attended with Accidents; It must be such a
Credit, that the Trader may have Money on such reasonable Security as he is
able to give, and for so long time as he shall have need to use it, and yet
That Security be made strong enough to answer the Sum borrowed; by which means
our Products will be increased, our Manufactures encouraged, and our Fishery,
with other Foreign Trades, managed on Terms equal with our Neighbors; It must
be such a Credit, that the Gentlemen of England may be furnished with Money at
low Interest, and be permitted to make their Payments by such Parts as they can
best spare it, the want of which is now a Clog on their Estates, and eats up
very good Families, who when they are once gotten into the Usurers Books, can
find no way out: such unhappy Gentlemen have too often their Houses filled with
Scriveners and Sollicitors, who entertain them with the croaking Music of
Procuration and Continuation, till they have devoured their Estates; It must be
such a Credit as shall have an esteem in Foreign Parts, and make the Traders
of Europe desire to house their Money here; It must be so settled, that the
Nations Debts may be as punctually paid as Foreign Bills, and all Men who
trust the Government as well assured of their Money when due, as they are now
from the most reputable Merchants; then the King will buy cheap, when all who
serve him are paid exactly, and the meanest Trades Men will not be afraid to
deal with the Public, when they are sure to be paid according to their
Contracts, which now none but large Stocks can adventure to do, and therefore
make their own Terms; It must be so settled, that he who has Money in one place
of England may have it in any other Place where he shall want it, at an
inconsiderable Charge, which cannot now be done, without locally altering the
Species, and carrying the Money to the place where it is wanted; this will
prevent many Robberies now committed; It must be so settled, that as on the one
side it may answer the ends of the Borrower, so on the other side it may
likewise of the Lender. In a word, It must be a Credit set, led on an
unquestionable Foundation, which may be wound up to a perpetual Circulation,
like those Waters, which being first drawn up from the Sea, then shower'd down
on the Earth, and strained through its porous Cranies, glide through the Rivers
into the Sea again from whence they came, where they become the Subject Matter
for future Exhalations.

A Credit thus fixed must needs be of great Advantage to this Kingdom, and
should it cost an Hundred Thousand Pounds per Annum to carry it on, yet the
Nation would gain many Millions by it, though if rightly settled, It will not
only support its own Charge, but bring in a great advantage to the Public;
such a Credit as This would make us the Envy of all our Neighbors, who though
they might desire it, are not able by the Constitutions of their Governments to
effect it.

Nor are these all the Advantages the Nation will reap by a well settled Credit;
for besides, that out of the Profits thereof new Stocks might be provided for
industrious Men, who, having been bred up in Trades beneficial to the Nation,
and careful in those Employments, have yet been forced to stoop under the Load
of their Cross Fortunes; which Wheels being again set at Work, will by their
Circular Motion carry round many others, and by these Means in time reimburse
their Benefactor; much like unto well manured Lands, whose plentiful Crops do
soon repay the Charge of Soiling laid out on them by their Proprietors, with
Advantage, On the other side, Rewards might be raised for those, whose honest
Heads have grown Gray in the Service of the Public; and herein we should
imitate our Wise Neighbors, who do the same out of the ancient Demesne of
Holland, though in another way, whereby they give Encouragement to those who
pass through the Employments of their State, to serve it with Integrity, by an
expectation to obtain this Honorable and Profitable Retreat in their Old Ages.

I say besides these, many great things might be done for this Nation out of
the Profits of this Bank; as the Draining of Levels: Regaining Lands out of the
Sea; maintaining Lights for the Direction of Navigation; providing Employments
for the Poor; all which would more then pay the Expenses laid out on them, and
are Works too great for common Stocks, and fit only for Parliaments to
undertake; New Inventions might be rewarded, according as they were found
useful to the Public, which would be better then confining their use for
Fourteen Years to the Inventor; Committees or Councils of Trade might be
erected; and Courts Merchants settled for the more easy and quick deciding of
Differences relating to Trade, which after great expenses in Westminister-Hall,
are now usually referred to the Determination of Those, who understand them
better then the Lawyers can pretend to do; Ships of War might likewise be
built, fitted out, and separated for the Security of our Trade; and all this
out of those Profits, which formerly slid through private Channels into the
Pockets of useless Men, who must be then forced to betake themselves to
Employments more Serviceable to the Public; in this we should out do our
industrious Neighbors the Dutch, even in their own way.

And since I have mentioned a Council of Trade, I cannot let it pass without
some Reflections, (though I have shown the Advantages thereof, if well settled,
in another Treatise) we generally employ Commissioners in the Management of
things of much meaner Circumstances, and believe they cannot be well carried on
without them, who are supposed to understand what they undertake: whilst at the
same time, the general Trade of the Nation (which is the support of all) lies
neglected, as if the Coggs which directed its Wheels did not require skill to
keep them true; Trade requires as much Policy as Matters of State, and can
never be kept in a regular Motion by Accident; when the frame of our Trade is
out of Order, we know not where to begin to mend it, for want of a Set of
Experienced Builders, ready to receive Applications, and able to judge where
the defect lies; it is not the twisting of Laws, and forcing them beyond, and
sometimes contrary to their first Intentions, under pretense of advancing His
Majesty's Customs, will answer that end; nor worrying the Merchants with
unnecessary and Groundless Suits, wherein the King's Name and Purse are often
made use or to screen the Ignorance of Self Conceited Officers; Honesty,
Industry, and good Judgment, are three necessary Qualifications for such as are
employed in the Public Revenue; if Reads versed in Trade were set at Work, the
King's Customs might be advanced many Thousand Pounds per Annum, by such proper
Methods, as would at the same time promote Trade, and enrich the Trader.

It Is certain, we cannot support our Trade long without a Substantial Credit,
every Man running daily in Debt, and not knowing which way to get out of it;
the Species of Money will not answer the occasions we have to use it, by which
means there is a difference already of Fifteen per Cent between Money and
Credit, which must be paid, where Men's necessities do require the former, thus
our Foreign Bills will become a Burden on Trade, when the Premio of raising
Money to pay them shall be so great, and consequently the Importer must advance
it in his Sales, which will be a heavy Tax on the Nation; both Gentlemen and
Traders who are engaged in Bonds, must either make them a standing Charge on
their Estates, or pay them off at Fifteen per Cent loss; and this is not likely
to grow better, but rather worse; the Retailer will be the happiest Man, who
has the Convenience of raising Money, wherewith he may purchase Bank Bills,
and pay his Creditors with them, for which Opportunities will not be wanting in
all places of England, when the Cloathiers shall be forced to receive them in
payment from their Factors in London, under pretense that they had them for
their Cloth, which, whether true or no, they will have a fair Opportunity to
put upon them; these Bills not answering the Clothiers Occasions, who must have
Money to pay their Workmen, will be sold to Shopkeepers in the Country, who
will return them thither again, to answer the Credits they have received there;
This will suddenly be our State, and the Trade of England Center in that great
City, to the prejudice of all other Seaports, unless some Care be taken to
better our Credit; for though our supply of Money may annually increase from
the Mints, yet there will be People ready to catch it up, in order to make
these Advantages; and indeed every Man, to whose Hands Money shall come, will
endeavor to do the same, so that to what a Condition the King's Affairs will
in a short time be reduced, 'twill not be difficult to Guess, when, besides
former Cloggs, another addition of Fifteen per Cent shall be added to all the
Money is taken up for the Occasions of the Nation.

I am of Opinion that whatever Difficulties may seem to attend the settling of
such a Credit, yet it may be done, and I humbly Conceive that Methods may be
Proposed, such as may answer all the Ends Intended by it; but then it must be
done with an Eye designing only the general Good, Self must be clear shut out,
and had we more public Spirits, things which seem difficult would appear more
easy; Self Interest, as it Byasses our Judgments, so it perplexes our Designs;
a frank free Spirit for the common Good will go a great way in a generous
undertaking, and the Public is able to reward such honest Endeavors, which
'twas better they did, then suffer the Treasure of the Nation to be eat up by
Goldsmiths, and other Harpies, who prey upon our Vitals; bv the one the
generous undertaker is no Charge to the Public, but increases its Treasure,
whilst the other lessens it, and destroys our Trade into the Bargain.

The Face of our Affairs seems to look lowering with respect to these three
Things; the meanness of our Credit; the laugnishing of our Trade: and the ill
management of Public Offices in relation to both; I do not mention this to
amuse the Nation, but as deplorable as things seem to be, I doubt not a Remedy
may be found out to rectisie all, if Men of quick and strong thoughts were set
about it.

I have already spoken to the first, our Credit; The next is our Trade, which
must be acknowledged to have labored under the neglect of a tedious, bnt
necessary War; and this is not our Case alone, all Europe has felt the smart of
it, and France has had little Cause to boast; I am apt to think it has
lighted more severely on that Nation then any other, it has seized on the
Vitals of her Trade, which it has not done on ours; Here let us Consider what
are the Vitals of the Trade of France, and we shall find them to be, Wines,
Brandy, Paper, Silks, Salt, and Linnens, in all which both our Selves, and
other Nations, have made such a Progress, that the French, who live by them,
will scarce ever recover the Blow they have Received; On the other side, the
Vitals of this Kingdom are, our Manufactures, our Fishery, and our Plantation
Trade; As to the first, it must be confessed our Losses at Sea have been great,
and lighted heavy on the Exporters, but still the Manufactury it felf has not
suffered, no other Nation has beat us out of the making of them, nor has had
occasion to disuse them for want of a supply; and if our Woollen Manufactures
sink not in their Reputations Abroad, and Care be taken to secure our own Wool
from being carried out, and to get that of Ireland brought hither
Unmanufactured, farther Improvements may yet be made to the advantage of the
Nation; but having spoken largely to this Subject in my Essay on Trade, I shall
referr the Reader to it, where I have likewise showed how the Wool of Ireland
may be secured hither; I shall only now offer it as my Opinion, that better
Steps may be made toward keeping our own from being Exported then have yet
been done; I confess all the Laws I have yet seen about Wool seem to reach but
half way, they depend too much on Force and Penalties, and too little on
Policy; we must begin deeper, and secure the Wool from the time of its
growing, till it is wrought up into Manufactures; This may be done by
practicable Methods, and nothing less then this can do it; our Laws must be so
framed, that it shall be the Interest of every one concerned in Wool to put
them in Execution; Provision must be made to supply the Growers in all
Countries with Money to serve their Occasions, and when they shall see it more
their Advantage to sell their Wool, to be wrought up at Home, then to be sent
Abroad, no doubt they will do it. Men are not apt to desire the ruin of their
Native Country, but when they think themselves neglected, are often provoked
to take such Courses, as they would not otherwise do; Those of Rumny Marsh
complain of this, that having few Clothiers, their Wool lies on their Hands
whilst other Counties have any to sell, by which Means their Rents are unpaid,
whilst their Tenants have sometimes Three Years Wool on their Hands; now say
they, let us be sure of our Money once in a Year, we our Selves would take Care
that none should be Exported, it is not the Price but the Payment that prompts
us to take these Courses, which, in our own Judgments, we think destructive to
the Nation; This might easily be done if our Credit were well settled, and Wool
might be made a better Staple then now it is; nor am I of Opinion that the
beating down its Price is our Advantage, 'twould bear a better Rate if we could
keep it from being shipped out; I belive this Malady might be soon Cured, were
the thing well Considered.

The next Vital in Trade is our Fishery wherein we have had greater advantages
then the French; the Ports of Spain have been open to us, which have been shut
to them; This might be improved very much to the Interest of England, were a
good Credit settled; many Hundred Thousand Pounds might then be raised from
these Northern Seas, which would be all Profit to the Nation.

Neither have we suffered in our Plantation Trade by this War so much as the
French have done; I do not say we have not suffered in our Navigation, but our
Plantations are not lessened since the War began; and our Losses by Sea have in
some Measure been made good to us by our Neighbors the Dutch, and others, who
have depended on us for their Products, to whom we have sold both our Sugars
and Tobacco, at higher Prises then we could have done, if all our Ships had
come home well; These are our Golden Mines, and have helped to support the
Balance of our Trade during the War, their Products being clear Profit to the
Nation; and might be yet more Serviceable, were Laws made which might
effectually secure all their Product to be brought hither; especially Tobacco,
whereby we might as it were put a Tax on most parts of Europe, and make them
pay toward the Support of our Government; It Is a mighty advantage to a Nation,
when it produces a Commodity, so generally desired, and so universally used, as
Tobacco is, which, Custom has to some People made equally-necessary with
Provisions, so that they can as well be without the one, as the other; such a
Trade as this, ought to be guarded with a great-deal of Care, and all our Laws
should tend to make it easy; where great Duties are laid, endeavors should be
used to have them equally paid, else Men do not Trade alike, but the honest
Importer will be under sold by him, that runs them; I humbly Conceive, a Model
might be proposed to make this Commodity much more advantageous to the Kingdom,
and to shut out Strangers from being concerned therein: ways may be found out
to secure Tobacco from the time of its being cured in the Plantations, till the
Duties were paid in England, and by such Practicable Methods, that none should
go besides the Mill, or be Exported to Foreign Countries, till it had first
paid a Toll here; If this were done, we might set almost what Price we thought
fit thereon to Foreign Parts; such a Trade as this deserves all the
Encouragement the Nation can give, both to the Planter, and also to the
Importer, which cannot be done by any Laws I have yet seen, but new ones may be
made, whereby the former might be encouraged to raise greater quantities, and
the latter to fetch them Home, and the Government might receive a considerable
Revenue thereon, both from the Retailer, and the Exporter, with very little
Charge, were a National Credit well settled.

Lastly; The Public Affairs cannot be expected to be Managed well till a good
Credit is settled, and from hence do arise all our Miseries; It Is a Shame to see
how Its Debts are Compounded, and those who trust It forced to make Provision
accordingly by great Over-charges, whilst the Nation pays the whole, The rest
being devoured by Agents, Tally-Buyers, Sollicitors, Goldsmiths, and others,
who raise great Estates on the ruin of the Public: besides the excessive
Rates the KING is now forced to pay for Money, and the Chain of ill
Consequences that attend the non payment to such as are employed: Our Soldiers
would fight more Courageously, and our Sailers serve more willingly, were they
paid more Punctually; and I dare presume to say, that if a Credit had been well
settled at the beginning of this War, it might have been carried on with better
Success, and we appeared more formidable to the French then we have done, for
half the Charge it has now cost the Nation.

FINIS.

