AN ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE Corporation of BRISTOL, In Execution of
the Act of Parliament FOR The better Employing and Maintaining the Poor of that
City.

LONDON: Printed by F. Collins in the Old Baily. 1700.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND HONORABLE, THE Lords Spiritual and Temporal, AND
Commons in Parliament ASSEMBLED.
May it please your Honors,
I Humbly make bold to lay before your Honor's an Account of our Proceedings
in the City of Bristol on the Act of Parliament for Erecting Hospitals and
Workhouses for the better employing and maintaining the Poor of that City,
which passed in the first Sessions of the Parliament begun at Westminster the
22nd of November 1695. whereby the Power invested in the Corporation commenced
from the 12th of May 1696.

The first thing we did was to choose Four Guardians for each of our Twelve
Wards, as the Statute does direct, which, with the Mayor and Aldermen, amounted
to Sixty Guardians, and made up our Court.

The Court being thus constituted, at our first Meeting we chose our Officers
appointed by the said Act, viz. a Governor, a Deputy Governor, Twelve
Assistants, a Treasurer, a Clerk, and a Beadle.

This being done, we ordered the Guardians who dwelt in each Parish, to bring
in an account of all the Poor in their respective Parishes, their Names, Ages,
Sexes, and Qualifications. Also an Account of the Charges expended for
maintaining them in each of the last three Years, that so we might bring it to
a Medium. We also appointed certain standing Rules for the better governing our
Debates, and ordered all things done in the Court to be fairly entered in a
Journal.

We likewise considered which would be most for the Advantage of the
Corporation, to build Workhouses, or to purchase such Houses, which being
already built, might be altered and made fit for our purpose.

These things spent much time, and it was about the Month of September before
we could settle the Medium of the Poor's Rates, in order to certify to the
Mayor and Alderman what Sum was necessary to be raised on the City for the next
Year.

But here we met with an unexpected Remora, Mr. Samuel Wallis was succeeded in
his Majoralty by Mr. J. H. and this Change made a great Alteration in our
Affairs: For whereas the former had given us all the Encouragement we could
expect from him, and had done us the honor to be our first Governor, the
latter resolved to obstruct us all he could. And because the power of raising
Money was vested in him and the Aldermen, he absolutely refused to put that
Power in Execution.

This, together with his other Endeavors to Brow-beat the Corporation, kept us
at a stand till October (97.) only our Court met, and discourst things, and we
labored to keep up the Spirits of our Friends, who began to sink under these
Discouragements, and to despair of Success, the Work seeming difficult enough
in it self; our undertaking being nothing less, then to put to work a great
Number of People, many of which had been habited to Laziness and Beggary; to
civilize such as had been bred up in all the Vices that want of Education could
expose them to; and to clothe, lodge, and feed them well, with the same Sum of
Money which was distributed among them when they begged, lay in the Streets,
and went almost naked.

Yet all this would not have discouraged us, could we have prevailed on Mr.
Mayor to have joined with us. We often sought it, and he as often refused us,
till his time being expired, his Successor granted our Request; and then,
having lost much time, we were forced to make large steps.

The first we made was, a Vote to take on us the Care of all the Poor of the
City; and as I remember, this Vote passed in October or November 1697. though
we had then no Money raised, nor could we expect any till after our Lady Day
School. So that from the passing that Vote to this time is about Two Years.

The next step was to appoint a Committee of Twelve to hear the Complaints of
the Poor, to relieve them, and set them at work; Six whereof were to go out
every Month, and to be succeeded by Six more, to be chosen by Ballating.

We had formerly obtained from the Mayor and Common Council, in the Majoralty
of Alderman Wallis, the Grant of a Workhouse, which then lay unoccupied, and
the Court had appointed a Committee to place as many Girls in it as it would
conveniently contain, both as to Lodging and Working. This is that we called
the New Workhouse.

But all things having stood still so long, we resolved now to lose no more
time; yet we had no Money, nor could we expect any in less than Six Months from
the Poor's Rates; therefore we reresolved to make our several Loans for Twelve
Months without Interest to the Corporation on the Credit of their Common Seal;
in which Design many of the Citizens lent their Assistance, whereby we became
soon Masters of about Six hundred pounds Stock. Likewise our Guardians, who
were appointed to pay the Poor in their several Parishes, voluntarily advanced
their weekly Payments, till they could be reimburst by the Treasurer. The other
Stock we employed to furnish Beds and other Necessaries for our House, Clothes
and Provisions for our Children to be taken in, and Materials for their Working.

We had now Two Committees; one for the Poor, the other for the New Workhouse.

The Committee for the Poor met twice every Week: And in this Committee we
proceeded thus;

First, We voted that the Poor of the City should be visited in their
respective Parishes, and that new Poor's Rates should be made; and accordingly
we ordered the Guardians of each Parish to bring together the Poor on a certain
Day in some convenient Place, where the Committee met, and without Partiality
endeavored to provide for every one according to their Wants. We likewise took
notice of all the young Girls that were on our Poor's Books, and of such whose
Parents took no due Care of them; and these we recommended to the Committee of
the New Workhouse, to be taken in, and employed by them.

Our Poor's Rates we made in this manner: Every One that expected Relief came
before us with their whole Families, except such as were impotent and could not
come: In our Books we put down the Name of the Man, the Woman, and each Child;
together with the Qualifications of all, either as to Age, Health, Civility,
etc. what each Person did or could get by the Week, and in what Employment. We
likewise set down for what Reason the Charity was bestowed, that when that
should cease, or we could find out any other way to provide for it, the Charity
should likewise cease.

Having thus seen the state of all our Poor, and provided for them, the
Committee sat twice a Week in the Public Court, to hear and provide for all
casual Complaints; which we did in this manner; We ordered that the Poor in
their respective Parishes, should first apply themselves to their Guardian or
Guardians, who were to relieve them as they saw fit, till the next Sitting of
the Committee, when they were to bring them up with their Complaints, if they
were able to come; and this we did, lest the Committee (three whereof made a
Quorum) should be deceived; who could not be supposed to know the state of all
the Poor in the City, and by this weans we had the Opinion of the Guardian of
each Parish; nor could he easily deceive us, because he brought the Poor with
him, and thereby the Committee became Judges of the Matter laid before them. At
these Meetings care was taken of the various Cases and Exegencies which
offered, and in all things there was a regard, as much as could be, to put
People on living by their own Labors.

To such as were sick, we gave Warrants to our Physician to visit them; such as
wanted the Assistance of our Surgeons were directed to them, and all were
Relieved till they were able to work; by which means the Poor having been well
attended, were set at work again, who by neglect might with their Families have
been chargeable to the Corporation; for some we provided Clothes, for others
Work; where we found People careful, but wanted a Stock to employ themselves
and their Children, we either lent or gave it; where they wanted Houses, we
either paid the Rent, or became Security for it; where we found them oppressed,
we stood by them; where Differences arose, we endeavored to compose them; so
that in a little time all the Complaints of the Poor came to this Committee,
(which saved our Magistrates a great deal of trouble) and care was taken that
none went away unheard.

The Committee at first sat twice a Week, but now only once in a Fortnight; not
that we grew slack in the Care of our Poor, but because their Number being so
much abated by those received into our several Workhouses, the Business does
not require their meeting oftener.

The other Committee, (viz.) That for the New Workhouse, having furnished it
in order to receive in the young Girls, first began with such as were
recommended to them by the Committee for the Poor; and this Method has been
generally observed ever since, both by that Committee, and also by the
Committee since chosen for our other Workhouse; not that either of them
depends ou the other, but because the first application for Relief is made to
the Committee for the Poor.

But before we took in the Girls, we first considered of proper Officers to
govern them; and these consisted of a Master, whose Business was to receive in
Work, and deliver it out again, and to keep the Accounts of the House, etc.

A Mistress, whose Business was to look after the Kitchen and Lodgings, to
provide their Meals at set times, and other things which related to the
Government of the House.

Tutresses to teach them to Spin, under each of which we designed to put Five
and twenty Girls.

A School-Mistress, to teach them to Read.

Servants in the Kitchen, and for washing, etc. but these we soon discharged,
and caused our biggest Girls to take their Turns every Week.

We also appointed an old Man to keep the Door, and to carry forth and fetch in
Work, and such kind of Services.

Being thus provided, we received in One hundred Girls, and set them to work at
Spinning of Worsted Yarn; all which we first caused to be stripped by the
Mistress, washed, and new clothed from Head to Foot; which, together with
wholesome Diet at set hours, and good Beds to lie on, so encouraged the
Children, that they willingly betook themselves to their work.

We likewise provided for them Apparel for Sundays; they went to Church every
Lord's Day; were taught their Catechisms at home, and had Prayers twice every
Day; we appointed them set Hours for working, eating, and playing; and gave
them leave to walk on the Hills with their Tutresses, when their work was over,
and the weather fair; by which means we won them into Civility, and a love to
their Labor. But we had a great deal of trouble with their Parents, and those
who formerly kept them, who having lost the sweetness of their Pay, did all
they could to set both the Children and others against us; but this was soon
over.

Hitherto things answered above our Expectations; our Children grew sober, and
worked willingly, but we very much questioned, whether their Labors at the
Rates we were paid, would answer the Charge of their Maintenance; and if not,
our great doubt was how we might advance it, without prejudicing the
Manufactures.

To clear the first, we supposed ourselves in a fair way, having appointed
their Diets to be made up of such Provisions as were very wholesome, afforded
good nourishment, and were not costly in price, (viz.) Beef, Pease, Potatoes,
Broth, Pease-porridge, Milk-porridge, Bread and Cheese, good Bear, (such as we
drank at our own Tables) Cabage, Carrots, Turnips, etc. in which we took the
Advice of our Physician, and bought the best of every sort. They had three
Meals every day, and as I remember, it stood us (with Soap to wash) in about
Sixteen pence per Week for each of the One hundred Girls. We soon found the
effect of their Change of Living, Nature being well supported, threw out a
great deal of foulness, so that we had generally Twenty down at a time, in the
Measels, Smallpox, and other Distempers; but by the Care of our Physician, and
the Blessing of God on his Endeavors, we never buried but Two, though we have
had seldom less than One hundred in the House at any time.

Having thus provided for their Dyets, we next appointed their times of
working; which in the Summer was Ten hours and a half every Day, and an hour
less in the Winter; by which means we answered the two Objections raised
against the Poor, (viz.) That they will not work, and that they spend what they
get in fine feeding.

But we soon found, that the great cause of begging did proceed from the low
Wages for Labor; for after about Eight Months time, our Children could not get
half so much as we expended in their Provisions. The Manufacturers, who
employed us, were always complaining the Yarn was spun course, but would not
advance above Eight pence per pound for spinning, and we must either take this,
or have no work. On the other side, we were laboring to understand how we
might distinguish, and put a value on our Work, according to its fineness. This
we did by the Snap Reel, which when we were Masters of, the Committee made an
Order, That the Master should buy in a Stock of Wool, and spin it up for our
own Accounts, and then proceeded to set the Price of Spinning by the Snap Reel,
wherein we endeavored to discourage course work, and to encourage fine,
because we saw the latter was likely to bring most profit, not only to the
Poor, but to the Kingdom in general. We likewise ordered some things to be made
of the several sorts of Yarn, at the Rates we had set them; and on the whole,
we found the Commodities made of fine Yarn, though they were much better than
those made of course, yet stood us in little more; because what the one
exceeded in the charge of Spinning, was very much made good in abatement of the
Quantity used. We therefore sent to the Manufacturers, and showed them what
Experiments we had made; but finding them still unwilling to advance above the
old Rate, the Committee voted that they would give Employment to all the Poor
of the City, who would make application to them, at the Rates we offered to
work, and pay them ready Money for their Labor.

We soon found we had taken the right course, for in a few Weeks we had Sale
for our fine Yarn as fast as we could make it, and they gave us from Eight
pence to Two shillings per pound for spinning the same Goods, for which a
little before they paid but Eight pence, and were very well pleased with it,
because they were now able to distinguish between the fine and course Yarn, and
to apply each sort to the use for which it was most proper: Since which they
have given us Two shillings and six pence per pound for a great many pounds,
and we spin some worth Three shillings and six pence per pound spinning.

By this means we had the pleasure of seeing the Children's Labor advanced,
which a little before I came up, amounted to near Six pounds per Week, and
would have been much more, but that ^ur biggest Girls we either settle forth,
or put in the Ktchin; and those we receive in being generally small, are able
to do ltitle for some time after.

The encouragement we had received on this beginning, put us on proceeding
further: The Court resolved to purchase a great Sugar-House, out of the Money
directed by the Act to be raised for building of Workhouses, and fit it up for
receiving in the remainder of the Poor, (viz.) ancient People, Boys, and young
Children; which was accordingly done, and a Committee was appointed to manage
it. This we called the Mint Workhouse, because it had been lately hired by the
Lords of the Treasury for that Use.

The Committee began to take in the Boys in August last; these we clothed,
dyeted, and governed, much after the same manner as we had done the Girls, but
put them on a different Employment, (viz.) spinning of Cotton Wool, and weaving
of Fustians: We have now about One hundred of them together, who settle well to
their work, and every day mend their hands; they get us already Six pounds per
Week; they are likewise taught to Read, and we shall hereafter teach them to
Write.

We next took in our ancient People; and here we had principally a regard to
such as were impotent, and had no Friends to help them, and to such as we could
not keep from the lazy Trade of Begging; these we clothed as we saw they
needed, and put on such Employments as were fit for their Ages and Strengths,
having our Eyes chiefly on those to which they were bred; we found it difficult
at first to bend them down to good Orders, but by degrees we have brought them
under Government.

Then we called in all the Children that were on our Poor's Books, and put them
under Nurses; those who can speak and go are carried down into the School to
learn their A, B, C, etc. As they grow up, we shall put them into the working
Rooms.

The Boys are kept at a distance from the ancient People, who do also lodge in
distinct Apartments, the Men in several Chambers on one Floor, and the Women on
another; all do something, though perhaps some of their Labors comes to
little, yet it keeps them from Idleness; Both the Old and Young attend Prayers
twice a day, (except the Bedridden, for whom other Care is taken) and go to
Church twice on Sundays.

We have now three standingCommittees, (viz.) For the Poor, for the New
Workhouse, and for the Mint Workhouse: The first gives all Directions, and
makes all Allowances, for the Poor, without whose Order no Guardian can act any
thing considerable, except in Cases of absolute Necessity, which at the next
Meeting of the Committee he must give an Account of, and desire their
Approbation. The other two Committees have power to act in the Affairs of that
Workhouse for which they are chosen: They receive in both Old and Young; they
bind forth Apprentices, Correct, order the Diet as they please, oversee the
working, sell the Manufactures when made, order the payment of all Moneys,
which cannot be done unless the Note be signed by the Chairman; and generally
direct every thing relating to those Houses.

The Accounts are made up thus: The Treasurers Account is audited every Year by
a Committee chosen for that purpose; at which time he is succeeded by another
Treasurer, chosen by the Court: The Accounts of the Guardians who pay the Poor
in their several Parishes are audited every three Months, by a select Committee
chosen likewise by the Court, and are then paid by the Treasurer: The Accounts
for each Workhouse are audited by the respective Committee every Month, when
the Master adjusts, not only his Account of Cash, but also of each particular
Specie of Goods he has under his Care, the Balance whereof is still carried
forward to the next, which when allowed of is signed by the Chairman: And the
Account for each House is so stated, that it shows at one sight, what the House
is indebted; what Debts are outstanding, and from whom; what Goods remain in
the House, and the Quantity of each Specie.

At the making up these Accounts nothing (unless very trivial) is allowed, for
which an Order is not produced, or found entered in our Books, so that it is
very difficult to wrong the Corporation of any thing, if any Guardians should
endeavor it.

These Committees keep their Journal Books, wherein all they do is fairly
transcribed, and signed by the Chairman.

This is what at present occurs to my Memory touching our Workhouses at
Bristol; I have been as brief as the nature of the thing would admit: The
Success has answered our Expectation; we are freed from Beggars, our old
People are comfortably provided for; our Boys and Girls are educated to
Sobriety, and brought up to delight in Labor; our young Children are well
looked after, and not spoiled by the neglect of ill Nurses; and the Face of our
City is so changed already, that we have great reason to hope these young
Plants will produce a virtuous and laborious Generation, with whom Immorality
and Profaneness may find little Encouragement; not does our hopes appear to be
groundless, for among Three hundred Persons now under our Charge within Doors,
there is neither Cursing nor Swearing, nor profane Language, to be heard,
though many of them, were bred up in all manner of Vices, which neither
Bridewell nor Whippings could fright them from, because, returning to their bad
Company for want of Employment, they were rather made worse then bettered by
those Corrections; wherers the Change we have wrought on them is by fair means.
We have a Bridewel, Stocks and Whipping-Post, always in their sights, but never
had occasion to make use of either.

What is done in that City I humbly hope may be carried on by the same steps
throughout the Kingdom, if the Bill for that purpose now depending in
Parliament, does obtain the Sanction to be past into an Act. The Poor may be
set at work, their Wages advanced without danger to our Manufactures, and they
thereby enabled to live on their own Labors, whereby the Charge of the Poor's
Rates may be saved, and a great many worthy Benefactors encouraged to give,
when they shall see their Charity so well disposed of. This I have great reason
to hope, because we have had near One thousand pounds freely given to us within
the compass of one Year, and much thereof by Gentlemen who dwelt at a Distance
from us, only were willing to Encourage a Work they saw likely to be carried
on, which might be of good Example to the Nation.

I am, with all dutiful respect, Right Honorable and Honorable, Your Honors
most obedient Servant JOHN CARRY.


