The Unfortunate Court-Favourites OF ENGLAND, Exemplified In some Remarks upon
the Lives, Actions, and Fatal Fall of diverse Great Men, who have been
Favorites to several English Kings and Queens; Namely, I. Pierce Gaveston Earl
of Cornwall. II. Hugh Spencer, Earl of Winchester. ^II. Hugh Spencer the Son,
E. of Glorester. ^V. Roger Mortimer, Earl of March. V. Henry Stafford, Duke of
Buckingham. VI. Thomas Woolsey, Cardinal of York. VII. Thomas Cromwell, Earl of
Essex. VIII. Robert Devereux, Earl of Essex. IX. George Villiers, Duke of
Buckingham. X. Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Stafford.


By R. B.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey (...) Cheapside
1695.

The Kings and Queens of England to whom the following Unfortunate Great Men
were Favorites.
I. Pierce Gaveston Earl of Cornwall, Favorite to King Edward II. II, and III.
Hugh Spencer the Father, and Hugh Spencer the Son, both Favorites to King
Edward II. IV. Roger Mortimer Earl of March, Favorite to Queen Isabel, Widow
to King Edward II. and Mother to King Edward III. V. Henry Stafford Duke of
Buckingham, Favorite to King Richard III. VI. Thomas Woolsey Cardinal of York,
Favorite to King Henry VIII. VII. Thomas Cromwell Earl of Essex, Favorite to
King Henry VIII. VIII. Robert Devereux Earl of Essex, Favorite to Queen
Elizabeth. IX. George Villiers Duke of Buckingham, Favorite to King Charles I.
and King James I: X. Thomas Wentworth Earl of Stafford, Favorite to King
Charles I.
To the Reader.
NOthing is more obvious than that Ambition, Envy and Emulation are the usual
Attendants on the Courts of Princes, and that the effects of them have been
often very fatal to many Great Men, who had the fortune to have a larger share
in their Masters affections than others. It is likewise as notorious, That
there are certain Crises of Government, wherein Princes have been obliged to
Sacrifice their darling, Ministers either to their own safety or to the
importunity of their People. Lastly it is as evident, That some
Court-Favourites have justly merited the unhappy Fate they met with, for their
many Rapines, Insolences and Enormities, as that others have been ruined
merely from the Caprichio or inconstant Temper of the Prince whom they served.
Of all these, in my opinion, the ensuing Favorites are pregnant Instances. But
I shall leave the Reader to particularise them according to his own Judgment
and will only add, That they are not all to be condemned as Criminal, merely
because they all happened to be unfortunate.

R. B.

Remarks on the Life, Actions and Fatal Fall of Pierce Gavestone, Earl of
Cornwall, and Favorite to King Edward the Second.
THAT Unhappy Prince, Edward the 2d. was certainly the most Unfortunate in his
Favorites of any King of England, either before or fince his Reign: The first
and Fatal Favorite he had was in his Youth, before he came to the Crown, whose
name was Pierce Gaveston, born in Gascoigne, a Province of France, and for the
good Service performed by his Father in the Wars in that Kingdom, his Son was
taken into such Favor at Court, that by K. Edward the First's own appointment
he was Educated, and made a Companion to the young Prince: And indeed his
outward Accomplishments seemed to render him worthy of such great Honor, being
a Person of a sharp Wir, an excellent Shape, and of a valiant Temper, of which
he gave notable proof in a Battle against the Scots, and for which they
afterward bore him a mortal Hatred: But all these worthy Qualities were utterly
defaced and clouded by his vicious Incli^ations, so that as to his Christian
and Moral Virtues, which are only really commendable in Men, Authors are very
silent in mentioning them, though all give large accounts of his Faults and
Immora^ities.

And King Edward was so sensible, that his Son the Prince had been debauched by
the corrupt Conversation of Gavestone, that some time before his Death he was
banished the Kingdom: And upon his Deathbed commanding the Prince his Son to
repair to him with all speed to Carlisle in Cumberland, where he was with a
great Army ready to invade Scotland: He gave him many worthy Admonitions, and
much good Advice, particularly, That he should be merciful, just, and kind,
faithful in word and deed, an incourager of those that were good, and ready to
relieve those that were in distress; That he should be loving to his two
Brothers Thomas and Edmund, but especially to honor and respect his Mother
Queen Margaret; That upon pain of his Malediction and Curse he should not
presume without common consent to recall Pierce Gavestone from Exile (who for
abusing his tender Years with wicked practices by common Decree of the Nobility
was banished): He also added a strange Injunction for a dying man, namely, That
after his Death the Prince should not presume to take the Crown of England till
he had honorably revenged the Injuries his Father had received from the Scots,
and finished the present Expedition against them, and that he should carry his
Father's Bones about with him in a Coffin, till he had marched through all
Scotland, and subdued all his Enemies, assuring him that while they were with
him he should be always victorious.

Lastly; Whereas by the continual Attempts of Bruce King of Scotland, he was
prevented from performing his Vow of going in Person for the recovery of
Jerusalem and the Holy Land from the Infidels, that he should send his Heart
thither accompanied with 140 Knights and their Retinue, for whose support he
had provided Thirty two thousand pounds of Silver; That after his Heart was
conveyed thither, he hoped in God all things would prosper with them; Adjuring
the Prince upon pain of Eternal Damnation, that he should not expend the Money
upon any other use. After these Admonitions, and having taken an Oath of this
vain Young Prince, to perform his Will, he gave up the Ghost.

After his Father's Death, the Son soon made it appear how little regard he had
to perform his dying Requests, and to show what his future Behavior was like
to be, he in the first place revenged himself upon Walter Langton Bishop of
Chester, Lord Treasurer of England, and Principal Executor of his Father's Last
Will, whom he imprisoned in Wallingford Castle, seizing upon all his Estate, no
man daring to intercede on his behalf, because of the extreme hatred which the
King showed against him, the Bishop's Crime being only in using a modest
freedom in K. Edward's days, in gravely reproving (...) for his (...) meanours,
and not suffering him to have what (...) he required, to waste prodigally upon
his (...) Gavestone, against whom he likewise made such great and just
Complaints, as occasioned the imprisonment of the Prince, and the banishment of
his lewd Favorite.

Soon after the young King married Isabel Daughter to Philip the Fair of
France, the March being concluded before his Father's death, and was now
performed with extraordinary Magnificence at Bullen: At which Solemnity there
were five Kings, namely, Philip the French King, the K. of Almain, the K. of
Sicily, the K. of Navar, and K. Edward the Bridegroom, and four Queens, Mary Q.
of France, Margaret the Q. Mother of England, her Daughter the Q. of Navar, and
Isabel the Bride, Q. of England: There were likewise present a great number of
Persons of Honor and Quality, and among them the beloved Pierce Gavestone, who
was entertained with the tenderest affection imaginable by K. Edward; but the
Nobility had such a detestation of him, that they resolved to have hindered the
Coronation of the King and Queen, which soon after followed, had not King
Edward solemnly promised to give them a reasonable satisfaction in the matter,
yet was he so far from it, that none appeare^ more great in Attendants,
Bravery, and all other grandeur, than Gavestone; and as a particular mark of
Esteem, the King ordered him to carry Sr. Edward's Crown before him at that
Solemnity: This still increased the Abhorrence of the Lords against him, who
having the power and favor of the King on his side, slighted all their
Attempts and Designs, and resolved to provoke them to the utmost by abusing,
miscalling, and scoffing at the chief Peers of the Land, naming Thomas Earl of
Lancaster, the Stage player, Aymer de Valence Earl of Pembroke, Joseph the Jew,
because he wa^ (...) pale; and Guy Earl of Warwick, the (...) of Ardern, all
whom at a Tur(...) a most contemptible manner.

(...) took little notice of these base Af(...) rather enconraged his
Insolence, by heap(...) daily upon him; and Gavestone, to establish himself,
was still contriving those Diversions which he knew to be pleasing to his vain
Mind; so that the Court was filled with Fiddlers, Players, Jesters, Flatterers,
and all such pernicious People as by sensualities and riotous practices might
withdraw him from attempting any Noble Enterprises in performance of his
Father's Last Will, or for the good Government of his People, and led him into
all kind of Debauchery and Dissoluteness, while Gavestone himself revelled in
all outward felicity, and wasted the Treasure of the Kingdom in Riot and Folly,
or else converted it to his private use, and likewise transported great Sums
beyond the Sea, that he might have somewhat to trust to, if Fortune should
happen to turn her back upon him, and force him to a second Banishment.

And indeed he had so absolutely and entirely engrossed the King's Favor, that
he had thereby frequent opportunities of enriching himself, for all Addresses
to the King for obtaining Offices, Honors, Pardons, or any other Advantages
passed through his hands, who always espoused their business not according to
Justice, but by the value of the Presents made him; and it is scarce credible
to relate with what Prodigality the King squandred away his Money upon him; yea
so prodigious was his kindness toward him, that he bestowed on him the best
Jewels, Gifts or Rarities that he had, nay, the Imperial Crown (...) Victorious
Father, and a very fine Table, and Stands all of pure Gold, with many other
rich Ornaments, which Gavestone privately conveyed away, to the great damage of
the Kingdom; Nay, he treated him by the name of Brother, and publicly
declared, that if it were in his power, he would make him his Successor to the
Crown.

The Lords who had hitherto past by the private Affronts and Injuries they had
daily received, in hope that the King might in time have seen his Errors,
which they by their daily Admonitions endeavored to make him sensible of,
finding that he still persisted in the same Courses, which grew now
intolerable, resolved more plainly to remonstrate the matter to him, telling
him, That to their great grief they perceived that his Dotage and ill-placed
Affection was unlimited toward Gavestone, a Person of a wicked and infamous
Life, whose Father was a Traitor to the French King, and was hanged for the
same: That his Mother was burnt for a Witch, and that he himself was banished
for being a Confederate with her in her cursed Witchcrafts, and that they did
verily believe he had bewitched the King, or else certainly he could never
retain such an unreasonable Passion for so profligate a Wretch: That they much
doubted he would abuse his Greatness so far as to bring Foreigners into the
Land to defend him in his lawless and destructive Courses, to the utter Ruin
of the Laws, Liberties and Estates of his Subjects; They therefore humbly
desire him to hearken to the Advice of his Peers, which would be both for his
own Honor, and the Welfare of his People, and particularly, 1. That he would
confirm and maintain those Ancient Laws and Customs which were contained in the
Charters of the Kings his Predecessors. 2. That he would not force any man to
part with his goods without payment of the full value thereof. 3. That whatever
Money, Lands, Jewels, or other valuable things had been given away or alienated
from the Crown since his Father's death might be restored. 4. That he would
remember the Oath he had taken to his Father before his death not to recall
Pierce Gaveston from his Banishment: And for prosecuting the War against
Scotland, and that he would rectify all that had hitherto been amiss, that so
his Enemies might have no cause to rejoice, nor his Friends be any longer
troubled and disquieted: Lastly, That no man should be restrained by the King's
Writ from prosecuting his Suits in any Court of Justice, for defending his
Right and Property, but that Justice might be impartially administered
throughout the Kingdom both to Rich and Poor, according to the ancient and
approved Constitutions, Customs and Laws of England.

The King taking Counsel of Pierce Gavestone and his Accomplices, commanded the
Lord Chancellor to tell the Lords that he would give them satisfaction to their
demands at the next Session of Parliament. The Barons were no sooner gone out
of London to their own homes, but the King ordered the Gates of City to be
shut, and the Streets to be chained, and and strict Watch to be kept, and then
with some Forces, both English and Foreigners, marched in company of Gaveston
to Wallingford Castle, and as his Conscience did not trouble him for the breach
of his Oath, so their dislike increased his love to Gavesion, for none but
Gaveston must do all, and nothing was acceptable nor grateful but what came
from his hand. However the King's lavishness having quite emptied his
Exchequer, he was compelled to comply with the Parliament at their next Meeting
in London, so far as to pass an Act for Gaveston's perpetual Banishment, and
for securing the Liberty of the Subject, and the due execution of Justice,
which the King confirmed by a solemn Oath, and for which they gratified him
with a subsidy of the twentieth part of their Estates. In pursuance of this
Decree Gaveston is sent by the King into Ireland, himself accompanying him in
Person as far as Bristol, and giving him a Commission to be Chief Governor of
that Kingdom, bestowing likewise on him no less then thirty two Towns in the
Province of Gascoign in France, and furnishing him with men and money
sufficient to secure himself against his Enemies, creating him Baron of
Wallingford, and Earl of Cornwall, and giving him the whole Revenue of that
County as well as of Ireland; to be disposed of at his pleasure, with such
store of Plate and Jewels that he might well think his Banishment was but a
splendid Embassage, and an occasion offered to the King by fortune to make him
the more Rich and Honorable. He was no sooner arrived there but the King sent
Messengers to him with his gracious Letters, requiring him to be cheerful and
merry in his exile, assuring him that his troubles should in the end be
recompensed with greater dignities and favors than he had yet received, and
indeed the King's mind was so fondly transported that he could not live without
him, and the exigency of his affairs being over, he soon made it appear that
what he had done against him was absolutely contrary to his humor, and that
his Heart went not along with his Tongue and Hand. He therefore sends for him
back, who arriving in Wales and coming to Flint Castle was there met by the
^ing and received with such extraordinary satisfaction as if the greatest
blessing of Heaven had been bestowed upon him, and to fix him more strongly if
possible in his affections he Married him to Joan of Acres Countess of
Gloucester his Sisters Daughter, resolving with himself to retain his Gaveston
in despite of all his Lords and People, and to adventure his Crown and Life in
protecting of him from their displeasure, wherein both the King and He showed
much indiscretion, it being as equally dangerous for a Prince to show
extravagant love to his Favorite as for him to accept and make use of the
same, and at length it proved fatal to them both. For Gaveston who was
naturally insolent and ambitious being thus above his hopes or expectation^
advanced to an alliance with the Blood Royal, seemen now to endeavor if
possible to exceed in his former outrages, and practifed many more notorious
Villainies than ever he had done before, wasting and consuming the King's
Treasure with such monstrous profusion that he had not wherewithal to defray
the ordinary expenses of his Court or to provide necessaries for his Family.
For he continually studied to supply the King's luxurious fancy with fresh and
chargeable delights both in banqueting, costly Wines, and Lascivious dalliance,
whereby be clouded his understanding, and vi^ated his Soul, insomuch that he
abandoned the Law^ Bed and Society of his Religious and Virtuous Queen, and
gave himself up to the embraces of wanton and impudent Harlors.

The Queen was extremely grieved at these unsufferable wrongs and abuses, which
she endeavored to redress by her earnest Prayers to God, and her obliging
demeanor to the King, but all her pains were fruitless, for the beams of her
excellent endowments could not disperse the thick mists of his debauched
temper, neither could her sighs nor tears soften his Heart hardened with the
variety and continuance of sinning and the malevolent example of the cursed
Gaveston. Neither were the Common People silent, but took much liberty to talk
of these great misdemeanors of the King, who still continued resolute in those
dissolute courses to which he inti^ed him. The Queen being thus ab^ed both in
her Honor and Maintenance, having not a sufficient Maintenance allowed her by
the pre^ominant Gaveston to support her Royal Dignity, sends her ^plaints to
her Father the French King, and the Abbot of St. Dennis in France being (...)
Pope's Legate, to demand the Legacy that the King's Father lest for the
recovery of the Holy Land, used his earnest importunities with him to banish
that lewd Companion Gaveston from his Court and Kingdom, with whose
Conversation all Mankind that had converse with him were infected, but all was
in vain. After this the King Summoned a Parliament to meet at Northampton,
designing to go from thence to Scotland. The Barons came thither well armed and
guarded, of which the King having intelligence sent them word he would not
come, yet at last he came as far as Stony-Stratford, to whom the Lords sent the
Earls of Warwick and Clare, with their earnest entreaties that for his own
safety and the benefit of the Kingdom he would appear at his Parliament.
Whereupon he was prevailed with to come in the Habit of an Esquire, and the
Lords were present unarmed, and in conclusion an happy agreement was made, and
the Expedition to Scotland laid aside for the present.

Soon after the Parliament assembled at London, to which came Jews Brother to
the French King, and the Bishop of Poictou, to endeavor to settle a lasting
Concord between the King and the Peers. At this Parliament many good Laws were
Enacted, and among others one for banishing Pierce Gaveston once again, which
the King was obliged to pass though sore against his will, with this condition
added by the Lords, That if he were ever found again in any of the King's
Dominions he should be taken as a Common Enemy, and executed by Martial Law
without any farther Trial.

Hereupon Gaveston went into France, but that King being his sworn Enemy upon
the account of the Queen his Daughter, he durst not continue long in any one
place, but wandered from one Country to another seeking for Rest but could find
none. Wherefore ^ing still confidence in the love and favor of the (...),
whose Sister he had Married, he (with many Foreigners) adventured once more to
England having scarce been absent three months, and coming to the King who then
kept his Christmas at York he was received and entertained with the former
endearedness, and so much joy, that an Angel from Heaven could not have been
more welcome to the King, who instantly made him Principal Secretary of State.

The Queen, Nobility and People were all mightily disturbed at Gaveston's
return, and the Lords perceiving the irreclaimable Temper of the King, they
consulted how to put an end to those notorious mischiefs, and at length
concluded that there could be no peace in the Kingdom while Gaveston was alive.
Hereupon they resolved to venture their Lives and Estates for the destruction
of this infamous Fore^gner, who seemed to design nothing but the utter ruin of
the Nation. Pursuant to which resolution they constitute Thomas Earl of
Lancaster to be their Leader, and put themselves in Arms, but being sensible of
the miseries of intestine Wars, they were willing, first to try all peaceable
Expedients, and therefore several Great men were sent with an humble Petition
to the King at York, requesting him to deliver into their hands, or drive out
of his Company and Kingdom the wicked Gaveston, assuring him that they were all
of opinion that he would never have any Money in his Exchequer, nor any love
for his Queen, whilst that profligate stranger was in so much Grace, and
threatening that if he did not gratify them in their requests, they would
renounce their Allegiance, and prosecute him as a perjured Prince. But the
obstinate King would not condescend to their desires, resolving to lose all
rather than part with his dear Gaveston; and therefore he instantly sent for
several Foreign Soldiers, and having hired three hundred Horsemen commanded by
the Earl of Hannow and the Viscount Foix, in their passage through France for
England, they were seized by that King, who killed most of the Soldiers and
hanged up the Officers, He then solicited aid from Robert Bruce King of
Scotland, from (...) Thomas a Great man in Ireland, and likewise from the
Welsh, but they all denied to give him any assistance against his Barons.
Whereat being enraged he fortified Windsor Castle, and built Forts in several
other parts of the Kingdom. The Lords likewise raised Forces, and resolved to
march toward York, from whence the King was gone to Sea for his recreation,
leaving Gaveston behind him, who lodged in the Castle, and caused that and the
City also to be strengthened with new Fortifications. The Barons rendezvoused at
Bedford, where they made Gilbert Earl of Gloucester Lord Keeper of England, and
ordered strict Guards to be set upon the Seacoasts for preventing any Foreign
Forces from landing to assist the Ring. From hence they proceeded to York, at
whose approach Gaveston fled from thence to Scarborough, the Lords pursued him
thither, and Besieging the Town they quickly took it, and made him a Prisoner,
committing him to the Custody of Aymer de Valence Earl of Pembroke, who carried
him to a Village called Dathington between Oxford and Warwick, designing to
have conveyed him the next day to Wallingford Castle, and going that night to
lodge with his Countess who was hard by, the next morning Guy Earl of Warwick
with a strong Party took him away from thence and brought him to Warwick
Castle. And the Lords having called a Council of War it was unanimously
resolved by the Earls of Lancaster, Warwick and Hereford that he should be
instantly put to death, as a subverter of the Government, and a notorious
Traitor to the Kingdom. And thereupon he was carried to a place called
Blacklow, and afterward Gaveshead, where he was beheaded in the presence of the
Lords aforementioned in 1312. His Body was by the Friars Predicant conveyed to
Oxford, and there kept above two years, till the King caused it to be removed
to Kings Langley in Hartfordshire, where he in person (to demonstrate his
endeared affection to him dead as well as living) attended with the Archbishop
of Canterbury, four Bishops with many Abbots and principal Clergy Men, caused
him to be interred in the Friars Church which he had built, with all manner of
Funeral Pomp and Solemnity: Few or none of the Temporal Lords being present,
whose great Hearts could not comply to honor him being dead whom they so
mortally hated when alive. This was the fatal end of this angracious Favorite,
who if he had used moderation and discretion might have long enjoyed the
grandeur to which he had arrived, but the public wrongs he was guilty of,
together with the private and personal abuses offered to the principal
Nobility, made him odious and abhorred, no injuries being harder to be forgiven
or forgotten than Scoffs and Jeers at men's Personal defects, which have
occasioned the destruction of many in all Ages, and made this unfortunate man
dye unpitied and unlamented, being reckoned to fall a just Sacrifice both to
public and private vengeance.

Remarks on the Lives, Actions and Fatal Fall of Hugh Spencer the Father Earl
of Winchester, and Hugh Spencer the Son, Earl of Gloucester, Both Favorites to
King Edward the Second.
INnumerable are the mischiefs that a Kingdom is subject to, which is governed
by a perverse and wilful Prince, which commonly occasions great calamities both
to himself and his People, and of which we have scarce a more pregnant instance
than in the Reign of that unhappy King Edward the second, who though he had
suffered so many troubles for his inordinate and unreasonable favors to Pierce
Gaveston; and by whose removal the Nobility seemed so well contented, that he
might now have settled himself and the Realm in Peace, yet his violent nature
was such, that instead thereof he made it his Study how ^o destroy those Lords
who had deprived him of his beloved Gaveston, whose death so afflicted him that
he seemed as if he had lost half of himself, and whose Blood he designed to
revenge upon them to the utmost, as the only means to revive his languishing
Spirit, and remove the mourning and sorrow that had lain upon his mind ever
since his fatal Fall. The Barons were very sensible of his rage and displeasure
against them and therefore resolved not to (...) down their arms till they had
sufficiently provided for their future security, and settled the Government
upon its ancient and legal foundation.

This unnatural division between the King and his Peers was much heightened by
the ill Offices of the Queens Kindred and Countrymen the French, who coming
over in great numbers to attend the solemnity of the Baptizing the King's Son
(afterward the Victorious King Edward III.) who was about this time born at
Windsor, they so aggravated these proceedings of the Lords against him, that he
who was too much inflamed before, seemed now irreconcilable to them. So that
nothing but the miseries of an Intestine War were expected. To prevent which,
the young Queen, the Bishops and some other Noblemen, procured an enterview
between them, where the King sharply charged the Barons for their rebellious
and presumptuous taking up Arms against him, and for seizing and wickedly
murdering his dear and faithful Friend Pierce Gaveston: The Lords resolutely
answered, That they were not guilty of Rebellion, nor had done any thing but
what deserved his Royal thanks and favor, since they had not raised any Forces
against his Sacred Person but only in their own defense, and to bring to
Justice that impious Traitor Pierce Gaveston the public Enemy and Firebrand
of the Realm. But though both were very fierce in words, yet the Queen and
Bishops used all manner of means to prevent their coming to action, and by
their incessant endeavors wrought so effectually, that the King seemed willing
to be pacified if they would acknowledge their Fault. And the Lords for
preventing the dangers which now threatened them from Robert Bruce King of
Scotland, were contented to make their humble submissions to the King in open
Court at Westminster, and desired him to forgive all their offenses against
him; which the King graciously granted them offering his Pardon to all that
would Petition him for the same. Upon which happy agreement, the Parliament
then sitting being sensible of the King's great want of money, freely granted
him a fifteenth of their Estates for his support. But Guy Earl of Warwick did
not long survive this happy union, being secretly Poisoned, as the Lords
reported, by some of the King's Friends.

The Office of Lord Chamberlain being vacant by the death of Pierce Gaveston,
the Nobility recommended Hugh Spencer the younger to the King to succeed in his
place, because he had been formerly of their Party, and they did not doubt but
he would be a very faithful Counselor. But as the Proverb says, Honors change
Manners, for though the King before hated him, yet he soon insinuated himself
so far into his weak Mind, that he became as intimate a Favorite, and
succeeded in all the Graces, Familiarity and Power of his Predecessor, as well
as in the Hatred and Envy of the Nobility and People, occasioned by his
Insolence, Ambition and Lewdness, wherein he seemed to equal if not exceed the
Wicked Gaveston, and thereby rendered himself so acceptable to the vitiated Soul
of King Edward. Hugh Spencer his Father an ancient Knight was yet living, and
accounted a Person of great virtue, a wise Counselor, and a Man of Valor, but
seeming very forward in promoting his Son's Interest and Grandeur, he was
likewise introduced into Court, and in great favor with the King, so that he
was made partaker of the guilt and calamity of his Son, rather out of Natural
and Paternal Love and Tenderness, than from the wilfulness or depravity of his
Mind.

But young Spencer, was n^ of a more lovely shape and comely Personage, than he
was of a profligate and flagitious temper: The Spirit of Pride, Rapine,
Oppression, and all the most intolerable vices seeming to have wholly possessed
him. So that in comparison of him the People were ready almost to wish for
Gaveston again. By his lewd advice the K. pursued his former course of
Debauchery, spending his Time and Treasure among lascivious Harlots and
Concubines, and utterly renouncing the sweet Conversation of his excellent
Consort, which made him a scorn to Foreign Princes, and hateful in the sight of
all Civil Men. He was the cause of the ruin of diverse Widows and Fatherless, of
the destruction of many Noblemen and Gentlemen, and at length of the utter
overthrow and confusion of Himself, his Father, and the King also.

This evil management of Affairs caused new dscords between the King and his
Nobility, whereby many mischiefs happened in the Kingdom, and their Enemies had
a fair opportunity to put in practice their designs against them. Among others,
the Scots having joyfully Crowned the valiant Robert Bruce for their King,
resolved to use their utmost efforts for recovering their Country and
Liberties, which had been Ravished from them by the valiant King Edward I. who
had made an entire Conquest of their Kingdom, and appointed John Cummin Earl of
Buquan a Scot, to be Governor thereof for the English. Him King Robert had
vanquished in Battle, and was now grown so powerful, while King Edward was
buried in soft and unmanly luxury and delight, that he sent his Brother Edward
to Besiege the Castle of Sterling, which bold attempt began to awaken the King
of England out of his destructive Slumbers: So that with all speed raising a
very potent Army, he with all diligence marched toward the relief thereof.
Hector Boethius the Scots Historian gives a very surprising account of the
number of Soldiers that King Edward carried with him to this Siege, which he
reckons to be one hundred and fifty thousand Hors^ ^en, and as many Foot; and
because this may seem incredible, he adds, That besides the English, he had
likewise the assistance of the Hollanders, Zealanders, Flemings, Picards,
Boulonis, Gascoigns, Normans, and many more from other Provinces in France, and
other Countries: Besides which three hundred thousand Men of War, he relates
that there were a vast multitude of Women, Children, Servants, yea whole
Families, with their Household-stuff which followed the Camp; wherein this
Author may be thought to have designed the magnifying the Valor of his
Contrymen, who with far more inconsiderable Forces defeated this mighty Host.

His Darling Spencer accompanied the King in this Expedition, but the Earls of
Lancaster, Warren, Warwick and Arundel, the greatest Peers of that Age,
positively refused to attend him, since He and his Evil Ministers continued
their Invasions and Depredations upon the Liberties and Estates of the People,
notwithstanding the provisions they had so often made, and he had so often
consented to for securing the same: And as this must needs diminish his
strength, so it likewise deprived him of their Counsel and Conduct, which was
so absolutely necessary in Military Affairs: However, his number of Men was
sufficient, if Multitude without Discipline, Piety, or Courage, could always
obtain Victory: But K. Edward and his Army seemed rather to be going to a
Wedding or a Triumph, than to engage a rough and hardy Enemy for their Targets,
Bucklers, and other Habiliments of War, were so glorious with Gold and Silver,
and their bright Armor gave such a dazzling luster against the Sunbeams, as
raised wonder in the admiring Spectators, and seemed very much to correspond
with the wanton Humor of the Prince: And herein it is very apparent what great
Advantages true and sober Courage usually obtains against vain Gallantry, and
ungrounded Confidence: King Robert with his Forces (which were much inferior
to the English) being incampt near King Edward's, he published a strict Order
the Evening before, That his Soldiers should prepare themselves for Battle the
next day, and that they should make humble Confession of their sins and
offenses in order to the receiving of the Blessed Sacrament; and then no doubt
the Lord of Hosts would give them Victory, since they designed only to free
themselves from the many woeful Calamities which they had suffered from the
English, and to recover the Liberty and Freedom of their Country.

Far otherwise was it in the Camp of K. Edward; for the Scots having the day
before surprised and cut off several English Horsemen, he was so far from
being discouraged at such a slight presage of ill Fortune, that he resolved the
very next day to take a terrible Revenge upon them, of which he had such a
confident assurance, that he triumphed before the Victory, his Soldiers
drinking, carousing, and threatening their Enemies with the utmost Cruelties
that could be executed upon them: But the Scots, to obviate their streng^h by
Policy, had dug before the Front of their Battalions several Trenches three
foot in depth, and as many broad, wherein they placed sharp Stakes with their
points upwards, and covered them over so exactly with Hurdles, that Foot men
might pass lightly over, but Horse would certainly sink in, and this Strategem
n^xt to the Anger of Heaven against the English for their Vainglory and
Effeminacy, was the principal cause of the Defeat of King Edward, for he
reposing much Confidence in his Cavalry, the fury of their first Charge was
intercepted and stopped by these Pit-falls, into which the Horses plunging in
great numbers, the Riders were miserably destroyed with much ease by the Scots,
whom King Robert marching on foot in the head of, led on with the utmost
Courage and Gallantry: The King of England had marshalled his Army in very good
Order, but this unexpected and dismal Discomfiture of his Horse in those
mischievous Ditches, utterly confounded all his measures, so that he was
compelled after some disordered Resistance, to leave to the Scots the greatest
Victory that ever they obtained against the English in any Age either before or
since: King Edward could hardly be persuaded to make his Escape, it being the
first time that ever he discovered any symptoms of the Courage of a Valiant
English King; but at length being overpersuaded by his Friends, himself and his
cowardly Favorite Spencer, whom K. Edward's own Historian calls, A
Faint-hearted Kite, fled with all speed to a place of safety. All things proved
unfortunate in this Battle, for when the Foot perceived the Horse in that
wretched condition, they shot their Arrows at the Scots, who came to kill them,
but they being Armed in their fore-parts, received little or no damage, so that
they slew a great number of their Friends whose backs were toward them
unarmed: The loss fell much upon the Nobility, for there was slain in this
Battle Gilbert Clare Earl of Gloucester, a Man of singular Valor and Wisdom,
the Lord Clifford, with several other Peers, besides seven hundred Knights,
Esquires, and Officers of Note: The slaughter of the rest could not be great,
since the Scots fought on foot: Hector Boethius says, There were 50000 English
killed, though no other Author will allow of above 10000. The Riches and
Plunder taken, doubtless was very valuable. Among the Prisoners, the chief was
Humphrey Bohun Earl of Hereford, who was after exchanged for King Robert's
Queen, who had been long time Prisoner in England.

This Battle was fought at a place called Bannocks Boum near Sterling in
Scotland, on Midsummer day, June 24, 1314. and King Robert having been formerly
Resident in England, Treated the Prisoners with all kind of Civility, and sent
the Bodies of the Earl of Gloucester, and Lord Clifford, to England, to be
honorably buried with their Ancestors: From this Overthrow King Edward and his
Minion Spencer made their Escape to Berwick, and came from thence to York,
where he publicly declared, That he was resolved instantly to raise new
Forces, and to regain the Honor he had lost, or else to lose his Life in the
Attempt: But all his Designs of that kind proved utterly fruitless: For soon
after the strong, and almost impregnable Castle of Berwick, was treacherously
betrayed into the hands of King Robert by one Peter Spalding, whom the King of
England had made Governor thereof, but he instead of the promised Reward was
hanged by the King of Scots for his Treachery: After this the King raised
another Army against the Scots, but received a second great and unhappy
Overthrow, returning home with much Ignominy and Shame, leaving his Subjects in
the North distressed and unrelieved from the continual Ravages of their
Implacable Enemies the Scots, in as lamentable a manner as ever any People were
abandoned by an unworthy and careless Prince.

Of these Disgraces, Losses and Troubles, we may make this useful Observation;
That as the Heroic Virtues of excellent Princes are usually crowned with
Blessings from Heaven; so for the Iniquities and heinous Transgressions of
wicked and ungodly Kings, both themselves and their Subjects likewise are
severely punished by the Almighty, before whom Princes must fall as well as
common Men, except their true and hearty Repentance, with amendment of their
Lives, do procure his Mercy and Favor before it be too late: And indeed the
Hand of God seemed now stretched out against this Kingdom; for about this time
so great a Pestilence and Mortality happened, that the Living were hardly
sufficient to bury the Dead. This was attended with a dreadful Famine
occasioned by immoderate Rains in Harvest, which destroyed all the Corn almost
throughout England, and at length the Dearth grew so terrible, that Horseflesh
was counted dainty Victuals: The Poor stole fat Dogs to eat them, yea some,
compelled with hunger, are their own Children, and others stole their
Neighbors Children to eat them: Thieves in Prison killed and tore in pieces
those that came newly in, and greedily devoured them half alive: As for Cows,
Sheep, Goats, etc. they were generally rotten and corrupted by eating the
Grass, which was infected as it grew, so that those who eat of them were
poisoned.

But neither these woeful Visitations, nor the innumerable dishonours,
afflictions and discontents under which the Nation lay, had any influence upon
the King or his Ministers, which gave encouragement to one John Poydras a
Tanner's Son at Exeter, to attempt a very daring Enterprise, he boldly
affirming himself to be the truly begotten Son of the last King Edward the
first, and said, That he was changed in his Cradle by his Nurse for a Carter's
Child, offering diverse colorable Allegations to prove the same, and among the
rest, he strongly insisted upon the unprincely and unworthy qualities and
actions of the King, such as none could be guilty of that was not of a mean,
sordid, and obscure Birth and Descent. His confident Claim, and daring
Assertions, quickly affected the Minds of the common People, so that many
gathered to him and acknowledged him for their King: But at length he was
apprehended, and having confessed his Treason, he was Condemned and Executed for
his folly near Northampton, declaring that he did it by the motion of a
Familiar Spirit, whom he had served three years in the likeness of a Cat. About
the same time diverse notorious Thieves and Robbers, near two hundred in number,
being all clothed like Gray Friars, robbed, and murdered, and destroyed the
Inhabitants of the North-Countrey, without regard to Quality, Age or Sex; but
some Forces being sent against them, took the greatest part, who were
deservedly Executed for the same.

The Nobility and Gentry perceiving that the Distempers and Mischiefs in the
Realm did daily increase and grow more dangerous, they, like good Physicians,
determined to search narrowly into the Causes of all these Maladies, and to
provide some Remedy for their Redress before it were too late; and the
miserable Oppressions and Violencies daily committed in their view, made them
take courage to inform the King, That the two Spencers by their Mismanagement
and ill Conduct in the Affairs of State, of whom alone the King took Advice and
Counsel, were the immediate and only occasion of all those Calamities and
Misfortunes which now miserably afflicted and disturbed the whole Kingdom; and
plainly told him, That they had so great an Interest in the King's Person and
Government, that they judged themselves bound in Honor and Conscience to
inform his Highness of all such Misdemeanors a^ were committed by any of his
Subjects, which tended ^o the subversion of the State, and to the disturbing of
the Public Peace thereof: They concluded (...) ^umbly imploring his Majesty,
That he would be pleased to dismiss the two Spencers from his Pre^ence, Court,
and Council for ever, (...) corrupted ^im with monstrous Vices, and rendered
him altogeher careless and negligent in performing those Royal Offices and
Duties that God Almighty required at his ^ands; for as subjection belonged to
the People, so ^e King was likewise obliged to afford them Pro^ction, which yet
he had most dishonourably and un^scionably neglected, by exposing his Subjects
in ^e North to the Rage and Fury of the Scots, and to (...) the Extremities of
Hunger and Want. And lastly, that if he would not instantly discharge those two
^aceless and wicked Counselors from bearing any ^fice or Employment in the
Realm, they then must ^d would do it themselves, though it were with the ^ard
of their Lives, and whatsoever else was dear (...) them in the World.

The King could not choose but know that this brisk ^monstrance of the Barons
about their Grievances was nothing but Truth, and founded upon Honor
Conscience, and true Zeal for their Country, and wa^ as sensible that they
were earnestly resolved to re^form what was amiss. But though his Countenan^
proclaimed his inward discontent, and declared h^ Intentions of surprising and
ruining those Noblem^ who discovered their hatred against his belove^ Spencers;
yet he returned the Barons a favourab^ Answer, assuring them all that was amiss
should b^ redressed by the ensuing Parliament, which he would assemble with all
speed. The Lords seemed very mu^ rejoiced at this Answer, (as well as the
common People) but yet they very much suspected that the King intended to seize
and surprise them at that Solemn Meeting: To prevent which, they came to Lo^
Son, attended with so many of their Friends an T^ pants, all in the same
Livery, as composed a galla^ Army, sufficient to secure them against any
siniste Attempts.

The King was much disturbed to find himself the prevented in his secret
Designs, but his greatest gri^ was, that he found himself unable any longer to
defend and protect his detested Favorites the Spence^ for whom he had a more
tender affection than for his Queen, Children, and all his Friends besides whom
notwithstanding he was compelled by the P^liament to relinquish; by whom it was
Enacted wi^ his consent, That they should be banished the Ki^dom, never to
return again during their Lives, und^penalty of High Treason.

This being concluded on, the Barons longing to (...) the Spencers under Sail,
provided several Ships (...) their Transportation: Being gone, to the great
sa^faction of the People in general, the King, instead redressing the remaining
Grievances, wholly appl^ his thoughts how to be avenged of those Lo^ that had
forced him to comply in decreeing the Exile: And to declare his resentment of
it, wh^ he was informed that the younger Spencer have got a Squadron of Ships
together, was turned Pirate in the Narrow Seas, Robbing and Plundering all
Nations that he could meet with, but especially the English Merchants, to the
unspeakable damage of the Realm, having taken out of two Ships only, at
Sandwich, goods to the value of 40000 pound: Upon which great Complaints were
made, and many Petitions presented, that a Fleet might be set out for taking
him and his Associates, and bringing them to punishment as Pirates and Robbers
according to the Laws of the Land: He was so far from being concerned at it, or
providing any Remedy, that he seemed very merry at the News, and soon after
sent them a general Pardon of all their Crimes; and the more to despite and
inrage the Nobility, he recalled them both from Banishment, and honored them
with more Dignities, Offices and Authority, than ever they had before.

These strange proceedings of the King, together with the notorious Injuries
and Abuses which they daily suffered by the return and advancement of the two
Spencers, who now defied their utmost Power, scorning and deriding them with
the most pungent Affronts, were sufficient Warnings to the Lords to take timely
care of their Safeties: Wherefore since neither Petitions, Submissions, nor any
other Legal procedure could procure any Remedy of their repeated Wrongs, they
raised a strong Army, and marched into the Field, and the King with the two
Spencers, and some few of the Nobility did the like. Before any Action between
them, this odd Accident happened, procured, as was thought, by the Contrivance
of the King, or his Evil Ministers. A certain Knight belonging to John Earl
Warren, stole away the Wife of Thomas Earl of Lancaster, one of the Chief of
the Lord's Party, from his House at Caneford in Dorsetshire, and with great
Pomp carried her To E. Warren's Castle at Rygate in Surrey, in despite of her
I, and Husband, where one Rich. Maurice a wretched lame, deformed Dwarf,
challenged her for his Wife, pretending he had been formerly Contracted to her,
and that he had lain with her. The Countess though the noblest and richest
Inheritrix of that Age, confirmed his Allegations, openly declaring to her
immortal infamy, that what he said was true and thereby acknowledging her self
to be an impudent Strumpet. Upon which this deformed Elf (being encouraged by
some great Persons) had the confidence to lay claim to the Earldoms of Lincoln
and Salisbury in her Right, and the Honor of this great Earl was blasted by a
debauched Woman.

This unhappy passage increased the fatal aversion between him and the King,
and the Earl, and Humfry Bohun Earl of Hereford, having likewise received some
damage from the Spencers, these two allured almost all the rest of the Nobility
to join with them. So that being now gotten into Arms they marched with Banners
displayed under the command of the Earl of Lancaster, whom they constituted
their General, and after many sharp skirmishes and encounters, the Armies met
at Burton upon Trent, where both Parties fought with such obstinate desire of
revenge, that he was reckoned the most valiant man who drencht his Sword
deepest in Blood. The Nobles now forgot that they fought against their
Sovereign Lord, and the King would by no means acknowledge, that his Tyranny
and Misgovernment had compelled them to take Arms. Now neither Kindred,
Alliance, Neighborhood, Religion, Country, nor any other obligation had the
least power over their enraged minds. Nothing but death and wounds must
determine the controversy between them. At length when many of the Lords, and
thousands of their Adherents were slain, they fled, and were pursued by the
King, the Earl of Hereford wa^ slain by a Welshman, who thrust a Spear into his
Body between the Chinks of a Wooden Bridge. The Earl of Lancaster with eighty
Lords and Knights were taken Prisoners.

The occasion of this great defeat of the Barons is attributed in some measure
to an unhappy accident a while before. For Queen Isabel, who upon all occasions
used her utmost interest to procure a right understanding between the King and
the Peers, coming from Canterbury to the Castle of Leeds in Kent, where she
designed to lodge that Night, was denied entrance by Lord Badlesmere one of the
Earl of Lancaster's Party, wherewith she was so offended, that she made great
complaint thereof to the King, who glad of any opportunity to be revenged of
the Barons, came in Person with a very strong Party before the Castle, many of
the Queen Friends, who were formerly on, the other side joining with him. The
Lord himself was gone with the rest of the Noblemen to destroy the Lands and
Estates of the two Spencers, having left his Wife and Children in the Castle,
and a Captain to command there. After some time spent in the Siege, the
Besieged finding little hope of relief were forced to surrender it to the King
at Mercy, who hanged five or six of the principal Persons. And committed the
Lord Badlesmere's Wife and Children to the Tower. After which many of the
Barons misdoubting their strength, deserted their Chief the Earl of Lancaster,
which now made the Victory the more easily incline to the King.

The third day after the Battle, the King resolving to take his full swing of
Vengeance upon the Barons, sat in Judgment in Person at Pomfret Castle,
together with the Earls o^ Kent, Pembroke, Surrey and the two Spencers. Before
whom the Earl of Lancaster and the rest being brought, Sentence was pronounced
against them to be drawn, hanged, and quartered as guilty of High Treason, by
Andrew Harkley a man of small fortune, but made Earl of Carlisle, and Lord Chief
Justice, for taking the Earl of Lancaster and several other Lords Prisoners
after the late Fight. The Earl of Lancaster being the King's Uncle was only
Beheaded the same day at Pomfret, but the other Lords were hanged and quartered
in several parts of the Realm. As the Lords Lisle, Touchet, Manduit, Bradburn,
Fitz Williams, Cheyney at Pomfret. The Lords Clifford, Mowbray and Deynvile
hanged in Chains at York. The Lord Gifford at Gloucester. The Lord Teys at
London. The Lord Aldenham at Windsor, and the Lords Badlesmere and Ashburnham
at Canterbury. And several other Baronets, Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen were
executed in other places. Never before did English Earth at one time drink up
so much Blood of her Nobility and Gentry shed in so vile a manner, which
whatsoever was pretended, was reckoned by the People to be spilt upon the
account, and in the quarrel of the two Ravenous Favorites the Spencers, nor
was it long unrevenged with the destruction of the principal Actors. After this
the King likewise seized all their Estates as forfeited to the Crown.

This havoc being made of the Nobility to the astonishment of the rest, and
the terror of the Vulgar, the Spencers were elated so intolerably with Pride by
this Victory, that instead of making good use thereof, and reforming those
abuses that might occasion the like again, and giving the King good Counsel,
they now proceed to commit greater Rapines and Violences than before, making
their Will a Law in all things. And then presuming that all affairs should for
the future be managed according to their pleasure, they advise the King to call
a Parliament at York, in which he created Edward his eldest Son Prince of Wales
and Duke of Acquitain, He also created Sir Hugh Spencer the Father Earl of
Winchester, and Sir Hugh the Son Earl of Gloucester. And exacted the sixth Penny
of all Men's Estates and Goods to support his intended Wars against the Scots,
the levying of which Tax caused much murmuring and discontent among the People,
who affirmed, That they were already totally impoverished and ruined by War,
Famine, and the disordere^ Government of the King and his Evil Counselors.

The King was fully persuaded that his late Successes had rendered him as
terrible to the Scots as to his own Subjects, and that they were no way capable
of resisting so great a Power as he had raised against them, resolving now to
call them to a strict account for all their Inroads, Murders and Robberies.
The Scots being secretly informed that King Edward was intended to Invade their
Country, and to revenge those wrongs he had received from Robert Bruce their
King endeavored to divert him by landing a great Army in Ireland, but the King
having timely notice of their design, made such provision that the greatest
part of the Assailants were slain, and the rest fled to their Ships and
returned shamefully to their own Country.

The King after this marched with a very gallant Army into Scotland, and being
arrived the Scots Nobility with some thousands of men pretended to give him
Battle, but intended nothing less: For at his approach they retired in good
Order into the Woods, Forests and Mountains of their Country, insomuch that the
English were quite tired, and dispirited in pursuing them through those
difficult and uneasy passages, so that in a short time for want of Provisions
and Necessaries, and by reason of the Rains, Hail, Snow and Frosts, which are
incident to that cold Region, the King's Forces were so afflicted with Sickness
and Mortality, that they were obliged to retire without having performed any
thing suitable to such mighty preparations. Which when the Scots perceived they
pursued them with much cruelty, and one night assaulted them with so much fury
that the King himself very narrowly escaped, and finding his Forces broken, and
his Army scattered, he was forced to save his Life by an ignominious flight,
and to leave behind him his Treasure, Ordnance, Tents and Furniture, a joyful
prize to the Victorious Scots

This last disaster and danger was occasioned principally by the Treachery of
Sir Andrew Harkley the new made Earl of Carlisle, who under pretense of making
Peace with the Scots, secretly agreed to Marry the Daughter of King Robert,
whereupon he was seized and carried to London in Irons, and being brought to
the Bar before the Judge Sir Anthony Lucy, in the Robes of an Earl with his
Sword girt, Hosed, Booted and Spurred, the Judge spoke thus to him, 'Sir Andrew,
the King for thy Valor and Good Service has advanced thee to great Honor,
and made thee Earl of Carlisle, notwithstanding which, thou as a Traitor to thy
Lord and King, leddest a Party that should have assisted him at the Battle of
Bayland in Scotland, away by Copland through Lancashire, by which Falseness and
Treason of thine our Lord the King was discomfited by the Scots, whereas if
thou had arrived in time he might have gained the Victory. And this Treason
thou did wilfully commit, for a great sum of Gold and Silver which thou did
receive from James Douglas a Scot, and the King's Enemy. For which great Crime
our Lord the King has commanded that thou be deprived of the Order of
Knighthood wherewith he has honored thee, for a terror to all other Knights,
to avoid the like Treachery. Then his Spurs were hewed from his Heels, and his
Sword, with which he was Knighted and Girt when created an Earl, was broken
over his Head, he was then unclothed of all his Robes of Honor and State, and
his Coat of Arms defaced. After which the Judge proceeded thus, 'Andrew, thou
art now no Knight but a Knave, and for thy Treason the King has appointed that
thou shall be hanged, thy Head smitten off and placed on London Bridge, thy
Bowels taken out and Burnt, thy Body quartered, and thy four Quarters set up in
four principal Cities of England for an example to such heinous Offenders. And
this Sentence was accordingly executed upon him.

Thus ended this unfortunate expedition to the great reproach and loss of the
English, and the scandal of the King who was grown sufficiently infamous
already for making the Kingdom a shambles for the Nobility. Yet in the midst of
these calamities the two Spencers rid Triumphant in the Chariot of Favor,
Power, Honor, and Riches, enjoying great part of the Estate of the late
unfortunate Earl of Lancaster, and in this grandeur they continued for the
space of five years, notwithstanding the utmost efforts of their potent, and
numerous adversaries, who continually meditated their destruction. During which
time the Queens Interest extremely declined, who for showing some relentings
for the severity used to the Lords, and expressing her dislike of the overgrown
authority of the two wicked Favorites, by whose persuasions she was sensible
the King her Husband abandoned her Company and Bed, was extremely hated by
them. So that they continued their impious Artifices to allure the King with
the Company and Dalliance of Lewd and Lascivious Harlots, and to avoid any
converse with her.

And it did appear that these evil minded and vile men, working upon the King's
inclination, were the principal Authors and Advisers of that sharp revenge
taken upon the Lords for their own ambitious, and avaritious ends, whereby at
length they brought inevitable ruin upon the Crown, Dignity and Life of their
Sovereign. Which the following instance see^ plainly to confirm.

Among those who were condemned for joining with the Earl of Lancaster the
King's Uncle, there was one very poor Fellow, for whose life because he had
long continued at Court, many great Court^rs interceeded very earnestly, and
pressed the matter so far that the King in a rage replied. 'A plague upon you
for a company of Cursed Whisperers, malicious Backbiters, Flatterers and wicked
Counselors, who can beg so heartily for saving the life of a notorious wicked
Knave, and yet could not speak a word in the behalf of the most noble Knight
Earl Thomas of Lancaster my near Kinsman, whose Life and Counsels would now
have been of great use and service to the Kingdom. Whereas this wretch the
longer he lives, the more villainies will he commit, having already made himself
notorious throughout the Realm for his horrid Crimes and desperate Outrages.
For which (by the Soul of God) he shall dye the death he has justly deserved.
And he was accordingly executed. This may be some evidence that the King was
over persuaded to commit those Tragedies upon the Lords (...) was reckoned to
be naturally merciful, and (...) according to the Religion of those times, but
(...) ^i^led by depraved Counselors, though he (...) inexcusable, since it is
usually said, That good (...) cannot satisfy for public Errors and Mischiefs.

The Spencers still continued their Rapines and Profligate courses, and
aspiring to more absolute Dominion, resolved to leave nothing unattempted that
might rivet them in the affections of the King, and enrich themselves, which
begot implacable enmity in the People both against them and their Master, their
insolence rising to such an height that they abridged the Queen of her usual
allowance, so that she had not wherewith to maintain her self, while themselves
abounded in all manner of plenty and magnificence. Which caused her publicly
to complain, 'That the Daughter and Sole Heir of the King of France was Married
to a miserable Wretch, who did not allow her necessaries, and that being
promised to be a Queen, she was now become no better than a waiting
Gentlewoman, subsisting only upon a Pension from the Spencers. And dreading
their malice she took her Eldest Son Prince Edward, and privately withdrew into
France to her Brother King Charles, by whom she was kindly received, and
comforted with solemn Oaths and Promises that he would effectually assist her
against all her Enemies, and redress the grievances of the Kingdom. A while
after the Barons by their Letters assured her of their best help and service to
her Self and Son, declaring that if she would return to England with the aid of
only a thousand valiant men at Arms, they would raise so great a strength here
to join them, as should make the Spencers feel the smart of their unsufferable
follies.

The Queen was exceedingly rejoiced with the hopes of her fortunate success.
But the two Spencers much doubting the event if she should return with Forces,
and having the Treasure of the Kingdom at command, they corrupted King Charles
and his Council with such prodigious sums of Gold and Silver, and of Rich
Jewels: that not only all succor was denied her, but the French K. reprimanded
her very sharply for having so undutifully and imprudently forsaken her Lord
and Dear Husband. Yea the Pope likewise (and many of the Cardinals) being
engaged with rich Presents by the Spencers, required King Charles under the
Penalty of Cursing to send the Queen and Prince to King Edward. And doubtless
she had been unnaturally betrayed by her own Brother, had she not privately and
speedily made her escape to the Earl of Heynault in Germany, where she was
entertained with extraordinary joy by the Earl and the Lord Beumont his Brother
who resolved to accompany her to England.

In the mean time King Edward and his profligate Favorites having intelligence
of their Intentions, he sent to demand his Wife and Son to be returned home,
but not succeeding, and the Spencers knowing that if an happy Agreement should
have been made between the King, his Queen, and the Barons, they must both have
been made Sacrifices of Peace Offering, to appease the resentments of the
People; they therefore resolve to make the Breach irreconcilable, by
persuading the King to proclaim the Queen and Prince, with all their Adherents,
Traitors and Enemies to the King and Kingdom; banishing all that he thought
were well-affected to them, and keeping a severe Eye over the disco^ented
Barons; and it was reported, That a secret Plot was laid to have taken away the
Lives both of the Queen and her Son.

While the Queen continued in Heynault, she concluded a Marriage between the
Prince then about fourteen years old, and the Lady Philippa that Earl's
Daughter, and with the Money of her Dowry Listed Soldiers in Germany, and soon
after with three hundred Knights and gallant Warriors, and about 1700 Common
Soldiers, Germans and English, commanded by the Earl of Heynault, with the
Earls of Kent, Pembroke, the Lord Beumont, and many other Englishmen of
Quality, she safely arrived at Orwell in Suffolk: Upon the first Intelligence
of their Landing, the Lords and Barons, with joyful hearts, and numerous Troops
of resolute Gallants completely Armed, repaired to her Assistance with all
speed, so that her Forces hourly increased.

Her Arrival being reported to the King, He poor Prince was so surprised, that
he knew not what course to take, being as destitute of Friends, and Means to
defend himself, as he was of Courage and Counsel: However, he requested Aid of
the Citizens of London, whose Answer was, That they would honor with all duty
the King, Queen, and Prince their Son, who was lawful Heir to the Kingdom, but
that they would shut their Gates against all Foreigners, and Traitors to the
Realm, and with all their Powers withstand them; but that they were not obliged
to go out of their Ctiy to fight, no farther than that (according to their
Liberties) they might return home again before Sunset. This uncertain Answer so
discouraged the King, that he resolved to withdraw from the City to the Marches
of Wales for the present levying of an Army, attended with his inseparable
Favorites the two Spencers, and Robert Baldock Bishop of Norwich, their
intimate Friend. Before he went he ordered the Tower of London to be fortified,
which he committed to the Custody of Sir John Weston, who was well provided
with Men and Victuals, leaving also to his care his younger Son, called Lord
John of Eltham, with the countess of Gloucester, the King's Niece, Wife to the
younger Spencer, and gave the Government of the City to Walter Stapilton,
Bishop of Exeter (a Creature of the Spencers) his chief Treasure; and caused a
Proclamation to be published, enjoining all his Subjects to oppose, kill, and
destroy all the partakers with the Queen, her self, her Son, and the Earl of
Kent his half Brother only excepted. On the other side, the Queen made
Proclamation, That no Person whatsoever should receive any hurt or damage from
her Army, but only those two notorious Miscreants the Spencers, Bishop Baldock
Lord Chancellor, and their Associates; and that she came over for no other end,
but to bring to condign punishment those notorious Traitors and Misleaders of
the King, promising a thousand pound to any who should bring her the Head of
the younger Spencer.

The King had no sooner took his last leave of the City, and thereby of his
Crown and Dignity, but the Londoners scorning to submit to their proud and
insolent Governor, apprehended Stapilton, and two of his Servants, and without
any Trial or Judicial proceeding beheaded them at the Standard in Cheapside,
with one John Marshal a Citizen and Friend of the Spencers: They likewise
surprised the Tower, killing all that opposed them, and declared Lord John the
King's Son, Keeper of the City, securing that and the City for the use of the
Queen and the young Prince: All Prisoners throughout the Kingdom were likewise
set at liberty, and all Fugitives, and banished Men recalled, which much
augmented the Queen's Power.

The King hearing of this Revolt, altered his purpose of raising Forces: But
whither could this poor Prince fly? What course could he take for his own
safety? who, to gratify a few profligate Miscreants, had made his Wife, his
Son, his Nobility, and his People, his avowed Enemies: At length he concladed
to fly to Bristol, which he fortified as strongly as he was able, giving the
Government of the Town to the Earl of Arundel, and Hugh Spencer the Elder,
himself with the younger Spencer retiring into the Castle, which they resolved
to defend to the utmost.

The Queen marched from Oxford to Gloucester in her way to Bristol, which she
designed to besiege, her Forces increasing all the way: The Earls of Leicester
and Marshal, the Lords Peircy, Wake, and other Noblemen both from Wales and the
North, with the Bishops of Hereford, Ely and Lincoln, and a great number more
of Barons, Knights and Gentlemen, coming in to her Assistance: With this great
Army she arrived at Bristol, and besieged it: The City was taken in a few days,
with the Elder Spencer the Governor, whom the Queen, at the earnest
importunity of the common People commanded to be hanged without examination, in
his Armor on the common Gallows without the City, and then cut down alive, his
Bowels taken out and burnt before his Eyes, his Head cut off, and then his Body
hanged up again by the Feet; and after, having four days hung a miserable
spectacle to all Beholders, his Body was cut all to pieces, and given to the
Dogs to eat, and his Head set upon Winchester Castle.

The King, the younger Spencer, and Bishop Baldock, much distrusting their
ability to defend the Castle, retired from thence secretly in the night, and
getting into a small Fisher-boat, determined to fly into the Isle of Lundy, in
the mouth of the River Severn, about two Miles in length, and as many broad,
stored with Rabbits, Pigeons, and other Fowls, encompassed with the Sea, and
having only one passage into it, so narrow, that two Men can scarce go abreast:
But Divine Providence seemed to withstand their purpose, as designing them to
be brought to Justice; so that every day for a week or more, when they
attempted to Row their Boat thither, the Wind and Waves drove it back again
toward the Castle, which being at length perceived by the Lord Beumont, he
chased the Fisher boat with a small Vessel, and boarding it, found therein the
King, young Spencer, and Baldock, whom they so much desired, and brought them
to the Queen, who caused them to be carried and set in sight of the Besieged in
the Castle, which was still defended by Hugolin, Grandchild to the Elder
Spencer, with much courage; and now finding no hope of relief, surrendered it
upon condition to have his own and his Companions Lives saved.

Some Authors write, That the King going into a Vessel out of Bristol Castle,
designed to fly into Ireland; and that after he had wandered a week upon the
Sea, Sir Thomas Blount, one of his Friends forsaking him, and going to the
Queen, he came ashore in Glamorganshire, where with his few Friends he
entrusted himself with the Welsh, who had still a kindness for him: The King
not appearing, Proclamation was made, That the Barons and People desired his
return to the Exercise of the Government, provided he would remedy what was
amiss: Whereupon Henry Earl of Lancaster, Brother to the late Earl, Sir William
Zouch, and Rice ap Howel, who had all Lands in Wales, were sent with Money and
Forces to discover him, which so prevailed upon the Welsh-men, that they
delivered him up, together with the younger Spencer, Baldock, and one Simon
Reading (and received a Reward of 2000 pound) They were brought to the Queen,
who was then at Hereford with Adam Tarlton the active Bishop, The King was
conveyed by the Earl of Lancaster to Kennelworth Castle. After which the Queen
and Prince, attended by the Barons and a strong Army marched toward London,
carrying with them young Spencer in Chains, like a Slave, before whom certain
pitiful Fiddlers, and other Varlets scornfully played upon Pipes made of Reeds,
skiping, dancing and singing through every Town as they passed along. Spencer
and Simon Reading, another evil instrument, were sentenced to Death by the
Judge Sir William Trussel as Traitors. Spencer in his Armor was with all
manner of scorn and insults from the People, dragged to a Gallows set up on
purpose fifty foot high, where being hanged, he was afterward cut down and
beheaded, and quartered. His head set upon London Bridge, and his Quarters in
four principal Towns of the Kingdom. Simon Reading was hanged ten foot lower on
the same Gallows, and Robert Baldock was committed Prisoner to Newgate, where
with grief and hard usage he soon after died. This happened in 1326.

Thus Divine Vengeance pursued these two ambitious and profligate Wretches the
Spencers Father and Son, and brought those who set at defiance the Nobility,
Gentry, and People of the Realm, to such shameful and ignominious deaths, as by
their vile actions they had justly merited. Since by their lewd and prosligate
Counsels, they prevailed upon the King to commit all manner of Enormities, by
forsaking the Company and Bed of his lawful Wife, and living in all manner of
debauchery with common Strumpets. By destroying and ruining his Nobility and
Gentry, by all manner of Rapines upon the Common People, by suffering their
Enemies to Plunder and Beggar them without any redress, and by all other
misdemeanors, which rendered him odious to his Subjects, and made him rule
rather like a Tyrant than a King. And thereby occasioned his Deposition and
Death, which soon after followed.

For the Queen having summoned a Parliament, it was by General consent of the
three Estates concluded, That King Edward should reign no longer, but his Son
the Prince should be advanced to the Throne. The Archbishop of Canterbury
Preaching a Sermon, and taking for his Text this Maxim, Vox Populi Vox Dei, The
Voice of the People, is the Voice of God, Exhorting all his Auditors to Pray to
the King of Kings, to bless and prosper the King that they had Elected. The
Queen seemed very sorrowful and even distracted at her Husband's deposition,
and the P. lamented for his Mothers grief, swearing that he would not accept of
the Crown without his Father's consent. To content them both, Commissioners are
sent to the King who persuaded him to make a formal Resignation of the
Government, and then his Son was Crowned King. And not long after the Father
being removed to Corf Castle was barbarously murdered by his Keepers, who
through a horn run a burning hot Spit into his Fundament, of which he instantly
died. I shall add no more having already given a particular account of his
Resignation and Death in a Book called Admirable Curiosities and Rarities in
every County in England, etc.

Remarks upon the Life, Actions and fatal Fall of Roger Mortimer Earl of March,
Favorite to Queen Isabel, Widow to King Edward II. and Mother to King Edward
III.
SUCH is the Malignity of Humane Nature, that though there are daily examples
of Divine Vengeance executed upon notorious Offenders, yet men continue to
perpetrate the same crimes that plunged their Predecessors into misery and
ruin. Of this, Roger Mortimer is an obvious instance, who though he were an
Eyewitness of the fatal fall of the three unfortunate Favorites, Gaveston and
the two Spencers, with diverse of their Associates in the former Reign: Yea
though he himself was very instrumental in their destruction, and very active
in pretending to reform the Grievances of the Kingdom: Yet no sooner was King
Edward by his means deposed, and a young Prince advanced to the Throne under
the Government and Management of his Mother, but he by managing the Queen,
occasioned many mischiefs not much inferior to those of the former abhorred
Minions, yea exceeding their wickedness in one point, namely, in being
criminally concerned with the Queen Dowager, that being one of the Articles the
Parliament charged him with. But as he wilfully disregarded these warnings, and
impudently committed the like faults, so the Justice of Heaven visited him with
the same deserved punishment.

He was descended from Roger called the Great Lord Mortimer of Wigmore in the
Marches of Wales, who was his Grandfather, and revived and erected again the
Round Table at Kennelworth after the Ancient Order of King Arthur's Table, with
the Retinue of an hundred Knights and 100 Ladies in his house, for the
entertaining of such Adventurers as came thither from all parts of Christendom.
This young Roger inherited his Estate and Grandeur. And Queen Isabel Wife to
King Edward II. and Daughter to Philip the Fair King of France, being in the
glory of her youth forsaken by the King her Husband, who delighted only in the
company of Pierce Gaveston his Minion and Favorite, she fell passionately in
love with this Lord Wigmore, though before she was accounted the most virtuous,
chaste and excellent Lady of that Age.

After the ignominious, but deserved death of Gaveston, the King instead of
being reformed was presently infatuated with the love of two others, the
Spencers Father and Son, who were as bad if not worse than he, for all manner
of leudness and debauchery. Whereupon the Earls of Lancaster, Hereford,
Warwick, Lincoln and others, rise in Arms against them, they having taken an
Oath to King Edward I. on his death bed to oppose and withstand his Son Edward
if he ever recalled Gaveston from Exile; and finding that his death had not
much bettered the state of the Kingdom, they thought themselves obliged by the
same Oath to endeavor the ruin of them also, and thereby, the redressing the
many oppressions and violencies under which the Nation groaned. This Roger Lord
Wigmore a man of an invincible Spirit and his Uncle Roger Mortimer the Elder
resolved to join with the Lords in this attempt, and being very busy in
raising Forces, were taken before they could muster them, and by the King
committed to the Tower of London. But the Queen by means of Torlton Bishop of
Hereford, Beck Bishop of Durham and Patriarch of Jerusalem, then both Mighty
Men in the State, prevailed so far with the King that upon the submission of
the Mortimers the King was somewhat pacified. But afterward when He had gained
a great Victory against the Barons, the young Lord Wigmore and his Uncle were
condemned to be Drawn and Hanged at Westminster, and the day of Execution was
appointed. Whereupon the Younger Spencer some time before, pretended to make a
great Feast in honor of his Birthday, inviting thereunto Sir Stephen Seagrave,
Constable of the Tower, with the rest of the Officers belonging to the same,
and after he had made them very merry he gave to each a large Cup of a sleepy
Drink prepared by Queen Isabel, by which means he made his escape, breaking
through the Wall of his Chamber, and coming into the Kitchen near the King's
Lodgings, and getting into the top thereof, came into a Ward of the Tower, and
so with a strong Ladder of Ropes provided by a Friend he got over the Wall,
leaving the Ropes fastened thereunto, which the next day the Spectators beheld
with much astonishment, considering the desperate danger which he ventured in
the attempt. He then swam over the Thames into Kent and avoiding the Highaways
came at length to the Seaside near Portsmouth, where happily meeting with a
Ship bound for France, he passed over thither, and lived in the French Court
several years. His Uncle Roger was detained in a loathsome Prison five years
after, and at length died, and was Buried at Bristol.

King Edward was so enraged at his escape that he turned Sir Stephen Seagrave
out of his place of Constable of the Tower, and several Citizens were seized
and accused of being accessory to his getting away, and of corresponding with
and maintaining him beyond Sea, but there note being sufficient proof against
them, they were all acquitted.

Mortimer continued in France till Queen Isabel and the Prince arrived there,
to avoid the insults of the two insolent Spencers. He after attended the Queen
into Germany, and came over with her and the rest of the English Lords,
accompanied with the Earl of Heynault, and several German and English Forces.
And upon King Edward's Flight, and afterward his Seizing and Imprisonment,
Mortimer presumed to manage all affairs according to his own pleasure, and
therefore the death of the Spencers, Reading and some others not satisfying his
revenge, being high in the Queens favor who could not deny him the Heads of a
few of his Enemies, he procured that the Earl of Arundel and two Gentlemen
more, named John Daniel and Thomas Mochelden, (against whom he had a particular
aversion) should be Beheaded at Hereford.

After this, the Queen, her Son, and the beloved Mortimer went to Wallingford
Castle, where they kept their Christmas with all manner of jollity. From
thence they proceeded to London, where the Queen and Prince were received with
much Joy, and many rich Presents, and a Parliament being called, it was
concluded that King Edward should be Deposed and his Son advanced to the
Throne. In the management whereof Mortimer discovered very much zeal, activity
and diligence, as hoping thereby to become Chief Minister of State, as well as
principal Favorite of the Queen. King Edward was Deposed accordingly and
confined to Kennelworth Castle, the Queen, Roger Mortimer and Torlton Bishop of
Hereford having concluded to allow him an hundred Marks a month for his
necessary Expenses.

And now it was hoped that the Kingdom, having suffered so many Concussions and
Miseries for several years, would have been settled and restored to its former
peace and tranquillity. But it soon appeared that though the Nation had changed
its Master, yet other evil Instruments succeeded to trouble and disquiet the
already harassed People. So that one Historian writes thus, The beginning of
the Reign of King Edward III. was very troublesome, for he by reason of his
tender Age being but fifteen years old when he came to the Crown, was drawn
aside by evil Counsel, and committed many foul errors of State and Government.
The chief occasion of which, were the Queen, her Darling Roger Mortimer, and
some others.

For first they procured so great a part of the Revenue of the Nation to be
settled for maintaining the Queen and her Family, that the young King had
scarce a third part of it for himself and his necessary Attendants and
Officers. So that she and her Favorite Mortimer lived in the greatest State
and Grandeur imaginable, and the People began to exclaim against him and say
publicly, That the great zeal and hatred he had showed against the Rapines of
the Spencers, was not because they had been oppressive to the Subject, but that
he was desirous no Body should abuse them but himself.

Secondly, The Queen and he having intelligence that several Great Persons, and
the whole Order of Friars Preachers, taking pity of the late King's Captivity,
seemed to Consult for his deliverance, and knowing that his Restoration would
be their confusion, they wickedly plotted and contrived to add Murder to their
former Impieties, and therefore Roger Mortimer was sent with that ambiguous
Order to his Keepers, devised by Torlton Bishop of Hereford, Edwardum occidere
nolite tinere bonum est. To shed King Edward's Blood
Refuse to fear I count it good.
Where by leaving out the stops, they sufficiently encouraged the Murderers,
and yet afterward produced the Writing under Queen Isabels Seal for their own
Justification, when the horrid Fact was committed. Though this was very far
from clearing them from the guilt of it in the opinion of the Vulgar, whose
Tongues spare none, and who had before heard, that though the Queen in her
outward deportment pretended much grief and sorrow for the Imprisonment of the
King her Husband, yet instead of visiting him in his distress, which he often
desired, as still retaining a very great love for her. She only sent him fine
Clothes and kind Letters, but contrary to the Laws of God and Man refrained
from rendering him any Nuptial Duties, which they plainly reported she bestowed
freely enough upon her bloody Adulterer Mortimer. Pretending in the mean time
that Reasons of State would not allow her to converse with him. And soon after
this desolate Prince was by an express order from the Young King, wholly
procured by them, removed from Kennelworth to Corf Castle, and there miserably
deprived of his life.

Thirdly, In the second year of the young King's Reign, Robert Bruce King of
Scotland denounced War against him and his Kingdom, which occasioned the
raising of a strong Army consisting of above fifty thousand men, with which the
King accompanied by the Queen Mother, Roger Mortimer, the Lord of Heynault,
John Lord Beumont and many others of the Nobility and Gentry, marched toward
the Scots, who had Invaded England. And had so happily incompast them in the
Wood of Wiridale and Stanhope Park, that the English seemed fully assured of
Victory. Yet by the Treachery of Roger Mortimer, they were not only suffered to
make a total escape without any loss; but Sir James Dowglass in the dead of the
Night with 200 Light Horse assaulted the King's own Pavilion, and had certainly
killed him, had not one of his Chaplains (a Valiant Man) sacrificed his own
life in defense of his Sovereign's: Dowglass, after this bold attempt, escaped
back without damage, but not without honor for his daring Courage; this
misfortune was afterward charged upon Mortlmer, as designing by the death of
the King to Usurp the Crown: The Scots left their Camp entire behind them,
wherein the English found 500 Oxen and Cows ready killed, a Thousand Spits full
of Roast-Meat; 500 Caldrons made of Cow-hides new, with the Hair on, full of
Flesh, Boiling over Fires: And Ten thousand pair of Shoes, made of raw Hides
with the Hair outward; All which became a welcome booty to the hungry English
Soldiers.

Fourthly, After this dishonorable retreat of the King (who was extremely
grieved to return so ingloriously, notwithstanding the expense of a vast
Treasure, and the imminent danger of his own Person) and just before the death
of King Robert, who died of the Leprosy, being accounted one of the most
Valiant Warriors of that Age, as having redeemed his Country from Slavery, and
by whose loss it appeared of how much value the Courage and Conduct of a Prince
is; yet before he died, by the contrivance of the Queen Mother, Roger Mortimer,
and their Adherents such a dishonorable Peace is made with the Scots, as
exceedingly displeased the whole Kingdom, and in the end proved fatal to the
principal actor Mortimer. For at this Treaty the King, then in his Minority,
Sealed Charters to the Scots at Northampton contrived by the Queen, her
Favorite, and Sir James Douglas, without the knowledge or consent of the Peers
of England, whereby that famous Charter called Ragmans Roll, was surrendered to
them, with several Jewels, and among them one of an extraordinary value called
the Black Cross of Scotland, all which were taken from the Scots by the
Victorious King Edward I. The Scots Kings were likewise freed and discharged
for ever, from doing homage and fealty to the Kings of England, or from
acknowledging them to have any Right or Superiority over that Kingdom: And that
all Englishmen should forfeit their Lands in Scotland unless they went and
resided there, and swore Allegiance to that King; Moreover under pretense of
making reparation for damages, King Robert was obliged to pay the King of
England Thirty Thousand Marks Sterling, which Money was given to Mortimer, as a
reward for his procuring this destructive and mischievous Treaty. And to
conclude all: David Bruce Prince of Scotland, a Child of Seven or Eight Years
Old, and Heir to K. Robert, Married Jane Sister to K. Edward at Berwick; whom
the Scots in derision both of the Peace and Marriage scornfully nicknamed Jane
Make Peace.

Lastly, The Queen and Mortimer being sensible that some of the Principal
Nobility disliked their proceedings, and hindered their absolute Government;
they resolved to contrive some means for removing them out of the way, and
among others Edward Earl of Kent the King's Uncle: To effect this, it is said,
Mortimer caused a report to be spread abroad that K. Edward II. was still alive
at Corf-Castle, but not to be seen in the day time; and to countenance the
deceit, for many Nights together there were Lights set up in all the Windows of
the Castle, and an appearance made of Masquing, Dancing, and other Royal
Solemnities, as if for the King's diversion: This being observed by the
Country People, they confirmed the rumor of the late King's being there,
which was soon dispersed throughout England. The Earl of Kent hearing the news,
sent a Preaching Friar to the Castle to find out the truth of it; who by giving
Money to the Porter, was admitted into the Castle, lying very privately in his
Lodge all day; at night the Porter causing him to put off his own Priestly
Robes, and put on his, the Friar was brought into the Hall where he saw, as he
imagined, King Edward II. sitting in Royal Majesty at supper. The Friar
returning to the Earl, assured him of the reality of what he had seen;
whereupon the Earl being discontented, swore that he would endeavor by all
ways possible to deliver his Brother out of Prison, and restore him to his
Throne: To which purpose he engaged several other Noblemen in the design; with
the Provincial of the White and Carmelite Friars, the Bishop of London, and
others: This Conspiracy being discovered, though it were only a Lie and fancy,
the Friar being imposed upon only, by a King made of Clouts. Yet the Earl of
Kent by his words and some Letters that were found about him, was condemned as
a Traitor, for conspiring to set a dead Man at liberty. But so generally was
this Noble Lord beloved and honored, that he stood upon a Scaffold at the
Castle-Gates at Winchester, from Noon till five a Clock at Night for want of an
Executioner, none being to be found that would behead him, till at length
Mortimer sent for a poor wretched Fellow out of the Jayl, who with much ado,
and many blows hacked his Head from his Body.

The Malice and Ambition of Mortimer and his Associates, in making so little
conscience of shedding Royal Blood; with the many other Male-administrations
aforementioned, raised inveterate discontents throughout the Kingdom against
the Insolent Authors of them. But in the mean time they who resolved to support
their Grandeur in despite of Peers and People, summoned a Parliament at
Nottingham, where Roger Mortimer appeared in the utmost splendour and glory,
being Created Earl of March, and having greater attendance, and stronger Guards
than the King himself; whom he would suffer to rise up to him, and with whom he
walked as his Companion, yea went before him with his Officers. He likewise
very scornfully, and insolently rebuked Henry Earl of Lancaster the King's
Cousin, that without his leave he had taken up Lodgings in the Town so near the
Queen; and obliged him, with the Earl of Hereford and Effex, to remove their
Lodgings, a Mile from Nottingham: This notorious affront caused great murmuring
among the Noblemen, who said publicly, That Roger Mortimer the Queens Gallant
and the Kings's Master, sought by all means possible to destroy all the Royal
Blood, thereby to Usurp the Crown and Government; which some of the King's
Friends being mightily concerned at, endeavored to make him sensible of his
danger, swearing that if he would espouse their Cause they would faithfully
assist him, and secure his Person.

The Young King began already to put on serious thoughts, and acted the Man
much beyond his years; so that the Lords soon prevailed upon him to join with
them in asserting his own Authority, which he himself saw so much lessened by
Mortimer's (...) grown Power. He was likewise informed that (...) was commonly
reported the Queen was with Child by Mortimer, to the great dishonor both of
his Mother and himself, and to the grief of all his Loyal Subjects: Hereupon he
resolutely engaged with the Peers, to bring this Miscreant and his Abettors to
punishment. In order to which, Robert Holland, who had been long Governor of
Nottingham-Castle, and knew all the secret passages, and conveyances therein,
was taken into the design: Now there was in the Castle a private Passage cut
through the Rock upon which it is built; which was divided into two ways, one
opening toward the River of Trent which runs under it, and the other went a
great deal farther under the adjoining Meadows, and was after called Mortimer's
Hole: The King lying one Night without the Castle, was conducted by Torch-light
through this Passage (himself and his Valiant Attendants being all well Armed,
and their Swords drawn,) till he came to the door of the Queens Bedchamber,
which the secure and careless Lords had left wide open: Some of the foremost
entered the Room (desiring the King to retire a little that the Queen might not
see him) and slew Sir Hugh Turpington, who opposed them, from whom they went
toward the Queen Mother, with whom they found Mortimer, both just ready to go
into Bed, and seizing him they led him out into the Hall, whom the Queen
followed crying out, Bell silz, bell filz, ayes pity de gentil Mortimer, Good
Son, Good Son take pity upon the gentle Mortimer: For she suspected the King
was there, though she did not see him. Then were the Keys sent for, and all the
Castle with the Ammunition, and Provisions were delivered up to the King so
secretly, that none without the Castle had any knowledge of it but only the
King's Friends. This was counted a very daring enterprise in regard that
Mortimer had usually 180 Knights, besides Esquires and Gentlemen, as a constant
Guard for the security of his Person.

The next Morning early Roger Mortimer and his Accomplices were carried with
mighty shoutings and rejoycings of the Common People (the poor Earl of
Lancaster, though blind, making up the cry) toward London, and was committed to
the Tower: And soon after in open Parliament at Westminster, was Condemned by
his Peers, without being brought to Trial, by a Law of Mortimer's own
contriving, whereby the Earls of Lancaster, Winchester, Gloucester and Kent were
formerly out to Death. The following Articles of High Treason were laid to his
charge.

1. That he was consenting to the Murder of the King's Father. 2. That he
Treacherously occasioned much loss and dishonor to the King at Stanhope Park,
by procuring the escape of the Scots, for which he had received a great Sum of
Money. 3. That he caused several Ancient Deeds and Charters to be burnt,
wherein the King of Scots was obliged to do homage to the King of England, and
had made a dishonorable Contract between the King's Sister, and David Bruce
King Robert's Son. 4. That he had prodigally and lewdly wasted the King's
Treasures, as well as those of the two Spencers. 5. That he had been an Evil
Councellor to the King, and had been too familiarly conversant with the Queen
Mother. All which Articles are sum'd up in the following ragged Rymes, which
might very well have been in Prose; but for their Antiqutty and brevity, I will
here insert them.

Five heinous crimes against him soon were had.

1. That he caused the King to yield the Scot,
To make a Peace, Towns that were from him got,
And therewithal the Charter called Ragman.
2. He by the Scots was bribed for private gain.
3. That by his means King Edward of Carnarvan,
In Berkley Castle Treacherously was slain.
4. That with his Prince's Mother he had lain.
5. And finally with polling at his pleasure,
Had robbed the K. and Commons of their Treasure.
For these Treasons he was sentenced to be hanged, and afterward ignominiously
drawn in a Sledg to Tyburn, the common place of Execution, then called the
Elms, and there upon the common gallows was as ignominiously Executed, hanging,
by the King's command, two Days, and two Nights, a public and pleasing
spectacle to the wronged People: There died with him Sir Simon Bedford, and
John Deverel Esquire; as well for the expiation of the late King Edward's
detestable Murder, as in complement, as it were, to so great a Man's fall, who
seldom or never perish without company; they suffered in 1330.

The King by the advice of Parliament deprived the Queen of her excessive
Dowry, allowing her only a Thousand Pound a Year, and confining her to a
Monastery during Life, but giving her the honor of a visit once or twice a
Year, though otherwise judging her scarce worthy to live, in regard of her
Debaucheries with Mortimer, and her many other heinous practices.

From the sudden ruin of this great Favorite Mortimer, we may Remark what
Enchantments, Honor, Riches, and Power, are to the minds of Men, how suddenly,
how strangely do they blow them up with contempt of others, and forgetfulness
of themselves? And surely the frailty, and uncertainty of Worldly felicity is
very visible in this Great Person, who when he was drunk as it were with all
humane happiness, so that he seemed to fear neither God nor Man, was suddenly
overtaken by Divine Justice; and brought to utter confusion, when he least
dreamt of it: But it was very equitable, that he who would not take example by
the wretched Fate of his Favorite Predecessors, should himself be made an
Example by the like shameful and Ignominious Death.

Remarks on the Life of Henry Stafford Duke of Buckingham, Favorite to King
Richard the Third.
TWO Or three considerable Remarks do naturally result from the following
History. 1. That Tyrants being but single Persons could never perpetrate the
many mischiefs which they are usually guilty of, did they not meet with proper
Instruments to employ therein. 2. That the pravity of Mankind is so deplorable,
that the temptations of Honor and Riches too often prevail upon Men, and
engage them in the most vile and destructive designs. 3. That those who are
employed by Tyrants must never boggle not strain at the greatest Villainies,
since if they be not as thoroughly wicked as their Master he will account them
his implacable Enemies, and they are subject to be justly ruined by his unjust
and revengeful hand.

All these Maxims seem to be verified in the Life, Actions, and Fall of this
Great Man, Henry Stafford Duke of Buckinham: He was Son to Humfry Stafford of
Brecknock-shire in Wales, who was created Duke of Buckingham, and Lord High
Constable of England, by King Henry VI. Being descended from a Daughter of
Thomas of Woodstock, youngest Son to King Edward III. His Son succeeded him in
his Titles and Honor, and was a great Favorite to King Richard III. and very
Instrumental in advising him to his Usurped Throne, as by the following
Relation appears.

When King Edward IV. died, he left behind him two Sons, Edward his Successor
of thirteen, and Richard Duke of York of eleven years of Age. The Young King
and his Brother were by their Father's Will committed to the care of the Earl
of Rivers the Queens Brother, whom he made Protector of the King during his
Minority. The Court was at this time kept at Ludlow in Wales to retain the
Welsh in obedience, who began to be unruly, and in the mean time the Earl of
Rivers disposed of all Offices and Places of Preferment, which very much
dislatisfied the Duke of Gloucester Brother to King Edward IV. and Uncle to the
Present King, who upon his Brother's Death possed from the North, where he then
was, to London, and finding the Queen and her Kindred had the whole Government
of affairs about the King, he was very much displeased, as judging it a main
obstacle to his Usurpation and and Advancement to the Throne which it seems he
had long before designed; for it was reported that the very night wherein King
Edward IV. died, one Misselbrook came early in the morning to one Potter living
in Redcross street near Cripplegate, and told him, that the King was dead. By
my Troth man (says Potter) then will my Master the Duke of Gloucester be King.
For surely if he had not been acquainted with his Master's Intentions he would
not have thus spoke. But the Duke knowing that a business of such consequence
was not to be managed alone, he associated to himself the Duke of Buckingham
Lord High Constable, and the Lord Hastings Lord Chamberlain of England, two of
the most powerful men in the Kingdom, prevailing upon the former by promising
him the Earldom of Hereford, and the other being hereby in hopes to be revenged
upon his former Enemies. So that they joined with him in opinion, that it was
not necessary the Queens Kindred should so wholly engross the King, and Persons
of better Birth and Nobility should be neglected, and therefore they ought to
use their utmost endeavors to remove them.

The young King was now coming toward London with a great Attendance of Lords
and their Followers, in order to his Coronation, which the Duke of Gloucester
judging to be another rub in his way, since he could not bring about his
purposes without seeming to make an open War. He thereupon sends flattering
Letters to the Queen, with zealous pretenses of Loyalty and Service, persuading
her to dismiss the great Guards about the King, since it might raise Jealousies
in the Minds of the rest of the Nobility, that her Kindred did not raise these
Forces for the security of the King's Person, but for some Sinister intent, and
might cause them to raise a strength proportionable to encounter them, and so
occasion a Civil War in the Kingdom, wherein her Kinsmen would by all the World
be judged the first Aggressors.

These plausible reasons had such influence upon the innocent Princess, that
she sends positive Order to the King and her Brother, instantly to disband
their Guards for reasons best known to her self, (without mentioning by whose
advice) which if she had, they would never have done it, but upon the receipt
of these Letters they presently discharged the Soldiers, and came on with a
very mean Train, and having passed through Northampton were proceeding to
Stony-Stratford twelve Miles from thence, where the Dukes of Gloucester and
Buckingham met them; But they pretending that the Town was too little for them
and their Retinue went back to Northampton where the Earl Rivers had taken up
his Quarters for that night, intending the next Mornining to follow the King.
Several Complements passed upon their Meeting, and Supper being ended the two
Dukes pretend to retire to rest, and the Earl went to his Lodgings.

The two Dukes wasted a great part of the Night in consulting with their
Friends how to execute their enterprise, and having got the Keys of the Inn
Gate they suffered none to go in or out, of which Earl Rivers having notice,
though he suspected mischief, yet in confidence of his own innocence he went
boldly into the Dukes Chamber, where he found the Duke of Buckingham and the
rest closely contriving their business, with whom he expostulated the
unreasonableness of their making him a Prisoner against his Will, but instead
of a reply, they instantly command him to be seized, accusing him of diverse
crimes whereof they themselves were only culpable, and then putting him in safe
custody they ride away to the King to Stony Stratford, coming just as he was
taking Horse, whom they salute with much seeming reverence, but presently begin
a quarrel with the Lord Richard Gray the King's half Brother. The Duke of
Buckingham giving the King an account, that this Lord, the Marquess of Dorset
his Brother, and the Earl Rivers, had contrived and almost effected the
engrossing the management of all the affairs of the Kingdom among themselves,
which might be of dangerous consequence, by raising discontents among the
Nobility, and dissension among the People, and that the Marquess had taken out
of the Tower of London a great quantity of Money and Arms without Warrant,
which might justly be suspected is not intended for any good end, and that it
was therefore thought necessary by the Lords and Peers that he should be seized
at Northampton, so to be ready to answer what he should be charged with.

The King not being sensible of their design, mildly answered, What my Brother
Marquess has done I cannot say, but for my Uncle Rivers and my Brother here, I
am well satisfied that they are ignorant of any unlawful Practices either
against me or you. Oh, says the Duke of Buckingham, that has been their policy
to conceal their treachery from your Graces knowledge. And thereupon they
instantly in the King's presence seized the Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Vaughan, and
Sir Richard Hall, and carried the King with all his company back to
Northampton, turning away all his Old Officers and Servants, and putting those
in their rooms who were under their direction, at which harsh usage the young
King wept, and was much discontented but without remedy. Yet to color their
intents, the Duke of Gloucester being at Dinner, sent a Dish of Meat from his
own Table to the Lord Rivers, biding him he of good cheer for in a short time
all would be well. The Earl thanking the Duke, desired the Messenger to carry
the Dish to the Lord Richard Gray with the same message for his comfort, as one
to whom such troubles were unusual but for himself he had been inured to them
all his life, and therefore could the better bear them. But notwithstanding
this pretended kindness the Duke of Gloucester sent the Earl Rivers, the Lord
Gray, and Sir Tho. Vaughan into the North, and afterward to Pomfret Castle
where they were all in the end beheaded by his Order, without Trial.

The Duke having gotten his Prey in his Clutches, marches with the King toward
London, declaring to all People in the way, that the Queens Relations had
conspired to destroy the King, and all the ancient Nobility of the Kingdom, and
to subvert the Government of the Nation, and that they were taken and
imprisoned in order to be brought to a Legal Trial. And to make it more
probable they carried along with them diverse Wagons laden with Arms, with
several Chests, which they themselves had provided, pretending they were full
of Money, which the Conspirators had provided to pay the Forces they designed
to raise. But the finest Intreague of all was, that five of the Dukes own
Creatures were brought along in Chains, who in every place where the K. lodged
were given out to be Persons of Quality that had been drawn into this horrid
Plot and Treason by the Queens Brother, who being now very sensible of their
guilt, had confessed the whole of these wicked contrivances. This Pageantry was
acted all the way till the King came to London, but then the actors were
discovered, and the cheat was openly detected.

About midnight of the next day, the Queen had notice of these sorrowful
accidents, and now too late repented her folly in being so treacherously
imposed upon by the bloody Duke of Gloucester, as to dismiss the Guards about
her Son's Person by his instigation, and doubting that worse would follow, she
with her youngest Son Richard and five Daughters, takes Sanctuary at
Westminster, lodging in the Abbot's House there. The Young King having
intelligence of these things, with Sighs and Tears expressed much grief, but the
two Dukes made so many protestations of their fidelity and care of his safety
that they seemed to wonder at his being any way concerned.

Soon after, the Lord Hastings sent a Messenger to the Archbishop of York, then
Lord Chancellor of England to signify to him, that he need not be disturbed at
what happened, assuring him that in a little while all would be well again. I
am sure, replied the Archbishop, Let it be as well as it will, it will never be
so well as we have seen it. And presently after, the Archbishop attended by all
his Servants armed in the midst of the Night came to the distressed Queen, whom
he found sitting alone upon an heap of Rushes, much disconsolate and in Tears,
whom he endeavored to comfort by telling her, That he had good hopes the
matter would not be so bad as she suspected, the Lord Hastings having by a
Messenger sent on purpose assured him that all would end well. 'Ah wretch!
quoth the Queen, that man is one of those who endeavor to ruin me and my
Family: Madam quoth the Bishop, pray be pacified, for I will engage that if
they dare presume to Crown any but your Son whom they now have with them, the
next day we will Crown his Brother who is here with you. And Madam, I here
deliver you the Great Seal which was committed to me by that Noble Prince your
Husband, and which I resign to you, only for the use and benefit of your Son.
After which he departed, and in his way home observed the River of Thames full
of Boats, with the Duke of Glocester's Servants, watching to prevent any from
going into Sanctuary without being first searched and examined.

These proceedings were very distastful to many of the Nobility and Citizens,
doubting that all this was intended against the King's Person, and to prevent
his Coronation. Whereupon they went armed about the streets, and met together
to consult of the common safety. But the Lords of the Council being assembled,
the Archbishop of York fearing that he should be charged with want of
understanding for delivering the Great Seal to the Queen, without the King or
Councils leave, he privately sent for it again, which being returned, he
brought it as usually into Council. The Lord Hastings, whose fidelity to the
King was real, assured the Lords that the Duke of Gloucester was faithful and
loyal to his Prince, and that the Lord Rivers and Lord Richard with the other
Knights were secured for some secret practices against the Dukes of Gloucester
and Buckingham, and that the King should receive no damage thereby, and that
they should continue Prisoners no longer than till the whole matter was
thoroughly examined before the King and Council. He therefore advised the Lords
not to judge of it before they had heard it, nor to turn their private grudges
and quarrels into public contentions, and thereby disturb the King's
Coronation, which might be of worse consequence than they could at present
imagine. For the Dukes were now coming to London to that purpose, and if the
Lords should take up Arms to oppose them, they would be counted Rebels. Since
having the King in their Hands they would pretend his Authority to declare them
so to be. By these Arguments, some of which he knew to be true, and others not,
but chiefly by the near approach of the two Dukes to the City, these commotions
were pacified.

At the King's approach, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Sheriffs of London with
five hundred Horse went as far as Hornsey to wait upon him, and attended him
from thence to London, where he arrived May, 4. 1483. And was Lodged in the
Bishop's Palace: A great Council was then held, and the Dukes of Gloucester and
Buckingham, with the rest of the Lords present, swore Allegiance to the King,
and the Duke of Gloucester carried himself so respectfully to him, that all the
former jealousies of his designing foul play vanished, and he gained such
reputation and credit with the Council; that by their general consent and
approbation he was chosen Protector of the King and Kingdom. And thus was the
Innocent Lamb delivered into the Custody of the Ravenous Wolf: The Council
severely checked the Archbishop of York for so inconsiderately delivering the
Great Seal to the Queen, which was now taken from him, and given to Dr. Russell
Bishop of Lincoln, one of the Honestest and Learned Men of that Time: Several
Knights and Gentlemen had Places bestowed upon them, but the Lord Hastings kept
his Office of Lord Chamberlain as formerly, and so did diverse others.

The Duke of Gloucester knowing he could not finish his mischevious purposes,
without having the other Son Richard Duke of York in his hands; for without
them both he was as good have had neither: Therefore as his actions had made
the King Melancholy, he now pretends that he ought to have his Brother's
company to make him merry; and at the next meeting of the Lords of the Council
he represented to them, That it was a very heinous (...) in the Queen to keep
the King's Brother in Sanctuary, and not to let them come together and (...)
pleasure in each others conversation. That it (...) occasion the People to have
ill thoughts of the (...) Counselors, since the Queen durst not trust (...)
Son in the hands or those who were (...) by the Peers of the (...) to have the
(...) and Guardianship of the (...) stoyal Person, (...) and office consisted
(...) in preserving him from Enemies or Poison, but in procuring for him such
recreations and pleasures as were suitable to his Youth and Dignity, and which
he could not enjoy so properly in the company of Grave Counselors or Ancient
Persons, as in that of his own Dear Brother: He therefore advised, that the
Archbishop of York might be sent to persuade the Queen to deliver her Son out
of Sanctuary, which would be so much to the advantage of the Young Duke the
King's most Noble Brother, and after his Sovereign Lord himself, his most Dear
Nephew, and might also prevent any sinister thoughts of the People, concerning
the Nobility and Council. But if she continued obstinate, and would not hearken
to the Archbishop's Council in this matter, that then by the King's Authority
he should be forcibly taken from her, and brought to his Royal presence, where
he shall be so honorably received and treated, that the World shall be
convinced it was only the malice, frowardness, and folly of his Mother which
occasioned his being kept in Prison so long already.

This subtle Speech had such effect upon the Council that they all concluded
the motion to be just and reasonable: And likewise comfortable and honorable
both to the King and his Brother, and would prevent Evil surmises, provided the
Queen could be induced quietly to deliver him. The Archbishop undertook to use
his utmost endeavors to incline her to it, but added, if she persisted in
refusing it, he thought it was not to be attempted against her will, for it
would turn highly to the dishonor of God, and to the displeasure of the
People, if the privilege of that Holy place should be now broken, which had so
many Years been inviolably preserved, which so many good Kings and Princes had
granted and confirmed; and which Holy Ground was 500 Years ago by St. Peter in
his own Person accompanied with great numbers of Angels by Night, so
miraculously hallowed and Dedicated to God: And for proof whereof they have St.
Peter's Copy yet in Westminster Abbey to show; and from that time to this,
there was never any King so indevout and profane that durst violate that
Sacred place, nor any Bishop so Holy that durst as to presume to Consecrate it;
and therefore (quoth the Archbishop) God forbid that any Man for any Earthly
thing should presume to break the Privileges, and Liberties of that Holy
Sanctuary, and I hope in God I shall not need to fear it, for my utmost
endeavors shall not be wanting.

The other Bishops and Clergy in the Council were of the same opinion, that no
violence ought by any means to be used toward the Queen, or that Sacred Place.
The Archbishop added, But my Honorable Lords, If the Mothers fears, or
Womanish dread render my message ineffectual, I hope, I shall receive no
prejudice in your judgments thereby.

Womanish fear, nay Womanish frowardness, replied the Duke of Buckingham, for I
dare take it upon my Soul, she very well knows there is no just cause for her
to fear any danger can accrue thereby; either to her Son or her self; for
surely no Man will make War with Women. I would to God that some Men of her
Family were Women too, and then we should all be quickly quiet: Yet are none of
them the less respected because they are her Relations, but by reason of their
ill actions; but if we had no kindness for her or her Kindred, yet no Man can
believe that we have any hatred, or evil design against the King's Noble
Brother who is a Kin to us all, for whose Honor and welfare, if his Mother had
so much regard as we of the Nobility have, She would not suffer him any longer
to be without his Brother's society, nor give occasion to Men to think that we
have any surreptitious intentions toward him. For though she be a Wise
Princess, yet I hope she does not so presume upon her own Wit, as to prefer it
before the Wisdom of this Illustrious Assembly, nor suspect any unfair dealing
from us, whom she knows to be devoted to the Service both of the K. and his
Brother. Her refusal must therefore be the effect of her pevishness, and
preversness, and not of her real fears, unless she dreads her own shadow:
Besides, if upon pretended doubts she is not willing to part with him, we have
the greater reason to take him out of her hands, lest to prevent us, she should
convey him out of the Kingdom; and it would much reflect upon the discretion of
this Honorable Council, to suffer the King's Brother to be carried out of the
Realm before our Faces; I am therefore clearly for taking him from her, not
that I would have Sanctuary violated, but as I would not break the Privileges
they have so long enjoyed; so if they were now to be given, I would not be one
that should consent to confirm them.

I will not deny but it may be necessary that those Men whom unfortunate
accidents, and not their own ill Husbandry, have reduced to Poverty, should
have a place of security from their cruel Creditors: Likewise, If their be a
Contention about the Rights of Princes to the Crown, whereby sometimes one
Party, and soon after another are declared Traitors, as it has lately happened;
I judge it convenient that there be some places of refuge for both: But for
Thieves, and especially wilful Murderers, whom God Almighty commands should be
taken from the Altar and put to Death, I know no reason that they should have
any protection. For if either necessity, self defense, or misfortune brings a
Man into danger, he is either acquitted by the Law, or the King out of his
Clemency has power to grant him a Pardon.

Now let us consider, how few Sanctuary men are necessitated to go thither, and
how great a number their own flagitious crimes drive into them: What a rabble
of Thieves, Murderers, Traitors, and other heinous Offenders shelter
themselves from Justice, in two Sanctuarys only; The one in the Elbow of the
City, as I may call it, I mean this at Westminster, the other in the very
bowels of it, St. Martins Le Grand; and I dare avow that if we compare the
mischiefs that are occasioned by them, with the benefits received from them, we
must conclude that we were better without both: This I affirm, though they were
not abused as they are, and having so long continued bad, there is now little
hope of redress, since no Man dares presume to talk of reforming them, and Men
thereby seeming to make God and St. Peter the Patrons of Profligate and Vicious
People. For how many live prodigally, and run in debt upon the encouragement of
securing themselves in these places? How many Rich Villains carry in thither
Poor Men's Goods, and leave them and their Families to Starve for want of their
just dues? How many Women run away from their Husbands, with their Plate and
Money, and are there protected, to spend it upon their Gallants? How many
Robbers bring Stolen Goods thither, and live bravely upon them? there they
contrive new Robberies, going out at Night to commit them, and having Stolen,
Plundered, and Murdered, they return thither again with their prey, as if such
places gave them not only security to perpetrate these Villainies, but a License
to continue them.

But much of this mischief might be prevented if good Men would in earnest put
their hands to it, which might tend much to the honor of God, and yet be no
breach of Privilege. For, since former Popes and Princes, who were more
Politic than Pious, have granted them these long immunities; We and others
since, out of fear have confirmed them, we must be content to suffer them; and
in God's name let them stand in force as far as reason will permit, but not in
such force as to hinder us from taking this Young Prince out of Prison, and
restoring him to his Liberty, Honor and Estate.

A Sanctuary is to preserve those Men or Women that are in danger of the Law
abroad, but not to wrong nor cheat any body, by going in thither: Now this
Prince is in peril by no Law, his Youth and Innocence free him from all
suspicion of danger, as well as his near Alliance to the King; therefore he
neither needs, nor can have any benefit by Sanctuary, and I dare say, is very
angry with those that keep him there: But suppose the Duke is willing so long
to continue there, yet it is my opinion that he may be taken from thence
against his will, as justly as a Man may take his Wife, who is run away from
him thither, by the Arm and lead her out of St. Peter's Church, without any
offense to St. Peter. For if none must be taken out of Sanctuary that have a
mind to continue there, then if a Child will run thither to prevent his going
to School, his Master must let him alone, and as mean as this instance is, yet
there is less reason in our case than in that, for that Child has some fear,
imaginary or real, but this Young Gentleman has none at all.

To conclude, I have often heard of Sanctuary Men, but never before of
Sanctuary Children: Let those Men that desire and need it have the benefit of
it, but he can be no Sanctuary Man that has not understanding to desire it,
nor malice to deserve it, whose Life nor Liberty can by no Legal process be in
Jeopardy, and he that takes one out of Sanctuary for his own advantage and
benefit, can never be challenged for a Sanctuary breaker.

The Duke having ended his long Harangue, all the Temporal and most part of
Spiritual Lords, not having the least suspicion of any Treachery, were of
opinion that if the Young. Duke were not delivered, he ought to be taken away
from his Mother; yet to avoid clamor they concluded that the Archbishop of
York should be sent to persuade her, the Protector and Council resolving to Sit
in the Star Chamber till his return: Thereupon the Archbishop with diverse other
Lords accompanying him, went to the Queen in Sanctuary, both out of respect to
her, and to show by their number that the Council were unanimous in the Message
that was sent her: And some were of opinion that the Protector had several of
his Creatures among them, to whom he had given private Instructions to seize
him by force, and bring him away if his Mother should persist in her denial,
and thereby prevent her from conveying him to a place of more security.

When they came into the Queens presence, the Archbishop acquainted her that
the Protector and all the Council had upon mature deliberation concluded that
the detaining the King's Brother in Sanctuary, was a thing that might occasion
strange surmises of them among the People, and seemed scandalous to them, as
well as grievous to the King's Royal Majesty, to whom the presence of his Dear
Brother must needs be as pleasant and delightful, as the keeping them apart was
dishonorable to her and her Kindred; as though one Brother were in danger of
another: That the Council had therefore sent him and the rest to require her
delivery of him out of that place; so that he might at full liberty and freedom
visit and continue with the King his Brother, and be respected and attended
according to his High Birth and Quality; the doing whereof would tend to the
quiet of the Realm, be very pleasing to the Council, and advantageous to her
self, as well as to her Friends that were now in trouble: And above all (quoth
the Archbishop) and what. I suppose you desire beyond all, it will not only be
comfortable and honorable to the King, but to the Young Duke himself, whose
singular happiness it will be to be with his Brother, and to partake in those
Princely Sports and Recreations which are suitable to their Dignity, and which
they cannot so properly partake of in the company of any other. For the
Protector esteems it no such slight matter as it may be thought, that the minds
of the Young Princes should for their Healths, be sometimes refreshed with
those diversions which may be both pleasant and proper for their Age and
Quality.

My Lord (replied the Queen) I will not deny but it may be very convenient that
this young Gentleman you require of me were in the Company of the King his
Brother, and in truth I think it might be as necessary that for a while yet,
they were both in the Custody and Company of their Mother, their tender age
considered, but especially the younger, who besides his Childhood has been
lately visited with a severe sickness, and is yet only amended but not
recovered, so that it is very fit he should be carefully attended, and that
charge I will commit to no Person upon Earth, but resolve to make it my own
business, considering that the Physicians tell us, a relapse is more dangerous
than the first Sickness, for nature being before weakened, is less able to
endure a second Combat, and though it may be others might use their best skill
and diligence about him, yet none knows so well how to order him as my self,
who have so long been with him, nor can any be so tender of him as his own
Mother that bore him.

None can deny, quoth the Archbishop, but that your Grace is of all Persons the
most proper about your Children, and the Council would be very glad that you
would take care of them, if you please to do it in such a place as might be
convenient and honorable, but if you design to continue here, they then think
it more proper that the Duke of York should be with the King at liberty and in
honor, to the comfort of them both, than to live here as a Sanctuary man, to
their high dishonor and disgrace. Since it is not always necessary that the
Child should be with his Mother, but on the contrary that they be separated
from each other. And of this there is a late instance, that when your dearest
Son the Prince, and now King, did for his honor and the security of the
Country reside at Ludlow in Wales far distant from your Grace, yet you seemed
very well contented therewith. Not so well contented neither, said the Queen,
but the case is not now the same, for that Son was then in health, and this is
now sick, and therefore I much wonder that my Lord Protector should be so
desirous to have him in his company, since if the Child should happen to
miscarry he will be suspected of having a hand in his death, and to have used
foul play toward him. Neither can I but admire that the Council should think it
so dishonorable for him to be here, when none can doubt but he will be in
safety while I am with him, and where by the Grace of God I intend to continue,
and not to bring my self into the danger that my Kindred are in, whom I rather
wish to be here with me in security. Why Madam, said one of the Lords, do you
know that your Kindred are in danger: No verily Sir said she, nor why they are
wrongfully Imprisoned, but I shall not marvel if those who have thus illegally
confined them without reason, should proceed to destroy them without Cause. The
Archbishop bid him forbear such discourse, and told her, that he did not doubt
but the Lords in Custody would be quickly at liberty, if nothing could be
proved against them. And that her own Person could not be in any peril. The
Queen replied, What reason have I to believe that, since my Kindred are as
Innocent as my self, and all the malice against us is because we are so near a
kin to the King. As for the Gentleman my Son, I intend he shall be where I am
till I see farther, for I assure you the more earnest I see some men to have
him away without any real ground, the more I dread to part with him. And truly
Madam, quoth the Archbishop, the more loath you are to part with him, the more
afraid are other men that you should convey him away, and therefore since he
can have no privilege that does not ask it, nor for any fault can want it, they
will think it no breach of privilege to take him from you by force.

Ah S^r quoth the Queen, has the Protecter so much love and tenderness for
him, that he only fears he should escape him. Alas whither should I send him if
he be not safe in this Sanctuary, the privilege whereof there was never any
Tyrant so wicked or devilish to break. But it seems my Son deserves no
Sanctuary and therefore cannot have it: What, is this place of security for a
Thief, and not for an Infant? But he is in no danger, say they: I would to God
he were not. I wish the Protector may prove a Protector to him, but the matter
is plain, he has one Son already in his Hands, and could he get the other, and
destroy them both, he would then Usurp the Crown. I shall give no other account
why I have such a fear, but only what the Law gives, which as Learned men tell
me, forbids any man to have the custody of one by whose Death he may inherit
far less than a Kingdom. I shall say no more, but that whosoever breaks this
holy Sanctuary, I pray God he may soon have need of one, but not enjoy it.

The Queen then proceeded in severe reflections upon the Protector's designs,
which the Archbishop did not then believe, and was therefore loath to hea^, but
told her in short, That if she would deliver her Son to him and the rest, he
durst pawn his Soul and Body for his safety; but if not, he much doubted she
would be obliged to do it against her will, and that he would never move her
any more in that matter. These words made the Queen stand silent, and
considering she had no time or place to secure him from them, the Sanctuary
being strongly guarded, and that she did believe the Archbishop and some of the
rest of the Lords were good men, and would not see her Child wronged, and
finally that if the Protector was resolved to have him, he would scruple at
nothing to compass his ends, she concluded to deliver him her self to their
fidelity, and taking the young Duke by the Hand, she said, My Lords, I neither
mistrust your prudence, nor am jealous of your faithfulness, of which I now
give you a convincing proof, and wherein if I should be mistaken, it would be a
very great affliction to me, and would bring much mischief to the Realm, and
eternal reproach upon your selves. For behold here is the Gentleman you
require, whom I doubt not but I could have kept safe in this place, whatever is
alleged to the contrary. Though I do not question but I have some such deadly
Enemies to my, Family and Blood abroad, that if they thought they had a drop of
it in their own Bodies they would let it out. For we have had many examples
that the ambition of Sovereignty makes void all ties of Kindred and Alliance,
for this cause Brothers have been the ruin of Brothers, and may the Nephews
find better usage from their Uncle. While these Children are apart the life of
one is a defense to the other, and their safety consists in each others
welfare. Keep one safe, and that will secure the other, but nothing is more
dangerous than that they should be in one place, for no wise Merchant will
venture all his Estate in one Ship. But however, here I deliver him, and his
Brother in him, into your hands, of whom I shall require them both, in the
sight of God and the World. I know very well that you are both Just and Wise,
and that you want neither Will nor Power to preserve them, if you think
otherwise pray leave him with me. But one thing I earnestly recommend to you,
to be very cautious, lest while you count me too fearful, you your selves be
not too fearless and secure.

Then turning to the Child, Come my own sweet Son said she, let me Kiss you
before you go, for God knows whether ever we shall kiss one another again, to
whose holy protection I commit you. Having Kissed and Blessed him she turned
aside and wept, and then went away, leaving the Child weeping as fast as she.
The Lords having received the Duke, brought him into the Star Chamber, where
the Protector and Council were sitting. As soon as he was entered the room, the
Protector rises up and takes him in his Arms, Kissing and Embracing him,
saying, Dear Nephew you are welcome with all my heart, for next to my Sovereign
Lord your Brother, nothing gives me so much contentment as your presence. And
herein it was thought he did not dissemble, having now got the prize which he
so much desired. Soon after upon pretense of removing the two Princes into a
place of more security, till the Peoples minds were settled, the Protector
caused them to be carried in great Pomp and State through London to the Tower,
there to continue till the King's Coronation, from whence they never after came
abroad.

The Protector now began more openly to prosecute his designs, but the work
being great, he must make use of Great men in it, and at that time none was
more potent than that Duke of Buckingham. Some have writ that the Duke was
privy to all the contrivances of the Duke, from the death of King Edward IV.
Others thought the Protector never durst adventure to discover a matter of such
great consequence to him, and that he now employed some cunning people to
insinuate into the Duke that the young King had a secret hatred to him for
being accessory to the Imprisonment of his Kindred, and that if he were ever in
a capacity he would revenge it upon him, for if they should be again at liberty
to be sure they would incite him to it, and if they should be put to death,
this would the more inrage the King against him. That there was no way for the
Duke to retreat, or make his Peace with the King, since the King himself, with
his Brother and Kindred were now in such safe custody that the Protector with a
word of his Mouth could destroy them all, and him also, if he found him fall
off from his Interest.

Though the Duke might be troubled at what he had done, yet being sensible of
the Protector's cruelty, and his own danger, he resolved to join with him in
all his traiterous enterprises, and so it was agreed between them, that the
Duke should assist the Protector to advance him to the Crown. In recompense of
which service, the Protector's only Son and Heir should marry the Duke's
Daughter, and should likewise have the Earldom of Hereford settled upon him and
his Successors, which he had claimed as his Inheritance from Edward IV. but
could never obtain it. He also promised the Duke a large sum of the King's
Money, and a great quantity of his Household Stuff.

Having entered into this cursed combination, to delude the People they pretend
to make great preparations for Crowning the young King. To which purpose all
the Lords of the Council were summoned to appear in the Tower. Where they met
accordingly, but the Protector being sensible that the Lord Hastings would be a
great obstacle in his way, because of his firmness and fidelity to his old
Master King Edward's Sons, he resolved to be rid of him, which he effected in
the manner following.

The Protector coming into Council complemented all the Lords very affably,
seeming more than ordinarily merry, and after some other discourses, My Lord,
says he to the Bishop of Ely, I hear you have very good Strawberries in your
Garden in Holbourn, pray let us have a dish of them: With all my heart replied,
the Bishop, and instantly sent for some, The Protector then rose hastily up,
desiring them to excuse his absence for a while. And returning about an hour
after, he appeared so extremely disturbed and changed in his countenance
uttering so many grievous sighs, and using such passionate gestures that the
Lords were in much admiration of the cause thereof. He knit his Brows, and bit
his Lips, appearing extre^mly concerned. After long silence, the more to
prepare their attentions he asks confusedly, what punishment they deserved who
had compassed, imagined and contrived the destruction of him who was so near
allied to the King and Protector of his Person and Kingdom. At this question
the Lords were all amazed and sat looking upon each other without speaking a
word, at ength the Lord Hastings (by the instigation of the Duke of Buckingham)
presuming upon his intimacy with the Protector, replied, That whoever they
were, they deserved to be punished as Traitors, to which the other Lords
assented. Whereat the Protector rising up, Why it is, says he, that old
Sorceress my Brother Edward's Widow, and her Partner that common Whore Jane
Shore, that have by Witchcraft and Enchantment, contrived to take away my life.
And though by God's Mercy they have not been able to finish their Villainy, yet
see the mischief they have done me, for behold (and then he showed his left Arm
naked and withered) how they have caused this dear Limb of mine to wither and
grow useless, and my whole body had been in the same miserable plight if they
had executed their Wills upon me. The Lords who knew the goodness and virtue of
the Queen, and that his Arm had been always withered from his birth, found it a
false pretense, but were so astonished at his confidence that they durst not
utter a word, till the Lord Hastings (thinking to lay all the fault upon the
Queen, and excuse Jane Shore whom he had taken for his Mistress and Bedfellow
ever since King Edward's death, and from whom he had risen that Morning)
submissively answered, If the Queen have conspired -- which he had no sooner
said, but the Protector looking fiercely upon him, What, says he in a great
rage, do thou tell me of If's and And's, I tell thee they and none but they
have done it, and thou art Confederate with them in their Villainy. Who I, my
Lord? quoth he; Yea thou Traitor, says the Protector, and therewith striking a
sound blow with his hand upon the Table, Treason was cried in the next room,
and immediately a great number of armed men came rushing in as if to guard the
Protector, one of whom with a furious blow of a Pole-axe, wounded the Lord
Stanley in the head, and had certainly killed him, but that with the stroke he
sunk under the Table. The rest of the Council were seized, and secured in
several Rooms. The Lord Hastings the Protector charged with High Treason, and
wished him to make haste and Confess himself, swearing by St. Paul, (his usual
Dath) that he would neither eat nor drink till his Head were off: It signified
nothing to ask a reason, for he knew the Protector would give none; so he was
carried to the Green in the Tower before the Chapel, where his Head was laid
upon a long piece of Timber, and there struck off, and his Head and Body
afterward buried in Windsor Chapel, near King Edward IV.

In the Tragical end of this Lord, we may observe how inevitable the strokes of
destiny are, for the very Night before his Death the Lord Stanley sent a secret
Message to him at Midnight, in all have to inform him of a Dream he had, in
which he thought that a Boar with his Tusks had so goared them by the Heads,
that the Blood ran about their Ears, and because the Protector gave the Boar
for his Arms, or Cognizance, this Dream had made so dreadful an impression upon
his mind, that he was fully resolved not to stay any longer, and had his Horse
ready, requiring the Lord Hastings to go along with him; and that they might
Ride so fast as to be out of danger before Morning. But the Lord Hastings
returned this Answer by the Messenger; Ah good Lord! Does thy Master insist so
much upon Trifles, and has he such faith in Dreams, which either proceed from
fancy, or from the thoughts of the preceding Day; but if they foretell things
to come, why may they not presage; that if we run away and should be taken,
then the Boar might have some reason to use us ill; Therefore commend me to thy
Master, and bid him (...) merry and fear nothing, for I am as sure of the ^an
he woteth of, as I am of my own Right hand. The (...) he meant, was one Catesby
a Lawyer, who was at (...) advanced by his favor, and now grown so intimate
(...) the Protector, that he did not doubt but he would discover any ill design
against him: But he was much mistaken, for after he became so great with the
Pretector, Catesby was the first Man that advised the taking off the Lord
Hastings: Likewise the same Morning he was Beheaded, his Horse stumbled twice
or thrice almost to falling, which though it often happen by chance, yet has
been sometimes reckoned a token of misfortune. Moreover, at the same time
coming to Tower-Wharf, he there met a Pursivant of his own Name, which made him
recall what had happened to him some time before, in that place; for he was
accused by the Lord Rivers in King Edward IV. Reign, of some Crimes which for a
time cast him out of the King's favor, and endangered his Life, but was after
restored again into Grace.

Now seeing this Man, Ah Hastings quoth the Lord, Thou can not forget that
the last time I met thee here it was with a heavy Heart: Yes my Lord, said the
Purfivant, I remember it very well, but thanks be to God your Enemies gained
nothing, nor had your Lordship any damage thereby, and now the danger is over:
Thou would say so indeed, said the Lord, if thou knew as much as I do,
for the World is well changed now, and my Enemies are in greater danger, as
thou may happen to hear in a few days: (the Enemies he meant, were the Lord
Rivers and others of the Queens Kindre^, who were that very day secretly
ordered to be Beheaded at Pomfret-Castle, of which he had knowledge) and I was
never merrier, nor in more safety since I was Born. By this we may learn that
there is no greater sign of ill fortune than to be too secure, and that Men are
blind as to their own Fate, and though the Ax hangs over their Heads, yet are
not sensible of it, but are often most in danger when they think themselves safe,
and most safe when they judge themselves in danger. For this Lord
notwithstanding his great confidence, lost his Head two hours after he spoke
these words.

The same Morning, as the Lord Hastings was going to the Council in tht Tower,
a Knight who pretended kindness to him, but was thought to be privy to the
Protector's designs, and sent to meet and hasten him thither, offered to
accompany him. The Lord Hastings staid by the way in Tower-street, to discourse
with a Priest whom he met; the Knight jokingly interrupted their talk, saying,
Pray, my Lord, make haste, for you have no need of a Priest yet, seeming to be
in jest, but it was thought, meant in earnest that he would in a short time
have occasion for one.

The news of the Death of the Lord Hastings, soon flew into the City, and much
surprised the People, but the Protector to prevent any Commotion, sent for
several of the Principal Citizens to come to him with all speed. At their
appearance, himself with the Duke of Buckingham, received them in Old Rusty
Armor, to make a show as if the present danger had obliged them to take what
they could first come by, and then the Protector declared to them; That the
Lord Hastings, and other Conspirators, had contrived to have slain him and the
Duke of Buckingham in Council, and then to have taken upon them to Govern the
King and Kingdom at their pleasure: Of which Treason they had made discovery,
but few hours before it should have been acted; so that their sudden fear had
caused them to put on such Armor as they first met with, but that God had so
far prevented their Traitorous purposes, as some had already received their
deserts. This he required them to report to the People: The Citizens seemed as
if they had believed what he said, though they all knew nothing was more false.
Presently after a Proclamation was published throughout the City; reciting the
aforenamed particulars, and adding several reflections upon the Lord Hastings,
as that he was an Evil Counselor to King Edward IV. Advising him to do many
things to his great Dishonor, and the damage of the Kingdom by his ill Example
and Conversation, particularly in the lewdness of his Life, which he still
continued with Shore's, Wife who was one of the principal Conspirators, with
whom he had converst the very last night, and that it was no wonder if such a
wicked course of Life had brought him to such an untimely Death, which he was
condemned to suffer by the special command of the King and his Honorable Privy
Council, before whom he was clearly Convicted to have contrived this horrid
Treason, and whose sudden Execution according to his demerits, they hoped would
prevent the other Conspirators, from proceeding in their Traitorous purposes,
and secure the Peace of the Nation.

Now this Proclamation was published within two hours after the Lord Hastings
was Beheaded, and was so exactly perceived, and fairly Written in Parchment,
and withal so long, that all the World perceived it had been prepared long
before, which occasioned the School Master of St. Paul's at the Proclaiming it
to say; Here is a gay goodly cast, foul cast away for haste, To whom a Merchant
Answered; That it was written by Prophecy, or Revelation.

After this the Protector, like an Innocent, continent Prince, sent the
Sheriffs of London to Jane Shore's House, (who lived from her Husband) with an
order to seize all her Goods, which they did to the value of two or 3000 Marks,
and committed her to Prison: He charging her with bewitching him, and with
conspiring with the Lord Hastings, to destroy him, but having no proof of any
thing, be then gravely accused her of what all the Kingdom knew before, and she
her self could not deny; that she was Unchaste of her Body, which made Men
smile that it should be now told as new: Hereupon he caused the Bishop of
London to put her to open Penance for Incontinency, and the next Sunday she
was brought out of Ludgate, going before a Cross in Procession, with a Wax
Taper in her hand, and though she was then in mean Apparel, having only her
Girdle on, yet she appeared so fair and lovely, the crowd of Spectators raising
a comely blush in her Cheeks, and withal so modest and sober, that she was much
commended by them, who had more love for her Body than for her Soul; yea those
that hated her vicious life, and were glad to see Sin punished, yet pitied her
misery, and hard usage from him, who inflicted it for wicked and politic ends,
and not out of love to Virtue, or Chastity.

This Woman was a notable instance of the mutability of Fortune; she was born
in London, of a good Family, and very well Married to one Shore, a sober worthy
Citizen and Goldsmith, but it was thought, a little too Young; so that she
never showed much affection to her Husband, whom she was (...) a capable of
loving, which might incline her the (...) embrace King Edward's Kindness: Which
being attended with Honor, Riches, Fine Clothes, Ease, Pleasure, and all other
humane delights, was hardly to be resisted by such a tender heart as she had:
When the King had taken her for his Mistress, her Husband wholly abandoned her
Bed: After his Death the Lord Hastings, who had an extreme passion for her
during the King's Life, but either out of respect, or faithfulness, forbore
Courting her, now took her home to his House, and maintained her in great
splendour: She was very fair and proper, and nothing amiss in her whole Body,
but that some thought her not tall enough, as some report who knew her in her
Youth, (says Sir Thomas More) but now she is Old, says he, who saw her, she
is lean, withered, and her Skin so extremely shrivelled, that it is scarce to
be imagined so much beauty and comeliness ever resided in that wretched
Carcass. Yet she was not more admired for her handsomeness, then for her ready
wit, and brisk temper; neither too full, nor too sparing in discourse, jesting
often without abuse, but very pleasantly, so that her company was extreme
entertaining. King Edward used to say, That he had three Concubines, who were
excellent for three different Qualities; One being the merriest, another the
most politic and subtle, and the third the most devout Harlot in the World;
who when he sent for to his Bed, was usually at Prayers upon her knees in the
Church; the other two were Persons of greater Quality, but Jane Shore was the
merriest, and therefore the King took much delight in her conversation; for
though he had many Mistresses, yet he may be said only to love her, and to say
the truth, she never abused the kindness he had for her to the detriment or
hurt of any, but to the relief of very many, appeasing the King's anger toward
some, getting abatement of Fines, restoring others to favor, dispatching their
Suits and Affairs, and all for little or no reward. Valuing any thing that was
fine or pretty above great Sums of Money, being contented either with the
pleasure of doing kindnesses, or of being Courted and Petitioned for them, to
show what power she had with the King; or lastly, because wanton Women are not
always Covetous. It may be thought, says Sir Thomas More, That this Woman is
too slight a Subject among matters of a greater consequence, but says he, She
to me seems worthy of Remark, that she should now be a miserable beggar,
without Friends, or Money, but what she gets by Charity, who was formerly in
such great favor with a renowned Prince, was adored by the Courtiers,
addressed unto by Persons of the highest Quality, for expediting their
business, as much as the greatest Favorites of this Age: Had abundance of
Riches, and all other goods of fortune: And yet should become so wretched a
Creature as she is at this day, being obliged to beg of those now living, that
must have begged themselves, if it had not been for her kindness toward them.

To proceed: It was contrived by the Protector, the Duke of Buckingham, and the
the other bloody Councillors, that the very day the Lord Hastings was Beheaded
in the Tower, and at the very same hour, he himself consenting to it, the Lord
Rivers, and the other Lords and Knights that were taken from the King at
Northampton, were Beheaded at Pomfret, which was done in the presence, and by
the order of Sir Richard Ratcliff, whose service the Protector much used in
these affairs, he being a Man of a malicious wit, and cruel nature, and fit for
any mischievous designs. Who bringing them out of Prison to the Scaffold, and
telling the People they were Traitors, not suffering them to declare their
Innocence, lest their words should have inclined the People to pity them and
hate the Protector, he caused them hastily, without Trial, Witnesses, Sentence,
or any Legal Process, to be Beheaded, only because they were Loyal to the King,
and too near a Kin to the Queen his Mother.

These Noblemen being thus dispatched, the Protector now resolved to advance
himself to the Crown, whilst the Peers and People being amazed, and terrified
at these proceedings durst not interpose to hinder him: But because the matter
would seem exceeding odious, he and his wicked Council consulted how to put a
fair gloss thereupon. Several ways were proposed, among the rest they thought
it necessary to bring in Edward Shaw then Lord Mayor of London, who upon
promise of advancement, should prepare the Peoples Inclinations; and because
Clergymen are hearkened to in Matters of Conscience, therefore Doctor Shaw the
Lord Mayor's Brother, and Doctor Pinke, Provincial of the Augustine Friars, are
likewise engaged in the Affair, both great Preachers, but of more Learning than
Virtue, and of more fame than Learning, having a notable estimation among the
Vulgar. These two were appointed to Preach, the one at Paul's-Cross, and the
other at the Spittle, and to display the excellent Qualities of the Protector:
Pinke in his Sermon so lost his Voice that he was forced to break off, and come
down in the midst; and Doctor Shaw by his Sermon lost his reputation, and soon
after his Life, for he was so ashamed of it, that he never after came abroad.

But the next perplexity was to get some plausible pretense for deposing the
Young King, and advancing his Uncle: After several alterations, they at length
concluded to allege Bastardy, either in King Edward IV. himself, or in his
Children, or both; to lay Bastardy publicly to King Edward, would reflect upon
the reputation of the Mother both of his Brother and himself. The Protector
therefore ordered that point to be handled tenderly, but the Bastardy of the
Children he would have openly and boldly asserted, and to ground their
Allegations upon the following pretext.

After King Edward IV. had deposed King Henry VI. and got Possession of the
Throne, he determined to Marry, and thereupon Richard Nevil, the Great Earl of
Warwick is sent to France to Treat of a Marriage between the King and the Lady
Bona, Daughter to Lewis Duke of Savoy, and Sister to the Lady Carlote then
Queen of France. The proposition is readily embraced in France, the Match soon
concluded: In the mean time King Edward being Hunting in Wichwood Forest near
Stony Stratford, happened to come to the Manor of Graston, where the Duchess
of Bedford then lay, and where her Daughter by Sir Richard Woodvile, called the
Lady Elizabeth Gray (Widow of Sir John Gray of Groby, Slain in the Battle of
St. Albans,) came to Perition the King for some Lands, of which her Husband had
made her a Jointure: With whose beauty and graceful mein the King was so
surprised, that he presently fell to Courting her. The Lady perceiving his
intent, told him plainly, That as she thought her self not worthy to be his
Wife, so she esteemed her self too good to be his Concubine. The King who very
seldom was denied such favors, his handsomeness and dignity making him
acceptable to most Ladies, so much admired her Virtue that he resolved to Marry
her. His Mother having notice of it endeavored to prevent the Match, telling
him, That it would be both honorable and safe to Marry some Great Princess,
and thereby strengthen his Government by Potent Alliances. That it was below
him to Marry his own Subject, and especially a Widow, that had Children, he
being a Young Man and a Batchellor. Lastly, that he was already Contracted to
the Lady Elizabeth Lucy. The King Answered, That as to Honor and Alliances,
they might bring more trouble than profit; and whereas you object Madam, (says
he) That the Lady is a Widow and has Children, By God's Blessed Lady, I am a
Batchellor, and have some Children too, and so we have both proof that we are
not like to be Barren, and for your alleging that I am already Contracted to
the Lady Elizabeth Lucy: Let the Bishop, says he, charge me with it when I
come to take Orders, for I understand, it is forbidden to a Priest, but I never
heard before that it was prohibited to a Prince; and soon after he Married the
Lady Elizabeth Gray.

Upon this Pretext the Protector would found the Bastardy of King Edward's
Children. That he had been formerly Contracted to the Lady Elizabeth Lucy,
though the Lady her self upon Examination, acknowledged she had a Child by him,
but denied there was any Contract between them. However upon this ground Doctor
Shaw took for his Text, Bast^ Plants shall take no deep root, and in his Sermon
(...) King Edward was never Lawfully Married to (...) Queen, but was before
God, Husband to the Lady Lucy, and so his Children were Bastards, adding, that
those in the Family had great jealousy that neither King Edward IV. himself,
nor his Brother the Duke of Clarence, were begotten by his Father, they much
resembling other Persons in Court that were well known, but that the Noble
Prince Richard, Lord Protector, had the the very Lineaments, Complexion, and
Countenance, as well as the Courage, and Magnanimity of the Renowned Richard
Duke of York, his Father.

Now it was contrived, That at the uttering these words the Protector should
have come in and appeared to the People, that the Preacher's words, and his
presence thus corresponding, it might be thought he had spoke them by the
special Inspiration of the Holy Ghost. But this trick failed, for either by the
Protector's delay in coming, or the Doctor's haste in Preaching, he had
proceeded for some time upon other matters: At length observing the Protector
was coming, he without order or reason, diverted from the matter he was upon,
and began to repeat the same words again. This is that Noble Prince, the
Father's own Picture, his own Face, and the express Image of his Father's
Person. In the mean time the Protector with the Duke of Buckingham, pressed
through the crowd to the Pulpit, and there sat to hear the Sermon. But the
People were so far from crying out, God save King Richard, as was expected,
That they cried shame on the Preacher, for abusing his Calling to such vile
purposes.

The Tuesday following the Duke of Buckingham with diverse Lords and Knights
came to Guildhall London, and the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons being their
assembled, the Duke of Buckingham made a long Speech to them to this effect.
'That the Lord Protector and the rest of the noble Peers were come to acquaint
the worthy Citizens with a matter of great consequence, and which they did not
doubt would be very pleasing and acceptable to them. A matter they had long in
vain desired, and which was ^bsolutely necessary to their welfare and
happiness, even the future security of their Lives, Wives, Children and
Estates, which had been all endangered by the ill government of the late King
Edward IV. who by tricks and shams endangered their Lives, and by ^reasonable
Taxes, Pillings, and Pollings to maintain his Riot and Prodigality, wasted
their Estates and what people he respected most appeared by his favors to
Shore's Wife, who in his Reign was more sought unto, and managed greater
affairs by her influence over his vain mind, than the greatest Peer in England,
whereby he raised the hatred and ill will of the People both against himself
and his Children. He then reminded them of the Doctor's Sermon the last Sunday,
who being a Preacher of God's Word, had by his God's Authority declared the
just Right and Title of the Protector to the Crown of this Realm, which he
doubted not but they would regard, (considering the honesty and wisdom of the
Preacher) beyond what he could say to them, he having so clearly proved that
King Edward was before Married to the Lady Elizabeth Lucy, and that therefore
his Children by the Lady Gray cannot be Legitimate, so that for want of lawful
Issue, the Lord Richard had an undoubted Right and Title to the Crown, by whose
Renowned Virtues and Valor he did not doubt but the Kingdom would enjoy all
happiness, and be freed from that woe which the Wise Man pronounces that Nation
to be subject too, whose King is a Child. All which the Lords of the Council
having taken into consideration, had thereupon agreed to accept of him for
their King. 'And now (said the Duke) I am come to acquaint you with it, and to
require your consents, which I do not doubt but for your own benefit you will
readily give, both in electing so worthy a Prince, and thereby also obliging
his Majesty who will be kind to those who are most zealous for his advancement
to the Throne.

Having ended his long Oration, the People stood mute, as admiring at the
motion, but none cried King Richard, King Richard, as was expected. At which
the Duke being amazed, supposing the Lord Mayor had before informed and
prepared the Common Hall, he whispered to him to know the meaning of this
sullen silence. The Lord Mayor answered, It may be they did not hear, or at
least understand what he had said. Hereupon the Duke repeated the same words,
more audibly and earnestly, but this obstinate silence still continued. Then
the Duke desired that the Recorder, who usually spoke to the People, might move
them in it. But the Recorder, named Fitz Williams, being an honest man, and
newly come to his Office, repeated the Duke's words only, without adding any of
his own. So that this nothing prevailed upon their resolved sullenness. At last
the Duke told them plainly, That all the Nobility and Commons of the Realm were
determined to choose the Protector for their King, as the true and undoubted
Heir, and that it was only out of respect and kindness to the Citizens that
they had acquainted them with it, desiring them freely to speak whether they
would join with them in this Election or No. Upon this some of the Duke's
Servants, and others planted on purpose at the lower end of the Hall threw up
their Caps and shouted aloud, King Richard, King Richard, while the Citizens
stood murmuring and inquiring among themselves what the meaning of it was.

However the Duke took the advantage of it, as of an unanimous consent, A
goodly cry, quoth he: Giving them all thanks for their universal approbation,
promising he would acquaint the Protector with their great kindness toward him,
requiring the Lord Mayor, and Citizens to meet the Protector the next Morning
at Baynard's Castle. Being met accordingly, the Duke of Buckingham sends up
word to the Lord Protector, that the Lord Mayor and his Brethren were come to
present a supplication to him, in a matter of great consequence. The Protector
though pre-acquainted with the matter, yet pretended to admire what the
business should be, and though he did suspect no ill from any thing which the
Duke of Buckingham should offer, yet desired some hint of what it might be. It
was Answered, That the business was to be communicated only to himself in
person, and therefore they humbly desired to be admitted into his presence:
Hereupon as if not well assured of their intent, he appears to them in the
Gallery, to prevent any sinister practice against him. The Duke of Buckingham
with great reverence tells him, That he hoped his Highness would pardon him in
what he was going to declare in the behalf of the Lord Mayor and Nobility there
present, and after many circumstances, proceeds to discover the cause of their
coming, That in regard of the urgent necessities of the Commonwealth, they all
humbly entreated him to take upon him the Government of the Kingdom in his own
Right, to whom they all tendered their Alleglance: At which word the Protector
started back as if extremely surprised, and passionately replied. 'I little
thought good Cousin, that you of all Men would have moved me in a matter, which
of all things in the World I must decline! Far be it from me to accept of that
which without apparent wrong to the Children of my dear deceased Brother, and
my own upright Conscience, I cannot well approve of: And pretending to proceed
in this dissembling Harangue, the Duke seemed abruptly upon his Knees to stop
him. 'Since your Grace, says he, has been pleased to give free liberty to offer
to you in the Name of this Great Assembly, the free tender of their Obedience
to you; I must further add, That it is unanimously concluded that your late
Brother King Edward's Children, as being generally known to be Illegitimate,
shall never be admitted to the Crown of England; and therefore if your Grace
shall neither regard your self nor us, so far as to accept of the same, we are
fully determined to confer it upon some other of the House of Lancaster, that
will be more sensible, of his own and our good.

^hese words seemed to have such powerful effect upon the Protector's mind,
that with a pretended change of countenance, and feigned perturbation, He
replied: 'Since I perceive the whole Kingdom are resolved by no means to admit
my dear Nephews, being but Children, to Reign over them, and since the Right of
Succession justly belongs to me as the undoubted Heir of Richard Plantaginet,
Duke of York, my Renowned Father: We are contented to condescend to your
Importunities, and to accept the Regal Government of the Kingdom; and will to
the utmost of my power endeavor to procure and maintain the quiet and welfare
thereof.

After this he came down from his Gallery, and very formally Saluted them all,
which so pleased the giddy and inconstant Mobile, that they presently shouted
out, Long live King Richard our Dread Sovereign Lord, and so every Man departed.

Having thus Usurped the Sovereignty, He was soon after Crowned: Creating his
Son Edward a Child of Ten years old, Prince of Wales; advancing several of the
Nobility to higher Honors, and Dignifying others. And to show his Clemency and
good Nature, several whom he suspected would have hindered his proceedings, and
had been therefore Imprisoned were now released; but Morton Bishop of Ely, who
would never consent to the disinheriting King Edward's Children, was committed
to the custody of the Duke of Buckingham, who secured him in his Castle of
Brecknock in Wales.

And now King Richard with his Queen (the Lady Ann, Youngest Daughter of the
Great Earl of Warwick, and the Widow of Prince Edward Son to King Henry VI.)
whom he had newly Married, made a progress to Gloucester, upon pretense of
visiting the place of his former Honor: But in truth to be absent while he had
a special villainy to be acted. For though he had satisfied his Ambition by
depriving his Nephews of their Livelihood; yet he could not remove his fears
without taking away their Lives: To perpetrate this villainy he durst not use
the assistance of his old Friend and Favorite the Duke of Buckingham, as being
sensible of his abhorrence thereof. However it was too easy to find wicked
Instruments for Money, and upon inquiry, he heard of two Brothers in his Court,
Sir Thomas, and Sir James Tyrril, the first of an honest sober temper, but the
other of a proud ambitious humor, and ready to commit any wickedness for
preferment. Being told of this Man as he was at the Close-Stool, he instantly
rose and went to him, whom he found more free to undertake the work than he was
to employ him, so the bargain was soon made, and nothing remained but an
opportunity to effect it.

King Richard had before sent John Green one of his Privadoes, to Sir Robert
Brackenbury, Lieutenant of the Tower, to require him to do the deed, he being
raised by him, but the Lieutenant declaring an absolute aversion thereto; Good
Lord, says the King, Whom can a Man trust: So that finding he must be removed,
or else it was impossible to effect it, he sends him an absolute Order by Sir
James Tyrril, immediately to deliver up the Keys of the Tower to him. Tyrril
being now Lieutenant for the time, hires two Rascals like himself, Giles
Forest, and James Leighton his Hostler, a stout lusty fellow, to join with him
in the Murder of these Innocent Children, who coming into their Chamber in the
Night, accompanied only with one Black Will, or William Slaughter another
bloody Villain, they suddenly wrapped them up in the Bed-cloaths, and keeping
down the Pillow and Bed-cloaths, with all their strength upon their Mouths,
they so stifled them that their breath failing, they surrendered up their
Innocent Souls to Heaven. The Murderers perceiving, First by their struggling
with the pangs of Death, and then by their long lying still, that they were
thoroughly Dead, they laid their Bodies out upon the Bed, and then called Sir
James to see them, who presently caused their Bodies to be buried under the
Stairs, under a heap of Stones, from whence they were afterward removed to a
place of Christian Burial, by a Priest of Sir Robert Brackenbury, who dying
soon after it, was never known where they were laid; which gave occasion to the
Imposture in K. Henry VII. Reign of Perkin Warbeck, who pretended to be Richard
Duke of York the Younger Brother, that by the compassion of the Murderers was
saved, and sent to seek his Fortune. Others write that King Richard caused
their Bodies to be taken up, and being closed in Lead, to be put into a Coffin
full of holes, hooked at the ends with Iron, and so thrown into a place called
the Black Deep, at the Thames mouth, to secure them from being ever seen or
rising again.

But Divine Vengeance soon reached the Murderers, Miles Forest rotting away
alive piece meal at St. Martins Le Grand: Leighton dyed at Callice, detested of
all Men, and in great misery; Sir James Tyrril was afterward Beheaded for
Treason at Tower Hill, and King Richard himself after this execrable Fact,
never was quiet in mind, being tormented with fearful Dreams, starting out of
his Bed, and running about the Chamber with great horror, as if all the Fiends
in Hell had been about him to torture his vexed Soul.

And here we may observe, That Confederacies in Evil seldom continue long, but
usually end in reciprocal ruin: And thus it happened with King Richard, and the
Duke of Buckingham his intimate Favorite, who had been Confederates in the
Death of many; which now dissolves in the destruction of them both. What the
cause of the first breach was could not be known: Whether the Duke did not
think he was sufficiently rewarded for his Services: Or that King Richard did
not judge himself safe, whilst he that set him on the Throne remained so Great:
Or that the Duke being Ambitious and Aspiring, grew envious at his own ast in
advancing him. The last of which conjectures he seemed to confirm by pretending
sickness to avoid being present at the Coronation: Which King Richard was
jealous of, and therefore obliged him to come by sending word, That if he did
not, he would ferch him. Whereupon the Duke came with so ill a will that ever
after there was no good understanding between them, retiring presently after to
his Castle at Brecknock.

And here the inscrutable depth of Divine Providence is very remarkable, which
the greatest Politicians cannot Fathom. For the King had committed the Bishop
of Ely to the Duke's custody, as one that would secure him from doing any hurt,
and therefore designed it for the Bishop's punishment. Whereas this very thing
occasioned the Bishop's liberty and advancement, and was a means of King
Richard's destruction. For the Duke retiring home, seemed to be much disturbed
and discontented in his mind, and wanting rest, would be sometimes talking with
the Bishop, who being a Man of great Wit and Judgment, the Duke became at
length extremely pleased with his company, and opened himself more freely to
him, whereby the Bishop perceived that the chief cause of his trouble was his
envy to King Richard; and thereupon he took an opportunity to discourse him to
this purpose.

My Lord, 'You know that formerly I took part with King Henry VI. and could
have wished his Son had enjoyed the Crown, but after God had ordained King
Edward IV. to Reign, I was never so mad to contend for a dead Prince against a
living one; and so I was a faithful Chaplain to King Edward, and would have
been glad his Child had succeeded him, but since by the secret judgment of God
it has happened otherwise, I will not strive to set up that which God has
plucked down: And as for the Lord Protector and now King --

Here the Bishop made a sudden pause, saying, He had already meddled too much in
the World, and would for the future be concerned with nothing but his Books and
his Beads. Because he ended with King, the Duke was impatient to have him
proceed, saithfully promising no hurt should come from it, but it may be much
good; assuring him that the reason why he desired the King to put him under his
custody, was that he might secretly ask his council and advise. My Lord, Said
the Bishop, I humbly thank your Grace, but I confess I do not much care to talk
of Princes, since it may often prove dangerous, though nothing be ill meant:
But a Man's words may be interpreted, not as he intended them, but as the
Prince pleases to construe them, which puts me in mind of one of Aesop's
Fables. The Lion had published a Proclamation, That upon pain of death no
Horned Beast should continue in an adjoining Wood, now a certain Beast that had
a bunch in his forehead, flying away in great haste was met by a Fox, who asked
him whither he ran so fast? Fast, quoth he, I think it is time to run if I
intend to save my life? Why Brother Reynard, have not you heard of the
Proclamation against Horned Beasts? What then you Fool, quoth the Fox, That
does not concern you, for I am sure you have no Horns on your Head: Ay marry,
quoth the Beast, that I know well enough, but what if the Lion should call my
bunch a horn, where were I then, Brother Reynard? The Duke laughed at the
story, and said, My Lord, I warrant you neither the Lion nor the Boar shall
pick any matter out of any thing that has been spoken, for it shall never come
near their Ears. In good faith, Sir, says the Bishop, What we have said if
taken as we meant it, could only deserve thanks, but being wrested as some
would do, might be of ill consequence to us both. The Duke entreated him to go
on, in his former discourse; My Lord, said the Bishop, As for the late
Protector, since he is now King in possession, I shall not dispute his Title,
but for the good of the Kingdom, I could wish he had in him those excellent
Virtues wherewith God Almighty has qualified your Grace. Here he stopped again;
My Lord said the Duke, I much wonder at these sudden pauses, which so interrupt
your discourse, that I can neither comprehend your thoughts of the King, nor
your affection to my self, I therefore beg of you not to conceal your thoughts
any longer, but freely to discover your sentiments; and upon my Honor, I will
be as secret as the Deaf and Dumb person is to the Singer, or the Tree to the
Hunter. The Bishop upon the assurance of the Dukes, thus followed his discourse.

My Lord, 'I plainly perceive that this Realm is in great danger of being
brought to confusion and desolation under the present Government; but I have
still some hope remaining, by the daily observation of your Noble Personage,
your Justice, your ardent love to your Country, and likewise the great love
the People have toward you, and should think the Kingdom fortunate which had a
Prince so fit and apt to be their Governor as your self, whose Person and
actions contain in them all that is truly great, just and honorable. He then
reproached the King for his many Murders, Cruelties, and Oppressions, adding,
'And now my Lord, If you love God, your posterity, or your Native Country, you
must your self take upon you the Imperial Crown and Diadem of this Realm: But
if you refuse the same, I then adjure you by the Faith you owe to God, and the
regard you ought to have for your Native Land, in your Princely Wisdom, to
contrive some means whereby the Kingdom may be settled in Peace, Liberty and
safety under a Legal Government; and if you think fit to advance again the
House of Lancaster, or to Marry the Eldest Daughter of King Edward IV. to some
powerful Prince; the new Crowned King may be quickly removed from his Usurped
Throne, and thereby Peace and Plenty, and Tranquillity will again be restored to
the Nation.

The Bishop having ended his Speech, the Duke remained silent for some time,
only breathing forth many deep sighs, which much startled the Bishop, and made
his color change. The Duke perceiving it, Be not afraid my Lord, said he, All
promises shall be kept; and so for that time they parted. Next day the Duke
sent for the Bishop, and having repeated their former discourse, he proceeded;
'My Lord of Ely, Because I discern you have a real kindness and affection for
me, I will freely unbosom my Thoughts to you: After I observed the
dissimulation and falsehood of King Richard, and especially when I heard of the
Barbarous Murder of the two Young Princes, to which, God is my witness, I
never condescended, I so much abhorred his presence, and company, that I left
the Court upon a pretended excuse, he not in the least perceiving my
discontent, and so returned to Brecknock to you. In my return, whether by
Inspiration, or Melancholy, I was possessed with many Imaginations and
Contrivances, how to deprive this Unnatural and Bloody Butcher, of his Royal
Seat and Dignity. First, I fancied that if I had a mind to take the Crown, now
was the time, the Tyrant being so generally abhorred and detested of all Men,
and believing that I had the nearest right to the Succession. In this
imagination I continued two days at Tewksbury, and was ruminating whether I was
best to take upon me the Crown as Conqueror, but I presently thought that then
certainly both the Nobility and Commons would use their utmost Efforts against
me. But at length I happened on something that I did not doubt would have
brought forth fair Flowers; yet proved at length nothing but Weeds. For I was
thinking that Edmund Duke of Somerset my Grandfather, was with Henry VI. within
two or three degrees of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster; and my Mother being
Eldest Daughter to Duke Edmund, I supposed my self to be next Heir to King
Henry VI. of the House of Lancaster. This Title was well pleasing to those whom
I made of my Council, but much more to my aspiring mind, but while I was
perplexed whether it were best instantly to publish this my Right, or wait some
better opportunity, observe what happened: As I rid from Worcester to
Bridgnorth, I met the Lady Margaret, Countess of Richmond, now Wife to the Lord
Stanley, and Daughter and Sole Heir to John Duke of Somerset, my Grandfather's
Elder Brother, whom I had as utterly forgot, as if I had never known her, so
that she and her Son Henry Earl of Richmond, have a Right before me. By this I
perceived my mistake, and resolved to relinquish all Ambitious Thoughts, and to
endeavor the Establishment of the Earl of Richmond, Right Heir of the House of
Lancaster; and that he should Marry the Lady Elizabeth, Eldest Daughter to King
Edward, so that the two Roses might be hereby united. And now said the Duke, I
have told you my whole Heart.

The Bishop was very glad that they had both hit upon the same design, and
extolling his well laid contrivance, replied, Since by your Graces incomparable
prudence this Noble Conjunction is intended, it will be necessary to consider
who are fittest to be acquainted with it. By my troth quoth the Duke, we will
begin with the Countess of Richmond the Earl's Mother, who will inform us
whether he be under Confinement, or at Liberty in Britain. And thus was the
Foundation of a League laid by these two Great Men, which fully Revenged the
Death of the two Innocent Princes: And it was prosecuted with all Expedition;
one Reynold Bray being employed by the Bishop, to his Lady the Countess of
Richmond; Doctor Lewis the Dutchesses Physician, was sent to Queen Elizabeth,
and two other Persons were ordered privately to wait upon the Earl of Richmond
then in France, and acquaint him with the Design, and procure his consent to
the intended Marriage. Who coming to the Earl, and giving him information of
the Plot; He thereupon discovers it to the Duke of Britain, who though by
Hutton King Rich. Ambassador, he had by many great offers been solicited to
detain the Earl in Prison, yet he readily promised, and really offered him his
utmost assistance: Several Knights and Gentlemen were also brought into the
Confederacy in England. Bishop Morton, though against the Earl's consent,
retires in disguise into the Isle of Ely, where having prepared his Friends to
espouse the Earl's Interest, he went from thence to Britain to him, and
continued there, till the Earl, when King, sent for him home, and made him
Archbishop of Canterbury.

But though all was managed with the utmost Privacy, and under Oaths of
Secrecy; yet King Richard had made a discovery thereof; but pretending
Ignorance he sends for the Duke of Buckingham to come to him: Which the Duke
endeavoring to avoid by pretended excuses, He at last peremptorily commands
him to appear upon his Allegiance; upon which the Duke returned this resolute
Answer, 'That ne owed no Allegiance to such a perjured, inhumane Butcher of his
own Flesh and Blood. And so from that time preparations of War are made on each
side. The Duke had Assembled a good number of Welshman, and the Marquess of
Dorset, having got out of Sanctuary, was laboring to raise Forces in
Yorkshire. The two Courtneys were doing the same in Devonshire and Cornwall,
and the Lords Guilford and Rame in Kent: King Richard sets forward with his
Forces; The Duke of Buckingham Marches to encounter him, intending at Gloucester
to have past the Severn, and joined the two Courtneys, but the great Rains had
so swelled the River, that overflowing its Banks there was no Fording over.
This Inundation was so great, that Men were drowned in their Beds, Houses
overturned, Children carried about the Fields, Swiming in Cradles, and Beasts
were drowned on Hills, which rage of Water continued Ten days, and is to this
time in the Countries adjacent, called, The Great Water, or the Duke of
Buckingham's Water. The Welshmen were so affrighted with this accident, that
judging it an ill Omen, they all secretly deserted him, so that the Duke being
alone without either Page or Footman, retired to the House of one Humfrey
Banister, near Shrewsbury, who having been advanced by him and his Father, he
thought himself safe under his roof. But Banister upon King Richard's
Proclamation of a reward of 1000. Pound to him that should discover the Duke,
Treacherously and perfidiously discovered him to John Mitton High Sheriff of
Shropshire, who took him in a Threadbare Black Cloak, walking in an Orchard
behind the House, and carried him to Shrewsbury where King Richard quartered,
and there without Arraignment, or Legal Proceeding he was in the Market place
Beheaded in 1484. Whether Banister received the proclaimed reward from King
Richard's hand is uncertain; but it is certain he received a reward of a
Villain, from the hand of Divine Justice; for himself was after hanged for
Manshughter, his Eldest Daughter was Ravished by one of his Plowmen, or as some
say struck with a loathsome Leprosy, his Eldest Son in a desperate Lunacy
Murdered himself, and his Younger Son was drowned in a small puddle of Water.

This was the fatal end of the Great Duke of Buckingham, who went too far for a
good Man, in being accessory to the depriving the Innocent Princes of their
Birthright, and declaring them Bastards. But it seems he went not far enough
for so bad a Man as King Richard, because he would not consent to the Murder
of them. However, he fell by the same hand that advanced him to be his chief
Favorite and Privado. And though King Richard now Triumphed over his Enemies,
yet in a very short time, he lost both his Crown and Life in one day; the
foundation of his Ruin having been first laid by this unprosperous Conspiracy
against him. For a while after he was Slain in a Battle at Bosworth, in
Leicester shire, by Henry Earl of Richmond, who succeeded him by the name of
King Henry the Seventh.

Remarks upon the Life, Actions, and Fall of Thomas Woolsey, Cardinal of York,
Favorite to King Henry VIII.
THE Magnanimity of Spirit which appeared in the Life, and Actions of this
Great Cardinal; does clearly evince that Persons of Mean Birth may be endued
with as generous and lofty Sentiments, and be possessors of as much Grandeur of
Soul, as those of Noble Descent; which occasioned some to allege that he must
needs be the By-blow of some Prince, and not the Issue of such mean Parents as
his were generally reckoned.

For all Historians relate that he was the Son of an honest poor Butcher at
Ipswich in Suffolk; who in his Childhood being very apt to learn, his Father,
with the assistance of Friends, sent him to a Grammar School, from whence he in
a short time went to the University of Oxford, where he was so great a
Proficient, that at Fifteen Years Old, he was made Batchellour of Arts; and
therefore called the Boy Batchellour. He was after made Fellow of Magdalen
College, and Master of Magdalen School, and had the Education of the Marquess
of Dorset's Sons committed to him, by whose care they so well (...) in
Learning, that the Marquess bestowed (...) in his gift upon this Ingenious
School-Maste^ (...) left his Fellowship, and came to reside in his Living:
Where he had not been long when one Sir James Pawlet, upon some displeasure set
him in the Stocks; which affront was not forgotten nor forgiven by Woolsey: Who
when by the mighty favor of Fortune he came to be Lord Chancellor of England;
he sent for Sir James, and after having sharply reproved him, enjoined him not
to stir out of the Middle Temple, without Special License from himself, which
he could not obtain in Six Year time.

After the Death of the Marquess of Dorset, from whom he expected higher
preferment, his towering thoughts, aimed at some greater employment, and since
he found he must now make his own Fortune, he resolved to take all
opportunities to advance himself. To this end he became acquainted with one Sir
John Naphant, an Ancient Noble Knight, formerly Treasurer of Callice, under
King Henry VII. to whom he was Chaplain, and by his Wisdom and Discretion,
gained such favor with his Master, that he committed all the care and charge
of his Office to his Chaplain. At length being discharged of his Employment for
his great Age, he returned into England, but retained so much kindness for
Woolsey, that by his Interest at Court, he procured him to be made one of the
Chaplains to King Henry VIII.

Having thus cast Anchor in the Port of Preferment he rose amain, for he had
opportunity hereby to be daily in the King's Eye, by reason of his daily
attendance, and saying Mass before him in his Closet. Neither did he squander
away his leisure time, but would commonly attend those Great Men, who were in
most favor and power with the King, and among others, Doctor Fox, Lord Thomas
Lovell, Master of the Wards, and Constable of the Tower, who perceiving him to
be a Man of a very acute wit, thought (...) a fit Instrument to be employed in
matters of (...). And King Henry having occasion to send an Ambassador to
Maximilian Emperor of Germany, These two Grave Councillors, recommended His
Chaplain Woolsey to him, as proper for so Honorable an Office. The King
instantly sent for him, and discoursing with him about Matters of State, he
found him endued with so much Eloquence, Learning, Judgment, and Modesty, that
he caused his Commission, and Instructions to be drawn up with all speed: Which
having received, he took his leave of the King at Richmond, at Four a Clock in
the Afternoon, and in Three Hours arrived at Gravesend, from thence he Rid Post
to Dover, and going a board the Passage-boat, he arrived next Day before Noon
at Callice, and the same Night he made such haste that he came to the
Emperor's Court, at Brussels in Flanders. Who having notice of this arrival,
of the King of England's Ambassador; out of great Affection to his Master,
gave him Audience the same Evening. The Ambassador having delivered his
Message and Credentials, and humbly desiring his speedy dismission, the
Emperor readily granted all his Master's Requests; and fully dispatched him
the next Day. Hereupon he Rides back that Night Post to Callice, being attended
by several Noblemen, by the Emperor's Order; and came thither in the Morning
before the Gates were opened, and the Packet Boat being ready to go off, he
arrived at Dover by Eleven at Noon, and the same Night came Post to Richmond,
and the next Morning presented himself to the King at his coming out of his Bed
Chamber to Mass, who checked him for not being upon his Journey. May it please
your Highness said he, I have been with the Emperor already, and I hope have
dispatched my Embassy to your Graces Satisfaction. The King admired at his
Expedition, Asking him whether he met with the Messenger sent after him, before
he thought him gone from London, with further Instructions of weighty
Consequence: Yes said Woolsey, I met with him Yesterday by the way, and though
I did know his Message, yet presuming upon your Highness goodness, and judging
those Matters very necessary to be done, I made bold to exceed my Commission,
and dispatch them, for which I humbly beg your Majesty's Pardon. The King much
pleased herewith, replied, We not only pardon you, but give you also our Royal
Thanks, both for your discreet management and great Expedition.

Soon after the King bestowed on him the Deanery of Lincoln, being one of the
greatest Promotions under the degree of a Bishop; and in a short time made him
his Lord Almoner, wherein he behaved himself with so much discretion, that he
was advanced to be one of the Lords of the Privy Council; and King Henry
bestowed on him Bridewell in Fleetstreet, one of his Royal Houses for his
Residence and Family, and he was observed by the People to be a Rising
Favorite. For the King was Young, and much given to pleasure; and his Ancient
Councillors advising to be sometimes present in Council, to consult about the
weighty Affairs of the Government; his Lord Almoner on the contrary, dissuaded
him from imbarasing himself in the Troubles and Intreagues of State, assuring
him, that if he would allow him sufficient Authority, he would ease him of
those Fatigues, and manage all Affairs to his content. This Advice was quickly
received by the Youthful Prince, who gave him what Power he demanded, so that
governing all things according to his own mind, he seemed to Rule more than the
King himself.

In the first Year of King Henry's Reign, a difference happened between him and
the French King Lewis XII. who upon some private quarrel with Pope Julius II.
Marched with a great Army into Italy, and possessed himself of the Rich City of
Bolonia: King Henry having a great respect for the Pope, because he had
dispensed with his late Marriage with Queen Katherine of Spain, his Brother
Arthur's Widow; and likewise finding the Pope was unable to defend himself,
offered to be a Mediator of Peace between them. But the French King, flushed
with Success, refused or neglected his Proposal, which so inflamed the vigorous
mind of the Young King, that he declared to the World, As he scorned to be
neglected, so he abhorred to be idle in this affair, and therefore resolved by
Invading the Dominions of France, to withdraw that King out of the Pope's
Territories. In pursuance of this courageous resolution, he instantly sends
Ambassadors to King Lewis, requiring him to deliver up to him the peaceable
possession of his two Dutchies of Guien and Normandy, together with his Ancient
Inheritance of Anjon and Mayn, which had for many Years been wrongfully
detained from his Predecessors and himself.

The little acquaintance that the French King had with Henry, and the contempt
of his Youth caused him to return a slighting denial of this his demand;
whereupon King Henry proclaimed War against him, and resolved to Invade his
Country in Person, with a gallant Army, and believing no Man more proper to
make provision for this great Expedition than his Almoner Woolsey: The King
committed the sole management thereof to his Wisdom and Policy, and he
scrupling no command of the King's, undertook this difficult charge; and
proceeded therein so dexterously, that all things were in a very short time
provided necessary for this noble Voyage. Upon which the King Marched with his
Army to Dover, and Transporting them to Callice, he proceeded in order of
Battle, to the strong Town of Tymyn, which he vigorously assaulted and took. In
which Siege the Emperor Maximillan, with Thirty Noblemen repaired to his Camp,
and were all enrolled in the King's Pay. The King Marched from thence to
Tournay, which he likewise attacked with such briskness, that it was soon
surrendered to him; which Bishopric the King bestowed upon his Almoner Woolsey,
in recompense for his care and diligence in this Expedition. And then the King
returned into England, where he was welcomed with the News of a great Victory,
obtained by the Earl of Surrey, against James King of Scotland, he himself
being Slain, with diverse of his Nobility; and 18000 Scots and French, who came
to his assistance.

After the King's return the Bishopric of Lincoln becoming void, he bestowed
the same upon his Lord Almoner, and then the Archbishopric of York, which was
likewise vacant. Lastly, he obtained of the Pope to be made a Cardinal, and his
Master Henry, for his great Zeal to the Holy Chair, had the new Title of
Defender of the Faith, conferred upon him. Being suddenly mounted to such a
mighty height, and the King's affection daily increasing, it made him so
extreme proud and insolent, that he thought none to be his equal; and erected
Ecclesiastical Courts, and had the boldness to summon the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and all other Bishops and Clergymen to appear before him. And as
his Authority was superior to all, so he exceeded them all in Covetousness and
Ambition; so that for many Years the Kingdom groaned under his monstrous
Oppressions, and violent Depredations. Yet his Ambition was so excessive, that
he still hunted after greater Dominion; intermedling with affairs wherein he
was not concerned, especially in the Chancellorship, which then pertained to
the Archbishop of Canterbury, who being Old, and perceiving how great a
Favorite Woolsey was with the King, he chose rather to deliver up the Seals
than have them taken from him. Upon this surrender the King delivered them to
Woolsey; which Favors and Dignities might have satisfied any, but the
insatiable mind of this Mighty Prelate, who was now Cardinal, Archbishop, Lord
Chancellor, and Councellor of State.

But he still aimed to be Higher, and to gratify his humor this occasion
offered: In 1517. Pope Leo sent Cardinal Campeius, as his Legate to King Henry,
to Solicit him (as he had done the Kings of France, and Spain, and the Princes
of Germany) to join in a League against the Turks, who made horrible ravages
into Christendom. The subtle Cardinal being sensible that when Campeius
arrived, he must have the precedence of hi^ upon all occasions, on the account
of his Legateship; he privately sent two Bishops to Callice, as if to attend on
him, who cunningly insinuated into Campeius, that his Journey would be
ineffectual, unless Woolsey were joined in equal Authority with him in this
matter. Whereupon Campeius dispatched an account thereof to Rome, and in Forty
Days received a new Commission, whereby Woolsey was made the Pope's Legate, and
joint Commissioner with him. But Woolsey having notice of the ragged condition
of his Brother's Retinue, he instantly sent a great quantity of Red Cloth to
Callice, wherewith to Cloth his Servants, answerable to the Dignity of so
great a Personage. When all things were ready, Campeius passed the Seas and
landed at Dover, and in his passage to London, by Woolseys Order, he was
received with Procession by the Clergy, and Magistrates through every Town he
came to, and attended by all the Lords and Gentlemen of Kent. Being arrived at
Black Heath, near Greenwich; he was there met by the Duke of Norfolk, a great
number of Prelates and Clergy, and many Persons of Quality. The Cardinal was
brought into a Tent covered with Cloth of Gold, where he shifted himself into
his Cardinals Robes, Furred with Rich Ermin; and then mounting his Mule rid
toward London, having Eight Mules more laden with his Equipage attending him,
but these not being sufficiently Magnificent in proud Woolsey's Eyes, he
therefore sent him twelve more to make the Pageantry more gay, through the
Streets of London. The next day these Twenty Mules were led through the City,
as if laden with treasures, and other necessaries, to the great admiration of
the People, that the Legate should be possessed of such vast Riches, but their
wonder quickly ceased by an unlucky accident, which turned all this vain Pomp
into ridicule. For in going through Cheapside one of the skittish Jades,
affrighted with the multitude of Spectators, broke the Collar he was led with,
and running upon the other Mules put them all into such disorder, that they
threw their Sumpters to the ground, which flying open, discovered the
Cardinal's gallant Wealth, some of them being filled with old Clothes, Rags old
Boots and Shoes, Horshoes, and old Iron: Others with Marybones, Scraps of Meat,
Roasted Eggs, Moldy Crusts, and a great deal of other Trumpery, which gave
sufficient diversion to the People, who shouted and clapped their hands at this
ridiculous sight; crying, Behold the Cardinal's Rich Treasure. The Muliteers
were much ashamed at this discovery; however quietly gathering up these hungry
relics, they peaceably marched on: Cardinal Campeius was conducted through the
City to St. Paul's, where having bestowed his blessing upon the People, he was
then brought to Cardinal Woolsey's Palace, where he lodged, having his Golden
Crosses, Pillars, Guilt Axe, and Mace carried before him.

And now as Cardinal Woolsey had the Power, so he maintained the Port and
Grandeur of a Prince; of which we have this account, He had in his Hall three
long Tables, to which belonged three several Officers, a Steward who was always
a Priest, a Treasurer a Knight, and a Comptroller an Esquire;. He had also in the
Hall a Confessor, a Doctor, three Marshalls, three Ushers, two Almoners, and
two Grooms: In the Hall Kitchen, two Clarks, a Comptroller, a Surveyor over the
Dresser, a Clerk of the Spicery, two Cooks, twelve Laborers and Children: In
the Kitchen a Master Cook, Clothed in Velvet or Satin, with a Gold Chain, two
Under Cooks, six Laborers, four Scullery-men, two Yeomen of the Pastry, and
two Past-layers under him: In the Larder a Yeoman and a Groom: In the Buttery
two Yeomen and two Grooms: In the Eury as many: In the Cellar three Yeomen,
three Pages: In the Chandery two Yeomen: In the Wayfary, two Yeomen: In the
Wardrobe of the Beds, the Master and twenty Persons besides: In the Landrey, a
Yeoman, a Groom, and thirteen Pages; two Yeomen Purveyors, and a Groom
Purveyor: In the Bake-house, two Yeomen, two Grooms: In the Woodyard a Yeoman
and a Groom: In the Barn a Yeoman: Two Yeomen, and two Grooms Porters at the
Gate: A Yeoman of his Bing: A Master of his Horse: A Clerk and Yeomen of the
Stables: A Farrier and Yeoman of the Stirrup: A Malter and sixteen Grooms,
every one keeping four Geldings.

His Chapel was furnished with a vast number of costly Ornaments, and Rich
Jewels, Forty four Copes gloriously imbroidered with Gold and Silver, Silver
Candlesticks, and other necessary Utensils: In which were the following
Officers, a Dean, a Sub-Dean, a Repeater of the Quire, a Gospellor, an
Epistoler of the Singing Priests, a Master of the Children: In the Vestry, a
Yeoman and two Grooms, beside other Retainers that appeared at principal Feasts.

He had likewise two Cross-bearers, and two Pillarbearers in the Great Chamber;
and in his Privy-Chamber the Chief Chamberlain, Vice Chamberlain, Gentleman
Usher, twelve Waiters, six Gentlemen Waiters: Also nine or ten Lords, who had
two or three Men to wait on them, and the Earl of Darby five. Then he had
Gentlemen Cup-bearers, Carvers and forty Sewers of the Great and Privy Chamber,
six Yeomen Ushers, eight Grooms, twelve Doctors and Chaplains, daily Guests,
besides his own, a Clerk of his Closet, two Secretaries, two Clerks of his
Signet, four Councillors Learned in the Law.

As he was Lord Chancellor of England, he had a Riding Clerk, a Clerk of the
Crown, of the Hamper, of the Check, four Footmen with gallant Liveries, a
Herald at Arms, a Sergeant at Arms, a Phisician, an Apothecary, four Minstrels,
a Keeper of his Tents (when upon a Journey) and an Armourer. Also in his House,
a Surveyor of York, a Clark of the Green Cloth. All these attended daily. At
Dinner he had every day eight Tables furnished for his Chamberlains and
Gentlemen Officers, half of whom were young Lords, who had two or three Persons
to wait on them, and all the rest had one. These were all his enrolled
Servants, (besides Retainers and other Persons that came about business, who
daily Dined in his Hall) which according to the List amounted to eight hundred
Persons. So that he was as bountiful an Housekeeper as any in that Age, and
much superior to any since.

When he went to Westminster Hall to hear Causes as Lord Chancellor, his
Magnificence was as conspicuous as in other Offices. He was clothed in red like
a Cardinal, his upper Garment all of Scarlet, or else fine Crimson Taffety, or
Crimson Satrin in Grain. A black Tippet of Sables about his Neck, and an Orange
in his hand, the Meat taken out, and filled with Confections to prevent the ill
scents from the Crowds of People. Being mounted, his two Cross bearers, and his
two Pillar bearers all in fine Scarlet upon tall Horses rid before him, then
one with the Purse and Great Seal of England. Another with his Cardinals Cap,
then a train of Gentlemen with every one a Pole-ax, next the Cardinal himself,
attended on each side by four Footmen. In the same State he used to go every
Sunday to the Court at Greenwich in a very rich Barge, and furnished with Yeomen
all round, where when he arrived he was attended by the Lord Treasurer,
Comptroller and other principal Officers of the King's House, who conveyed him
in State into the King's Chamber.

In this grandeur he continued for fourteen or fifteen years managing all
affairs of State, to whom all foreign Ambassadors made their application, and
all Addresses and Petitions were offered. And to secure this Sovereign Power
which he had gained over the King's affections, he contrived all kind of
pleasures and divertisements suitable to his juvenile temper, as Masking,
Dancing, Banqueting, Young Ladies, and variety of other Pastimes. I saw the
King (says my Author) come one time suddenly to the Cardinals Palace at
Westminster now White Hall which he had newly built, with a dozen Masquers
attired like Shepherds in cloth of Gold and Silver imbroidered, with six
Flambeux: And others in Vizors clothed all in Satin. The King came thither
privately by Water, and arriving at the Stairs, several great Guns were
discharged, which much surprised the Noblemen, Gentlemen and Ladys, a great
number of whom the Cardinal at that time was treating at a sumptuous Supper, he
himself sitting at the upper end of the Table under a Cloth of State, a
Gentleman and Lady being placed together through all the Tables. The Cardinal
at the great noise, as if ignorant of the matter, desired the Lord Chamberlain
to inquire the meaning thereof. Who looking out of the Window into the Thames
returned again and told him that he believed there were some Noblemen and
Strangers coming to the Landing ^tairs. My Lord said the Cardinal I entreat you
who can speak French, to go and receive them and conduct them to our Banquet,
desiring them to sit down and be merry with us. The Lord Chamberlain went into
the Hall. And with twenty Torches, and a great number of Drums and Trumpets
brought them into the Dining Room, who by two together went up to the
Cardinal's Chair, and saluted him. To whom the Lord Chamberlain said, My Lord
Cardinal these Gentlemen being Strangers, and not speaking English, desire me
to inform your Grace that they hearing of your Triumphant and Magnificent
Banquet this Night, and of such a number of handsome Ladies as were assembled
thereto, they presumed upon your Graces goodness to intrude into your Palace to
take a view of these fine beauties and to offer our service to them. The
Cardinal replied they were welcome, whereupon having saluted all the Ladies, a
great Cup of Gold filled with Crown Pieces was opened and they thrown on the
Table to play withal. After they had played some time, the Gentlemen came and
threw down their winnings before the Cardinal being about two hundred Crowns;
Have at all, quoth he, and throwing a Die he won it, whereat the company seemed
much pleased.

Then said the Cardinal, My Lord Chamberlain, Pray go and tell these Gentlemen
that I am of opinoin there is a Nobleman among them who better deserves to sit
in this place than I, and to whom I would gladly surrender it according to my
duty if I knew him. The Lord Chamberlain spoke to them in French, and they
replied, That they must confess there was such a Noble Personage among them,
whom if his Grace could distinguish from the rest he would then discover
himself and accept of his Place. The Cardinal taking a strict review of them
said, I believe the Gentleman with the black Beard is he, and thereupon he role
up and offered him his Chair with the Cup in his hand; But it was Sir Edward
Nevil who was very like King Henry, and the King seeing the Cardinal's mistake
could not forbear laughing, and pulling off his Vizor and Sir Edward's
likewise, discovered himself to all his Guests, and then withdrawing, clothed
himself in his Royal Robes. In which short space the former Banquet was clear
taken away, and the Tables new covered again with perfumed Linen, and the King
and his Masquers returning again in their rich Cloths a Royal Banquet of two
hundred Dishes was brought in, where they continued Feasting and Dancing till
the next Morning.

As these Entertainments discover the extreme Magnificence wherein the Cardinal
lived, so they also show the familiar temper of King Henry, whom one Historian
says, was so free from Pride, that he was rather too humble, at least he
conversed with his Subjects in a more familiar manner than is usual with
Princes. Which is confirmed by a Passage in the eleventh year of his Reign,
when the Privy Council complaining that certain young Gentlemen in his Court
^ith whom he was over-familiar were so Frenchified, that forgetting the respect
due to his Royalty, they used many unfeemly actions and discourses with him,
they were thereupon with his consent banished the Court, and several other
ancient grave Knights and Gentlemen placed in their Rooms about the King's
Person.

Neither did the Cardinals grandeur consist only in the aforementioned
instances, but likewise in erecting costly and magnificent Houses and Palaces,
as York Place at Westminster so named by him from his Archbishopric, now
Whitehall. Hampton Court, his stately buildings at Christ Church and Windsor.
He likewise designed to have built two new Colleges in Oxford and Ipswich the
Town of his Birth, and obtained a License of Pope Clement to suppress forty
Monasteries, and seize the Revenues thereof to perform the same. And for the
farther support of his Dignity he enjoyed at one time no less than seven rich
Bishoprics, that is York, Winchester, Lincoln, Tournay, Bath, Worcester and
Hereford, so that he seemed a Monster with seven Heads, each of them honored
with a Miter.

He being thus imperiously Great, more like a Prince than a Priest, was
continually inventing new ways for getting of Money. For he required an account
of the Captains, Treasurers and other Officers that had been employed in paying
the Soldiers in the Wars, some of whom he obliged to refund great sums of
their ill gotten Estates, who made themselves poor to enrich him. Others
compounded with him for half they were worth. But those that had deceived the
King, and then prodigally spent what they had wrongfully gained, were exposed
to public shame and punishment. So that none suffered, though deeply Criminal,
but only for the Mortal Sin of Poverty. He likewise erected several Courts of
Equity, as he called them, but the People named them Courts of Iniquity, in
which upon pretense of relieving the poor from the rigor of the Law he brought
such a multitude of Causes into them that the other Courts of Justice were
abandoned, and he thereby gained vast Treasures to himself: Till at length the
People perceiving that he only grew Rich and themselves poor, and that the
Verdicts in these Courts would not stand in Common Law, they utterly left them
and returned to the former course of Proceeding. He likewise erected another
new Court which he called the Legantine Court, whereby he visited all
Bishoprics and Monasteries, punishing such Clergymen as were unable to bribe
him, but enriching himself by those who were full of Money and full of Faults.
By the same Authority he suppressed several Abbeys and Priories, seizing all
their Goods and Lands, leaving only a small Pension to the Abbots and Priors,
whereby he purchased great riches and and great hatred from the Clergy, who in
many places opposed his Visitor Dr. Allen (who rid in a Velvet Gown with a
great Train following him) and for which they were openly cursed by Dr. Forest
at Paul's Cross, so that the Cardinal prevailed against them all; and caused
the generality to murmur and complain, that by his Visitations, Probate of
Wills, granting of Faculties, Licenses, and other Tricks, he made his constant
revenue equal to the King's, besides great sums which he yearly conveyed out of
the Realm to the Court of Rome.

In 1517. The Citizens of London were so highly provoked by the multitude of
French and Walloons who settling here undersold their goods, and thereby
impoverisht them, that they resolved to endeavor to rid themselves of this
annoyance all at once. Whereupon John Lincoln a Broker persuaded one Dr. Bell
to represent this great grievance to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen in a Sermon at
the Spittle on Easter Tuesday. The Doctor undertook the business, and took
these words for his Text, The Heaven is the Lord's, but the Earth he has given
to the Sons of men. From hence he inferred that this Land was given to
Englishmen, who were obliged to defend the same as Birds do their Nests, and to
fight for their Country, by the Law of God, against all Strangers and
Foreigners, who to the great trouble, vexation and ruin of the People had now
overrun the Land, and for which there was no redress to be had but by the
Commons uniting themselves together and extirpating them out of the City and
Kingdom; and thereby avenge themselves of the many affronts and abuses which
they had lately publicly offered them. This Sermon inflamed the Minds of the
Citizens who were sufficiently enraged before, so that they took all occasions
to q^arrel with the Foreigners, and a rumor was spread that the next May day
would be very remarkable. The Cardinal and Council hearing of it, ordered the
Lord Mayor to keep strong Watches throughout the City. However on May Eve
several hundreds of young Fellows got together, and in the Morning they fell to
rifling the Houses of several Foreigners, but four or five hundred of them
being seized by the Lord Mayor, were committed to Prison, and two hundred
seventy eight were afterward indicted for High Treason, but John Lincoln only
was executed, the King by the intercession of three Queens, Katherine Queen of
England and the French Queen, and Queen of Scots his Sisters, and by the
persuasion of Cardinal VVoolsey, without whose advice he would do nothing,
pardoning all the rest, who being in number four hundred men and eleven women,
were brought by the Lord Mayor with Ropes about their Necks into Westminster
Hall, where the Cardinal severely reprimanded the Lord Mayor and Aldermen for
their negligence in not securing the peace of the City, and then aggravated the
high crime of the Prisoners, who had justly deserved death. Upon which they all
cried to the King for mercy who thereupon told them, That he would pardon them
all, which he had no sooner pronounced but the Prisoners gave a loud shout all
at once, throwing up their Halters toward the top of the Hall, and so were
dismissed, and the Gibbets that had been set up in several parts of the City
for their Execution were taken down, and afterward this was named, The evil
May Day.

About this time Maximilian the Emperor died, and Charles V. his Son succeeded
him in the Empire of Germany, the Kingdom of Spain and the Low Countries. Upon
which Cardinal VVoolsey was sent over to Bruges in Flanders to condole with,
and Congratulate the young Emperor who was then Resident there, being furnished
for his Journey in all respects like a Great Prince, his Attendants being
clothed some in Crimson, Velvet and Chains of Gold about their Necks. Others in
fine Scarlet edged with black Velvet; and was received by the Emperor with as
much honor as if he had been the King himself, having the Great Seal of
England with him which was always carried before him, being served upon the
knee by several English Noblemen and Gentlemen, to the admiration of the
Germans for his strange Pride and Insolence. After which he returned into
England in great Triumph, being more in fav^ with the King than before.

The French King Jews being weary of the War with England, and having a great
Kindness for the Lady Mary King Henry's Sister, sent Ambassadors to Treat of
Peace, and of a Marriage with her. Both which were soon concluded, and the Lady
was sent to France and Crowned Queen at Paris, the French declaring, That they
thought themselves the happiest People in the World, who had so good a King
and fair a Queen to reign over them. But King Jews after twelve weeks converse
with his most beautiful Lady died, and his Brother Francis I. succeeded him,
who renewed the former amity between the two Kingdoms, and for further
confirmation of the same desired an enterview between them, which the Cardinal
persuaded the King to gratify him in. VVhereupon King Henry and his Queen,
attended by VVoolsey and a great number of Noblemen and Gentlemen sailed over
to Callice, and in a plain near Guisness a large Palace of Timber was framed,
where both the Kings met and embraced each other with much seeming affection
and where nothing was wanting as to Justs, Tournaments, and the other Princely
Military Exercises of that age, which were proper for such a Royal Assembly.

Soon after Charles the Emperor coming out of Spain to Sail into the Low
Countries, landed at Dover, where he was received and entertained by the
Cardinal, and King Henry went to Canterbury to meet with him, and having
sumptuously treated him for a few days, the Emperor pursued his Voyage to
Flanders in forty four men of War. A while after some differences happened
between the French King and the Emperor, to compose which Cardinal VVoolsey
with some other Noblemen were sent, but they not prevailing. King Henry fell
from the French King alleging that he had stirred up the Scots to make War
with him, but King Francis laid all the blame on the Cardinal's dissimulation
and base treacherous practices. However the War proceeded becteixt the two
Kingdoms, between the French King and the Duke of Bourbon, insomuch that the
Duke fled out of France to the Emperor to save his life, the Cardinal having
notice of it, he contrived that he should be King Henry's General against the
French King. Who thereupon raised a great Army against Burbon, and drove him
into the Town of Pavia in Italy, where he was so closely besieged that he could
get no Provisions, the Cardinal being secretly corrupted by the French King to
withhold his pay, so that his Soldiers were ready to mutiny against their new
General. Hereupon finding his case desperate, he resolved to attempt an escape,
and in the dead of the Night, he sent part of his Forces to attack that part of
the French Camp which was weakest, himself marching out on the other side the
City. The Guards being weak, and the Soldiers asleep, it caused a very great
disturbance among the French, who turned their Cannon toward the Assaulters,
when Burbon falling unexpectedly upon the backs of them drove them from their
Cannon, which they turned upon themselves, slew their Soldiers, cut down their
Tents, and took Francis the French King Prisoner. This great success so much
encouraged these brave Germans, that with their Imperial Ensigns displayed,
they marched to Florence, and thence to Rome; and gave three Assaults to the
Walls thereof in one day, in the last of which the Duke of Burbon was slain,
however his Army being commanded by the Prince of Orange, and some other brave
Generals, the Popes Palace, and the Castle of St. Angelo were taken, and the
Pope was made Prisoner, with twenty four Cardinals that fled thither for
security. The City of Rome also was plundered, where the Soldiers gained a very
rich booty, so that they were overloaden with valuable Jewels Plate and Money:
During the Siege the Soldiers would often Cloth a Man like the Pope, and set
him on Horseback with a Whore behind him, who sometimes blessed, and sometimes
cursed as he rid along, and whom the Soldiers called Antichrist.

The Cardinal hearing of the misfortune of his Father the Pope, endeavored by
all means to induce K. Henry to declare War against the Emperor, and to show
himself the Defender of the Church, but the King replied; 'My Lord, I am more
disturbed at this unhappy chance, than my Tongue can express; but whereas you
say, that I as Defender of the Faith ought to be concerned therein; I do assure
you my opinion is, That this War between the Pope and the Emperor, is not a War
of Religion, or for the Faith, but for Temporal Possessions and Dominions, and
now Pope Clement is in the hands of Soldiers, What can I do? I can neither
assist him with my Person, nor my People cannot rescue him, but if my Treasure
will help him take what you think convenient. Whereupon Woolsey took two
hundred and forty thousand pound out of the Exchequer, which he carried over to
Callice; and from thence in 80 Wagons, and a Guard of 1200 Horse, 60 Mules and
Sumpter Horses, and attended with a great number of Lords and Gentlemen, he
conveyed this great Sum to the French Court at Amiens. Having before his going
hence, sent out Commissions to all the Bishops of England, to Sing the Litany
after this manner, Holy Mary pray for our Holy Pope Clement; Holy Holy Peter
pray for Pope Clement, etc. And thus was the Cardinal disappointed in advising
the King to declare the Duke of Bourbon his General, who proceeded farther then
he could ever have imagined.

The Cardinals ambition being unlimited, he during the Imprisonment of the
Pope, sent to the Emperor to use his interest to advance him to the Papacy;
but receiving a disobliging answer, he grew thereupon so furious that he sent
the Emperor word, That if he would not endeavor his advancement, he would make
such a rustling among the Christian Princes as there had not been the like for
an hundred years before; though it should cost him the whole Kingdom of
England. The Emperor answering this insolent Letter in Print, bid the Cardinal
have a care of undertaking what might both ruin himself and the Kingdom.
Hereupon the Cardinal sent private Letters to Clarentius King at Arms, to join
with the French Herald, and proclaim defiance to the Emperor: Who suspecting
that it was done without the King's knowledge, ordered his Ambassador at
London to complain thereof.

The King much wondered to hear of it, and the Cardinal confidently affirmed
that he knew nothing of the matter, but that it was the fault of Claren^ius,
who had done it at the request of the French Herald; for which he swore he
should lose his Head when he came to Callice: Clarentius having intelligence
hereof, instantly Embarked at Bullen, and coming to Greenwich, was introduced
by some of his Friends into the King's Presence, before the Cardinal knew of
it, and produced the Cardinals Letters, Commission, and Instructions for what
he had done. At which the King was so surprised that he stood some time silent,
and then said, 'O Lord Jesus! He that I trusted most has deceived me, and
given a false account of my Affairs. Well Clarentius, for the future I shall
take care whom I believe, for I now find I have been informed of a great many
things as true, which I now find to be utterly false. And from that time the
King withdrew his favor and confidence from him.

Some time before this the Cardinal sent Letters to Doctor Stephen Gardener,
the King's Orator at Rome; (and afterward Bishop of Winchester) urging him to
use all manner of means for advancing him to the Papal Dignity, which he said,
nothing could induce him to aspire to, but the vehement desire he had to
restore and advance the Authority of the Church, wherein no Man should be more
Zealous and indefatigable than himself. He likewise engaged the French King,
and King Henry to write to the Cardinals on his behalf, that he might succeed
after the Death of Pope Clement; and vast Sums of Money were wasted in this
business, but all the Cardinals ambitious thoughts proved abortive; and as he
already began to stagger in the King's favor, so in a short time he fell into
his high displeasure. For these extravagant expenses drained the King's
Treasury so low, that the Cardinal was compelled to contrive new ways for
filling them again. To which end he, without the King's knowledge, and by his
own Authority Issued out Commissions under the Great Seal, to every County in
England, for taking an account of every Man's Estate; and he that was worth
Fifty Pound, was charged to pay Four Shillings in the Pound: All that were
worth above Twenty, and under Fifty Pound, Two Shillings in the Pound; and
those not worth Twenty Pound, to pay Twelve pence, to be paid either in Money,
or Plate, making himself chief Commissioner for raising the same in and about
London: The Clergy were likewise charged at four Shillings in the Pound for
their Livings.

These unjust Proceedings were grievous both to the Clergy and People, who
generally refused to comply, alleging, That these Commissions were contrary to
Law, and against the Liberty of the Subject, and that it was not possible for
those who were worth more, yet to raise the half of what they were charged
with, either in Plate or ready Money, and therefore they Petitioned the
Cardinal to intercede with the King for remitting it: To whom he haughtily
replied, That he would rather have his Tongue plucked out of his Mouth with
Pincers, then move any such thing; and that he was resolved to make them pay
the utmost Farthing; and the Lord Viscount Lisle one of the Commissioners in
Hampshire, sending a Letter to the Cardinal, that he doubted the raising this
Money would occasion an Insurrection, he swore deeply, that his not following
the Instructions given him, should cost him his Head.

But however the discontents of the People were so general, that the Cardinal
doubting the Event, thought fit to recall those Commissions, and to issue others
whereby he demanded a sixth part of every Man's Estate, according to the
aforesaid Rates; which he did not doubt, but they would have complied with; but
on the contrary, they renewed their complaints and cursed the Tyrannical
Cardinal for his Arbitrary Proceedings, which at length reached the King's Ear.
who being told that all Places were filled with Clamours, Discontents and
Mutinies, he openly protested that these Commissions were issued out without
his Knowledge or Consent; and to prevent farther Mischief he by Proclamation
vacated them, declaring that though his necessities were never so urgent, yet
he would never force his Subjects to pay any Tax without their own consent in
Parliament, but that his wants being extreme at this time, if they would of
their own accord, by way of Benevolence, supply his present exigencies, he
should accept it as an infallible Proof of their Love and Duty toward their
Sovereign.

The Cardinal perceiving himself obliquely struck at by this Proclamation, as
the principal Author of these heavy Pressures, and public Grievances, he
Politickly sent for the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of London
before him, to whom he declared, That perceiving the former Demands to be
grievous to the People, he had upon his Knees (for the Love and Kindness he
bore toward them) persuaded the King to annul those Commissions, and wholly to
rely upon the free Gift of his People; and though the King might have justly
demanded the former Sums as a due Debt, yet he freely released them of the
same; not doubting but they would equal if not exceed the Rates formerly
required of them; the Lord Mayor and Aldermen assembled their respective Wards,
and acquainted them with the King's desire, but the Citizens absolutely refused
to give any thing, alleging that they had paid enough already, and were able
to do no more, adding many opprobrious Words against the Cardinal, who having
notice of it, sent for the Lord Mayor and Aldermen again, saying, he would
examine them upon Oath what they were worth, which they also denied to have
done; and one of their Counselors pleaded; that the demanding or paying of
any Benevolence was contrary to the Statute made in the I. Year of King Richard
III. What, says the Cardinal, do you quote a Law made by an Usurper and
Murderer the Counselor replied, the Act was made by the Lords and Commons of
England, and not by him alone; Well, my Lord Mayor and Aldermen said the
Cardinal, pray tell me what you will give; My Lord pray excuse me, said the
Lord Mayor, for if I should offer any thing, I do not know but it may cost me
my Life; 'What for your kindness to your King, that is very strange, said the
Cardinal, why then I am afraid you will constrain the King to force you to your
Duty; well my Lord, pray go home, and tell your Neighbors, the King will be
very kind to them, if they do but show their good will to him in some competent
sum; next day the Lord Mayor called a Common Council, where it was unanimously
Voted, that the Meeting of the Aldermen in their respective Wards in order to
the demanding a Benevolence of the Subject was contrary to Law, and therefore
not to be regarded; two or three of the Common Council moved, that every Man
should go to the Cardinal, and give him privately what they thought fit, but
this so enraged the rest, that they required that these Men should be for ever
banished and excluded from sitting in the Common Council, and so the Court broke
up in disorder, and every Man went to his own home.

Neither had this Project better success in other places of this Realm, the
People in Kent, Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, etc. assembling three or four thousand
in a Company, and openly declaring against the Benevolence, and the Duke of
Norfolk coming to them, and demanding what was the cause of their Insurrection,
and who was their Captain; was answered, that Poverty was both their Cause and
Captain, the great Taxes they had already paid, having so ruined their Trades
that they had not Bread for their Families, nor Work to employ them in;
desiring the Duke to mediate with the King on their behalf.

The King having daily Intelligence of these disorders, thought it dangerous to
proceed further in this matter; and therefore summoned a great Council to York
Place (now Whitehall) where he again made a solemn Protestation, That he never
designed to demand any thing of his People, which might tend to the breach of
the Laws, and therefore desired to know by whose Order those Commissions were
issued out, to demand the Sixth Part of every Man's Estate; the Cardinal
answered, That it was done by the consent of the whole Council, and by the
Advice of the Judges, for the supply of the King's wants, who said it might
lawfully be demanded, and that he took God to witness he never designed to
oppress the Subject, but like a true and just Counselor contrived how to
enrich the King; and some Clergy men had told him, that it might be done by the
Law of God, because Joseph caused Pharaoh King of Egypt, to take the Fifth Part
of every Man's Goods in that Land; 'But however, said he, since I find every
Man is willing to free himself of this burden, I am content to take upon me the
scandal of it, and bear the ill Will of the Multitude, for my good Will toward
the King, and to clear you my Lords and Counselors, but the Eternal God
knows all; Well, said the King, I have been informed that my Realm was never
so rich as now, and that no trouble would have risen upon this demand, since
every Man would freely pay it at the first request, but now I find all
contrary; at which all held their Peace; Come, said the King, I Will have no more
of these disturbances; pray send Letters to every County in England to recall
the Benevolence. I will freely pardon what is past, but pray let me hear no
more of it; The Lords on their Knees returned the King thanks, and Letters were
sent accordingly, wherein, somewhat to excuse the Cardinal, it was inserted,
That the Lords, Judges, and others of the Privy Council first contrived that
demand, and that the Cardinal only concurred with them in it; but however the
Common People had a mortal Aversion to him for this, and many other illegal
Practices, and his Interest with the King seemed likewise daily to lessen; and
to disoblige the Court, he insinuated into the King, that his Family was much
out of Order, and thereupon undertook to reform the same by removing several
Officers and Servants from their Places, and putting ill Men in their Rooms; He
likewise presented his Manor and Palace of Hampton Court to the King, a little
to sweeten him; in recompense of which, the King gave him leave to keep his
Court in his Palace at Richmond, wherein King Henry VIIth did so extremely
delight; which yet made him the more abhorred both by the Courtiers and Common
People, who reproachfully said, Who would ever have thought to have seen a
Butcher's Dog lie in the Palace of Richmond.

After this the Marriage of the King with Queen Katherine, his Brother Arthur's
Widow began to be questioned; and some Authors say, the scruple about it was
first put into the King's Head by Cardinal Woolsey, who being naturally
revengeful, and never forgiving any Injury, moved it partly to be avenged on
the Emperor, whose Sister Queen Katherine was, for not making him Pope, and
partly because the Queen had often secretly and modestly reproved him for his
Tyranny, Covetousness, Oppression, Pride, and Lasciviousness; King Henry seemed
very much disturbed at this Motion, and desired that the Legality of his
Marriage might be debated among the Learned, pretending that he had no design
in it, but only to satisfy his Conscience, and to establish the Succession of
the Crown in a rightful Heir, which could not be done if Queen Katherine were
not his lawful Wise; upon this account a religious Sorrow seemed to seize upon
him, (...) he refrained from the Queen's Bed till by a Ju(...) Sentence, this
grand Affair might be settled; the Cardinal to advance his Reputation higher
with the King, procured a Commission from the Pope to himself and Cardinal
Campeius, that before them as Supreme Judges, this Question might be debated by
legal Processes and Proceedings, and determined according to the Laws of God
and Man; the King declared, that he intended nothing but Justice in the Case,
and therefore allowed the Queen to choose what Counselors she pleased to
defend her Cause, who accordingly nominated Warham Archbishop of Canterbury,
West Bishop of Ely, Fisher Bishop of Rochester, the Bishop of St. Asaph, and
some others.

Cardinal Campeius being again arrived in England, the two Legates caused a
stately Court to be erected in Black Friars, and their Commission being read,
the Crier called, Henry King of England, who answered, Here: Then he cried,
Katherine Queen of England come into the Court; the Queen made no answer, but
rising out of her Chair, came to the King and kneeling at his Feet, she in
broken English spoke thus to him;

'Sir, I beseech you do me Justice and right, and take some Pity upon me; I am
a Poor Woman and a stranger Born out of your Dominions, having here no
indifferent Council, and less Assurance of Friendship; Alas Sir, how have I
offended you, that you thus intend to shorten my Days; I take God to witness, I
have been to you a True and Loyal Wife, ever conformable to your Will, and
never contradicting your desires; but have always complied and submitted to
your Pleasure in all things, without the least grudging or discontent: For your
sake I have loved all Men whom you loved, whether they were my Friends or
Enemies; I have been your Wife these twenty Years, by whom you have had many
Children; and when I first came to your Bed, God and your own Conscience knows
that I was a Virgin: If you can prove any dishonesty by me, whereby you may
lawfully put me from you, I am willing to leave you with shame and rebuke, but
if I am guilty of none, I beseech you set me have Justice at your hands. The
King your Father was a man of excellent Wisdom in his time, and accounted a
second Solomon, and the King of Spain Ferdinand my Father was reckoned one of
the wisest Princes that has reigned there for many years. And doubtless they
had both as wise Counselors as any are at this day. And who could never have
imagined when you and I were Married that such new devises should have been
invented as to compel me to submit to the decrees of this Court, from whom I
may expect to receive wrong, and may be condemned for not answering, but not to
have Right administered to me, since I can have no indifferent Council assigned
me to plead my Cause, but must make choice of your own Subjects who know your
Mind and dare not contradict your Will. Therefore I most humbly beseech you
spare till I know how my Friends in Spain will advise me. But if you will not,
you may do your pleasure.

Then making a low Courtesy to the King she departed out of the Court; Upon
which the King bid the Crier call her back which he did, but she refused to
return, saying, It is no indifferent Court to me, I will not go back.

When she was gone the King declared to the Court, that she had been a loyal
loving and obedient Wife to him, and was endued with all the good qualities and
virtues of a Woman either of her Dignity, or of any meaner Estate. After which
Cardinal Woolsey said, 'I humbly beseech your Highness to declare to this
audience whether I have been the first and chief Mover of this matter to your
Highness or not, for I am much suspected of all men. The King declared he was
not, but rather advised the contrary, but that the special cause that moved him
in this matter was a certain scruple of Conscience upon some words spoken by
the Bishop of Bayon the French Ambassador upon a debate about a Marriage
between the Lady Mary his only Daughter, and the Duke of Orleans second Son to
the French King, and the Bishop desiring time to consult his Master whether the
Lady Mary were Legitimate as being born of his Brother Arthur's Wife. This
discourse so affected him, considering he had no Heirs Male, they all dying as
soon as born, that he judged God Almighty was displeased at this match.
Hereupon, considering the state of the Realm, and dispairing to have any more
Children by his Queen, whereby the Kingdom might be endangered for want of a
Prince to succeed him, and to quiet his own mind which was tossed with the
Waves of troublesome doubts, he desired to have the opinion of the Learned
Prelates and Pastors of the Realm whether by the Laws of God and the Land, he
might take another Wife (if his first Marriage were not Legal) by which he
might have more Issue. Affirming in the presence of God that he had no dislike
to the Person nor Age of the Queen, with whom he could be content to live if it
were the Will of God. Nor out of carnal Concupiscence or desire of change, but
only for the settling of his Conscience.

After this the Court sat daily, where many subtle and learned Arguments and
Disputations touching the lawfulness or insufficiency of the Marriage were
handled, but the Queen Appealing to the Court of Rome for deciding this
Question, from which she could not be dissuaded; The King expected a final
^efinitive Sentence on his behalf, the two Legates declined to give it, which
so i^raged the King who now perceived their dissimulation, and that they
purposely contrived delays, that from this time he had a mortal hatred against
his false Favorite Woolsey, whom from a contemptible Birth and Estate, he had
preferred to be Abbot of St. Albans, his Almoner, a Counselor of State, Bishop
of Winchester, Durham, Lincoln, Bath, Worcester, Hereford, Tournay, Archbishop
of York, an Ambassador to Kings and Princes, his Chancellor and a Cardinal, who
by contriving this business, thereby to render himself Gracious with the King,
and to be revenged of his Enemies, brought ruin and destruction at length upon
himself.

For notwithstanding the King excused him from being the Author of this scruple
of Conscience, yet Woolsey seemed at first very forward in promoting it, and to
incline to have it determined according to the King's Mind, but afterward
perceiving the fatal consequences which might ensue thereupon, so as at length
to shake the Infallibility of the Papal Chair, if the Case were decided
according to the Scriptures, he declined proceeding therein. For if the
Marriage was unlawful, then the former dispensation of Pope Julius was null and
void, and if it was lawful then the Judgment of so many learned Universities as
had given their Opinion to the contrary, was false. In this difficulty his
Colleague Campeius went out of the Kingdom before the day of the final
determination of the matter, leaving Woolsey to bear all the weight of the
King's Indignation.

Another cause of the Cardinal's opposing the Divorce was, that the King during
the Ventilation of this Knotty Case, had fallen in love with Mrs. Ann Bullen,
who he after Married, one of the Maids of Honor to Queen Katherine, and
Daughter to Sir Tho. Bullen, (afterward Earl of Wiltshire) a Lady no way
favorable to his Pontifical Grandeur, nor to the Superstitions of the Church
of Rome. So that when the King discovered his great affection for her, the
Cardinal upon his Knees used many arguments to dissuade him from it. Which the
Lady had notice of, and therefore when the King once entertained him at a great
Feast, She being present, among other discourses said, 'Sir is it not a
mavelous thing to think into what great Debt this great Cardinal has brought
you, to all your Subjects? How so, quoth the King. Why, says she, there is not
a man in your whole Kingdom worth an hundred pounds but he has made you a
Debtor to him. (Meaning the Loan which the Cardinal had borrowed for the King
some years before, and which he procured the House of Commons, who were most
the King's Servants, to discharge without repaying a farthing, to the great
loss of the People): Nay, added she, how many violencies and oppressions is he
guilty of, to your great dishonor and disgrace, in diverse parts of the Realm,
so that if my Lord of Norfolk, my Lord of Suffolk, my own Father, or any other
Nobleman had done but half so much wrong as he, they well deserved to lose
their Heads. Then I perceive, said the King, that you are no friend of my Lord
Cardinal's. Why Sir, quoth she, I have no cause, no more have any others that
love the King. Neither has your Grace any reason to be kind to him, considering
his indirect and unlawful actions. The King said no more, but went away.

The Council and the Nobility perceiving that the King's Heart was estranged
from Woolsey, they resolved if possible utterly to depress him, for he was
generally hated for his excessive Pride, insulting Tyranny, grievous
oppressions, monstrous injustice, unsatiable covetousness, abominable
debauchery, malicious and cruel revenge, and likewise for his secret Intreagues
with the Pope and Church of Rome, whereby the King's Authority and Prerogative
Royal in all things touching the Church and Clergy were made void. Hereupon
they concluded him guilty of a Praemunire, and that consequently he had
forfeited all his Promotions, Spiritual and Temporal, with all the rest of his
Estate and likewise his Liberty to the King. These crimes the Nobility drew
into Articles which were engrossed and signed with their hands, and then
delivered to the King. Which were as follows:

I. That by subtle and indirect means he had procured himself, without the
King's consent, to be made a Legate, whereby he deprived the Bishops and Clergy
of England, of all jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical Affairs. II. That in all his
Letters to Foreign Princes he used the insolent style of Ego and Rex meus, I
and my King, as if the King were his Inferior or Servant. III. That he
unchristianly and abominably slandered the Church of England to the Pope,
affirming, That they were Reprobates and without Faith, and that there was an
absolute necessity for him to be made a Legate to reduce them to the true
belief. IV. That without the King's consent he carried the Great Seal of
England to Flanders only for vain Glory, and to the great damage of the
Subjects of England. V. That he being filthily powdered with the French Pox, by
reason of his excessive Letchery and Debauched Life, did often presume to
discourse with, and cast his unwholesome Breath into the King's Face. VI. That
he caused the Cardinals Hat to be put on the King's Coin. VII. That to obtain
his Dignities he had conveyed out of the Realm 240000 l. at one time, and
incredible sums at other times: And to enrich the K. again had of his own
accord sent out Commissions for exacting infinite sums contrary to Law, which
raised hatred and insurrections among the People against the King.

These with many other Articles being charged against VVoolsey, he with his own
Hand freely Subscribed to them, confessing all of them to be true, throwing
himself upon the King's mercy, hoping he would have forgiven him, but afterward
finding that he disposed of his Offices, and part of his Estate, he secretly
procured a Bull from the Pope to Curse and Excommunicate the King, unless he
would restore to him all his Dignities and Lands, who likewise declared that
the King himself nor no other authority on Earth but the Pope alone, had power
to punish any Clergyman for any crime or offense whatsoever. This Bull, with
the Letters sent him by several Cardinals, to encourage him not to faint or be
discouraged, assuring him of his Restoration, and that the King should be
certainly crossed in the business of his Marriage, so animated the Cardinal that
he did not doubt of his re-advancement, if not with, yet without the King's
consent, so that he made great preparations for his in stalment into his
Archbishopric of York, which he designed to solemnize with extraordinary Pomp
and Magnificence, to which purpose he had erected a stately seat of an
extraordinary height in that Cathedral, resembling the Throne of the King, and
writ Letters to the Nobility and Gentry of the North, wherein he kindly invited
them to be present at his Instalment, for which he had made extraordinary
provision of all manner of Dainties.

These mighty preparations being made without acquainting the King therewith,
and seeming to be in contempt of him, who had been so kind to allow him the
Bishoprics of York and Winchester though justly forfeited to the Crown,
caused the King to put a stop to his aspiring purposes, so that he sent order
to the Earl of Northumberland to Arrest him, and deliver him to the Earl of
Shrewsbury Lord High Steward of the Household. The Earl accordingly went to his
Manor of Caywood about seven Miles from York, and coming into his Chamber told
him, he arrested him for High Treason in the King's name: The Cardinal was so
astonished that for some time he stood speechless, at length recovering himself,
he said, You have no power to Arrest me, who am both a Cardinal and a Legate,
and also a Peer of the Sea Apostolic of Rome, and ought not to be Arrested by
any Temporal Power, for I am Subject to none, and none I will obey. Well, said
the Earl, here is the King's Commission, and therefore I charge you to submit.
I remember when I was sworn Warden of the Marches you your self told me that
with my staff only, I might Arrest any man under the degree of a King, and now
I am stronger, for I also have a Commission for what I have done. The Cardinal
at length recollecting himself, Well, my Lord, said he, I am contented to
submit, but though by negligence I fell into the danger of a Praemunire,
whereby I forfeited all my Lands and Goods to the Law, yet my Person was under
the King's Protection, and I was pardoned that offense, therefore I much wonder
I should be now Arrested, especially considering I am a Member of the Sacred
College at Rome, on whom no Temporal Man ought to lay hands; Well I find the
King wants good Counselors about him. He was then kept close in one of his
Chambers, and Dr. Austin his Physician was at the same time Arrested for High
Treason and sent to the Tower. The Cardinal's Goods were all seized, and his
Servants discharged: And he himself was so dejected that he continually
lamented his hard fortune with such a mean and unbecoming forrow as such
haughty Spirits are commonly subject to when they fall into adversity, as
having neither good Consciences nor manly Courage to support their drooping
Spirits. From hence he was carried to the Earl of Shrewsbury's to Sheffeild,
where he continued till the King sent Sir William Kingston Captain of the Guard
and Constable of the Tower to bring him to London, the sight of whom so daunted
him that he redoubled his lamentations, and would receive no comfort, and much
doubting he should lose his Head, he took so strong a Purge, or poisonous
Potion, for fear of being brought to open punishment for his many enormities,
as in a few days put an end to his Life at Leicester Abbey in his Journey
toward London.

Being near his end he called Sir William Kingston to him and said, 'Pray
present my Duty to his Majesty, who is a Noble and Gallant Prince, and of a
resolved Mind, for he will venture the loss of his Kingdom rather than be
contradicted in his desires. I do assure you I have sometimes kneeled three
hours together to dissande him from his resolutions but could never prevail,
therefore you had need take care what you put into his Head for you can never
get it out again. And now Mr. Kingston, had I but served God as diligently as I
have served the King he would never have forsaken me in my Gray Hairs, but this
is the just reward that I receive for all my pains and labor, who neglected
the Service of God, and studied only to please and humor my Prince.

He then proceeded to vilify the Protestants whom he named Hellish Lutherans,
and that the King should take care to suppress and extirpate them, as being the
occasion of Rebellions and Insurrections in Bohemia and England in King Richard
II's time, and other places, and that these Seditions and Heresies would ruin
Holy Church, and bring destruction upon the Realm. About eight a Clock at Night
he gave up the Ghost, as himself had predicted the day before. A Person in
whose Arm he died, affirmed, that his Body when dead was as black as pitch, and
so heavy that six men could hardly carry it, and stank so horribly that they
were forced to bury him that very night before it was day. At which time so
great a Tempest of Wind, and such a loathsome stench arose, that all the Torches
were blown out, and the Corpse being hastily thrown into the Grave was there
left, without Tomb, Monument, or Remembrance. Of which the Poet thus writes,
And though from his own Store Woolsey might have
A Palace or a College for his Grave,
Yet here he lies interred as if that all
Of him to be remembered were his Fall:
Nothing but Earth to Earth, no pompous weight
Upon him but a Pebble or a Quait.


One Historian thus concludes his Story. Thus Lived and thus Died this great
Cardinal, who was Proud and Ambi^ious, VVanton and Letcherous, Rich and
Covetous, a Liar and a Flatterer, a Tyrant and Merciless, forgetful of his
beginning, disdainful in his Prosperity, dispirited and base in adversity, and
wretched in his end. Whose Death made the King joyful, the Nobles jocund, and
the People glad. This happened in 1530.

Thus died this mighty Prelate who though guilty of so many horrid crimes, yet
to the last hour pretended much zeal for the Church, breathing forth Death and
murder against the Protestants, and charging them with those Rebellions and
Disturbances which the Clergy only were the cause of, by their violent
Counsels, and their bloody, cruel, illegal and arbitrary decrees and practices;
Insomuch that Sir Richard Baker in his Chronicle of England, writing the
Character of King Henry VIII. says thus: But it will be injurious to charge all
the Blood spilt in his Reign to his account. They were the bloody Bishops that
made those bloody Laws, and the bloody Clergy that put them in execution, the
King oft-times scarce knowing what was done, and when he heard of some of them,
he extremely condemned their barbarous cruelty.

Remarks upon the Life, Actions and Fatal Fall of Thomas Cromwell Earl of
Essex, Favorite to King Henry the Eighth.
(...) the Life of this Great Person we may remark, That those Noble Virtues
which sometimes ad^ Men to Honor and Dignity are not always pri^es intailed
and appropriated to high Birth and ^rable Descent. But that those that proceed
from mean and abject Families are oftentimes endued with such singular Wisdom,
Dexterity and Industry that they rise to high preferment and authority. We may
likewise observe, That though his Predecessor VVoolsey could not bear the great
Fortune to which he arrived with any moderation, but by his Pride and Insolence
became distastful to all men, yet our great Cromwell on the contrary carried an
even Sail in all conditions, being neither elated with Prosperity, nor deprest
when fallen from it. Lastly, We may hence conclude with the Wise man, that all
things happen alike to all in this life, Woolsey the greatest slave to Vice,
and Cromwell a Person of the most sublime Virtue, being both Favorites to the
same King, both falling into disgrace with him, and both expiring by a fatal
Fall.

Thomas Cromwell was the Son of a Blacksmith at Putney in Surrey, to whom may
be applied what Juvenal said of Demosthenes the famous Orator, who had the same
Original: Whom his poor Father, blear-eyed with the Soot
Of Sparks which from the burning Iron did shoot,
From Coals, Tongs, Anvil, and such Blacksmiths Tools,
And dirty Forge, sent to the Grammar Schools.


His Father educated him according to his mean ability, and though his low
condition was at first a great hindrance to his promotion, yet such was his
pregnancy of wit, his solid judgment, his ready elocution, his indefatigable
diligence, his courageous Heart and his active Hand, that so many excellencies
could not lie long concealed, insomuch that though he were without Friends or
Money, yet nothing being too difficult for his Wit and Industry to compass, nor
for his Capacity and Memory to retain, he soon got into Employment. For having
passed over his Youth with the common diversions of that state, when he grew
toward man he had a great inclination to travel abroad and learn experience in
the World, and gain those Languages which might be serviceable to him in the
future course of his Life. Whereupon going over to Antwerp he was there
retained by the English Merchants for their Secretary.

It happened about this time that the People of Boston in Lincolnshire thought
fit to send to Rome to renew the Great and Little Pardon which formerly
belonged to a Church in their Town, by which they found much advantage from
those who came to have the benefit of the remission of their Sins by them,
which were no small number of superstitious Zealots. And being very sensible
that all things at Rome were to be purchased only by Money, they sent one
Jeffery Chambers with a round sum upon this notable errand, who in his Journey
coming to Antwerp, and much doubting his ability for managing so weighty a
business, he made a visit to Mr. Cromwell, and giving him an account of the
affair, he was very importunate with him to accompany him. Cromwell knew very
well the many Intreagues of the Roman Court, and the unreasonable expenses they
must be at among those Spiritual Cormorants; however having some knowledge of
the Italian Tongue, and being not yet well settled in Religion, he was at length
prevailed with to adventure with him. When they arrived at Rome, Cromwell
finding it very difficult to get his Pardons dispatched, and being unwilling to
spend much time or money, he at length perceived that nothing was to be done
without making a Present of some Rarity to the Pope; and hearing that he was
much delighted with delicate new found Dishes, he prepared several fine Dishes
of Jelly of diverse colors according to the English fashion, which were not as
yet known at Rome. Cromwell observing his time when the Pope was newly returned
to his Palace from Hunting, he with his English Companions, approached him
with their Presents, which they introduced with singing in English the three
Man's Song (as it is called): The Pope wondering at the Song, and understanding
they were Englishmen, and came not empty handed, ordered them to be called in.
Cromwell making low obeisance, presented his jolly junkets, being such as, he
said, none but Kings and Princes in England use to Eat, desiring his Holiness
to accept of them from him and his Companions, who were poor Suitors at his
Court, and had presented them as Novelties proper only for his Table. Pope
Julius observing the strangeness of the Dishes bid a Cardinal taste them, which
he liked so well and the Pope after him, that inquiring what their business
was, and then requiring them to give him an account how these Jellies were
made, he without delay Sealed both the Great and Lesser Pardons, and fully
dispatched them.

All this while Cromwell had no great sense of Religion, but was wild, youthful
and without regard to any thing that was serious, as he often declared to
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, being very diligent (with Jeffery Chambers)
in publishing the Pardons of Boston in all the Churches as he traveled, and
serving sometime under the Duke of Burbon at the Siege of Rome. Thus he
continued for some years, till at length by learning the New Testament of
Erasmus by Heart in his going to and from Rome, he began to come to a better
understanding. About this time Cardinal Woolsey began to grow very great in
England, ruling all under, or rather over the King, so that Persons of the
briskest Wits and noted Abilities addressed themselves to him for employments.
Among whom Thomas Cromwell was by him preferred to be his Chancellor; and at the
same time Sir Thomas More and Stephen Gardener were likewise taken into the
Cardinals Family, being all three almost of one Age, one standing in Learning,
not much unequal in Wit, and their advancements arising from the same
foundation, though afterward their Studies, Dispositions and Fortune were
greatly different.

The Cardinal designing to erect a famous College in Oxford called then
Frideswide, now Christ Church, obtained leave from the Pope to suppress several
small Monasteries and Priories in diverse parts of the Realm, and to convert the
Revenues thereof to his own use. He committed the charge of this business to
Cromwell, who used such industry and expedition therein as was displeasing to
some Great Persons both of the Nobility and Clergy. But afterward the Cardinal
who had risen suddenly, began to fall as fast, first from his Chancellorship,
which was bestowed on Sir Thomas More, and then falling into a Praemunire, his
Family was dissolved; Cromwell being thereby out of Office, endeavored to be
retained in the Kings Service; and Sir Christopher Hales Master of the Rolls,
though an earnest Papist, yet had so great a kindness for him, that he
recommended him to the King, as a Man most fit to be employed by him; but
Cromwell had been so misrepresented by the Popish Clergy, for his forwardness in
defacing their Monasteries and Altars, that the King abhorred the very name of
him, but the Lord Russel Earl of Bedford being present (whose Life Cromwell had
saved at Bononia in Italy, where he was secretly employed in the King's
Affairs, and was in great danger to be taken, had he not been secured by
Cromwell's Policy) who not forgetting his Benefactor, gave him an account of the
whole matter, and since His Majesty had now to do with the Pope his great
Enemy; he was of Opinion, there was not a fitter Instrument for the King's
purpose than he, and told him wherein: The King hereupon was willing to speak
with him, of which Cromwell having Private notice, he got in readiness the Oath,
which the English Bishops took to the Pope at their Consecration; and being
called in, after paying his Duty to the King, answered to all Points demanded
of him, whereby he made it plainly appear, that his Royal Authority was
diminisht within his own Kingdom by the Pope and his Clergy, who having sworn
Allegiance to the King, were afterward dispensed with for the same, and sworn
anew to the Pope, so that he was but half King, and they but half Subjects in
his own Realm, which was derogatory to his Crown, and absolutely contrary to
the Common Law of England, and that his Majesty might therefore justly make
himself rich with their forfeited Estates, if he pleased to take the present
occasion.

The King was very Attentive to his Discourse, especially the last part of it,
and demanded whether he would justify what he said, He affirmed he would,
producing the Oath they had taken to the Pope, which the King having read, he
took his Ring off his Finger, and first admitting him into his Service by the
Advice of his Council, sent him therewith to the Convocation then sitting;
Cromwell coming boldly with the King's Signet into the Convocation House, and
placing himself among the Bishops (Warham being Archbishop of Canterbury)
declared to them, the Authority of the King, and the Obedience due from
Subjects, especially from Bishops and Clergymen to the Laws of the Land, which
are necessarily provided for the Benefit and quiet of the Commonwealth, which
Laws notwithstanding, they had all highly transgressed to the great Derogation
of the King's Royal Dignity, and thereby brought themselves into a Praemunire,
not only in consenting to the Power Legantine of the late Cardinal Woolsey, but
also by Swearing to the Pope, contrary to their Allegiance to their Sovereign
Lord the King, whereby they had forfeited all their Spiritual and Temporal
Estates, real or personal.

The Bishops were amazed at first to hear this bold Charge, and began to deny
it, but Cromwell showing them the very Copy of their Oath taken to the Pope at
their Consecration, made the matter so plain; that they began to shrink, and
desired time to advise about it; but however before they could get clear of
this Praemunire, the two Provinces of Canterbury and York were obliged by Act
of Parliament, to pay the King one hundred eighteen thousand, eight hundred and
forty Pounds.

Cromwell after this came into great Favor with the King, who made him a
Knight, Master of his Jewel House, and a Privy Counselor, and soon after
Knight of the Garter, Earl of Essex, Lord Privy Seal, and Lord Great
Chamberlain of England; and lastly, he was constituted Vicegerent in all
Ecclesiastical Affairs, by Virtue whereof, both in Parliament and elsewhere, he
had the precedence of the Archbishop of Canterbury: This Authority he used upon
all occasions, for the extirpating Romish Superstition and Idolatry, to which
he always was an utter Enemy, and for which there was a fair occasion offered:
For the King being enraged against the Pope, for refusing to annul his Marriage
with Queen Katherine, though he had the Judgment of nineteen Universities on
his side, he resolved to have the matter determined by the Clergy of his own
Kingdom; and having summoned a Convocation, they after mature debate, declared
the Marriage null and void from the beginning, and confirmed the Kings second
Marriage with Queen Ann of Bullen, which he had consummated some time before:
And a Parliament being called, several Acts were passed against the Popes
Supremacy, whereby all Clergymen that should make any appeal to Rome, were
declared guilty of a Praemunire, and that the King should have power to visit,
examine and reform all the Monasteries and Nunneries of the Kingdom, and should
give Licenses for electing Bishops to all Vacancies, without the Popes consent
or approbation, and declaring the King Supreme Head on earth of the Church of
England; after which, a stop was put to the Persecutions which the Protestant
Ministers had suffered, many of whom were cruelly burnt by the Popish Clergy,
for want of stronger Arguments to convince them: The Nobility and Gentry were
generally well satisfied with this change, but the Body of the People, who were
more under the Power of the Priests, were by them possessed with great fears of a
change of Religion, being told that the King had now joined himself with
Heretics, and that Queen Ann, Cranmer now Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Lord Cromwell favored them: For the Monks and Friars saw themselves left at the
King's Mercy, the Trads of new Saints was now at an end, they had also some
Intimations, that Cromwell was forming a Project for suppressing Monasteries, so
that in Confessions and Discourses, they infused into the People a dislike of
the Kings Proceedings, which prevailed so far upon them, as they afterward
broke out into formidable Insurrections and Rebellions in diverse Parts of the
Kingdom.

Cromwell by his Vicegerency, had precedence of all next the Royal Family, and
as the King came in the Popes Room, so the Vicegerents Authority was in all
Points the same, that the Legates had in the time of Popery; the first Act of
Cromwell's after his being Vicar General, was (with a Delegation of the Kings
Supremacy to him) to visit all the Monasteries and Churches in England, of
which the Bishops and Abbots were so jealous, that of their own accord before
any Law was made about it, they swore to maintain the Kings Supremacy; however
the Visitation went on throughout England, and in many places monstrous
disorders were found, as the Sin of Sodomy in some, barbarous Murders and
Cruelties in others, Tools for false Coining in others, and great Factions and
Divisions in many: The Report that was made, contained many other abominable
Crimes not fit to be named; hereupon Cromwell procured the Parliament to pass an
Act, that thirty Persons Spiritual and Temporal, such as his Majesty should
empower under his Great Seal, should have Authority to make and establish Laws
and Ordinances Ecclesiastical, which should be obligatory upon all the Subjects
of this Realm; and likewise that all Religious Houses, either Monasteries,
Priories or Nunneries, whose revenues did not exceed two hundred pounds a Year
should be suppressed and dissolved, and all their Possessions and Lands settled on
the Crown for ever: And the Reasons alleged for doing this were, because these
Houses were erected upon gross abuses and subsisted by them, the Foundation of
all their Wealth being founded upon the belief of Purgatory, and of the Virtue
that was in Masses to redeem Souls out of it, and that these eased the Torments
of departed Souls, and at last delivered them out of them, so it past among all
for a piece of Piety to Parents, and of care for their own Souls and Families
to endow those Houses with some Lands, upon Condition they should have Masses
said for them, the number of which were usually according to the value of the
Gift; this was like to have drawn the whole Wealth of the Nation into those
Houses, had not some restraint been put to that Superstition; they also
persuaded the People, that the Saints interceded for them, and would kindly
accept offerings made at their Shrines, and the greater they were, the more
earnestly would they use their Interest for them: The credulous Vulgar
measuring the Court of Heaven by those on Earth, believed that Presents might
be very prevalent there; so that every new Saint must have new Gifts presented
him: Likewise some Images were believed to have an extraordinary Virtue in
them, and Pilgrimages to them were much extolled, and there was great
Contention among the Monasteries, every one magnifying their one Saints,
Images, and Relics above others; the Wealth that these Follies brought in
occasioned great Corruptions, so that the Monks and Friars were very debaucht,
and very Ignorant: And the begging Friars under the appearance of Poverty,
course Diet, and Clothing gained much esteem, and became almost the only
Preachers and Confessort in the World, but not being able to conceal their
Vices, they were now fallen under much Scandal, and a general Disesteem, and
the King designing to create new Bishoprics, thought it necessary in Order
thereto to make use of some of their Revenues, and that the best way to bring
them into his hands, would be to expose their vices, that so they might quite
lose the esteem they yet had with some, and it would be the less dangerous to
suppress them.

Cromwell was employed in this Reforming Work, and for removing all Images and
Superstitious Pictures out of the Churches; many of the Abbots surrendered their
Monasteries, and in most Houses, the Visitors made the Monks sign a Confession
of their former Vices and Disorders, in which they acknowledged their Idleness,
Gluttony and Sensuality, for which the Pit of Hell was ready to swallow them
up; others acknowledged that they were sensible that the manner of their former
pretended Religion, consisting only in some Dumb Ceremonies; whereby they were
blindly led without any Knowledge of God's Laws, and being exempted from the
Authority of their own Bishops and wholly subjecting themselves to a Foreign
Power, who took no care to reform their abuses, it had occasioned great
disorders among them; but the most perfect way of Life revealed by Christ and
his Apostles, being now discovered to them, they thought it very fit, that they
should be governed by the King their Supreme Head, and therefore resigned their
Abbeys to him; So that in the whole, one hundred fifty nine Resignations were
made to the King before the Meeting of the next Parliament, who made an Act for
the Total Dissolution of all the Abbeys in England, the Rents of which were
then valued at, being one hundred thirty two thousand, six hundred and seven
pound six shillings four pence, but they were worth above ten times as much in
true value.

These Proceedings against the Pope and Holy Church caused the Rude, Ignorant,
and wilful People in Lincolnshire to assemble in Arms to the number of twenty
thousand: The King levied a strong Army, and went in Person to suppress them,
and approaching them, they sent him an humble Petition; that if he would
reestablish the Monasteries, and the Popes Authority, they would freely lay
down their Arms and return to their Duty; hut the King disdaining these
Rusticks should dictate Politics to him, rejected their Petition, sending them
Word, that if they did not instantly deliver up a hundred of the principal
Rebels into his hands, he would immediately fall upon them with the utmost
Fury, and Sacrifice them all to his resentment; This daring Resolution, so
daunted the Hearts of this undisciplined Multitude, that their Leaders
expecting each would deliver the other up to the King, they secretly deserted
them and returned home, but Captain Cobbler their Chief Commander, otherwise Dr.
Makarel and some other being taken were executed according to their merits, and
the Common People being left without Officers made haste home, and were
pardoned by the King. This was succeeded by another Insurrection in the North,
where 40000 got together upon the same pretenses, calling themselves 'The Holy
Pilgrims, who intended nothing but the establishing of the true Religion, and
restoring the Rights of Holy Church. The Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk were
ordered to suppress these brainsick Zealots, who seemed very joyful they were
to fight, not doubting of success in this Religious War, but the Night before
the intended day of Battle a little Brook which ran between the Armies, and
might have been passed over dry foot, grew so broad by the next Morning by a
violent Rain which fell, that they could not approach each other, which being
reckoned by both Parties a great Miracle, the Rebels upon promise of free
pardon quietly departed home. In these commotions those men whose profession
was only their Books and their Beeds, mistaking the Command of Christ, To sell
their Coats and buy a Sword, came armed into the Field, and being taken,
several Abbots, Monks and Priests were executed.

The Kingdom being again settled in peace Cromwell proceeded in the Work of
Reformation, and because the People seemed discontented that the abuse of these
Monasteries should be turned to the utter ruin of them, from whence they used
to have relief and alms, Therefore Cromwell thought fit to make them sensible
of the Cheats and Tricks which the Priests had imposed upon them. And many
Impostures about Relics and Wonderful Images or Roods were now discovered, to
which Pilgrimages had been formerly made. As at Reading where they showed the
Wing of the Angel that brought over thither the point of the Spear which
pierced our Savior's side. And so many pieces of the Cross were found in
several Abbeys as joined together would have made a large Cross. The Rood of
Grace at Boxley in Kent which had drawn so many Pilgrims to it, was brought to
St. Paul's Cross, which by many springs used to bow down and lift up it self,
to roll the Eyes, shake the Head, Hands, and Feet, move the Lips, seem pleased,
or angry, by bending the Brows, which the credulous multitude imputed to a
Divine Power, but was now made appear to be a Cheat, and the Springs openly
showed that governed its several motions. Likewise the Images of our Lady of
Walsingham and Ipswich, adorned with rich Jewels, and diverse others both in
England and Wales were removed out of the Churches, and being brought to London
were openly burnt in the presence of the Lord Cromwell at Chelsey. The blood of
Christ was showed in a Glass Vial at Hales in Glocestershire, and the Priests
said it was not visible to any that were in Mortal Sin. So that after the
People had well paid, it became visible to them, and the deluded Souls went
away well satisfied that they were now free from any damnable transgression.
But this was proved to be the Blood of a Duck renewed every Week, and put into
a Glass thick on one side and thin on the other, so that till the Pilgrim had
offered what the Priest thought fit, the dark side was turned to him, and
afterward the light side. Several such Impostures were discovered, which tended
much to undeceive the People. But the richest Shrine in England was that of St.
Thomas of Becket that great Rebel to King Henry II. and for whose death he
severely whipped himself a great way to the Cathedral of Canterbury, where he was
killed by four of King Henry's officious Servants, and he thereupon Canonized a
Saint, to whose Altar greater Oblations were made than to that of our Savior
or the Virgin Mary. Every fiftieth year there was a Jubilee and an Indulgence,
granted to all that came and visited his Tomb, who were sometimes thought to be
an hundred thousand on that occasion, he prints of their kneeling and devotion
remaining in the Stones to this day. So that it was immensly Rich with Gold,
Jewels, Plate and Money, the Gold only being so heavy that it filled two
Chests, which required eight men a piece to carry them out of the Church. The
Timber work of this Shrine was covered with Plates of Gold, Damasked and
Imbossed with VVires of Gold, garnished with Images, Angels, great Orient
Pearls and Precious Stones, the chief whereof was a rich Jewel offered by Jews
seventh of France who came over in Pilgrimage to visit this Tomb, and to obtain
that for the future no Passenger should be drowned betwixt Dover and Callice.
It was valued to be the richest Jewel in Europe. St. Thomas's Skull which had
been so much Worshipped was proved an Imposture, for the true Skull was with
the rest of his Bones in the Coffin, and were now so mixed with other Bones that
it had been a Miracle indeed to have distinguished them afterward. Then the
Axes and Hammers went to work in pulling down the Nests of Superstition and
Idolatry, whose number as Camden reckons them were six hundred forty five
Monasteries, ninty Colleges, an hundred and ten Hospitals, and two thousand
three hundred seventy four Chauntries and free Chapels, and their Lands and
Revenues being by Act of Parliament settled on the Crown, the King by the
advice of the Lord Cromwell politickly exchanged them for others with his
Nobility and Gentry, allowing them good Bargains for their Encouragement, many
of whose Estates do now consist wholly of Possessions of this nature, or else
were greatly enlarged by them, and the restoration of them to their former uses
was thereby rendered so impracticable, that all the flaming zeal of Queen Mary
for Popery was never able to effect any thing of that kind. And this may be
thought to have been one strong Barrier and Security of this Nation against
Popish Slavery to this very day, notwithstanding the many attempts that have
since been made to reduce us back to that House of bondage.

The Churches being thus cleansed from rubbish, the magnanimous Lord Cromwell
resolved to place better Ornaments in them, and therefore he sent out
Injunctions requiring the Clergy to set up English Bibles in their Churches,
and to encourage all to read them. Exhorting the People not to dispute about
the sense of difficult places but to leave that to better Judgments. Ministers
were likewise commanded to instruct the People and to teach them the Creed, the
Lord's Prayer, and the Ten Commandments in English, and that once every
Quarter, there should be a Sermon to declare the true Gospel of Christ, and to
exhort the People to works of Charity, and not to trust to other men's Works, to
Pilgrimages, or Relics, or telling their Beads, which was only Superstition.
Also the folly of offering Candles to Images, and that to make any use of
Images in Divine Worship was Idolatry, and the praying to Saints unnecessary.
These struck at some of the main Points of the former Superstition, but the
free use of the Scriptures gave the deadliest blow of all. Yet all the Clergy
submitted to them without murmuring.

The Death of Queen Ann Bullen (who was beheaded some time before for several
pretended Crimes, which she utterly denied at the Scaffold, and of which a
great number of worthy men thought her Innocent) gave fresh hopes to the Popish
Clergy that a stop would have been put to any further Reformation, of which she
was reckoned a great promoter and inconrager. And the Succession of the Crown
being likewise altered by Parliament: By whom Queen Mary was declared
Illegitimate as born of Queen Katherine in unlawful Marriage, and a new Oath
imposed upon all the People to acknowledge the Children of the Queen Ann to be
rightful Heirs to the Crown, and she leaving one Daughter (who was afterward
the renowned Queen Elizabeth) that Party had likewise expectations that she
being dead, the Lady Mary would succeed to the Crown, to which end she was
persuaded to submit her self to the King, and own him as Supreme Head of the
Church of England, which she had hitherto refused. But within twenty days after
this Tragedy was over, the King Married the Lady Jane Seymour Daughter of Sr.
John Seymour, by whom he had the most excellent Prince Edward, who succeeded
him, though within few days after the good Queen died. The birth of a Son
blasted the Papists expectations, and therefore Gardener, Bonner and the rest
of that Clergy seemed now very zealous in promoting the Injunctions that
Cromwell had lately published. Yet Gardener still retaining a secret hatred
against the Reformation, he by his Artifices and Flatteries prevailed much with
the King, persuading him that his zeal against Heresy was the greatest
advantage that his Cause, in renouncing the Pope could have over all Europe.
Which meeting with the King's own persuasion of the Corporal presence of Christ
in the Sacrament, caused him to sit in Person upon the Trial of one John
Lambert a learned man, who because he would not recant his opinion about
Transubstantion was cruelly burnt in Smithfield, and in the next Parliament an
Act was made for making it death not to consent to the six Articles following
(which were after called the six bloody Articles.) I. That after the words of
Consecration; the Real and Natural Body and Blood of Christ was in the
Sacrament. II. That Communion in both kinds was not necessary to Salvation.
III. That Priests by the Laws of God ought not to Marry. IV. That Vows of
Chastity are to be observed. V. That private Massies were agreeable to the Word
of God. VI. That Auricular Confession was necessary to be retained. Against
most of these Cranmer argued several days, and Cromwell promoted Bonner to the
Bishopric of Hereford to be a faithful second to Cranmer in his Pious designs,
though he afterward proved a violent Persecutor, and indeed Cranmer wanted
support against the other Bishops, who made great complaints of the rashness of
the Protestant Preachers who were very furious against some things not yet
abolished. Upon which, Letters were writ to the Bishops to take care that as
the People should be rightly instructed, so they should not be offended with
too many Novelties. Thus was Cranmer's interest so low that he had none but
Cromwell to depend on. There was not a Queen now in the King's Bosom to support
them; and the refusal of owning these Articles caused the death of many
Protestants, as the denying the King's Supremacy cut off several Papist, so
that at the same time Protestants were burnt on one side Smithfield, and
Papists hanged on the other, which made Foreigners admire, as not
understanding what Religion King Henry was of.

Hereupon Cromwell contrived how the King should be engaged in a nearer
Alliance with the Protestant Princes of Germany; with whom he had already
settled a League, and who was acknowledged its Patron, he sending over an
hundred thousand Crowns a year for the support of it; all engaging, That they
would join against the Pope as the Common Enemy, and set up the true Religion
according to the Gospel. Now that the King might be prevailed upon both, by
Affection and Interest, to carry on what he had thus begun, Cromwell resolved
to bring about a Match between the King and the Lady Ann Sister to William Duke
of Cleve, whose other Sister Frederick Duke of Saxony, a very zealous
Protestant, had espoused. And the King unwilling to live any longer a Widower,
both the Emperor and the King of France proposed Matches to him, but Reasons of
State inclined him powerfully to that with the Lady Ann. Her Father had before
Treated with the Prince of Lorrain about Marrying her, but it went no farther
than a Contract between the two Fathers. And the famous Painter Hans Holbin
much favored her in the Picture which was sent to the King, who never liked
the Original so well as he did that. The Duke of Saxe dissuaded the Match
because the King was going backward in the Reformation as appeared by his
enacting the six bloody Articles, but Cromwell carried it on with the greatest
vigor. Some write that the Lady was handsome enough, but could speak only Dutch
which the King understood not, neither had she learned Music, and was also so
stiff in her Carriage as no way suited the King's temper. However the Marriage
was concluded, and arriving at Rochester the King was so impatient to see her
that he went thither incognito, but was much dampt at first sight, for he
thought her demeanor so rude that he asked whether they had brought over a
Flanders Mare to him, and thenceforward had an absolute aversion for her
Person: Neither had he any kindness for her Religion, and many Virtues, she
being a very Devout Protestant. So that he resolved to break the Match if
possible; but for fear of disobliging the German Princes, his affairs making
their friendship very necessary to him at this time, to obviate the designs of
the Emperor, Pope and French King now projecting against him, he Married her
but expressed his dislike of her so plainly, that all about him took notice of
it, and the day after he told Cromwell that he had not consummated his Marriage
with her, and did believe he should never do it, complaining of ill smells
about her, and that he suspected she was not a Virgin, which so much increased
his dislikes, that he thought he should be never able to endure her. Cromwell
endeavored in vain to overcome these prejudices, so that though the King lived
with her five Months, and lay often in the Bed with her, yet was his aversion
rather increased than abated.

About this time all the ground that the Reformation gained after so much had
been lately lost, was a liberty for all private persons to have Bibles in their
Houses the managing of which was put into Cromwell's hands by a particular
Patent. And a new Parliament being called, as the Lord Chancellor declared the
matters of State to them, so the Vicegerent Cromwell spoke to them concerning
Religion, telling them, 'That the King desired nothing so much as an entire
Union among all his Subjects, but that some Incendiaries opposed it as much as
he promoted it, and that rashness on one side, and inveterate Superstition on
the other, had raised great dissentions, which were inflamed by the reproachful
names of Papist and Heretic, and though they had now the Word of God in all
their hands, yet they rather studied to justify their Passions, than amend and
govern their Lives by it. To remove which, the King had appointed several
Bishops to settle the Doctrine and Ceremonies, and to publish an exposition of
the Doctrine of Christ without corrupt mixtures, and yet to retain such
Ceremonies as should be thought necessary, resolving afterward to punish all
Transgressors of either side. At this time Cromwell was created Earl of Essex,
which sh^ws that the King's dislike of the Queen was not the chief cause of his
ruin, otherwise he had not now advanced him.

The Popish Bishops (especially Gardener) being glad to be any way rid of a
Protestant Queen, heightened the King's aversion to the Lady Ann of Cleve by all
means possible, and persuaded the King to move for a Divorce. The Queen seemed
little concerned at it, and expressed much willingness to discharge him from a
Marriage so unacceptable to him. The Lords addressed to him that he would suffer
the Marriage to be examined, which being granted, a Commission was sent to the
Convocation to discuss it, and Witnesses being heard, it appeared that her
Pre-contract with the Prince of Lorrain was not fully cleared. And that the
King had Married her against his Will. And not having given an inward and
complete consent, he had never consummated the Marriage, so that no Issue could
be expected from the Queen. Whereupon the Convocation published an authentic
Instrument under the Seals of the two Archbishops, declaring to the Christian
World that the King's Marriage with the Lady Ann of Cleve was a nullity, void,
frustrate and of none effect, because the said Lady under her own hand had upon
due examination confessed that the King never had, nor could perform to her that
Benevolence which by a Husband was due to a Wife. This Sentence was confirmed
by Parliament, adding that it was lawful according to the Ecclesiastical Laws,
for the King to Marry another Wife, and for the Lady Ann of Cleve to take
another Husband according to the Laws of Holy Church. And all such as by
Writing, Printing or Speaking did maintain the contrary should be punished as
for High Treason.

During this Transaction a sudden turn happened at Court. The Lord Cromwell was
suddenly Arrested for High Treason by the Duke of Norfolk in the Council
Chamber at White Hall, and committed Prisoner to the Tower. The lowness of his
birth procured him many Enemies among the Nobility, to see a Blacksmiths Son
preferred to such high Dignity, He being at the same time Lord Vicegerent, Lord
Privy Seal, and Lord High Chamberlain of England, Earl of Essex, and Master of
the Rolls. The Popish Clergy hated him mortally, the suppression of the Abbeys,
and the Injunctions about Reformation in the Church, being imputed to his
Counsels: And the King being freed from the fear of the Confederacy betwixt the
Emperor and French King against him, who could not agree upon the Terms;
Cromwells Counsel's now became useless to him, and he hoped the making him a
Sacrifice might somewhat appease the People, who were much disturbed at some
late proceedings. And surther, he now intended a Match with Katherine Howard
Neice to the Duke of Norfolk a Papist and an Enemy to the Reformation. The King
was likewise told that Cromwell was an Enemy to the Six Articles, and
encouraged those that opposed them.

Of the truth of the fast we read this following Passage. About two years
before, the King ordered Archbishop Cranmer to put in Writing all the Arguments
he had used in Parliament against the six Articles: He likewise sent Cromwell
and the Duke of Norfolk to Dine with him, and assure him of the continuance of
his favor and kindness to him. At Table they acknowledged that Cranmer had
opposed the Articles with much Prudence and Learning, expressing a great value
for him, and telling him that those who differed from his opinion could not but
esteem him highly for his worth, and since the King seemed to approve of them,
he need fear nothing. Cromwell added, That the King had so much respect for him
above his other Counselors, that he would not give ear to any complaints
against him, and that as Cardinal Woolsey lost his friends by Pride, the other
gained upon his Enemies by his Humility and Moderation. The Duke of Norfolk
replied, he could speak best of the Cardinal, having been his man so long.
Cromwell replied warmly, That he never liked his Manners, but said he, If he
had been Pope, I never intended to have gone into Italy with him, as you my
Lord Duke designed to have done. The Duke swore he lied and gave him ill
Language which put all the company into disorder, and they were never friends
afterward. Cranmer drew up his Reasons against the six Articles, and gave them
to his Secretary to transcribe fairly for the King's use, but crossing the
Thames, met with a very odd accident. For a Bear being baited near the River
broke loose, and running into the Water overturned the Boat wherein the
Secretary was, whereby his Book fell into the Thames, and was taken up by the
Bearward, who showed it to a Priest; he presently perceived it was a Refutation
of the six Articles, and told the Bearward that the Author would certainly be
hanged. The Secretary coming to demand his Book, which he said was the
Archbishops, and offering him a Crown to Drink for saving it: The Fellow being
an obstinate Papist, replied, he would not part with it for five hundred
Crowns. The Secretary acquainting Cromwell with the matter, he sent for the
Bearward, who guessing at the business brought the Book with intent to have
delivered it to Stephen Gardener or Sir Anthony Brown, both inveterate Enemies
to Protestancy. Cromwell seeing him, snatched the Book from him, and giving it
to the Secretary, Here, says he, I know this is your hand, take it with you,
and Sirrah, says he to the Fellow, you deserve to be punished for detaining a
Privy Counsellor's Book when demanded, you being fitter to meddle with Bears
than matters of State. And so Cranmer was preserved from the danger of Fire,
which at this time threatened him by Water.

The blow at Cromwell was suddenly given, and being in disgrace, he had the
common Lot of discarded Favorites, to be forsaken by his Friends, and insulted
over by his Enemies, of whom Gardener was the most implacable; only Cranmer
stuck to him, and in a Letter to the King on his behalf, he assured him, He had
always found that the Lord Cromwell ever loved his Majesty above all things; and
that he had served him with such Fidelity and Success, that he was of the
Opinion, no King of England had ever a more faithful Minister, wishing the King
might find a Councellor, who was as willing and able to do him Service as he
was: But the King being freed from his Marriage, and having made Katherine
Howard his Queen in a few Weeks after, the Duke of Norfolk had now an
opportunity to be revenged on him, she being Daughter to the Lord Edmund
Howard, Brother to the Duke: So that from henceforth, the King looked
discontentedly upon his former intimate Favorite and inward Counselor, as
being told that he was the cause of all his late Troubles.

Those who had long desired his Downfall, soon perceiving this Alteration, drew
up a long Bill of Attainder against him in the House of Lords, which was read
twice in one day; and sent to the Commons, who after ten days debate passed it,
whereby he was condemned for High Treason and Heresy, by that unjust way of
Attainder without coming to an Answer; wherein it was set forth, That though
the King had raised him from a low Estate to high Dignities, yet it appeared by
many Witnesses, that were Persons of Honor, that he was the most corrupt
Traitor that ever was known; That joining with the last Queen Ann, he had
favored the Lutherans above measure, and so strongly supported them against
the Catholic Prelates and Priests of this Kingdom, that when he was told by
some of the Clergy, that they doubted not but the King would shortly curb their
Boldness and Presumption, the said Lord Cromwell did reply, That he was sure of
the King; and that about two Years before, he had said, the Preaching of Barnes
and other Heretics was good, and that he would not turn, though the King did
turn, but if the King turned, he would fight in Person against him, and all
that turned; and drawing out his Dagger, he wished he might be pierced to the
Heart with it, if he did not do it: And that if he lived a Year or two longer
it should not be in the King's Power to hinder it. That he had set many at
liberty who were condemned or suspected of Misprision of Treason. That he had
given Licenses for Transporting out of the Kingdom things prohibited by
Proclamation, had granted Pasports without searching, and had dispersed many
erroneous Books contrary to the belief of the Sacrament. And had said, that
every man might administer it as well as the Priest. That he had Licensed
several Preachers suspected of Heresy, and had discharged many that were
committed on that account. That he had many Heretics about him and had
discouraged Informers. He was likewise charged with Bribery and Oppression, and
that when he heard some Lords were consulting about him, he threatened that he
would raise great disturbances in England.

Many of these things were charged upon him in general, but no particulars
produced: And the words about the King being sworn to have been spoken two
years before, it was strange that they should be so long concealed, considering
the powerful Adversaries which he had. As to the Licenses, it was thought he
had the King's Order for what he did in it. Bribery and Oppression seem to be
added only to render him odious, who always appeared of a quite contrary
temper. And therefore Authors think that the chief cause of the King's
Indignation was, that having discovered his affection for the Lady Katherine
Howard to him, Cromwell used some words in defense of Queen Ann of Cleve, and
in dislike of the Lady Katherine, which so much displeased the King, that he
thereupon delivered him up into the hands of his Enemies who thirsted for his
Blood, and fearing that he would clear himself from all their Calumnies by a
Legal Trial, they Tried, Judged and Condemned him by a way which seems both
against Nature and Reason, and Justice, not being suffered to appear, or speak
a word in his own defense.

When he was Prisoner in the Tower, several Commissioners were sent thither to
examine him, who found him in a very composed sedate frame, bearing his
affliction with a Patient and Christian Constancy of Mind, not at all ruffled
with the suddenness of his Fall, for he foresaw the Tempest before it came, and
prepared for the same. And being sensible of the vigilance power and malice of
his adversaries, he called his Servants before him, and told them that he found
himself upon a very uncertain foundation, and that a storm was approaching, and
therefore charged them that they should manage all their affairs with
Uprightness and Justice, that so he might not be blamed, or suffer by any
misdemeanors of theirs. He entertained the Commissioners with much gravity and
freedom, and answered all their Interrogatories with great moderation and
discretion, being as well informed in all matters Ecclesiastical or Civil as
themselves. He once desired one of these Commissioners (supposed to be Stephen
Gardener his most implacable Enemy) to carry a Letter from him to the King, who
replied, That he would carry no Letter to the King from a Traitor. Then said
the Lord Cromwell, Pray deliver a Message to him by word of Mouth. This he
consented to, provided it were not against his Allegiance; 'Well my Lords, said
he to the rest, pray be witnesses of what this Lord has promised: Pray then
present my duty to the King, and tell him, That when he has tried and proved
you so thoroughly as I have done, he will find you the falsest man that ever he
had about him. Before this he writ a Letter to the King which none durst
undertake to deliver him, but Mr. Sadler his old friend, willing to do him a
kindness, first went to understand the King's pleasure whether he would permit
him to do it, which the King granting, he presented the Letter to him, who
commanded him to read it to him thrice over, seeming much affected with it. And
some write that after his death the King being in a great exigency and not
knowing whom to trust or with whom to advise, he much lamented his Death,
saying, O that I had my Cromwell again; But the Act of Parliament being passed,
he could not conveniently dispense with it, and his Enemies being so many and
mighty, was obliged to take him off; So that July 28. 1541. the worthy and
noble Lord Cromwell was brought to the Scaffold on Tower Hill, where he spoke
thus to the multitude that surrounded him.

'I am come hither to dye and not to clear my self, as some peradventure may
think that I will. I am condemned by the Law to dye, and thank my Lord God that
has appointed me this death for mine offenses: For since the time that I came
to years of discretion I have lived a Sinner, and have offended my Lord God,
for which I ask him heartily forgiveness. It is not unknown to many of you that
I have been a great Traveller in this World, and being of mean degree was
called to an high estate, and since I came thereto I have offended my Prince,
for which I ask him heartily forgiveness, and beseech you all to pray to God
with me that he will forgive me. And now I pray you all to bear me record that
I die in the Catholic Faith, not doubting in any Article of my Faith, no nor
doubting in any Sacrament of the Church. Many have slandered me and reported
that I have been an Hearer of such as have maintained evil opinions, which is
untrue. But I confess that as God by his Holy Spirit does instruct us in the
Truth, so the Devil is ready to seduce us, and I have been seduced, but bear me
witness that I die in the Catholic Faith of the Holy Church, and I heartily
defire you to pray for the King's Grace, that he may long live with you in
health and prosperity, and that after him his Son Prince Edward that goodly
Branch, may long reign over you, And once again I desire you to pray for me
that so long as life remains in this flesh, I may never waver in my Faith.

Then kneeling down on the Scaffold he prayed thus:

'O Lord Jesus, who art the only health of all men living, and the everlasting
life of them which dye in thee; I wretched sinner submit my self wholly unto
thy most Blessed Will: And being sure that the thing cannot perish which is
committed to thy mercy, I now willingly leave this frail and wicked Flesh, in
sure hope that thou will in better wise restore it to me again at the last Day
in the Resurrection of the Just. I beseech thee most merciful Lord Jesus
Christ, that thou will by thy Grace strengthen my Soul against all Temptations,
and defend me with the Buckler of thy Mercy against all the assaults of the
Devil. I see and acknowledge that there is in my self no hope of Salvation, but
all my confidence, hope and trust is in thy most merciful goodness. I have no
merits nor good works, that I may allege before thee. Of sins and evil works
alas I see a great heap. But yet through thy mercy I trust to be in the number
of them to whom thou will not impute their Sins, but will take and accept me
for Righteous and Just, and to be an Inheritor of Everlasting Life: Thou
merciful Lord, were born for my sake; Thou did suffer both hunger and thirst
for my sake; Thon did teach, pray and fast for my sake; All thy holy acts and
works thou wroughtest for my sake; Finally, Thou gave thy most precious Body
and Blood to suffer on the Cross for my sake: Now most merciful Savior, let
all these things profit me who have given thy self for me. Let thy Blood
cleanse and wash away the spots and foulness of my Sins. Let thy Righteousness
hide and cover my Unrighteousness. Let the merits of thy Passion and Blood make
satisfaction for my Sins. Give me O Lord, thy Grace that the Faith of my
Salvation in thy Blood waver not in me, but may be ever firm and constant, That
the hope of thy mercy and everlasting life in me may never decay, nor thy love
wax cold in me; Finally, That the weakness of my flesh be not overcome with the
fear of Death. Grant O merciful Savior, that when Death has shut up the Eyes
of my Body, yet the Eyes of my Soul may still behold and look upon thee, and
when Death has taken away the use of my Tongue, yet my Heart may cry and say
unto thee, Lord into thy hands I commend my Soul, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.
Amen.

After this he quietly laid down his Head on the Block, which was cut off at
three or four strokes by the hand of an unskilful and butcherly Executioner.
Thus fell this Magnanimous Worthy, who rose merely by the strength of his
natural Parts, for his education was suitable to his mean extraction. He
carried his greatness with extraordinary moderation, and his zeal for the
Reformation created him many potent adversaries, who continually sought for
matter against him, till in the end by lies, falsehood, and flattery they had
thrown him out of the King's favor. He mixed none of the Superstitions of the
Church of Rome in his Devotions at his Death, and used the word Catholic Faith
to express the ancient Apostolic Doctrine, of Christ, in opposition to Popish
Novelties. With him fell the Office of Vicegerent, and none since ever had that
Character. The miseries that befell the new Queen Katherine, and the Duke of
Norfolk and his Family were thought to be the Judgments of Heaven upon them for
their cruel prosecuting this Unfortunate Favorite. The Queen being in a few
months beheaded for her former lewd Life, together with the Lady Rochford her
Bawd (as the Act of Parliament called her) who had been very instrumental in
the ruin of Queen Ann Bullen, and of her own Husband the Lord Rochford, who
being now discovered to be so vile a Woman, it tended much to raise both their
reputations again. The Duke of Norfolk and his Son the Earl of Surrey were both
condemned for High Treason a few years after, and the Son was beheaded, the
Father happily escaping by the death of King Henry.

To conclude, The Lord Cromwell had several eminent Virtues so conspicuous in
him, that they ought not to be concealed. His gratitude eminently appeared
toward one Frescobald an Italian Merchant, who had relieved him in his
necessities in that Country, which he rewarded afterward with so excessive a
generosity as several eminent Pens have strove who should the most celebrate
the same, and of which I have given a particular relation in a Book called
Vnparallell'd Varieties, or the Transcendent effects of Gratitude, etc. of the
like value with this. His Charity was very apparent, in that foreseeing himself
declining in the King's favor, he like a kind and loving Master provided
beforehand for almost all his Servants, and gave twelve Children of his Music
twenty pound apiece: And likewise in delivering many out of danger for having
broken Popish Laws and Constitutions. His Humility was very eminent in several
instances, particularly that He and Archbishop Cranmer riding once in state
through Cheapside, Cromwell seeing a poor Woman to whom he had formerly owed
Money, called her to him, and bid her go to his House, where he not only
discharged the Debt, but settled a Pension of four pound a year upon her during
Life. At another time observing a poor man at the Court of Sherin employed in
Sweeping the Cloisters and Ringing the Chapel Bell, He in the Company of
several Lords called him by his name, and said, This poor man's Father was a
great friend to me, having given me many a meals meat in my necessity, and
therefore I am resolved to provide for him as long as I live, which he did
accordingly. His Wisdom and Policy in state affairs was very obvious in the
management of all Treaties, Negotiations, and Transactions, both at home and
abroad with the utmost prudence, dextegity and success. Lastly and Principally,
his fervent zeal for the true Religion was sufficiently discovered by the
Injunctions, Proclamations and Articles, published by his advice, for promoting
and advancing the same. In a word, many Ages before and since, have not been
blessed with two such excellent Persons as the Lord Cromwell, and Archbishop
Cranmer, who both flourisht together at this time.

Remarks upon the Life, Actions and Fatal Fall of Robert Devereux Earl of
Essex, Favorite to Queen Elizabeth.
BY the fall of this Great Man we may observe that the Love of a People may be
of no less dangerous consequence to a Subject to trust to, than their hatred
proves satal to such Princes as are so unwary to procuse it. Nor is the
affection of a Prince to a Favorite to be much relied on, since their love is
oftentimes inconstant, and their anger deadly. Of both which we can scarce find
a more pregnant instance than in the Life and Death of this Eminent Favorite.

Robert Devereux was born in 1566. and was not above ten years of Age when his
Father Walter Earl of Essex, and Earl Marshal of Ireland deceased at Dublin,
Premonishing his Son never to forget the thirty sixth year of his Age, as the
utmost term of Life, which neither himself nor his Father before him survived,
and which his Son never attained to. After his Father's death he was under the
Tuition of the Pious and Learned Dr. Whitgift, and at sixteen years performed
his public Acts as Master of Arts. His first advancement at Court was procured
by the Earl of Leicester his Father in Law, and was thought to be designed not
so much out of love to him, as envy against Sr. Walter Rawleigh. His Descent
was very honorable, his Title being derived from Evereux a City in Normandy.
His Title of Lord came by Marriage with Cicily the Daughter of William
Bourchier whose Grandmother was Sister to Edward IV. King of England, whose
great Grandmother was Daughter to Thomas of Woodstock Son of King Edward III.
born of one of the Daughters of Humfry Bohun Earl of Hartford and Essex,
whereupon the Title of Viscount Hartford was bestowed upon his great
Grandfather Walter, by King Edward VI. and that of Earl of Essex upon his
Father by Q Elizabeth. So that this high Birth might fill him with some
ambitious thoughts. He was with much ado at first made Master of the Horse, the
Queen being displeased with his Mother, but afterward when by his observance
and duty he had procured her full favor, she forgave a great debt that his
Father owed her, made him a Knight of the Garter and a Privy Counselor when he
was scarce twenty three years old. His first appearance in action was at
Tilbury Camp in 1588. being made by the Queen, General of the Horse, to whom in
the fight of the Soldiery and People she discovered a more than ordinary
kindness.

And now Queen Elizabeth to follow the blow that she had given the Spanish
Armada, the next year sends Sir Francis Drake and Sir John Norris with a Fleet,
and some Forces to the aid of Don Antonio, who pretended a Right to the Crown
of Portugal; but Philip II. of Spain being both ambitious and powerful, sent
the Duke of Alva with an Army thither, who drove this new King out of his
Country, and after many skirmishes wholly possessed himself of that Kingdom for
his Master. The English Forces landed near the Groin in Gallicia and took the
lower Town. During this Voyage the Earl of Essex unwilling to be idle, when
honor was to be gotten, went privately to Sea without the Queen's knowledge or
consent, and joined the Fleet: At which she was much disturbed, saying, This
young Fellow is so ventrous that he will certainly be knocked on the Head one
time or other. The English likewise took Peniche another Town in Portugal, and
approached Lisbon, took the Castle of Cascays, burnt the Town of Vigo, and
finding that the Portuguese did not declare for Don Antonio as he expected,
sickness likewise increasing among the Soldiers, the Fleet returned home.

After this the Popish Princes of France entering into a League that they would
have no Protestant reign over them, raised an Army against the King of Navar
their rightful Sovereign, who thereupon craved aid of the Q. who readily
assisted him with money, and then with men under the Earl of Essex, who gave
sufficient proof of his Valor upon all occasions, his Brother Walter being
slain before the Walls of Roan. Upon which the Earl challenged Villars the
Governor of the City to a single Combat, which he durst not accept of. The Earl
a while after returned to England, being informed by his friends that many
envious Courtiers were contriving to throw him out of the Queen's favor.

In 1595. Archduke Albert Governor of the Spanish Netherlands for the King of
Spain, suddenly Besieged Callice and took it, the news whereof so surprised the
Queen because of the near Neighborhood of this Potent Enemy, that to divert
the Tempest from England, She and the States of Holland instantly set out a
Navy of 140 Ships, whereon were imbarqued about seven thousand Soldiers and as
many Seamen, commanded in chief by the Earl of Essex and Charles Howard joint
Admirals, with several other Inferior Commanders of great Courage and Conduct,
who Sailing to Cadiz, in a short time took both the Town and Castle, no man of
Note being lost in this Expedition but Captain Wingfield; and after having
Ransackt the Town and Island whereon it is built, demolisht the Forts, burnt
most of the Houses, filled their Ships with Plunder, and burnt several Spanish
Vessels, the Fleet returned victoriously home. The King of Spain having lost in
this Gallant Expedition, thirteen of his best men of War, forty Merchants Ships
from New Spain, an hundred Cannon, with such vast Stores of Ammunition and
Naval Provisions, that he was not able to fit out another Fleet for many years
after; and the Spaniards themselves gave this Character of the brave English;
That they were Heretics in Religion, but in all other affairs Warlike,
Politic, and truly Noble. This happy Success advanced Essex in the opinion
both of the Queen, Soldiery and Common People, though his making so many
Knights some of them of very mean fortunes produced this Libel. A Gentleman of
Wales, with a Knight of Cales,
And a Lord of the North Country:
A Yeoman of Kent upon a Rack Rent,
Will buy them out all three.


The Queens indulgence increasing by this fortunate Expedition, he grew wanton
with her favors, and was offended if she preferred any but those recommended by
himself, as particularly Sir Francis Vere being made Governor of Brill in
Holland, and Sir Robert Cecil Secretary of State, both which he had designed
for other Persons, he discovered so severe a resentment for it, that his
Enemies and Enviers turned it at length to his disadvantage. After this, Essex
is made Admiral of a Fleet, that were sent against the Islands of Azores
belonging to the Spaniard, where the Island of Graciosa and Faial yielded to
him, and likewise Villa Franca. And then returning, Essex who would be sole
Favorite, had great contentions with Sir Walter Rawleigh and Cecil, etc. and
likewise with Charles Howard who was now made Earl of Nottingham, because the
Queen had given him part of the honor of the Victory at Cales. However the
Queen's affections so blinded her that she passed by many Indignities, offered
her by him, and to pacify him created him Earl Marshal of England.

In 1598. Some Proposals being offered for concluding a Peace with Spain the
Earl of Essex opposed it, urging the Spanish Ambition for gaining the Universal
Monarchy, his inveterate hatred against the Queen and the Kingdom, his Maxim,
That no Faith is to be kept with Heretics, and that the Pope could dispense
with him to break all Leagues when for his advantage, these and many such
cogent Reasons made a Peace with him impracticable. But other great Courtiers
whether for Reasons of State, or that they had received some Spanish Gold, were
very much displeased, so that the Lord Burleigh told him, That he breathed
nothing but War and Slaughter, and turning to the Psalm he bid Essex read that
verse, as seeming to presage his future Fate, Blood-thirsty men shall not live
out half their days. Yet many much admired his Conduct as really designing
nothing but the honor and security of his Country. However, the Queen and
Essex were of a contrary opinion both as to the Peace, and to a fit Person to
be sent Lord Deputy into Ireland. The Queen judged William Knolles the Earl's
Uncle proper for the employment: Essex affirmed George Carew to be much fitter,
and because he could not persuade the Q. to be of his mind he contemptibly
turned his back and seemed to scoff at her. At which she growing out of
patience stepped forward, and giving him a sound box on the Ear, bid him be gone
with a vengeance. At which he laid his hand upon his Sword, but the Admiral
coming up to him, he vowed and swore, 'That he neither would nor could put up
so great an Indignity, which he would never have taken from her Father King
Henry, much less from the hand of a Woman. And then in a great rage he withdrew
from Court. Afterward the Lord Keeper sent him several Letters, exhorting him
to come and ask the Queen pardon, whom if he had justly wronged he could not
make her satisfaction, and if she had wronged him yet, his Prudence, Duty, and
Religion should oblige him to submit himself to so good a Queen, since there is
a great inequality between a Prince and a Subject. Essex answered very
haughtily to these Advices, and his Followers published his usual expressions
upon this account. As 'That he appealed for Justice from the Queen to God
Almighty. That no Tempest rages more than the indignation of an Impotent
Prince. That the Queens Heart was hardened; I know, said he, what I have to do
as I am a Subject, and what as I am an Earl, and Marshal of England; I cannot
live as a Servant and a Bondslave; If I should confess my self guilty I should
both injure Truth, and God the Author of Truth; I have received a Dart through
my whole body; It is absolutely a Sin to serve, after having received so great
a disgrace; Cannot Princes Err? Cannot they Injure their Subjects? Is their
Earthly power Infinite? It Is the Fool, says Solomon, that being struck, laughs;
They that receive benefit who by the Errors of Princes, let them bear the
injuries of Princes; Let them believe the Queen's Power Infinite believe that
God is not Omnipotent; As for my part I being rent in pieces by injuries have
long enough endured bitterness of Soul for them.

Yet after all, the Queens Passion for him soon admitted of an easy
submission, so that he was pardoned and restored to favor by her who could be
angry with him, but could never hate him, and soon after made him Lord Deputy
of Ireland, (which was then in an ill condition by the Rebellion of the
Natives) and empowered him with so ample a Commission as was thought to be
contrived by his Enemies, on purpose by inflaming his ambition, to procure his
ruin, for he had liberty to pardon or punish the Irish Rebels suitable to his
own Will: and Power to reward with Lands or Honors all he esteemed worthy.
These were such Flowers of the Crown as they seemed designed by his Enemies to
deck that head they meant to Sacrifice to their malice and revenge. Upon his
arrival in Ireland the Earl spent so much time in subduing the petty Rebels,
while he not only neglected the chief one Tyrone with whom instead of fighting
he Treated, and made a Truce, that the Queen unsatisfied with his dilatory
proceedings, first reproaches his Conduct, and then recalls him. Essex was much
discontented, because the Queen in her Letters had chid him for making the Earl
of Southampton General of the Horse, and that Cecil his Enemy was preferred to
be Master of the Wards in his absence. So that within a Month after he
unexpectedly returned to England, having some thoughts to bring so great a
force with him as to secure himself from any danger, but was dissuaded
therefrom by the Earl of Southampton and Sir Christopher Blunt. So that only
accompanied with six, he comes to the Court at Nonsuch to inform the Queen of
the affairs of Ireland. In the way he met the Lord Gray of Willon his chief
Adversary, whom one of his Attendants offered to kill to prevent him from doing
further mischief, but the Earl declaring his abhorrence of such wickedness
hastened to Court and fell upon ^is Knees before the Queen, who had not the
least notice of his arrival; She entertained him with a short Speech, but not
with her wonted kindness, commanding him to go to his Chamber till he heard
farther, and afterward she committed him to the Custody of the Lord Keeper. The
Earl endeavored to vindicate himself from all the aspersions charged upon him,
and among other expressions, 'Can I (says he) be suspected to have any ill
design upon mine Enemies, who only came with six to Court, but I abhor revenge,
knowing who has said, Vengeance is mine and I will repay it? Shall my return
be suspected, who have worn out my body, wasted my Fortunes and lain a
suppliant at my Princes feet? Shall I be suspected, who have lost my Father and
my Brother in the service of my Country, who for thirteen years have served the
Queen, and for seven have been of her Privy Council? Who for her saite have
been hated by all that are Enemies to her or her Religion? Who out of Duty to
her have so exposed my self to their malice, that no Country but this, nor no
Person but her self, can secure me from falling by their bloody Machinations?

However his Enemies proceeded to Arraign his ill management of affairs in
Ireland, in which Cecil enlarged himself with much elocution, while The Earl in
custody of the Lord Keeper seemed wholly devoted to pious meditations, and to
have renounced all Worldly concernments with a religious contempt, in several
Letters to his Friends: And likewise sent such humble and submissive Letters to
the Queen, that after six months Confinement under the Lord Keeper, she
admitted him to continue at his own H^use under the inspection of Richard
Berkley, protesting that she did not design his ruin but amendment. But the
Common People who entirely loved him thinking he had received much wrong, the
Queen thought it necessary that he should have his Cause heard before four
Earls, two Lords, and four Judges, who having charged him with several
misdemeanors, and hearing his defense, they at length sentenced him, To be
degraded from being a Privy Councellor, suspended from his Offices of Earl
Marshal and Master of the Ordinance, and to remain in Custody during the Queens
pleasure. But still the People had hopes of his Liberty and Restoration,
because of the extreme favor the Queen had for him, who expressly commanded the
Commissioners not to deprive him of being Master of the Horse, as if she
intended again to use his Service. The Earl still expressed great humility of
mind, declaring both by Words and Letters, That he had taken leave of the
World, that he had washed away with his tears the heat of Ambition which was
formerly in his Heart, and that he desired nothing more but that her Majesty
would let her Servant depart in Peace. The Queen was so delighted to hear of
these expressions, that she instantly discharged him from all confinement
sending him word, That he was now his own man, and admonishing him to make his
own discretion his Keeper, but not to come near her Person or Court. The Earl
returned answer, 'That he humbly kissed the hand and rod of the Queen which only
corrected but not overthrew him, But that he was sure he should never live a
happy day til he saw those blessed Eyes of hers, which had hitherto been his
Stars whereby he had failed on happily, and had kept on in a direct course.
That now he resolved to repent in earnest and to say with Nebuchadnezzar: My
habitation shall be amongst the wild Beasts of the Field, that I may eat Hay
like an O^e, and be watered with the Dew of Heaven, till such time as it shall
please the Queen to restore me to my senses again.

The Queen was extreme glad when she was told of it, and said, 'I wish his
deeds and words would agree together. He has long tried my Patience, and I
have pretty well tried his humility. Sure I am, my Father would never have born
with his perverseness, but I will not look back, least like Lot's Wife I be
turned into a Pillar of Salt: All is not Gold that Glisters. And so it
happened, for the Earl had so far regained her favor as to presume to beg the
gainful Farm of the sweet Wines, but the Queen would not give it him, saying,
That she would first know what it was worth, and that such kindnesses are not
to be bestowed blindfold. That they who intend to tame a Wild Horse must keep
him without food, That the more a corrupted and diseased body is fed the more
hurt it does. The Earl extremely discontented at her answer and denial, and
that she had bestowed the Farm upon others, began to hearken to the
insinuations of one Henry Cuffe, Sir Christopher Blount, and Merrick his
Steward, who charged him with Pusillanimity and Cowardice for making such mean
submissions, telling him that the Queen, the Council, and his cruel Enemies had
conspired to make him a Beggar, so that he must hereafter live on the
Almsbasket, and the crumbs that fell from their Tables. That so being poor,
neglected of the Queen, and forsaken of his Friends, he might become a scorn to
his triumphant adversaries. So they advised him that the only remedy against
all these disasters was to make his own way to the Queen, he having many of the
Nobility, Gentry and Common People that would stand by him and his Cause. These
suggestions pierced his Soul daily, so that at length he gave himself up wholly
to their directions, and entertained great numbers of Soldiers and other
discontented and indigent People, keeping open House to which there was
extraordinary resort; Of which the Queen having notice sent the Lord Keeper and
others to know the meaning of it, who coming thither found the Earls of Essex,
Rutland, and Southampton among a confused number of People in the Yard. The
Lord Keeper told the Earls, That the Queen desired to know the design of this
concourse, promising that if any injury had been done him he should be righted
both in Law and Equity. The Earl answered aloud, That wait had been laid for
his Life, and that some had been hired to Murder him in his bed, That he had
been Traitorously dealt with, and that his Letters had been Counterfeited both
with his Hand and Seal. That they were therefore met together to defend
themselves, and to preserve their Lives, since neither his Patience, nor his
Miseries would appease the Malice of his Adversaries, unless they drank his
blood also.

The Lord Keeper then desired him to give an account of his particular
grievances, but the multitude cried out, 'Let us be gone, come, they abuse your
patience, they betray you my Lord, kill them, kill them, away with the great
Seal. Come away, make haste. The Lord Keeper and the other Lords of the Council
going into the House with Essex; The People cried, Shut 'em up close, keep 'em
fast, Whereupon the Earl bolted them into the room, saying, 'Be patient but a
little my Lords, I must needs go to the City to take order with my Lord Mayor,
and the Sheriffs, and I will return instantly. The Lords being thus made
Prisoners, the Earl issued forth with about 200 Followers without Order, among
whom were the Earl of Bedford, the Lord Cromwell and some other of the
Nobility, and coming into London, Essex cries out continually, 'For the Queen,
for the Queen, there is wait laid for my Life, Exhorting the Citizens to take
Arms and join with him, but notwithstanding their pretended kindness, not a man
appeared for him. And soon after he was proclaimed Traitor, and the Earl of
Nottingham marched with all speed against him, which so discouraged him, that
casting away all hopes of success, he thought of returning home and making his
Peace with the Lords which he had in Custody: But found his way Chained up at
the West end of St. Paul's. Whereupon he drew his Sword to have forced his
passage, but had three of his associates slain, besides two Citizens, and his
own Hat shot through. So that making haste to Queen Hith, he there got a Boat
wherein he returned to his own House, where he was soon Besieged both by Water
and Land, and was advised by the Lord Sands to issue out upon his Enemies,
telling him, 'The most valiant Counsels were the most safe, and that it was far
more honorable to dye fighting with Noblemen, than by the hand of an Hangman.
But Essex his Mind being as inconstant as his Fortune, he at length yields to
the Admiral. And soon after he is brought to a Trial for High Treason, with the
Earl of Southampton, where they made the best defense they could, but at length
were both condemned, the Lord Chief Justice Cork concluding his Sentence with
this bitter Sarcasm against Essex; 'That it w^e to be wished that this Robert
should be last of the name of Earl of Essex, who affected to be Robert the
First of that name King of England.

'Feb. 25. 1601. was the day appointed for his death, on a Scaffold upon the
Green within the Tower where sat several Lords, and Aldermen of London. The
Earl mounting the Scoffold uncovered his Head, and lifting his Eyes to Heaven
confessed the many and grievous sins of his youth, and especially the last, which
he said was a bloody, crying, and contagious sin, for which he asked God and
the Queen forgiveness, protesting he never had any ill design against her
Person, wishing her long life and a happy reign. He thanked God that he was
neither Atheist nor Papist, but put all his trust and hopes in the Merits of
Christ; Beseeching God to strengthen him against the fears of death. Then he
forgave the Executioner, and fitted his Neck to the Block. Entreating the
Spectators to join in a short, but fervent prayer and ^aculation to God. He
then repeated the Creed and the five first verses of the 51. Psalm, adding,
Lord I submit humbly and obediently to my deserved punishment. Thou O Lord have
mercy upon thy Servant that is cast down. Into thy hand O Lord I commit my
Spirit. 'So laying down his Head, it was stricken off at the third ^w, but the
first took away all sense and motion. Sir Walter R^w^eigh his great Enemy was
present, which many thought very unbecoming him. King Henry IV. of France and
Marshal Byron his Prime Favorite, hearing the Christian manner of his death,
scoft at him, saying, He died more like a Parson than a Soldier. 'But this
very Byron was soon after beheaded by this very King for Treason, raving at his
Death against his Master, and dying more like a madman than a Christian. And
King Henry having renounced the Protestant Religion, was stabbed to Death in his
Coach by a bloody Villain, without having hardly time to say, Lord have mercy
upon him.

Thus was this noble E. snatched out of the Arms of his Mistri^s, and torn from
the Hearts of the People that doted on him, and by the subtilty of his Enemies,
brought to an untimely end in the sight of them both, who were quiet Spectators
of his ruin in the 34 year of his Age. The tears of her Subjects for his loss,
and the little kindness they discovered afterward for her, for signing the
Warrant for his Death, together with her own passion for him, cast the Q into a
deep melancholy, which was much augmented by the following Passage. When Essex
was in greatest favor with her, which was on his return from Cales, he
importuned her to give him some token of her affection, that might renew her
favor to him, if at any time his Enemies should mis-represent him. Whereupon
in much familiarity she gave him a Ring, which she vowed and swore should free
him from all danger upon his s^nding it to her, even in the greatest distress.
After his Commitment to the Tower, he sent this worthy Token to her Majesty by
the Countess of Nottingham, but Sir Robert Cecil would not suffer her to
deliver it. This made the Q think her self scorned, and that what his Enemies
had reported he should say, was true, That she grew old and doted, and that her
mind was now as crooked as her body. Which she though^ to be high Blasphemy
against such a divine beauty as he^ (...) persuaded her she was. But the Lady
Nottingham com^ing to her deathbed, and finding (by the daily sorrow the Q.
expressed for the loss of Essex) that she was the principal Agent in his
destruction, could not be at rest till she had sent for her and discovered all,
imploring mercy from God and Forgiveness from her Earthly Sovereign. The
relation of which so enraged the Q. that shaking her as she lay in her Bed, she
said she would never forgive her, and sent her with most fearful Curses to the
Judgment Seat of God. Not long after the Queen's sickness appeared Mortal. For
having thus unfortunately cut off her endeared Favorite, she took comfort in
nothing besides. But upon all occasions of signing Pardons would say to her
Courtiers, You can beg Pardons for these wretches, but could never speak a word
for the gallant Essex, whose less to my self and the Nation can never be
recovered. Some thought Essex would have discovered some secret commerce
between the Q. and himself at his Death, but others were of opinion, that
nothing Criminal ever passed between them, only a generous kindness that she
had for a man, noble, lovely, and every way accomplished. To conclude, her
happiness and her power both seemed to be buried in the Tomb of Essex, whose
absence with continued fighs and tears she bemoaned for some few months, and
then was likewise laid in her Grave. The E. of Southampton was pardoned, but
Sir Christ. Blount, Sir Charles Danvers, Sir Gill. Merick and Henry Cuffe, were
condemned and executed for this Insurrection. And the Lord Gray, Lord Cobham,
and Sir Walter Rawleigh, professed Enemies to Essex, and no mean instruments in
his destruction, fell into a Treason of a like depth with his in the Reign of
K. James I. Gray and Cobham dying miserably in Prison, and Rawleigh being
beheaded at Tower Hill.

Remarks on the Life, Actions and Fatal Fall of George Villers Duke of
Buckingham, Favorite to King James I. and King Charles I.
THIS Favorite rose upon the Fall of the E. of Somerset, upon whom K. James
had heaped many honors, advancing him from a Knight to Viscount Rochester,
Privy Counselor, E. of Somerset, and L. Chamberlain. But his Glory was soon
overclouded, for having married the Countess of Essex, who had been divor^ed
from her Husband the Son of the preceding Favorite, that unfortunate Knight
Sir Tho. Overbury, for speaking against the Match was by their procurement
poisoned in the Tower, (...) which the Earl and Countess were both Condemned
but Pardoned, and banished the Court.

K. James who could not live without a bosom Favorite cast his Eye upon George
Villers, a young Gentleman of a fine shape, second Son to Sir George Villers of
Brooksby in Leicestershire, with whom the K. was so taken, finding him a man of
quick understanding, and fit to make a Courtier, that he advanced him by
degrees in honor next to himself, making him first a Knight, then Gentleman of
his Bedchamber, Viscount, Master of the Horse, Lord Admiral, Earl Marquess, and
lastly D. of Buekingham. And now lying in the King's Bosom, every man paid
Tribute to his Smiles, and he managed all affairs, putting men in or out of
Office according to his pleasure. Yet his Mother who was a Papist having a
great hand in all business, and a great power over her Son, directed him in all
matters of Profit and Concernment, and was addressed to first, in order to
procure any favor from him. Which caused Gondemar the Spanish Ambassador to
write merrily to his Master, 'That there was never more hope of England's
Conversion to Rome than now, for there were more Prayers and Oblations offered
here to the Mother than to the Son. He Married the Earl of Rutlands Daughter,
the greatest Match in the Kingdom, who pretended to be a zealous Protestant,
but his Mother and the Jesuits reduced her to the Popish Religion, so that
between a Mother and a Wife Buckingham himself grew very indifferent being
neither Papist nor Protestant.

K. James affected the name of a Peacemaker, and designing the general quiet
of Europe and the reconciling all parties, he professed that if the Papists
would renounce their K. killing Doctrine, and some other gross errors, he was
willing to meet them half way. And being zealous also to maintain the height of
Regal Majesty, after the death of Prince Henry, he resolved to match his Son
Prince Charles with some Princess of most high Descent, though of a different
Religion. And there having been a Treaty of Marriage between P. Henry and a
Daughter of Spain, wherein the Spaniards deluded him with their accustomed
gravity and formality, he now set his thoughts upon a Match with France, which
the Spanish King doubting would be to his disadvantage, he made new Overtures
for a Marriage with his Daughter to Sir John Digby the King's Ambassador there,
though with as little sincerity as before. And at length Articles were agreed
on and signed by K. James, whereby the Children of this Marriage were not to be
constrained to be Protestants, nor to lose their right of succession if they
were Catholics. The Pope's Dispensation was to be procured, the new Queen was
to have Popish Chaplains Priests, Confessors and all other Privileges. The K.
was mightily pleased with this Alliance, but the People as much displeased, who
had not forgot the intended cruelty of 1588. and dreaded the consequence of
this Popish Contract. But the K. not thinking that the business went on with
that speed he desired, sends the Prince and Buckingham to Spain to consummate
the Marriage, where he is received with all manner of magnificence by that
King, and universal joy of that People, in hope the Prince would turn
Catholic, they generally discoursing, That he came thither on purpose to
become a Christian. Neither were any endeavors wanting to seduce him. Pope
Gregory writing a smooth Letter to him: Yea condescended to write another to
Buckingham his Guide and Familiar to incline him to the Romish Religion. The
Prince returned an answer to the Pope's Letter, and among other expressions
says,

'Your Holines's conjecture of our desire to contract an Alliance and Marriage
with a Catholic Family and Princess, is agreeable both to your Wisd^m and
Charity, for we would never desire so vehemently to be joined in a strict and
indissoluble Bond with any Mortal whatsoever whose Religion we hated. For it is
very certain, I shall never be so extremely affectionate to any thing in the
World, as to endeavor Alliance with a Prince that has the same apprehension
of the True Religion with my self. Therefore I entreat your Holiness to
believe, that I have been always far from encouraging Novelties, or to be a
Partizan of any Faction against the Catholic Apostolic Roman Religion (...)
on the contrary I have sought all occasions to take away ^picion that might
rest upon me. And I will employ my self for the time to come to have but One
Religion, and one Faith, seeing that we all believe in one Jesus Christ. Having
resolved in my self to spare nothing that I have in this World, and to suffer
all manner of discommodities, even to the hazard of my Estate and Life, for a
thing so pleasing to God. I pray God to give your Holiness a blessed Health
here, and his Glory after so much Travel which yor Holiness takes within his
Church.

After a while the Match was concluded in England, and the Articles sworn to by
K. James, and some private ones much in favor of the Papists. And the King was
so transported with the ass^rance of it, that he was heard to say, 'Now all the
Devils in Hell cannot hinder it. But a stander by said to one of his
Attendants. 'That there was never a Devil now left in Hell, for they were all
gone into Spain to make up the Match. And indeed the Spirit of the Nation was
so averse to this Union, that they boldly vented their Sentiments both with
their Tongues and ^ens: And among others, Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury writ
a very warm Letter to the K. against a Toleration of Popery, which was one of
the Articles agreed to. The Treaty was likewise Signed and Sealed by the K. of
Spain and the Prince, Who also obliged, himself, That as often as the Infanta
pleased, he would hearken to such Catholic Divines, as she should appoint to
debate matters of Religion with him, but would never dissuade her from her own
Religion, and would take care to abrogate all the Laws made against Catholics
in three years.

But after all, this Match proved abortive, and the Prince and Duke returning
home again, the K. declaring, that unless the Emperor would restore the
Palatinate taken from his S^n in Law the Prince Palatine, he would proceed no
farther. Which the K. of Spain declining to be concerned in, the Treaty was
totally dissolved, to the great joy of all good Protestants.

The Duke gave the Parliament an account of the whole Transaction, wherein he
severely reflected upon the unfair and delusory practices of the Spanish Court,
which so incensed the Spanish Ambassador, that he sent to the K. to inform
him, that the Duke had some desperate design against his Life, and that the
least he could do against him, would be to confine him to some of his Country
Houses during Life, the Prince being now fully ripe for Government. This raised
some jealousy in the old King, so that the next time he saw Buckingham, he
cried, 'Ah Stenny, Stenny (which was the Familiar name he always called him)
'wilt thou kill me? At which the Duke was at first amazed, but finding afterward
that a Spanish Jesuit was the Informer, he told the King, It was only their
malice against him for breaking the match, protesting his Innocence. The K. was
satisfied the Ambassador was his Enemy, and that such an attempt could never be
performed without the consent of the Prince, whom the Ambassador reflected
upon, though he did not directly accuse him, and He thought it so horrid and
unnatural a design, that he passed it by without any further notice: But only
in sending to the K. of Spain to defire justice of him against his Ambassadors
false Accusation, which he said wounded his Sons honor through Buck ingham's
sides. Soon after the Ambassador was recalled, and for Forms sake had a little
check given him, but was in as much favor as ever.

Thus was this Information waved, and the Duke so far reestablished in favor,
that he doubted not but to crush all that opposed him, and charged Cranfield
Earl of Middlesex in Parliament, with several mismanagements of the Revenue,
the Prince who was Buckingham's right hand joining with him in it. The King
being at New Market, to free himself from the noise of business, hearing of it,
writ to the Prince, 'That he should not take part with any Faction in
Parliament against the Earl of Middlesex, but be so indifferent that both
parties might seek to him, for if he bandied to remove old Servants, the time
would come that others would do as much by him. This wise advice declared
^eking ham to be a little declining in the King's favor, or the King in his.
For if the King knew Buckingham to be the chief Prosecutor, it looktill for the
King to plead for him, and if not, there was not that intimacy between them as
formerly. However Cranfield's Actions were proved to be so dishonorable, that
he was sined severely, and made incapable of ever fitting in the House of Peers
for the future.

Soon after the King died at Theobald's of a Tertian Ague as was then said, and
King Charles who in his Fathers Life time was linkt to the Duke, now continued
to receive him into an admired intimacy and dearness, making him Partaker of
all his Counsels and Cares, and chief Conductor of his Affairs, an example rare
in this Nation to be the Favorite of two succeeding Princes: But was not so
fortunate as to Parliaments, for though the last in King James's time had
approved of his Conduct in breaking the Spanish Match, yet the first Parliament
of this King drawing up a Remonstrance of their Grievances, inveighed against
him in their Speeches, as the chief occasion of all miscarriages in Government.
As the loss of the Royalty of the Narrow Seas, by his mismanagement of the
Office of Lord High Admiral; His enriching himself and kindred to the
impoverishing of the King and Crown. His ill bestowing of Offices of Trust and
Profit. The increase of Popery occasioned by the Dukes Mother and Father in
Law, both Papists. The scandalous sale of all Honors, Offices and Employments
Ecclesiastical, Military and Civil. And his staying at home (though Admiral)
when he should have commanded the Fleet, which miscarried by his being absent.
In the same Parliament likewise, the Earl of Bristol accused the Duke of High
Treason, and the Duke charged him with the same. One of the Articles against
Buckingham was, 'That the Pope being informed of his inclination to the
Catholic Religion, sent the Duke a Bull in Parchment, to perseade and
encourage him to pervert the Prince of Wales. After this the Parliament
proceeded to Impeach the Duke upon 13 Articles of High Treason and other high
Crimes and Misdemeanors, one of which was his giving Porions and applying
Plasters to the late King James in his sickness, without the advice and
contrary to the directions of his sworn Physicians, from whence proceeded
drowths, raving, fainting, and an intermitting Pulse, which ^he King was so
senfible of, that being told by his Phys^ians that his Distemper increased by
cold, he replied, 'No, no, it proceeds from that which I have from Buckingham.
The King was so angry at these ploceedings having cautioned them from meddling
with the Duke, that he committed Sir Dudly Diggs, who made the Prologue, and
Sir John Eliot the Epilogue of his Impeachment, both Prisoners to the Tower.
After which the Duke gave in an answer to all the Articles charged against him,
as well of misimploying the Ship of Rochel, as about the death of K. James,
wherein he acknowledges, he did give the Potion to the King, but it was by his
own Order, in presence of the King's Physicians, who did not seem to diflike
it, some of them having tasted it. And the Duke acquainting the King that some
had reported that this Drink had made him worse, and that he had given it him
without advice, the K. answered, They are worse than Devils that say it.
However the Parliament proceeded with an Address to the K. for removing the D.
from his Council and Presence, and the House of Lords sent four Peers to
entreat him to give audience to their whole House upon this Subject. But the K.
replied, That his resolution was to hear no motion for that purpose, but that
he would Dissolve the Parliament, which he did instantly by Commission, which
gave occasion to the People to utter their minds freely upon this Transaction.

After this the King declares War against France, and (...) Fleet being
provided, and an Army raised, Buckingham is made both Admiral and General, and
lands his Army at the Isle of Rhee, notwithstanding the opposition of the
French both Horse and Foot, whom the English defeated. From whence they marched
to St. Martin's, and blockt up the Citadel. But notwithstanding our Army at
Land and 100 Sail of Ships at Sea, yet the French got into the Harbor with
relief of Provisions; and afterward carried so great a supply into the Citadel,
that the Duke who had lain idle for many VVeeks, being at length prevailed with
to Storm it, was forced to retire, and in his retreat had a great number of his
Soldiers killed and drowned, returning home with great disuonour. Upon the
return of the Fleet, the Cry of the Nation was so great, both for the Disgrace
and the Seamen's want of Pay, that the King was obliged to call a Parliamene,
which being met, the Duke is declared the Grievance of Grievances, and the
Cause of all the miseries of the Kingdom. But the King Proroguing the
Parliament before they could proceed against him, in the mean time Dr. Lamb the
Duke's Creature is murdered in the City out of hatred to his Master. And the
Town of Rochel (who had declared for the English when they were there) being
now closely besieged by the French. The King had prepared a Fleet under the
command of the Duke to relieve it, who being advanced as far as Portsmouth to
go aboard, was slain by one Lieutenant Felton in his own Lodgings, by one blow
with a Knife under the left Rib and up to the Heart, leaving the Knife in his
Body, and got away undiscovered. In his fall to the Ground, the Duke was heard
to say, The Villain has killed me. Company coming in and finding him weltring
in his Blood, began to inquire for the Murderer, when Felton immediately stepped
out and said. 'I am the man that have done the deed, let no man suffer that is
innocent. When he gave the fatal blow, Felton cried, The Lord have mercy upon
thy Soul. Which the Duke had not time to pronounce himself. Felton had a Paper
sticking to the Lining of his Hat wherein he had written as follows: 'I would
have no man commend me for doing it, but rather discommend themselves, for if
God had not taken away their Hearts for their Sins, he had not gone so long
unpunisht. The man is cowardly, base in mind, opinion, and deserves not the
name of a Gentleman or Soldier, that is unwilling to Sacrifice his Life for
the Honor of God, his King, and Country. Subscribed John Felton. He confessed to
the Council, that the motives to it were his want of pay, his being
disappointed of a Captains place which the Duke promised him, Together with the
late Remonstrance of the House of Commons against him. A. B. Laud asked him,
whether the Puritans did not incite him to it, which he denied, or any body
else. Well then said Laud, we must make you confess your Accomplices on the
Rack, If you should, said Felton, it may be the torment would make me accuse
you as soon as another. So he was tried for murder, and suffered very
penitently at Tyburn, and his Body was hung in Chains at Portsmouth in 1628.

An Ingenious Writer is much offended with Sir Henry Wotton, for making a
Parallel between the Earl of Essex aforementioned and the Duke of Buckinghim,
(to be found in his remains) which he says is much to the disadvantage of
Essex, who besides his last action, never did any thing so ungrateful as might
make him fear the anger, or beg the favor of a Parliament, much less owe his
Life to the Dissolution of one. He died like a Christian. He was no instrument
of Tyranny and Oppression, his memory being still valuable among the People.
Whereas the Duke's retains a contrary Tincture, nor can his bounty to his
Friends and Servants expunge his faults, because the Money was drained either
from the People, the Public Treasury, or from the general safety of the
Nation. Whereas Essex obliged his Confidents out of his own store, or by such
innocent ways as the Subject had no cause to repine at. His natural parts were
as great, and his Learning and Birth greater than the Dukes. Nor can his last
inconsiderate action that rather deserves the Title of a Riot than Treason,
come up to so great an ingratitude and indignity to the Nation as Buckingham's
proceedings at Rochel, wherein the Duke showed no less folly in procuring so
great a hatred among the People, than Essex did in misapplying their love. And
if his Picture be exact. Essex was as hand some as he, which was the chief
cause of Villers advancement. Only in this Essex came short, in having a
Mistress that would attend to reason, whether it came from friendship or
malice; Whereas the Dukes fortune depended on two Princes, that in reference to
their own weakness or his strongth, remained deaf to all Complaints but what
were made by him or his Creatures, under pain of his high Displeasure, which
was usually much heavier than the King's. Concerning their Deaths, (says my
Author) I can attest, the Duke's did occasion no l^ joy, than the other did
sorrow, though the death of Queen Elizabeth her self be put into the Scale. Nor
was the Hangman willing to be hired to cut off Essex, whereas Felton seemed to
be inspired with some Demon, if not the Genius of our Nation.

Remarks on the Life, Actions and Fatal Fall of Thomas Wentworth Earl of
Strafford, Favorite to King Charles I.
THIS great Favorite was born in Chancery Lane London, his Mother coming
casually to the City, but descended from an ancient Family at Wentworth
VVoodhouse in Yorkshire. He was educated in St. John's College in Oxford,
whereby he was so accomplished, that his endowments soon advanced him to be a
Member of the House of Commons, wherein he appeared very zealous for the
Liberties of his Country, and that often with so much strength of reason, that
his Sentiments prevailed for or against the Cause he managed. Of which I shall
give a few instances.

In the Parliament 3. Charles I. Upon a debate on the Grievances of the
Kingdom, by quartering Soldiers, Loans, Benevolence, Privy Seals, and
Imprisoning Gentlemen that refused to lend Money on that account, and were
refused to be Bailed upon there Habeas Corpus, he spoke thus. 'Surely these
illegal ways are punishments and marks of indignation, The raising of Loans,
strengthened by Commissions, with unheard of Instructions and Oaths, and the
Billetting of Soldiers by Deputy Lieutenants have been such as if they could
have persuaded Christian Princes, that the right of Empires had been to take
away men's Properties by strong hands. These Projectors have introduced a Privy
Council, who have ravished at once the Spheres of allantient Government,
shprisoning us without either Bail or Bond. They have taken from us, what? What
shall I say indeed? What have they left us. The remedy I shall propound is, To
vindicate our ancient vital Liberties, by reinforcing the Laws made by our
Ancestors, by giving such a Character of them as no Licentious Spirit shall
ever dare enter upon them hereafter. Let (...) secure our selves, and our
freedom from imprisonment, Les us secure our Goods that no Levies be made but
by Parliament, no Bilseting of Soldiers. If we are not secured in these, we
cannot give supplies. -- I cannot forget that duty I owe to my Country, and
unless our Liberties be secured, I incline to look upon the state of our
Country whether it be fit to give or no. Are we come to an end of our Countries
Liberties? Are we secured for time future? -- We are accountable to a Public
Trust, and since there has been a Public Violation of the Laws by the King's
Ministers, nothing will satisfy but a Public Amends, and our desire to
vindicate the Subject's Right is no more than what is laid down in former Laws.
-- Let us be sure that the Subject's Liberties go hand in hand with the supply,
and not to pass the one, till we have good Ground and a Bill for the other.
Upon the Petition of Right which the House of Lords would have had this
addition to, 'We present this our Humble Petition to your Majesty, with the
care not only of preserving our own Liberties, but with due regard to leave
entire that Sovereign Power wherewith your Majesty is trusted for the
Protection, Safety and Happiness of the People, Sir Tho. Wentworth spoke thus:
'If we admit of this Addition, we shall leave the Subjects worse than we found
them, and we shall have little thanks for our labor when we come home. Let us
leave all Power to his Majesty to punish Malefactors, but these Laws are not
acquainted with Sovereign Power. We desire no new thing, nor do we offer to
entrench on his Majesty's Prerogative, but we may not recede from this Petition
either in part or in whole.

The King hearing of his ability and understanding, used all means to gain him
to himself, by bestowing of Titles of Honor and Places of Trust upon him,
Creating him Viscount Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, and Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, whereby he made him wholly his own. In Ireland he was very active in
augmenting the King's Revenues, and advancing the Royal Authority by all ways
within his Power; And upon his return into England, he advised the King to go
into Scotland, and settle the Peace of that Kingdom by his Coronation there, he
having intelligence that if it were deferred any longer, the Scots might perhaps
incline to Elect another King. Upon the troubles that rose soon after there, on
the account of imposing the Common Prayer upon them, and the King resolving to
raise an Army to reduce them, but doubting the Parliament would not supply him,
the Lords told the King that they would engage their own Credits to forward the
business, and the Earl of Strafford for the encouragement subscribed 20000 l.
other Noblemen following his example conformable to their Estates, and some of
the Judges contributed largely.

April 13. 1639, a Parliament being assembled, the Earl of Strafford was led
into the House of Peers by two Noblemen, to give an account of his proceedings
in Ireland, having there obrained the Grant of four Subsides, for maintaing
10000 Foot and 1500 Horse. Implicitly hinting thereby that they should
propostion their Supplies accordingly. But the Parliament doubting that the
Irish Forces might endanger Religion, and seeming to allow the justness of the
Scots Cause, and of the good that might be obtained by favoring them in this
Conjuncture, the King doubting they might vote against the War with the Scots,
whom he resolved to Treat severely for not complying with his Will and
Pleasure, he thereupon suddenly Dissolves them, to the great discontent of the
People, who for eleven years past, durst scarce mention the name of a
Parliament.

Being hereby disappointed of a supply, the King sends to the Citizens of
London to lend Money, and to all Knights and Gentlemen who held Lands of the
Crown, to provide Men, Horses and Arms for his Assistance. The Citizens
generally refused, pleading poverty and want of Trade, but by the assistance of
the Gentry, an Army was raised with great celerity, of which the Earl of
Strafford was made Lieutenant General, and the King commanded in Chief. The
Scots having notice of these preparations, speedily raised an Army, with which
they marched into England to make this the Seat of War. The Lord Conway
doubting they would take in Newcastle, drew off 3000 Foot and about 1200 Horse
to secure the Pass at Newburn. Lesly the Scots General marching forward sent a
Trumpeter to the Lord Conway, to desire leave to pass to the King with their
Petition, which being denied, they fell upon the English and killed 300 of
them. Which being accounted an unhappy Omen, several of the Lords Petitioned
the King for a Parliament, which was seconded by another from the Scots, and a
third from the City of London. At length the King consented to it, having
first, by advice of the Peers, consented to a Treaty with the Scots at Rippon,
they refusing to send their Commissioners to York, alleging, That the
Lieutenant of Ireland resided there, who proclaimed them Rebels in Ireland,
before the King had done it in England, and against whom as a chief Incendiary
they intended to complain in the next Parliament.

For the Parliament meeting Nov. 3. 1640. the Scotch Commissioners coming to
London, had many private Conferences with some of the House of Commons, and it
was concluded that the Earl of Strafford should be immediately Impeached at his
first coming into the House of Lords, which was done accordingly, and thereupon
he was instantly taken into Custody, and in March following he was brought to
his Trial in Westminster Hall. The King, Queen and Prince were present in a
private Closet, where they could here all, but were seen of none.

And then Mr. Pym Impeached the Earl of twenty eight Articles of High Treason
in the name of the Commons of England, sharging him, That he had Traitorously
endeavored to subvert the fundamental Laws and Government of England and
Ireland, and to introduce an Arbitrary Tyrannical Government, by Traitorously
assuming to himself Regal Power over the Laws, Liberties, Persons, Lands and
Goods of his Majesty's Subjects. Had countenanced and encouraged Papists: Had
maliciously endeavored to stir up enmity and hostility between the Subjects of
England and Scotland. Had wilfully betrayed the King's Subjects to death by a
dishonorable retreat at Newburn, that by the effusion of blood, and the
dishonor and loss of New Castle, the People of England might be engaged in a
National and Irreconcilable quarrel with the Scots. And that to secure himself
from being questioned for these and other Traiterous Courses he had labored to
subvert the Rights of Parliament, and to incense his Majesty against them by
false and malicious slanders, and that upon the Dissolution of the last
Parliament, he did treacherously and wickedly counsel and advise His Majesty to
this effect, That having tried the affections of his People, he was loose and
absolved from all rules of Government, and was to do every thing that power
would admit. Since having tried all ways he was refused, so that he would now
be acquitted both by God and Man. And that he had an Army in Ireland (meaning
the Army of Papists who were his Dependants) which the King might employ to
reduce this Kingdom to his obedience. That he falsely, maliciously and
treacherously declared before some of the Privy Council, That the Parliament of
England had forsaken the King, and that in denying to supply him, they had
given him the advantage to supply himself by such ways as he should think fit,
and that he was not to suffer himself to be mastred by the frowardness of the
People. That he was very rigorous in levying the illegal Imposition of
Shipmoney, and Imprisoned diverse Persons for not levying the same. And a Great
Loan of an hundred thousand pound being demanded of the City, and some refusing
to lend, the Lord Mayo^ and Aldermen were required to return their names, which
they with humility refusing to do, the Earl said, That they deserved to be put
to fine and ransom, and to be made examples, and laid by the heels, and that it
would never be well till some of the Aldermen were hanged up. That by wicked
Counsel he had brought on the King excessive charges, and then advised him to
approve of two dangerous Projects. To seize the Money in the Mint, and to
imbase his own Coin with a mixture of Brass. That he had declared that Ireland
was a conquered Nation, and that the King might do with them what he pleased,
and speaking of the Charters of former Kings of England, he said, They were
nothing worth, and that he would neither have Law nor Lawyers question or
dispute any of his Orders, and that he would make all Ireland know that so long
as he had the Government there, any Act of State there made, should be as
binding to the Subject as an Act of Parliament. That he did not only Tyrannize
over the Bodies but over the Consciences of Men, by forming and imposing a new
and unusual Oath, which because some Scots refused to take, he fined and
banished great numbers, and called all that Nation Rebels and Traitors, and
said if ever he returned home from England he would root them out both stock
and branch.

These and a multitude of other crimes, he was charged to have committed both
in Ireland and England. Many of which he confessed to be true, but not with their
aggravations. Some he denied, and others he extenuated, and pleaded that though
the whole were proved against him, yet it did not amount to Treason. Some of
the Lords and Commons were of the same opinion. Others urged, That though he
were not guilty of any of the Offenses declared to be Treason by the 25 of
Edward III. yet so great were his crimes that (according to that Statute which
impowers the Parliament to declare what is Treason) they ought to be declared
Treason. At length it was concluded to proceed against him by way of Attainder,
which was much opposed likewise, it being alleged, That no man could be
convict of Treason but by the Letter of the Statute, and the Lord Digby a
Member of the House of Commons, and an earnest Prosecutor of the Earl spoke
thus of it, 'Mr. Speaker, I am still of the same opinion and affections to the
Earl Strafford, I confidently believe him the most dangerous Minister, and the
most insupportable to free Subjects that can be found. I believe his p^actices
as high and as Tyrannical as any Subject ever ventured on, and the malignity of
them highly aggravated by those rare abilities of his, whereof God has given
him the use, but the Devil the application. I believe him still, the grand
Apostate to the Common Wealth, who must not expect to be pardoned in this
World, till he be dispatched to the other. I do not say but his Crimes may
represent him a man as worthy to dye, and perhaps worthier than many a Traitor,
and may justly direct us to enact that they shall be Treason for the future,
but God keep me from giving Judgment of Death on any man, and to ruin his
Posterity upon a Law made after the Crime is committed. And by any Law yet
made, I do not believe he is guilty of Treason.

However the Bill of Attainder passed in the House of Commons, and Mr. Sir
John's endeavored to satisfy the Lords in the reasonableness thereof, to
induce them to Pass it. For said he, though the proofs at the Trial were
insufficient, and nothing but Legal Evidence can prevail in Judicature, yet by
this way both Lords and Commons might proceed by the light of their own
Consciences, although no evidence were given at all. And after many
Aggravations of the Earl's Offenses in subverting our Laws, as he affirmed, he
concluded thus. 'He that would not have had others have any Law, should have
none himself: It is true, we give Law to Hares and Dee, because they be Beasts
of Chase. It was never accounted cruelty or foul play to knock Foxes or Wolves
on the Head as they can be found, because these be Beast of Prey. The Warrenner
sets Traps for Powl-cats and other Vermin for preservation of the Warren. The
Lords after this Speech showing a greater propensity toward the Earl's
condemnation than before, the King having an account of it, came next day to
the House of Peers, and sending for the House of Commons told them;

'That Judgment being ready to pass on the Earl of Strafford he thought it
necessary to declare his Conscience therein, they being sensible that he had
been present at the hearing this great Cause from one end to the other, and yet
that in his Conscience he could not condemn him of High Treason; assuring them,
That he never intended to bring an Irish Army into England, nor was ever
advised by any body so to do. That there was never any debate before him of the
disloyalty of his English Subjects, nor had he ever any suspicion of them. That
he was never. Counseled by any to after all, or any of the Laws of England,
since if any durst have been so impudent he should have made them examples to
Posterity. That he would be rightly understood, for though in Conscience he
could not condemn him of High Treason, yet he could not clear him of such
Misdemeanors, as he did not think him fit to serve him or the Commonwealth
hereafter, in any Place or Trust, no not so much as a Constable, and therefore
he hoped they would find out a way to satisfy Justice and their own fears, and
not oppress his Conscience, since neither fear nor any other respect
whatsoever, should ever make him act against it.

This Speech relisht so ill with the two Houses, that few of them attended next
day being Sunday May 2. on the solemnity of the King's Eldest Daughter Mary
being Married to the Prince of Orange. On Monday five or six thousand
Apprentices and other tumultuous Citizens came down to Westminster to demand
justice against the Earl of Strafford, and Petitions subscribed with thousands
of hands were presented to both Houses about redressing Grievances. Soon after
the Lords passed the Bill of Artainder, but the King seemed very averse to Pass
it, and consulted both with Lawyers and Divines of the Lawfulness thereof. The
Bishop of Lincoln urged. That the opinion of the Judges and the Judgment of the
Parliament thereupon ought much to sway with him, considering the terrible
consequences of an enraged multitude, and that no other expedient could be
found out to appease the People. But the main satisfaction of the King's
Conscience it is said proceeded from a Letter sent to him by the Earl, to this
purpose. 'Sir, to set your Majesty's Conscience at Liberty, I do most humbly
beseech you, for preventing of such mischief^, as may happen by your refusal,
to pass the Bill, by this means to remove, (I cannot say this accursed, but I
confess) this unfortunate thing out of the way, toward that blessed agreement
which I trust God shall forever establish betwixt you and your Subjects. Sir,
my consent herein shall more acquit you to God than all the World can do
besides, etc.

The next day the King Signed a Commission to several Lords to pass the Bill
which was done accordingly. But being unwilling to part with his indeared
Favorite, he sent a Letter by the Prince of Wales to the House of Lords, that
mercy might be extended to him as to Life, but that he might fulfill the natural
course of his Days in close Imprisonment. But the Lords sent twelve of their
number to the King to satisfy him that it could no^ be done with safety,
neither to himself nor his Queen. If it cannot says he, then Fiat Justitia, Let
Justice be done.

May 12. 1641. The Earl was conveyed from the Tower to the Scaffold erected on
the Hill with a sufficient Guard, and Archbishop Usher to assist him, where it
is said he designed to have made a Speech already prepared, to this effect.
'People of my Native Country, I wish my own or your Charity had made me fit to
call you Friends. It should appear by your concourse and gazing Aspects that I
am now the only prodigious Meteor, toward which you direct your wandering Eyes.
I would to God my Blood would cure your sad hearts of all your Grievances.
Though every drop thereof were a Soul on which a Life depended, I could tender
it with as much alacrity as some, nay most of you are come to triumph in my
final expiration. In regard I have been by you my Native Country (whose wisdom
and justice in respect of the generality of it, is no way questionable) voted
to this untimely end, I have not one syllable to say in justification of my
self or those actions for which I suffer. Only in excuse of both, give me leave
to say my too much zeal to do my Master service made me abuse his Royal
authority, and howsoever I have been most unfortunate, yet at all times a
Favorite in the prosecution of my Places and Offices, as I shall answer at the
dreadful Tribunal whereunto your just anger has, before nature, doomed me, my
intents were fairer than my actions, but God knows the overgreatness of my
Spirits severity in my Government, the Witchcraft of Authority, and Flattery of
many to sharpen it, are but ill Interpreters of my intentions, which I have no
argument to induce you to believe, but that it proceeds from a dying man. It
would too much hinder your longing expectation of my shameful death to give an
account of my Arraignment and Attainder, for I have been, and whilst I breath
am, the Pestilence which rages through your Minds, your Estates and Trades, and
you will read the Bills of your losses though the disease that brought the
destruct on be removed, etc.

He then declared, That he forgave all the World, and acquitted them of his
death: And beseeched the God of Heaven heartily to forgive them. That he was
never against Parliaments as judging them the most happy constitution, and the
best means to make the King and People happy. That it was a great comfort to
him, that the King did not think he merited so heavy a punishment as this. So
wishing all prosperity to the Kingdom, he addressed himself to his Prayers, and
then laying down his Head on the Block, it was cut off at one blow. Instead of
a Character of him, I shall conclude with his Epitaph written by Mr. John
Cleaveland.

Here lies Wise and Valiant Dast
Hudled up 'twixt Fit and Just:
Strafford who was hurried hence,
'Twixt Treason and Convenience.
He spent his Life here in a Mist,
A Papist, yet a Calvinist,
His Princes nearest joy and grief
He had, yet wanted all relief.
The prop and ruin of the State,
The Peoples violent love and hate,
One in extremes loved and abhorred,
Riddles, lies here. And in a word,
Here lies blood, and let it lie
Speechless still, and never cry.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultrey;
near Cheapside.
History.
1. ENgland's Monarchs: Or, A Compendious Relation of the most remarkable
Transactions, from Julius Caesar to this present; adorned with Poems, and the
Picture of every Monarch, from K. Will. the Conqueror to the sixth year of K.
Will. and Q. Mary. With a List of the Nobility, and the number of the Lords and
Commons in both Houses of Parliament; and many other useful particulars. Price
one shilling. 2. THE History of the House of Orange: Or, a Brief Relation of
the Glorious and Magnanimous Achievements of his Majesty's Renowned
Predecessors, and likewise of His own Heroic Actions, till the Late Wonderful
Revolution. Together with the History of K. William and Q. Mary, etc. Being an
Impartial Account of the most Remarkable Passages from their Majesty's Happy
Accession to the Throne to this time. By R. B. Price one shilling. 3. THE
History of the two late Kings, Charles the II. and James the II. being an
Impartial account of the most remarkable Transactions, during their Reigns, and
the secret French and Popish Intrigues in those Times. With a Relation of the
happy Revolution. Pr. 1s. 4. THE History of Oliver Cromwell, being an Impartial
Account of all the Battles, Sieges, and other Military Achievements, wherein
he was engaged in England, Scotland and Ireland; and likewise of his Civil
Administrations, while he had the Suprea^ Government, till his Death. Relating
only mothers of Fact, without Reflection or Observation. By R.B. pr. 1 s. 5.
THE Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland, containing an Account of all the
Bettels, Sieges, and other remarkable Transactions, which happened from the
beginning of the Reign of K. Charles I. His Trial at large, with his last
Speech. Pr. 1s. 6. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and
Present State of London and Westminster, showing the Foundations, Walls, Gates,
Towers, Bridges, Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts,
Hospitals, Schools, Inns of Courts, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges
thereof; with the most remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and
other occurrences, for above 903 years past. Pr. 1 s. 7. ADmirable Curiosities,
Rarities and Wonders in England, Scotland, and Ireland; or an account of many
remarkable persons and places; and likewise of the Battles, Sieges, prodigious
Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Thunders, Lightnings, Fires, Murders and
other Occurences and Accidents for many hundred years past: Together with the
Natural and Artificial Rarities in every County in England With several curious
Sculptures. Price one shilling. 8. THE History of the Principality of Wales in
three parts: Containing, 1. A brief account of the ancient Kings and Princes of
Britain and Wales, till the final extinguishing of the Royal, British Line. 2.
Remarks upon the Lives of all the Princes of Wales of the Royal Families of
England, from K. Edward I. to this time, particularly of Edward the black
Prince of Wales, who with 30000 English defeated an Army of 100000 French at
Cressy; and at Poictiers with 10000 beat 80000 and took John the French King
Prisoner. Also of Henry of Monmouth (afterward K. Henry V.) who with 13000
routed 90000 French, whose Son Henry VI. was Crowned K. of France at Paris. 3.
Remarkable Observations on the most memorable Persons and Places in Wales, and
of diverse considerable Passages for many hundred years past: With the birth and
strange actions of Merlin the famous Welsh Prophet. Together with the Natural
and Artificial Rarities in every County of that Principality. By R. B. Price
One Shilling. 9. THE History of the Kingdom of Ireland, being an Account of the
Ancient Inhabitants, and of all the Battles, Sieges, and other considerable
Tramactions in that Country, from King Henry II. till its entire Reduction, by
His Majesty's Arms. Together with the most remarkable Passages since, By R B.
Pr. 1s. 10. THE English Empire in America, or a prospect of His Majesty's
Dominions in the West, New York, New Jersey, Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia,
Carolina, Bermudas, Barbadus, Anguila, Monserrat, Dominica, St. Vincent,
Antego, Mevis or Nevis, St. Christophers, Barbados and Jamaica: And a relation
of the discovery of this New World, and of the Voyages of S. Cabot, Sir M.
Frobisher, C. Davis, C. Weymouth, C. Hall, C. Hudson, Sir Tho. Cavendish, the
E. of Cumberland, Sir W. Rawleigh and others. Illustrated with Maps, and
Pictures. Price one shilling. 11. A View of the English Acquisitions in Guine a
and the East Indies: With the Religion, Government, Wars, strange Customs,
Beasts, Serpents Monsters, and other Observables in those Countries. Intermixed
with pleasant Relations. Pr. 1s. 12. THE English Hero: Or, Sir Francis Drake
Revived. Being a full Account of His Voyages and Adventures. By R. B. pr. 1s.
13. TWo Journeys to Jerusalem, Containing first, An account of the Travels of
two English Piligrims some years since, to Jerusalem, Grand Cairo, Alexandria,
etc. 2. The Travels of 14 English Merchants in 1669. from Scanderoon to
Jerusalem, and back again to Aleppo. Beautified with Pictures. Pr. 1s. 14.
EXtraordinary Adventures of several Famous Men: With the strange Events, and
signal mutations and changes in the Fortunes of diverse Illustrious places and
persons in all Ages; being an acount of a multitude of stupendous Revolutions,
accidents, and observable matters in diverse States and Provinces throughout the
World; With Pictures. Pr. 1s. 15. THE History of the Nine Worthies of the
World: Three whereof were Gentiles: 1. Hector Son of Priamus. 2. Alexander the
great. 3. Julius Caesar; Three Jews. 4. Joshua Captain General of Israel. 5.
David King of Israel. 6. Judas Maecabeus. Three Christians. 7. Arthur King of
Britain. 8. Charles the Great K. of France, and Emperor of Germany. 9 Godfrey
of Bullen King of Jerusalem. Illustrated with Poems and the Pictures of each
Worthy. By R.B. Price One shilling. 16. FEmale Excellency, or the Ladies Glory,
Illustrated in the Worthy Lives and Memorable Actions of nine Famous Women: As
1. Deborah the Prophetess. 2. The valiant Judith. 3. Q. Esther. 4. The virtuous
Susannah. 5. The Chaste Lucretia. 6. Boadicia Q. of Britain. 7. Mariamne Wife of
K. Herod, 8. Clotilda Queen of France. 9. Andegona Princess of Spain. The whole
adorned with poems and pictures to each History. By R. B. Price One Shilling.
17. WOnderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy, discovered in above 300.
memorable Histories; containing, 1. Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists,
Blasphemers, and Perjured Villains. 2. The miserable ends of many Magicians,
etc. 3. Remarkable predictions and presages of approaching Death, and how the
event has been answerable. 4. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants, Murderers,
etc. 5. Admirable Deliverances from imminent dangers and deplorable distresses
at Sea and Land. Lastly, Divine goodness to penitents, with the dying thoughts
of several famous Men, concerning a future state. Pr. 1s. 18. Unparalleled
Rarities, or the Matchless Actions and Passions of Mankind; displayed in near
400 notable Instances and Examples, discovering the transcendent Effects; 1. Of
Love, Friendship and Gratitude. 2. Of Magnanimity, Courage and Fidelity. 3. Of
Chastity, Temperance and Humility: And on the contrary, the Tremendous
consequences; 4 Of Hatred, Revenge and Ingratitude. 5. Of Cowardice, Barbarity
and Treachery. 6. Of Unchastity, Intemperance and Ambition. Imbellished with
Proper Figures. Price 1s. 19. THE Kingdom of darkness: Or, The History of
Demons, Specters, Witches, Apparitions. Containing near 80 memorable Relations.
Collected from Authentic Records. With a Preface obviating the Common
Objections of the Sadducees of the Age, who deny the Being of Spirits, Witches,
etc. With Pictures of several memorable Accidents. Pr. 1s. 20. Surprising
Miracles of Nature and Art, in two parts; containing, 1. The Miracles of
Nature, or the wonderful Signs, and prodigious Aspects the Heavens, Earth and
Sea; with the most famous Comets, and other Prodiges, from the Birth of Christ
to this time. 2. The Miracles of Art, describing the most Magnificent
Buildings, and curious Inventions in all Ages, as, the seven Wonders of the
World. Beautifyed with Pictures. Price 1s. 21. THE General History of
Earthquakes: or An Account of the most Remarkable and Tremendous Earthquakes
from the Creation to this time, and particularly those lately in Naples,
Smyrna, Jamaica, England and Sicily; With a Description of the famous Burning
Mount Aetna, and the several dreadful Conflagrations thereof for many Ages. To
which is added an Appendix, containing several other late strange Accidents. As
I. A Surprising Account of Augels Singing Psalms in the Air over the Ruins of
the Protestant Church at Orthez, a City in the Province of Bearne, and other
places in France in the year 1686. II. The Life of a Great Person of near an
Hundred years old, who is now an Hermit in a Forest in France, etc. III. The
wonderful Army of Locusts or Grasshoppers that were seen near Breslaw in
Silesia, September. 7. 1693. which took up 16. Miles. IV. Three Miraculous Cures
wrought by Faith in Christ, in 1693. As 1. Of Mary Maillard the French Girl,
suddenly healed of an extreme Lameness, 2. The Wife of Mr. Savage Cured of a
Lame Hand. 3. A Shepperd near Hitchin in Hartfordshire instantly healed of the
King's Evil, under which he had languished Twenty Years. Price one shilling.
22. MEmorable Accidents and Unheard of Transactions, containing an account of
several strange Events: As the Deposing of Tyrants, Lamentable Shipwracks,
Dismal Misfortunes, Strategems of War, Perilous Adventures, Happy Deliverances,
with other remarkable occurrences and select Historical passages, in this last
Age. Printed at Brussels in 1691. and Dedicated to K. William, etc. Published
in English by R. B. Pr. 1s. 23. MArtyrs in Flames, or Popery in its true
Colors being a Brief Relation of the horrid Cruelties and Persecutions of the
Pope and Church of Rome, for many hundred of years past, in Piec^ mont,
Bohemia, Germany, Poland, Lithuania, France, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Scotland,
Ireland and England; with an abstract of the cruel Persecutions of the
Protestants in France and Savoy, in 1686, and 1687. And of God's Judgments upon
Popish Persecutors. pr. 1s.
Miscellanies.
24. DElights for the Ingenious, in above Fifty Solect and Choice Emblems,
Divine and Moral, Ancient and Modern, cutiously Engraven upon Copper Plates,
with 50 delightful Poems and Lots, for the Illustration of each Emblem, to
which is prefixed, A Poem, entitled, Majesty in Misery, or an Imploration of
the King of Kings, written by K. Charles I. in Carisbrook Castle in the Isle of
Wight, 1648. with a curious Emblem. Collected by R. B. Price 2s. 6d. 25.
EXcellent Contemplations Divine and Moral, written by the Magnanimous A.L.
Capel Baron of Hadham; together with some accountor. (...) Life, and his
Letters to his Lady, with his (...) at his Suffering. Also the Speeches of D.
Him. (...) E. of Holl, who suffered with him: With his Pious Advice to his Son.
Price 1.s. 26. VVInter Evenings Entertaintment, in two parts, Containing, 1.
Ten Pleasant Relations, 2. Fifty Ingenious Riddles, with their Explanations,
and useful Observations and Morals up on each. Enlivened with above 60
Pictures. pr 1s. 27 ESop's Fables in Prose and Verse, The second part,
Collected from Esop and other Ancient and Modern Authors, with Pictures and
proper Morals to every Fable. By R. B, pr. 1s.
Divinity.
28. THE Divine Banquet, or Sacramental Devotions, consisting of Morning and
Evening Pravers, Contemplations and Hymns for every day in the Week, in order
to a more Solemn Preparation for the worthy Receiving of the Holy Communion,
With brief Resolutions to all those scruples alleged for the omission of this
important duty. And Graces. Imprimatur Z. Isham, R. P. D. Hen. Epise. Land. a
Sacris. Price 1s. 29. A Guide to Eternal Glory: Or, brief Directions to all
Christians how to attaint Everlasting Salvation: To which are added several
other small Tracts. Poems, upon diverse Subjects and Scriptures. Price one
Shilling. 30. YOuths Divine Pastime; Containing Forty Remarkable Scripture
Histories, turned into common English Verse. With Forty Pictures proper to each
Story. Together with Scripture Hymns upon diverse occasions. Pr. 8d. 31. THE
Young Man's Calling, or the whole Duty of Youth, in a serious and compassionate
Address to all young persons to remember ^eir Creator in the days of their
Youth. Together (...) Remarks upon the Lives of several excellent (...) ^ersons
of both Sexes. With twelve curious (...) the several histories. Price 1s. 6d.
FINIS.

