Bajazet Emperor of the Turks Enclosed in an Iron Cage by K. Tamerlane

Extraordinary ADVENTURES Discoveries And EVENTS By R B.



London Printed for Nath: Crouch

EXTRAORDINARY ADVENTURES AND DISCOVERIES Of several Famous MEN.

With the Strange Events, and Signal Mutations and Changes in the Fortunes of
many Illustrious Places and Persons in all Ages.

Being an Account of a Multitude of Stupendous Revolutions, Accidents, and
Observable Matters in many Kingdoms, States and Provinces throughout the whole
World.

With diverse Remarkable Particulars Lively described in Picture for their
better Illustration.

By R. B. Author of the History of the Wars of Enggland; Remarks of London;
Wonderful Prodigies; and Admirable Curiosities, etc.

London, Printed by J. Richardson, for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in
Exchange-Alley, next to Kemps Coffee-House, over against the Royal Exchange in
Cornhil, 1683.

To the READER.
IT is a saying, That the greatest Divertisement to a Soldier or Traveller, is
to discourse of their former Dangers and Adventures; And if the relating of
them be so pleasant, certainly the hearing thereof is no less divertive. Now in
this little Volume you may meet with variety of Accidents of all kinds, for
here you may see on the one side Pompous Greatness laid as low as Contempt it
self, and on the other hand Baseness and Obscurity raised up to amazing and
Prodigious Heights; Here you may find some such noble Spirits, that they could
not rest satisfied, till by their own hazards they had discovered New Worlds,
and brought one Hemisphere to some Acquaintance with the other; Here you may
observe, That though amongst the Romans the Temple of Honor was so contrived,
that therein was no Passage to it but through that other of Virtue, yet that
things are far otherwise than they ought to be, and that Virtue is as
familiarly persecuted as rewarded, nor have Persons of worth been always barely
beholden to their Merit for their Preferment, but perhaps some petty Accident,
or inconsiderable Circumstance has been the occasion of their Advancement.
Here you may remark, That as some men who have received the Sentence of
Condemnation in themselves, have had unlooked for Deliverance, and have
miraculously escaped when in all Humane Reason they might be numbered among the
Dead; So others have been the hasteners of their own Downfalls and Destruction,
and have made their own Graves with their own Tongues, by their Temerity and
rashness in Talking; Here lastly we may be seriously informed, that their is no
Creature so small and inconsiderable in our Eyes, but if the Almighty please
may be able to afflict, yea and ruin us, when we are in the fullness of our
sufficiency; These with a multitude of other Instances of various natures and
kinds are the subject matter of this small Treatise, which being duly
contemplated are sufficient proofs to a considering Mind of a Superior and
Divine Power, that visibly discovers it self in the Occurrences and
Transactions of this lower World, and disposes of Men and Things as it
pleases, even beyond either their Hopes or Fears; and if the Perusal of these
Stupendous Examples produce such a real Belief in the Reader, the Publisher
will think himself sufficiently recompensed for his Labor and Pains; and may
conclude with the Poet, That Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci
He certainly does hit the white,
Who mingles Profit with Delight.
And that this may have such a lasting and effectual Impression is the real
wish of

R. B.

Extraordinary Adventures, Discoveries and Events.
THE Surprising Adventures and Events that daily assail Mankind, are so
Numerous and Extraordinary, that nothing seems more inseparable to our Mortal
state, than constant and continual Vicissitudes, Changes and Alterations; But
since we find in History, that some more Remarkable Accidents have happened to
some Places and Persons than to others, it must needs be very delightful among
such a multitude of Instances, to give an Account of the most Considerable
Relations I have met with in many credible Writers, and that is the design of
this small Tract; wherein I shall not so much regard the Method, Order, or
other Circumstances of an exact Historian, as in the whole to divert the Reader
with what may be both pleasant and profitable, wherein it may be he may more
fully inform himself of several matters, which he had formerly heard of, but
yet did not so clearly understand; This without any further Preface is that
which I now aim at, wherein I will impose nothing upon any man's belief, but
leave every one at his full Liberty what degree of Faith he will exercise
therein, it being sufficient that I have cited my Authors, who are generally
such as have been accounted Men of Veracity and Honesty in the Accounts they
give, and may therefore challenge as much Credit as is due to any Humane
History.

I. Strange were the Adventures of Christopher Columbus, who discovered a New
World in the last Age, which is now called America; He was born at Nervi in the
Seigniory of Genoa, who being a man of excellent Abilities; and born to
undertake great matters, could not persuade himself, but that, considering the
Motion of the Sun, there must needs be another World to which that Glorious
Planet did impart both his Life, and Heat, when he went from us; This World he
purposed to seek after, and in 1486 he discovered his Design to the State of
Genoa, who rejecting his Proposals, he sent his Brother Bartholomew to King
Henry the seventh of England, who in his Voyage hither unhappily fell into the
hands of Pirates, by whom he was long kept Prisoner, but having at last
obtained his Liberty, he repaired to the Court of England, where he found such
cheerful entertainment at the hands of that King, that Christopher Columbus was
sent for to come thither also; But Christopher not knowing of his Brothers
Imprisonment, and not hearing from him, conceived the offer of his service to
have been neglected, and thereupon made his desires known at the Court of
Castile, where after many delays, and six years attendance upon the business,
he was at last furnished with three ships only, and those not for Conquest but
Discovery.

With this small strength he sailed on the Ocean sixty days, and yet could see
no land, so that the discontented Spaniards began to Mutiny, and refused to
move a foot forward; Just at which time it happened that Columbus discerned the
Clouds to carry a cleerer color than they did before, and therefore entreated
them to expect only three days longer, in which time, if they saw not land he
promised to return; Toward the end of the third day, one of the Company
descried Fire, which was an evident token that they drew near to some shore;
The Place they discovered was an Island on the Coast of Florida called by
Columbus St. Salvador; Having Landed his Men, he caused a Tree to be cut down,
and made a Cross thereof which he set up near the place where he came on Land,
and by that Ceremony took Possession of the New World for the Kings of Spain,
October. 11. 1492. Afterward he discovered and took Possession of Hispaniola,
and with much Treasure and Content returned to Spain, and was preferred by the
King for this good Service, first to be Admiral of the Indies, and in
conclusion to the Title of the Duke De la Vega in the Island of Jamaica; The
next year he was furnished with 18 Ships for further Discovery; in this second
Voyage he discovered the Islands of Cuba and Jamaica, and built the Town of
Isabella, after called Domingo in Hispaniola, from whence for some severities
used against the mutinous Spaniards, he was sent Prisoner to Castile, but very
honorably entertained, and cleared from all Crimes imputed to him.

In 1497. he began his Third Voyage; in which he discovered the Countries of
Paria and Cumana on the firm Land, with the Islands of Cubagna, and Margarita,
and many other Islands, Capes and Provinces; In 1500 he began his fourth and
last Voyage, in the course whereof coming to Hispaniola, he was unworthily
denied entrance into the City of Domingo, after which scowring the Seacoasts,
he returned back to Cuba and Jamaica, and from thence to Spain, where six years
after he died, and was buried Honorably at Sevil, where to this day an Epitaph
remains on his Tomb, far short of his merit, which is to this purpose.

Christophorus genuit quem Genoa clara Columbus, etc.
I Christopher Columbus whom the Land
Of Genoa first brought forth, first took in hand
I know not by what Deity incited,
To scour the western Seas, and was delighted
To seek for Countries never known before,
Crowned with success, I first descried the shore.
Of the New World, then destined to sustain
The future yoke of Philip Lord of Spain;
And yet I greater matters left behind
For men of more means, and a braver mind.
Columbus dying left two Sons behind him, of which the youngest called
Ferdinand died unmarried, the the eldest named Diego, succeeded his Father in
the Admiralty of the Indies, and the Dukedom of Vega, and married the Duke of
Alva's Daughter, but having no issue by her, he spent the greatest part of his
Estate in Founding a famous Library in Sevil, which he furnished with Twelve
thousand Volumes, and endowed with a liberal Revenue to maintain the same; But
though his Family be extinct, yet his Fame shall live renowned to all
Posterities, as the first Discoverer of this New World, and consequently the
greatest and most Fortunate Advancer of the Spanish Monarchy, though in his
lifetime so envied and maligned by most of the Spaniards, that Bobadilla being
sent into those parts for redress of Greivances, loaded him with Irons, and
returned him Prisoner into Spain; Nor did they only endeavor to deprive him of
the honor of this Discovery after his Death, by pretending that he had seen
the Charts and Descriptions of some unknown Spaniard, but in his Lifetime they
would often say, That it was a matter of no such difficulty to have found these
Countries, and that if he had not done it then, some body else would have done
it for him; But he confuted their peevishness by this modest Artifice, desiring
some of them who had insolently enough contended with him about this Discovery
to make an Egg stand firmly upon one of its ends, which when after many Trials
they could not do, he gently bruising one end of it, made it stand upright,
letting them see thereby without any further reprehension, how easy it is to
do that thing which we see another do before us. Heylin's Cosmography Lib. 4.

II. Columbus having thus led the way, was seconded by Americus Vespusuis, an
adventurous Florentine, employed therein by Emanuel King of Portugal in 1501 on
a design to find out a nearer way to the Molucca's than by the Cape of Good
Hope; who though he passed no further than the Cape, without having so much as
a sight of the great River De la Plata, which washes the South parts of that
Country, yet from him (to the Great Injury and neglect of the first
Discoverer) the Continent or Main Land of this Country has the name of
America, by which it is still known and commonly called; To him succeeded John
Cabot a Venetian in the behalf of King Henry the seventh of England, who
discovered all the North-East Coasts thereof from the Cape of Florida in the
South to New-foundland in the North, causing the American Royale's or little
Kings to turn Homagers to the King and Crown of England. After whom there
followed diverse private Adventurers and Undertakers out of all parts of Europe
bordering on the Ocean; Ferdinando Magellanus was the first that compassed the
whole World, and found the South Passage called Fretum Magellanicum, or the
Magellan Streights to this day. Heylin's Cosmog. Lib. 4.

III. But the most famous of all the Spaniards (as I suppose says P. Jovius)
for the Discovery of New Lands and People, was Ferdinando Cortesius, or Corter,
to whom the Spaniards stand indebted for the Kingdom of Mexico; He was born in
Medeline a Town of Estremadura in Spain 1485, and in the 19 year of his Age,
employed himself in the Trade, and business of America for the improvement of
his Fortune; In 1511, he went as Clerk to the Treasurer for the Isle of Cuba,
where he so well husbanded his Affairs by carrying over Kine, Sheep and Mares,
and bringing Gold for them in Exchange, that in short time he very much
improved his stock, and now resolving to venture all his Credit both in Friends
and Money, he furnished himself with eleven Ships, and with 550 Men, set sail
from Spain, and arrived at the Island of Santa Cruce, and sailing up the River
Tabasco sacked the Town of Pontoncon, the Inhabitants refusing to sell him
Victuals; After this, by the help of his Horse and Ordinance, he discomfited
forty Thousand of the naked Indians, who were gathered together to revenge
themselves for the plundering their Town; he then received the King thereof in
Vassallage to the Crown of Spain.

Being told that Westward he should meet with some Mines of Gold, he turned his
Course for the Haven of St. John de Vlloa, where landing he was entertained by
the Governor of Montezuma King of Mexico, who understanding of his coming, and
that he was a Servant of so Great an Emperor as Charles the fifth, he sent him
many rich Presents both of Gold and Silver; Cortez inflamed at the sight
thereof, resolved to go unto the place where such Treasures were, and took
Possession of the Country in the Name of Charles the fifth King of Spain, and
Emperor of Germany; and building there the Town De la Crux, he left 150 of his
men therein, and attended with only 400 Foot, 15 Horsemen, and 6 pieces of
Ordinance, he pursued his Enterprise, and having cunningly gained to his
assistance those of Zempoallan, Tlascala, who were ill affected to Montezuma,
he marched on toward Mexico, plundring in his way the Town of Chololla
consisting of Forty Thousand Households; He was kindly received into Mexico by
the affrighted King, whom he caused to acknowledge himself a Vassal to Spain,
and to present him in the name of a Tribute with so much Treasure as amounted
to an hundred and threescore thousand Castellins of Gold; A quarrel growing not
long after, the Spaniards were driven out of the Town; But Cortez aided with
the whole Forces of the Tlascalans, and a recruit of more Spaniards, sent
thither upon a design against himself) he made up an Army of an hundred
Thousand Indians, 900 Spanish Foot, 80 Horse, 17 pieces of Ordinance, and
having with great Diligence made ready a Navy of 13 Galliots, and 6000 Canoes
or Boats, he laid siege to Mexico by Sea and Land, wherein the Admirable
Courage of that King is very remarkable, for having for three Months most
valiantly defended the City, and endured therein all manner of inconveniences,
he was at the taking thereof unhappily delivered up alive into the hands of the
Spaniards his Enemies, upon condition to be used as became a King, during his
Imprisonment he said or did nothing but what became that Title, but after the
Victory, the Spaniards not finding that quantity of Gold which they had
promised themselves, though they had left no place unsearcht to discover it,
they then proceeded by the most cruel and horrible Tortures, to force those
Prisoners they had taken to confess where they had hid it.

But unable to prevail this way, finding the Indians hearts more strong than
their Torments, they thereby grew so enraged, that contrary to all Law of
Nations, and against their solemn Vows and Promises, they condemned the King
himself, and one of the Chiefest Princes of his Court to the Rack in the sight
of each other; The Prince being encompassed with hot burning Coals, and being
overcome with the extraordinary Torment, at last turned his dying Eyes in a
most lamentable manner toward his Master, as if he begged his Pardon that he
could endure the pain no longer; The King fixing his Eyes fiercely upon him,
seemed to upbraid him with pusillanimity and want of Courage, and with a stern,
and settled voice spoke thus to him, What? Supposest thou that I am in a cold
Bath? Am I at more ease than thou art? Whereat the miserable Prince immediately
fainted under the Torture, and gave up the Ghost. The King being half roasted
was carried away, not so much for Pity, for what Compassion could enter into
such Barbarous Wretches, who only upon supposing to get some odd Vessel or
piece of Gold, would broyl a Man to death before their Eyes; and not only a
Man, but a King, and a King of such mighty Grandeur and Renown; but because his
undaunted Constancy baffled their inhuman Cruelties, they afterward hanged him
for Courageously attemping by Arms to deliver himself from his long Captivity
and miserable subjection; and thus he ended his wretched life. Wonderful even
to Amazement was the Magnificence of the famous Cities of Cusco, and Mexico,
and admirable the Curiosities of this King, who had all the Trees, Fruits,
Herbs, Plants according to their Order and full bigness in the Garden, most
Artificially framed in Gold; He had likewise in his Cabinet all the Living
Creatures that his Country or his Seas produced cast in Gold, besides
abundance of exquisite Works in Precious Stones, Feathers, Cotton, and
Painting. After a siege of three Months Mexico was Taken, Plundered and Burnt,
Aug. 13. 1521. but afterward rebuilt more beautifully than before, and thus
fell this mighty Kingdom into the hands of the Spaniards, by the Valor and
good Fortune of Cortez a private Adventurer, who was rewarded for that Service
by Charles the fifth, with many fair Estates in the Province of Mexico, and
dignified with the Title of Marquess de Valla. Montaigne's Essays, Lib. 3.

IV. Francis Pizarro, a Person of mean Birth, but of an Adventurous Nature;
subdued the most Potent and Flourishing Kingdom of Peru in America, and made it
a Member of the Spanish Empire. He was born in a Village in Navarre, and by the
poor Whore his Mother laid in the Church Porch, and so left to Divine
Providence, by whose direction (there being none found that would give him the
Breast) he was nourished by several days by sucking of a The woeful deaths of
ye 2 Mighty Emperors of Peru and Mexico by ye Spaniards Page. ^.

Sow; At last one Gonsales a Soldier acknowledged him for his Son, put him to
Nurse, and when he was somewhat grown set him to keep his Swine, some of which
being strayed, the Boy durst not for fear return home, but betook himself to
his heels, ran to Sevil, and there shipped himself for America; where by
several Adventures growing rich, he Associated himself with Diego de Almagro
and Fernando Luques a rich Priest who betwixt them raised 220 Soldiers, and in
1525 went to seek their Fortunes on those Southern Seas, which Balboa had
before discovered; After diverse repulses at his Landing, and some hardship
which he had endured; Pizarro at last happened to take some of the Inhabitants
of Peru Prisoners, of whom he learnt the wealth of the Country, and thereupon
returning to Spain, he obtained that Kings Commission for the Conquest of it,
excluding his Companions out of the Patent, but taking in Almagro of his own
accord; Thus furnished, he Landed in Peru again, at such time as the Wars grew
hot betwixt two Brethren for the Kingdom, and taking part with the Faction of
Guascar the elder Brother, he marched against Atabaliba the younger, whom he
met with in the Plains of Caxamala, where he had appointed an Enterveiew upon
pretense of Friendship to parley with the King.

Atabaliba came with Twenty five Thousand unarmed Men in Ostentation of his
greatness, and without any design of making resistance, of which this
treacherous Pizarro, taking the advantage, picked a quarrel with him, and
suddenly charged upon him with his Horse, and Ordnance, slaying his Guard
without resistance, and coming near the Kings Person, who was carried upon men's
Shoulders upon Rafters or Beams of Massy Gold, in a Chair of State also all of
Gold, they killed several of the Bearers to make him fall, endeavoring to take
him alive, but as soon as one of them fell another presently succeeded in his
place, so that he could never be brought down, or made to fall what slaughter
soever was made of these People till a Horseman furiously rid up, and taking
him by his Clothes pulled him down, and took him Prisoner; They took as much
Gold with him as amounted to fourscore Thousand Castellans, and as much Silver
as amounted to seven Thousand Marks of his Household Plate, every Mark weighing
eight Ounces, and in the soil of Caxamala they found almost infinite Riches.
The wretched King they set at so excessive a ransom as exexceedeth all belief,
which though he truly paid, and though by his Conversation he had given
apparent Signs of a great and undaunted Soul, and of a generous and ingenious
Mind, yet these insolent Conquerours having exacted from him an House piled
upon all sides with Gold and Silver, amounting to a Million three hundred
Twenty five thousand and five Hundred pound weight in Gold, besides the silver
and other precious things which came to as much more, so that even their Horses
were shod with Massy Gold; yet they Villainously and Traitorously contrived a
false Accusation against him, pretending that he designed to raise his Subjects
against them for procuring his Liberty, upon which they condemned him to be
publicly hanged and strangled, having first made him to be baptized as he went
to Execution, thereby to prevent the Torment of being burned alive, wherewith
they threatened him; He took his Death patiently, and with a Royal Gravity and
undismayed Constancy, without the least discomposure either in Words or
Countenance. The Treasures here gotten were so great, that besides the fifth
part which Pizarro sent to the Emperor, and that which Pizarro, and his
Brethren kept to themselves, every Footman had 7 Thousand 200 Ducats, and
every Horseman 'twice as much for their part of the Spoil, beside what they had
gotten in way of Plunder; But Vengeance persued these horrid Murderers (though
the Spaniards put many fair pretenses upon their Actions) few of the greatest
undertakers going to the Grave in peace, for all that were consenting or
accessory to the death of this King came to wretched ends, but especially his
four Brethren, Ferdinand, Gonsal, John, Martin of Al^antara, and Diego of
Almagro, who as they were principal in the Actions so were they in the
punishment; and first John Pizarro was surprised in the City of Cusco, and
slain by some of King Atabaliba's Soldiers; then there happened such
differences between Francis Pizarro and Almagro, that after they had wasted
this rich Country of Peru, and divided the Spoil among them, yet they
destroyed one another; for Pizarro envying Almagro for being Governor of Cusco
and not himself, sent his Brother Ferdinand to Challenge him, who was so
fortunate as to take Almagro Prisoner, and delivered him bound to Francis his
Brother, who cused him to be strangled privately in Prison, and afterward
publicly beheaded. Ferdinand was after sent to Spain with a great Mass of Gold
to clear himself of the death of Almagro, yet could not so well justify
himself, but that all his Treasure was seized, and himself secretly made away
in Prison. Soon after this, the kindred and Friends of Almagro (whose Estate
Pizarro had seized) consulted with Don Diego Almagro his Son to revenge the
death of his Father; Twelve of them undertook the Business, who coming into
Francis Pizarro's house at Lima (he being then Marquess and Governor of Peru)
they suddenbroke into it, and immediately killed a Captain who guarded the
entrance of the Hall and Martin of Alcantara, so that he fell dead at his
brother the Marquess his Feet; who though he saw his men thus slain before his
eyes, and himself left alone in the midst of his Enemies, yet he still made a
stout defense, till all falling upon him at once, he was stabbed into the
Throat, and died; Lastly, Gonsal had his head cut off by the Emperors Command,
and thus finished they their wretched days answerable to their cruel Deserts.

Thus have we seen the deplorable Ends of Two of the most mighty and glorious
Monarchs of this New World, and peradventure of all our Western parts, who were
Kings over so many Kingdoms; And these are the cursed Fruits of Covetousness
and Ambition, for which so many goodly Cities were ruined and destroyed, so
many Nations made desolate, such infinite Millions of harmless innocent People
of all Conditions, Sexes and Ages woefully Massacred and Murdered, and the
richest, fairest, and best part of the World turned to a Field of Blood; And
though we have the Vanity to call those Nations Barbarous who are not so
wickedly knowing as our selves, yet the ingenious discourse and Replies of
these naked Americans, show that their Honesty, Truth and Integrity have been
the chief occasions of exposing them to the Slavery and Barbarity of these
wicked Treacherous and Idolatrous Spanish Christians; of which it may not be
amiss to give the following Instance.

Certain Spaniards coasting along the Sea in search of Mines, happened to Land
in a very Fruitful, Pleasant, and well peopled Country, who declaring to the
Inhabitants, That they were quiet and well meaning People, coming from far
Countries, being sent from the King of Castile, the greatest King on the
Habitable Earth, unto whom the Pope representing God on Earth had given the
Kingdoms and Dominions of all the Indies, and that if they would become
Tributary to him, they should be kindly used, and courteously dealt withal.
They likewise desired them to give them some Victuals to eat, and some Gold
wherewith to make certain Physical Experiments; They also declared to them,
That they ought to believe in one God, and to embrace the Catholic Religion,
adding withal some Threats thereunto; The Indians having patiently heard them,
one of them returned this Ingenious answer.

That possibly they might be quiet and well meaning People, though their
Countenances showed them to be otherwise. And as for their King, since he
seemed to beg, he appeared to be poor and needy; And for the Pope who had made
that distribution, he seemed to be a man who loved mischief and dissension, in
going about to give that to a third man which was none of his own, and so to
make it questionable and raise quarrels among the ancient Possessors thereof;
As for Victuals they should have part of their store; and for Gold they had but
little, and that it was a thing they very little valued as being utterly
unprofitable for the service of their lives, whereas all their care was to pass
their time happily and pleasantly, and therefore what quantity soever they
should find of it, except what was employed in the service of their Gods they
should freely take it; As touching one only God, the discourse of him had very
well pleased them, but they were resolved by no means to change their Religion,
in which they had so long time lived so happily; neither indeed did they use to
take advice or Counsel but from their Friends and Acquaintance; As concerning
their high words, it was a sign of great want of Judgment to threaten those,
whose nature, condition, strength and power was utterly unknown to them; And
that therefore they should with all speed hasten out of their Country and
Dominions, since they were used to take in good part the kindnesses and
discourses of Strangers, but if they did not suddenly depart, they would deal
with them as they had done with some others; showing them the Heads of diverse
Persons lately executed, sticking upon Stakes about their City. Montaign's
Essays, Lib. 3.

V. John Cabot succeeded Columbus in this Country, who on the behalf of King
Henry the seventh of England discovered all the North-East Coasts of America,
from the Cape of Florida in the South, to New-foundland in the North, causing
the American Royolets or petty Kings to turn Homagers, and swear Allegiance to
the King and Crown of England. In 1496 Sebastian Cabot his Son, rigged up two
Ships at the charge of the same King Henry, who intended to go to the Land of
Cathay, and from thence to turn toward India; to this purpose he aimed at a
passage by the Northwest, but after certain days he found the Land ran toward
the North; He followed the Continent to the 56 Degree under our Pole; and there
finding the Coast to turn toward the East, and the Sea covered with Ice, he
turned back again, Sailing down by the Coast of that Land toward the
Equinoctial, which he called Batalaos, from the number of Fishes found in that
Sea like Tunnies, which the Inhabitants call Bacalaos. Afterward he Sailed
along the Coasts to 38 Degrees, and Provisions failing he returned into
England, and was made Grand Pilot of England by King Edward the sixth, with the
allowance of a large Pension of 166 pound 13 shillings four pence a year.
Hackluits Voyages, Vol. 3.

VI. Sir Francis Drake was born nigh South Tavestock in Devonshire, and brought
up in Kent, being the Son of a Minister who fled into Kent for fear of the six
Bloody Articles in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and bound his Son to the
Master of a small Bark which Traded into France and Zealand; his Master dying
unmarried, bequeathed his Bark to him, which he sold, and put himself into
farther Employment, at first with Sir John Hawkins, and afterward upon his own
Account, In the year 1577 Dec. 13. He with a Fleet of five Ships and Barks, and
174 Men, Gentlemen and Saylors, began that Famous Navigation of his, wherein he
Sailed round the World, with many Changes of Fortunes, and Strange Adventures;
He finished that Voyage the third year after his setting out, arriving in
England Nov. 3. 1580. and though he was a curious searcher after the Time, yet
through the Variation of several Climates he lost one day. He feasted Queen
Elizabeth in his Ship at Deptford, who Knighted him for this Service, being the
first who had accomplished so great a design; He is therefore said to have
given for his Device, a Globe with this Motto, Tu primus circumdedisti me, Thou
first did sail round me. He died at Sea, and was buried there. Fullers Holy
State, Lib, 2. Mr. Thomas Candish (or Cavendish) of Trimley in Suffolk Esquire,
departed out of Plymouth, Thursday July 21, 1586. with the Desire, a Ship of
120 Tun, and the Hugh Gallant a Bark of 40 Tun, with 123 Persons of all sorts,
with these he made an admirable and successful Voyage into the South Sea; and
from thence about the Circumference of the whole Earth; and Sept. 9. 1588.
after a Terrible Tempest, which carried away most part of their Sails, they
recovered their long wished for Port of Plymouth in England. Stows Chronicle,
page 720.

VII. Strange were the Adventures of one T. S. an Englishman taken Prisoner by
the Turks of Argiers, as they are published by himself, wherein he gives an
Account of the Customs of those Barbarians and their manner of selling
Christians, which I shall Epitomize in his own words; My name (says he) will
be useless to the Judicious Reader, I will only tell him that I was first
designed for a Scholar, but an old Schoolmaster soon frighted me from my
Studies by his extraordinary Rigor; he gave me such an Aversion from Learning
which formerly I esteemed, that I could not endure the sight of a Book; My
Estate being that of a younger Brother, and but very small, I was bound
Apprentice to a Merchant in London, who after five years resolved to send me as
his Factor to Smyrna, and other places within the Streights; At which thime
1648, my Father dying, and my elder Brother being killed in our unhappy
Troubles, they left me an Estate which might have obliged me to have kept at
home, had not the desire of seeing foreign Places, and the Vainglory of being
called a Traveller, with my Masters commands, forced me abroad. Before I went I
sold part of my Estate, and bought a Cargo of Goods of above 2000 pounds; with
which and some Goods belonging to my Master I imbarqued in the River of Thames
in July 1648 in a Vessel of Hamburgh; the wind favored us very much out of the
Channel, and though we met with contratrary Gusts we reached Cape St. Vincent
in 20 days, designing to unload some Goods at Cales; when we came near the
Cape, we espied two Ships to Windward making toward us, upon which we cleared
our Decks, charged our Guns, and prepared all things for our defense, some
imagined them to be French, because they put out French Colors, but when they
came within half a League of us they discovered themselves to be Turks Men of
War by their bloody Colors, which they put out instead of the white; Then
began our Captain to be amazed, our Company to be affrighted, and every one to
bestir himself; I observed one Fellow who before had some disease in his Legs
and Hands, much like the Gout, which made him hitherto useless, yet now in
danger he skipped about, and handled the Guns as if nothing had ailed him. We
had then aboard about an 100 men, with Passengers of several Nations, and 30
Great pieces of Ordnance, with other small Guns.

About seven afternoon, the Turks overtook us, and the foremost Vessel gave us
a Broadside, the other followed, and saluted us in the same manner, and we
returned them the like, the Fight was furious and Bloody for four hours, our
Men behaved themselves gallantly, neither Death nor wounds could force them
from their Charge nor Posts, some when their Limbs were all bruised, their
Bones shattered, and their Bodies all torn with Splinters, did obstinately
continue to manage the Guns, every one resolved to dye with his weapons in his
hands rather than to shrink in the least from the Fight. In this four hours we
received near 50 Broadsides, and our Enemies were as obstinate as we; Our
number was at last reduced to eighteen men, most of them wounded so that we
could no longer resist the Numbers, and Fury of our Enemies, who continued to
pour in upon us great and small Shot, and withal our Ship was shot through
between Wind and Water, which caused us to make but weak resistance, and the
Turks perceiving it, were afraid the Sea would at last swallow us and deprive
them of their Booty, and therefore resolved to board us, grapling on both sides
of us, and their men entering, but we from our Fore-Castle and Steerage with our
Murdering Pieces forced them back again, at last for fear our obstinacy should
cause our Ship to sink under us, and deliver us into the hands of a more
merciless enemy the raging Sea, we called for Quarter, which the Turks
willingly gave, almost dispairing of Success; We found near 300 of our Men
killed, my self was shot through the Right Arm, and the Enemies ships were
miserably rent and torn; One thing during the Fight I judged an ill Omen, that
at a broadside, one great shot was forced back again, and split in pieces,
which we conceived had met with a more violent one that had driven it upon us;
The Turks treated us more generously than we could expect from Enemies whom we
had angered by so long resistance, commending our Courage, and admiring our
Resolution and when they saw the rich Loading they had gained, they soon
pardoned the injuries we had done them.

The Captains of the Turks called to me and the Skipper for our Bills of
Lading, which we were forced to deliver; I made some Reflections on my former
Condition, and wished my self, as poor as Job upon a Christian shore; Liberty
was dear to me that was taken a slave, I remembered then that excellent advice,
Trust not in uncertain riches; I then condemned the Joy I had felt for the rich
Patrimony that was left me, and the earnest desire to see Foreign Places, and
sorrowfully recalled to mind my former Condition, but all these Reflections and
Regrets could not turn the Wind, nor stop our Course toward Argiers where we
were next bound, for we Christians who were left alive were disposed into the
Enemies Ships, and stripped of our best attire, which some lusty Rogues did us
the kindness to wear for our sakes before our Eyes; The dead bodies and those
past Recovery were stripped naked and sent to feed Sharks, and other ravenous
Fishes of the Sea, which we saw at that instant waiting as we thought, being it
may be as sensible of dead Bodies amongst us, as Vultures, who in these
Countries constantly hover about a House or Tent, where sick People who will
there infallibly die, are, in hopes to enjoy the Prey, the dead bodies being
exposed to that purpose; we were used as civilly a Shipboard as we could expect
from Turks, feeding with them on Garlic, Rusk, poor John, Rice and the like; I
observed them very inquisitive to examine us apart about our Qualities, and
Friends, which we were forewarned of, and therefore I persuaded all our Company
to represent me as a poor Fellow, only entrusted by my Master, which satisfied
them, till by discourse with some English Renegadoes, one of them suspected me;
after which they set a higher value on me as expecting a greater ransom; we
sailed into the Streights, and the next day Anchored in the Bay of Argiers;
some Officers thereof coming to take notice of our number and the Price; One of
them was a Cornish man, who by his Apostasy had got great wealth being a Trader
in slaves, well knowing how to make advantage by his own Nation; He inquired in
what part of England we were born, but I desired him as a Countryman to show us
some favor, and buy us for himself which he promised to do if we did give him
hopes of returning our Money, to prevent as he said our falling into severer
hands to the endangering of our lives, since if we came on shore we should be
led to the Market and sold like Horses, and might be bought by those that would
use us inhumanely, and exact from us the remainder of our Estates, but he being
our Countryman would be our Friend, and take no more for us than it cost him if
we would freely discover our selves to him; we with our Eyes on each other
discovered how inclinable we were to comply with him, though we were something
Jealous of this Turks Faith, judging that he who was not True to his God, would
scarce be so to us, which we afterward found too true, for those that were poor
and had few friends were left to their ill Fortune, and the others the Owners
set a high value on, so that we repeated our Credulity in this Wretch, but not
agreeing on the Price we were set on shore.

Great Companies came flocking to see us, upon report of our Courage, some
whose Relations had been slain, gave us such welcome as became the Cruelty and
Impertinency of Heathens, loading us with Curses and Imprecations, and
insulting strangely over us, so that had we not been guarded, we had been torn
in pieces; a Spanish Renegado was so transported with rage for the loss of his
Comrade of the same Nation, that he drew his Cymeter, and begged Liberty to
sacrifice one of us, promising to pay his Ransom; which being denied, he then
desired only cut off one of our ears, it chanced he came near one of us, and
with a blow struck off a part of the Cheek of a German, which he greedily
swallowed down, affirming that he never tasted so sweet a Morsel in his days,
so strangely had Vengeance possessed him, that he desired to feed upon us. But
our keepers safely conveyed us into the City, where we found our Chains ready
made waiting for us; Every one of us had a strong Chain about 20 pound weight
linked to our Legs, and tied to our Girdles, that if we did meditate an escape,
it should not be without difficulty. In this strange Equipage we were conducted
with our gingling Chains to the Kings Palace, much wondering what they intended
to do with us in a place of so much honor. We past the first Guard, and came
into a spacious Court paved with White Marble, whereof there is great quantity
near old Carthage or Tunis in this Country, it was enclosed with a high brick
Wall, wherein was a large Gate chequered with diverse Colors, which led us into
a Great Hall, where we stayed till the King of Argiers came to visit us, an
honor we did not expect, but it seems it is the Custom for him to view all the
Slaves when they first land, out of whom he chooses for himself the Tenth
Person, and likewise one more whom he pleases; we were placed round about the
Hall ready for his coming in, which was not speedily, for being about Noon, he
had been Bathing himself, and then taking another Recreation which is usual at
that time of day in these hot Climates. About two a Clock in comes a lusty
Officer clothed in Scarlet, with a Rod in his hand and a great Turbant about
his head, who was the Kings Gentleman Usher, followed by six Persons of good
Mien and Appearance, armed with Scymiters; Next came a Grave Fellow with a
Turbant almost as big as our English half Bushel, at one side he had a set of
Diamonds which did sparkle like his Eyes, his Garment was green, his Legs were
bare, and on his feet he wore Sandals; we had time to observe him as he entered
the door, for his pace was slow and Grave, I could have numbered 20 between
every step; He marched in that manner to the upper end, where there was a
Canopy of State over his Head, and two Turkey Carpets with a large Damask
Pillow under him upon which he sat; then the Owners of the Ships presented
themselves before him, kissing the Hem of his Garment, they discoursed among
themselves about an hour, and then presented the King (who only sat, all the
rest standing about him) with a Considerable Present in Cloth and other rich
Commodities; The King then veiwed every one of us with a Stern Countenance, and
took notice of our Features and Stature, for the Turks are excellent in
Physiognomy, and know a man's Temper and Inclinations at first view as well as
an expert Farrier does the good and ill Qualities of a Horse, which indeed
concerns those who Trade in Slaves; He cast a Jest upon every one, which gave
the Company a great deal of Mirth, but increased our Sadness; He chose out of
the Company my self, the Skipper, and a pretty ruddy German Boy, which I
wondered at, since he could expect no ransom for him, but I after understood the
good old man was a great Lover of his pleasures, and therefore pitched on him
to give him some in his old Age, a strange fancy possessing the Minds of all
the Southern People, so that they burn with the Fire which consumed Sodom and
Gomorrah.

I was glad to be in possession of the King hoping to get my Freedom, who
inquiring of my Quality, I told him I was a Cook, which he was glad of, as
wanting one; but I proved a mad Cook, putting in sometimes Oil instead of
Vinegar, and Salt instead of Pepper, yet I handled my meat so nimbly, that they
all believed I had been used to Cookery; But I lost my Place on this occasion;
at a Feast my Master made, I had several sorts of Fishes that I never saw
before, the Liver of one has a most loathsome Taste, I thought it good in the
Sauce, and therefore I sent it up stewed under the Fish, in a Dish garnished
with Flowers; The Guests seeing such a pleasant Appearance, expected the Fish
to be extraordinary, and prepared their Stomachs to feed thereon, neglecting
others much better, but tasting the Sauce they thought it a Sir reverence, and
all began to spew and spit. I angered the King so much with this Master-peice
of Cookery, that he ordered I should recieve ten Bastinado's for my Sallary, I
vainly pretending Ignorance and our Country Fashion, being forced to endure it
with patience; For this, and being likewise Jealous of me about one of his
Women, who was indeed very kind to me, he was resolved to part with me, and
gave order I should be led into the Marketplace, and there Sold; When I saw my
self with an ill-favored Turk, leading me with a Chain like a Horse or Bullock
through the Streets I began to lament my hard Fate, doubting what surly Master
I should have next; The Turk that led me, cried before me in Lingua Franca; Who
will buy a Christian? Who will buy a Christian? It was a grievous change of
Fortune to be reduced in one year from my Fathers Honorable Estate to the
lowest misery even that of a Slave, to be sold as a Beast in a strange Country
where I had no Friends that durst own me. Their manner of selling slaves is
thus, They lead them up and down the Market, and when any bids Money, they cry,
a Rache, a Rache, that is, Here Is so much money bidden, who bids more? The
buyers are very subtle, and first look into their mouths, and a strong set of
Grinders will much advance the price, arguing rationally, That those who have
no Teeth cannot eat, and they that cannot eat cannot work, and therefore are
not for their turn, nor their Money; For they intend to keep them at hard meat
all the year, and therefore it must not be Gums but solid, and if possible case
hardened Teeth that must chew it, and an Ostriches Stomach to digest it; next
they feel their Limbs, whether any Fracture or Dislocation, which will much
lower the price; and therefore to be clean Limbed, close Coupled, and well
joynted, will advance it as much; The Age is also very considerable, but the
Slaves not being obliged to discover it, and they not breeding them that sell
them, they judge by the Face, Hair or Beard, but a good set of Teeth will make
one 10 years younger, and a bad set as much older; The seller commends his
Goods to the sky; O says he, Mark what a Back he has, what a breadth between
the Shoulders, what a Chest! how strong set! how fitted on purpose for Burdens,
He Will do but e'ne too much work; The Buyer on the other hand as much undervalues
him, Pish, says he, he looks like a Pilliard, a very Meacock at his Provender,
and one that seems to be surfeited. But they are very curious in examining the
Hands, for if they be hard and brawny, they will shrewdly guess they have been
inured to Labor, if delicate and tender, they will suspect him to be some
Merchant, and then the hopes of a good price for Redemption makes him saleable;
When any are sold they must be brought back once more to the Kings Palace that
he may view them again, and if he likes any at the prizes they went off at,
there is no more dispute, they are his own.

When I was come into the Marketplace, a Fellow offers my Keeper money for me,
and several others came about me, and among the rest that ill-natured
Englishman aforementioned, I trembled for fear of falling into his hands,
knowing how cruelly he had handled some of my Comrades; My keeper made
advantage of the Crowd, and asked an 100 Dollars more for me than he was
ordered; The first who seemed by his looks to be a good Man, though of no great
appearance would not let me slip out of his hands, but paid the Money, and led
me to a House next the Grand Mosque or Church of the City, near the Kings
Palace; My loving Lady having employed this Fellow to buy me for her Service,
became very devout after my coming to that place, seldom missing a day without
coming to her Devotions at the Mosquette, from whence there was a Passage into
my Lodgings. By this frequent and constant attendance at Public Prayer, she
purchased a great esteem with the People, and a favor with her Husband, and
ever after she was counted a Saint, I continued her Slave about two years,
employing my self in some Slavish work, but not above measure, so that I had
opportunity to view the City of Argiers, and took special notice of many
remarkable particulars.

It is a City not so large as populous, Fortified by Art and Nature, the Walls
are sixty foot high, and in some places 70 or 80; Built with square Stones or
Flints about 12 foot broad; It is not above a Mile round: On the East Side, on
the top of an high Hill stands a strong Citadel, very well Fortified, built at
first by the Spaniards, having 40 or 50 Pieces of Ordnance, and Garrisoned by
300 Renegadoes. Another Castle somewhat less on the West overlooks the Town;
There is a very commodious Mold in the Harbor able to contain above 200 ships;
upon which stands a strong Fort threatening destruction to all Assaillants Three
Tyer of Guns being planted in it, the lowest is level with the water; The Mold
is so crooked that no ships can come in with full sail without turning; so that
it is very difficult to break the Chain, and enter by force; This Nest of
Pirates are very well prepared against the attempts of an enemy, none can
hardly do them any injury either by Land or Sea, so that they retreat hither
like wild Beasts to their Dens, to enjoy their Thefts and Prey; The Town is
built on a Rock hard to be undermined. The Emperor Charles the 5th. attempted
to drive them out of their nests, but in vain, though he came with a Navy by
Sea, and a puissant Army by Land to besiege the Town; The violence of a Storm
broke his vessels to pieces, and forced him to raise the siege, with the loss
of an 100 ships, and many Thousand men; since which Argiers is much stronger
and better Fortified daily, so that unless the European Princes join together,
or some powerful Monarch lay siege to it by Sea and Land, it will be one day
Impregnable unless by Famine. The Houses of the City are very pleasant, and
more beautiful within and without than in other parts of Africa; the greater
lie open in the middle with handsome Galleries and Turrets; several Mosquets
are built for Public Devotion, into which no Christian must enter unless he
turn Turk, or else he will be burnt, or for handling the book of their Law
before witness, or repeating their Prayer, Illa Alla Mahumet, etc.

Others have a great Number of their Talubs, or Religious men to read Public
Prayers, and others to expound the Mahumetan Law; Over all is placed a Marabut,
who is to Judge matters of Equity between Persons; Besides the King, and
Bashaw, the Lagaw, is the next chief man in this City, who is the first Person
of the Divan or Council, and General of the Armies abroad, under whom are the
Chenses like our Sheriffs or Justices of Peace; next are the Boulgebushes, like
our Bailiffs, who are Servants to the Divan, and remain 3 years in their
places, going out after with the Armies as Comptrollers of the rest. There are
also other Bushes, Captains and Officers of the Militia, who wear a badg of
Honor on their heads, and are distinguished from the rest by their Turbant,
which is wound about in the form of a Sugar Loaf, behind which a Redcross falls
down, and is a badg of their Office, which others must not wear, as the
Red-scarf is a sign of Command among Christians; In the Camp are other Great
Officers as Daventees, Mouchees, etc.

An Achabasha is an experienced man among them, who has been in several
Encounters, and commands a Party when it is separated from the main Body; He
must be an old Man, and when he once comes to that Employment he can rise no
higher as other Officers can. There are most pleasant Gardens and Orchards
about Argiers, and very good Corn upon the Hills near it, with plenty of all
things but wine, which is forbidden to the Turks and Moors, yet those of
Argiers, have not such scrupulous Consciences, but that they will be drunk with
wine when they take good store of Prizes. Toward the East of the City is a very
strong House built, and some soldiers to keep Guard, it being the Public
Treasury House wherein they every year cast in vast sums of Money according to
their success against the Christians, which they never take out, so that its
thought there are many Millions in that Hold; When the ships come in, there is
always something for the Treasury, and a good Portion for Mahomet, and those
that read Prayers, which is put into the hands of a Treasurer, whom if they
find to have converted the least part thereof to his private use, he is cruelly
put to death in this manner; He is stripped naked, and at the door of the
Marabut, he is impaled alive, that is a stake is thrust into his Fundament and
driven leasurely up through his body; In this manner he is raised to the top of
the steeple of a Mosquet or Church, where he is exposed to Public view for
three days, and then his body is carried out of the City to be given for food
to the wild beasts, and his Estate sold for the benefit of the Religious men;
There are excellent Orders to stir them up to their Worship, they are often
called to Prayers that is in the Morning, at twelve a Clock, at four afternoon,
at Sunsetting, at Twilight, and at Midnight, at all which times great numbers
of all sorts re^ort to their Mosquetts, and there in an humble manner on their
Faces pray to God and Mahomet; Those that are negligent in coming to Prayers,
are taken notice of, and if formerly Christians are excluded from all hopes of
Employment, and for the least offense severely Treated; The Ceremonies used at
Consecrating their Priests are observable; The Father of the young man brings
him before the Marabut, or Chief Priest, who sits in the Principal Mosquette of
the City with a numerous attendance to be Witnesses of his Dedication to that
Service, entering the place the Father holding his son on the right hand, they
both approach the Marabut and kiss the Hem of his Garment, who ask's the Father
whether he can read; He answers yes, and a book is immediately brought usually
the Alcoran, who reads a page in it; If he miss not a word but read it
distinctly, he is then admitted; and his name enrolled in the Order; Then a
Fellow with a sharp Knife cuts in his right Arm the Figure of an half Moon,
into the wound is put Gunpowder, which being blown up, leaves a blue
Impression that nothing can take away unless the place be cut off, After some
Prayers for Confirmation, he is obliged to swear by Mahomets Lock to observe
certain Rules; He is then clothed in another manner before the People, and the
Marabut takes him into his Arms, and gives him a Kiss, which sanctifies him
for ever; The Solemnity ends in Music and Dancing; Their Marriages,
Circumcisions, and other Customs are not much different from the Turks.

Many other particulars I observed during the Happy time of my Slavery, having
liberty to walk up and down my business and work being only to wait upon my
Lady at the time of her Devotions; But after two years she departed this Life,
leaving me sufficient cause to Lament; Another of the Kings Wives was supposed
to have poisoned her, because he had a greater love for her by reason of her
constant Devotions than for the other; About six months before her Death, she
was brought to bed of a Girl somewhat whiter than ordinary, which the old Fool
thought himself to be the Father of; During her sickness she sent to her Cosens
house, where I lay, to speak with him, whom she engaged to release me after her
Burial in requital of my good Service, and sent me by her Gentlewoman a
considerable present in Gold which I did not possess long; After her death her
Cosen did not perform her request, but led me to the Market, where I was sold
for 300 Dollars, I durst not anger him for fear he should publish the Mystery
which would infallibly cost me my head; My next Master was a Gardener, who put
me into his Orchards, and there with a good Cudgel made me understand a new
Trade I never knew before, I endured much with him, for he made me labor above
my strength, and often threatened to stab and kill me, therefore fear of Death
made me endeavor my escape; I was sometimes sent for Lime, for a building he
had in hand near the Seashore; A Vessel was lately arrived from France to
redeem the Captives, and lay without the Mold, at what time I was on the shore
it was dusky, a Frenchman offered me his assistance, I accepted of it and went
into his Boat, but was discovered before I could get off the Mold and sent back
to my Master, who punished me with an 100 blows on the soles of my Feet,
whereby I became unserviceable many days; He was soon weary of my Company; and
sold me to the English Renegado aforesaid, I expected from him a kinder
entertainment but found worse, he was cruel and severe to me, making me work
night and day; I often treated for my ransom, but his demands were so high,
that I could not comply with him; He abused we wretchedly about five Months,
and then death put an end to his Tyranny; His Executors sold me again among his
Goods and Chattels; I fell next into the hands of an Italian Renegado, who was
no kinder to me than my former Masters, my work was painful, my Diet mean, my
Labor continual, and my Rewards the blows of a hard Cudgel; I could not long
endure this Service, and therefore sought to displease my Patron, and make him
sell me to another; He gave me next to an Officer of the Militia, who was so
well pleased with my Person and Countenance that he resolved not to part with
me for any Money I offered him 800 Dollars, he told me, I should first go with
him into the Country, and at his return I should have Liberty to be redeemed
if I behaved my self well; The Turks about this time sent a strong Army to
gather the Contributions, of the People, and to relieve Tremisen or Climsan, a
strong Populous City in the Inland parts of Africa, which commands all the rest
of Country, and was now besieged by the Arabs their deadly Enemies;

Having run through so many strange and unexpected Fortunes and Adventures, I
doubted not but to meet with as much variety in this Expedition, my Master was
Commander of an 100 men, he was very passionate and Lascivious, but withal
valiant; Our Army was composed of a thousand Horse, and two thousand Foot,
besides Slaves and Servants; with which strong Party we set forward, and found
the Country very fruitful of Corn and Fodder; As we past by a Wood, we had the
sight of several wild Beasts that returned from seeking their Prey; Our
Vanguard shot at many of them, one of our Company to show his Valor, met a
Lion that advanced toward us, and with his Scymiter in his hand encountered him,
but the sport almost cost the Fellow his Life, for the Lion was very strong,
and struck him down twice with his Paws, and the last time in a rage bit off
part of his Arm, and would have instantly devoured him, had we not all shot at
him and fixed above an hundred Bullets in his Body; We found the Fellow almost
dead with fear under the Lion; He was glad with the loss of some of his Flesh
to have so happily escaped, none pitying him since his rashness deserved it. In
three Leagues we came to a little Valley fruitful of Palms and Olivetrees, with
a small Rivulet covered with Strawberry Bushes, and a Grove at the end; Wherein
I saw a flying Serpent about the bigness of an ordinary Dog, with a large mouth
and Tongue about four foot long, we shot at it but could not kill it; It
threatened some of our men, who ventured to go near it, and would not go till a
great number came toward it; I saw it near a pleasant Fountain, but could not
learn the name; It had Wings of diverse colors, especially Red and White,
bigger than those of our winged Fowls, but I could not discern the substance of
them; It hovered long over our heads, and had not the noise of our Guns
frighted it away, I think it had ventured among us again, all the Birds that
saw it at a distance fled away. I imagined it to be a kind of Basilisk; a
desperate Serpent, and extraordinary venomous, it was admired by all of us
having never seen the like, which made me believe it some Inland Creature not
usually seen near the Seacoasts.

Our business in this Journey was to gather Contribution of the Inhabitants,
who do not willingly pay, and therefore the Turks are forced to go in great
numbers to oblige them to it; The third day we passed over high Mountains
fenced on all sides with craggy Rocks, so that we were forced to climb over
them. Our Horse took a Compass about by a way more easy; About noon the Sun
was extraordinary hot which caused us to seek a repose under the shady Trees
that grew in this stony ground, as I was resting my self between sleep and
waking, a great venomous Scorpion fixed her sting in my naked Leg, so gently
that I had not felt it, had I not been told thereof. I had heard much of this
Serpent, and being stung began to fear the increase of the Venom, but some had
already killed it, and brought the blood to me to apply to the Wound, which
wonderfully gave present Cure, for it had no sooner touched the Tumor but it
began to decrease, and out of the little wound came forth a Liquor white as
Milk, by which I found the blood of the Scorpion has an attractive Virtue; I
had no sooner escaped this Adventure but I fell into a worse, My Master had
sent me to the Rear of the Army to buy Victuals for himself it being there sold
ready dressed; As I was returning loaded, I fell down a steep Rock with my
Burden, but for fear my Master should Cudgel me, I soon recovered my self. From
this unhappy place we removed up a Hill into a Country uninhabited, but by
Monsters and wild Beasts, whereof we saw a great many; This Mountain is part of
the Atlas and runs through all this Kingdom and Fez as far as the Main Ocean,
part thereof being in the second Region of the Air, and so cold that in some
Corners which are not exposed to the Sun, there was a great deal of Ice and
Snow; Here we found plenty of Woods and Trees, and several sorts of Birds, we
killed one that had 4 Legs like a Beast; Its body was as big as a Turky-cock,
and the head like an Owl, its Tail was extreme broad, the Feathers Gray, and
the head black, it flies slowly, and was therefore killed without difficulty.

Toward Evening we saw several sorts of Lions go out of their Dens, when the
Jackals began to bark, the Noblest is called the Royal Lion, of shape bigger
and stronger, and a more courageous Voice; when any of the rest meet such a
one, they seem to yield a respect to him, He is graver in his motion, fiercer
in the Encounter, and undaunted in the greatest danger, others are smaller;
every night we were visited with several Companies of wild Creatures, some of
whom had the boldness to break in upon us, but never returned back to tell
news. One Evening we discovered a great Beast afar off, and some of us went
nearer to discharge our Guns at it; It was a Monster of a large size, the head
like a Lion, the Paws like a Bear, the hinder parts much like an Ass. When it
was killed every one in the Army had a sight thereof, and I then remembered the
saying of the Romans, Africa always produces something new, for there is every
year some strange Creature or other to be seen in those remote places; some
make it their business to watch them when they come into the World, and employ
all their Art to catch them, and show them for money; In this wild place were
several other sorts of Beasts and Serpents, one of a strange nature seeming
like a white Lamb, which fled before us; Our Captain thought it to be so, and
that it had straggled, and therefore we had order to pursue it, and coming
near, it made more have than ordinary to shift among the Trees, but being very
weary and over-fat, it could not escape us, yet ran into one of the Bushes,
where to prevent discovery its white color was changed in an instant into that
of the Bush, which alteration gave us much trouble, and we had never found it
again if one of the Company had not discharged a Musket, at the noise whereof
it rose affrighted, and run for its life, we did not think it the same, yet
some ventured after it, and others stayed in the place seeking the white beast.
The Persuers shot off one of its Legs, and then cried to us to forbear seeking,
and that the Counterfeit Lamb was caught. It was the same shaped Beast, but the
color was no more white as before, but changed into a blackish Gray; Its Coat
was a Fine Wool the head like a Wolf, but not quite so long, with very sharp
Teeth, and a fierce look, the hinder parts like a sheep, we wondered at this
change of color, and imagined it to be that Beast mentioned by by the Learned,
and is a good Emblem of a Hypocrite.

Having in three days got over these Mountains and lying down to refresh our
selves, in the Morning an Alarm was sounded, at which we all ran to our Arms,
and put our selves in Order, expecting the coming of the Arabs, but no Enemy
appeared, only a Company of Apes persued by a few Jackalls who made such a
noise in running about the branches of the Wood near us, yet those upon the
skirts of the Army thought them to be the Enemy, who had taken the advantage of
the place to fall upon us; their needless fear did as soon appear as the nimble
Creatures recovered the tops of the highest Trees, to whose protection they
durst commit themselves; yet the Alarm continued, and ran as nimbly as the
Apes all over the Army, which could not be stopped till every one was informed of
the true cause of the Fright.

Soon after we met with the Enemy indeed, and had several Skirmishes with them,
and at last utterly defeated them, and brought the whole Country under
Contribution, and at last arrived at Chinsan a large and populous City, where
we continued for some time, and then traveled toward another ancient City
called Bedtua, not much inferior to the former, we passed through many
Companies of Tents, and the first day had a sharp Encounter with about a Dozen
lusty Lions who hunting after their Prey, met with death at the end of our
Muskets, yet were they not killed without some damage, one of our men was
wounded with one of their Paws, who lept upon him after he had been struck
through the Belly, which made us soon dispatch the Lion. This danger was
followed by another more fearful though we again happily escaped; For the next
day we passed through a Sandy plain about ten Leagues long, and The Cruelties
upon the Slaves at Argiers and their manner of selling Christians etc Page 33

four broad; in which were raised several little Hills moveable with the Wind,
between which we were of necessity to pass; as soon as we were entered, a strong
Easterly Wind raises the light Sand, and threatens to bury us alive. It was a
fearful thing to us to behold so much earth flying in our Faces, and the Air
thick with the dusty Sand; in a Moment a Hill was removed from one place to
another, and we were forced besides to encounter with the boisterous Wind,
whereby our Horses were half buried in an instant, neither durst we make a stop
here in this dreadful place for fear of being past hopes of returning. In eight
days we had a sight of Bedtua, where we continued for some time, and then
returned back to Chinsan, where we staid much longer, in which time I took
notice of many particulars, and of the several ways of Execution; as Impaling
by thrusting a sharp stake into the body of the Criminal which enters in
between his Legs, and appears again at his mouth, in which manner they usually
treat Traitors and Robbers; in this cruel manner some will live six hours;
Those that commit Adultery, or Murder, are cast down headlong from the top of a
of a high precipice at the bottom whereof sharp stakes are erected; For those
that have committed Sacrilege, etc. they pour scalding Lead into his Mouth,
which sinks in with with an horrible smoke, and burns the Throat to the
entrails without the least Shreik; Others are exposed to the Cruelty of the
Children, who with sharp Sticks and Lances prick them to death, thereby
accustoming these young Spirits to Blood and Wounds. There is also another as
strange an Execution as the former; In the great Marketplace of the City
stands a Brazen Lion, hollow within, with a grim and threatening Countenance, at
his side a door opens to receive those that are to be executed, which Execution
is performed in this manner; some very great Offenders who have been useless in
their lives are forced to make some sport to the World at their Deaths: For
they are shut into this new Invention, and a Fire of wood is kindled under it,
which by degrees as it heats the brass, puts them to a greater Torture, and the
pain forces them to complain and cry out. Now at the Mouth, Ears, and under the
Tail of the Lion are holes Artificially made, out of which the Complaints and
Cries of the Patient do burst forth through different Windings and Turnings in
such a manner that several Voices, or rather Tunes are framed one after
another; for the cry is longer coming out of the Tail than the Ears, and so of
the Mouth; besides the variety of the cries yields a pleasant and a various
sound to the ears of the Spectators. This cruel sport continues many times a
whole day to divert the People; for at the Judges Pleasure they kindle a
greater or lesser Fire, which causes the Prisoner to dye accordingly: During my
three years abode there, I saw above twenty cast into that Oven; A Woman, a
Child, and a Man were put in together, for it is very large; Their Crime was,
that they had attempted to kill our Governor by the Solicitation of a Morisco
Prince who hated him, the Woman was to Trepan and ensnare him with her Beauty,
and to convey some Poison secretly by that means into his Drink, and if that
failed, the man was to stab or shoot him. The Woman having large and beautiful
Eyes, our old General was soon acquainted with her, but as they were together,
he discovered a Box which she was so desirous to hide from him, that he
suspected it to be Poison, but to be more assured he tried it upon a Dog, who
died within an hour after. The Woman confessed the whole design, whereupon she,
her Husband, and an innocent Boy were condemned together, the Child only
because he had such wicked Parents, was forced to accompany them in death;
Their different Voies, and cries did yield a most pleasant, though a cruel
Harmony, which was not ungrateful to the Turks who never pity the Moors. They
use in this City strangling (as well as the Turks) drowning with a stone about
their neck, executing by Beasts, by the Sword and other deaths used in other
places, Besides one other manner of executing Offenders, proper to this place
which was as cruel as strange to us. Out of the Town is planted a high Post in
form of a Cross, upon which the Offender is laid, stripped naked, and his Tongue
cut out, then they stretch him on the Post that lies across, and tie him to it
both by his hands and feet; thus they expose him to the fury of the Ravenous
Birds, who soon smell him out, the Eagles and Vultures dispatch him in less
than a day, the poor Creature lies at their mercy, he sees them fix their sharp
Bills in his Flesh, and pluck out his heart not being able to resist them, and
it cannot but torment him to see himself become a Prey to the Birds of the Air,
and to behold such base Creatures insult over him, and feed themselves on his
Flesh without the least respect to his humanity. It is observed that the Eagles
first seek for the Heart, and tear up the breast to find it, without regard to
the rest of the body till that be devoured, sometimes twenty of these Birds are
seen at once upon a poor man, this part of the World being full of them; A
sight that would move compassion in any Breast but that of a Turk, and had I
not feared the censure of the Law, which makes it death to hinder the execution
of the Sentence, I had once ventured to protect the body of one poor man from
those ravenous Birds.

After we had taken all the Country which was revolted, we returned to the
Maritime City of Argiers, My Master was grown very rich, and powerful, and had
got great honor, and great wealth for his Services. And I having likewise
served him faithfully all this time, and helped him out of many streights, and
difficulties by my Advice and Council, with whom he constantly consulted in any
Exigency, according to his promise often made me, he gave me my Liberty, and a
sum of Money to carry me home; so that after so many strange Adventures and
Discoveries which I had made in this my long time of Slavery, I met with a
French Vessel of Marseilles in the Harbor, wherein I embarked for my Native
Country. Adventures T. S. 1670.

VIII. The Adventures, Dangers and Troubles of Katherine Duchess Dowager of
Suffolk are very remarkable, as we find them recorded in the Book of Martyrs.
This Duchess was the Widow of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and after his
death was married to Richard Berty Esquire. In the first year of Queen Mary,
Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, knowing this Duchess to be a zealous
Protestant, and no good Friend of his, resolved to be revenged of her husband
first, and subpoena'd him before him, alleging, That it was the Queens
pleasure he should presently pay 4000 pound due to her Father from D. Charles
late husband to his Duchess, whose Executrix she was. Mr. Berty replied, That
Debt was already truly satisfied. The Bishop answered, The Queen would not be
put off with payments in the time of Kets Government, (so he in scorn called
King Edward the sixth's Reign;) Mr. Berty said, It was acknowledged to be paid
by K. Henry the Eighth. If that be true, said the Bishop; I will show you
favor, but Mr. Berty, says he, I must tell you another thing because I intend
you well; I hear ill of your Religion, and pray is your Lady now as forward to
set up Mass as she was to pull it down, when she caused a Dog in a Rochet to be
carried with her, which she called by my name, or does she now think her Lambs
as safe, as when she saw me vail my Bonnet to her out of the Tower window, at
which time she said, That it was merry with the Lambs when the Wolves were shut
up. And at another time when my Lord her husband invited me amongst other Lords
to Dinner, desiring every Lady to choose him whom she liked best, and so place
themselves together, your Lady taking me by the hand said, That since she might
not sit by her husband whom she loved best, she had chosen me whom she loved
worst. To which Mr. Berty replied; My Lord, Of the device of the Dog, she was
neither the Author nor Allower. As for her words she can answer her self, and
for the Mass she has been taught by learned men to abhor it, and therefore
if she should outwardly pretend to it, she would be a false Christian to
Christ, and a masquing Subject to her Prince, you know my Lord, one Judgment
reformed is better than a Thousand Transformed Time-servers. Yea marry, says
the Bishop, deliberation is good, if she were to come from an old Religion to a
New, but she is to return from a new one to an old one; when I was her Ghostly
Father she was as earnest a Papist as any My Lord, said Mr. Berty, she told a
Friend lately, That Religion went not by Age, but by Truth, and therefore she
was to be converted by Argument and not by Compulsion. Pray do you think it
possible, says the Bishop, to persuade her? I hope, said Mr. Berty, you will
find no fruits of Infidelity in her. The Bishop then persuaded Mr. Berty to
take pains in her Conversion, promising him large Favors to effect it, and so
dismissed him.

When Mr. Berty came home he had frequent intimations from his Friends, That
the Bishop intended to call his Duchess to an Account for her Faith, and
therefore they designed to go beyond Sea. In pursuance whereof Mr. Berty made
such Friends to the Queen, as to obtain her License to pass and repass at
pleasure, to receive several sums of money due to Duke Charles from the
Emperor of Germany; Mr. Berty went beyond Sea accordingly, but without his
Duchess who yet by agreement was to follow, and made her escape from this
desperate danger in the manner following.

She dwelt at that time in Barbiean, and acquainted none of her Servants with
her design but only one old Gentleman, neither did she take any but the meanest
of her Servants with her, fearing the others would not run so dangerous an
adventure, she took also her young Daughter of a year old with her. Upon
New-years-day, about four a Clock in the Morning she went from her own house,
and an Herald of the Queens who lay in her house to guard her hearing the
noise, rose up, and came down with a lighted Torch in his hand, so that for
fear of discovery she was forced to leave most of her Child's necessaries
behind, and ordered her Servants to make have to Lion Key, taking with her only
two Women and her Child; she was no sooner out of doors but the Herald
followed, whereupon she stepped into the Charterhouse Gate, so that he could
not see her, the Herald finding some things she had lost, fell to ransacking
them, and in the mean time she hasted away knowing the place only by name,
where she should take boat. Her Servants also divided themselves, and only one
of them knew the way thither; Thus she attired in a mean habit, and they that
were with her, took their way into Finsbury Fields, where by the special
Providence of Heaven, near Moregate she and all her Company met, and went
together to Lyon-Key, a Barge was there ready for her; but the morning was so
extreme misty that the Steersman would not venture out without great entreaty.
Soon after the Council were informed of her departure, whereupon some came
presently to her house to inquire out the manner of her escape, and to take an
Inventory of her Goods, and Orders were issued to apprehend her, so that the
noise of her Flight, was at Leigh in Essex before her Arrival.

When she came thither, the old Gentleman her Servant carried her privately to
a Merchants house near Leigh, naming her Mistress White, where she stayed till
she had made some new Provision for her Child in the room of that left behind
her at Barbican. When the time came she was to take Shipping, she hardly
escaped Discovery, and being 'twice carried into the Seas almost within sight
of Zealand, by contrary Winds was driven back to the place whence she came; And
at her last return the searchers suspecting she might be in that Ship, examined
her Servant that came to buy Victuals, who told them such an innocent Story of
a Merchants Wife which was on Shipboard, that they searched no further; and so
at last the safely arrived in Brabant, where she met with her Husband, who
apparelling her and her Women like Dutch Froes, they traveled to Santon, and
had leave from the Magistrates to live privately there, but it being reported
they were greater Personages than they pretended, the Bishop and Magistrates
resolved to seize and examine them both of their Condition and Religion; but
Mr. Berty having secret notice thereof, took his Duchess, his Child, and the
two Women, and about three Afternoon in February walked out as if to take the
Air, intending that Night to get to Wesel, and the better to conceal his design
they went on Foot, and left the rest of their Family at Santon: They had not
gone above an English Mile, but there fell a mighty Rain, which dissolved the
Frost and Ice; and so made the ways deep and slippery, which proved extreme
tedious to these new Lacquies, and no Wagon to be gotten, so that Mr. Berty
was forced to carry the Child, and the Duchess his Cloak and Rapier, the Women
being sent before. At last, near seven a Clock in the dark Evening, they came
to Wesel, seeking after such a tedious Journey to repose and refresh their
wearied Limbs in an Inn, but they all refused to entertain them, though they
offered a considerable sum for the same, judging them to be ill People.

In the mean time the poor Babe cried bitterly, the Duchess wept as fast, the
Weather was extreme Cold, and the Heavens rained as fast as the Clouds could
pour. Mr. Berty destitute of all Worldly Succor and relief for him and his, in
this deplorable Condition, resolved to carry the Duchess with her Infant into
the Porch of the great Church, and so to buy some Coals, Food and Straw for
their Repose that night, or at least till he could procure some better Lodging;
Mr. Berty could speak little Dutch, and could meet with none who understood
either English, French, Italian, or Latin, till going toward the Church he
heard two Boys speaking in Latin, who stepping to them, promised them two
Stivers if they would bring him to a Walloons house, and so it pleased God he
happened into a house where Mounsieur Rivers a Minister was at Supper, he had
formerly been in England, and received some Courtesies from this good Duchess;
Mounsieur Rivers going to the door, and seeing Mr. Berty, his Duchess and
Infant in that lamentable Case with Rain, Mire and Dirt, and in Apparel so
unlike what he had seen them in England, was so overwhelmed with sorrow, and
tears, that for some time he could neither speak to them, nor they to him: At
last they saluted each other, and he brought them to his house, into which God
knows they entered joyfully, Mr. Berty changing his Clothes with the good Man of
the House, the Duchess with his Wife, and their Infant with the Child of the
House. Here they continued some time, and then hired a House, where they
discovered themselves freely, and lived in good fashion, but whilst they past
the time here with some content, in hope of resting after their Tedious
Travels, Sir John Mason, Queen Mary's Ambassador in the Netherlands gave them
private notice of a design for seizing and carrying them back to England,
managed by the L. Paget. For the D. of Brunswick being to pass by that City
with ten Companies of Soldiers to assist the Emperor against the French, it
was contrived that he should suddenly apprehend them, and carry them away from
Wesel.

Upon this Information Mr. Berty with his Duchess, and Child, presently fly
into the Palatinate, and found Protection in Wincheim, but the money which they
brought out of England being almost spent, they began to faint under their
heavy burden, being almost out of heart and hope in this their distressed
condition, at which time it pleased God to provide wonderfully for them by the
following means. One John a Lasco, being driven out of England at Queen Mary's
coming to the Crown, after many troubles and adventures returned into Poland
his Native Country, where he found great favor with that King, and
understanding the Condition of Mr. Berty and his Duchess whom he had known in
England, he gave an account thereof to the King of Poland, and the Palatine of
Vilna, who presently wrote to them to come thither with great offers of
kindness. They returned Letters full of Thanks to the King, and Palatine, and
sent with them all the remainder of the Jewels which they had brought from
England; and having received Letters of Conduct for their Security, in April
1557 the Duchess with her Husband and Family began their Journey toward
Poland. By the way they met with many dangers; One was occasioned by a Captain
of the Lantgraves who quarrelled with Mr. Berty about a Spaniel of his, and
with his Horsemen set upon them by the way, thrusting their Boar-spears through
the sides of the Wagon where the Children and Women were, yet it pleased God
none of them were hurt; Mr. Berty had only four Horsemen with him, and in the
quarrel the Captains Horse was slain under him, upon which a Rumor was
presently spread about the Country, that the Lantgraves Captain was slain by
the Walloons, which much enraged the Common people against them. The Duchess
understanding their danger, persuaded her husband to leave them, and by the
swiftness of his horse to recover some Town for his Security; which Mr. Berty
attempting to do, was eagerly pursued by the Countrymen, and the Captains
Brother, who thought he had been slain indeed. And in the pursuit they came so
near him that he had certainly been murdered, but that as God would have it,
spying a Ladder standing against a Window, he leapt off his Horse and ran up
the Ladder, whereby he got into a Garret on the top of the house where he
defended himself for some time with his Sword, and dagger, till the Magistrates
came and persuaded him to submit to the Law; Mr. Berty knowing himself to be
clear and the Captain alive, yielded himself upon condition to be protected
from the rude multitude, and delivering up his weapons was committed to Custody
till the Case should be heard; Mr. Berty then writ to the Lantgrave and the
Earl of Erbagh, declaring his Case to them, and the next morning the Earl came
to Town, where the Duchess was now arrived in the Wagon; The Earl having
before heard of the Duchess, came to see her, showing much civility, and
respect toward her; which the Townsmen observing, and finding the Captain was
alive, they began to shrink away and make Friends to Mr. Berty, and the
Duchess not to represent their Actions at the worst.

And thus through Divine Providence escaping this great danger also, they
proceeded in their Journey, and at last arrived safely in Poland, where they
were entertained by the King with all humanity and kindness; The King likewise
settling them safely and Honorably in the Earldom of Crozan, where they had as
absolute a Power in Government as the King himself, so that it proved to them a
quiet Haven, after so many Troubles in a Tempestuous Sea, and there they lived
with much Honor and Comfort till the Death of bloody Q. Mary, and then
returned together with the Protestant Religion into their native Country in
the Reign of Q. Elizabeth of Glorious Memory. Clarks Martyr. 521.

IX. A. B. Spotswood gives a very notable Relation of the Adventures and
Dangers of Mr. John Craig, as follows; In the year 1600. Mr. John Craig, who
had been Minister to King James in Scotland (but through Age was compelled to
quit the charge) departed this Life; whilst he lived he was had in great
esteem, a great Divine, and an excellent Preacher, of a grave behavior,
sincere and inclining to no Faction; and which increased his Reputation, he
lived honestly, without Ostentation or desire of outward Glory; Many tossings
and troubles he endured in his lifetime; For in his younger years having
passed his course in Philosophy in the University of St. Andrews, he went from
thence into England, and waited on the Lord Dacres Children as a Tutor for two
years; But Wars then happening between England and Scotland, he returned home
and became a Friar of the Dominican Order; He had not lived long among them,
when upon suspicion of Heresy he was put into Prison, after his Release he
went back to England, hoping by means of the L. Dacres to have got a place in
Cambridge, but his expectation being frustrated, he went into France and from
thence to Rome. There he won such favor with Cardinal Pool that by his
recommendation he was received among the Dominicans of Bononia, and by them was
first appointed to instruct the Novices of the Cloister; Afterward when they
perceived his diligence and dexterity in business, he was employed in their
Affairs throughout Italy, and was sent in Commission to Chios an Island in the
Ionick Sea, to redress things that were amiss among those of their Order.

Herein he discharged himself so well, that at his return he was made Rector of
the School, and thereby had access to the Libraries, especially to that of the
Inquisition, where meeting with Calvin's Institutions, he was taken with a great
liking thereof; and one day discoursing with a Reverend Old Man of the
Monastery, he was by him confirmed in the opinion he had entertained; but
withal was warned by no means to discover himself, or to make his mind known,
because the times were dangerous. But he neglecting the Counsel of the old Man,
and disclosing his Opinions too freely, was accused of Heresy, and being sent
to Rome, after Examination he was Imprisoned for Nine Months, at the end
whereof being brought before the Judge of the Inquisition, and making a clear
Confession of his Faith, he was condemned to be burnt the next day, being the
29 of August.

It happened that the same night Pope Paul 4 died; upon the noise of whose
death, the People came in a Tumult to the place where his Statue in Marble was
erected, and pulling it down, did for the space of three days drag it through
the Streets, and in the end threw it into the River of Tiber; During this
Tumult all the Prisons were broke open, and the Prisoners set free, and among
others Mr. Craig had his Liberty; And as he endeavored to escape, as not
thinking it safe to continue in the City, two things happened to him not
unworthy relating; First in the Suburbs as he passed along he met a sort of
Outlawed People, whom they call Banditi; One of the Company taking him aside
demanded if he had ever been at Bononia, He answered, That he had been sometime
there; Do you not remember, said he, that walking on a time in the Feilds with
some young Noblemen, there came a poor maimed Soldier to you entreating some
releis. Mr. Craig said, He did not well remember it; But I do, said he, and I
am the man to whom you then showed kindness, be not afraid of us, for you shall
incur no danger, and so conveying him through the Suburbs and directing him the
securest way, he gave him so much money as might bear his Charges to Bononia;
for he intended to go thither, thinking to find entertainment among his
acquaintance there; but at his coming to them, they looked strangely upon him,
whereupon being afraid to be betrayed by them, he got secretly away intending
his Course for Millain; By the way another Accident befell him, which he
afterward often related to many Persons of Quality as a singular Testimony of
Gods Providence, and care over him, and thus it was; when he had traveled some
days, going out of the Highways for fear of Discovery, he came into a wild and
desert Forest, and being sorely tired, he lay down among some Bushes on the
side of a little Brook to refresh himself, lying there Pensive, and full of
thoughts, not knowing where he was, nor having money to bear his Charges, a Dog
with a Purse in his Teeth, came fawning upon him, and laid it down before him;
He being struck with fear rose up, and judging it to proceed from God's
favorable Providence toward him, he followed his way, till he came to a little
Village where he met with some who were traveling to Vienna in Austria,
whereupon changing his former intentions he went in their Company to that City.

Whilst he continued there, professing himself one of the Dominican Order, he
was brought to preach before Maximilian 2. Emperor of Germany, who likeing the
Man, and his manner of Preaching, would have retained him, if by Letters from
Pope Paul 3. he had not been required to send him back to Rome, as one that was
condemned for Heresy; The Emperor being unwilling to deliver him, and on the
other hand not willing to quarrel with the Pope, sent him privately away with
Letters of safe Conduct, and so traveling through Germany, he came into
England, where being informed of the Reformation begun in his own Country, he
went into Scotland, and offered his Service to the Church, but the long disuse
of his Native Language (having lived abroad 24 years,) made him unuseful at the
first; only now and then he preached a Sermon in Latin to the Learned in
Magdalens Chapel in Edinburgh, and in the year 1567. having recovered the use
of ^he language, he was appointed Minister of Holy-rood House. Next year he was
removed to Edinburgh, and was joined as Colleague with Mr. Knox for Nine years
space; Then by Order of the General Assembly he was removed to Montress, where
he continued two years, and upon the Death of Adam Heriot was removed from
thence to Aberdeen, having the inspection of the Churches of Mar and Buchan
committed to his care; In 1579 he was called to be K. James his Minister, and
served in that charge till born down with the weight of years he was forced to
retire himself; After which time forbearing all Public exercises, he lived
privately at home, comforting himself with the remembrance of the Mercies of
God that he had experienced in his life past, and this year December. 12. without
any pain, he died peaceably at Edenburg in the 88 year of his Age. A. B.
Spotswood History of Scotland, page 461.

X. The Great King Henry the Fourth of France, says Mr. Howell, was as
remarkable an Example of the Lubricity and unstableness of Mundane Affairs, and
of the Sandy Foundation whereon the highest Pomp and purposes of men are
grounded as almost any Age can Parallel; For this Illustrious Prince having a
most potent and irresistible Army, composed of Forty Thousand Combatants, all
choice men led by Old Commanders and the most expert, Europe could afford, in a
perfect Equipage, having also a Mount of Gold as high as a Lance, estimated at
sixteen Millions to maintain this Army, having assured his Confederates abroad,
settled all things at home, caused his Queen to be Crowned with the highest
Magnificence imaginable, and appointed her Regent in his absence, behold this
mighty King amongst these Triumphs of his Queens, being to go next day ^o his
Army, when his Spirits were at the highest elevation, and his heart swelling
with assurances rather than hopes of Success and Glory; going one Afternoon to
his Armory, he was stopped in a small stre^t by so contemptible a thing as a
Colliers Car^ and there from amongst the Arms of his Nobles he was thrust out
of the World by the meanest of his own Vassals the Villain Ravilliac, who with
a Prodigious Confidence put his Foot upon the Coach-wheel reached him over the
Shoulders of one of his greatest Lords, and stabbed him to the very heart, and
with a monstrous undauntedness of Resolution making good his first stab with a
second, dispatched him suddenly from off the Earth, as if a Mouse had strangled
an Elephant.

-- Sic parvis pereunt ingentia rebus
And thus the smallest things
Can stop the Breath of Kings.
Let us now see the deserved punishment of this Notorious bloody Wretch; This
Francis Ravillac was born in Angoulesme, by Profession a Lawyer, who after the
committing of that Horrid Fact being siezed and put upon the Rack, May 25. the
27 he had Sentence of Death passed on him; and was executed accordingly in the
manner following; He was brought out of Prison in his Shirt with a Torch of two
pound weight lighted in one hand, and the Knife, wherewith he Murdered the
King, chained to the other, he was then set upright in a Dung-cart, wherein he
was carried to the Greve or place of Execution, where a strong Scaffold was
built; At his coming upon the Scaffold he crossed himself, a sign that he died
a Papist, then he was bound to an Engine of wood made like St. Andrew's Cross,
which done, his hand with the Knife chained to it was put into a Furnace then
flaming with Fire and Brimstone, wherein it was in a most Terrible manner
consumed, at which he cast forth horrible cries like one tormented in Hell, yet
would he not confess any thing; After which the Executioner having made Pincers
Red hot in the same Furnace, they did pinch his Paps, the brawns of his Arms
and Thighs, the Calves of his Legs, with other fleshy parts of his Body,
pulling out Collops of Flesh, and burning them before his Face, then they
poured into those wounds scalding Oil, Rosin, Pitch and Brimstone melted
together, after which they set a hard Roundel of Clay upon his Navel, having a
hole in the middle, into which they poured melted Lead; at which he again
roared out most horribly, yet confessed nothing; But to make the last act of
his Tragedy equal in Torments to the rest, they caused four strong Horses to be
brought to tear his body in pieces, where being ready to suffer his last
Torment he was again questioned but would not reveal any thing, and so died
without calling upon God, or speaking one word concerning Heaven; His Flesh and
Joints were so strongly knit together that those four Horses could not in a
long time dismember him, but one of them fainting a Gentleman who was present,
mounted upon a mighty strong Horse, alighted, and tied him to one of the
Wretches Limbs, yet for all this they were constrained to cut the flesh under
his Arms and Thighs with a sharp Razor, whereby his body was the easier torn
in pieces; which done the Fury of the People was so great, that they pulled his
dismembered Carcass out of the Executioners hands, which they dragged up and
down the dirt, and cutting off the fllesh with their Knives, the Bones which
remained were brought to the place of Execution and there burnt, the Ashes were
cast in the Wind, being judged unworthy of Earths Burial; By the same Sentence
all his Goods were forfeit to the King. It was also ordained that the House
where he had been born, should be beaten down a recompense being given the
owner thereof, and never any house to be built again on that ground; That
within fifteen days after the Publication of the Sentence by sound of Trumpet
in the Town of Angoulesme, his Father and Mother should depart the Realm never
to return again, if they did to be hanged up presently; His Brethren, Sisters,
and other kindred were forbidden to carry the name of Ravillac, but to take
some other, and the Substitute of the Kings Attorney General had charge to see
the Execution of the said sentence at his Peril. De Serres Hist. France lib.
ult.

XI. Darius King of Persia entitled himself King of Kings, and Kinsman to the
gods; and having notice of Alexander's landing in Asia, he so much scorned him
and his Macedonians, that he gave Order to his Lieutenants of the lesser Asia,
that they should take Alexander alive, whip him with Rods, and then convey him
to his Presence, that they should sink his Ships, and send the Macedonian
Prisoners beyond the Red Sea. In this manner spoke the glorious King, in a vain
Confidence of the multitudes over whom he commanded, but observe here a a
wonderful Revolution, his vast Armies were successively routed by the
Macedonians: His Riches which were hardly to be reckoned up, were seized, his
Mother, Wife and Daughters made Prisoners, and himself by the Treachery of
Bessus his Vassal taken from the ground where he lay bewailing his misfortune,
and bound in a Cart covered with hides of Beasts, and to add derision and scorn
to his adversity, he was fastened to the Cart with Chains of Gold, and thus
drawn on among the ordinary Carriages. But the Traitor Bessus being hastily
persued by Alexander, he brought a Horse to the Cart where Darius lay bound,
persuading him to mount thereon; The unfortunate King refusing to follow those
that had betrayed him, they cast darts at him, wounded him to Death, wounded
the Beasts that drew him, and killed his two Servants that attended him, which
done they all fled; Polystratus a Maceaonian being by pursuit pressed with
thirst, while he was refreshing himself with water spyed a Cart with wounded
Beasts breathing for Life, and not able to move. He searched the same, and
there found the miserable Darius bathing in his own blood, Impatient Death
pressing out his few remaining Spirits, he desired a draught of cold water,
which Polystratus presented him with, after which he lived but to tell him,
That of all the best things that the world had, and which were lately in his
power, he had nothing remaining but his last breath, wherewith to desire Heaven
to reward his Compassion. Rawleigh Hist. of the World, Lib. 4.

XII. As unfortunate was the end of Philip King of Macedon, Father of Alexander
the Great; who after many famous exploits by him performed, and being chosen by
all Greece as their General in the Asian Expedition, (an honor he had long
thirsted after) consulted the Oracle of Apollo, and from thence received as he
did interpret it, a very favorable answer about his success against the
Persians; He therefore ordains great and solemn Sacrifices to the Gods, marries
his Daughter Cleopatra to the King of Epirus, and that he might appear amongst
the Greeks in his greatest Glory and Magnificence, he invites diverse Great
Persons throughout all Greece to this Nuptial Feast, and desires them to bring
as many as they pleased with them, whom he would also entertain as his Guests;
There was therefore a mavelous Confluence of People from all parts to these
Royal Nuptials, and the Musical Contests which he had also ordained; At Egis a
City in Macedonia was this great Solemnity, where he then received diverse
Crowns of Gold from several Illustrious Persons, as also others that were sent
to him in his honor from the most famous Cities in Greece, even from Athens it
self; Now was the Feast over, and the Musical Concertation deferred till the
next day, a multitude of People were assembled in the Theater in the Morning
before it was light, and at the first appearance of Day, then began the Pomp to
set forth, in which besides other glorious preparations there were twelve
Statues of the Gods carried upon huge and Triumphant Arches, and together with
these a Thirteenth, which was the Statue of Philip himself adorned with Divine
Habit, by which he would have it understood, That he was in dignity equal with
the Gods themselves; The Theater being now crowded, Philip himself appears all
clothed in white having ordered his Guards to keep at a distance from him that
the Greeks might know he thought himself sufficiently guarded with their Love;
At this his glorious appearance he was openly extolled, and looked upon as the
happiest Person amongst all other Mortals; But this his dazleing brightness was
soon overcast with a black Cloud, and all the Pageant of his Glory wrapped up in
the Sables of Death; For while his Guards kept at their commanded distance,
there ran up to him Pausanias, one of those who had the nearest charge of his
body, and with a short Gallick Sword he had hid about him for that purpose,
smote him into the fide, and laid him dead at his Foot in the sight of
Thousands of his Soldiers and Friends. Diodorus Siculus. Lib. 16.

XIII. Bajazet Emperor of the Turks for his fierceness was surnamed Gilderun,
that is Lightning, a Prince of a great Spirit, and who for ten years space had
been exceeding fortunate in his greatest Enterprises; This Great Monarch was
invaded by Tamerlane the Great Cham of Tartary, overthrown in the Battle, his
Son Mustapha slain and he himself made Prisoner. At the first Tamerlane gave
him a civil Reception, and sitting together he thus said to him; O Emperor we
are each of us exceedingly indebted to the Divine Bounty, I that am thus lame,
to have received an Empire extending many Thousand miles, even from the Borders
of India to Sebaste, and thou who from the same hand have another, reaching
from the same Sebaste to the Confines of Hungary, so that we almost part the
whole world betwixt us; we owe therefore our praises to Heaven, which I both
have and will be always ready to render accordingly; but thou, it may be have
been less mindful, and of a more ungrateful disposition, and therefore thou art
now brought into this Calamity; But let that pass, and now my Friend tell me
freely and truly what thou would have done with me in case I had fallen
under thy power. Bajazet who was of a fierce and haughty Spirit, is said thus
to reply; Had Fortune given me the Victory I would have enclosed thee in an
Iron Cage, and carried thee about with me as a spectacle of derision to all
men. Tamerlane hearing this, passed the same Sentence upon him. Three years
almost the miserable Creature lived enclosed in this manner; at last, hearing
he was to be carried into Tartary, dispairing then to obtain his Freedom, he
struck head with such Violence against the Bars of his Cage that he beat his
Brains out. Turkish History page 220.

XIV. Charles the Gross, the 29th. King of France, and Emperor of the West,
began to Reign in the year 885. The eyes of the French were fixed upon him as
the man that should restore their Estate, after many disorders and confusions.
He went into Italy, and expelled the Saracens that threatened Rome, being
returned, he found the Normans dispersed in diverse Coasts of his Realm; Charles
marches with his Army against them, but at the first encounter is overthrown;
this Check, though the loss was small, struck a great Terror, and at last
caused an apparent impossibility to succor the City of Neustria, then besieged
by them with very great Forces. He was therefore advised to Treat with them,
and to make them of Enemies Friends, and to leave them that which he could not
take from them; Whereupon he yielded Neustria to them by his own Authority,
without the consent of the Estates, and the Normans called the Country
Normandy; By this and some other things he fell into a deep hatred with the
French; upon which Charles fell sick, and that sickness was accompanied with a
distemper of the mind through Jealousy conceived against his Queen Richarda.
After this the Germans dispossess him of his Empire, and give it to Arnold and
the French reject him from governing that Realm, electing in his room Odo Duke
of Angiers; This poor Prince deposed from all his Dignities was forsaken of
every man, having so ill provided for himself in prosperity, that he had not a
house wherein to shroud himself, and being banished the Court, he was driven to
a poor Village in Swevia, where he lived some days in extreme want without any
means of his own, or releif from any man. In the end he died neither pitied nor
lamented of any man, in a Corner unknown, till now made famous, as being the
Theater of so extraordinary a Tragedy. And surely for one of the greatest
Monarchs in the World thus to dye without House, without Bread, without Honor,
without Mourning, and without Memory is a singular instance of the Vanity and
inconstancy of this uncertain World, Hist. France. page 72.

XV. Dionysius the younger, King of Sicily, had his Kingdom in good
constitution, and sufficiently fortified; having no less then 400 Ships of five
or six Oars in a Seat, He had one hundred Thousand Foot, and Nine Thousand
Horse; His City of Syracuse had strong Gates, and was compassed with high
Walls, he had in readiness all manner of Warlike Provisions to furnish out 500
Ships more; He had Granaries wherein he laid up an 100 Myriads of that measure
which contains 6 bushels of Bread Corn. He had a Magazine filled with all sorts
of Arms, Offensive and Defensive; He was also fortified with Confederates and
Allies, so that he himself thought the Government was fastened to him with
Chains of Adamant; But being invaded by Dion in his absence, his People
revolted, and behold what a fatal Revolution fell out in his Family; Himself
had before slain his Brothers, and in this Insurrection against him, his Sons
were cruelly put to death, his Daughters were first ravished, then stripped
naked, and in short none of his Progeny obtained so much as a decent Burial,
for some were burnt, others cut in pieces, and some cast into the Sea, and he
himself died old in extreme Poverty, his manner being to (...) in Barbers
Shops, and as a Jester to move men to ^aughter. Thus in the midst of Greece, in
a very mean and low condition he wore out the miserable remains of a wretched
Life. Aelian. var. Hist.

XVI. Croesus, that vast rich King of Lydia, showed the wise Solon his abundant
Riches and Treasures, And what think thou, said he, is there any man thou
know more happy than my self? There is, said he, and named one Tellus, a man
of mean Fortune but contented with it; and then he named two others who having
lived well were now dead, Croesus laughed, and said, What state take you me to
be in? I cannot tell, said Solon, nor can we reasonably account that man happy
who is tossed with the waves of this life till he is arrived at the Haven,
since a Tempest may come which may overturn all. Croesus made slight of this at
that time, but being afterward overcome by Cyrus and condemned to dye and to
that purpose being bound and laid upon a great Pile of Wood to be burnt alive;
Croesus cried out O Solon, Solon! at which Cyrus admiring, caused him to be
asked, What God or man it was whom he invoked, and called upon in this
Extremity; He replied, That Solon came unto his mind, who had wisely admonished
him not to trust in his present Fortune, nor to think himself happy; I laughed
k. Cambuses cruelly kills the Son of One of his Principal Favorites Page: 54.

said he, at that time, but now I approve and admire that saying. And so did
Cyrus also, for he immediately commanded Croesus to be set at Liberty, and made
him one of his special Friends.

After the death of Cyrus, Cambyses his Son reigned King of Persia, and King
Croesus still remained in that Court. Now it happened that King Cambyses had
slain twelve Persians of Principal rank, whom K. Croesus thus admonished, Do
not O King, said he, indulge thine Anger and Rage in every thing, but refrain
your self; It will be for your advantage to be prudent and provident, and
foresight is the part of a wise man, but you upon slight occasions put to death
your Countrymen, and spare not so much as young Children, If you shall go on
to do often in this manner, consider if you will not give occasion to the
Persians to revolt from you; your Father Cyrus laid his strict Commands upon me
that as often as occasion should require I should put you in mind of those
things which might conduce to your profit and welfare. Cambyses snatch up a bow
and arrow with intention to have shot Croesus through therewith, but he hastily
fled; Cambyses thus prevented, commanded his Ministers to put him to death, but
they supposing the King would repent himself, and then they should be rewarded
for his safety, kept him privately alive; It was not long before Cambyses
wanted the Counsel of Croesus, and when his Servants told him that he yet
lived, Cambyses rejoiced thereat, but ordered them to be slain who had
disobeyed his Commandment in preserving him whom he had condemned to Death.

This Cambyses was a very bloody Tyrant which might be partly occasioned by his
Flatterers, for having a mind to marry his Sister, he was told by his Lawyers,
That they knew no Law which admitted such Marriages, but that there was a Law
that the Persian Kings might do what they listed; which Maxim he often put in
Practice; For on a time desiring to be truly informed by Prexaspes his beloved
Favorite what the Persians his Subjects thought of his Conditions, He answered,
They were followed with abundance of praise from all men, only it was observed
by many that he took more than usual delight in the Taste of Wine; Cambyses
being enraged at this reproof, replied, And are the Persians double Tongued
then, who also tell me that I have in all things excelled my Father Cyrus? Thou
Prexaspes shall be my witness whether in this report they have done me right.
For if at the first shot I pierce thy sons heart with an Arrow then it is false
that has been spoken, but if I miss the mark I am then pleased that the same
be counted True and my Subjects believed; And immediately he shot an Arrow at
the innocent Child, who falling down dead with the stroke, Cambyses commanded,
the body to be opened, and his heart was found sticking upon the Arrow, at
which this monstrous Tyrant greatly rejoicing showed it to his Father with this
saying instead of an Epitaph; Now, Prexaspes, thou may resolve thy self and
conclude that I have not lost my wits with wine, but the Persians there is, who
report such things of me; He died miserably afterward in Egypt without any Son
or Successor of his Family. Rawleigh Hist. World, Lib. 3.

XVII. Strange and bloody was the Consequence of a small accident at Lisbon in
Portugal. Upon April 10, 1506. many of the City went to the Church of St.
Dominick to hear Mass; On the left side of this Church there is a Chapel much
reverenced by those of the Country, and called Jesus Chapel; Upon the Altar
there stands a Crucifix, the wound of whose side is covered over with a piece
of Glass, some of those who came thither to do their Devotions casting their
eyes upon this hole, it seemed to them that a kind of Glimmering Light came out
of it; Then happy was he who could first cry a Miracle, and every one said,
That God showed the Testimony of his presence; A Jew who was but lately become
a Christian there, denied that it was any Miracle, saying, It was not likely
that out of a dry piece of wood there should come such a Light. Now though many
of the Spectators doubted of the Miracle, yet hearing a Jew deny it, they began
to murmur, calling him, wicked Apostate and a detestable Enemy to Jesus Christ;
After they had sufficiently reviled him in words, all the Multitude, foaming
with rage, fall upon him, pluck off the hair of his head and Beard, tread upon
him, and drawing him into the Churchyard, beat him to death, and kindling a
great Fire, they cast the dead body into it, and burnt it to Ashes; All the
residue of the People in the City ran to this mutinous Company, and among them,
a certain Friar made a Sermon, wherein he vehemently stirred up his Auditors to
revenge the injury which, he said, our Lord had received; The People furious of
themselves, grew even stark mad with this Exhortation, and besides this, two
other Friars took and held up a Cross as high as they could, crying out,
Revenge, Revenge, Heresy, Heresy, down with wicked Heresy, and destroy the
wicked Nation. Hereupon the Rabble like hungry Dogs fall upon the miserable
Jews, cut the throats of a great number, and drag them to the Fires half dead,
many being kindled for that purpose; They regarded neither Age nor Sex, but
murdered Men, Women, and Children, they broke open doors, rush into Rooms, dash
out Childrens Brains against the Walls; They went insolently into Churches to
pluck out thence the little Children, Old Men, and young Maids who had taken
hold of the Altars, Crosses and Images of the Saints, who pitifully cried out,
Mercy, Mercy; yet they either murdered them there presently, or drew them out
and threw them alive into the Fire; Many that appeared, or looked like Jews,
found themselves in great danger, some being killed, and others wounded before
they could make proof they had no Relation to them. Some who had a grudge
against others, did but cry, A Jew, a Jew, as they met them, and they were
presently beaten down without having any Liberty or Leisure to answer for
themselves. The Magistrates durst not oppose themselves against the Rage and
Fury of the People, so that in three days time the Cutthroats murdered above a
Thousand Jewish Persons. The King of Spain having notice of this horrible
disturbance, was extremely angry, and immediately dispatched away Jaquez Almeida
and Jaquez Lopez, with full power to punish so great Offenses, who caused a
great number of the Seditious to be executed, The Friars who had lifted up the
Cross and animated the People to Murder were degraded, and afterward hanged and
burnt. The Magistrates who had not been diligent to repress this Mutiny, were,
some put out of Office, and others fined. The City also was deprived of many
Privileges and Honors; Camerarius his Spare Hours. Cent 1.

XVIII. Such another bloody Event happened in Sicily in 1281. For Charles of
Anjou Reigning in that Kingdom, and his Soldiers being all Frenchmen lying in
Garrisons in the Cities, grew so odious to the Sicilians, that they studied
nothing so much as how to be revenged on them, and to free themselves from the
slavish Yoke of the French. The Chief, and most Resolute in this business was
called John Prochyto, who being justly incensed against the French, who had
ravished his Wife, and likewise dispossessed him of an Island whereof he was
Lord; Provoked with these two Abuses, the injured Gentleman plots with King
Peter of Aragon to make him Master of the Isle of Sicily, and finding himself
to be much favored by the Sicilian Lords and Gentry, and the French by reason
of their Lusts and Insolences having made the Natives ready for mischief, He
by their Council and support begins to build a strange design for the
entrapping all the French at once, and abolishing their Memory out of Sicily
for ever; All which was so secretly carried for eighteen Months, that it has
ever since been accounted a prodigious thing, that a design of this Nature
could possibly be so long and safely concealed by so many People, and so
different in Humor. The Watchword or signal was, That upon Easter day, when
the Bell should begin to toll to Evening prayers, all the Sicilians should
presently run to Arms, and joining together with one accord, should fall upon
all the French throughout Sicily; Accordingly all the Inhabitants of the Isle
were joined together at the appointed hour, and armed, ran upon the French, cut
all their throats without taking so much as one Prisoner, or sparing the
Children, or Women who were got with Child by the French, that they might
utterly extinguish the whole race of them; There were slain eight Thousand at
that time, and there escaped but a very small number who fled into a Fort
called Sperling, where for want of Victuals they were all starved to death; And
Don Pedro having according to Agreement rigged out his Navy under pretense of
some exploit against the Moors, came to an Anchor in the Port of Sardinia,
there to expect how the Tragedy would be Acted, which falling out agreeably to
his expectation, and coming in with his Navy just as the deed was done, he was
by the General Consent of all sorts of People Crowned King of Sicily, and the
Government thereof remains under the King of Spain to this day; This bloody
Massacre is called The Sicilian Vespers or Even Song to this day. Heylin's
Cosmog. Lib. 1.

XIX. The following Accident related by Vincent le Blanc, may discover the
danger of too much Curiosity. In the Land of Transiane in the East Indies,
there was a Prince Tributary to the King of Pegu, and his near Kinsman named
Alfonge, who married a Sister of the Prince of Tazatai called Abelara, who was
one of the greatest Beauties in all those Countries. They lived a sweet and
happy life with entire Affection, and for their greater Felicity, they had two
Twin Sons, who in their young Age discovered something of great and lofty
Minds; and appeared singularly hopeful for the future, These Infants being now
Ten years old, loved so cordially, that they could not live asunder, and the
desires of the one still met with the consent of the other in all things; But
the Devil the Enemy of Concord inspires a Curiosity into the minds of the
Father and Mother to know their Fates, or Fortunes; and to their grief they
were told, The time should come when these two Brothers that now loved so
fondly should cut one another Throats; Which much astonished the poor Princes,
and filled them with fearful Apprehensions; The two Princes being come to their
15 years, one said to the other; Brother it must needs be that you must murder
me, for I will sooner dye an hundred deaths than do you the least hurt
imaginable. The other replied, Believe it not good Brother, I beseech you, for
you are as dear or dearer to me than my self. But the Father to prevent the
misfortune resolved to separate them, whereupon they grew so troubled and
Melancholy, that he was constrained to delay his design till an occasion
happened which invited all three, the Father and his two Sons to a War betwixt
the Kings of Narsinga and Pegu, upon Title of Territories. But by the Mediation
of some Persons a Peace was concluded upon Condition that these two young
Princes should marry the two Daughters of the King of Narsinga, and that the
King of Pegu should confer on him that married the elder all the Countries he
took in the last War, with the Kingdom of Martaban; and the other Brother
besides the Kingdom of Tazatai should have that of Verma; The Nuptials
consummated, each departed to his Territory, Lands spaciously divided: Now it
after happened that the King of Tazatai was engaged in a sharp War with the
King of Mandranella, and sent to the two Brother Princes for Aid, who both
hastened unknown to each other to his assistance. He from Verma came secretly
to Town with one Servant only to visit a Lady who had been once their Ancient
Mistress, and the other Brother being upon the same design, they met at the
Ladies Gate by Night, not knowing one another, where furious with Jealousy,
after some words they drew and killed each other; One of them dying gave humble
thanks to Heaven for preventing the direful destiny foretold him, that he
should kill his Brother; hereupon the other knowing by his Voice and Discourse,
drawing near his end, himself crept to him and embraced him with Tears and
Lamentations and so both dolefully ended their days together. The Father having
tidings of it, and seeing his white hairs led by his own fault to so hard
Fortune, overborn with Grief and despair, came and slew himself upon the Bodies
of his Sons, and with the grief and Tears of all the People were buried all
three in one Monument, which shows us the Danger of too much Curiosity. Le
Blanc's Travels. Tom. 1.

XX. There is a Remarkable History of one Abner an Eastern King in the Indies,
who having a Son born, gave immediate Order for his Confinement to a stately
and spacious Castle, where he should be delicately brought up and carefully
kept from having any knowledge of Humane Calamities or Troubles. And gave
special command that no distressed Person should come into his Company, nothing
sad, nothing Lamentable, nothing unfortunate, no poor man, no old man, none
weeping nor disconsolate was to come near his Palace; Youthfulness, Pleasures,
and Joy were always in his Presence, nothing else was to be seen, nothing else
discoursed of in his Company. But alas in process of time the Prince longed,
this made him sad in the very midst of his Joys, and what should he long for,
but not to be so cumbered with Delights; The grief of Pleasures made him
request his Father to loose the Bonds of his miserable Felicity; This desire of
the Son crossed the Intention of his Father, who was forced to give over his
device to keep him from sadness, least by continuing it he should make him sad;
He therefore gave him his Liberty, but charged his Attendants to remove out of
his way all objects of Sorrow; the blind, the maimed, the deformed and the old
must not come near him. But what diligence is sufficient to conceal the
Miseries of Mortality! The Prince in his Recreations meets with an old Man,
Blind and Leprous; The sight astonishes him, he startles, trembles, and faints,
like those that swound at the Apparition of a Spirit, and inquires of his
Followers what that thing might be. And being told that it was Man, he was so
extremely concerned thereat, that he disliked Pleasures, condemned Mirth, and
despised Life, he rejected the Kingdom and Royal Dignity, and bid adieu to all
the Blandishments of Fortune at once, spending the remainder of his days in a
Religious Retirement from the vanities of the World, and in preparations for
Eternity. Vaughan Florilegus, page 126.

XXI. The Ingenious Dr. R. Plat in his Natural History of Oxfordshire, gives an
Acconnt of two strange Accidents which as he says are to be reckoned among
those things which are unaccountable. One is, That in the year 1649 when the
Commissioners for surveying the Manor House, Park, Deer, Woods and other the
Demeasnes belonging to Woodstock Manor in that County, came thither, and sat
and lodged therein, they took up their Lodgings in the Bedchamber and
withdrawing Room thereof, the former whereof they also made their Kitchen, The
Council Hall their Brewhouse, The Chamber of Presence they sat in to dispatch
business, and made a Woodhouse of the Dining Room; October 14 and 15 they had
little disturbance, but on the 16 there came as they thought somewhat into the
Bedchamber where two of the Commissioners and their Servants lay, in the shape
of a Dog, which going under their Beds did as it were gnaw their Bed-cords, but
on the morning finding them whole, and a quarter of Beef which lay on the
ground untouched; they began to entertain other thoughts. October. 17. Something
to their thinking removed all the Wood out of the Dining Room into the
Presence Chamber, and hurled the Chairs and Stools up and down that room; From
thence it came into the two Chambers where the Commissioners and their Servants
lay, and hoisted up their Beds feet so much higher than their heads that they
thought they should have been turned over and over, and then let them fall down
with such a force that their bodies rebounded from the bed a good distance, and
then shook the Bedsteads so violently that themselves confessed their Bodies were
sore with it. October 18 something came into the Bedchamber and walked up and
down, and fetching the Warming Pan out of the withdrawing Room made so much
noise that they thought five Bells could not have made more; And October. 19.
Trenchers were thrown up and down the Dining Room, and at them that lodged
there, whereof one of them being shaken by the Shoulder and awakened, put forth
his head to see what was the matter, but had Trenchers thrown at it; October
20. The Curtains of the Bed in the withdrawing Room were drawn to and fro, and
the Bed-stead much shaken, and eight great Pewter Dishes, and three dozen of
Trenchers thrown about the Bedchamber again, whereof some fell upon the beds;
this night they also thought whole Armfulls of Wood had been thrown down in
their Chambers, but in the morning they found nothing moved.

On the 21 of October the keeper of their Ordinary and his Bitch lay in one of
the Rooms with them, which night they were not disturbed at all; But October 2.
though the Bitch kenelled there again to whom they ascribed their former nights
rest, both they and the Bitch were in a pitiful taking, the Bitch opening but
once, and that with a whining fearful yelp. October 23. They had all their
Cloths plucked off them in the withdrawing Room, and the Bricks fell out of the
Chimney into the Room, and the 24th. day they thought all the Wood had been
brought thither, and thrown down close by their Bedside, which noise being
heard by those of the withdrawing Room; one of them rose to see what was done,
fearing indeed that his Fellow Commissioners had been killed, but found no such
matter; whereupon returning to his bed again, he found two Dozen of Trenchers
thrown into it, and handsomely covered with the Bed-clothes. October 25, The
Curtains of the Bed in the withdrawing Room were drawn to and fro, and the
Bed-stead shaken as before, and in the Bedchamber, glass flew about so thick,
that they thought it had been Money, (and yet not a pane of the Chamber Windows
broken) but lighting a Candle, to their grief they found nothing but Glass,
which they took up in the Morning and laid together. October 29, something
walked in the withdrawing Room about an hour, and going to the Window opened
and shut it, then going into the Bedchamber, it threw great Stones for about
half an hours time, some whereof lighted on the High-bed, and others on the
Truckle-bed, to the number in all of about Fourscore; This night there was also
a very great noise as though 40 pieces of Ordnance had been shot off together;
at two several knocks it astonished all the Neighboring Dwellers, which its
thought might have been heard a great way off; During these noises which were
heard in both Rooms together, both Commissioners and Servants were struck with
so great horror, that they cried out to one another for help, whereof one of
them recovering himself out of a strange Agony he had been in, snatched up a
Sword, and had like to have killed one of his Fellows, coming out of his bed in
his shirt, whom took for the Spirit who did the mischief; However at length
they got all together, yet the noise continued so great and Terrible, and shook
the Walls so much, that they thought the whole House would have fallen on their
Heads. At its departure it took all the Glass away with it.

The 1. of November, something as they thought walked up and down the
withdrawing Room, and then made a noise in the Dining Room; The Stones that
were left before and laid up in the withdrawing room were all fetched away this
night, and a great deal of Glass, not like the former thrown about again.
November 2. came something into the withdrawing Room, treading as they
conceived much like a Bear, which first only walking about a quarter of an
hour, at length it made a noise about the Table, and threw the Warming-Pan so
violently, that it quite spoiled it; It threw also glass and great Stones at
them again, and the bones of Horses, and all so violently that the bed-stead
and walls were bruised by them. This night they set Candles all about the
Rooms, and made Fires up to the Mantle Trees of the Chimneys; but all were put
out, no body knew how, the Fire and Billets that made it being thrown up and
down the Rooms; the Curtains torn with the Rods from their Beds, and the
Bed-posts pulled away, that the Tester fell down upon them, and the feet of the
Bedsted was cloven in two; And upon the Servants in the Truckle Bed, who lay
all the time sweating for fear, there fell first a little water, which made
them begin to stir; but before they could get out, there came a whole Tub full,
as it were of stinking Ditchwater down upon them, so green that it made their
Sheets and Shirts of the same color too.

The same night the Windows were all broken by throwing of Stones, and there
were most terrible noises in three several places together, to the
extraordinary wonder of all that lodged near them. Nay, the very Coney-stealers
that were abroad that night, were so affrighted with the dismal Thundering that
for have they lest their Ferret in the Coney Buroughs behind them beyond
Rosamond's Wells; notwithstanding all this, one of them had the boldness to
ask, In the name of God, what it was? what it would have, and what they had
done that they should be disturbed in this manner? To which no Answer was
given, but the Noise ceased for a while; At length it came again, and as all of
them said, brought seven Devils worse than it self; whereupon one of them
lighted a Candle again, and set it between the two Chambers in the door way, on
which another of them fixing his eyes, saw the similitude of a hoof striking
the Candle and Candlestick into the midst of the Chamber, and afterward making
three scrapes on the snuff to put it out. Upon this the same Person was so bold
as to draw his Sword, but he had scarce got it out but there was another
invisible hand had hold of it too, and tugged with him for it, and getting it
from him, struck him so violently with the Pummel that he was stunned with the
Blow; Then began grievous noises again, insomuch that they called to one
another, got together, and went into the Presence Chamber, where they said
Prayers and sung Psalms, notwithstanding all which the thundering noise still
continued in other Rooms. After this, November. 3. they removed their Lodgings
over the Gate; and next day being Sunday to Ewelm, but returning on Monday, the
Devil, (for that was the name they gave their nightly Guest) left them not
unvisited, nor on the Tuesday following, which was the last day they stayed. On
Wednesday the Commissioners and their Dependants went quite away, and those
that lived at the place affirm, that afterward several Persons of good quality
lodged in the same room but were never disturbed.

I had several Relations of these strange Passages (says my Author) put into
my hands, and one of them written by a learned and faithful Person then living
upon the place, which being confirmed to me by several Eyewitnesses of many of
the particulars, and all of them by one of the Comissioners themselves, who
ingeniously confessed to me, that he could not deny but what was written by
that Person abovementioned was all true, I was prevailed on at last to make
the Relation Public, though I must confess, I have no great esteem for such
kind of stories, many of them no question being performed by Combination, and
so might some of these Transactions aforesaid: But there are others which are
scarce reconcilable to Contrivance or Juggling. As 1. Such extraordinary Noises
beyond the power of Man to make, without such Instruments as were not there. 2.
The tearing down and splitting the Bed-posts, and putting out so many Candles,
and so great Fires no body knew how. 3. A visible shape seen of a Horses hoof
treading out the Candle; And 4. A tugging with one of them for his Sword, by an
Invisible hand. All which being put together, perhaps may easily persuaded some
man otherwise inclined, to believe that immaterial Beings might be concerned in
this business; which if it do, it will abundantly satisfy for the trouble of
this Relation, still provided the Speculative Theist, who beleives a God, be
not, after all, a Practical Atheist. Natural Hist. Oxfordshire. page 206.

XXII. The same ingenious Dr. Platt gives a Relation of another strange and
unaccountable accident, which he delivers with the same certainty as the
former; That of the Family of one Captain Wood, formerly of Bampton, then of
Brise Norton in Oxfordshire, Captain in the late Wars for the King; some of
them have had signal warnings given them before their Deaths by a certain
knocking either at the door without, or on the Tables and Shelves within, the
number of Strokes and distance between them, and the place where, for the most
part respecting the Circumstances of the Persons to dye, or their deaths
themselves, as will easily be collected from the following Instances; The first
knocking that was heard or at least observed, was about a year after the
Restoration of the King, 1661, in the afternoon, a little before night, at or
upon the door, it being then open, as it was apprehended by Mrs. Eleano Wood,
Mother to Captain Basil Wood, who only heard it, none being then by, or about
the house but her self, at which she was very much disturbed, thinking it
foretold some ill to her, or hers, and within fourteen days after she had news
of the death of her Son in Law, Mr. George Smith, who dyed in London. About
three years after that, there were three great knocks very audibly given, and
heard by all then in the house; who were Mrs. Eleanor Wood aforesaid, Mr. Basil
Wood, and his Wife, Mrs. Hester, and some Servants; which knocks were so
remarkable, that one of the Maids came from the Well which was about 20 yards
from the place, to see what was the matter; and Mrs. Eleanor Wood, and another
Maid who was within the House saw three great Pans of Lard shake and totter so
upon a shelf in the Milkhouse that they were like to fall down. Upon this
violent knocking Mr. Basil Wood and his Wife being then in the Hall, came
presently into the Milkhouse to their Mother, where finding her somewhat
disturbed, and enquiring the reason, she replied, God Almighty only knew the
matter, she could tell nothing, but she heard the knocking; which being within
doors, Mr. Basil Wood concluded it was a fatal warning to some of the Family at
home; since the other upon the door without signified death to some Friend
abroad, which accordingly fell out, for three of the Family according to the
number of the knocks died within half an year after, that is Mrs. Hester Wood,
Wife to Mr. Basil Wood, a Child of Mr. Wood's Sister, and Mrs. Eleanor Wood his
Mother. About August 1674, Mr. Basil Wood Junior, Son of Basil aforesaid,
living at Exeter in Devonshire heard the same kind of knocking, at which being
disturbed he writ word of it to his Father at Bampton in Oxfordshire, That one
Sunday, He, his Wife, and her Sister, and his Brother did distinctly hear upon
a Table in their Chamber, as they stood by it, two several knocks struck as it
were with a Cudgel, one of them before and the other after Morning Prayer, a
little before dinner; which Letter was shown by Mr. Wood Senior (as the other
knockings before the deaths of any that died were beforehand told) to several
Neighboring Gentlemen, after which within about fourteen days Mrs. Hester
Wood, a second Wife of Mr. Basil Wood Senior, and about a quarter of a year
after her Father Mr. Richard Lisset died both at Bampton, since which time they
have heard nothing more as yet, Natural History Oxfordshire. page 206.

XXIII. Of this kind of unaccountable Accidents we may reckon that which is
related by Mr. Clark in his 2d. Vol. of Examples, which he intitles, A True and
faithful Relation of one Samuel Wallas, who was restored to his perfect health
after 13 years sickness of a Consumption, taken from his own mouth, who for the
last four years lay bedrid, and so weak that he could not turn himself therein
without help, by which Distemper his body was so parched and dried that he was
like an Anatomy, but upon this cure he recovered his former health and
strength, whereby he was enabled to follow his Trade being a Shoemaker, and
living at Stamford in Lincolnshire, whereof he gave this following Account with
much affection and sensibleness of Divine Mercy and Goodness to him, upon April
7. 1659.

Upon Whitsunday last before the date hereof, about six a Clock in the
afternoon after evening Sermon, he finding himself a little lightsome, and able
to get out of his Bed without help there being no body in the house then with
him, his wife being gone in the Country to her Friends to seek some releif, he
crept to the Fireside, and as he was reading in a book called, Abraham's suit
for Sodom, he heard some body rap at the door, and thinking it to be some
stranger, because he struck as it were with a stick, and being on the Lords
day; thereupon taking his stick in one hand, and holding by the Wall with the
other, he went to the door and opening it, he saw a proper grave old man, who
said unto him, Friend I pray thee give to an old Pilgrim a Cup of small Beer;
to whom Wallas said, Pray Sir come in; He answered, Call me not Sir for I am
none, but yet come in I must, for I cannot pass by thy door. To whom Wallas
thinking he had been very dry, said, Come in Sir and welcome, which he did, and
Wallas with the help of his stick drew him a Cup of Beer, who took it and drank
a little, and then walked two or three times to and fro, and drank again, and
so a third time before he dr^nk it all up, and setting down the pot, Wallas
thought he was going, but he walked again backward and forward three or four
times, neither of them speaking a word to each other; At last the old Man
coming up to Wallas said, Friend I perceive thou art not well; No truly, said
Wallas, I have not been well these many years. What is thy disease, said he?
Wallas replied, a deep Consumption, and our Doctors say it is past cure; They
said well, answered he; but what have they given thee for it? Truly nothing,
said Wallas, for I am a very poor man, and not able to follow the Doctors
prescriptions, and so I have been willing to commit my sel^ into the hands of
Almighty God, to dispose of me as he pleases. The Old man answered, in that
thou say very well; But I will tell thee by the Almighty power of God what
thou shall do, only remember my words, and observe them and do it; But
whatsoever thou do, fear God and serve him; To morrow morning go into thy
Garden, and get there two red Sage Leaves, and one leaf of Bloodwort, and put
these three leaves into a Cup of small Beer, and let them lie therein three
days; and drink thereof as often as thy need requires, but let the leaves still
remain in the Cup; and the fourth Morning cast them away, and put three fresh
ones in their room, and thus do for 12 days together neither more nor less,
and I pray remember what I say, and observe my words and do it; But above all
whatsoever thou do, Fear God, and serve him; And for the space of these 12
days thou must neither drink Ale nor strong Beer, yet afterward thou may to
strengthen Nature, and thou shall find that before these twelve days be
expired, through the great Mercy and help of Almighty God, thy Disease will be
cured, and the frame of thy body altered.

But Wallas doubting the truth of these things said to the old man, Sir, is it
good for all Consumptions? To which he replied, I tell thee, I tell thee,
observe what I say unto thee and do it, but above all, whatsoever thou do,
Fear God and serve him. Yet, said he, this is not all, for thou must also
change the Air for thy healths sake; To which Wallas replied, what do you mean
Sir by changing the Air; He answered, Thou must go three or four miles off, or
if it be twenty miles, the farther the better, and this thou must do as
speedily as thou can after the twelve days are over, or else thou will have
a grievous fit of sickneiss which will suddenly seize upon thee, yet through
Gods Mercy by doing this, thou may avoid that, and thou shall see that before
the twelve days be ended, through the help of Almighty God thou will scarce be
able to wear the Cloths now on thy back with ease, thy body will be grown so
much, and I pray thee remember my words and observe to do them, but above all
whatsoever thou do, Fear God and serve him.

Then said Wallas, Pray Sir if it shall please God to enable me to go into our
own Fields two or three times a day will not that serve the turn; The old man
answered, Friend it will not, for that Air where the Infection is taken is not
so proper for the Cure of the disease; said Wallas, I thought to have been let
blood; No friend, said the old man, by no means, for before thy twelve days be
expired thy blood will be as good as ever it was in all thy life, yet this one
thing observe, Thy joints will be weak as long as thou live; Now Friend I
must be going, pray remember what I have said and do it, but above all fear God
and serve him. Then Wallas asked him to eat; But he refused saying, No Friend I
will not eat any thing, the Lord Christ is sufficient for me, neither do I
drink any beer but very seldom, but that which comes from the Rock, and so
friend the Lord in Heaven be with thee. When Wallas saw him go out of doors, he
went to shut the door after him; But the old man returned half way into the
entry again, and said, Friend, I pray remember what I have said unto thee and
do it, But above all whatsoever thou do, Fear God and serve him; and so they
parted.

Samuel Wallas says, he saw him pass along the streets some sixty yards from
his door, and so he went in; But this old man was not seen to pass along the
Streets by any one else, though some Persons were standing in their doors
opposite to Wallas his house; After Wallas had made use of the leaves
aforementioned about four days, there arose a Scurff upon his Body, and when
that was gone a new skin came under it like that of a sucking Child, and by the
end of the twelve days he was as healthful and strong as ever he had been, only
he said when he went to sit down his knees would smite together, so that he
still found a weakness in his joints as was foretold him; He said likewise that
one day within the time prescribed by the solicitation of some Friends he
drank a little strong drink, and immediately his Speech was taken from him for
the space of 24 hours. As for the Description of this old man's Person and
Habit, he thus related it; He was tall and Ancient, his hair as white as Wool
curled up, with a white broad beard, and of a fresh Complexion, he wore a
fashionable Hat, and a little narrow band; His Coat and Hose were both of a
purple Color, his Stockings pure, with a pair of new black shoes tied with
Ribbons of the same Color with his Cloths, and though it rained when he came
into Wallas his house and all that day, as many remembered, yet he had not one
spot of wet or dirt upon him; He had no Gloves, but his hands were as white as
Snow; This strange accident being related abroad, several Reverend Divines met
together about it at Stamford, to consider and consult about it, and for many
reasons, says Mr. Clark, were induced to believe that this Cure was wrought by
the Ministry of a good Angel. Clark's Mirror, Vol. 2. page 18.

XXIV. I will add one History more of this kind which I find related in a
German Author; In the year 1626, there was in Silesia one Christopher Cotterus,
whom the Famous German Divine, Johannes Comenius judges to be a Prophet; This
man had many enemies and among the rest one David Wacksman, the Emperors
Prefect for gathering his Tributes in the lower Silesta, and Lusatia; He swore
that he would never rest till he saw Cotterus, and Mincelius a Protestant
Minister hanged upon the same Gallows in the City of Sprotovia where they
lived; Their Friends informed them hereof, which caused them with greater
fervency to commend themselves to God; yet Cotterus by a strong Impulse of
Spirit resolved to go to Glogow, and though his Friends would have dissuaded
him, yet Jan. 2. 1627, he went thither, where being known he was apprehended,
and carried before the Count of Oppersdorf, and the aforesaid Prefect, who
after Examination committed them to Prison. The next day a Commissary was sent
to Sprotovia, with a Command to the Senate that he should before some of them
search all the house and Coffers of Cotterus, for writings, and like- Mencelius
his house in the same manner; This was done, and the Writings were by the
Commissary carried to them, which they read and examined, but all his
Prophecies were not found; January 25, Cotterus was again examined more
strictly whence he had those Prophecies, He answered, Not from any mortal man,
but from spirits that used to appear to him, but whether they were Good or Bad
Angels, he left it to the learned to judge; The Count upon certain Conditions
would have released him, but the Prefect strongly opposing it, charged him with
Treason against the Emperor, and required that Mincelius might likewise be sent
for; The Senate sent with him two of their Magistrates, in whose presence
Mincelius was charged to be guilty of Death (who it seems writ out those
Prophecies) which they said were Lies, and to the great dishonor of the
Emperor; Mincelius pleaded, That he was enjoined by the Senate to do it, which
the Magistrates also affirmed. The Prefect appealed then to the Council of
Prague, and commanded that Mincelius should be kept under an Arrest till he had
answered them; The Consuls that came with him protested against this,
affirming, That their City could not want his Ministry, offering to stand bound
for his appearance and at length they prevailed after having given a Bond of
Two Thousand Crowns for his forth coming.

Hereupon the Prefect poured out all his Indignation upon Cotterus, removing
him from his former Prison into a Dungeon where Malefactors used to be
Tortured, wherein he lay in Hunger, Dirt and Cold for above three Months; Now a
special Providence from Heaven appeared, For Cotterus his Enemies understood
that a complete Book of all his Prophecies was in the hand of a Citizen of
Sprotovia; This they got, and carried it to the Governor of Oppersdorf, who
after he had read it, was much taken with Cotterus, and would no more meddle
against him; He also persuaded the Prefect to have his cause heard in the City
of Glogow, and prevailed that Cotterus should have an Advocate allowed him. In
the mean time the Prefect married a Noble Virgin, and at the weeks end his
Office necessitated him to go Sagan, and in his return he was to lie at
Sprotovia; but as soon as he came into the Suburbs of that City, he was taken
with a violent pain in his Bowels; whereupon he sent for a Physician, who not
knowing what to make of his Disease, forbore to administer any thing to him
till the next Morning that he might see farther. But it pleased God the
Prefect died that night, and in that very place where he had sworn to see
these men hanged. This dreadful Judgment being known to the Enemies of
Cotterus, they removed him out of the Dungeon into a better Prison, and after
some Months space they sentenced him, and brought him to the Town-Stocks,
fastened a Collar of Iron about his Neck, and set over his head a Paper thus
written; This is the false Prophet which foretold such things as came not to
pass; There he stood an hour, after which he was banished out of all the
Emperors Dominions upon pain of death.

From hence he went to Lusatia under the Jurisdiction of the Elector of Saxony,
where he lived quietly till the day of his death, which was in the year 1647.
But before this, that is in 1628 when the Persecution grew hot in Silesia,
there was in the City of Spretovia, one Adam Pohl, a good Friend to Cotterus,
who knowing the great want, and necessity he was brought unto, not through any
fault of his own but by Gods Providence, he entertained him at his house
gratis, and Cotterus continued with him by the space of half a year to the time
of his Imprisonment. During which time Adam Pohl fell dangerously sick, and
after a while had his Nerves and Sinews so shrunk up, that he could make no use
of his Legs, but for a half a year together was confined to his Bed; But it
pleased God that the very morning before the Emperors Commissioners came with
Armed Troops to reform the City (as they called it) his Wife being risen and
gone down, there appeared by his Bedside a young man in white Clothing, who
after he had saluted him, said, Adam, This is the day wherein God has decreed
to take Vengeance upon the Citizens of this City for their Ingratitude, Arise
go in the name of the Lord, put on thy Cloths, take thy wife and young
Daughter, and fly from hence, make have; and so he disappeared; After which
Pohl prayed earnestly, and then began to move his hands and feet, and trying to
rise, found that he could stand on his feet, whereupon he called to his Wife
for his Cloths, which had been laid up in a Chest all that half year of his
lameness, and when he was dressed, he fell down on his knees and praised God;
Then taking his Wife and Daughter, he hasted to the City-gate, and having sent
for Mincelius to meet him there (who was astonished to see him) with sighs and
Tears they took Council together, and resolved to go to Gorlits (and by Gods
strength, and as he judged the Ministry of an Angel,) he and his little
Daughter went afoot eight miles that day. Historia Prophetarum. page 22.

XXV. Linschoten in his Discoveries and Voyages to the East Indies, gives this
Account; That in the Island of Ceylon, there is a high Hill, upon the top
whereof stands a great House as big as a Cloister; In this place in time
past, shrined in Gold and precious Stones, was kept the Tooth of an Ape, which
was esteemed the holiest thing in all India, and had the greatest resort to it
from all the Countries round about it, so that it surpassed St. James in
Gallicia, and St. Michaels Mount in France, by reason of the great Indulgences
and Pardons that were there daily to be had; For which cause it was sought unto
with much Devotion, by all the Indians within four or five hundred Miles round
about in vast multitudes; But it happened that in the year 1554, when the
Portugals made a Road out of India, and entered the Island of Ceylon, they went
up upon the Hill, where they thought to find great Treasure, because of the
Fame that was spread abroad of the great resort and Offerings in that place;
They diligently searched the Cloister, and turned up every Stone thereof, yet
found nothing but a little Coffer made fast with many precious Stones wherein
lay the Apes Tooth; This Relic they took with them to Goa, which when the
Kings of Pegu, Siam, Bengala, Bisnagar, and others heard of, they were much
greived that so costly a Jewel was in that manner taken from them; Whereupon by
Common Consent they sent their Ambassadors to the Viceroy of India, desiring
him of all Friendship to send them their Apes Tooth again, offering him for a
Ransom (besides other Presents, which they then sent to him) seven Hundred
Thousand Ducats in Gold, which the Viceroy for Covetousness of the Money did
intend to do. But the Archbishop of Goa dissuaded him from it, saying; That
they being Christians ought not to give it to them again, being a thing
wherewith Idolatry might be furthered, and the Devil worshipped; but rather
were bound by their Profession to root out, and abolish all Idolatry, and
Superstition, By this means the Viceroy was persuaded to change his Mind, and
flatly denied the Ambassadors Request, having in their Presence first burnt the
Apes Tooth, the Ashes whereof he caused to be thrown into the Sea; The
Ambassadors departed, astonished that he refused so great a sum of Money for a
thing which he so little esteemed; Not long after there was a Benjane or Priest
that had gotten another Apes Tooth, and gave out that he had Miraculously found
the same Apes Tooth that the Viceroy had, and that it was revealed unto him
(...) a Pagod (that is one of their Gods) in a Vision tha^ assured him it was
the same, which he said the P^^tugals thought they had burned, but that he had
been there invisible, and taken it away, laying another in the place. This the
Heathens presently believed, so that it came unto the King of Bisnager's ears
who thereupon desired the Benjane to send it him; With great Joy he received
it, giving the Benjane a great sum of Gold for it; whereupon this Tooth was
holden and kept in the same Honor and Estimation, a the other that was burnt
had been. Linschotens Voyages, lib. 1.

This Relation demonstrates that there is no Nation so void of Civility and
Humanity, but they have always owned a Deity, or some Being which the adored,
so that rather than they would have nothing t^ Worship, they were contented to
fall down to a^ Onion; and a Multitude of other Ridiculous things wherein their
Ignorance and Folly is chiefly to b^ lamented, that they still made choice of
any thi^ to pay their Devotions to, rather than the True God And to discover
the Mercy and Goodness of Heaven to us in this part of the World, I shall give
some further Relations of this kind, that thereby we may be thankful to God for
the Knowledge he has bestowed upon us.

XXVI. The Egyptians amongst the many Animals which they esteemed as Gods did
especially Worship an Ox which they called Apis; He was black, and remarkable
for some spots of white; and in his Tongue and Tail different from all others.
The day in which he was Calved was held as a Festival throughout the whole
Nation. At Arsinoe they Worship the Crocodile; At the City of Hercules, the
Ichneumon, a Creature that is an Enemy to the Crocodile; Others of them adore a
Cat; some a Falcon; others the Bird Ibis; In the Island of Java they Worship
whatsoever it is they first meet, and chance to see in the Morning, and pray to
it all the day although it be a Hog, or a worse thing. They of Cale^ut Worship
the Statue of the Devil; the Chapel in which he is adored is not above three
paces from the ground, in the midst of it is a Throne, and a Brazen Statue that
is framed sitting in it, with a Diadem about his head, like the Pontifical
Mitre amongst the Romans; He has 4 large Horns upon his Head, his Mouth
stretched out to an unreasonable wideness, a crooked Nose, threatening Eyes,
Cruel Countenance, crooked Hands and Feet like those of a Cock, which put
together render the Devil wickedly deformed. Those of the Province of Manta
Worship an Emerauld, a great and beautiful Jewel, and this they esteem of as
the True Deity, the sick come in Pilgrimage to visit it, and there offer their
Gifts, which the Priests turn to their own profit. The Inhabitants of Nagapatan
have a Massy Copper gilded Pagod, or Idol, mounted upon a Triumphant Chariot
moved by eight mighty wheels, over-laid with pure Gold, The Ascent is easy,
spacious, and by many steps, on which are placed on a solemn day the Priests,
and many young Maidens, who to enrich the Devil Prostitute their Bodies to the
lustful Flames of wicked men; Happy is that man, rich or poor, high or low, who
can fasten an hand to draw the Chariot; yea, they account them happiest who out
of a frantic zeal furiously throw their naked Bodies in the way, that by the
vast weight of the Pagod and his Chariot their wretched Bodies may be crushed
in pieces, being for this thought Martyrs; and such is the stupid folly of
these Men, that they persuade their Daughters to become Strumpets to please
their Pagods, insomuch that it is a great wonder to see so many Girls at such
immaturity so impudently delighted with the impure Conversation of silthy Men.
Herbert's Travels, lib. 3.

XXVII. In the City of Meaco, the Metropolis of Japan, besides 70 Temples,
wherein they number three Thousand three hundred thirty three Manada's or
little Idols, there is one more notable than the rest, like the Rhodian Coloss,
huge and wonderful; It was built by Tycho-zamnia, and without much pain and
cost was not finished; It was framed of gilded Copper, its posture is sitting
in a Chair of 70 Foot high, and 80 broad. His Head capable to support fifteen
men, who may stand together upon it without pressing; His Thumb is 40 Inches
about, and his other Limbs proportionable. At Dabys is another Manada or Idol
no less infamous, and resorted unto; This Devil or Moloch is of Concave Copper,
vast thick, and double gilded, its height is 24 foot, and would be more, but
that they have formed it kneeling; His Buttocks resting upon his Legs after the
usual mode of the Eastern Pagans; His Arms are stretched to the uttermost, and
at Solemn times is made Red hot within, and sacrificed unto by offering him a
Child, which in his embraces is fried to death in an Infernal Torture. But more
of note is T^uchedy Eastward thence, where Satan visibly plays the Impostor;
The Fotigue or Temple there, is of a rare Structure, and daily served by a
multitude of Hellish Bonzees or Priests, not admitted to attend there, except
they be young, well shaped, and stout Disciples of Venus. Every New Moon they
solemnly betroth to the Devil a Damsel, whose Parents account the Ceremony
happy and Honorable. If any be more fair and singular than another, she is
chosen out by the lustful Priests, Devoted and brought into the Temple, and
placed right against the Manada or Idol. The Room is first made glorious with
Lamps of Burnished Gold, and a preparation by the Burning of Lignum vitae, Gums
and perfumes, such as are most curious and costly; By and by the Lamps
extinguish by a kind of pretended Miracle, and in a gross darkness the Prince
of Darkness approaches, and enjoys her as she imagines, and it is the rather
credited because the Devil leaves behind him certain Scales like those of
Fishes, which is an Argument that it is no Phantasm, but by this Hellish
Conjunction they swell not, unless the Bonzee or Priest second it; Satan is no
sooner gone, but she is saluted by the Bonzees, who ravish her with Songs and
pleasant Music, which ended she acquaints them with her Fortune, and resolves
them in such questions as she by their instruction propounded to the Devil, and
he satisfied her in; she comes out from thence with applause, and ever after is
reputed Holy and Honorable. Herbert's Travels, lib. 3.

XXVIII. We often read of Moloch, and other Idols of the Heathens, worshipped
sometimes by the Jews, some of whom I shall here give an Account of according
to the Judgment of the Learned Dr. Godwin and others; Moloch (so called quasi
Melech, which in most of the Eastern Languages signifies a King) was the God of
the Amorites to whom they offered their Sons and Daughters; not that this was
his ordinary Sacrifice, but in extraordinary Cases and Distresses, and being
reckoned as a work more meritorious. They generally caused their Children to
pass through the Fire to him, that is betwixt two Fires made before him. The
Carthaginians worshipped this Idol under the name of Saturn; and indeed Baal,
and Saturn, and Moloch are reputed to be all one. The Image of this Idol was of
Brass, wonderful for its greatness, having the face of a Bullock, and Arms
spread abroad like a man that opens his hands to receive something of
another. This Image was hollow, and had seven Closets or Apartments within; One
for Wheat Flour of the finest, a second for Turtles, a third for a Sheep, a
fourth for a Ram, a fifth for a Calf, a sixth for an Ox; and to him that would
offer his Son or Daughter a seventh Concave or Chamber was opened; and then
while the Child was burning in the Idol, with the Fire that was made under him,
the Parents and such as were present were to Dance, and to play upon Timbrels,
and beat upon Drums, that they might not hear the Sorrowful cries of their
Child while thus Sacrificing. Anammeleck and Adrameleck the Gods of Sepharvaim
mentioned 2 Kings 17, are supposed to be the same with this Idol, whose Priests
were called Chemarim from their blackness; The place of this Idol amongst the
Israelites was Tophet, the Valley of the Sons of Hinnom that is, Of Lamentation
or Roaring, from the cries of them that were offered. The Carthaginians being
greatly distressed by Agathocles, they barbarously at one time offered, or
burnt to this Moloch (their Saturn) no less than two hundred choice Youths of
their Nobility. This Idolatrous Custom continued to the days of Tiberius. The
Philistines, and all that Seacoast were called Phoenicians, and they Worshipped
Dagon; what Dagon was, says P. Martyr is not well known, but by the derivation
of his name, which signifies a Fish, it seems he was a Sea-god; Above his
Belly he was of Humane shape, beneath like a Fish. When Cicero says, The
Syrians worshipped a Fish, it may be supposed to be this Dagon, and it may be
they intended Neptune (says P. Martyr) or I know not what Devil; Lucian says,
he saw the Image of it in Phoenicia, not unlike that of a Mermaid the upper
half like a Woman, and the lower like a Fish, in reverence of whom, the
Phoenicians were said to abstain from Fish. They offer to it, Fishes of Gold
and Silver, and the Priests all day long set before it true Fishes roasted and
Boiled, which afterward themselves did eat, At Ekron was worshipped Baalzebub,
that is, The Lord of Flies; so called either from the abundance of Flies that
attended the multitude of his Sacrifices, from which inconvenience it is said,
the Sacrifices to the true God in the Temple of Jerusalem were wholly free, or
because he was the God of their Larder or Buttery to drive away Flies, or for
that he was Worshipped in the form of a Fly; though others write, that it was a
name given him in Scorn and Derision, calling him the Fly Lord. Godwins
Antiquities, lib. 4. Purchase Pilgrim. Tom. 1.

XXIX. Some Leagues from the Town of Junquilen in China (says Ferd. Pinto in
his Travels) we arrived at a place encompassed with great Iron Gates, in the
midst whereof stood two mighty Statues of Brass upright, sustained by Pillars
of Cast Metal of the bigness of a Bushel, and seven Fathom high, the one of a
Man, the other of a Woman, both of them 74 spans in height, having their hands
in their Mouths, their Cheeks horribly blown out, and their Eyes so staring
that they affrighted all who looked upon them; Having demanded of the Chinese
the meaning of these Figures, they told us, That the Male was he which with
those mighty swollen Cheeks blew the Fire of Hell to torment all those miserable
wretches that would not liberally bestow Alms in this Life; And for the other
Monster that she was the Portress of Hell gates, where she would take notice of
all those that did her good in this World, and letting them fly away into a
River of very cold water would keep them hid there from being tormented by the
Devils as other Damned were. At such time as we arrived there; we found twelve
Bonzoes or Priests upon the Place, and with Silver Censers full of Perfumes of
Aloes and Benzoin, they smoke those two Devilish Monsters, and chanted out
aloud, Help us even as we serve thee, whereunto diverse other Priests answered
in the name of the Idol with a great noise; So I promise to do like a good
Lord. In this manner they went as it were in a Procession round about the
place, singing with an ill-tuned Voice to the sound of a great many Bells that
were in Steeples thereabout. In the mean time there were others that with Drums
and Basins made such a noise, as I may truly say, put them all together, was
most horrible to hear. Pinto's Travels, chapter 28.

XXX. The same Author proceeds thus; We arrived, says he, at the great Temple
of Snignafatur in Tartary, where we saw an enclosure of above 3 Miles in
Circuit, in which were built 164 Houses, very long and broad, after the fashion
of Arsenals, all full of up to the very Tiles of Dead men's Skulls, whereof
there was so great a number that I am loath to speak it, since it will hardly be
credited, without each of these Houses were also great Piles of Bones belonging
to these heads, which were three fathom higher than the Ridges of them, so that
the Houses seemed to be buried, no other part of them appearing but the
Frontispiece where the Gate stood. Not far from thence upon the Southside of
them was a kind of Platform, whereunto the ascent was by certain Stairs of Iron
winding about, and through four several doors; Upon this Platform was one of
the Tallest, the most deformed, and dreadful Monsters that can possibly be
imagined, standing upon his feet, and leaning against a mighty Tower of hewn
Stone. It was made of cast Iron, and of so great and Prodigious a Stature that
by guess he seemed to be above thirty fathom high, and more than six broad.
This Monster held in both his hands a Globe of the same Iron, being thirty six
spans in the compass of it; we demanded of the Tartar Ambassador the
explication of so Monstrous a thing, You must know, said he, that this great
Saint which you see here, is the Treasurer of the bones of all those that are
born into the World, to the end that at the last day, he may give to every one
the same bones which he had upon Earth, so that he who in this life shall be so
ill advised as not to honor him, nor present him with something will be but in
an ill case; For he will give him some of the rottenest bones he can meet
withal, and one or two less than he should have, by means whereof he will
become deformed, lame and crooked; The Globe he holds in his hands is to
fling at the head of the Gluttonous Serpent that lives in the profound Abyss
of the house of smoke, when he shall come thither to steal away any of those
bones. He told us moreover, That it was threescore and fourteen Thousand years
since he was begotten on a Tortoise, called Migoma, by a Seahorse that was an
hundred and thirty fathom long, who had been formerly King of the Giants of
Fanius. He also assured us, That the Gifts which were presented to this Idol
amounted to a vast sum of Money in a year, besides other Revenues which was as
much more; He added, That this Idol had ordinarily Twelve Thousand Priests
attending on his Service, maintained with all necessaries only to pray for the
Dead unto whom these bones belonged, who also had allowed them without the
Temple six hundred Servants, who took care, for providing all conveniences for
them; As for the Priests themselves, they never went without the limits of the
Temple but by permission of their Superiors. There was also a Seraglio wherein
many Women appointed for that purpose were shut up, whom their Governesses
permitted to have too near an Acquaintance with the Priests of this beastly and
Diabolical Sect; Pinto's Travels, chapter 41.

And thus will I conclude the ridiculous and Idolatrous ways of Worship among
the Heathens in these dark parts of the World.

XXXI. Many strange Events have happened by the Ingenious Stratagems of some
men, as we find in diverse Authors; Sir Walver Rawleigh writes, That the Island
of Sark joining to Guernsey, and belonging to that Government, was surprised by
the French, and could never have been recovered again by strong hand, having
Corn and Cattle enough upon the place to feed so many as would serve to defend
it, and being every way so inaccessible as it might have held out against the
Great Turk; Yet in the Reign of Q. Mary by the Industry of a Gentleman of the
Netherlands it was in this manner regained; He Anchored in the Road with one
ship of small burden, and pretending the death of his Merchant besought the
French, (being about thirty in number) that they might bury their Merchant in
hallowed ground, and in the Chapel of that Isle; offering the French a Present
of such Commodities as they had aboard; whereunto the French yielded, upon
Condition that they should not come ashore with any weapon, no not so much as a
Knife; Then did the Flemings put a Coffin into their Boat, not filled with a
dead Carcass, but with Swords, Targets, and Carabines; The French receiving
them at their Landing, and searching every one so narrowly that they could not
hide a Penknife, gave them leave to draw their Coffin up the Rocks with great
difficulty; some of the French took the Flemish Boat, and rowed toward the Ship
to fetch the Rewards promised them, and what else they pleased, but being come
aboard, they were taken and bound. The Flemmings on Land when they had carried
their Coffin into the Chapel shut the door to them, and taking their weapons
out of the Coffin set upon the French, who ran to the Cliff, and called to
their Company Aboard the Ship to come to their assistance, but finding the Boat
came back full of Flemmings, they yielded themselves and the place. Rawleigh's
History of the World, lib. 5.

XXXII. Notable was the exploit of the surprising Breda in the Wars of the
Low Countries, A River called Merch runs by that City, upon which stands a
Noble Castle rather for Habitation than Strength; Three Leagues from Breda, the
River falls into a large Channel in Holland, and some Barks of Merchandise used
to pass to and fro upon that River, having Pasports for that purpose; The
Governor of Breda under the Prince of Parma used sometimes to go to a place
about nine Miles off, and in his absence his Son commanded in his stead; All
the while the Father kept in Breda, he still caused diligent search to be made
in every Boat that passed, lest by some trick or other he might be surprised,
but his Son being young and inexperienced was neither so considerate nor
careful as he should have been. Among other Boats which passed to and fro, some
carried Turf, which instead of Wood is much used for firing in Friesland,
Holland, and the lower Parts of Flanders, who coming from Holland into the
River Merch, went to Breda, and some other Towns thereabout, At this time there
was a Mariner, a Master of a Boat, who was well acquainted with the Soldiers
that kept the Castle by which all these Boats used to pass, who went to Prince
Maurice, and told him, That a considerable company of Soldiers might be hid
under the Turf in his boat, and that he might thereby very probably surprise
the Castle by night, and afterward with a supply of Soldiers might easily
enter Breda. Prince Maurice liked the Stratagem very well, and resolved to make
Trial of it. These Turf-boats are usually of a good length, thereby to supply
their want of breadth, the lesser Rivers and Channels not being capable of
Broader, The Boat being fitted, the Master came with it to Breda, and
underneath the Turf which was upheld by great Poles, were placed fourscore
Soldiers all choice men, and Captain Charles Harawger an old and Valiant
Soldier commanded them; The Bark being come into the Castle, the young
Governor gave Order that it should be searched according to Custom, but as
that order was carelessly given, so it was carelessly executed; The Mariners
hereby encouraged, passed from more serious affairs to Sport and Jollity, and
so delayed the time till night came on, and invited those Soldiers which came
to search the Boat to drink some Wine with them, and when they were well warmed
with Wine, they soon fell asleep; The rest of the Soldiers were withdrawn into
the Castle to take their rest; But on a sudden the Soldiers under the Turf
Landed, and assaulted them on every side, being at first very much astonished,
but were soon made sensible of the Surprizal, and as suddenly left the Castle
to these New Guests; Some of them were hurt and some slain, and the young
Governor was taken Prisoner; The Captains in the City were in so great
Confusion that they could neither break down the Bridge whereby the Castle was
joined to the Town, neither did they secure any one Gate of the City for some
few hours, till succors could have come from the Neighboring Garrison. In the
mean time Count Hollack, and soon after Prince Maurice himself came, at whose
entrance the Spanish Garrison marched basely and shamefully out, and left the
City to the Hollanders in 1590. Bentivolio's History of Flanders, page 264.

XXXIII. Plutarch relates, That Hannibal the General of Carthage intending to
remove his Forces to Cassinas; his Guides by a mistake of the Punick Tongue,
led his Army to Cassilinum in Campania, which is very Mountainous, save a long
Valley which stretches it self out into the Sea; Fabius the Roman General had
shut up the way by which he should get out with Four Thousand Soldiers, and
the rest of his Army he had securely placed upon the Mountains, or with a part
of them troubled the Rear of his Enemy; Here Hannibal found himself in a Trap,
and his Army was dejected with fear, apprehending an Impossibility of freeing
themselves out of these Streights. Hannibal therefore causes two Thousand Oxen
of his Prey, that he drove along with him to be caught, and fastens to each of
their Horns Torches, and Faggots of dry sticks; These being lighted, he caused
the Oxen to be driven up to the top of the Mountains, and in the mean time with
the main of his Army, silently and in the dark, Marches to the outlet of the
Valley; The Oxen marched in order till the Fire about their Horns got to the
quick, and then they ran up and down as mad, their Fronts and Tails blazing and
firing the Bushes as they went; The Romans amazed at this unwonted and terrible
Spectacle, supposing that they were on all sides shut in by the Enemy, quitted
their Post, and thereby gave free Liberty for Hannibal to March through the
narrow Passage. Fabius not knowing whereto this Subtilty of the Enemy tended,
kept himself within his Camp in good Order, but by the first light in the
Morning it was easily discerned that by this Stratagem Hannibal had made his
escape. Plutarch in Fab. p. 178.

XXXIV. Fernando Camero Governor of Dourlans in Flanders, for the Spaniand
1596, being advertised that the Citizens of Amiens, a proud People and little
practiced in Arms, would not receive the Garrison that the King offered them
for the preservation of he Town, was resolved to do it by Policy, having also
Intelligence with some within the Town, and thereupon attires 40 or 50 stout
Soldiers like Country Peasants laden with many burdens, and armed underneath
with Daggers and short pieces; and Marching with about 700 Horse and 5000 Foot,
he lays several Soldiers in Ambush near the Town, and the next day sends some
of his disguised Soldiers to one of the City Gates following a Cart, which
being under the Portcullis, one of the pretended Peasants cut the Horsetrace,
which disordered the Horses and stopped the Gate; Upon which the others presently
discover their Arms, sieze upon their Corpse de Guard, and give a sign to those
that lay in Ambush, who being both Horse and Foot, immediately enter the Town,
go directly to the Marketplace, take the Fort and sieze upon the Armory and
Ammunition which King Henry the 4th. of France had lately sent, and in the end
forced the Townsmen to a Composition for the Redemption of their Goods.
D'Avila's History of France, lib. 15.

XXXV. Remarkable have been the escapes of some men from Death, and the Grave,
of which I shall give some Instances. Aristomenes General of the Messenians had
with too much courage adventured to set upon both the Kings of Sparta, and
being in that fight wounded and fallen on the ground, was taken up senseless,
and carried away with fifty of his Companions; There was a deep natural Cave
into which the Spartans used to cast headlong such as were condemned for the
greatest Offenses; To this Punishment were Aristomenes and his Companions
adjudged; All the rest of these poor men dyed with their falls; Aristomenes,
howsoever it came to pass, took no harm yet it was harm enough to be imprisoned
in a deep dark Dungeon among dead Carcasses, where he was likely to perish with
hunger and stench; But a while after, he perceived by some small Glimmering of
Light (which perhaps came in at the top) a Fox that was gnawing upon a dead
body, hereupon he bethought himself that this Beast must needs know some way to
enter the place and get out; for which cause he made shift to lay hold upon it,
and catching it by the Tail with one hand, saved himself from biting with the
other hand by thrusting his Coat into the mouth of it, so letting it creep
whether it would he followed it, holding it as his Guide till the way was too
straight for him, and then dismissed it. The Fox being let loose ran through an
hole at which came a little Light, and there did Aristomenes dig so long with
his Nails, that at last he clawed out his Passage, and so got home in safety,
and afterward became very famous and renowned as both the Corinthians and
Spartans, afterward found to their cost. Heylin's Cosmog. page 580.

XXXVI. In the year 1357, There was a great Plague at Colen in Germany, amongst
many others who were infected with it, was a Noble Lady, her name was Reichmut
Adolch, she lived in the New Market where her house is yet to be seen, she
being supposed to dye of it, was accordingly buried; The Sextons knew that she
was buried with a Ring upon her Finger, and therefore the night following they
came privately to the Grave, and dug up the Coffin and opened it; Upon which
the buried Lady raised up her self, the Sextons ran away in a terrible Fright,
and left their Lanthorn behind them, which she took up, and made have to the
house of her Husband, by whom she was known and received in; Afterward being
attended with all care and diligence she perfectly recovered, and lived to have
three Sons by her husband, all whom she devoted to the Ministry; The Truth of
all is confirmed by a public Monumental Inscription, erected in Memory of so
strange a thing, and is yet to be seen in the entrance of the Apostles Church
in that City. Wanly's Hist. Man. page 626.

XXXVII. I cannot but contemplate, says. N. Causin, upon that Prodigy so
loudly proclaimed by the Greek Historians; There was a Father and a Son in a
certain Ship, which as it fortuned Split upon the Rocks; The Fathers Age not
able to grapple with the Waves, was soon overwhelmed and drowned; The Son
laboring to save his Life, saw a Carcass floating upon the Water, and
mistrusting his own Strength, mounted himself upon it, and by this help reached
the shore in safety, He was no sooner free of his danger, but he knew the Corpse
to be that of his dead Father, who gave him life by his death, as he had
afforded him birth by his Life.

XXXVIII. I read in the Relations of Muscovia (says the same N. Causin)
published by the Ambassador Demetrius, of the Memorable Fortune of a Country
Boor, The man seeking for honey, leapt down into an hollow Tree, where he fell
into such plenty of it, that it sucked him in up to the Breast; He had lived
two days upon Honey only, and finding that his Voice was not heard in that
solitary Wood, he despaired of freeing himself from his Liquorish Captivity;
but he was saved by a strange chance: A huge Bear came to the same Tree to eat
of the Honey, whereof these Beasts are very greedy, he descended into the Tree,
as a Man would do with his hinder parts forward; which being observed by the
poor forlorn Creature, he desperately caught hold of his Loins the Bear in a
lamentable fright labored with all his power to get out, and thereby drew out
the Peasant from his sweet Prison, which otherwise had proved his Tomb.
Causin's Holy Court. Tom. 1. and 3.

XXXIX. Dr. Fuller, in his Worthies gives 3 notable instances of this kind;
First, Sr. Richard Edgcomb being zealous in the cause of Henry Earl of
Richmond, (afterward King Henry the seventh) was in the time of King Richard
the Third, so hotly persued, and narrowly searched for, that he was forced to
hide himself in the thick woods, at his House at Cuttail in Cornwall; Here
extremity taught him a sudden Policy, which was to put a stone in his Cap, and
tumbled the same into the water, while these Persuers were fast at his heels,
who looking down after the noise, and seeing his Cap swimming thereon, supposed
that he had desperately drowned himself, and deluded by this honest fraud, gave
over their farther persuit, leaving him at liberty to escape over into France.

XL. A Second is of one John Thornborough, preferred by Queen Elizabeth to be
Dean of York, and Bishop of Lymerick in Ireland, where he received a most
remarkable deliverance in manner following; Lodging in an Old Castle in
Ireland, in a large room partitioned but with Sheets or Curtains, with his
Wife, Children, and Servants, in effect a whole Family; These all lying upon
the ground on Matts, or such like; in the dead time of the night, the Floor
over head being Earth and Plaster, (as in many places is used) and overcharged
with weight, fell wholly down together, and crushing all to pieces that was
above two foot high, as Cup-board, Table, Forms, Stools, rested at last on
certain Chests, as God would have it, and hurt no living Creature; He was after
made Bishop of Worcester, by King James.

XLI. A Third Relation is concerning Sir Richard Edgcomb, who fighting
valiantly for the King at Edghil Battle, received twenty six wounds, and was
left on the ground among the dead; Next day his Son Adrian Scroop obtained
leave of the King to find, and fetch off his Fathers Corpse, and his hopes
pretended no higher than a decent interment thereof; Such a search was thought
in vain amongst many naked bodies with wounds, disguised from themselves, and
where pale death had confounded all Complexions together; However he having
some general notice of the place where his Father fell, did meet with his Body,
that had some heat left therein, which with rubbing, within a few Minutes
increased to motion, that motion within some few hours into sense; that sense
within a day into speech, that speech within certain weeks into a perfect
recovery, living more than Ten Years after, a Monument of God's Mercy, and his
Sons Affection; The Effect of this story I received from his own mouth in
Lincoln College. Fuller's Worthies, Page 151. 175. 274.

XLII. In the Year 1568 upon the Eve of All Saints, by the swelling of the Sea
there was so great a deluge as covered certain Islands of Zealand, a great part
of the Seacoast of Holland, and almost all Friezland, in which Province alone
Two Thousand persons were drowned, many men who had got up to the tops of Hills
and Trees, were ready to starve for hunger, but were in time saved by Boats;
Among the rest, upon an Hill by Sneace, they found an Infant, carried thither
by the water, in its Cradle, with a Cat lying by it, the poor Babe was soundly
sleeping without any fear, and then happily saved, Strada.

XLIII. William of Nassau, Prince of Orange, as he lay in his Camp near the
Duke of Alva's Army, some Spaniards in the night broke into his Camp, and some
of them run as far as the Prince of Orange's Tent, where he lay fast asleep. He
had a Dog lying by him on his Bed, that never left barking nor scratching of
him on the face till he had awakened him, and by this means he escaped the
danger. Strada.

XLIV. In the Earthquake of Apulia in Italy, which happened in 1627, on the
last day of July, one writes, That in the City of St. Severine alone, Ten
Thousand Souls were taken out of the World, and that in the horror of such
infinite ruins, and Sepulcher of so many Mortals, a great Bell thrown out o^
the Steeple by the Earthquake, fell so fitly over a child that it enclosed him,
and doing him no harm made a Bulwark for him against any other danger; And who
balanced the motion of this Metal, but the same fingers that distended the
Heavens, even the Almighty Providence of God. Causin's Holy Court, Tom. 3.

XLV. Mr. Lermouth, alias Williamson, Chaplain to the Lady Anne of Cleve, a
Scotchman, being cast into Prison for the Protestant Religion, as he was on a
time meditating, he heard a voice, (probably of an Angel,) saying to him,
Arise, and go thy ways, whereunto when he gave no great heed at the first, he
heard the voice a second time; upon this he fell to his Prayers, and about half
an hour after, he heard a voice the third time, speaking the same words;
whereupon rising up, immediately part of the Prison Wall fell down, and as the
Officers came in at the outward Gate of the Prison, he went out at the breach,
leaped over the Prison Ditch, and in his way meeting a Beggar he changed his
Coat with him, and coming to the Sea shore, he found a Vessel ready to set
Sail, into which he entered, and escaped. Clarks Examples, Vol. 1. Page 18.

XLVI. Richard White, and John Hunt, being apprehended by the Mayor of
Marlborough, in Queen Marie's Reign, they were sent to Salisbury, and kept a
long time in Lollard's Tower, and at last were brought before Bishop Capon, and
other Commissioners, and there examined of their faith, of which they made a
stout and zealous Confession, from which they could not be removed, neither by
frowns nor flatteries, so that at length they were Condemned at the Sessions to
dye, and with other Malefactors were delivered over to Sir Anthony Hungerford
the High Sheriff to be Executed; But the Evening after Mr. Clifford Son in Law
to Sir Anthony came to him, exhorting and entreating him earnestly in no case
to have a hand in the death of those two innocent persons; Sir Anthony hearing
him, went presently to one Justice Brown to ask advice, who told him, that if
he had not a Writ from above for their Execution, he could not answer the doing
it, but if he had he must then do his Office; The Sheriff hearing this took his
Horse the next day, and went out of Town, leaving these men in Prison; Dr.
Jefferies the Bishop's Chancellor hearing of it, rides after him, and
overtaking him, told him, He had delivered two Condemned men into his hands,
and wondered that he went away before he had Executed them, according to his
Office; The Sheriff told him, He was no Babe to be taught what belonged to his
Office; If you have (said he) a Wit to discharge me for the burning of them, I
know what I have to do; Why, (said the Chancellor) did not I give you a Writ
under my hand for it; Well, (said the Sheriff) that is not sufficient to
discharge me, if I have not a Writ from the Superior Powers, I will not burn
them for any of you all; Dr. Jefferies hearing this, returned home, and
presently fell sick upon it; Not long after came down a Writ from above to the
under Sheriff for their Execution; but he being a good Protestant, cast the
Writ into the Fire, saying, I will not be guilty of these men's blood; Within
four days after Jefferies dyed; About which time Richard White, and John Hunt
being in a low and dark Dungeon were going to Prayer, but on a sudden knowing
no reason for it, they burst forth into a great weeping, so that they could not
speak a word, and the next Morning they understood just at the same time the
Chancellor dyed; Presently after the Bishop dyed also, so that these two good
men continued in Prison till Queen Mary's death, and by that means it pleased
God to deliver them. Clarks Martyr. Page 510.

XLVII. In the time of Queen Mary's sickness, one Cox a Promoter taking the
Constable, and some others with him, went to the House of Mr. William Living, a
Minister in Shoo-lane, and there searching amongst his books, found a book of
Astronomy, made by Johannes de Sacro Bosco, wherein were many Figures, Cox
taking this book, and seizing Mr. Living and his Wife, carried them away to the
house of one Darbyshire, Chancellor to the Bishop of London, and by the way
opening the Book, he said; I have found him at last, It Is no marvel though the
Queen be sick, when there are such Conjurers in corners, but now I hope he
shall conjure no more; Then Darbyshire Examined him, and told him, that he was
a Schismatic, and a Traitor; To whom Mr. Living answered, I should be sorry if
that were true, but I know I am no Traitor, for I have alwaye^ Preached
Obedience according to the Tenor of God's Word, and when Tumults have been
raised, I have suppressed the^ by God's word; But (said the Chancellor) you
deny the Church of Rome; And therefore he bid Cluny the barbarous Jailer take
him away, and put him into the Cole-house; Then did Cluny violently hale and
draw him, and carrying him to his house, there robbed him of all his Money, his
Psalter, and New Testament, etc. After which he carried him to the Cole-house,
and there put both his Arms and Legs into the Stocks, saying, That except he
gave him Forty Shillings, he would put a Collar of Iron about his Neck also; I
am never able to pay so much, said Mr. Living, and so he was left in the
Stocks; At Evening a Kinswoman of his brought him his Supper, who seeing how
miserably he was used, told Cluny, That she would give him Ten groats to let
him loose; Cluny took her Money, and so let him eat his Supper, but presently
after set him in the Stocks again, within a few days he was removed, and put
into Lollard's Tower, and there laid in Irons, where he remained a Prisoner,
but the sudden death of Queen Mary, and the coming in of Queen Elizabeth, of
happy Memory, prevented the cruel death designed to be inflicted on him. Clarks
Martyrology. Page 511.

XLVIII. Leo, Son to the Emperor Basilius Macedo, was accused by a Monk, as
having designed upon the life of his Father, and was thereupon cast into
Prison, in order to the taking away his life, from which he was freed by this
strange means; The Emperor on a time feasted diverse of the greatest Lords in
his Court, who being all sat, a Parrot that was hung up in a Cage in the Hall,
cried out in a mournful Tone, Alas, alas, poor Prince Leo, which words, it is
like, he had frequently heard from Courtiers passing to and fro, who bewailed
the Princes misfortunes in those Terms; And when the Parrot had often repeated
these words; The Lords at the Table were siezed with such a sudden sadness that
all of them neglected their Meat; The Emperor observed it, and called to them
to eat, inquiring the reason why they did not? When one of them with tears in
his eyes replied; How should we eat Sir, being thus reproached by this bird, of
our want of Duty to your Family? The brute Creature is mindful of his Lord, and
we that have reason, have neglected to supplicate your Majesty in behalf of the
Prince, whom we all believe to be innocent, and to suffer under Calumny, and
false Accusation; The Emperor moved with these words, commanded to fetch Leo
^ut of Prison, admitted him to his Presence, and restored him first to his
favor, and then to his former Dignity of Caesar. Wanly Hist. Man. Page 628.

XLIX. In the Year 1552, Francis Pelusius of Six^y three Years old, digging a
Well, Forty foot deep ^n the Hill of St. Sebastian, the Earth above him fell in
upon him to Thirty five Foot depth; He was somewhat sensible before of what was
coming, and opposed a plank, which by chance he had with him, against the
Ruins, himself lying under it; By this means he was protected from the huge
weight of Earth, and retained some room and breath to himself, by which he
lived seven days and nights without food or sleep, supporting his Stomach only
with his own Urine, without any pain or sorrow, being full of hope which he
placed in God only; Ever and anon he called for help, as being yet safe, but
was heard by none, though he could hear the motion, noise and words of those
that were above him, and could count the hours as the Clock went. After the
seventh day, he being all this while given for dead, they brought a Bier for
his Corpse, and when a good part of the Well was dug up, on a sudden they
heard the voice of one crying from the bottom; At first they were afraid, as if
it had been the voice of a Subterranean Spirit, the voice continuing they had
some hope of his life, and hastened to dig to him, till at last, after they had
given him a glass of Wine, they drew him up, living, and well, his strength so
entire, that to lift him out he would not suffer himself to be bound, nor would
use any help of another; Yea, he was of so sound Understanding, that jesting,
he drew out his Purse, and gave them Money, saying, He had been with such good
Hosts, that for seven days it had not cost him a farthing. Soon after he
returned to his work again, and was then alive when I writ this, says
Bartholomew Aumulus. Thus we see many have been providentially saved from death
by very strange ways and means; And we likewise read that others have been as
happily cured of very dangerous Diseases by very strange Accidents, of which
the following Relations give an account.

L. A certain Cardinal was sick of an Impostume, and at last the Collected
matter was got in such manner into his Throat, that it caused great difficulty
of breathing, and threatened to strangle him immediately; The Physicians had
left him as a person whose case was utterly desperate, and his Servants eager
after the spoil, enter his Chamber, and seize upon all the Ornaments of it;
They took down the Hangings, Pictures, Statues, carry out the Carpets,
Cushions, and the very Clothes of their Master, yea his Cardinals Gown, while
he yet breathed and looked upon them; The Cardinal kept an Ape, and he
observing how his Fellow servants had been busied, comes also himself into the
Chamber, looks round about him to see what was left for him, he finds nothing
but only the Cardinals Cap which lay neglected upon the ground, this the Ape
merrily takes up, and puts upon his own head. This Spectacle moved the almost
dying Cardinal to an extreme laughter, the laughter broke the Impostume, and
after he had well vomited, he was restored to his health, and to the recovery
of his imbezelled Goods. Wanly's Hist. Man. page 631.

LI. In the year 1602. says the famous Crollius, I saw at Prague a Bohemian
Country Fellow named Matthew aged about 36 years; this man for 2 years
together, with a strange and unheard of Dexterity in his Throat, used often in
Company of such as sat drinking to take a knife af the usual bigness, with a
haft of Horn, and this after the manner of a Jugler, he would put down his
Throat and drink a good draught of Ale after it, which was given him for his
pains; But he could recover it at his pleasure, and with a singular Art take it
by the point and draw it out; But by I know not what misfortune the day after
Easter the same year, he swallowed the same knife so far that it went down into
his very Stomach, and by no Artifice of his could be drawn back any more; He
was half dead through the apprehension of death that would undoubtedly follow,
but after he had retained the knife in manner aforesaid for the space of seven
weeks and two days entire, by the use and means of Attractive Plasters made up
with Loadstone and other things, the knife point by a natural impulse began to
make its way out near the Orifice of the Stomach, which the Patient perceiving,
though by many persuaded to the contrary, because of the imminent hazard of his
Life, was very earnest that incision might be made, and so the knife drawn out,
which he at length obtained to be done by many entreaties, and upon Thursday
after Whitsontide about seven a Clock in the Morning all was happily performed
by Florianus Mathis of Brandenburg, the chief Surgeon both of the City and
Kingdom, The Knife is laid up amongst the Emperors Rarities, and showed as an
incredible miracle by the Courtiers and others in the City; the length of this
Knife is nine Inches, and the color of it was so changed as if it had all that
time lain in the Fire; The Country Fellow in some few weeks by the care of his
expert Surgeon, without any further Sickness or Trouble, and contrary to the
Judgment of Physicians recovered his former health so perfectly that soon after
he married, and lived many years. Crollius Chemistry, page 125.

LII. This man's Recovery was very admirable, but that which follows seems yet
more strange, being much more likely to kill than cure, as having been the
occasion of many a man's Death, but however since a credible Author reports it,
I shall do the same. Paleologus the Second, Emperor of Constantinople was
dangerously sick, and when Nature, nor the Art of his Physicians could any way
help him, and that he had kept his Bed for a whole year, to the great prejudice
of the State; His Empress was informed by an old Woman, that it was impossible
her husband should recover, unless he was continually vexed and provoked by her
harsh dealing and ill usage, for by that means the humors that were the
occasion of his sickness, would be dissipated and discharged; This advice was
approved, and by this way of contrary cure as one would think, the Empress
proceeded; For she began continually to vex and torment him to an exceeding
height, scarce observing him in any one thing that he commanded; with these
frequen^ and incessant vexations, the malignant Humors were dispersed by the
Augmentation of heat, and the Emperor did so perfectly recover, that throughout
those twenty years in which he afterward lived, even to the sixtieth year of
his Age, he remained sound and well. Camerarius's Spare Hours, Cent. 3.

LIII. A certain man (says Solenander) lay sick upon his Bed, and in all
appearance entering upon the last moments of his life, at which time came an
Enemy of his, and inquires of his Servant where his Master was, He is, said he,
in his bed, and in such a condition, that he is not likely to live out this
day; But he, as the manner of the Italians is, resolving he should dye by his
hands, enters his Chamber, and giving the sick Person a desperate Stab,
departs, but by the Flux of Blood that issued from that wound, and the diligent
attendance of his cure, the man recovered, receiving as it were a new life from
him who came for no other purpose than to assure himself of his death; Schenk.
Observat. lib. 5.

LIVE. Sir John Cheek was once one of the Tutors to King Edward the 6th. and
afterward Secretary of State, much did the Kingdom value him, but more the
King, for being once desperately sick, the King carefully enquiring of him
every day, at last his Physician told him, there was no hope of his Life, being
given over by him for a dead man; No, said the King, He will not dye this time,
for this morning I begged his life from God in my prayers, and obtained it;
which accordingly came to pass, and he soon after contrary to all expectation
wonderfully recovered. This, says Dr. Fuller, was attested by the old Earl of
Huntington (bred up in his Childhood with King Edward) to Sir Thomas Cheek who
was alive in 1654. and eighty years of Age. Lloyds State Worthies, page 194.

LV. Duffe the Threescore and eighteenth King of Scotland, labored with a new
and unheard of Disease, no cause was apparent, all Remedies insignificant, his
body languishing in a continual sweat, and his strength apparently decaying,
insomuch that he was suspected to be bewitched, which was increased by a rumor
that certain Witches of Forest in Murray practiced his destruction, arising
from a word which a Girl let fall, That the King should dye shortly; who being
examined by Donald Captain of the Castle, and Tortures showed her, Confessed
the Truth, and how her Mother was one of the Assembly; And when certain
Soldiers were sent in search, they surprised them roasting the waxen Image of
the King before a soft Fire, to the end that as the wax melted by Degrees, so
should the King dissolve by little and little, and his life should waste away
with the Consumption of the other. But the Image being broken, and the Witches
hanged for this Treason, the King recovered his wonted health in a Moment.
Sandy's Ovids Met. lib. 8.

LVI. And as by these Examples we may observe how strangely some Persons have
been saved from death, so we find others have unwarily and unwittingly procured
and hastened their own death and downfall; For we read in Josephus that Anthony
being at Laodicea sent for King Herod to answer what was objected against him
touching the death of young Aristobulus; Herod was an impotent Lover of his
Wife Mariamne, and suspecting that her Beauty was one cause of his danger,
before he went he committed the care of his Kingdom to Joseph his Uncle, withal
leaving him order to kill Mariamne his Wife in case he should hear that any
thing evil had befallen him; Herod took his Journey and Joseph in Conversation
with the Queen acquainted her with the Order he had left with him. Herod having
appeased Anthony, returned with Honor, and speaking to the Queen of the Truth
and Greatness of his Love, in the midst of Embraces, Mariamne said to him, It
was not the part of a Lover to give Commandment that if any thing should
befall thee otherwise than well with Anthony, I should presently be put to
death. No sooner were these words out of her mouth, but the King entered into a
strange Passion, and giving over his Embraces, he cried out with a loud Voice,
and tore his hair, saying, That he had a most evident proof that Joseph had
committed adultery with her, because he would not have discovered those things
which had been spoken to him in secret, except they had greatly trusted each
other. And in this emotion or rage of Jealousy he hardly contained from
killing his Wife; yet he gave Order that Joseph should be slain, without
admitting him Audience or Justification of his Innocence. Thus Joseph by his
Imprudent revealing a dangerous Secret, unwarily procured his own death.
Josephus Antiquit. lib. 15.

LVII. The same Author relates, that Herod being overcome with pain and
troubled with a vehement Cough, and almost pined with Fasting, was resolved to
hasten his own death; and taking an Apple in his hand, called for a Knife, and
then looking about him, least any stander by should hinder him he lifted up his
Arm to Stab himself; But Achiabus his Cosen ran hastily unto him, and stayed
his hand, and presently there was great Lamentation made throughout all the
Kings Palace, as if the King had been dead; His Son Antipater then in Prison,
having speedy news thereof was glad, and promised the Keepers Money to release
him; But the chiefest of them did not only deny to do it, but also went and
immediately acquainted the King with it; Herod hearing this, commanded his
Guard to go and kill Antipater, and Bury him in the Castle called Hircanium.
Thus was that wicked man cast away by his own Temerity and Imprudence, who had
he had more Patience and Discretion, might probably have secured both his Life
and the Kingdom to himself, for Herod outlived his death but five days.
Josephus Antiquities, Lib. 1.

LVIII. King Francis of France had resolved upon the Murder of the Chief Lords
of the Protestant Religion, this secret of Council had been imparted by the
Duke of Anjou to Ligneroles his Familiar Friend; He being one time in the Kings
Chamber observed some Tokens of the Kings displeasure, at the demands of some
Protestant Lords, whom he had newly dismissed with a show of Favor; Ligneroles
either moved with the Lightness incident to youth, which often overshoots
discretion, or moved with Ambition, not to be ignorant of the nearest Secrets,
told the King in his ear; That His Majesty ought to quiet his mind with
Patience, and laugh at their Insolence, for within a few days by that meeting
which was almost ripe, they would be all in his Net, and might be punished at
his pleasure. With which words the Kings Mind being struck in the most tender
sensible part of it, he made show not to understand his meaning, and retired to
his private Lodgings, where full of Anger, Grief, and Trouble he sent to call
the Duke of Anjou, charging him with the revealing this weighty secret; The
Duke confessed he had imparted the business to Ligneroles, but assured him he
need not fear he would ever open his Lips to discover it; No more he shall,
answered the King, for I will take Order that he shall be dispatched before he
have time to publish it. He then sent for George de Villequier Viscount of
Guearchy, whom he knew bore a grudge against Ligneroles, and commanded him to
endeavor by all means to kill him that day, which was accordingly executed by
him and Count Charles of Mansfield as he hunted in the Field. D'Avila's Wars of
France. Lib. 5.

LIX. Fredegundis was a Woman of admirable Beauty, and for that Reason
entertained by Chilperick King of France, over whose heart she had gained such
an Empire that she procured the Banishment of his Queen and lawful Wife
Andovera, and the death of his own Mother Galfinda; yet neither was she
faithful to him, but prostituted her Body to Landric de la Tour, Duke of
France, and Mayor of the Palace. Upon a day the King being to go a Hunting,
came up first into her Chamber, and found her dressing her head with her Back
toward him; He therefore went softly and struck her gently on the back-part
with the hinder end of his Hunting Spear, she not looking back; What do thou
do my Landric, said she, It is the part of a good Knight, to charge a Lady
before rather than behind; By this means the King found her Falsehood, and went
to his purposed Hunting, but she perceiving her self discovered, sent for
Landric, told him what had happened, and therefore enjoined him to kill the
King for his and her safety, which he undertook and effected that night, as the
King returned late from Hunting. Hist. France, page 23.

LX. Muleasses the King of Tunis was skilled in Astrology, and had found that
by a fatal influx of the Stars, he was to lose his Kingdom, and also to perish
by a cruel death; when therefore he heard that Barbarossa, the Turkish Admiral,
was preparing a Navy at Constantinople, concluding it was against himself, to
withdraw from the danger he departed Africa, and Transported himself into
Italy, to crave Aid of Charles the Emperor against the Turks, whom he thought
had a design upon him; In the mean time he had committed the Government of his
Kingdom to Amida his Son, who like an ungrateful Traitor assumed to himself the
Name and Power of a King, and having taken his Father upon his return, he put
out his Eyes. Thus Muleasses drew upon himself that Fate he expected, by those
very means by which he hoped to have avoided it. Wanly's History of Man. page
458.

LXI. There was an Astrologer, says Wierus, who had often and truly predicted
the event of diverse weighty Affairs, who having intentively fixed his Eyes upon
the Face of James Galleacius an Italian Duke, and contemplating the same;
Dispose Sir, said he, of your Affairs with what speed you may, for it is
impossible you should long live in this world; why so? said Galleacius?
Because, replied the other, the Stars whose sight and Position on your
Birthday, I have well observed, do threaten you, and that not obscurely with
death before such time as you shall attain to maturity; Well, said Galleacius,
you who believe in the Positions of the Birthday Stars as if they were so many
Gods, How long are you to live through the bounty of the Fates; The Astrologer
answered, I have a sufficient Tract of time allotted for my life. But, said
Galleacius, that for the future out of a foolish belief of the bounty and
Clemency of the Fates, thou may not presume farther upon the continuance of
life than perhaps it is fit, thou shall dye presently contrary to thy own
opinion, nor shall the combined force of all the Stars in Heaven be able to
save the from destruction, who presumest in this manner to dally with the
Destiny of Illustrious Persons; and thereupon commanded him to be carried to
Prison and Strangled, whereby the poor Astrologer appeared to be fatally
mistaken in his pretended Infallible Predictions. Wieri Opera, Lib. de Ira.
page 148.

LXII. The Emperor Probus a great and excellent Prince having well nigh
brought the Empire into a quiet and peaceable, from a troublesome and Turbulent
posture, was heard to say, That he would speedily take such a Course that there
should be no more need of Men of War; This speech was so distasted by the
Soldiers that they conspired against him, and procured his death. To the same
purpose is the Relation of some Persons of Syracuse in Sicily, who discoursing
in a Barbers shop concerning the Tyrant Dionysius, they said his Tyranny was
Adamantine, and that he could not be destroyed; What, said the Barber, do we
speak thus of Dionysius, under whose Throat I ever and anon hold a Razor? As
soon as Dionysius was informed of this, he caused his Barber to be Crucified,
and so he paid for his foolish words with the price of his Life. Plutarch, de
Loquacitate. page 200.

LXIII. The same Author relates a Passage of another Barber though not of such
dangerous Consequence; A Barber who kept shop at the end of the Suburbs called
Pyreum in Athens, had no sooner heard of the great discomfiture of the
Athenians in Sicily, from a certain slave fled from thence out of the field,
but leaving his Shop at six and sevens, he ran directly into the City to carry
the Tidings fresh and new, For fear some other might the honor win,
And he too late, or second should come in.


Now upon reporting of these unwelcome tidings, there was a great stir within
the City; the people Assembled to the Market place, search was made for the
Author of this rumor, hereupon the Barber was haled before the body of the
People, and being examined hereof, he knew not so much as the name of the Party
from whom he had heard the News; Upon which the whole Assembly were so moved to
anger, that they cried out, Away with the Villain, set the Rascal upon the
Rack, have him to the Wheel, who has devised this Story of his own fingers
ends; The Wheel of Torture was brought, and the Barber was tormented upon it;
In the mean while there came certain News of that defeat, and thereupon the
Assembly broke up, leaving the Barber racked out at length upon the Wheel, till
it was late in the Evening, at which time he was let loose, yet was no sooner
at liberty, but he must inquire News of the Executioner, what he had heard
abroad of the General Nicias, and in what manner he was slain. Plutarch's
Morals. Page 200.

LXIV. Candaules King of Lydia doted so much upon the Beauty of his own Wife,
that he could not be content to enjoy her, but would needs enforce one Gyges to
behold her Naked Body, and placed the unwilling man secretly in her Chamber,
where he might see her preparing to Bedward; This was not so closely carried
but that the Queen perceived Gyges at his going forth, and understanding the
matter, took it in such high disdain, that the forced him the next day to
requite the Kings folly with Treason; So that Gyges being brought again into
the same Chamber by the Queen, slew King Candaules, and was rewarded not only
with his Wife, but the Kingdom of Lydia, wherein he Reigned Thirty Eight Years.
Justin Hist. Lib. 1.

LXV. Fulvius, one of the Favorites and Minions of Augustus Caesar Emperor of
Rome, having heard him toward his latter days, lamenting and bewailing the
desolate estate of his House, because he had no Children of his body begotten,
and that of his three Nephews or Sisters Children, two were dead, and
Posthumous who only remained alive, upon an Accusation against him was sent
away, and lived in banishment, whereupon he was enforced to bring in his Wives
Son, and declare him his Successor in the Empire. Notwithstanding upon a tender
compassion he was sometime in deliberation with himself, and minded to call
Posthumous from Banishment; Fulvius I say being privy to these means, and
designs of his, went home and told his Wife all that he had heard; She could
not hold, but went presently to the Empress Livia, Wife to Augustus, and
reported what her Husband Fulvius had told her; Whereupon Livia in great
Indignation did sharply expostulate with Caesar in these Terms; Seeing said
she, you had so long projected such a thing as to call home your Nephew, why
did you not send for him at first, but have exposed me to the hatred and enmity
of Posthumous, who shall be Emperor after your Decease; The next morning
betimes, when Fulvius came as his manner was to salute Caesar, and bid him good
morrow, after he had said, God save you Caesar, Augustus resaluted him with
this, God make you wise Fulvius; Fulvius soon found him, and conceived
presently what he meant thereby; He retired then to his house with all speed,
and having called his wife, Caesar said he, is come to the knowledge that I
have not concealed this secret, and therefore I am resolved to make away my
self with my own hands; And well worthy, (quoth she) for justly have you
deserved death, who having lived so long with me, knew not all this while the
incontinency of my Tongue, nor would beware of it, yet suffer me first to dye
upon your Sword; And she accordingly killed her self, her Husband likewise
following her in the same bloody fate; and thus we may see what mischief has
befallen persons by their loquacity, and too much inconsiderateness in their
words. Plutarch's Morals. Page 199.

LXVI. Strange was the destiny, or rather the Divine Vengeance which fell on
the Duke of Guise, a cruel Persecutor of the poor French Protestants, and a
bloody instrument in the Massacre of Paris; For Advertisements came from all
parts, both within and without the Realm, from Spain, Rome, Lorrain and Savoy,
to give notice to this Henry of Lorrain Duke of Guise, in the Reign of King
Henry the third of France, that a bloody Catastrophe would dissolve that
Assembly he had then occasioned of the Estates; The Almanacks, had well
observed it; It was generally reported in the Estates that the Exececution
should be on St. Thomas his day, the very Evening before the Dukes death, the
Duke himself sitting down to dinner, found a scrole under his Napkin,
Advertising him of a secret design of the King, and his Party against him, but
he writ underneath with his own hand, they dare not, and threw it under the
Table; seeing therefore that no warning would abate his confidence, nor awake
his security; This Murder was performed on this manner; Upon December 23. 1588.
The King Assembles his Council, having before prepared seven of his Gentlemen
that were near his Person, to Execute his Will; The Duke of Guise came, and
attending the beginning of the Council, sends for an Handkerchief; Pericart his
Secretary having fresh notice of the Plot, and not daring to commit the News to
any man's report, ties a note to one of the Corners thereof, wherein was
written; Come forth, and save your self, or else you are but a dead man; But
Larchant the Captain of the Kings Guards, staid the Page that carried it, and
caused another Handkerchief to be given him by St. Prix the Chief Groom of the
Kings Chamber; The Spirit of man does often Prophecy the mischief that does
pursue him; The Duke in the Council complains of strange alterations, and
extraordinary distemperatures, and amidst his distrust a great fainting of his
heart, St. Prix presents unto him some Prunes of Brignolles, he eats, and
thereupon the King calls him into his Cabinet by Revol one of his Secretaries
of State, as if to confer with him about some secret of importance; The Duke
leaves the Council to pass into the Cabinet, and as he lift up the Tapestry
with one hand to enter, no less than forty five persons waited with Ponyards,
Rapiers, and Partisans to dispatch him, and so he was there slain. Hist.
France. Page 821.

LXVII. As by the foregoing Instances, many mischiefs have happened by the
intemperance of the tongue, so by taciturnity and secresy great Enterprises
have been conducted with safety, which might otherwise have proved frustrate or
hazardous; The secret Councels of the Senate of Rome, says Valerius Maximus,
were divulged by no Senators for many Ages together: Only Caius Fabius Maximus,
(and he also through imprudence) meeting with Crassus as he went into the
Country, told him of the Third Punick war secretly decreed ^n the Senate, for
he knew he was made Questor three years before, but knew not that he was yet
chosen into the order of the Senators by the Censors, which was the only way of
admittance. But though this was an honest error of Fabius, yet he was severely
reprehended by the Consuls for it, since they would not that Privacy, which is
the best and safest bond in the Administration of Affairs, should be broke;
Therefore when Eumenes King of Asia, a Friend to Rome, had declared to the
Senate, that Perseus King of Macedon was preparing to War upon the people of
Rome, it could never be known what he had said in the Senate house, or what
answer the Senators had made to him, till such time as it was known that King
Perseus was a Prisoner; So that you would have thought that which was spoken in
the ears of all, was heard by none. Valerius Maximus. Lib. 2.

LXVIII. It was formerly a custom, that the Senators of Rome carried their Sons
with them to the Senate house, and thither did Papirius Praetextatus follow his
Father; Some great Affair was consulted of, and deferred to the next day,
charge being given that none should disclose the Subject of their debate,
before it was decreed; The Mother of the young Papirius at his return, inquired
of him, what the Fathers had done that day in the Senate, who told her that it
was a secret, and that he might not discover it; The woman was the more
desirous to know for this answer he had made her, and therefore proceeds in her
inquiry with more earnestness and violence; The boy finding himself urged,
invented this witty Lie; It was, said he, debated in the Senate which would be
most advantageous to the Common wealth, that one man should have two wives, or
one woman should have two husbands; The woman in a terrible fright leaves the
house, and acquaints diverse other Ladies with what she had heard; The next day
came a Troop of women to the door of the Senate house, crying and beseeching,
That rather one woman might Marry two men, than that one man should Marry two
women; The Senators entering the Court, inquire what meant this intemperance of
the women, and what their request intended; Hereupon young Papirius stepped into
the midst of the Court, and told them what his Mother had desired to know, and
what answer he had given; They commended his wit and secrecy, and then made an
order, that no Senators sons should enter their Court save only that one
Papirius. Wanly Hist. Man. Page 232.

LXIX. The Ambassadors of the King of Persia were at Athens invited to a Feast,
whereat also were present diverse Philosophers, who to improve the Conversation,
discoursed of many things both for and against, amongst which was Zeno, who
being observed to sit silent all the while, the Ambassadors pleasantly demanded
what they should say of him to the King their Master; Nothing said he, farther
than this, that you saw at Athens an Old Man, who knew how to hold his Tongue;
Metellus the Roman General was once asked by a young Centurion what design he
had now in hand, who told him, That if he thought his own shirt was privy to
any part of his Counsel, he would immediately pluck it off, and burn it.
Plutarchs Morals. 506.

LXX. Leaena was an Athenian Strumpet, who could play well upon an Harp, and
sing sweetly to it, she was familiarly acquainted with Harmodius, and
Aristogiton, and privy to their Plot and Project, touching the murder of
Pisistratus the Tyrant, yet would she never reveal this purpose or intention of
theirs to the Tyrant, or his Favorites, though she was put to most cruel and
painful torments about it; The Athenians therefore desirous to honor this
woman for her resolute and constant secrecy, and yet loath to be thought to
make so much of such an Harlot as she was, devised to represent the memorial of
her, and her Act, by a Beast of her name, and that was a Lyoness; the statue of
which they gave order to Iphicrates to make, and that he should leave out the
tongue in the head of this Lyoness, for some say, That fearing least her
torment should cause her to betray her friends, she bit it off, and spit it in
the face of the Tyrant and Tormenters. Pliny. Lib. 3.

LXXI. When the King of Ala goes to War, says Mr. Purchase, he Assembles his
chief men into a Grove near the Palace, where they dig a ditch in a round
circle, and there every man declares his opinion, after this consultation the
ditch is closed, and under pain of Treason and Death, all which has been
spoken must be concealed, as if it were so buried as they had before
represented in their Emblem. Purchas's Pilgrimage, Tom. 1.

LXXII. Prodigious and Wonderful was the Revolution at Naples in Italy 1647.
Translated from the Italian by James Howel Esquire and thus contracted by Mr.
Samuel Clark. The Duke of Arcos Viceroy of Naples under the King of Spain,
having imposed many Gabels or Taxes upon several Commodities both vendible and
edible, at last laid a Tax upon Fruit also, which more provoked and offended
the Multitude than all the former, whereupon by their public Cries and
Lamentations they daily solicited the Viceroy as he passed through the
Marketplace to ease them of that Burden, using likewise the mediation of
others, which not prevailing, they were ready to raise a Mutiny, which so
affrighted the Viceroy, that he promised quite to take off the Gabel, but
delaying to do it, some of the enraged People one night put fire to some Powder
in the Marketplace where it was exacted, and blew it up; There were also daily
bitter invectives and protests against the public Officers fixed in diverse
parts of the City; At which the Viceroy being Alarmed, often Assembled the
six Precincts of the City to consult about the business, some being for, and
others against easing the People, saying, They were but a Company of
Tatterdemalions who made all this noise; Besides diverse Great Men and Merchants
of the City had advanced upon this Gabel above six hundred Thousand Crowns, and
were to pay eighty five Thousand Crowns of Annual Rent; This was noised abroad,
and likewise that if this were taken off another Tax would be set upon Corn and
Wine, whereupon the enraged People protested they would never endure it; While
these discontents were hot, July 7. 1647. This occasion suddenly presented it
self.

A young man of about twenty years old, brisk, pleasant, and of a middle
Stature, in Linen Breeches, a blew Wastcoat, and barefoot, with a Seamans Cap
on his head, happened to be in the Marketplace; His Employment was to Angle
for little Fishes, and also to buy Fish and carry them about to sell, he was
vulgarly called Massanello, and being naturally Crafty, he observed the general
Murmurings of the People, and so went up and down to the Fruiterers Shops, and
advised them, that meeting together the next day in the Marketplace, they
should tell the Country Fruiterers that they should buy no more Gabelled or
Taxed fruit; Accordingly next day they refused to buy, but one of the City
Officers persuaded them to buy it for the present and promised that the Gabel
should be suddenly taken off, and so prevailed with them for that time;
Massanello seeing his expectation frustrated, went up and down crying; Avaunt
Gabel, Down with the Gabel, for which some jeered him, others considered well
of his Words, About the same time many Boys being met in the Marketplace, he
bid them say as he said, and do as he did, and then taught them to cry, Let God
live, etc. Let the Pope live; Let the King of Spain live, and let the ill
Government dye. This the Boys cried up and down, which caused much Laughter
and Jeering at their Master, as if he were Mad, or a Fool; But he told them,
You laugh at me now, but you shall shortly see what Massanello can do; Let me
alone, and if I do not free you from all your Slaveries, let me be held
infamous for ever; Which words increased their Laughter the more; But he
minding his business, listed about Two Thousand Boys about sixteen or seventeen
years old, whom he prepared against a great Festival that was approaching;
giving every one of them a little Cane in his hand.

The day being come upon which a Feast used to be made by the Boys, and meaner
sort of People in the Marketplace, they erected a Castle of Wood, which they
battered with Sticks and Fruit, which drew a great Concourse of People
together, and at the same time a Quarrel began between the Shopkeepers and
Fruiterers, the former refusing to buy their Fruit; Whereupon a Chief Officer
came to still the Commotion, and the better to quiet the Citizens, he reviled
the Country Fruiterers, threatening to Bastinado them, and to send them to the
Galleys; Amongst these was a Cosen of Massanello's, who according to the
Instructions given him, threw his Baskets of Fruit upon the ground, crying out,
God gives Plenty and the ill Government gives a Dearth, I care not a straw for
my fruit, let every one take of it; Whereupon the Boys eagerly gathered it, and
Massanello cried out, Without Gabel, without Gabel. So that the Officer
threatened him with whipping and the Galleys, at which the People threw Figs,
Apples, and other Fruit with Fury into the Officers Face; But Massanello hit
him on the Breast with a Stone, encouraging his Militia of Boys to do the like;
so that if the Officer had not speedily broken through with his Coach, and got
away to the Palace, he had been torn in pieces or stoned to death. Upon this
success the number of the People still increasing they exclaimed aloud against
their oppressions, protesting not to pay any more Gabels, crying out, Let the
King of Spain live, and let the ill Government die. Massanello being thus
attended with his Boys, and an infinite Company of loose People, who were now
armed with Pikes and Partisans. he leaped upon a Table and with a loud voice
cried; Be joyful my Dear Companions, give God Thanks that the hour of your
Redemption draws near; This poor barefooted Fellow as another Moses who freed
the Israelites from Pharaoh's Rod, shall Redeem you from all Gabels and Taxes.
Peter a Fisherman with his voice redeemed Rome; and with it a world from Satan's
Slavery to the Liberty of Christ. Now another Fisherman which is Massanello,
shall release Naples, and with it a whole Kingdom from the Tyranny of Gabels,
etc. Nor to effect this do I care a rush to be torn in pieces, nor to be
dragged up and down the kennels of Naples; Let all the blood of my body spin
out of these veins; Let my head skip from my Shoulders by a fatal Steel, and be
set up in the Marketplace on Pole, yet I shall dye contentedly and gloriously;
It will be honor enough to me to think that my blood and life perish in so
glorious a Cause; With these and such like Words he so enflamed the People,
that they were willing to join with him, and to begin the work, they fired the
House next to the Tole-house for Fruit, which was burnt down with all the Books
of Accounts and other Goods in it.

This being done, the number so increased that every one shut up his Shop,
being astonished at so sudden a Tumult, who burnt down other Gabel-houses for
all other Goods with their Books and Writings; wherein it was very observable,
that in plundering those Houses wherein were such quantities of Money and rich
Furniture, not one durst meddle with the least piece of any thing, but all was
consumed in the Flames, being as they said, The Quintessence of their blood.
The People meeting with no opposition, were encouraged and increased thereby;
so that above Ten Thousand made toward the Palace of the Viceroy, carrying
Loaves of Bread upon their Pikes and crying, Let the King of Spain live, and
the ill Government die; and Massanello and his Boys with doleful and loud
voices as they went along the Streets labored to move all the People to join
with them, and going to St. James's Prison, they freed all the Prisoners, and
admitted them into their Society; when they came to the Palace, they cried out;
That they would not only be freed from the Gabel upon Fruits, but from all
other Gabels also; whereupon the Viceroy coming out into a Balcony, told them,
That the Gabel should be abolished, and part of that upon Corn also. But they
still cried out, That they would not be releived in part, they would have the
whole taken off; adding, May the King of Spain live, and the ill Government
dye; Many of them attempting to go up the Stairs to acquaint the Governor with
the rest of their Grievances, they were kept back by the Guard of Soldiers;
But with their Canes, Clubs, a great Cry, they forced their Passage, and
demanded Audience of the Viceroy, but he had withdrawn himself. So that when
they came to the Hall-door, and found it shut, they broke it open, and at his
Chamber they met with some further resistance by Soldiers, but forcing them
away, they had easy access into all other rooms, even to the very Closet where
the Viceroy had hid himself, and though it was double bolted, yet by main
force they broke it open, where he had certainly lost his life, but that two
Noblemen with much ado, conveyed him away; Then he intended to have gone into
the Castle, whither his Lady and Children had retired, but understanding that
the Drawbridge was up, he took Sanctuary in a Church and Friery, and so out of
a Window gave the People notice that he was willing to content them, and
accordingly published diverse Schedules for taking off the Gabel from Fruit, and
part of that from Corn, yet were they not satisfied, but made signs for him to
come down, and speak with them Face to Face, which he did accordingly in a
Coach, but they upon pain of Death commanded him out, and some then said, Sir,
for the Love of God disburthen us at once of these Gabels, Let us have no more
Slavery, Let us breathe; Then did the Viceroy grant their Request, yet
thinking himself unsafe, he threw some pieces of Gold among them, which whilst
they were scrambling for, he got into a Church, and fortified the passages both
of that and the Monastery.

The People furiously followed him, and though at a Window he promised them
satisfaction, yet they had proceeded farther had not the Archbishop interposed,
and obtained an Instrument under the hand and Seal of the Viceroy, which he
showed to the People, and so drawing him after them along the Streets, he at
last with a loud voice read the Instrument to them; But when it was read, they
all cried out, That they were cheated, since it only contained the taking off
the Gabel of Fruit, and part of that upon wheat; and it was thereupon resolved,
That it was necessary for the Defense of the Faithful People of Naples to enrol
some Armed men to procure a Total discharge of Gabels. They then disarmed all
the Guards, and desired, yea beseeched the Prince of Basignano, Colonel
General of the Battalions of Naples who was well beloved amongst them, to be
their Defender and Intercessor to the Viceroy for the Total Abolishment of
Gabels; This Request he could not refuse, and therefore mounting on Horseback,
he went along with them, the number of Men and Boys still increasing till they
were about fifty Thousand; The Prince used all possible means to quiet the
People, swearing, That he would obtain for them what they desired; yet he
prevailed nothing, for some of them ran to diverse Prisons, breaking them open,
freeing the Prisoners, and burning all the Books, and Processes of Prisoners
that were found in the Offices; Then going to the Toll-houses for Corn, they
burnt it quite down, together with much Corn, Household Stuff and Money; Then
they went to St. Lawrence's Church to ring the great Bell to warn all the
people to Arm; but there they met with some Resistance; in which time the
Prince being almost spent in the Crowd slipped away; which the People
understanding, cried out to Massanello to be their Captain and Conductor, who
accepting the Charge, by sound of Drum stirred up all the People of the City
and Suburbs to take Arms.

The day now declining, to prevent the infinite mischief that was like to
ensue, it was thought fit by some, that the Monks and Friars should go in
Procession through the City to implore the Divine help and if possible to quiet
the People, which accordingly they did but without success; But the Viceroy
and Nobility fearing the People should sieze upon 16 pieces of Ordnance, Arms,
etc. and Ring the Bells to increase the Uproar, they sent a good guard of
Spaniards, and others to prevent them; and about Midnight the Vice Roy and
other principal men removed to the Castle Nuovo, that was near the Palace, and
the better to quiet the People, he published good Orders concerning bread,
which being scarce 24 Ounces, should now be made above 33 Ounces, and that
Considerable Guards should be set about the Castle; yet the People went on with
their Fury, Ringing Bells, and dividing themselves into all Quarters; Some
burning down the rest of the Toll-Houses; Others plundering the Shops for
Swords, Muskets, Bullets, Match, etc. And one foolish Man resisting them, they
put Fire to his house wherein were diverse Barrels of Powder, which taking Fire
blew up 87 Men, besides 44 that were hurt; To prevent the like mischief the
Viceroy commanded, that all the Powder in other places should be made wet with
water.

The next day July 8. very early in the morning the People appeared in a
warlike Equipage, amongst whom were mingled many Country Fellows with
pitchforks, plowshares, shovels, and the like, and many Women with
Fire-shovels, Tongs, Spits, etc. Yea the very Children with little Staves and
Canes all in an enraged manner crying out; Let the Lord our King live, and the
ill Government die; With such like cries the Air was filled. They then sent
order to the 36 Wards of the City to Arm immediately, upon pain of having their
Houses burnt down. But wanting Powder, they went to a House where they knew
some was, who refusing to sell it them, they threw lighted Matches into it,
blowing up the House and sixty Persons that were in it; Then they hastened to
the Kings Powderhouse that was out of the City, but when they came thither
found it all put in Water, and so were disappointed; In the mean time the
Viceroy had strengthened his Guards with a Thousand Germans, eight hundred
Spaniards, and a Thousand Italians, fortifying all places about him; He sent
also for another Regiment of Germans from Pozzolo, which the People hearing of
met them, slew some and took the rest Prisoners; That morning also the Spanish
Guard had Imprisoned two mean fellows for some Insolences, but the people set
upon the Guard, slew some, and threatened to tear in pieces all the Spaniards in
Naples, if they were not released, to prevent which they were set free; Then
the Viceroy sent some Lords to Massanello with an instrument, wherein he
granted as much as they desired the day before, that is, To take off all the
Gabels, but this satisfied not the people, they would now have more, and all
his Officers and Nobles should oblige themselves to restore all their
privileges granted by King Ferdinand and Frederick, and the Emperor Charles
the fifth and also that a Law should be enacted, That never any more Gabels
should be imposed upon them; The Viceroy perceiving that they still grew upon
him, sent amongst them the Lords that were most Popular, who told them That his
Excellency was ready to give them all satisfaction; The people answered, That
by their forementioned Privileges, no New Tax was to be imposed without
consent of the Pope, and if any were, that the City might defend their
Liberties with the sword, without any mark of Rebellion against their Prince,
and therefore they demanded the Original of those grants; With which answer the
Lords returned to the Viceroy; who immediately summoned all the Councils to
consider what return to make to them.

In the mean time New Processions were made by the Priests, and the Sacrament
and Relics were laid forth in the Churches to implore the Divine Assistance
in such an Exigency; Then came a Lord from the Castle, and brought a Copy of
their Privileges, assuring them that it agreed with the Original, this pleased
them at first, but when it was read, it was found imperfect, whereupon the
people raged exceedingly, saying, That they were mocked and betrayed, and that
they would be revenged upon all the Nobility; and taking the Duke that brought
it, they cast him into Prison, who hardly escaped, but by the interc^ssion of
Peronne, one of the Chiefs, who with a Priest called Julio Genovino, were
joined in Assistance to Massanello; The first order they made, was to burn down
the Houses of Sixty Persons who had been Projectors and Officers in the
Custom-houses, and had enriched themselves by the blood of the people; This was
performed so strictly, that one for taking a little Towel out of those Houses
was killed, another for a Horse-crouper had Fifty lashes on his back, and some
others for small Trifles were hanged by the Command of Massanello, and he that
pityed the burning of those men's Houses or Goods was held no friend to the
people, the houses were very stately, out of which they threw all sorts of
Plate, Dishes, Stools, Tables, Chairs, Carpets, Tapestry, and abundance of
Money, all which they carried into the Market place, and burned, crying out;
These goods are our blood, and as these burn, so the Souls of those Dogs that
own them deserve to burn in Hellfire; In one of these Palaces, besides all
sorts of rich Furniture, were brought out Twenty Three great Trunks, which were
full of Rich Cloth of Gold, Tissue, costly Embroideries, that dazzled the Eyes
of the Beholders, a Cabinet of Pearls and Precious Stones, yet nothing was
saved from the fire;

The Vice Roy being desirous to put an end to these Combustions and Burnings,
sent a Printed Instrument for abolishing all Gabels with a General Pardon,
which took no effect, because the pardon was not so full as they desired; but
percieving that the Nobility in General were hated, he resolved to employ two
Advocates of the people, committing to their care and prudence the quieting of
them, who told him nothing would quiet them, unless the Original Charter of
Privileges granted by Charles 5 were delivered to them, which he therefore
ordered to be searched out; In the mean time Massanello commanded all the
Merchants in the Name of the people to be ready in Arms for their service; And
himself went with his Train to all the Houses of the Gentry, and others, to
search for Arms, taking all they found of all sorts, which were many Thousands,
with Nine Pieces of Ordnance, Two Canons they took out of a Ship, and Seven
more out of another; all which they planted at the mouths of Principal Streets;
Thus ended the second day, the Sun scarce appearing on the third Morning, when
the enraged People ran to the house of a Rich Farmer of the Gabel upon Corn;
and it is incredible what a world of Goods, very precious both for quantity and
quality, were found in his house, all which they burned to Ashes, only two
Boxes of Gold were preserved and deposited in the King's Bank; Then went they
to the Palace of the Duke of Caivano, who was Secretary of the Kingdom, where
they burned his Books, Writings and Library, with infinite store of Rich
Movables and Utensils, Coaches, Sedans, Couches, rare silver Vessels and
Jewels of all kinds, store of Curious Pictures, all which were burned, save
some that they sent to Churches as counting them holy pieces, yet burned their
Rich Frames; and harassed the house to the ground; The fire was so great that
it took hold of a Neighboring Monastery of Nuns, and burnt down a gallant
Library; The like Desolations were made in all houses that Massanello appointed
to destruction, which were many of the stateliest in all Naples; In one of them
was found an inestimable Wardrobe, fit for a King, which was all destroyed;
Others hid their Richest Movables in Monasteries, which were by the command of
Massanello brought out and burned.

Whilst the People were thus revenging themselves on their supposed
Adversaries, by the diligence of those that were employed, the Original
Charters of their Privileges were found out; which being carried to the Vice
Roy, he immediately sent them word of it, promising all satisfaction, but they
finding that delays were made, demanded to be Masters of the Tower, where the
great Bell hung to sound to war at any time, as also of a Port which they
thought might be prejudicial to them, and to have the use of the Artillery, and
Arms of the City therein, and before they could have an answer, Ten Thousand of
them Besieged and Assaulted the Tower, forcing the Soldiers to depart, leaving
all their Arms behind them; Then by the Command of Massanello, the great Bell
was rung, and the Arms brought forth, yet with a Protestation, That they
intended not to rebel, but only to secure the people; The Charter not yet
appearing, the People grew so furious that they drew forth other goods to be
burnt, amongst which they found the Pictures of the then King of Spain, which
they placed under a Rich Canopy, crying aloud, Let God live, let our King live,
and let the ill Government dye; Then they planted many pieces of Ordnance in
all places, and set Guards, and amongst their Company marched many women in
Warlike Equipage, like so many Amazons, and after them little Girls with
battoons and sticks in their hands, and amongst all several Banditi or thieves
mingled themselves, under a pretense to help the people, but indeed to enrich
themselves by plunder, or plot some Treason.

During these stirs they kept all Provisions our of the Castle where the
Viceroy was, and being Masters both of Sea and Land, they held him as it were
Besieged; So that he at last delivered the Original Charter to the Archbishop,
together with a Writing, wherein the Vice Roy promised firmly to observe it;
With these he went to the Market place, not doubting but to give them
satisfaction, and probably he had done it, but that at the same instant a
Conspiracy was discovered for the cutting off Massanello, and when the Charter
came to be read, they suspected it not to be real, whereupon the Archbishop was
in danger of his Life, but he told Massanello it was the right, and one was
appointed to examine it all night, which happened well for some, for otherwise
thirty six stately Houses were appointed to have been burned down, but at the
request of the Archbishop, Massanello preserved them; Again, when the
Instrument from the Vice Roy came to be read, wherein was this passage, That be
pardoned the People for whatsoever they had done, promising to obtain such
pardon from his Catholic Majesty for any Act of Rebellion that had happened,
they were greatly moved, and cried out; That they never committed any Act of
Rebellion, but had always been his most faithful Vassals, praying that he
might live a Thousand years, And so thinking they were cheated and betrayed,
they went on in forming their Militia, amongst whom marched the women in great
numbers armed, some with Battoons on their necks, some with naked swords in
their hands, others with swords, daggers, and knives, strutted about the
Streets, and marching before the Palace Royal, having a man in the Front, and
another in the Rear, still crying out; Let the King of Spain live, but the ill
Government dye; These Commotions being reported abroad, the Spanish Soldiers
quartered in the adjacent Villages, hastened toward Naples, which the People
hearing of, sent out parties who disarmed them, and turned them back, the like
they did to Five Hundred Germans, who were coming from Caprea; And Massianello
made an order, That all those Houses wherein were the Pictures of the King and
Queen of Spain, should be thrown down, and the Arms of the most faithful people
of Naples should be set up under Canopies; And truly it was a wonder that he
should have so much regard and respect, as to be able to rule things at his
pleasure in such a City, wherein were so many Doctors, Merchants, Notaries,
Scriveners, Proctors, Physicians, Lawyers, Soldiers, and worthy Artizans, with
a multitude of others, who were men of Judgment, Wit, Wealth and Valor, the
meanest of them far Superior to him in condition; But from this third day,
when he went from the people, to negotiate with the Archbishop, the Prelate
remained astonished at his Spirit and Parts; whereupon the People made him
Captain General of all their Forces, and he erecting a Scaffold in the Market
place, with two more that assisted him, gave public Audience, recieving from
all sorts, whether Laics, or Ecclesiastics, Petitions, Memorials; passing
orders, decreeing Civil, Criminal, and Military Sentences, and had at his
command an Army of an Hundred and Fifty Thousand Men, besides Women and Boys,
who were an incredible number, and thus ended the Third day, which was Tuesday.

The Fourth day early in the Morning, Massanello commanded his Lifeguard,
consisting of Seven or Eight Thousand men, to repair upon pain of death to the
Palace of the Duke of Caivano, who was accounted one of the Peoples greatest
enemies, and again to plunder his house, notice being given of far richer goods
than were before discovered; and accordingly when they had broken it open, they
found two Chambers full of the richest Tapestry that could be seen, with much
other costly goods, then they went into his Gardens, where they brake the
Marble Statues, grubbed up the Trees, Flowers, etc. and putting fire to several
places, they burnt the house, and all down to the ground; From thence they went
to the Palace of the young Duke his Son, to get the residue of his Fathers
Goods, preserved happily by him, and rushing in, they miserably spoiled every
thing; and to quicken them the Women and Boys brought Faggots, Pitch, Oil and
Straw, crying out, We have but this little Straw left in our Houses, and it
shall serve to burn down the Kennels of these Dogs, who have imposed and
exacted these cursed Taxes and Gabels from us, and thereby sucked out our
blood; Other Women would bring their Children in their Arms, and putting fired
Matches into their hands, they would make them throw them into the fire,
saying, These poor Lambs shall take vengeance on these Thieves, for the bread
which they have taken out of their Mouths; Yea, sometimes they added, Let God
live for ever, and our King, and let these Dogs dye the death; While the People
thus vented their discontents, the Archbishop had prevailed with the Viceroy
for a Pacification, and it was agreed, that the Viceroy and Nobles should come
to the Church of Carmine, and there Treat with Massanello, who consented to it,
yet charged the People upon pain of Death to maintain their Station; The
Viceroy in the mean time sent an Instrument, wherein he confirmed all the
Peoples Privileges, which the Archbishop having recieved, He requested
Massanello to call together all the Captains of the People to hear it read; and
there were great hopes of a final Conclusion, which yet again was interrupted
by this Accident; Peronne who was Massanello's Assistant, conspiring, with the
Duke of Mataloni and his Brother, to destroy Massanello, hoping that then he
might easily disperse the People, had sent five Hundred Banditi, who just then
entered at one of the Gates on Horseback, and being brought before Massanello,
they pretended to come for the Service of the People; Massanello welcomed them,
and ordered them to serve in several Places on Foot; But Peronne would have
them keep altogether on Horseback, whereupon Massanello suspecting somewhat,
commanded peremptorily, that they should be on Foot, and keep the place which
he assigned them to; The Banditi being vexed at this, discharged seven
Harquebuss Shot at him, but all missed him, though some of the Bullets burnt
part of his Shirt, which was esteemed a Miracle; The People being herewith
enraged, fell upon the Banditi, slew some, took others, and forced the rest to
fly over the Walls for their safety; Peronne also was apprehended by
Massanello's Order, and fettered till he was brought to his Trial which was
presently after the Tumult was over; He was first put to the Rack, where he
confessed, That by the Instigation of the Duke of Mataloni he had sent for
those Banditi, that Massanello, should have been slain, That Mines were already
made, and stored with Gunpowder to blow up many of the People, etc. After which
Confession his head and his brothers were cut off, and pitched upon Poles in
the Marketplace.

One of the Banditi, that was taken, promised, That if his life might be spared
he would make further Discoveries; which being granted, provided his
discoveries proved True, He confessed, That if the Banditi had succeeded in
their design, more Troops of Horse would have followed, and that they were to
have set Fire to some Mines under the Great Marketplace at such time as there
was the greatest Confluence of People, for which end a great quantity of powder
was spread up and down in several places under ground, by which means beside
the destruction of Churches and Houses, there would have been at least an
hundred and fifty Thousand Persons blown up into the Air, and when this was
effected, the Banditi joining with others of the Gentry should have fallen upon
the rest of the People in several places, and put them all to the Sword;
Massanello upon this discovery caused present search to be made, and the Vaults
and Powder being accordingly found, he spared the Man's life, but banished him
the City and Kingdom for ever, and the Powder served the People for their use;
It was discovered also by another of the Banditi put upon the Rack, That by the
Contrivance of the Duty of Mataloni and his brother Peronne, the Pipes, and
Aquoe-ducts which brought water to the City were poisoned, as also the Corn;
which being found to be true, especially the Cisterns of Rainwater; Notice was
given by sound of Trumpet, and Bills fixed in all Quarters of the City, that
none should drink of them; Massanello likewise sent Soldiers through all the
City to sieze the rest of the Banditi, who had taken Sanctuary in diverse
Churches, and Monasteries, who being dragged out, their heads were chopped off,
and set upon Poles up and down the Streets; They searched for the Duke of
Mataloni, but he escaped to Benevento, yet whosoever of his Servants, Pages or
Lacqueys fell into their hands, they presently Murdered them; And next they
vented their Rage against Guiseppe Caraffa, and Gregory, Brothers to the Duke,
who were hidden in the Monastery of St. Mary's; Gregory foresaw the danger, and
escaped betimes, and would have persuaded his Brother to have done the like,
but he refused, and being taken by some of the Rabble, he offered them twelve
Thousand pound in Gold to let him escape, but a Butchers Son with a great Knife
cut his Throat, and chopped off his head, which was fixed upon a Pike, with
this Inscription This is Don Caraffa 's head, a Rebel to his Country, and a
Traitor to the most Faithful People; They used his Body also very despitefully,
as also of four others his Companions, whom they murdered with him, The head
being carried to Massanello, he plucked him often by the Whiskers, using many
opprobrious words against him and made a Speech to the People, wherein He told
them of the Justice of God which comes surely though slowly to punish the
Guilty, etc. The People still cried out, Let Traitors die, Let Traitors die,
and nothing was heard up and down the Streets but shreiking, and howlings, with
horrible Curses, which made a hideous noise in the Air.

At this Spectacle of Caraffa, the Cavaliers were much troubled, fearing least
the People would destroy them all, who were now increased to the Number of one
hundred and Forty Thousand Fighting men; Massanello supposing that the Viceroy
had a hand in bringing in the Banditi, cut off all Provisions, and water from
the Castle, whereby he, his Duchess, his Council and Nobles, etc. began to
find themselves to be in an ill condition; whereupon the Viceroy sent a Letter
to the Archbishop, desiring him to make known to the People his sincere
Intentions toward them, and that he was not only a stranger but an Enemy to the
Practices of the Banditi, and that if he could catch any of them he would
deliver them to the People; This the Archbishop did, which somewhat allayed
the Fury of the People, yet Massanello suspecting that there was a Plot to
bring in more Banditi to join with the Soldiers for surprising the City, he
caused Barricadoes to be made at the end of every Street, that one only might
pass by them at a time, which was done with wonderful speed; He commanded also,
That all Houses, Palaces, Monasteries, etc. should in the night hang out Lights
in their Windows, and make Fires in the Streets that they might the more easily
discern if any of the Banditi entered, and all this to be done upon pain of
burning down their Houses, which terrified all men to obey; And now Massanello
had an hundred and fifty Thousand armed men at his beck, so that he did no
sooner signify his pleasure but it was done in a Minute; If he said, Bring me
the head of such a man, or let such a Palace he burnt, or the House of such a
Prince be plundered, etc. It was instantly done without delay or contradiction,
a Glory that no King or Emperor ever yet attained to; He also by sound of
Trumpet Proclaimed, That the Duke of Mataloni, was a Rebel to his King and
Country, and that whoever should bring him in, should have thirty Thousand
Crowns in Gold, and that his head should be a Ransom for one hundred and fifty
Banditi, etc. and thus ended the Fourth day being Wednesday.

Thursday July 11. Massanello went on with his Imperious commands; and truly it
is a wonder, and will scarcely be believed in after Ages that a poor
bare-legged Fisher-boy should have at his Command such a vast number of People
as he had the very first day; and the second day he was attended by the
Civiller and discreeter sort of Men. The third day he made himself
Generalissimo over all who willingly obeyed his Commands; The fourth and fifth
he won Admiration by his prudent and discreet Orders, ready dispatches, and
quick Contrivances, and especially by his sprightfulness and Capacity in
Negotiating businesses of so great importance; The Archbishop who often treated
with him, wondering at the same, seeing him behave himself, not like an abject
Fellow, but some Great Commander, having Threats in his Looks, Terror in his
Gestures, and Revenge in his Countenance, whereby he subdued all Naples, which
had in her six hundred Thousand Souls of all sorts. He made Trenches, set
Sentinels, laid spies, gave signs, chastized the Banditi, condemned the guilty,
viewed the Squadrons, ranked their Files, comforted the fearful, confirmed the
stout, encouraged the bold, promised rewards, threatened the suspected,
reproached the cowards, applauded the valiant, and wonderfully incited the
minds of men by many degrees his Superiors, to battles, burnings, plunder,
spoil, blood and death; and it was admired that amongst such a confused
multitude he could proceed so regularly in his orders, and have them so exactly
observed; He was very observant to Ladies, and Churchmen, not suffering any
outrage to them; yea among such mighty rich goods as were burnt, he would not
suffer the value of a pin to be converted to his own private use; The first
order Published by Massanello on Thursday Morning was, That none should wear
Cloaks, Gowns, Cassocks, etc. nor women any Fardingals, and that when they went
abroad they should tuck up their Petty-coats, least they should carry any Arms
underneath; and it was strange to see what Universal Obedience was given to the
same, then might you see even the Nobility, Churchmen, Religious Orders of all
sorts, going up and down in querpo without upper Garments, during Massanello's
Reign, every one submitting to so vile a fellow.

This Morning likewise he caused the great Guns to be mounted, and planted in
the most advantageous places of the City, and Guards of Horse and Foot placed
near them; He commanded all Noble men, and Gentlemen to deliver their Arms to
persons appointed, upon pain of death, and though this might expose them to the
fury of the people, yet they durst not disobey; He also set a rate upon all
edible Commodities; But now by the mediation of the Archbishop, Articles were
drawn up between the Viceroy and the People, whereby their Privileges were
confirmed, and a general pardon granted, and the people were acknowledged for
the King's Children, and the most Loyal Subjects he had in all his Dominions;
About Ten a Clock this day, it being reported that the Accord was finished, and
that Massanello was to go to the Viceroy to the Castle, for confirming it,
with the hands of the Viceroy, the Council Royal, and the Council of State,
hereupon an incredible multitude of People Assembled together, and command was
given under pain of Firing, That all Masters of Families should hang their
Windows, Walls and Balconies, with the Richest Silks and Tapestryes that they
had, and that all the ways to the Castle should be swept clean; Which was no
sooner spoken than done by persons of all sorts and ranks.

Massanello then sent one of his Captains, to acquaint the Viceroy of his
purpose of coming to parlee with him, who answered, That he might when he
pleased, for he would gladly see him; Presently after clothing himself in
Cloth of Silver, with a large Plume of White Feathers in his Hat, and a Naked
Sword in his hand, he mounted on a Prancing Gelding, and marched toward the
Castle attended by Fifty Thousand of the choicest of the people, some on Foot,
others on Horseback, next after him followed the Archbishop in his Coach, on
whose right hand rode Massanello's Brother, in Cloth of Gold, etc. The cry was
in every corner as they passed along, Let the King of Spain live, let the most
faithful people of Naples live; When he came to the Castle he was met by the
Captain of the Viceroys Guard, welcoming him in his Masters name to the
Palace, where his Excellency expected him with great desire. Massanello
returning a grave and short answer; stopped, and made a sign to the People that
they should go no farther, there being Twenty Thousand already entered, and it
was admirable to see how immoveably they all stood, and with incredible
silence; whereupon alighting, he began with a loud, yet gentle voice, to exhort
them to return thanks for their good success in obtaining their Liberties,
telling them, That for his own part he desired nothing but the public good;
For, said he, I was offered Two Hundred Crowns a Month, all the time of my
life, if I would have desisted, but I do refuse it; Moreover if the Archbishop
had not enjoined me, and threatened me with Excommunication, I would not have
apparelled my self as you now see me, I would never have altered my Seamans
Cloths, such a one I was born, such a one I lived, and such a one I mean to
dye, after I have once Established the public Liberty; But yet lay not down
your Arms, till a Confirmation comes from the King of Spain, Trust not the
Nobles they are Traitors, and our Enemies.

After which he went into the Castle, and upon the Stairs the Viceroy met him,
to whom he humbled himself, thanking him for condescending to their Articles,
telling him, That he might dispose of him as he pleased, either to hang him,
break him on the Wheel, or any other kind of death; But the Viceroy raised him
up, telling him, That he knew not that he had committed any fault, nor had
offended his Majesty, and therefore he should be cheerful, and that he should
always respect him; And herewith he often embraced him; Whilst they were
consulting together, a rumor arose among that infinite number of people which
staid without; That Massanello was arrested, or some hurt done to him,
therefore the Viceroy took him with the Archbishop unto a Balcony, where he
might be seen of all, who looking on the people, said to them, Lo I am here, I
am alive and free, Peace, Peace, at which the multitude exceedingly rejoiced;
Then said Massanello to the Viceroy; My Lord, you shall see how obedient the
People be, and so he bid them cry, Let God live, let the King of Spain live,
etc. which they immediately did; and then he added, Let the ill Government dye,
they all cried so likewise; Then putting his finger to his mouth, there was a
profound universal silence, that scarce a man was seen to breath; He then with
a loud voice commanded, that every one there present should depart from that
Court, under pain of Rebellion and Death, which was punctually and presently
obeyed, whereat the Viceroy was much astonished; After many discourses it was
agreed, That the Peoples demands should be printed, and subscribed by the
Viceroy and all his Councils, and that the Sunday following they should all
come to the Cathedral, and there swear to observe them for ever; as also to
procure the Confirmation thereof from his Catholic Majesty, after which
Massanello took leave to depart; At his departure the Viceroy gave him a rich
Chain of Gold worth three thousand Crowns, putting it about his neck with his
own hands, and declared him to be the Duke of St. George, both which he would
have refused, but that the Archbishop advised him to the contrary. Massanello
then went with the Archbishop to his Palace, and whilst they were discoursing
together, a Rumor was spread that many of the Banditi were coming into the
City, but it proved to be the Marquess of St. Ermo, who with his Followers
returned from his Country house to the City; yet had the jealous People almost
pulled him to pieces had not Massanello at the request of a Lady interposed for
his safety, and so ended the fifth day being Thursday, July, 11. 1647.

On Friday Morning there came a Boat with 6 Mariners, and four men completely
armed, which brought Letters from the Duke of Mataloni to his Secretary, and
because they were written in dark Ciphers, Massanello caused the four men first
to be racked, and then to have their heads chopped off. The same morning he
erected another Tribunal of Justice, substituting a Leiutenant under him, who
presently condemned four Banditi, and beheaded them. Massanello also having
left off his Cloth of Silver, appeared in his old Mariners habit, and yet was
obeyed and feared by every one. He stood in a Window to give Audience, and to
receive Petitions, which they reached up to him upon the ends of Pikes; All his
Orders ran in these words, Under pain of Rebellion and Death; and it was
wonderful to see so many Commands, Bans, Commissions and Orders published and
affixed to Posts subscribed, Thomas Anello Captain General of the most faithful
People of Naples; all which were executed with incredible readiness and
exactness; This morning he issued out an order, That every one should cut off
his great Lock, and wear no Perriwigs; He likewise renewed his former Order,
That Churchmen should not wear their upper Garment, because by that means many
Banditi came into the City. There was another Order, That upon sounding the two
a Clock Bell in the night, every one upon pain of death should retire to his
Lodging; And because many of the Nobility and Ladies were retired into the
Monasteries and Nunneries, he commanded, That upon pain of death they should
all return to their Houses, which was presently obeyed; Then he commanded, That
all the Inhabitants both Natives and Foreigners should set upon their Gates
the King of Spain 's Arms on the right hand, and the City Arms on the left;
which was suddenly put in Execution, though with much trouble to the Spaniards,
Many Delinquents were put to death; He caused a Baker to be baked to death,
because he made his bread too light. He had seven Secetaries, and ten Officers
to punish whom he pleased, and he was feared and obeyed with as much exactness
as if it had been the Great Turk,

A Choice Horse being sent Massanello worth four Hundred Ducats, he sent him
presently to the Kings Stable, saying, That he was too good for his use; There
were about an hundred Thousand Crowns discovered in a By-place, which he caused
to be reserved for the Kings Use, withal offering the Viceroy five Millions,
if need were; Many great Presents being sent him from Gentlemen, he would not
receive the value of one farthing; He employed many to search after the
Servants and Kindred of the Duke of Mataloni, and his Brother; and when they
were brought to him, he examined them upon the Rack where their Persons and
Goods were, and at last one confessing that their Goods were hidden in several
Churches and Monasteries; He caused them immediately to be searched for, both
above and under ground, whence were brought forth abundance of rich things,
valued at five Hundred Thousand Crowns, besides four Thousand Crowns in ready
Money; all which being brought to Massanello, he employed the Money to pay his
Soldiers and laid up the Goods in a Magazine, none daring to touch a Rag of
it; He sent also to make a new search in the Houses whence he had formerly
taken and burnt their Goods, and found much more in Wells, Pits, Houses of
Office, etc. with great quantities of Silver and Gold; He sent also armed men
into the Country to burn the House, Goods, and Furniture of the the Duke of
Caivano, which was done accordingly, as also the Palace of Mataloni, with all
that was within, whom likewise they hanged in Effigy in the Marketplace,
because they could not catch his Person; Then he commanded them to burn the
Goods of diverse other Officers, and particularly of the Kings Visitors; yet at
the request of the Archbishop it was not put in Execution; In the mean time the
Viceroy being besieged in his Castle and deprived of Provisions, he sent to
Massanello for some supply, which he readily consented to, sending him 50
Porters laden with all sorts of Provision, and Shops were opened, and all
People went up and down with as much security, as if there had been no
Soldiers, nor disturbance in the City, so strict and rigorous was he in the
Execution of Justice; At the same time 13 Galleys of Naples arriving at the
Port, their Admiral sent to the Viceroy for a supply of Provisions; But he
sent Messengers to Massanello, who promised them a supply, but on condition
they should go farther off, and none of them come ashore, which was done
accordingly; Presently after, came diverse from the Castle, bringing Presents
from the Viceroy to Massanello, with Thanks for the plentiful provision he had
sent him, amongst which was a Rich Suit of Clothes for his own wearing; The
Vice-Queen also sent to know how he did, desiring him for her sake to make use
of the things that were sent him.

Saturday, July 13. Massanello knowing that his safety consisted in keeping the
people in exact obedience, which hitherto he had done; he punished the least
Act of disobedience with death, and understanding that the night before, some
were employed in going about amongst the Shopkeepers, to make them sensible of
their slavery under him; He sent out strict orders for apprehending them, and
hanged them up before the shops where they had been, and among them two of the
Duke of Mataloni's Servants were hanged, who had brought Letters in the soles
of their shoes, written in Ciphers, which none could understand; Then being
informed of a Burglary which was committed that night, and that it was done by
some Banditi, who had taken Sanctuary in a Church, he caused them to be dragged
out, and executed; A Young Maid complained to him, that one of his Soldiers
had Murdered her Father, whereupon the Brother of the Murderer promised, that
if the fault might be remitted, he would Marry the Maid; but she refusing,
Massanello caused him to give her Two Hundred Crowns for a Dowry, and so
pardoned him; Now Intelligence being brought, that the Banditi were joined
together in diverse places, to invade the City; He made Proclamation, That what
Banditi soever should discover the Plot; he should be absolutely pardoned; and
a Message of consequence being brought him by a Cavalier; He said, I will have
nothing to do with the Cavaliers, God has set me up for the peoples good; and
turning to them, he said, My People pray for me, and preserve me well, for if
you lose me, woe be to you; The same Morning came in multitudes of People out
of the Country round about, and amongst them, Women and Children, with swords
and staves to do their Homage to Massanello, and to be redressed by him of
their grievances; About the same time he sent to the Viceroy, to mind him of
his promise of coming the next day, being Sunday, with all his Counselors, to
confirm his grants by all their Oaths, which accordingly was done; For after
dinner the Viceroy sent two of his best Horses with rich Furniture for
Massanello, and his Brother, who mounting upon them, went toward the Castle,
Massanello carrying in one hand a naked sword, and in the other the Charter of
Charles 5. Emperor; His Brother carried the Capitulations made with the
Viceroy, and being accompanied with a huge number of people, they arrived at
the Castle, and being Conducted into the Palace, they entertain themselves a
while with the Viceroy; And then all returned into the City with the Viceroy,
and all his Counselors; The streets were clean swept by Massanello's Command,
and the Houses adorned with the Richest Hangings; and thus they went to the
Archbishops Palace, the People crying all the way as they went, Let the King of
Spain live; but without Gabels; At the Archbishops Palace they all alighted,
and were met by him, and his Chaplains, in their Robes, and so going into the
Church, and kneeling at the High Altar, the Secretary of the Kingdom read the
Articles with a loud voice, Massanello standing by, and to the wonderment of
all, added, altered, corrected, and interpreted them at his pleasure, no man
presuming to contradict him; After which the Viceroy, with all the Officers of
State, swore to observe, and keep the said Capitulations to perpetuity, and to
get them confirmed by Oath of his Catholic Majesty; After which followed
Music, and Te Deum was sung for this good agreement.

When all was ended, Massanello told them, That in the last sixteen years the
King of Spain had had of them above an Hundred Millions, but that the greatest
part of it was consumed by his Officers, who enriched themselves by the Kings
and Peoples losses, which he was resolved to redress for the time to come, and
thereby prove himself a faithful Subject, and Friend to the King; Which he
spoke with such earnestness, that all the multitude gave him a loud applause;
Thus businesses being finished, he attended the Viceroy and his train back to
the Castle, where all the Ordnance was discharged, and Massanello told them,
That having now brought his honest intents to pass, he would return to be a
Fisherman; and so tearing off his garments of Silver, he returned with all the
People to the Market place, who wonderfully rejoiced for having thus attained
their desires. This day being Sunday July 14. the Papers of the agreement were
fixed up and down in all parts of Naples, which caused not only great joy in
the hearts of the people, but every one extolled Massanello as the Instrument,
and next to him the Archbishop, as the Mediator of that accord; And it was no
small astonishment in the minds of many, to consider that such great things
were effected, not by the power of a Mighty Emperor, and Conqueror, but by
the conduct of a poor bare legged Fisher-boy; Now though peace seemed to be
settled, yet it was not judged fit presently to dismiss the Soldiery, therefore
Massanello commanded them to stand firm to their Guard; and withal made
Proclamation, That every one upon pain of death should discover if any goods
were deposited in their hands, of those whose houses had been burnt; Whereupon
much wealth was brought out of Churches, Monasteries, Hospitals and Nunneries,
and being informed that four Banditi had taken Sanctuary among the Jesuits, he
sent some to fetch them thence, who having forced open the doors, found them,
and chopped off their heads, and a Jesuit zealous of the Churches Privileges,
making some resistance, they so wounded him that he presently after dyed;
Notice being likewise given of much Goods hid in a Nunnery, he sent some
Captains to fetch it into the Market place to be burnt, the Captains being
denied entrance, forced the doors, and so behaved themselves, that one of the
Nuns almost dyed through fear; which the Archbishop complaining of to
Massanello, he sent for the Captains, and after Examination beheaded them; The
same Morning he published a Proclamation, That none should go out of the City
without his License; whereupon the Archbishop of St. Severine being to go into
his Diocese went without a Cloak, according to former Order, to Massanello for
a Pass; Massanello when he saw him, said, What will thou have my fine Lord? I
desire with your good leave (says the Archbishop) that I may safely pass to my
Church; Go, says he, and let four hundred of my men go to guard you thither;
It needs not, said the Archbishop, for I go by Sea; Then, said he, Let forty
Barges be provided to attend you; I have, said the Archbishop, four already for
my Family which is sufficient; Well, said Massanello, you may do your pleasure,
yet you shall not refuse this bag of double Pistoles to bear your charges. The
Archbishop would have refused them, but he forced five hundred upon him, which
he durst not but accept for fear of angering him.

The same morning also he caused a Bakers house to be burnt for making bread
too light, and chopped off the head of an Abbot and some others, as being
Dependants upon the Duke of Matalone; He sent to the Jesuits and other
Religious Orders, for a great sum of Money for the Service of the People; He
sent to many Rich Men, and caused them to bind themselves to pay great Sums
that he might make good his Promise to the King of Spain of a Donative of six
Millions of Gold; This Morning a Kinsman of Massanello's in whom he much
confided went to the Palace, complaining openly, That Massanello began to dote,
and a Chaplain of the Archbishop came to him from his Lord, desiring him now
things were at peace to disband his Soldiers, and to retire himself a while
into a pleasant Island (whither they used to go for Recreation) to refresh
himself; This pleased him well, and several Companies of superfluous Soldiers
were disbanded, no man grumbling at any thing he did; which made him grow
proud, and multiplicity of Businesses and want of sleep distempering his Brain,
he gave forth many cruel Edicts for burning of Palaces, chopping off heads,
etc. whereupon some of his Captains complained to the Archbishop that he grew
intolerable, imprisoning, and commanding their Heads to be cut off to please
his Humor; The Archbishop labored to moderate and mollify him, at least to
procure his deferring the Execution for that holy day, which he obtained; That
afternoon Massanello went with a multitude of People following him to the
Castle in an odd habit, desiring the Viceroy to go with him to that Island to
take the fresh Air, but he excused it by reason of a pain in his head, yet
commanded his Gondola to be made ready to wait upon Seignior Massanello, into
which he embarked himself with diverse Mariners, and had forty Barges of
Musicians to make him Merry; and as he sailed along he threw pieces of Gold
into the Sea, which the Mariners dived to fetch up again for his Pastime, and
all the afternoon he spent in Mirth, Eating and Drinking too freely of the Wine
called Lachrymae Christi; and when he returned in the Evening, he gave all them
that attended him 1O Measures of Wheat apiece. The same afternoon, Massanello's
Wife, Mother and Sister, clad in Cloth of Silver, with Chains of Gold, and
other Rich Jewels, went in a stately Coach valued at eight Thousand Crowns to
give the Vice-Queen a Visit, attended with diverse other Gentlewomen, and when
she came to the Palace, Sedans were sent for her and her Company, with a Guard
of Halberdiers, Pages, and Lacquies to attend them; The Vice-Queen presented
her with a rich Diamond giving her great welcome, and many Dainties, and so
returned, where they found Massanello so heated with his Wine that he scarce
knew what he said or did, and thus ended Sunday.

On Monday Morning he would have resigned his Power, but his Wife and Kindred
dissuaded him, and himself conceived, that if he should do it, he could expect
no other but death, but now when he came to manage his Authority, he committed
so many Fopperies and Tyrannical Acts, as made him hated by those who before
had adored him, and the reason of his distempered Brain was conceived to be
from a fatal drink given him by the Viceroy the day before; To which may be
added, want of Food and Sleep, for he was seldom at leisure to do either, in
regard of multiplicity of business which wholly took him up, Early that morning
he rode into the Marketplace with a naked Sword in his hand, striking many,
for no cause offered; A Captain who came to him about business he wounded in
the Face; and meeting with one that was said to be a Spy, he caused his head
presently to be chopped off: another complaining, that his Wife was gone away
with another man, he caused the Woman to be hanged, and the Man to be broken on
the wheel. Then going to the Kings Stables, he took for himself and his
Followers six of the best Horses, but before he had gone far, better bethinking
himself, he sent them all back again. The Viceroy himself hearing of such
Extravagancies trembled, and retired into the inner Palace, causing it to be
fortified, and increased his Guard; Then Massanello sent to two Noblemen to
come to him into the Marketplace, upon pain of burning their Palaces, if
disobeying; who returned answer, That they would wait on him; But instead
thereof, having secured their Goods, they went to the Viceroy to complain of
their Slavish Condition, and whilst they were considering how to remedy it,
there came two of his chief Friends and Counselors making the same Complaint,
saying, That they were in continual danger of their Lives, and that the People
began to hate Massanello for his extreme Cruelty; whereupon it was concluded,
That the People should be persuaded to make their Addresses to the Viceroy,
and therein to declare that they would have no more dependence upon him, but
upon his Excellency only, provided that they might be assured to enjoy their
Privileges lately confirmed by Oath; This the Viceroy willingly assented to,
and the People were persuaded to accept of the Conditions, and Massanello being
gone abroad to take his pleasure, many of them met with the Viceroy, where it
was concluded, That Massanello should be laid hold on, and kept in chains
during his life, but not put to death because of the good he had done for the
People; At Massanello's return, being extremely inflamed with Wine, he began to
play many mad Pranks; whereupon the Captains of the People apprehended him, and
put him in Custody under a Guard of Soldiers, and the People confederating
with the Viceroy hastened his End.

Tuesday July 16, in the Morning Massanello's Secretary meeting some Bands of
men going toward the Castle, proudly asked them, By whose Authority they
Acted, One of the Captains answered, By the Authority of the Viceroy; Well,
said the Secretary, thy head shall pay for this; whereupon the Captain wounded
him with his Sword, and another shot him through, and so they put him into a
Sepulcher, But the people that adhered to the Viceroy drew him out, cut off
his head, and dragged his body about the Streets; Presently after, Massanello
escaping out of Prison, went to the Church of the Virgin of Carmine, and the
Archbishop coming to sing Mass there, it being a great Festival day to that
Saint, Massanello met him, saying, Most Eminent Lord I perceive that the People
will now forsake me, and go about to take away my life, I desire that a Solemn
Procession may be made to this most holy Lady, for being to die, I shall then
die with greater content; The Church being full of People, Massanello went to
the Altar, and taking a Crucifix in his hand, he commended, himself to the
People, remembering then what great things he had done for them; the
difficulties he had encountered with, and the hatred that he had procured to
himself thereby, etc. and then prostrating himself at the Archbishops Feet, he
desired him to send the Viceroy word, That he would willingly renounce his
Command, and resign it into his Excellencies hand; which the Archbishop
promised him to do, and seeing him all in a sweat, he conveyed him into a
Dormitory to be refreshed, and so he left him.

Massanello after a while went into the Hall, and some that were hired to
murder him, rushed into the room, crying aloud, Let the King of Spain live,
and let none hereafter upon pain of death obey Massanello. Massanello seeing
them, said, You go perhaps to search for me, behold me here my people;
Whereupon some shot at him, and he crying out, Ah ungrateful Traitors, fell
down dead; Then came a Butcher and cut off his Head, and carried it upon a
Lance, first into the Church, and then to the Marketplace, crying out, Let the
King of Spain live, Massanello is dead, Massanello is dead; and withal they
discharged some Harquebusses, whereupon the affrighted people slunk away, not
daring to Revenge their Captains death; so that they carried his head up and
down the City, and the Boys dragged his Body up and down the Streets, and at
last his head was thrown into one Ditch, and his Body into another; And thus as
the Almighty for the sins of the Egyptians punished them by small and
inconsiderable means, so did he Correct, Humble, and Chastize the Stately,
proud City of Naples by so mean a Person, who in ten days time acted the part
of the Greatest Monarch upon Earth, and then fell to the lowest Contempt, and
died the most vile death of the greatest Malefactor. Thus Massanello being
raised by the popular Air, slain and scorned by the same people, Honored and
Idolized by the same persons, may be compared to a Ball tossed up and down by
Fortune; The voice went afterward that a Chapel should be built for him, and
the prime Wits of Naples composed several Epitaphs upon him, amongst which, the
following is thus Englished by J. H. Esquire,

Massanello's Lamentation concerning the People of Naples.
I did expect from thee a better Fate
Ungrateful City, People more ungrate;
Thou chop'st his Neck who did thy Head unthrall;
Faithful thou art, yet have no Faith at all.
I did not have my Fishing as some say,
But still employed my Nets, to catch and lay
The Gabels on the ground; The Royal Throne
I brought into the Market; every Stone
Can witness it; The Nobles I did quell
Thou still shall live, but I must fry in Hell:
While my dragged body bleeds, so basely slain,
Thou Triumph'st in the Freedom I did gain.
Learn hence ye Mortals all
Be not too rash and bold
To fight for other Men
Least you be bought and sold.
Clarks Mirror, part 1. p. 518.

LXXIII. And as Inferior Persons, so likewise small and Contemptible things,
as Beasts, Birds, Insects, and the like, have been Scourges and wonderful
Afflictions to several People and Nations; For we read, That Sapores King of
Persia besieged the Christian City of Nisibis, but St. James the Holy Bishop
thereof by his Prayers to Heaven, obtained that such an infinite number of
Gnats came into his Army, as put it into the greatest disorder, these small
Creatures flew upon the Eyes of their Horses and Tormented them in such a
manner, that growing furious they threw off their Riders, and the whole Army
was thereby so scattered and brought into confusion, that they were enforced to
break up their siege and depart. Luther Colloquia, p. 245.

LXXIV. Marcus Varro writes, That there was a Town in Spain undermined with
Rabbits. Another likewise in Thessaly by Moles or Molewarps. In Africa the
people were compelled by Locusts to leave their Habitations; and out of Gyaros
an Island, one of the Cyclades, the Islanders were forced by Rats and Mice to
fly away; Moreover in Italy the City Amyclae was destroyed by Serpents. In
Ethiopia there is a great Country lies wast and Desert, by reason it was
formerly dis-peopled by Scorpions and a sort of Pismires; And if it be True
that Theophrast^s reports, the Treriens were chased away by certain worms
called Scolopendres; Annius writes, that an Ancient City situate near the
Volscian Lake, and called Contenebra was in times past overthrown by Pismires,
and that the place is thereupon vulgarly called to this day, The Camp of Ants;
In Media, says Diodorus Siculus, There was such an infinite number of Sparrows
that eat up and devoured the seed which was cast into the ground, that men were
constrained to depart their old Habitations, and remove to other places.

LXXV. About the year of our Lord 872, came into France such an innumerable
Company of Locusts, that the vast multitude of them darkened the very Light of
the Sun, they were likewise of a very extraordinary Bigness, and had a six-fold
Order of Wings, six feet, and two Teeth, the hardness whereof surpassed that of
a Stone; These eat up every green thing in all the Fields of France; At last by
the force of the Winds, they were carried into the Sea, and there drowned;
After which by the Agitation of the Waves, the dead Bodies of them were cast
upon the Shores; and from the Stench of them, together with the Famine they had
made with their former devouring, there arose so great a Plague, that it was
verily thought every third person in France died thereof. In one of the Cities
of France the Inhabitants were driven out and forced to leave it by reason of
the multitude of Frogs. Gualterus Chron. p. 599.

LXXVI. The Island of Anaphe heretofore had not a Partridge in it, till such
time as an Astypalaean brought thither a pair that were Male and Female, which
couple in a short time did increase in such wonderful manner that oppressed
with the number of them, the Inhabitants upon the point were enforced to depart
from the Island; Astypalaea of old had no Hares in it, but when one of the Isle
of Anaphe had put a brace into it, they in a short time so increased, that they
almost destroyed whatever the Inhabitants had sowed; whereupon they sent, says
the Historian, to consult the Oracle concerning this their Calamity, which
advised them to store themselves with Greyhounds, by the help of which they
killed six Thousand Hares in the space of a year, and many more afterward,
whereby they were delivered from their Greivance. The Inhabitants of the
Gymnesian Islands are reported to have sent their Ambassadors to Rome, to
request some other place to be assigned them for their Habitation, because they
were oppressed by the incredible number of Conies among them; And the Baleares
through an extraordinary increase of the same Creatures among them did Petition
the Emperor Augustus, that he would send them some Soldiers against these
Enemies of theirs which had already occasioned a Famine amongst them. Plin.
Not. Hist. lib. 8.

LXXVII. Myas (says Dr. Heylin) was a principal City in Ionia upon an Arm of
the Sea, but in aftertimes, the water drawing further off the Land, brought
forth such an innumerable multitude of Fleas, that the Inhabitants were fain to
forsake the City, and went with their Bag and Baggage to retire to Miletus,
nothing hereof being left but the Name and Memory in the time of Pausanias. And
Herodotus writes; That the Neuri a People bordering upon the Scythians, were
forced out of their Habitation and Country by reason of Serpents. For whereas
a multitude of Serpents are bred in the Soil it self, at that time there came
upon them such an abundance of them, and so infested them, that they were
constrained to quit the place, and to dwell among the Budini. Cassander in his
return from Apollonia met with the People called Abderitae, who by reason of
the multitude of Frogs and Mice were constrained to depart from their Native
Soil, and to seek out Habitations for themselves elsewhere; The Country of
Troas is exceedingly given to breed great store of Mice, so that already they
have enforced the Inhabitants to quit the place and depart. Justin. Hist. Lib.
15.

LXXVIII. In the 17th. year of the Reign of Alexander the third King of the
Scots, such an incredible swarm of Palmer Worms, spread themselves over both
Scotland and England, that they consumed the Fruits and Leaves of all Trees and
Herbs, and eat up the Worts and other Plants to the very Stalks and Stumps of
them; As also the same year by an unusual increase and swelling of the Sea, the
Rivers overflowed their Banks, and there was such an Inundation especially of
the Tweed and Forth, that diverse Villages were overturned thereby, and a great
number both of men, and all sorts of Cattle perished in the Waters, Zuinglius
Theat. Vol. 3. Lib. 2.

LXXIX. About the year 1610, the City of Constantinople and the Countries
thereabouts were so plagued with Clouds of Grasshoppers that they darkened the
beams of the Sun; they left not a green herb or leaf in all the Country, yea
they entered into their very Bed-chambers, to the great Annoyance of the
Inhabitants, being almost as big as Dormice with red Wings. Knowls's Hist. of
the Turks, p. 1308.

Thus we see there is nothing so small and inconsiderable in our Eyes, but may
be able to disturb, yea to destroy us even when we are in the fullness of our
sufficiency.

LXXX. Strange was the Accident which we find reported in the Treasury of Times
as followed; In the year 1563, Upon St. Andrews Day in the presence of
Mounsieur Brother to King Charles, and afterward Henry the third King of
France, Monsieur de Humier made report of the following History, the sum of
whose Relation I have thus abridged; In Picardy in the Forest of Arden,
certain Gentlemen undertook a Hunting of Wolves, amongst others they slew a
Shewolf, that was followed by a young Boy, aged about seven years, stark naked,
of a strange Complexion, with fair curled hair, who seeing die Wolf dead, ran
fiercely at them, but was beset and taken; the Nails of his Hands and Feet
bowed inward, he spoke nothing, but sent out an inarticulate sound, they
brought him thence to a Gentleman's House not far off, where they put Iron
Manacles upon his Hands and Feet; in the end by being long kept Fasting, they
had brought him to a Tameness, and in seven months had taught him to speak; He
was afterward by Circumstance of time, and six Fingers he had on one hand,
known to be the Child of a Woman, who stealing Wood was pursued by the
Officers, and in her fright left her Chile then about nine Months old, which as
is supposed was carried away by the She-wolf aforesaid, and by her nourished to
the time of his taking. When his Guardians had got much money by showing him
from place to place, he afterward was a Herdsman of Sheep and other Beasts for
seven years; in all which time the Wolves never made any attempts on the Herds
and Flocks committed to his charge, though he kept great store of Oxen, Kine,
Calves, Horses, Mares, Sheep and Poultry; This was well observed by neigbouring
Villages; and that they might participate of this Benefit they drove their
Herds and Flocks where he kept his, and desired him but to stroke his hands
upon them, which he would do, with some of his phlegm or spittle upon them;
after which done, (let others conjecture as they please) for the space of
fifteen days, Dogs of the greatest fierceness, nor any Wolves would by any
urgency touch them; By this means he got great store of money, for he would
have a double Turnois, which is the value of twopence in that Country, for
every Beast he so laid his hands on, or stroked their Ears; But as all things
have a certain Period, so when he had attained to past fourteen years of Age,
this Virtue which he had, left him; himself observed that the Wolves would not
come so near him as before, but keep aloof off, as being fearful of him, which
possibly might proceed from the change of his Complexion and Temperature
through so long alteration from his Wolvish Diet, which was raw Flesh, etc. His
gain by this means failed, and he went to the Wars, where he proved Brave,
Bold, and Valiant; at length he fell to be a Thief, excelling all others in
craft and subtilty, he was slain 1572. by the Soldiers of the Duke of Alva,
though he sold his Life at a dear rate, even with the death of a great many of
his Enemies. Treasury of Times, Lib. 7. chapter 37.

LXXXI. In the year 1534. This notable piece of Fallacy was acted by the
Franciscans at Orleance in France, a chief Judges Wife dying, desired of her
Husband that she might be buried in the Franciscans Church, which was done
accordingly, and the Judge gave them six Pistols, which was a Reward far
beneath their expectation and Avarice, but they hoped for some amends by the
fall of a Wood, which the Judge was to cut, and accordingly they desired some
Trees of him, which he denied them; This defeat did so exasperate the
Franciscans, that they resolved to be revenged, and to that purpose, they
reported abroad, That the Judges Wife was damned in Hell for ever; To carry on
this Villainy more secretly and effectual, they hired a young man to make
hideous noises about the Church at the time of their Public Devotions; and the
Prior of that Order (who had used many such cheats) was to play the Conjurer;
and had so ordered it, that the young man should not answer to any Question but
by signs, which were agreed upon between the Lad and the Prior, who was to
explain them to the Spectators; Accordingly when the young man had amused and
frighted the people with his dreadful Tricks; The Conjurer boldly asked him,
whether he were a Spirit or not, and if a Spirit, whose Spirit he was;
repeating the names of all such as had been buried there of late; and when he
named the Judges Wife, he made a sign, That he was his spirit; Then the
Conjurer asked, if she were damned, and for what offense, whether for
Covetousness, Lust, Pride, or Lutheranism, etc. and what he meant by those
Clamours, and that unquietness which he made, whether the body must be dug
up and carried elsewhere, etc. To all which the Spirit answered, Yea; But the
Judge hearing of it, and knowing their Juggling, complained to the King and
Parliament of Paris, procuring a Commission to examine the Business, whereby
the Knavery of the Franciscans was discovered, and the Actors punished
according to their deserts. Lavater de Spectris chapter 8.

LXXXII. Notable has been the subtlety and prudence of some men in the
Discovery of difficult matters; Lipsius writes, That Rodolphus Austriacus
Emperor of Germany, being at Norimberg, intent upon the public Affairs of the
Empire, a Merchant presented himself before him, imploring his Justice upon an
Innkeeper well known in that City, who as he said had cheated him of two
Hundred Marks in Silver, which having deposited in his hands, he had impudently
denied the Receipt of any such sum; and withal did most injuriously detain it;
The Emperor asked him, what Evidence he had of the Truth of what he had spoken,
who replied (as it is usual in such Cases,) That he had none other but himself;
The Emperor therefore considering the Thing, apprehended that some subtlety
must be used to find but the Truth of the business; He enquires what manner of
Bag it was wherein the pretended Money was delivered; The Merchant describes
the Shape, Color, and other particularities of it; The Emperor commands him to
withdraw into the next room and there to attend; It was his purpose to send for
the Innkeeper, but Fortune disposed it otherwise and more commodiously; For
the chief men of the City, as it is usual, came to present and wait upon the
Emperor, amongst whom was this Cozening Host; The Emperor knew him before, and
(as he was very courteous,) in a jesting way said to him, Sir, you have a very
handsome hat, pray give it me and let us change; The Innkeeper was proud of
the Honor, and readily presented his Hat; The Emperor retired a while, as if
he were called off by public business, and sends a Trusty and well known
Inhabitant of the same City to the Wife of the Innkeeper, with Order he should
say, Your Husband desires you would send him such a Bag of money, for he has
special occasion for it, and by this token that this is his Hat. The Woman
delivers it without scruple, and he returns with it to the Emperor, who then
calling the Merchant, shows him the Bag, and asks if he knew it; The man owns
it with Joy; The Emperor then calls in the Host, and says thus, This man
complains of you, and accuses you of perfidiousness and falsehood, what say you
to it? The Innkeeper replied, That the Merchant told him lies, or else was
mad, and that he neither has, nor ever had any thing to do with him; The
Emperor upon this immediately produces the Bag, at the sight of which the
Host is confounded, his confidence and Tongue fail him, and thereupon he
confessed the whole matter; The Merchant received his Money, and the
Innkeeper, besides the shame and disgrace was fined by the Emperor in a good
Sum of Money, and Rodolphus extolled for his Wisdom, the same of this Action
spreading it self through all Germany. Lipsius Monit. l. 2.

LXXXIII. Of the like nature is the following History related by N. Causin; A
Roman Lady left Widow by the death of her Husband, had a Son born of this
Marriage secretly stolen from her, and bred up in Slavery in another Province,
where being grown up to a young man; he had notice that he was the Son of such
a Lady in Rome, which caused him to take a Voyage to Rome, with a purpose to
make himself known to her, which he did by evident Tokens, so that the Mother
received him into her house, with Joy and Tears for the recovery of her loss;
She was at this time betrothed to a man who had often promised her Marriage,
yet never accomplished it, and this Lover was then absent, detained by urgent
Affairs far from Rome. At the end of thirty days he returned, and finding this
New-Guest in her house, ^emanded who he was; She freely answered, He was her
son; But he plainly told her, That if she sent not away this found Child from
her Lodging, she should never have any share in his Affection; The unhappy
Creature surprised with Love, to serve his Passion, renounceth her own Bowels,
and banished her own Child from his Mothers House; The young man being in great
necessity, hastens to require Justice of King Theodorick; He sends for the
Lady, who stoutly denied all the pretensions of this young man, saying, That he
was an ungrateful Impostor, who not content to have received the Charities and
Benevolence of a poor Creature in her house, would needs challenge the
Inheritance of Children, denying that she had any Motherly relation to him; The
Son on the other side wept bitterly, and gave assurance, that she had
acknowledged him as her own; very lively representing all the proofs which
passion, and Interest put into his mind; The King tried all means to discover
the design of this Lady, and asked her, Whether she were not resolved to marry
again? She answered, That if she met with a man suitable to her, she would do
what God should inspire her; The King replied, Behold this young man, whom
since you have lodged as a Guest thirty days in your house, and have been so
kind to him, what cause is there why you may not marry him, she answered, That
he had no Estate, and she was worth a Thousand Crowns, which was a great
Fortune in those days; Well, said Theodorick, I will give the young man as
much for his Marriage, on this condition that you shall marry him. She much
amazed, began to wax pale, blush, and tremble, seeking to excuse her self, but
faltering in her speech, the King to affright her more, protested deeply, She
should marry him presently, or tell the lawful Cause of the Impediment. The
poor Woman condemned by the Voice of Nature which cried in her heart, and
having horror of the Crime proposed to her, cast her self at the Kings Feet
with Tears, confessing her Loves Dissimulation and Mishap; Then this Great
Prince taking the words from her, spoke thus; Are not you a miserable woman,
said he, to renounce your own Flesh and blood for a Villain who has so often
deceived you; Get you to your house, forsake those fond Affections, and live in
the condition of a good Widow, taking unto you such support, and assistance
from your Son as he by nature ought to afford you. Causins Holy Court. Tom. 1.

LXXXIV, Josephus relates, There was a young Jew bred at Sydon with the freed
man of a Roman Citizen, who having some resemblance of Alexander the son of
Herod, (whom his Father had cruelly put to death) pretended he was the same
Alexander, affirming That those to whom Herod had recommended this barbarous
Execution, conceived such horror at it, that they resolved to save him, and to
conceal him till after the death of his Father, in which time he remained at
Sydon, and now was come as from the Gates of Death to demand his Right, as
being the undoubted and lawful Heir of the Kingdom. This Impostor had gained a
subtle Fellow, a Servant of Herod's Household, who taught him all the Affairs of
the Court, the People embraced this Alexander as a man returned from the other
World; when he saw himself strong in Credit and Coin, he was so confident as to
go to Rome, to question the Right of the Crown against Herod's other Sons; He
presented himself before Augustus Caesar, the distributer of Crowns, beseeching
him to pity the Fortune of so wretched and poor a King, who threw himself at
his Feet, as the Sanctuary of Justice and Mercy; Every one seemed already to
favor him, as a Person much wronged; but Augustus a Monarch very penetrating,
perceived this man tasted not of a Prince, for taking him by the hand he found
his skin rough, as having exercised servile Labors; Hereupon the Emperor drew
him aside, Saying, Content thy self to have hitherto abused all the world, but
know thou art now before Augustus, I will pardon thee upon Condition thou
discover the Truth of this matter, but if thou lie in any point, thou art
utterly lost; The Man was so amazed at the Luster of such Majesty, that
throwing himself at his feet, he began to confess all the Contrivance; which
done, the Emperor perceiving him to be none of the most impudent daring
impostors, saved his life, but condemned him to the Galleys; The Tutor of this
Counterfeit being observed by the Emperor to be of a Spirit more crafty, and
accustomed to evil Practices, was ordered speedily to be put to death. Josephus
Antiquit. lib. 17.

LXXXV. Praxiteles the famous Artist in the making of Statues, had promised
Phryne a beautiful Curtisan, the best and choice of all the pieces in his Shop,
to take from thence one single Statue as should be most pleasing to her; but
she not knowing which was most valuable, devised this Artifice to be satisfied
therein, she caused one to come as in great have, and to tell Praxiteles, That
his Shop was on Fire; he being startled at the News, cried out, Is the picture
of Cupid and the Satyr safe; By this Subtilty she found out, wherein the Artist
himself believed he had expressed most skill, and thereupon she chose the
Cupid. Zuinglius's Theater, vol. 3. lib. 3.

LXXXVI. Dr. Fuller relates this passage in his Holy State, That a poor Beggar
in Paris being very hungry staid so long in a Cooks Shop, who was dishing up
his Meat till his Stomach was satisfied only with the smell thereof, The
Choleric Cook demanded of him to pay for his Breakfast, the poor man denied
it, and the Controversy was referred to the deciding of the next man who
should pass by, which chanced to be the most notorious Idiot, and Changeling in
the whole City, He, on the Relation of the matter determined, That the poor
man's Money should be put between two empty dishes, and the Cook should be
recompensed with the gingling of the poor man's Money, as he was satisfied with
the smell only of the Cooks meat; and this is affirmed by credible Writers as
no Fable but an undoubted Truth. Fullers Holy State, lib. 3.

LXXXVII. Antiochus the Son of Seleucus daily languished and wasted away under
a disease, whereof the cause was uncertain, to the great Trouble and Affliction
of his Father, who therefore sent for Erasistratus a famous Physician to attend
the cure of his beloved Son; who addressing himself with his utmost dexterity
to find out the root of his Infirmity, he perceived it was rather from the
trouble of his Mind, than any effect of his Constitution; But when the Prince
could not be prevailed with to make any such acknowledgment, by frequent
feeling of his pulse, he observed it to beat with more Vigor and strength at
the naming or presence of Stratonica, who was the beloved Concubine of his
Father; Having made this discovery, and knowing the Prince would rather dye
than confess so dangerous a Love, he took this Course; He told Seleucus that
his Son was a dead man, For, says he, he languishes for the love of my Wife;
And what said Seleucus, have I merited so little at thy hands that thou will
have no respect to the Love of the young man? would you, said Erasistratus be
content to serve the love of another in that manner? I would heaven, said
Seleucus, would turn his love toward my dearest Stratonica; Well, said
Erasistratus, you are his Father, and may be his Physician, he loves none but
Stratonica. Seleucus immediately gave Stratonica to Antiochus, and Threescore
Thousand Crowns as a reward to the prudent Physician. Camerarij Horae Sub. chapter
1.

LXXXVIII. Camerarius tells out of Cedrenus, how the Queen of Sheba when she
saw that Solomon had expounded all her hardest Riddles, caused one day certain
young Boys and Girls apparelled all alike to be set before the King, none being
able by their Faces and looks to discern the one Sex from the other, to the end
that therein she might have further Trial of King Solomon's Wisdom; He knowing
the Queens intent, presently made some water to be brought in a great Basin,
bidding them all to wash their Faces, by this device he easily discerned the
Males from the Females, for the Boys rubbed their Faces hard and lustily, but
the Girls being shamefac't did hardly touch theirs with their Fingers ends.
Camerarii Horae subces. Cent 1.

Thus we find Quickness of Apprehension and Maturity of Judgment are instead
of the Cord and Pulley, whereby some men have prevailed to bring Truth to
Light, when she has lain reserved and concealed.

LXXXIX. Various have been the means whereby some Persons have arrived to
preferment, for I find, says Muretus, it is related in the Commentaries of the
Greeks, That Semiramis was the Concubine of one of the King of Assyria's
Slaves; As soon as Ninus that Great Monarch had taken notice of her, he was so
surprised with her Beauty and Wit, that he siezed her for himself, and by
degrees she gained such an Empire over him that he could deny her nothing, nor
was there any thing but she durst ask; And when once she had let fall in
discourse, There was one thing she did earnestly desire, and he had bid her
freely and openly speak it, whatever it was; I have desired, said she, to sit
one day in your Throne and to do Justice, and that for that whole day all
should obey me as they do you; The King smiling, granted her Request, and
forthwith sent out his Edict, That on such a day all men whatsoever should obey
the Commands of Semiramis, for such was the Kings pleasure; When the day came,
the Lady ascends the Throne in her Royal Apparel, a mighty Concourse there was,
she at first to try their obedience, commands something to be done of no great
moment; when she perceived she was exactly obeyed in all her Precepts, she
commands the Guards of the Kings Body, that they sieze the King himself; It is
done, the King is brought; She orders him to be bound, it is performed, she
commands that they strike off his head, she is presently obeyed, and though
hereby we may observe the great Folly of this Prince, and the base Ingratitude
of such kind of Cattle, she being advanced by him; Yet by this means she
prolonged the date of her Empire many years, which she ruled with great wisdom,
success and glory. Aelian. Vari. Hist. Lib. 7. Chapter 1.

XC. In the time of William Rufus King of England, there was one Roger a poor
Priest serving a cure in a Village near Caen in Normandy, It chanced that Henry
the Kings youngest brother passing that way, made some stay in the Village, and
being desirous to hear Mass, this Roger then Curate, was the man to say it;
which he dispatched with such speed and celerity, that the Soldiers who
commonly love not long prayers, commended him for it, telling their Lord, That
there could not be found a fitter Priest for men of War than he; Whereupon
Henry appointed him to follow him, and when he came to be King, preferred him
to many great places, and at last to be Chancellor of England, and Bishop of
Salisbury; When King Stephen came to the Crown, he held this man in as great
account as his Predecessor King Henry had done, and perhaps in greater; He
arrived to such wealth, that he built the Castles of Salisbury, the Vies,
Sherburn, Malmsbury and Newark, to which there were no structures comparable in
the Kingdom; He had also Forty Thousand Marks in Money, which together with his
Castles, the King siezed into his own hands upon Displeasure. Baker's
Chronicle. Page 71.

XCI. There was in the City of Capua (says Sir Walter Rawleigh) an ambitious
Noble man called Pacuvius Calavius, his credit grew, and was upheld by
furthering all popular desires, there was at this time a Plebeian faction in
the Town, and that so prevalent, that all was governed by the pleasure of the
multitude; who likewise wholly followed the direction of this Pacuvius. The
People had promised to yield up the Town to Hannibal, and to meet him on the
way to them with so many of the Nobility; but they were unable to maintain any
such Negotiation, without the consent of the Senate, and the Senate highly
opposed it; The People therefore were incensed against the Senate, for having
occasioned them to fail their new friend Hannibal; and withal since they had by
this their promise discovered themselves, they feared least their own Senate,
together with the Romans, should hold them in stricter subjection than before;
This fear being ready to break into some outrage, Pacuvius made use of to serve
his own ambition thus; He discoursed to the Senate as they sat in Council,
about these motions troubling their City, and said, That he himself had both
married a Roman Lady, and given his Daughter in Marriage to a Roman; But that
the danger of forsaking the Roman Party was not now the greatest, because the
people were violently bent to Murder all the Senate, and after to join
themselves with Hannibal, who should countenance the fact, and save them
harmless; This he spoke as a man well known to be beloved by the People; Having
thoroughly terrified the Senate, by laying open the danger hanging over them, he
promised them nevertheless to deliver them all, and to set things in quiet, if
they would freely put themselves into his hands, offering his Oath, or any
other assurance they should demand, for his faithful meaning; To this they all
agreed, and then shutting up the Court, and placing a guard of his own
Followers about it, that none might enter or issue forth without his leave; He
called the People to Assembly, and speaking as much evil of the Senate as he
knew they would be glad to hear, he told them, That these wicked Governors
were surprised by his policy, and all fast, ready to abide what sentence they
should lay upon them; Only thus much he advised them, as a thing which
necessity required, That they should choose a new Senate, before they satisfied
their anger upon the old; So rehearsing to them the names of two or three
Senators, he asked what their judgment was of these, all cried out, That they
were worthy of death; Choose then, said he, first of all new ones in their
places; Hereat the multitude unprovided for such an Election were silent, until
at last some one or other adventured to name whom he thought fit; The men so
nominated were utterly disliked by the whole Assembly, either for some fault,
baseness, or insufficiency, or else even because they were obscure and unknown,
and therefore held unworthy; The difficulty of the New Election appearing more
and more, whilst more were to be chosen, and the fittest men who were first
named, being already rejected, Pacuvius entreated, and easily persuaded the
people, That the present Senate might at this time be spared, in hopes of
amendment hereafter; which doubtless would be, having thus obtained pardon for
all offenses past; Henceforth not only the people, as in former times, honored
Pacuvius, and esteemed him their Patron; but the Senators also were wholly
governed by him, as a person to whom they acknowledged themselves indebted for
the safety of their lives. Rawleighs Hist. World. Lib. 5.

XCII. Alfred King of the West Saxons, went one day on hunting, and passing by
a certain wood, he heard as he supposed the cry of an Infant from the top of a
Tree, he diligently inquired of the Huntsmen what that was, commanding one of
them to climb the Tree, where in the top of it was found an Eagles Nest, and
therein a pretty sweet faced Infant, wrapped up in a Purple Mantle, and upon each
Arm a Bracelet of Gold, a sign of the Nobility of his Parents; This Child the
King carried with him, caused him to be Baptized, and from the nest wherein he
was found, he gave him the name of Nesting; after he had given him noble
Education, he advanced him to the Dignity of an Earl. Monasticon Anglic. Tom.
1. Page 256.

XCIII. Sir Walter Rawleigh was born at Bewdly in Devonshire; His introduction
to the Court was upon this occasion; This Captain Rawleigh coming out of
Ireland into the English Court in good habit, his clothes being then a
considerable part of his Estate, found Queen Elizabeth walking, till meeting
with a watery plashy place, she seemed to scruple going thereon, presently
Rawleigh spread his new plush Cloak on the ground, whereon the Queen trod
gently, rewarding him afterward with many suits for his so free and seasonable
tender of so fair a foot-cloth; An advantageous admittance into the first
notice of a Prince, is more than half a degree of preferment; When Sir Walter
found some hopes of the Queens favor reflecting on him, he wrote in a glass
window, plain and obvious to the Queens eye.

Fain would I climb but that I fear to fall,

The Queen espying, or else being showed it, did underwrite.

If thy heart fail thee do not climb at all.

Rawleigh soon improved this stock of favor to a great advantage, and in a
short time became a Minion to the Queen, obtaining her ear, is often consulted,
and nothing done without him; and she being willing to encourage him, who, as
Mr. Cambden says, was never sufficiently to be commended for the great pains
he took to discover remote Countries; and to advance the glory of the English
Navigation and Trade, sent him on a Voyage to Sea; Nor did he make a vain and
fruitless one, for at his return he brought news of a new Country discovered
by him in the year 1584. called in honor of the Queen Virginia, being before
named by the barbarous Inhabitants Wingandacoa; which has been since of no
inconsiderable profit to the Nation; But though Patents were granted to him to
settle a Plantation there, it grew not famous till the Reign of King James,
when this Nation found out the Excellency and fruitfulness of the place, so
agreeable to English bodies, and profitable to the Exchequer; Nature is there
prodigal, and makes amends for her parsimony in other parts of the world; an
Acre there often yields Forty Bushels of Corn, though (which is more strange)
there be three Harvests in a year; for their Corn is sowed, ripe, and cut down
in little more than two Months; For this and other beneficial Expeditions and
Designs, he is Knighted by Queen Elizabeth; And in the year 1592. The Queen
resolving to assault the Spaniard at a distance in revenge of his intended
Invasion in 1588. She sent Rawleigh to America with fifteen Men of War to
possess himself of Panama, where the Spaniards Ship their Plate, or at least to
fall upon, and intercept them in their Passage; but the King of Spain having
Intelligence thereof, sent express command that no Ship should stir from the
West Indies that year so that this design was prevented; After this he set sail
to Guiana, where he performed very considerable Service.

In 1596. The Queen rigs out a brave Fleet consisting of 150 Ships, Manned with
6360 Soldiers, 1000 Volunteer Gentlemen, 6772 Seamen, with which she is
resolved to fall upon the Spaniard at home; The Earl of Essex, and the Lord
Howard were Commanders of equal Authority, having been both at excessive charge
in carrying on the War; To these were joined a Council of War, consisting of
several eminent Seamen and Soldiers, among whom was Sir Walter Rawleigh; The
Fleet was divided into four Squadrons, the first commanded by the Lord Admiral
Howard, the second by the Earl of Essex; the Third by Sir Tho. Howard and the
fourth by Sir Walter Rawleigh; In the beginning of June they set sail for
Cales, and soon got to Gades, their Design being perfectly unknown as well to
their Enemies as their own men; The Ebbing waters would not permit the Great
Ships to engage, the shelves being of greater hazard than the Enemy; Therefore
Rawleigh is pitched upon as the most proper Person, in the midst of the Channel
to provoke them, who accordingly in a little Ship called the Warspight,
directed his Prowe against the Spanish Men of War, who thereupon presently fell
back; Upon this the rest of the Fleet came in, and burnt and took several of
their Ships; After this Victory at Sea, the Men were very importunate to go on
shore, whom Essex landed at Puntal a League from the City; At first the
Spaniards received them with a great deal of Courage, but the English charged
them so warmly that they thought it the best way to retire with more speed than
they came out; The English pursued so close, that they had almost recovered the
City Gates as soon as they; The Earl got upon a Bulwark near the Gate, and from
thence he espied an entrance into the Town, but very hazardous it being a
precipice, but this did not affright several of our English, who leaped from
thence into the Town, and engaged the Enemy in the Streets.

In the mean time Sir W. Rawleigh and others having forced the Gates, entered
the Town, and the Castle was surrendered upon merciful Conditions, but Sir
Walter was not Idle, or eager after the enjoyment of the Conquest; For whilst
others were reaping the plentiful Harvest of War, he with some small Ships who
could pass up the Channel, fired their Merchant Men, who were withdrawn to Port
Real, although they offered two Milions of Ducats for their Redemption; Great
were the Losses of the Spaniards by this War; and if we may believe our
Histories, amounted to no less than Twenty Millions of Ducats, upon
Consultation it was resolved to quit the Town, though contrary to the Opinion
of Essex, who was for keeping it as a future annoyance to the Spaniards; At
their return the Queen welcomed and encouraged her Soldiers with new Honors;
Rawleigh continued in her Favor to the last; but when King James came to take
possession of the Kingdom, Sir John Fortescue, the Lord Cobham, Sir Walter
Rawleigh and others, would have obliged the King by Articles before his coming
to the Crown, that his Countreymens numbers should be limited, but this was
stopped by the Treasurer, and the Earl of Northumberland; Sir Walter feared, that
the Scots like Locusts would quickly devour this Kingdom, It being probable,
that like the Goths and Vandals they would settle in any Country rather than
their own, and would make it their business to render our Nation as poor as
their own, for this he with the rest of them, were afterward frowned on by the
King, and lost his Command of the Guards.

However Sir Walter still pursued the good and Glory of his Country, and as
formerly in active times, gave his Advice against the Peace with Spain, who
might now with no great difficulty be brought on his knees; At the entrance of
the King, he presented him with a Manuscript of his own Writing, with no weak
Arguments against Peace; But Sir Walter was mistaken, for his Counsel was ill
timed, and a new Part was now to be acted, the Scene being changed; Peace was
the Kings aim, whether out of Fear or Religious Principles is not determined;
But with Spain a Peace is concluded, though an Enemy already humbled, who had
now time to recover their Losses, and were as it were cherished to assault us
with the greater Vigor; and the success thereof every one knows; and as if the
King would go quite contrary to Queen Elizabeth's Politiques, the Hollanders are
despised, flighted, and deserted, under pretense, that it was of ill Example
for a Monarch to protect them.

And now (though somewhat contrary to my method) it may not be unuseful to give
a brief Account of the fall of this once Great Favorite; King James is hardly
warm in his Throne but there is a great noise of a Plot generally called Sir
Walter Rawleigh's Treason, but upon what grounds is uncertain, since at his
Trial it appeared he had the least hand in it; A Plot that is still a Mystery,
and has a Vail spread over it, A Plot composed of such a hodg-podg of Religion
and Interests that the World stands amazed, Sir Walter Rawleigh should be drawn
into it; A Plot so unlikely to hurt others or benefit themselves, that as
Osborn says, If ever Folly was capable of the Title, or Pity due to Innocence,
theirs might claim so large a share as not possibly to be too severely
condemned, or slightly enough punished; Envy and Disdain (as Sir Walter has
told us in his Remains) seek Innovation by Faction; Discontent is the great
Seducer which at first put him to search into a Plot he afterward was betrayed
into; The chief Ingredients of this Medley were two Popish Priests, Watson and
Clark, and Count Aremberg Ambassador Extraordinary from the Archduke of
Austria, who brought in the Lord Cobham, and he his brother George Brook, both
seeming Protestants; Brook drew in Sir Edward Parham and others, and they the
Lord Gray of Wilton, a zealous Puritan; then came in Sir Walter Rawleigh, the
wisest of them all (says Mr. Sanderson) who dallilied, says he, like a fly in
the Flame till it consumed him, Willing he was to know the Design, and thought
by his Wit to overreach the Confederates, whom he knew well enough, though he
dealt with none but Cobham; One Mr. Laurency an Antwerp Merchant was made use
of by Count Aremberg, and was an intimate of the Lord Cobham's, these says
Sanderson, carried on the contrivance a great while, which at last was betrayed
by Laurency, and the Vigilance of the Lord Cecil. And indeed it was morally
impossible that so many disagreeing weak Souls should carry on a Project
without taking Air, the least glimpse being enough to give Light to the
Statesmen of those times.

The Design they were charged with was, 1. To set the Crown on the head of the
Lady Arabella Stewart, or to seize the King, and make him grant their desires,
or a Pardon; and that Lord Cobham should say to Brook, It will never be well in
England till the King and his Cubs be taken away. 2. To have a Toleration of
Religion. 3. To procure Aid and Assistance, from Foreign Princes. 4. To turn
out of the Court such as they disliked, and place themselves in Offices. Watson
to be Lord Chancellor, George Brook Lord Treasurer, Sir Griffin Markham
Secretary of State; Lord Gray to be Master of the Horse, and Earl Marshal of
England; But it seems they made no Provision for Rawleigh, which is no
inconsiderable Argument of his Innocence, who could have deserved, and might
have expected as great a reward as any of them had he been engaged in the Plot;
To oblige to Secrecy, Watson draws up an Oath; But all is betrayed, they are
Seized, Examined and Tried at Winchester, Nov. 17. 1603. and the Lord Cobham,
George Brook, his Brother, Thomas Lord Gray of Wilton, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Sir
Griffith Markham, and Sir Edward Parham Knights, Bartholomew Brooksby, and
Anthony Copley Gentlemen, W. Watson, W. Clark Priests, were all found guilty of
Treason, (except Sir Edward Parham who was acquitted;) and Watson and Clark
were executed Nov. 29. George Brook was beheaded, December. 5. but here the hand
of Justice staid, the Lord Cobham, Lord Gray, and Sir Griffith Markham were
pardoned at the place of Execution; Sir Walter Rawleigh was left to the Kings
Mercy, who thought him too great a Malcontent to have his Freedom, and
probably too innocent to lose his Life. Therefore he is confined to the Tower,
where he writ that excellent History of the World, wherein the only fault or
defect rather is, that it wants one half thereof, which was occasioned as it
is commonly related, thus; Some few days before he suffered, he sent for Mr.
Walter Burr, who formerly printed his first Volume of the History of the World,
and asking him how it sold, Mr. Burr answered, It sold so slowly that it had
undone him; At which words Sir Walter stepping to his Desk, reaches his other
unprinted part of his History, which he had brought down to the times he lived
in, and clapping his hand upon his breast said with a sigh; Ah my friend, has
the first part undone thee, the second Part shall undo no more; this ungrateful
World is unworthy of it; and immediately going to the Fireside threw it in, and
set his Foot upon it till it was consumed; As great a loss to Learning as
Christendom could have sustained, and the greater because it could be repaired
by no hand but his.

While Sir Walter was thus confined, Death took away his Mortal Enemy Sir
Robert Cecil, after Earl of Salisbury, who had purchased the Monopoly of
Favor, and being jealous of Sir Walters Abilities, had some fear he might
supplant him, which was the cause, says Osborn, that he was brought to the
aforementioned Trial; However Sir Walter outlived his Designs and Hatred, and
for all kindnesses bestowed on him the following Epitaph, which is certainly
affirmed to be his; King James was so taken with the smartness of them, that he
hoped the Author would dye before him; The Verses are these, Here lies Hobnial
our Pastor while er'e
That once in a Quarter our Fleeces did share
To please us, his Cur he kept under Clog
And was ever after both Shepherd and Dog;
For Oblation to Pan, his Custom was thus,
He first gave a Trifle, then offered up us;
And through his false worship such power he did gain
As kept him of the Mountain, and us on the Plain;
Where many an Hornpipe he tuned to his Phillis,
And sweetly sung Walsingham to's Amaryllis,
Till Atropos clapped him a P -- on the Drab
For spite of his Tar-box he di'd of the Scab.


If the Reader desires a key to these Verses, he may have it in Osborn's
Memoirs; Fourteen years Sir Walter had spent in the Tower, (of whom Prince
Henry would say, That no King but his Father would keep such a Bird in a Cage)
and being weary of Confinement, his Destiny brought him to his end by Liberty,
which it could not do by Imprisonment; For out of a longing for Liberty, he
propounded a Project to the King, upon which, being a well spoken man, and of
great Capacity, he set such colors of Probability, especially guilding it over
with the Gold he would fetch from a Mine Guiana in the West Indies, without any
wrong at all to the King of Spain, that the King granted him a limited
Commission to undertake it, and thereupon with diverse Ships accompanied with
many Knights and Gentlemen of Quality, he set forward on the Voyage, but when
after long search, no such Place nor Treasure could be found, he fell upon St.
Thome, a Town belonging to the King of Spain, Sacked, Pillaged, and Burnt it;
And here was the first part of his Tragical Voyage Acted, in the death of his
Eldest Son, the last part was acted in his own death at his return; For
Gundamore the Spanish Ambassador did so aggravate this Fact to the King against
him, that it seemed nothing would give satisfaction but Rawleigh's head,
without which he seemed to threaten a breach between the two Nations; Rawleigh
excused his Actions, and sent this Defense thereof in a Letter to King James;
May it please your most Excellent Majesty,
If in my Journey outward bound I had my men murdered at the Island of St.
Thomas, and yet spared to take revenge; If I did discharge some Spanish Barques
taken without Spoil; If I did forbear all Parts of the Spanish Indies, wherein
I might have taken twenty of their Towns on the Seacoasts, and did only Follow
the Enterprise I undertook for Guiana, where without any directions from me a
Spanish Village was burnt which was new set up within three miles of the Mine;
by your Majesty's favor I find no reason why the Spanish Ambassador should
complain of me; If it were lawful for the Spaniards to murder twenty six
Englishmen, binding them back to back, and then cutting their Throats, when
they had Traded with them a whole Month, and came to them on the Land without
so much as one Sword, and that it may not be lawful for your Majesty's subjects
being charged first by them, to repel Force by Force, we may justly say, Oh
miserable English; If Parker and Metham took Campeach, and other Places in the
Honduras, seated in the Heart of the Spanish Indies, burnt Towns, killed the
Spaniards, and had nothing said to them at their return, and my self forbore to
look into the Indies because I would not offend; I may justly say, O miserable
Sir Walter Rawleigh! If I spent my poor Estate, lost my Son, suffered by
sickness and otherwise a World of Miseries; If I have resisted with the
manifest hazard of my life, the Robberies and Spoils which my Company would
have made; If when I was poor I have made my self Rich; If when I had gotten my
Liberty (which all men and Nature it self do so much prize) I voluntarily lost
it; If when I was sure of my life I rendered it again; If I might elsewhere have
sold my Ship and Goods, and put five or six Thousand pound in my pocket, and
yet have brought her into England; I beseech your Majesty to believe, that all
this I have done, because it should not be said to your Majesty, That your
Majesty had given Liberty and Trust to a Man, whose end was only the Recovery
of his Liberty, and who had betrayed your Majesty's Trust; My Mutineers told
me, 'That if I returned for England I should be undone; But I believed in your
Majesty's Goodness more than in all their Arguments; Sure I am that I am the
first that being free, and able to enrich my self, have embraced Poverty and
Peril; and as sure I am that my Example shall make me the last; But your
Majesty's Wisdom, and Goodness I have made my Judges, who have ever been and
shall ever be

Your Majesty's most humble Vassal, Walter Rawleigh.




Before Sir Walter made this Voyage, the King commanded him upon pain of his
Allegiance to give him under his hand (promising on the word of a King to keep
it secret) the number of his Men, the Burden and Strength of his Ships,
together with the Country and River he was to enter, which being done
accordingly by Sir Walter, That very Original Paper was found in the Spanish
Governors Closet at St. Thoma, so active were the Spanish Ministers that
Advertisement was sent to Spain, and thence to the Indies before the English
Fleet got out of the Thames; But now no Apology though never so persuasive
could satisfy G^ndamores Rage, who as soon as news came of the firing St
Thoma, desired Audience of the King, and (...) he had but one word to say; His
Majesty wondering (...) be delivered in one word, when he came before him he
only bawled out, Pirates, Pirates, Pirates; And was therefore now resolved to
sacrifice the only Favorite left of Queen Elizabeth, to the Spanish Interest,
and who was the only Person of the Earl Essex's Enemies that died lamented, and
the only Man of Note left alive that had helped to beat the Spaniard in 1588.

When Sir Walter was arrived at Plymouth, Sir Jews Steukly seized him, and was
ordered by the King to bring him to London, which could add no Terror to a
Person who could expect nothing less; and was now forced to use all the Arts
imaginable to appease Hls Majesty and defer his Anger; To which intent Manowry
a French Quack at Salisbury gave him several Vomits, and an Artificial
Composition, which made him look Ghastly and Dreadful, full of Pimples and
Blisters, and deceived even the Physicians themselves, who could not tell what
to make of his Urine (though often inspected) it being adulterated with a Drug
in the Glass that turned it even in their hands into an earthy humor of a
blackish color and of a very Offensive Savor; while he lay under this
Politic disguize, he penned his Dedication and Apology aforementioned, when he
was brought to London, he was confined only to his own house, but finding the
Court wholly guided by Gundamore, he could hope for little Mercy, therefore he
designed to escape into France, which Sir Jews Steukly betrayed; but the Fate
of Traitors pursued him and brought him to a Contemptible end, to dye a poor
distracted Beggar in the Isle of Lindey, having for a Bag of Money falsified
his Faith, confirmed by the tie of the Holy Sacrament (as Mr. Howel relates)
and also before the year came about was found clipping the same very Coin (in
the Kings own Palace at Whitehal) which he had received for a reward of his
Perfidiousness; for which being condemned to be hanged, he was forced to sell
himself to his Shirt to purchase his Pardon of two Knights.

The King being willing to Sacrifice the life of Sir Walter Rawleigh to the
advancement of the peace with Spain; Upon St. Simon and Judes day, the
Lieutenant of the Tower had a Warrant to bring his Prisoner to the King's Bench
Bar in Westminster Hall, where the Attorney General demanded Execution
according to the Judgment pronounced against him at Winchester; The Lord Chief
Justice caused the Indictment, Verdict, and Judgment to be read, and after
asked him, What he could say, why he should not dye according to Law? His
answer was, That this 15 Years he had lived upon the mere mercy of the King,
and did now wonder h w his mercy should be now turned into Judgment, he not
knowing any thing wherein he had provoked His Majesty's displeasure, and did
hope that he was clear from that Judgment by the Kings Commission in making him
General of the Voyage to Guiana; For, as he conceived, the words, to his trusty
and well beloved Subject, etc. did in themselves imply a pardon; But the
Attorney General told him, these words were not sufficient for that purpose;
whereupon he desired the opinion of the Court; To which the Lord Chief Justice
replied, That it was no pardon in Law; Then began Sir Walter to give an account
of his Voyage; but was interrupted by the Lord Chief Justice, who told him,
That it was not for any offense committed there, but for his first Fact that he
was now called in question, and thereupon told him, That seeing he must prepare
to dye, he would not add to his affliction, nor aggravate his crime, knowing
him to be a man full of misery, but with the good Samaritane, would administer
Wine and Oil for the comfort of his distressed Soul; You have been, said he, a
General, and a great Commander, imitate therefore that Noble Captain, who
thrusting himself into the midst of a battle, cried out aloud; Mors me
expectat, and ego Mortem expectabo, Death expects me, and I will expect Death.
As you should not contemn, so neither should you fear death, the one shows too
much boldness, the other no less cowardice; So with some few other
Instructions, the Court arose, and Sir Walter was committed into the hands of
the Sheriff of Middlesex, who presently conveyed him to the Gate House in
Westminster;

Yet it has been much wondered at, how that old sentence which had lain dormant
16 years and upward, against Sir Walter, could be now made use of to take off
his head afterward; Considering that the then Lord Chancellor Bacon told him
positively; (as Sir Walter was acquainting him that he could procure his pardon
for a less sum of money, then his Guiana preparations amounted to) Sir said he,
the Knee-timber of your Voyage is money, spare your Purse in this particular,
for upon my life you have a sufficient pardon for all that is passed already,
the King having under his Broad-Seal made you Admiral of your Fleet, and given
you power of Martial Law, over the Officers and Soldiers; It was then likewise
the opinion of many Lawyers, that he who by His Majesty's Patent had power of
Life and Death over the Kings Liege People, should be esteemed or Judged Rectus
in curia, and free from all Old Convictions.

Upon Thursday October 29. 1618. This courageous Knight was brought before the
Parliament House in the Old Palace Yard Westminster, where a Scaffold was
erected for his beheading, though it was reported over night that he should be
hanged; His Attire was a wrought Nightcap, a Ruff band, a hair colored Satin
Doublet, with a black wrought Wastcoat under it, a pair of black cut Taffety
breeches, Ash-colored silk Stockins, and a wrought black Velvet Nightgown;
His first appearance on the Scaffold was with a smiling Countenance, saluting
the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, with others of his acquaintance there present,
when after Proclamation of silence by an Officer, he addressed himself to speak
in this manner. I desire to be born withal, because this is the third day of my
Fever, And if I show any weakness, I beseech you attribute it to my Malady,
for this is the hour I look for it; Then pausing a while directing himself
toward a Window where the Lords Arundel, Doncaster, and other Lords and Knights
sat, he with a loud voice spoke as follows; I thank God of his infinite
goodness that he has sent me to dye in the sight of so honorable an Assembly,
and not in darkness; But by reason the place where they sat was some distance
from the Scaffold, that they could not easily hear him, he said; I will strain
my self, for I would willingly have your Honors hear me; The Lord Arundel
answered, we will come upon the Scaffold; where after he had saluted every one
of them severally, he proceeded as follows.

My Honorable Lords, and the rest of my good Friends who come to see me dye; I
thank my God heartily, that he has brought me into the light to dye, and not
suffered me to dye in the dark Prison of the Tower, where I have suffered a
great deal of Adversity, and a long sickness, and I thank God that my Fever
has not taken me at this time, as I prayed God it might not; There are two
main points of suspicion that his Majesty has conceived against me, wherein he
cannot be satisfied, which I desire to clear, and resolve you in; First, That I
had a Plot with France, His Majesty had some cause, though grounded upon a weak
Foundation, to suspect mine inclination to the French Faction, for not long
before my departure from England, the French Agent took occasion passing by my
house to visit me, and had some conference during the time of his abode, only
concerning my Voyage, and nothing else, I take God to witness; Though it was
reported I had a Commission from the King of France; But this I say, for a man
to call God to witness to a falsehood at any time is a grievous sin, and what
shall he hope for at the Tribunal of the day of Judgment? But to call God to
witness to a falsehood at the time of death, is far more grievous and impious,
and there is no hope for such a one; And what should I expect that am now going
to render an account of my Faith, I do therefore call the Lord to witness, as I
hope to be saved, and as I hope to see him in his Kingdom, which will be within
a quarter of an hour, I never had any Commission from the King of France, nor
any Treaty with the French Agent, nor with any other from the French King,
neither knew I that there was an Agent, nor what he was, till I met him in my
Gallery at my lodging, unlookt for; If I speak not true, O Lord let me not come
into thy Kingdom; I cannot deny that when I came back from Guiana, being come
to Plymouth I endeavored to go to Rochel, which was, because I would fain have
made my Peace before I came to England, having heard a rumor, that there was no
hope of my life upon my return to London, I would have escaped for the
safeguard of my life, and not for any ill intent, or conspiracy against the
State.

The second suspicion was, that his Majesty has been informed I should speak
dishonourably and disloyally of him, there is no witness against me but only
one Mimical Frenchman, whom I entertained rather for his Jests than his
Judgment; His way was to incroach himself into the favor of the Lords, and
gaping after some great reward, has falsely accused me of seditious speeches
against His Majesty, against whom if I did either speak or think a thought
hurtful or prejudicial, the Lord blot me out of the Book of Life. But in this
now what have I to do with Kings? I have nothing to do with them, neither do I
fear them; I have now to do with God, therefore to tell a Lie now, to get the
favor of the King were in vain; It is not a time to flatter nor fear Princes,
for I am subject to none but death, therefore have a charitable opinion of me,
and think me not now rashly or untruly to confirm or protest any thing.

Another suspicion arose of me, in that I persuaded Sir Jews Steukly my
Guardian to flee with me from London to France, but my answer to this is as to
the other, that only for my safeguard, and nothing else was my intent, as I
shall answer before the Almighty; It is alleged that I feigned my self sick,
and by Art made my body full of blisters at Salisbury; True it is, I did so,
the reason was, because I hoped thereby to defer my coming before the King and
Council, and so by delaying might have got time to have gained my pardon; I
have an example out of Scripture for my Warrant; The Prophet David in case of
necessity, and for the safeguard of his life, feigned himself foolish and mad,
yet it was not imputed to him for sin. As for other Objections, that I was
brought by force into England, that I carried Sixteen Thousand Pounds in money
out of England with me, more than I made known; That I should recieve Letters
from the French King, and such like; He with many Protestations utterly denied
it; Concluding thus, And now I entreat you all to join with me in Prayer, that
the great God of Heaven whom I have grievously offended, being a man full of
all vanity, and have lived a sinful life in all sinful callings, having been a
Soldier, a Captain, a Sea Captain, and a Courtier, which are all places of
wickedness and vice; That God I say would forgive me, and cast away my sins
from me, and that he would recieve me into Everlasting Life, and so I take my
leave of you all, making my peace with God.

Then Proclamation being made that all men should depart the Scaffold, he
prepared himself for death, giving away his hat, and wrought nightcap, and
some money to such as he knew that stood near him, taking his leave of the
Lords, Knights, and other Gentlemen, and thanking the Lord Arundel for his
Company, entreating him to desire the King, That no scandalous Writing to
defame him might be published after his death; adding, I have a long Journey to
go, and therefore will take my leave; Then putting off his Gown and Doublet, he
called to the Headsman to show him the Axe, which being not presently done, he
said, Prithee let me see it, do thou think that I am afraid of it, and having
it in his hands, he felt along upon the edg of it, and smiling, spoke to the
Sheriff, saying, This is a sharp Medicine, but it is a Physician for all
diseases; Then going to and fro upon the Scaffold on every side, he prayed the
company to pray to God to assist, and strengthen him; Being asked on which side
of the block he would lay himself, he replied, So the heart be right, it is no
matter which way the head lies, and then praying, after he had forgiven the
Executioner, having given him a sign when he should do his Office, at two blows
he lost both head and life, his body never shrinking nor moving; His Head was
shown on each side the Scaffold, and then put into a Red Leather Bag, and his
wrought Velvet Gown thrown over it; which was afterward conveyed away in a
mourning Coach of his Ladies; The large effusion of blood which proceeded from
his Loins amazed the Spectators, who judged that he had a stock of nature
sufficient to have lived much longer, though now near 80 years old. He behaved
himself at his death with so high, and so Religious a resolution, as if a
Christian had acted a Roman, or rather a Roman a Christian, and by the
Magnanimity which was then conspicuous in him, he abundantly bafled their
Calumnies who had accused him of Atheism. Various were the resentments of his
death, and several Pasquils, as it always happens on such occasions, were
scattered abroad, of the gallantry of his behavior on the Scaffold, these
following Verses may give a confirmation, and a taste of the Poetry of those
times, Great heart! who taught thee so to dye?
Death yielding thee the Victory;
Where took'st thou leave of Life? If here,
How could thou be so far from fear?
But sure thou dyed'st, and left'st the State
Of Flesh and Blood before that fate,
Else what a miracle were wrought,
To triumph both in Flesh and Thought?
I saw in every stander by
Pale Death; Life only in thine eye,
Farewell, Truth shall this story say,
We died, thou only liv'dst that day.


These Verses were found in his Bible, in the Gatehouse at Westminster.

Even such is time which takes in trust
Our Youth, our Joys, and all we have,
And pays us naught but Age and dust,
Within the dark and silent grave,
When we have wandered all our ways
Shuts up the story of our days,
Yet from this grave, this earth, this dust,
The Lord shall raise me up I trust.
These two lines Sir Walter writ on the Snuff of a Candle, the night before he
suffered, Cowards do fear to dye, but courage stout,
Rather than live in snuff, will be put out.


Thus dyed the great Sir Walter Rawleigh, great sometimes in favor with Queen
Elizabeth, and next to Drake, the great scourge and hate of the Spaniards and
Gundamors Triumph; who had many things to be commended in his life, but none
more than constancy in his death; A Person of so much worth and great Interest,
that King James would not execute him without an Apology; Authors are perplexed
under what Topic to place him, whether of Statesman, Seaman, Soldier,
Chemist, or Chronologer, for in all these he did excel; He could make every
thing he read or heard his own, and his own he could easily improve to the
greatest Advantage; He seemed to be born to that only which he went about, so
Dextrous was he in all his undertakings in Court, Camp, by Land and Sea, with
Sword and Pen. Rawleighs Life and Remains.

XLIV. Mr. Howel in his Epistles relates the following pleasant Accident, which
may be not ungrateful after the former Tragical Account; When the Duke of Alva
was in Brussels, about the beginning of the Tumults in the Netherlands, he sat
down before Hulst in Flanders, there was a Provost Marshal in his Army, who was
a Favorite of his; this Provost had put some to death by secret Commission from
the Duke; There was one Captain Bolea who was an intimate Friend of the
Provosts; one Evening late, the Provost went to the Captains Tent, accompanied
with a Confessor and an Executioner, as his Custom was; and coming into his
Presence, told the Captain, That he was come to execute the Dukes Commission,
and Martial Law upon him; The Captain suddenly started up, so struck with
amazement that his hair seemed to stand an end, asking him, wherein have I
offended the Duke; The Provost replied Sir I am not to expostulate the business
with you, but to execute my Commission, therefore pray prepare your self, for
here is your Ghostly Father, and your Executioner; The Captain hereupon fell on
his knees before the Priest, and having finished his Confession, the Hangman
was going to put the Halter about his Neck, but the Provost threw it away, and
breaking out into a Laughter told him. There was no such thing, and that he had
done this only to try his Courage, how he could bear the Terror of Death; The
Captain looked ghastly upon him, and said, Then Sir get you out of my Tent, for
you have done me a very ill Office; The next morning Captain Bolea, though a
young Man about thirty, had his hair all turned Gray to the admiration of all
the World; the Duke of Alva questioned him about it, but he would confess
nothing; The next year the Duke was recalled, and in his Journey to the Court
of Spain, he was to pass by Saragossa, and this Captain Bolea and the Provost
went along with him as his Domestic Attendants; The Duke being to repose some
days in Saragossa, the young old Captain Bolea told him; That there was a thing
in that Town worthy to seen of his Excellency which was a Casa de Loco* a
Bedlam-House, for there was not the like in Christendom; Well said the Duke, Go
and tell the Warden I will be there to morrow in the afternoon. The Captain
having obtained this, went to the Warden, and told him the Dukes Intention, and
that the chief occasion which moved him to it, was because he had an unruly
Provost about him, who was oft-times subject to Fits of Frenzy, and because he
wished him well, he had tried diverse means to cure him, but all would not do,
therefore he was resolved to try whether keeping him close in Bedlam for some
days would do him any good; The next day the Duke came with a ruffling Train of
Captains after him, amongst whom was the Provost very shining brave; Captain
Bolea told the Warden, pointing to the Provost, That Is the man, whereupon he
took him aside into a Dark Lobby, where he had placed some of his men, who
muffled him in his Cloak, seized upon his Sword, and so hurried him down into a
Dungeon; The Provost lay there two nights and a day, after which it happened,
that a Gentleman coming out of Curiosity to see the House, peeped into a small
Grate where the Provost was; The Provost conjured him as a Christian to go and
tell the Duke of Alva, That his Provost was there clapped up, nor could he
imagine why; The Gentleman did his Errand, and the Duke being astonished, sent
for the Warden, and his Prisoner; Hereupon the Provost was brought in Cuerpo,
full of Straws and Feathers, Madman like, before the Duke, who at the sight of
him breaking into a Laughter, asked the Warden, why he had made him a Prisoner;
Sir, said the Warden, it was by Virtue of your Excellencies Commission brought
me by Captain Bolea, Bolea stepped forth and told the Duke, Sir, you have often
asked me how these hairs of mine grew so suddenly Gray; I have not revealed it
to any Soul breathing, but now I will tell your Excellency; and so fell a
relating the Passage in Flanders, and Sir, said he, I have been ever since
beating my brains how to get an equal revenge of him, for making me old before
my time; The Duke was so well pleased with the Story, and the wittiness of the
Revenge, that he made them both Friends, and the Gentleman who told me this
Passage (says Mr. Howel) said, that this Captain Bolea was then alive, so that
he could not be less than ninety years of Age. Howel's Letters, Vol. 1.

XCV. Not much unlike this, is another piece of Innocent Revenge, related by
Mr. Chetwind; The Pope that he might congratulate Charles Cardinal of Lorrain
for his great Zeal against the Protestants, sent him his Letters of Thanks, and
withal the Picture of the Virgin with Christ in her Arms, being the curious
Masterpeice of Michael Angelo; The Messenger in his Journey fell sick, and
lighting upon a Merchant of Lucca, who pretended himself a Retainer to the
Cardinal, delivered the Popes Letter, and Present to him to convey to the
Cardinal, who undertook it. This Merchant was a bitter Enemy to the Cardinal
for diverse injuries from him received, and therefore determined at this time to
have upon him at least a moderate and bloodless Revenge; Being therefore
arrived at Paris, he gets a Limner (who also owed ill will to the Cardinal) to
draw a Picture of equal Bigness, in which instead of the V. Mary, were drawn to
the Life the Cardinal, the Queen his Neice, the Queen Mother, the Wife of the
Duke of Guise, all stark naked, their Arms about his Neck, and their Legs
twisted in his; This being put in the Case of the other, with the Popes
Letters, were delivered to one of the Cardinals Secretaries while he was with
the King in Council; At his return, the Cardinal having read the Letter,
reserved the opening of the Case till the next day, where having invited those
very Ladies, with many Nobles and Cardinals, they found themselves miserably
deceived, disappointed, and exceedingly confounded and shamed; Chetwind's Hist.
Collections. p. 359.

XCVI. The same Author relates another, that, An Astrologer foretold the death
of King Henry the seventh such a year, the King sent for him, and asked him if
he could tell Fortunes, He said, Yes; The King then asked If he did not foresee
some eminent danger which much about that time should hang over his own head,
He replied, No; Then said the King, Thou art a foolish Figure-caster, and I am
more skilful than thou, for as soon as I saw thee I instantly prophesied thou
should be in Prison before night, which thou shall find True; and immediately
sent him thither. He had not been long in Custody but the King sent for him
again, enquiring if he could cast a Figure to know how long he should be in
Prison? He still answered No; Then said the King, Thou art an illiterate
Fellow, who can not f^retell the good or bad that shall befall thee, therefore
I will conclude thou can not tell of mine; And (...) set him at Liberty.
Chetwind's Hist. Collect p 327.

XCVII I shall add one more, and so conclude this Subject. A certain Jeweller
had sold the Wife of Galienus the Roman Emperor counterfeit and glass Jewels
for true Ones; The Empress being informed of the Cousenage, requested that he
might have due punishment; The Emperor having heard the Complaint of his Wife
commands the man to be dragged from his Presence, with this sentence, That he
should be exposed to a Lion to be torn to pieces. But while the Impostor
fearfully, and the People greedily expect that some fierce and Terrible Lion
should be let out of his Den to devour him, The Head of a man only appears from
the Den, and it was a Crier, who by the Emperors Order, proclaimed these words;
He has played the Cheat, and now he is cheated himself; and thereupon he was
immediately pardoned, and discharged; Wanly's Little World* page 177.

XCVIII. Stupendous was the Tragedy Acted at the Hague upon Mr. John de Wit,
Pentionary of Holland and West-Friesland, and his Brother Mounsieur Cornelius
The Tragical Deaths of John and Cornelius de wit at the Hague in Holland Page.
180.

de Wit, Ancient Burgomaster of the City of Dort, and Ruwart of the Country of
Putten, on the 20 of August 1672. which happened in the manner following. On
the last day of July 1672, the Counselor Fiscal having according to the Orders
of the Court of Holland fetched Cornelius de Wit, called Ruwart Van Putten,
from Dort to the Hague, secured him in the Castle, where he was accused by a
Barber, who about a fortnight before had impeached him in the following manner;
That Ruwart Van Putten would have hired and obliged him the said Barber called
William Tichelaar to murder his Highness the Prince of Orange; Upon which,
several Examinations having been made, the said Ruwart was ordered to be kept
close Prisoner, and August 6, was removed from the Castle to the Prison Gate,
as also the Barber, who voluntarily surrendered himself; August 15, in the
Evening, a Report was spread in the Hague, that Ruwart had a design to break
out of the Prison, which made diverse Flock to the Prison Gate, and Guard the
same all night; Yet nevertheless the People were so dissatisfied, fearing that
by some means or other he might be got away; that they threatened to pull down
the adjacent houses if they did not find him; which forced several Persons of
Quality to go into the Prison, and at their return assured the enraged
Multitude, that they had both seen and spoke with the said Ruwart; But this
availing little, they resolved to be further satisfied, by making this Ruwart
show himself to them all at a Window of the Prison, that they might both see
and know him, which being done their Fury was somewhat allayed for that time;
yet the Prison was guarded Night and Day by the Burgers. Aug. 20. The following
Sentence was pronounced against Ruwart Van Putten by the Court of Holland and
West-Friesland.

The Court of Holland having seen and examined the several Points and Articles
given ^n by the Procurator General of the same Court against Mounsieur
Cornelius de Wit, Ancient Burgomaster of the Town of Dort, and Ruwart of The
Country of Putten at present Prisoner in the Voorpoort, together with his
Examination and Confession, and the Allegations of the several Witnesses,
declare the said Prisoner to have forfeited all his Dignities and Employments,
which he has hitherto possessed; and banish him out of the Provinces of Holland
and Westfriezland, never to return into the same on pain of greater punishment;
And that he accordingly quit the said Countries with the first, and farther
condemn him in the charges of his Trial; Actum by the Lords Adriaen Pauw Lord
of Bennebrock, President, Aelbrecht Nierox, William Goes Lord of
Boekhorstenburg, Frederick of Lieu, Lord of Zoetermeer, Cornelis Baen, and
Matheus Gool, Counselors of Holland and Westfriezland, pronounced in the
Voorpoort Gate of the same Court. August the 20th. 1672.

Before this sentence was published, the Barbar Tichelaar being released out of
Prison, reported through the Town, That he was the Person who had accused the
Ruwart, who was banished for ever, when he as they might all see was set at
liberty; Immediately after this, the sentence being Published, occasioned great
murmurings amongst the Burgers, who judged it to be unjust; since they saw the
Barber was set at liberty, and that consequently his Accusation against the
Ruwart must be real, which if it had been false, the Barber would undoubtedly
have been punished, and the Ruwart van putten released; upon which they argued,
that it appeared plainly, that the Ruwart had sufficient knowledge of the
Treason plotted against the Person of His Highness the Prince of Orange, and
therefore had justly forfeited his Life, and deserved to dye; The late Council
Pentionary, Mr. John de Wit, coming the same day with his Coach and two Horses
to fetch his Brother Rewart out of Prison, he was no sooner alighted, and gone
in, but the Burgers caused his Coach to drive away; About 11 a Clock the two
Brothers coming down to take Coach, the Watch threatening to fire their Muskets
on them, forced them to retire into the Prison again; Mean while the body of
the Watch came to their Sentinels Assistance, and beating an Alarm, in a short
time raised six Companies of Burgers, two whereof placed themselves round
about, and before the Prison Gate, the rest were drawn out on the outward
Court, while the three Troops of Horse, which were quartered in the Hague
immediately mounted, and one of them repaired to their appointed Station; while
the other two riding to the Burgers, desired to pass through the Gate, which
they refused, stopping them with their Pikes from going farther; At this time
it was reported, that the Bores were coming in great numbers from several
places to plander the Hague; Whereupon all the Horse were sent to the
Drawbridges and Trenches about the Town, to oppose all outward Assaults, but
all this came to nothing;

About six a Clock in the Evening the Burgers which guarded the Prison Gate,
resolved to open the same by force, and take out the two brothers, they being
jealous that either by subtle stratagem or violence they would be fetched from
thence the approaching night; Whereupon they began to discharge their Muskets
against the door of the Prison; which not opening, they fetched great Hammers
and Chissels, and therewith broke open the doors and locks; being entered,
several of them ran up stairs, and coming into the Chamber, they found Ruwart
in his Japan Nightgown lying on his Bed, and the Council Pentionary his
Brother sitting at the Beds feet, reading in a book, which laying aside, he
asked the Burgers, what this violence meant? and what they would have? To which
no other answer was made, but that they must both of them go down; Hereupon
they pulled Ruwart from the Bed, not suffering him to put on any more clothes,
but with bitter Curses and Exclamations pushed them down st^irs, in such a
violent manner that one of the Burgers wounded. John de Wit in the Forehead
with his Pike; No sooner were they come out into the Street, but the multitude
fell a kicking and striking of them, resolving to carry them to the Scaffold,
either there to shoo^ them, or put them to a more cruel death; as indeed it
soon happened; For some who could nor stay their furious and bloody hands so
long. First knocked down Ruwart Van Putten, whilst above five or ^^^^ces from
thence, John de Wit recieved a blow on his Forehead with the But end of a
Musket and fell likewise down on the ground but being not quite dead, he was
shot through the head with a P^^^ol, which made him give up the Ghost; Ruwart
i^ the mean time was stabbed in the body with several swords; After which both
their bodies having recieved several wounds, as well by Musket shots as
otherwise; The rude multitude broke in among the Burgers, tearing their clothes
from their dead bodies, and dragged them naked by the Legs along the Streets to
the Scaffold, where Rewart not being quite dead breathed his last.

The Bodies thus m^ngled were hung up by the feet on a Gibbet, where they were
kicked and spit on. On this bloody Stage, the last part of this Tragedy was
Acted, by several inhumane, and most barbarous people, who first plucked off the
hair from the heads of their Massacred Bodies, beat the Teeth out of their
Mouths, pulled out their Tongues, cut off their Ears, Noses, and Privy parts,
chopped off their Fingers and Toes, and that with such Hellish Oaths and Curses
as were never before heard of; But this not sufficing, they ripped up their
Breasts and Bellies, tore out their Hearts and Bowels, so that their Bodies had
more resemblance to slaughtered Beasts, than of men; At last, the darkness of
the night ended this horrible Tragedy, and all returned to their several
Habitations; The bodies were by some certain persons, who came in disguize,
taken from the Gibbet, carried home, and some days after privately buried,
while the Members of the slain are sold up and down the Streets, a Finger for
15 Stivers, a Joint of a Finger for 12, an Ear for 25, a Toe for 10, and so
proportionably; Their clothes were also sold by pieces, and kept as Relics of
the Barbarity of popular rage and insolence.

XCIX. To divert the Reader after this lamentable story, I will here insert the
famous Relation of the Ephesian Matron, as it is written by Petronius, and
diverse other remarkable Authors. There was a Matron in Ephesus of so noted a
chastity, that the Women of the neighboring parts flocked thither to behold
her; She when she buried her Husband, was not content with the common usages to
follow the Hearse with dischevelled hair, or in the sight of the Assistants to
beat upon her bare breasts, but she also followed the deceased into the very
Monument, and having seen it laid there in its peculiar apartment, after the
Greek manner, she remained there to keep the Body, and to lament it for whole
nights and days together; Her Parents nor Kindred could not prevail to get her
away, and the Magistrates themselves having in vain attempted it, departed from
her: All men bewailed a woman of so singular an example, and it was the fifth
day since she had tasted any food; Her faithful Maid sat by her mournful
Mistress, and when her own tears were spent, lent her others, repairing also
the light of the Monument, as often as it required it; She was therefore the only
discourse of the City, and it was confessed by all men, that she was the only
true and most illustrious example of Conjugal Chastity and Love; In the mean
time the Governor of the Province had commanded, that certain Thieves should
be Crucified near to that very Dormitory, where the Matron lamented her lately
departed Husband; The next night therefore the Soldier (that was set to guard
the Gibbets, least any should steal the Bodies thence, and bury them)
percieving a clear light amongst the Monuments, and hearing the sighs of some
Mourner, in a curiosity that is incident to Humane Nature, he was desirous to
know who was there, and what they did; He thereupon descends into the Monument,
where beholding a most beautiful Woman, at first sight he stood immovable;
Soon after espying the dead body, considering her Tears, and those injuries she
had done to her Face with her Nails, judging of the matter as it was, that the
Woman was not able to bear the death of her Husband; He went and fetched his
Supper into the Monument; and began to exhort the Mourner that she would not
persist in a vain Grief, or distend her heart with unprofitable sighs; He
represented, that the same Fate waited upon them all, that all must come at
last to that long home; and spoke such other things as serve to appease such
Hearts as are exasperated with Grief; But she wounded with unknown Sorrow, rent
her Breasts with greater Vehemence, and pulling off her hair threw it on the
breast of her deceased Husband which lay before her; Notwithstanding all which,
the Soldier left not the place, but with the same Exhortations, attempted to
bring the Woman to the taste of some Food; At last the Maid (corrupted it is
likely by the Odor of the Wine) reached out her Conquered hand to receive the
Humanity of him that invited her, and having refreshed her self with meat and
drink, she began to attempt upon the obstinacy of her Mistress; What, said she,
will it advantage you if you shall perish with Famine, if you shall bury your
self alive, if you shall render up your uncondemned breath before your
appointed time,

Think you the Ghosts or Ashes of the Dead
Regard what Tears their Superiors shed?
Will you restore him to life again in despite of all the Destinies that
o^pose it? or will you rather forsaking a Feminine Error, enjoy the Comforts of
Life as long as you may be permitted? That very Body which lies extended before
you, ought to put you-in mind, that you should endeavor to live; No Person is
unwilling to hear, when they are advised to save their Lives, and therefore the
Lady being dry with several days abstinence, suffered her Obstinacy to be
prevailed upon, and filled her self with meat as greedily as her Maid had done
before; But with the same Blandishments wherewith the Soldier had prevailed
with the Matron to live, with the same he attempts her Chastity also; The young
Man seemed to this chaste One, neither unhandsom nor uneloquent and the Maid too
seeking to get him into her favor repeated ever and anon; And will you still
resist kind Love, nor care
Within what solitary Feilds we are;


To be short, the woman abstained not from any kind of Familiarity, the
victorious Soldier overcame, and they lay together not only that night, but
the next and a third after; The entrance of the Monument being closed, that it
might be supposed the most chaste Woman had expired upon the Corpse of her
Husband. But the Soldier delighted with the Beauty of the Woman, and also with
the Privacy, bought what he was able, and at the entrance of the night brought
it to the Monument, where he continued till Morning; The Parents therefore of
one of the Thieves lately executed, perceiving how slightly the Bodies were
guarded, took down their Son from the Gallows, and committed him to the Earth;
But the Soldier in the Morning perceiving that one of the Gibbets was without
its Carcass, and fearing the punishment of his neglect, told the Woman what had
happened, and withal that he would not expect the Sentence, but would punish
himself for his neglect with his own sword, beseeching her to afford him a
place for Burial, and to make a fatal Repository for her Friend as well as for
her Husband; The Woman, no less compassionate than chaste, cries out, Certainly
said she, the Heavens will not suffer that at the same time I should behold the
Funerals of two men the dearest unto me of all other, I had rather part with
the dead than slaughter the Living; And having said this, she commands the body
of her dead husband to be taken out of the Coffin, cuts off his Nose to
disfigure his Face, and delivers him to be hanged on the Gibbet that was empty;
The Soldier made use of the Wit of this Wise Woman, and the next day it was
the wonder of the People which way the dead Theif was again got upon the
Gallows; The Woman hereby discovering the instability and unconstancy of Humane
Nature, in changing her extraordinary Grief for the dead into such an extreme
doting on the Living, and so ^oon to expose the former to the disgrace of a
Thief and Malefactor, for her kindness to the latter, whom she had known but a
few days before. Wanly's Little World, page 415.

C. It was a strange Accident, and is related by diverse Authors which happened
at a Town called Hammel in the Duchy of Brunswick in Germany in the year of
our Lord 1284, June 26. This Town being grievously troubled with Rats and Mice,
there came to them a Pied Coat Piper, who agreed with the Burgers that for so
much money, he would free them quite from those Vermin, nor would he demand
it, till a year and a day after; The Agreement being made, he began to play on
his Pipes, going from one Str^^t to another, and all the Rats and Mice followed
him, whom he led to a Great Lake hard by, where they went all in, and were
drowned, so that the Town was infected no more; At the end of the year the Pied
Piper returned for his Reward; The Burgers put him off with slightings and
neglect, offering him some small matter, which he refusing, and staying some
few days in Town; On Sunday Morning at High-Mass when most People were at
Church* he fell to play on his Pipes and began another Tune, whereupon there
followed him one hundred and Thirt^ Boys out of the Town, to a great Hill
called Koppen, situate on the Road hard by, which One Hundred and Thirty Boys
swallowed in a Mountain at Hamel in Germani Page. 188.

rent in two, and opening let him and the Children in and then closed up again,
so that they were never seen after; This History is writ and Religiously kept
by them in their Annals at Hammel, is read in their Books, and painted in their
Windows and their Churches; They date their Bills, Bonds and other Instruments
in Law to this day, From the year of the going out of their Children; besides
there is a Great Pillar of Stone at the Foot of that Hill, whereon this Story
is engraven; It is also observed in the memory of it, that in the Street they
passed out of, no Piper is admitted ever since, and if a Bride live in that
Street, till she is come out of it there is no Dancing to be suffered. Howel's
Epistles, page 272.

CI. The Seven Provinces or the Commonwealth of Holland, were formerly under
the Dominion of the King of Spain, as well as the other Ten in Flanders are
now, and Charles the 5th. Emperor and King of Spain, had a Design to reduce
them all to a Kingdom, which his Son Philip the second likewise attempted, but
could never Effect, because of the multiplicity and difference of their Rights,
Privileges and Immunities, which could not possibly be reduced under one
Monarchy; Philip the second at his Inauguration into these Provinces was sworn
to observe these Rights, and at his departure for Spain obliged himself by an
Oath, still to send one of his own blood to Govern them; Moreover at the
request of the Knights of the Golden Fleece, he promised that all Foreign
Soldiers should be removed, and that he himself would come to visit them once
in every seventh year; But being once gone, and leaving instead of a Sword, a
Distaff, or unweildy Woman to Govern them, He not only broke his promise with
them, but procured a Dispensation from the Pope to be absolved and freed from
his Oath, and all this by the Council of the Cardinal Granvil, who (as the
States Chronicler writes) was the first Firebrand who kindled that lamentable
and long War, wherein the Netherlanders traded above fifty years in blood; For
intending, To increase the number of Bishops, To establish the Decrees of the
Council of Trent, and to destroy the Power of the Council of State, composed of
the Natives of the Land, by making it appealable to the Council of Spain, and
by adding to the former Oath of Allegiance many particulars for settling the
Bloody Spanish Inquisition and curbing their Consciences in matters of
Religion. These harsh, unreasonable and Illegal Invasions upon their Civil and
Religious Rights and Liberties, were the first occasions of those dreadful
Broyls and Devastations which after happened.

To appease which, Ambassadors were dispatched to Spain from the Netherlands,
whereof the two first came to violent Deaths, the one being beheaded, and the
other poisoned, but the two last, Count Egmond and Horn were still fed with
false hopes, till Philip the second had prepared an Army under the Conduct of
the D. of Alva, to compose the difference by Arms; For as soon as he came to
the Government, he established the Bloet-Rad (as the Hollanders termed it) or
Council of Blood, made up most of Spaniards; Count Egmond and Horn were
apprehended, and afterward Beheaded; Citadels were erected, and the Oath of
Allegiance, with the Political Government of the Country in diverse things
altered. This powered Oil on the Fire formerly kindled, and put all in
Combustion. The Prince of Orange retires, thereupon his eldest Son was
surprised, and sent as Hostage into Spain, and above 5000 Families leave the
Country; Many Towns revolted which were afterward reduced to obedience; which
made the Duke of Alva say; That the Netherlands belonged to the King of Spain,
not only by Descent, but Conquest; After this he attempted to impose the Tenth
Penny, for maintenance of the Garrisons in the Citadels he had erected at
Grave, Vtretcht, and Antwerp (where he caused his Statue made of Canon Brass to
be erected, trampling the Belgians under his Feet) but all the Towns withstood
this Imposition, so that at last matters succeeding ill with him, and having
had his dear Friend Pacecio hanged at the Gates of Flushing, after he had
likewise traced out the Platform of a Citadel in that Town, he was recalled
back to Spain; Don Jews de Requiseus succeeded him, who came short of his
Predecessors Exploits, and dying suddenly in the Field, the Government was
invested for the time in the Council of State.

The Spanish Soldiers being without a Head, gathered together to the number of
1600, and committed such Outrages up and down, that they were Proclaimed
Enemies to the State, hereupon the Pacification at Gaunt was Transacted, one
Article whereof was, That all Foreign Soldiers should quit the Country; This
was ratified by the King, and observed by Don John of Austria who succeeded in
the Government; yet Don John retained the Lands-Knights still, as some thought
for Invading England; He kept the Spaniards also hovering about the Frontiers
for all occasions. Certain Letters were intercepted which made a Discovery of
some Projects, and caused the War to bleed afresh; Don John was hereupon
proclaimed an Enemy to the State, and the Archduke Matthias was sent for, who
being a Man of small Performance, and improper for the Times, was dismissed, but
upon Honorable Terms; Don John soon after dies, some said of the Pox, then
comes in the Duke of Parma, a man as of a different Nation, (being an Italian,)
so of a differing Temper, and more Moderate Spirit, and of greater performance
than all the rest, reducing several Cities and great Towns to the Spanish
Obedience; He had threescore Thousand Men in Pay, the choicest which Spain and
Italy could afford. At this time the French and English Ambassadors interceding
for a Peace, had a short answer of King Philip the second, who said, That he
needed not the help of any to reconcile himself to his own Subjects, and reduce
them to Conformity, but what difference there was, he would refer to his Cosen
the Emperor; Hereupon the business was Treated at Colen, where the Spaniard
stood as high a Tiptoe as ever, and notwithstanding the vast expense of Blood
and Treasure he had been at for so many years, and that matters began to
exasperate yet more, which would prolong the War for ever, he would abate
nothing in point of Ecclesiastic Government, but would impose the bloody
Spanish Inquisition upon their Souls, and Turkish Slavery upon their Bodies and
Estates.

Hereupon the States perceiving that King Philip could not be wrought either by
the solicitations of other Princes, or their own supplications so often
repeated, That they might enjoy the Freedom of Religion, with other Civil
Rights, Freedoms, and Infranchisements, to which he was obliged by Oath; being
provoked likewise by that Ban or Proclamation, which was published against the
Prince of Orange, That whosoever killed him should have 5000 Crowns, They at
last absolutely renounced and abjured the King of Spain for their Sovereign;
They broke his Seals, changed the Oath of Allegiance, and fled into France for
Succor; They set up the Duke of Anjou (recommended to them by Queen Elizabeth
to whom he was a Suitor) for their Prince; who attempted to render himself
Absolute, and so thought to surprise Antwerp, but received there an
ill-favored repulse; Yet nevertheless the United Provinces (for so they termed
themselves ever after,) fearing to distaste their next great Neighbor France,
made a second Offer to that King, To desire his Protection and Sovereignty; But
he had too many Irons in the Fire at home, the Unholy League growing daily
stronger against him, he therefore answered them, That his Shirt was nearer to
him than his Doublet; Then had they recourse to Queen Elizabeth, who partly for
her own Security, and partly for Interest in Religion reached them a supporting
hand, and sent them Men, Money, and the Earl of Leicester for their Governor,
who not agreeing with their Humor, was soon recalled, without any outward
dislike on the Queens side, for she left her Forces still with them, but upon
their Expense; She lent them afterward some Considerable Sums of Money, and
received the Towns of Brill and Flushing for her Security, and ever after the
English were the best Sinews of their War, and the Atcheivers of the greatest
exploits among them.

Having thus made sure of the English; they held the Spaniard tack many years,
and during those Traverses of War were very Fortunate against him; At last a
Treaty of Peace was propounded, which the States or seven Provinces would not
agree to singly with the King of Spain, unless the Provinces that yet remained
under him would engage themselves to the performance of the Articles, besides
they would not Treat either of Peace or Truce, unless they were declared
Free-States, and Treated by the Title of The High and Mighty States of the
United Provinces, all which was granted, and so a Truce was Concluded, which
ended in a Peace that has continued without any considerable Interruption even
to this day; These Wars did much drain and impoverish the King of Spain by
reason of the distance from thence to the Netherlands, for every Soldier that
he sent from Spain, and Italy, cost him near an Hundred Crowns before he came
into Flanders; So that notwithstanding his Silver and Gold Mines of Mexico and
Peru, it plunged him deeply in debt, insomuch that having taken up moneys in
all the chief Banks of Christendom, he was forced to dispense with himself from
Payment by a Declaration published to that purpose, alleging, That he could
not pay it, having employed those moneys, as he said, for the Public Peace of
Christendom; This broke many great Bankers, and his Credit was not good in his
own Towns of Sevil and Lisbon; and which was worse, while he was thus wrestling
with his own Subjects, the Turks took the Opportunity to seize the two strong
Forts of Tunis and Goletta in Africa, which were the Trophies of Charles the
fifth his Father.

So eager was he in this Quarrel, that he employed the utmost of his strength
and Industry to reduce this People to his Will, in regard he had an Intent to
make these Provinces his Main Rendevouz, and Magazine of Men of War, which his
Neighbors perceiving, and that he had an Aim to be a Western Monarch, they
stuck close to the Hollanders, not so much, it may be, out of Love, as Reasons
of State; and this was that Bone which Secretary Walsingham told Q. Elizabeth,
he would cast to the King of Spain, that should last him twenty years, and
perhaps make his Teeth shake in his head; And so it happened, for it was said,
That he might have paved the Streets of Madrid with Silver, and covered the
Houses thereof with Gold, with the money that he spent in the Wars of the
Netherlands. Thus this great Prince by embracing violent and unreasonable
Counsels, and endeavoring to deprive his Subjects of their Liberties, contrary
to the Obligations of Honor and Conscience, was unfortunate in all his
Enterprises; and at last obliged to acknowledge them, who were willing to have
been his Subjects, to be as it were his Equals and Competitors. Howels Letters,
page 81.

CII. The Adventures and Dangers of Mr. John Watts are no less remarkable than
any yet mentioned, which are related by himself, as follows, This John Watts
being about 18 years of Age, shipped himself at Deal in the Peachtree of London,
of about 60 Tun in June 1668; The Ship had not been long in the Downs but a
fair Gale presenting, they hoisted Sail; The first place they touched at was
the Gold Coast, and from thence they went to Old Calabar, in the Bith of
Guinney; They entered a River called Cross River into Pirates Island; After they
had taken in their Negroes and ready to Sail, the Master calls up the Boatswain
and three men more, whereof Watts was one, and commands them to look out the
Copper Bars that were left, and carry them on shore to try if they could sell
them; The Boatswain with his small Company desired that they might have Arms
with them, not believing the common Report, that they were an harmless,
Innocent People; They took with them three Muskets and a Pistol, and so rowed
toward the shore, but not far from it, our Match fell unhappily into the Water,
and our ship being fallen down from that narrow part of the River nearer the
Sea, quite out of our sight, we were consulting what would be safest for us to
do, we were not willing voluntarily to destroy our selves, and were ashamed to
return to our Ship before we had dispatched our business; At length the
Boatswain sent the Relator John Wats on shore to the first house to light our
Match, that we had recovered out of the Water after it was extinct, which he
readily obeyed; But before he was twenty Rods from the Waterside, he was seized
on by two Blacks, or rather Tawny Moors, and by them haled above half a mile up
into the Country, and thrown with great violence upon his Belly, and so
compelled to lie till they stripped him, and more Company coming to them, they
were so eager for his poor Canvas Apparel, that some they tore off, others they
cut off, and with that several pieces of his Flesh, to his Intolerable pain;
with these rags they made little Childrens Aprons to cover their Privities,
Linen and Woollen being very scarce there.

The Boatswain seeing John Wats thus carried away, was resolved with his two
Companions to have him again, with the venture of their Lives; They Arm
themselves; but whilst they were consulting whether to venture on shore or not;
of a sudden they were beset with about a Dozen men in several Canoes, but they
valiantly maintained their Boat for three hours, for after two or three
Muskets were discharged they defended themselves with the Oars and Boathooks;
The Boatswain received a mortal wound in his Groin, and fell down in the Boat;
the other two adventured into the River, endeavoring by swiming to escape the
merciless hands of Cruel Infidels; But the Negroes with their swift Canoes soon
overtook them, and brought them on shore to the place where John Wats was; The
Negroes took the Boatswain out of the Ships Boat, and instead of endeavoring
to preserve his life, they presently cut off his head with a sharp weapon
before his Companions Faces; and whilst he was yet reeking in his Blood, they
barbarously cut off pieces of Flesh from his Buttocks, Thighs, Arms, and
Shoulders, and broiling it on the Coals, they with great impatience, eagerly
eat it before our faces as a most rare Banquet, to our great terror and
astonishment; About fourteen days after, one of the Company fell sick, but
instead of being Physicians to cure him, they were his Butchers to murder him;
They served him as they did the Boatswain, cut off his head, and broiled and
eat up his flesh, and rejoiced exceedingly at this pleasant Entertainment; Ten
days after the third fell sick, whom they used in the same manner; These
dreadful Executions much affected John Wats, who expected hourly to taste of
the same Cruelty, but through Divine providence, notwithstanding the Alteration
of the Climate, want of Clothes, and the strangeness of the Food which was only
Herbs, he continued in good health, and the Natives who daily expected another
Banquet were disappointed, either their Customs, or the overruling power of
Heaven not suffering them to destroy him while he was well.

His Master therefore resolved to sell him, with whom he was pretty free to
discourse, Wats having about three years before been in the West Indies, where
he had learned the Tata Language, which is easily attained, being comprehended
in a very few words, and all the Negroes speak it; He desired to know of his
Master the reason of their Cruelty, who bid him be satisfied, since unless he
were sick he should not have his head cut off. In the Boat with which they went
first ashore one Musket of the three was saved, and had not been discharged,
which his Master brought to him to teach him the use of it, which for fear of
his Masters displeasure and their inhumanity he endeavored to do, but they
still professing their Ignorance, he was forced to shoot it off; But the
Negroes who expected some delightful thing, being frustrated, and at the sudden
noise and flash of fire, which they very much dread, fled from him greatly
affrighted; yet soon after, hearing no more of that noise, they came up to him
again, commanding him to do the like; He told them, he had not Powder which was
the cause of the noise, but this would not satisfy these Barbarians; and
therefore thinking it wilfulness, they would have murdered him, had not his
Master rescued him; After this, in discourse with his Master, he told him, That
naturally the people were civil, and simply honest, but if provoked, full of
revenge; and that this their barbarous dealing was occasioned by some
unhandsome action, of carrying a Native away from thence without their leave
about a year before, they resolving if any came on shore, they should never go
off alive.

About 7 weeks after Wats had been in the Country, his Master presented him to
his King, named Efnme King of the Buckamores, who immediately gave him to his
Daughter, called Onijah; when the King went abroad, he attended him as his
Page, throughout the whole Circuit of his Dominions, which was not above 12
Miles, yet he boasted extremely of his Power and Strength, glorying exceedingly
that he had a White Man to attend him, whom he employed to carry his Bow and
Arrows; In several places far from the Seaside, the people would run away from
him for fear, others would fall down, and seem to worship him, using those
Actions as they do to their Gods; Their progress was never so long, but they
could return home at night, but never without a handsome load of a cup of the
Creature; for he seldom or never went abroad, and came home sober; Their drink
is of the best Palm Wine, and another sort of strong Liquor called Penrore;
Wats knew quickly how to humor this profound Prince, and if any of the Natives
abused him, upon his complaint he had Redress, as once by striving with a
Negro, his Arm was broke, which by Providence more than skill was set again.
After some Months, the King of Calamanch, whose name was Esn mancha, hearing of
this beautiful White, Courted his Neighbor Prince to sell him to him; at
length they struck a bargain, and Wats was sold for a Cow, and a Goat.

This King was a very sober and moderate person, free from the treacheries and
mischiefs that the other was subject to; He would often discourse Wats, and ask
him of his King and Country; whether his Kingdoms and Dominions were as big as
his, which were not above 25 Miles in length, and 15 in breadth; Wats told him
as much as his understanding and years made him capable of, keeping still
within the bounds of modesty, and yet relating as much as possible to the
Honor and Dignity of his Sovereign; First informing him of the greatness of
one of his Kingdoms, the several Shires and Counties it contained, with the
number of its Cities, Towns and Castles, the strength of each, the infinite
Inhabitants and valor of his Subjects; One of these Kingdoms was enough
sufficiently to amaze this Petty Governor, that he had no need to mention any
more of His Majesty's Glory and Dignity; It put him into such a profound
Consternation, that he resolved to find out some way to show his respects to
this Mighty Prince, and told John Wats, that if he could find but a Passage, he
would let him go to England, to tell his Majesty of the great favor and
respect he had for him; Which did not a little rejoice our Englishman; withal
the King told him; He would send him a present which should be two Cabareets or
Goats, which they value very highly, the King himself having not above 16 or 18
of them; Wats tells the King, that the King of England had many Thousands of
his Subjects who were under the degree of Gentlemen, that had a Thousand Sheep
apeice, the Flesh whereof they valued at a very much higher rate than Goats.

Though our Englishman lived very handsomely with this King, yet his desires
and hopes were for his Native Country, and at length he obtained a Promise
from his King, That the first English Ship which came into the Road, should
have liberty to release or purchase him; This very much rejoiced his heart, and
now he thought every day a year, till he could hear of, or see some English
Ship arrive, and often did he walk to the Sea side to receive some comfort; which
at length was observed by Jaga a Wizard, and the chiefest in 3 or 4 Kingdoms
thereabout; They are persons that the Natives give very much credit to, and on
any difficult occasion run to them for satisfaction; And though they have vast
numbers of them in every place, yet this Jaga was the most renowned amongst
them; One day he comes to Wats, and asked him very civilly, why he so often
frequented that place, who told him; It was to see if he could discover any
English Ship to come in there; But Wats being unacquainted with his great fame,
asked him, when he did believe there would one come in; Not that he was willing
to give credit to any of their Divinations, but supposing hereby to please him,
and answer his expectation; Jaga immediately told him, That 15 days after an
English Ship should come into that Road; He then asked him, whether that Ship
should carry him away; To which he answered very doubtfully, but told him, He
should be offered to the Master of the Ship, and if they did not agree, so that
he were brought to shore again; he should not be sold, but would dye for grief.

These 15 days seemed very tedious to Wats, who cast many a look on the Sea
with an aching heart; The 14th. day he went to the highest Hill thereabout, but
could discover no Ship; the next morning he went again 2 or 3 times, but saw
none; About 2 or 3 hours after, some Moors came running, and told the King
there was a Canoe coming, for so they called our Ships; At which our Englishman
rejoiced heartily, in hope of release, yet durst not show it for fear of
Punishment or Death, for though he lived better now than with his first Master,
yet his service was far worse than the slaves in Turkey, and their Diet worse
than Dogs meat; he had therefore cause enough of inward joy; The Ship came
immediately in; and Wats goes presently to Jaga, to know if it were an English
Ship, who assured him it was; It happened to be the St. Malo's Merchant,
Captain Royden Commander, who hastened to dispatch his business, took in his
Negroes, and was ready to sail, and our Englishman heard not a word what should
become of him, the King never offering to sell him; This made him resolve on an
escape, to which end he had prepared a piece of Timber near the waterside, on
which he intended to paddle to the Ship, which then lay about a League from the
Shore; Just as he was about to lanch his little floating board, he espied a
great Aligator, which will devour a man at a mouthful; This made him alter his
resolution, and resolve rather to live with inhumane Infidels, than to throw
himself into so imminent a danger; The next day God Almighty opened the heart
of the King to let the poor Englishman go; He sent him in a Canoe placed
betwixt a Negro's Legs, with some others to guide this small Vessel, for fear
he should leap overboard, and swim to the Ship.

At a distance from the Ship he haled her in the English Tongue, which made
those aboard much admire; The Negroes gave him leave to stand up, and show
himself to the Captain, to whom he gave an account how four were left there,
and he only preserved; It was some time before they could bargain, though the
Captain was resolved not to leave him behind; Several times the Negroes padled
away with their Canoe, resolving not to part with him, but with promises and
entreaties he persuaded them back to the Ship again, and they delivered him on
board for 45 Copper and Iron Bars, the Copper being as big as a Youths little
Finger, and the Iron somewhat bigger, now were his Joys completed, he could
hardly persuade himself but it was a Dream or Vision, and that he did not
really see English faces again, nor embrace English Bodies; It was some time
before he could throw himself at the Captains feet, to acknowledge his infinite
obligations to him; When he came on board, his Hair was very long, and his Skin
tawny, having gone naked all the time he was there, and frequently anointing
himself with Palm Oil, he looked like a Tawny Moor; But the Seamen aboard, with
Christian Hearts soon apparelled him; The Master hoisted Sail for the
Barbados, where he was to stay some time, but Wats earnestly desiring to see
his Native Country, got passage in the Katherine of London, and by the
Assistance of Heaven, in a few Weeks safely arrived in the Downs, and was
entertained by his Uncle, Mr. Richard Wats of Deal with great joy, who took
this Relation from his own mouth. Sea Deliverances. Page 73.

103. The unparalleld revolution in Portugal in the year 1641, is very worthy
to be remembered, whereby Philip the Second, King of Spain, lost that whole
Kingdom as it were in one day; with almost all the Islands, Forts and
Provinces, thereunto belonging. To give a particular account of this great
Transaction, it will be necessary to look a little back upon the Original
causes, and occasion thereof;

In the Year 1573. Sebastian Grandchild of King John the 3d. and Sixteenth King
of Portugal, Reigned in that Kingdom, being about 23 years old; Scarce was he
well settled in his Throne, having Reigned not above a year an half, but
Ambassadors from Muly Mahamet, then turned out of his Kingdoms of Fesse and
Morocco by his Uncle Abdemelech, implored his Aid in the recovery of his
Kingdom, with promise, That if he would assist him to drive out Abdemelech, he
would freely resign to Sebastian, the Kingdom of Morocco, and content himself
with that of Fesse. Ambition of Glory and Dominion, makes Sebastian readily
undertake the Enterprise, sending to Philip of Spain for Assistance, who
promises him Ten Thousand men, but sailed, yet with the Forces that himself had
levied, he resolves courageously to proceed; To which by accident, just as he
was going, he got some addition; For Stukely an Englishman, as he was going
with a small Fleet of Ships, and about Six Thousand Italian Soldiers to assist
the Irish Rebels against Queen Elizabeth, was by Tempest driven into Lisbon;
Whom King Sebastian with much entreaty, persuades to desist from his intended
design, and accompany him into Barbary.

Thus set forth, he arrives at Tangier with an Army of about Thirty Thousand
men, where he meets Muly Mahamet with a very small addition of Forces, and much
less than he expected, yet he marches forward toward Abdemelech, who by Letters
in vain, advised him to return in Peace; The 2 Armies meet in the Plains of
Alcazar, where King Sebastian is utterly defeated, himself, Muly Mahamet,
Stukely, and several persons of quality slain; Three Kings fell in this field,
for Abdemelech was slain in the hottest of the fight; This Battle was fought in
August 1578, yet some have affirmed that Sebastian was not slain in this
Battle, but that for shame and sorrow he returned not home, but wandering from
one place to another, was at last discovered at Venice, and from thence by
command of the King of Spain, was carried to Naples, where he was kept three
days in a dark and dismal Dungeon, without any sustenance, but a Knife and an
Halter, where he miserably dyed. Whether this were the true Sebastian or not,
was not certainly known, but he was so like him, that the Spaniards used to
say, if it were not he, it was the Devil in his likeness; But however he being
thus lost to the Portugals, Henry the Cardinal (third Son to Emanual the first,
who was Grandfather to Sebastian,) succeeded in the Kingdom, but he being both
by reason of his Age, which was 67 years, and his Function, being a Churchman,
deprived of all means to give the people any hope of Issue, it was the whole
discourse not only of Portugal; but all Christendom, during the short time of
his Reign, who of right ought, and who probably might succeed King Henry in the
Kingdom; There were several pretenders thereunto, but Catherine Duchess of
Braganza, and youngest Daughter to Don Edward, sixth Son of Emanual
aforementioned, had the certain and undoubted Right; yet Philip 2. King of
Spain likewise made his claim, though contrary to the Fundamental Laws of the
Nation, which Philip knew very well; but having Power and Might on his side, he
little regarded Rights and Titles, thinking them not strong enough against the
infallible Arguments of Soldiers, Arms and Money; and therefore no sooner did
the News of the death of King Henry arrive at the Spanish Court, but the Duke
of Alva was commanded with an Army of Twenty Thousand men to march to Lisbon,
and in the name and right of his Catholic Majesty, to make conquest of that
Kingdom if he found opposition.

But little resistance was made, only Don Antonio the Bastard, son of Jews the
Infant, having got into Lisbon, in the head of a Tumultuary Rabble, rather
than a well formed Army, endeavored at first to make some defense, but was
soon defeated, and the Suburbs of Lisbon being plundered to satisfy the
Soldiers, the City was surrendered to him; Whither soon after King Philip came,
and so by a mixed Title of Descent and Arms, took possession of the Kingdom in
1580. Katherine Duchess of Braganza, being enforced to surrender to him all
her Interest and Pretensions to that Crown; The Nobility and People of Portugal
were without doubt extremely amazed to see themselves so suddenly surprised,
and made subject to a Foreign Prince, and especially to a Prince of that
Nation against whom they had a natural hatred and antipathy, but finding
themselves in a condition not able to make resistance, they thought they should
gain more by freely submitting to the King, than to be forced to it; They
therefore made their humble submission, which King Philip met as it were half
way, and condescended in the Parliament, or General Assembly of Estates, of
that Kingdom, to be sworn to these Articles or Capitulations following.

1. That the said Philip King of Spain, etc. Should observe all the Laws,
Liberties, Privileges, and Customs granted to the People by the former Kings
of Portugal. 2. That the Vice King or Governor should be always the Son,
Brother, Uncle, or Nephew of the King, or else a Native of Portugal. 3. That
all the Chief Officers in Church or State should be bestowed upon the Natives
of Portugal, and not upon strangers; Likewise the Governments of all Towns and
Places. 4. That all Countries now belonging to the Portugals should so
continue, to the Commodity and benefit of the Nation. 5. That the Portugal
Nation should be admitted to all Offices in the Kings House, as well as the
Spaniards. 6. That because the King could not conveniently be always in
Portugal, he should send the Prince to be bred up amongst them. These Articles
were shut up, or concluded, with a Blessing upon such Kings as should observe
and keep them, and a curse on those who should break or violate them; And some
Authors likewise affirm, that there was another clause added to them
signifying, That in case (which God forbid) the King which then was, or his
Successors should not observe this Agreement; or should procure a Dispensation
for this Oath the Three Estates of the Kingdom might freely deny subjection,
and obedience to the King, without being Guilty either of Perjury or Treason.

Though these Articles were thus sworn to, and the Cardinal Albertus Archduke
of Austria, Son to the Emperor, and Nephew to the King of Spain, appointed
Vice-King of Portugal, King Philip durst not yet in Person leave the Kingdom,
for he perceived by their Murmurs and visible discontents, that their
submission to him proceeded more out of Fear than Love; and that as he had in a
moment gained that Kingdom, so he should as soon lose it, if he gave them but
the least opportunity; For that the People were highly discontented, it did
easily appear by their Attentive listening after Old Prophecies, among which
was one of an Old Hermit, who told Alphonso the First King of Portugal of the
great Victory he should obtain over the five Kings of the Moors, and That his
Posterity should reign happily Kings of Portugal, but that in the sixteenth
Generation, his Line should fail, but that God at length should have mercy
again upon them, and restore them. Others had regard to a Letter written by St.
Bernard to the same King Alphonso, (the Original of which is reported to have
been given to the Portugal Ambassador by Lewis 13, King of France in 1641) the
substance whereof was; That he rendered Thanks to him for the Lands bestowed
upon him, and that in recompense thereof, God had declared unto him, that there
should not fail a Native of Portugal to sit upon the Throne, unless for the
greatness of their Sins, God would chastise them for a time, but that this time
of Chastisement should not last above threescore years; Other Prophesies there
were of this Nature, and to this Effect, which put the People in hope of a
Deliverance, and many flattered themselves, that Don Sebastian was yet alive,
and would come and deliver them; nay so foolish were some of them that though
they believed him slain at the Battle of Alcazer in Barbary, yet they thought
he should live again, and miraculously come to Redeem them.

But that which most of all expressed the Peoples discontents, was what was
publicly spoken by the Mouths of their Orators the Priests in their Pulpits,
who would ordinarily in their Sermons utter Speeches much to the prejudice of
the Spaniards Title, and in Favor of the Duchess of Braganza, nor did they
spare to do so, even in the presence of King Philip himself, who would
therefore often say, That the Portuguez Clergy had made the sharpest War with
him; Father Jews Alvarez a Jesuit, preaching one day before the Spanish
Viceroy took his Text, Surge, and attolle Grabatum tuum and ambula, Take up
thy Bed and walk; and turning himself to the Viceroy, Sir, said he, the
meaning of this is, Arise, take up your pack, and be gone home; But above all,
the discontents might be observed in the Noblemens Chapels, especially in the
Duke of Braganza's, where they were used to sing the Lamentations of Jeremiah,
applying all the scorn and reproach of the Israelites to themselves, as Aquam
nostram pecunia bibimus, We have drunken our water for money, etc. because of
the Excise laid upon Wine and other necessaries by the Spaniards; And that
other, Servi Dominati, etc. Servants have ruled over us, etc. And, The Crown is
fallen from our Heads; Most commonly ending with this Prayer and Invocation,
Recordare Domine, etc. Remember O Lord what is come upon us, consider and
behold our Reproach, Our Inheritance is turned to Strangers, and our Houses to
Aliens, etc.

Yet did King Philip bear all these Affronts with an incomparable Patience,
dissembling with an Admirable Prudence his Passion (if he had any) for these
discontents; for he knew the only way to win this Nation to an Obedience and
Compliance, must be mildness at first, whatever he intended to practice
afterward, and that he had by his exact keeping his Word and Oath, won much
upon this People appears, in that during his whole Reign, and that of his
Successor King Philip the third, who followed his Fathers Footsteps, though not
with that Craft and Dissimulation, they made no Attempts, nor were inclinable
to revolt, only some small bustles with Antonio the Bastard aforementioned, and
one or two Counterfeit Sebastians, not worth mentioning, for they, as was said,
keeping their words in most things, (though they infringed some of their
Privileges) had almost brought the People to a willing Slavery; But King
Philip the fourth committing the whole charge of the Government to his
Favorite Count Olivarez, who though without doubt an able Statesman, yet would
seem to have a way in Policy by himself, which no body else could understand
the reasons of, and thereby lost this whole Kingdom and all its Territories;
For such were the new rigorous ways which he used in the Government of
Catalonia and Portugal, both People very tender of their Privileges, the least
breach of which, should have been seconded by a potent Force to have suppressed
them, in case they should attempt an Insurrection; When instead of having such
Power in readiness, the Catalonians had rather opportunity given them to Rebel,
and spurs to provoke them thereto; For some Soldiers being scatteringly
quartered among them, but too few to curb them, they looked upon that as a
greater Intrenchment upon their Liberties than any before, and a design utterly
to inslave them; wherefore converting their Patience into Fury, they took Arms,
Massacred the Soldiers, slew their Viceroy, and put themselves under the
French Protection.

This Revolt of the Catalonians was a President to the Portugals, who had
extremely suffered under the breach of their Privileges, for contrary to the
second Article sworn to by King Philip the second, That the Viceroy or
Governor should be either Son, Brother, Uncle or Nephew to the King of Spain;
The Infanta Margarita di Mantoua who had no relation at all to the Kings of
Spain, was made Governess, which they might and perhaps would have born, had
they not been incensed by a more feeling injury in 1636, when a Tax of the
fifth part of their Estates was imposed upon all the Subjects of that Kingdom,
an intolerable Greivance, and thought so insufferable by the Southern Parts of
the Nation, that they rose in Arms to oppose it, and had set the whole Kingdom
in a Flame if it had not been quenched by the timely care and Industry of the
Governess. Yet this small stir gave an Item to the Court of Spain of the
readiness of the People to Revolt, which made Olivarez endeavor by all ways to
cut off the means of their being able to do it; and that was to allure thence
John Duke of Braganza, whom the Portuguess looked upon as the Person who of
Right ought to be their King, and the only Native of the Kingdom that might
restore again the Line of Alphonso; Besides he was a Prince who for Power,
Riches, and Number of Tenants, not only exceeded all the Nobles in Portugal,
but even of Spain it self; And indeed the Duke of Braganza was one of the most
Glorious Subjects in Europe, being allied to most Kings in Christendom, which
made the Kings of Spain, though they were Competitors for the Crown of
Portugal, Treat this Family with more Honor than any other of his Grandees,
receiving them with almost as much respect as if they were Sovereign Princes,
which appeared in King Philip 2. who most of all desired to abase this Family,
yet always when the Duke of Braganza came to visit him, he would meet him in
the middle of the Room, and not permitting him to kiss his hand, seat him with
himself under the Canopy of Estate.

To draw the Duke therefore out of Portugal, Olivarez first politickly offered
him the Government of Millain, a place of great Trust and Honor; but he
modestly refused it, as not in a Condition at that present to undertake so
great a Command, and indeed expressing an unwillingness to go out of the
Kingdom, which made the King of Spain and the Count more willing to draw him
from thence, and to this end it was discoursed; That the King himself was
resolved to go in Person to reduce the revolted Catalonians, and that therefore
all the Nobility should be in readiness in four months time to attend His
Majesty in that Expedition; But the Duke of Braganza being suspicious of the
Spaniards, because he knew himself suspected by them, and likely so to be,
whilst the Portuguess so much affected him, to assure himself of the ones love,
and if possible to prevent the others suspicion, retires himself to his
Country House at Villa Viciosa, and there follows his sports of Hunting, etc.
not at all regarding matters of State, withal sending an Excuse to Count
Olivarez, That his Affairs were at present in so low and mean a Condition, that
he could not appear to attend His Majesty in that Pomp and Splendor which
became a Person of his Quality, and that therefore he should do His Majesty
more service in staying at home when the other Nobles were abroad, than he
could possibly do by attending him; This Plot thus failing, made the Court of
Spain more suspicious of the Duke than ever before; Count Olivarez therefore
resolves to employ his utmost Art of Dissimulation to entrap him, and that by
such means as in reason might make the Duke Ambitious of the Throne; though it
appeared Olivarez trusted the Duke, only because the Duke should trust him.

In answer to the Duke of Braganza's Letter of Excuse, The Count assures him,
That His Majesty was very well satisfied with the reasons of his not attending
him to Catalonia, being very sensible of his good inclinations to his service
That for his own part he was very sorry his Affairs were in such a low
Condition, and could not but commiserate his Interest as his own; That His
Majesty to let him know how great confidence he reposed in his Fidelity, had
appointed him General of the Militia of the Kingdom, and had for his present
supply sent him Threescore Thousand Crowns, leaving it to his Choice to reside
in what place near Lisbon he pleased. This strange Confidence reposed in the
Duke by the King of Spain much amazed the greatest Politicians, who thought it
reasonable that the Spaniard should have permitted the Duke still to have kept
retired in the Country, rather than to have given him such a Command, and
called him to Lisbon into the continual view of the People, who looking on him
as the Heir of that House, which had been ever represented to have the only
Right to the Crown, might easily be inflamed with a desire to have a King of
their own; And these things the Princ^^ of Mantoua was very sensible of, and
therefore continually solicited the King to know his Reason, or to desire him
to remove those apparent opportunities which he had given the Duke of Braganza,
to effect a Revolt; But she not only received intricate and doubtful answers
from the King and Olivarez; but had likewise the former Actions seconded with
one, which made her think the King of Spain had a mind to toss the Kingdom of
Portugal into Duke Braganza's hands whether he would or no; For on a sudden
without any notice given her, all the Spanish Garrison in St. John's Castle
which commanded the City of Lisbon, and indeed upon the strength of which the
whole safety and security of the Kingdom depended, were suddenly drawn forth
and the Castle left to the disposal of the Duke.

But this was the last Act of Count Olivarez confidence in the Duke, for by
trusting him so much, he now thought that he could not on the contrary but
repose confidence in him, and therefore next Summer in 1640. he again by
Letters sollicites him to leave Portugal, and come to Madrid, assuring him,
That his Catholic Majesty gave him many thanks, and greatly applauded his
Loyalty in the exercise of the Office of General, and was very sensible of the
good effects which his Authority had wrought on the Portugals; He next
represented to him, the present declining condition of the Spanish Monarchy,
not only by reason of the disorders in Flanders and Italy, and the preparations
of the Turks, but more especially, because their most Potent Enemies the
French, were now in Assistance of the revolted Catalonians entered Spain; That
it highly concerned His Catholic Majesty to drive them out of his Territories,
which could not be done without a very powerful Force. That he being one of the
Prime Grandees of the Kingdom, might by his presence in the head of a good
number of his Tenants, encourage others to a suitable Assistance; That to this
purpose His Catholic Majesty expected him every moment, having designed for
him great Honors, Privileges and Dignities suitable to his merit. But as
cunning an Angler as Olivarez was, yet he failed of his Mark, this bait would
not hook in the Fish; For though the Duke of Braganza was accounted no great
Politician, yet his own safety taught him to know, that all these great
Offices, and fair Promises, were but gilded allurements to draw him to his
destruction; Having therefore supplied the King with a considerable number of
his Tenants and Friends, he found excuses for his own not going in Person; And
to prevent all suspicion, he retired again to his Country House; Thus these 2
great Personages endeavored by Craft and Dissimulation to supplant each other;
only one strove the others destruction, the other only studied his own safety
and preservation.

During all these passages, the Vice-Queen Margarita was very Vigilant in her
Government, and foreseeing in reason what might be the issue of those
proceedings, writ very importunately to the King, assuring him, that if it were
not suddenly prevented, the Kingdom would be infallibly lost; To which she
recieved no answer, only Olivarez slighting her Judgment as fitter to govern a
private House than a Kingdom, sent her word, That if her capacity would not
reach to the height and drift of those mysteries of State, yet that her wisdom
would keep her from discovering them; But without doubt Olivarez was inwardly
perplexed, to see all his Plots thus fail, and foul means he durst not openly
attempt, such was both the Dukes Power, and the great Love the people bore him,
he therefore at last had recourse to treachery, and gives secret order to Don
Lopez de Ossis, and Don Ant. Oquendo, that when they had relieved Flanders with
Men and Money, they should with their whole Fleet put into Portugal, and that
as soon as the Duke should according to the duty of his new Place and Office
come aboard, they should immediately set sail, and bring him away to Cales; But
this Plot was by a strange Divine Providence prevented, for that Fleet was
totally ruined by the Hollanders upon the Coast of England in 1639.

And now was the time come, wherein according to St. Bernards Prophecy, the
Kingdom of Portugal was to be released from the Tyranny of Strangers, and
restored again to the Government of a Native King, to which all things seemed
so well to concur, that it cannot be imagined to have less than a Divine hand
in it; for though all Plots failing against the Duke of Braganza, the Spaniards
being fearful of somewhat, drew as many Portugal Soldiers out of the Kingdom,
as conveniently they could, thinking to lessen the ill humors which began now
to appear, yet thereby they did but the more inflame those discontents, which
were taken at Vasconsello's managing all Affairs of State; For though Margarita
of Mantoua was a Princess of great Judgment and Knowledge in State Affairs, yet
she was too much overruled by Vasconsellos's Secretary of State, whose
Government was insufferable to the Portuguez, who hated as much his obscure
birth, as his evil customs, being a man Composed of Pride, Cruelty and
Covetousness, knowing no moderation but in excesses; Small faults were by him
made Capital Crimes, using all severity to those whom he did but suspect to be
dissatisfied with his Government, and exercising with all rigor the Spanish
Inquisition, punished not only the actions, but the very thoughts of men; The
infringing the greatest privileges of the Portugal Nation seeming to him but a
Trifle; which continued oppressions, in the end so exasperated the whole
people, that encouraged by the knowledge of their own strength, by the many
distractions of the Spanish Nation, by the late example of the Catalonians, and
stirred up by the absolute ruin which they saw hung over their heads, there
being six Thousand Portugals listed every year, and forced to serve the
Spaniard in his Foreign Wars; From all these considerations, they resolved to
loose the yoke from off their Necks, and to disclaim all obedience to him, by
the Election of a King of their own. Some thought that this conspiracy was of
at least 10 years standing, and agreed to by most of the Grandees of Portugal
but it being a State Mystery, is hard to be decided, I will therefore recount
only what was publicly acted

Upon Saturday Feb. 1. 1640. (and Saturdays have been often observed to be
favorable to the Portuguess Nation) all the Nobility of that Kingdom, led on
by the Marquesses of Ferriera, and the Earl of Vimioso took Arms, and assisted
with a great multitude of the Inhabitants of Lisbon, and some Portuguez
Soldiers, came to the Castle, situate in the midst of Lisbon, which was the
Residence of the Vice-Queen, and serves both for a Palace and a Castle, to
which place all the Magistrates for Governing the Kingdom were Assembled; The
Guards were 2 Companies of Spaniards, and 2 of High Dutch, who being either
gained before by secret Intelligence, or affrighted with the great numbers of
the Portugals, or else from a desire of Novelty, or perhaps unwilling to make
resistance against those to whom most of them were joined by Friendship or
Marriage, but however they forsook their Guard without the least opposition,
and gave them free admittance into the Castle; At this time Vasconsellos was in
the Chambers of his Office, upon some reasons he had to suspect an
Insurrection, because of the discontents of the People; and was at that instant
writing into Spain of the Alienation of the minds of the Portuguez Nobility
from the Spanish Government, and earnestly pressing that some rigorous
resolution might be taken to prevent it; which Letters being afterward seized,
did sufficiently demonstrate his ill will to the Portuguez Nation; whilst he
was thus busied, the confused noise of the Soldiers pierced his ears, and
wondering at the cause thereof, he came forth accompanied only with one
Dutchman, and one of the Guard, he would have gone down, but was hindered by the
Portugals, who came running up, crying, kill the Traitor, kill the enemy of our
blood; Whereupon not knowing where to save himself, he fled with those
accompanying him into an inner Chamber, and there with his sword in his hand,
assisted by those with him, disposed himself to sell his Life at the dearest
rate he could; but his valor stood him in no stead, for those two who
endeavored to defend him, being slain with two Musket Shot; He seeing it in
vain to defend himself there longer, leapt desperately out of the Window,
rather to seek his death, than out of any hopes to save his life; for no sooner
was he down, but numberless swords were imbrued in his blood, the very Women
and Children running to tear in pieces his dead Body, with the same alacrity
and cheerfulness that he used to torment them when alive.

In the mean time the Marquess of Ferriera was gone to secure the Vice-Queen,
whom having committed to the Guard of 200 Musketeers, he calls a Council, and
in a short discourse, sets forth the miseries the Kingdom had endured, whilst
subject to the Spanish Government, who sought nothing but their utter
destruction, then reminding them of the valor and merits of their Nation, he
exhorts them to condescend to the Election of a new King, nominating to them
the Duke of Braganza, as the most worthy of the Crown, not so much for his
Power, Riches, or the greatness of his House, as because the Kingdom was his
undoubted Right, he being the only person left of that Line, which for so many
years had gloriously governed Portugal; A long discourse was superfluous to
those who were before persuaded; A public shout interrupted the Marquesses
Speech, all of them crying with a loud voice; That they would have John Duke of
Braganza for their King; In the whole multitude there was not a face, much less
a voice, that did gainsay this general Vote, either because they did all really
rejoice, that they should again have a King of their own Nation, or that none
could without danger oppose themselves against the Torrent of so public a will.

The Duke of Braganza was at this time at his Country House at Villa Viciosa,
either by Accident or because he would always have had occasion to excuse
himself, if the business had not succeeded; but by reason of his absence, they
thought fit to make choice of two Governors, whom to avoid the pretenses of
others, they nominated to be the Archbishops of Lisbon, and Braganza; These
began immediately to Exercise their Command, and were obeyed with so much
quietness, that in all that great and Populous City of Lisbon, there was none
slain, but only those aforementioned. The Prisons were opened, neither did any
suffer wrong in their Goods or Life; All the Shops were opened as if there had
not happened any change of Government; Only the House of Vasconsellos was
plundered with so much Anger and Rage, that they did not Pardon the very Doors
and Windows; nay such was the fury of the People, that had they not been
hindered by the Soldiers of the Guard they had levelled it with the Ground; As
for his Carcass, it suffered all those Indignities which a People wronged both
in their Liberties and Estates could inflict; They ran like Madmen to express
Living Sentiments of Revenge upon his dead and senseless Corpse, vaunting who
could invent the newest ways of disgrace and scorn, till at length almost
wearied with their inhumane sport, they left it in the Street so mangled, that
it did not seem to have the least resemblance of a Man, from whence it was the
next day carried by the Fraternity Della Misericordia, Of Mercy, and thrown
into the burying-place of the Moors, and Infidels; The Marquess of Alemqua^
after he had by Command from the Governors assured the strongest places in the
City, sent several Soldiers into the Streets crying, Long live King John the
Fourth; Which the People hearing, being distracted as it were with very Joy,
leaving their Trades they ran up and down, proclaiming him with Voices of
Jubilee, the greatest part through excess of passion not being able to refrain
from Tears.

The Messengers did not run, but fly to the Duke of Braganza, to give notice of
his promotion to the Crown; The first arrived on Sunday morning before day; The
Duke pretended a great Alteration at the News; whereupon some have presumed to
say, That he had not any knowledge of the Design; He seemed at first not to
believe it, but told the Messengers, That though he might have Desert, and a
Spirit fit for the Crown of Portugal, yet he had neither Will nor Ambition to
desire it; That his Enemies wronged him by tempting him with such stratagems,
which were as far from his Genius and Humor, as from his Faith; But at the
Arrival of the Count of Monte Santo, who came to accompany him to Lisbon, he
seemed of another Mind, and having been with him in private discourse for about
two hours, without any delay he departed with the Count attended with about 500
Persons.

Yet others affirm, that he was not only acquainted with the Design of the
Revolt, but of Council about it; And that some time before, the Nobility having
had a private Meeting at Lisbon, it was at first propounded, That they should
reduce the Kingdom into the Form of a Commonwealth; But that not being
approved of by the Major part, the Archbishop of Lisbon stood up, and in an
eloquent Speech having laid before them the Miseries they had endured under the
Spanish Yoke, recommended to them John D. of Braganza as the undoubted Heir of
the Crown, and their Lawful Sovereign; This Motion they all most willingly
assented to, and concluded to send Gaston Cotigno a man of a fluent Tongue to
acquaint the D. with their Intentions, and to persuade him to accept the Crown
and deliver his Country; Gaston being arrived, with many well couched words
acquaints him, That there was now a pregnant opportunity offered, to recover
the indubitable Right of his Ancestors to the Crown of Portugal, That the
Nobility and Clergy were wholly inclined to redeem themselves from the Tyranny
of the Spaniards, by securing the Crown upon his head; That the Universal
Odium, and hatred of the whole People to the Spanish Government, the present
low Condition of the House of Austria, distracted on every side with War, The
assured Assistance that France and other Nations, emulating the greatness of
Spain, would lend, were as so many motives to persuade them, not to let slip so
fair an opportunity to regain their Liberty. That if he by refusal should be
the sole Enemy to his Countries Freedom, they would effect it themselves and
reduce it to a Commonwealth; These and many other Arguments he used, which his
Love to the House of Braganza, his hatred to the Castilians, or his own
ingenuity prompted him to.

The Dukes amazement permitted him not to return a sudden answer, but after a
little Pause he replied; That he was highly obliged both to him, and all the
Nobility for their Affections to him, but that this was a business required
great deliberation; that there was no Medium between a Throne, and a Chair of
Execution; That therefore he should first advise with himself, and not rashly
attempt so hazardous a business; He therefore communicates the whole Affair to
his Duchess Donna Lucia Sister to the D. of Medina Sidonia, a Woman of a
Noble, Heroic, and Masculine Spirit; with her he consults, whether he were
best accept of the Propositions of the Nobility, or to prevent all hazards, go
to Madrid; and being anxious what course to take, his Wife generously told him,
My Friend, said she, if thou go to Madrid thou do incur the danger of
losing thy life, and if thou acceptest the Crown thou do no more, consider
then whether it be not better to dye nobly at home than basely abroad; These
words of his Lady, say some, animated him with a Resolution to accept the
Crown; so he returned Gaston an answer; That he would conform himself to the
Counsels of the Nobility, resolving to live and run all hazards whatever with
them for the regaining his Countries Liberty. In the mean time the Marquess of
Ferreira reduced all those Castles which held out for the K. of Spain, and then
in the name of the K. of Portugal gave the Sacrament of Fidelity, or an Oath of
Allegiance to all the Orders, that is to the Clergy, Nobility, and Commons,
which was received with so much readiness, that had not the Marquess seen the
necessary Orders observed, the People had run into certain inconveniences, so
much they strived to prevent each other in willingness to perform this duty.

Upon Thursday Feb. 6, His Majesty made his entrance into Lisbon, with all
those Applauses that a Beloved King can expect from his most Loving Subjects,
the Rich Liveries given by the Nobles, the Triumphal Arches, the Streets hung
with Tapestry, the multitudes of People flocking to see him, and the Excellent
Fireworks, which were so many, that a Spaniard cried out, Es possible qu^ etc.
Is it possible that K. Philip should be deprived of a Kingdom only with Lights
and Fireworks without a powerful Army! Certainly this is an evident Token that
it is the Almighty hand of God; Yet these I say, were but the least
demonstrations of that Cities Love and Joy; For so great was the Concourse of
those that crowded to see their New King, that though His Majesty entered into
Lisbon by noon, he could not through the throng arrive at his Palace till two
hours after Sunset; Curiosity and Love, which usually have the Force to stir
up all Affections, made this People Flock so fast to the sight of their Prince,
and even those who hated the House of Braganza, did accommodate themselves to
the General Joy; His Majesty being arrived at the Palace, in stead of reposing
himself, fell presently to consultation for preserving the Kingdom he had thus
suddenly gotten, and the several Governors were commanded to their Countries
to Levy Forces, who listed the Inhabitants from the Age of eighteen to sixty,
in whom they found such a ready willingness, that many offered their Estates
and their Lives, and would follow the Colors, though they had Liberty to
depart; On the 25 of the same Month, followed the Coronation of His Majesty,
which was accompanied with all those Applauses and Demonstrations of Joy, that
could proceed from a People of infinite Riches, who weary of the Command of
Strangers were consequently ambitious of a King of their own Nation; It was
performed with all manner of Grandeur and Magnificence, the following Oath
being administered to the King by the Archbishops of Lisbon and Braga; We swear
and promise by the Grace of God, to Rule and Govern you well and justly, and to
administer Justice as far as humane frailty will permit, to maintain unto you
your Customs, Privileges, and Liberties granted unto you by the King's own
Predecessors; So help us God, and this his Holy Gospel. This Oath being
administered, the 3 Estates of the Clergy, Nobility and Commons took the
following Oath of Allegiance to His Majesty, one for every one of the Estates,
pronouncing these words: I swear by this Holy Gospel of God, touching
corporally with my hand, That I recieve for our King and Lawful Sovereign, the
High and Mighty King Don John the Fourth our Sovereign, and do homage to him
according to the use and customs of his Kingdoms.

These, and the other Ceremonies being ended, the King accompanied with all his
Nobles, returned from the Theater, where the Coronation was performed, to the
Palace, where notwithstanding it was a very great rain, all the Grandees went
bareheaded; There was a sumptuous banquet prepared, but his Majesty gave
himself wholly to consult of preparations for the War, and to show the
magnanimity of his mind, he only displaced two Officers; That of the
Proveditore of the Custom-House, because he was Brother in Law to the Secretary
Vasconsellos lately deservedly slain, and that of the Count of Castanlie, who
was President of the Tribunal or Court of Conscience, because he was too much
interested with the King of Spain; As for the Infanta Margarita late
Vice-Queen, and the Marquess Della Puella, Kinsman to Olivarez, the Castle
called Pasos de Angiobregas was assigned them, with Fourteen Thousand Crowns a
year for maintenance in that honorable Prison. Shortly after Lucia now Queen
of Portugal, with her Son Prince Theodosio arrived at Lisbon, who were recieved
with all imaginable expressions of Joy, the Q. being soon after solemnly
Crowned, and the Prince installed.

But let us a little recollect, how these Actions were resented in the Spanish
Court! Most men's minds there, were struck with Consternation, but Count
Olivarez came smiling to the King, saving, Sir, I pray give me, las Albricias,
(or a Reward) to handsel the good News, for now you are more absolute King of
Portugal than ever, for the people have forfeited all their privileges by this
Rebellion, besides the Estate of the Duke of Braganza, with all his Accomplices,
are yours by right of Confiscation, so that you have enough to distribute among
your Loyal Subjects, by way of reward; But however Olivarez seemed to dissemble
his Passion, it was believed than this News struck deeper into him than any.
The King of Spain upon the first News of the Proclamation of K. John, sent a
Letter to him to this purpose; Cozen and Duke, Some odd News are brought me
lately, which I esteem but folly, considering the proof I have had of the
fidelity of your House, give me Advertisement accordingly, because I ought to
expect it from you, and hazard not the esteem I make of your self, to the fury
of a mutinous rabble, but let your wisdom comport you so, that your Person may
escape the danger; My Council will advise you further; So God guard you,

Your Cozen and King.


To this Letter His Majesty of Portugal returned Answer;

My Cozen; My Kingdom desiring its Natural King, and my Subjects being
oppressed with Taxes, and New Impositions, have executed without Opposition
that which they had often designed, by giving me possession of a Kingdom which
appertains to me; wherefore if any will go about to take it from me, I will
seek Justice in my Arms, God preserve your Majesty,

Don John, the 4th. King of Portugal.


And now King John to show that the good of his Subjects was his only care,
called an Assembly of the 3 Estates of the Kingdom, who being convened, and the
King seated in his Royal Throne, the Bishop of Elvas made a Speech to them to
the following purpose. That one of the first Laws of Nature was the uniting men
together, from whence Cities and Kingdoms had their Original, and by which they
after defended themselves in War, and maintained themselves in Peace; That for
this cause His Majesty had called this Assembly, to consult for the better
service of God, defense in War, and Government in Peace; That there could be no
service of God without Union in Religion, no defense without Union amongst men,
no regular Government without Union of Councils; That His Majesty did expect to
be informed by his Loyal Subjects what was for the good of the State; That they
were to render thanks to the Almighty, who had given them a King that would
govern them by known Laws; That His Majesty did not esteem those Tributes
lawful which were paid with Tears; and therefore did from that present take off
from his Subjects all Taxes that had been imposed by the Kings of Spain,
because His Majesty was not willing to Reign over their goods, nor over their
heads, nor over their Privileges, but over their hearts, hoping that they
would find out a sweet expedient to defend their Country against their Potent
Enemy, who threatened to make them all slaves, and to destroy, and annihilate
their Nation; That they would therefore considering his Majesty's goodness, and
their own Honor, manifest at once to the world, that as never Subjects had
such a gracious King, so never King had such Loyal Subjects.

The Bishop having ended his Speech, the most ancient Officer of the Chamber of
Lisbon stood up, and in the name of all the 3 Estates, who stood up likewise,
returned humble thanks to His Majesty for this gracious bounty, heartily
professing, That they did not only offer up their Goods, but their Lives to His
Majesty's service, earnestly entreating him to dispose of both as he pleased;
And to manifest that their Hearts and Mouths agreed in this free offer of
themselves to His Majesty, they presently voted, that two Millions should be
immediately raised by this Kingdom; But the King wisely and politickly declined
the imposing a Tax on his Subjects, choosing rather to accept of their
Benevolence; which made every one strive who should offer most, so that instead
of the Two Millions, there was in short time brought into the Treasury Four
Millions of Gold; Nor was this Money intended by them, nor employed to any
other use, then to maintain the Grandeza, and Splendour of the K. and Kingdom,
there being no need of Money for the payment of Soldiers, every one offering
to serve freely, and at their own charge, against their vowed enemies the
Spaniards.

Thus was this Kingdom utterly lost to the Spanish Monarchy; King Alphonso the
6th. (lately removed from the Government) and his Brother Don Pedro now
Reigning, and likewise Her Majesty of England, Q. Katherine, being the Sons and
Daughter of this K. John, in which Family the Government is like still to
continue, and never to revert back to the Spaniard, who lost at this time not
only Portugal, but with it all they enjoyed by that Kingdom in the East Indies,
the Terce^a Islands, and other Islands in the Atlantic Sea, the Kingdom of
Algarve Brazile, with all they had in Africa, except the Town of Ceuta which
was the whole that remained to the Spanish Nation of all those great Dominions.
Hist. Portugal. Page 61.

104. The remarkable revolutions in the Empire of China, and the entire
Conquest thereof by the Tartars happened in the same year 1640; As if some
fatal influence had inclined most Nations to changes and distractions at that
time. It cannot therefore be unpleasant to give a brief account thereof; The
Inhabitants of China enjoyed all the pleasures of peace under the Government of
their last Emperor, who was the most absolute Monarch that ever ruled those
vast Territories; when in the year 1640, a year fatal to several States, those
Clouds began to gather, which shortly after produced such a storm as ruined the
whole Empire; The name of the present Emperor was Zunchin, a deceitful, and
unfortunate name, for in the Chinese Language, it signifies successful omen, or
Sovereign Dominion, but how false a prognostic this was appeared quickly; This
Emperor was of a most courteous and good disposition, and certainly his
Subjects, who enjoyed great Plenty, and all the advantages of Peace, lived
truly happy under so Excellent a Prince; But it is not sufficient for a Prince
to be Good, and to govern mildly and peaceably, unless he likewise takes care
not to have ill Officers, who make use of their Credit under him, to gratify
their Private Passions and to extend their Ambition beyond all Bounds and
Limits; yet some Authors have branded him for Covetousness, and that after a
great Famine which happened in the Northern Provinces, occasioned by an unheard
of number of Locusts, he imposed upon his Subjects as high Taxes, as they paid
formerly in fruitful flourishing times, the former Money being all misspent, and
the Soldiers not paid; Whereupon the number of the Mutineers daily increased,
who enriched themselves by Plunder and Rapine. For as Semedo in his History of
China intimates, Rebellion is the usual Effect of Extortion and Tyranny,
especially where the Prince would have more from the People than they are able
to give, And therefore Theopompus (says he) King of the Lacedaemonians, when
his wife told him, that because he had eased the People of many Taxes, he would
leave his Son a poorer Kingdom, than he received from his Father; answered,
Relinquo sed Diuturnius; that is, I shall leave him a more lasting Kingdom,
Happy had it been for Zunchin Emperor of China had he been of Theopompus his
Mind.

But (says my Author) though I find him charged with Covetousness, yet I am
not very apt to suspect him so guilty of that Vice, as of another usually more
fatal to Princes, which is a facile Nature, easy to be wrought upon by others,
and too inclinable to favor and indulge themselves, and not willing to undergo
the weight of Affairs; From whence it was, that though under the Reign of his
Brother Thienking, who preceded him in the Imperial Throne, Zunchin so opposed
his Darling Favorite the Eunuch Guei, and all the Eunuchs his Partisans, that
at last he prevailed with his brother to banish them all his Court, to the
great Satisfaction of the whole Empire, and when his Brother dying without
Issue the Imperial Crown fell to him, at his first taking possession thereof,
he so persecuted the Eunuchs who by abuse of their Authority under his Brother
had made themselves abhorred by the whole Nation, that Guei in despair poisoned
himself; yet at last this very Emperor suffered himself, by the crafty
insinuation of some about him, contrary to his own Judgment, to be prevailed
with to recall those insolent Extortioners, and most imprudently made his
incensed Enemies, his reconciled Confidents. And intrusts them with the sole
Management of all Affairs, who now conceal their Malice against him, but forgot
not to Study revenge; and being backed with his Authority, by their Extortion
they grind the face of the People, enrich themselves, render their Master
odious to his Subjects, endeavor by all Arts to defraud him, keep back his
Soldiers pay and Provision, thereby to occasion Mutinies; hold correspondence
with the Rebels, not acquaint him with the danger that Threatened both him and
his Empire, and at last admit the whole Army of the Traitors into the very
Walls of the City Peking, the sad Consequences whereof we shall find hereafter.

It was in the year 1640 when two Rebels at the same time revolted against
their Lawful Sovereign, one of them was called Ly, or Licungz, the other Cham
or Changien, and though they were but private Subjects of the Emperor of China,
and Persons of no Consideration either by their Quality or Birth, yet they both
equally aspired to the Supreme Dominion; And having drawn to them great numbers
of the choicest Soldiers in the Empire, they began to make incursions upon the
Northern Provinces which border upon Tartary; The Emperor in the mean time did
not take sufficient care to stifle this Revolt; In all likelihood the
Complaints and Informations of those Commanders who guarded the Frontiers never
entered the Court so far as to reach the Emperors Ears; The Ministers of State,
and Officers of the Court stopped the Passage, having already sold the Empire
and their Master, by abusing his mild Disposition; The saying of Dioclesian is
but too True, That though a Prince be Good, Prudent, Observant, Careful, and
Vigilant, yet he cannot prevent Treachery, if those who are in employment under
Him, and who ought to serve and advise him Faithfully, do contrariwise combine
together to surprise him, and make ill use of his Authority; Either the Ability
and Fidelity of the Counselors must strike a Terror into Rebels, or they will
soon make themselves a Terror both to the Prince, and His Counselors. The two
Cheifs of this Rebellion took such advantage by this Pernicious Negligence,
that those Counsels which if at first executed would with great facility have
put an end to these Troubles, became now both unfit, and impossible to be put
in Execution; In a short time they gained themselves the Renown of Great and
most Valiant Commanders, and by this advantage they quickly had Forces enough,
not only to defend themselves, but to enlarge their Conquests, their
Confederates increasing daily so that by force of Arms they made themselves
Masters of Five Provinces.

The Rebel Cham went to establish himself in that Province which of the five
was the most remote from the Emperors Court, and took upon him the Title of
King, with full Resolution to extend his Conquests to the Neighboring
Provinces; The other Rebel called Ly, having, as it appeared, framed to himself
greater designs, approached nearer the Court, and had already in his
Imagination conquered the whole Empire; But judging from the advantage he had
received from Cham's Confederacy with him at the beginning, how great an
obstacle so powerful a Competitor might be to him in process of time, he did in
all likelihood make him away, either by secret Treachery or open Violence, some
Historians affirming he was cut off by a Party sent against him by Ly, or
Lincungz, who having now no Competitor that could aspire to the Soverainty,
began to noise abroad his vast Projects, and settled himself in the Capital
City of the Province Xensi, called Singansuase; He caused himself to be
crowned, and took upon him the Title of Emp. of China, kept an Imperial Court,
and acted like a Sovereign Prince, threatening in a short time to make himself
Master of the Emperors Court, and to join Pequin which is the Chief, to the
five other Provinces; It is not certainly known what was the first rise of
these 2 Usurpers, only it is famed that they were both Generals in the Emperor
of China's Armies, who perceiving themselves, nor Soldiers to be neither
regarded, nor recompensed for their Services, but to be ill used by the
Ministers of State, they revolted against their King, and conspired together to
be their own Pay-masters; resolving to make the Grandees of the Court
understand, That those who serve their Prince in his Armies are without
Comparison better capacitated to serve or disserve the State, than those whose
sole Employment it is by their Court Artifices to ingratiate themselves with
their Prince: They began at first with Complaints, and from Complaints they
came to Arms, and having once began the Treachery, they thought themselves
engaged most vigorously to prosecute it.

Whilst the Flame of Rebellion, and Civil War, which every day increased,
threatened the whole Empire of China with a General Ruin and Revolution the
Tartar did most attentively and vigilantly watch for some pretext to enter into
some or all the Provinces, yet he would embrace none but what was honorable,
having solemnly sworn Peace with the Royal Family of China; and therefore he
could not resolve with himself, as great an Idolater as he was, to violate that
Oath which he had taken in the presence of his Idols; A great Example to those,
who boast of the True Religion, and yet swear and promise without regarding the
performance either of their Oaths or Promises; Finally the Tartar judged very
truly, that if he joined his Forces with any one of the 2 Parties, he should in
a short time make himself Umpire and Master of one or both; he therefore joined
with neither, but kept an Army under strict discipline on the Frontiers, hoping
for some favorable Opportunity of passing into China without falsifying his
Faith, which he desired to keep inviolable; Ly in the mean time resolved to
secure the whole Empire to himself, though it could not be done without
difficulty since the Chinese have such a tender and passionate Love to their
Sovereigns, that they seem rather to Idolize than love them, and the present
Prince was no less Beloved than any of his Ancestors, which the Tyrant being
sensible of, for his own security took care to pay his Soldiers, and resolved
with all possible speed to complete the entire Invasion of the whole Empire;
But first he thought fit to acquaint his most resolute Commanders and his
greatest Confidents, with his Resolutions, which he did in these Terms;

My Friends, said he, the Lot is cast, we must now either gain all or lose all,
we cannot hereafter be greater Rebels than we are already, therefore let us
dispatch with all expedition the Conquest of the other Ten Provinces of China,
now that we have made 5 Provinces feel the power of our Swords. But most
assuredly when we shall have subdued the rest, none will be so audacious and
rash to call us Rebels and Usurpers; Rebels if Victorious cease to be Rebels,
and become the Right and Lawful Lords and Masters; What therefore now remains,
but that I either make my self the Sovereign Monarch of China, or lose my Life
in these Feilds, and there become a Prey to Birds of the Air, and Beasts of the
Field; there is nothing in all this spacious Empire can gratify me, but either
a Throne or a Grave, and I will advance my self to such a pitch of Grandeur,
that if I fall, it shall be with such a Crack as shall shiver the whole frame
of Government, and bury the whole Empire under my Ruins. Thus Ly spoke to his
Followers, that were entirely devoted to him, who finding their Resolution, he
speedily entered upon a most bold and hazardous Design, but of high importance
for the sudden accomplishing his Pretensions, which was to go directly against
the very Person of the Emp. and with all his Forces to assault the Imperial
Court, and Capital City of the Empire, fully determining to strike off the
Emperors head, and to place the Crown on his own; By this eminent exploit he
knew he should possess himself of the Kings Treasure, which would highly
strengthen his Party, and besides cut off all Power from any of the Royal
Family to raise any Forces, or to head any who should yet have any sparks of
Loyalty in their Breast. To execute this Grand Attempt, he must make himself
Master of the Great City of Pequin, where all the Court resided; But he could
not hope to do this by open Force, and therefore resolves to do it by
Stratagem, and so to surprise the Town, that the Thunderclap should be felt
before the noise was heard. By this sudden surprise, he would not leave the
Emp. time to prepare either for his defense or flight; Otherwise it would have
been very difficult for Ly with all his Force he could have raised, to have so
suddenly reduced this Great City; For beside the vast Extent of Pequin, it was
very well fortified, and in time of Peace was guarded with 80000 of the Emp.
best Soldiers; The Imperial Palace alone is above 2 Miles round, and defended
with 2 or 3 Walls, Ditches and Bulwarks, which are all distinct from each other
and very strongly guarded. Ly foresaw all these difficulties, and therefore he
had already by Presents and fair Promises bribed several of the Grandees of the
Court and Council, whereby he found it not difficult to engage them in his
Interests. A strange thing, that when there was not one Person of the common
people either in City or Court who could be drawn into this Treason, yet
several of the Magistrates and Officers of the Court made themselves a
detestable Example, by entering into a conspiracy against the State, and the
Person of their Prince; The chief of the conspirators were the Eunuchs of the
Imperial Palace, who were then very potent, and considerable in the Court, and
upon whose Fidelity the Emperor of China much presumed, entrusting them with
the Guard of his Person and the Government of the State.

The Tyrant Ly having thus laid his treasonable design, he sent into the
imperial City of Pequin several of his Trusty, and most valiant Commanders,
disguised like Merchants, with instructions to keep open shop, and to sell
several Rich Merchandises; These counterfeit Merchants were never suspected to
be great Commanders, and their Apprentices and Servants choice Soldiers; But
it concerned them to mind their Trade, for upon that depended the purchase of
the greatest Empire in the world, which was put to sale by those who were most
of all obliged to preserve and defend it; When the bargain was thus made and
earnest mutually given, those in the City and Court, who kept Intelligence with
the Tyrant, failed not upon several pretenses to lessen the Guards, and to
weaken as much as possible the strength of the place; And on a sudden Ly
appeared, and found the Gates of the Town open, and his men victorious in the
Conquest of this great City; the Inhabitants being so astonished, that before
they could resist, they found themselves under the power of their enemies; The
Emperor Zunchin did not perceive the deplorable condition of his State till it
was past remedy, for now he knew that the rage of his enemies would not only
take from him by violence his Empire and Crown, but his life also; and then too
late percieved the design of those ill Counselors, who advised him not to
raise Forces, nor send Money nor Recruits to those Commanders, who guarded the
Frontiers; He now poor Prince, saw himself besieged in his own Palace, and was
fully convinced he was betrayed, and therefore thought of nothing but to depart
out of this life by a death worthy of his Dignity and Courage; His desperate
condition made him feelingly reflect, how much in him was to be pityed, the too
facile and easy natures and disposition of Princes, which is usually attended
with sad disasters both to themselves, and their States.

The City of Pequin being of a vast extent, before the Traitors could by Force
enter the Palace, which was very spacious, some of the most Loyal Officers,
and Soldiers made a vigorous resistance, which the Emperor looked upon as a
grateful Testimony of their Allegiance, since thereby he had liberty to choose
his own death, which he considered as his last happiness; A frail and cruel
satisfaction which the pride of man makes him seek out, to be his own
Executioner, that thereby he may dye with the greater renown and pomp. During
the time of this resistance, the Emperor considered how speedily to dispose
both of his Royal Family and Person, which was in the most Tragical manner that
ever Histories related; He had but one only Daughter, very young, which till
now had been the hope and desire of the Empire, his only Son dying before this
direful disaster; The Emperor cut her Throat with his own hands, and at her
own supplication, that she might not see her Honor and Illustrious Rank become
a shameful Prey to a Tyrant and Traitor, who had nothing great and eminent in
him, but his Treason and Rebellion against his Lawful Sovereign; After this
horrid Execution, the Emperor with his hands, yet reeking with the blood of
his Daughter, went into the Garden of the Palace, accompanied with his Lawful
Spouse, the Empress, for whom he had forsaken six other Wives who had each of
them the Title of Queen, 30 others who were the most illusttrious Ladies of the
Empire, and 3000 others of lesser Quality; Some of their faithful servants
understanding their cruel intentions, filled the Air in proclaiming their
griefs, some cried, My Lord and my Husband, others, My King and my Master, and
some my Father, every one accenting their sorrow in a tone suitable to their
part in this scene of sorrow.

The heart of this unfortunate Prince was penetrated with so great affliction,
that it could admit of no Consolation, and only comforted himself that he
should preserve the Honor of his Empress, being altogether unconcerned for his
other Queens, and numerous Wives; Some few Courtiers, who among so many
Traitors remained faithful to him, attended with a doleful silence upon the
Emperor and Empress, who could neither speak a word, nor shed a tear, sorrow
had taken such entire possession of their hearts. Zunchin was a young Prince,
endowed with all the qualities that might render him amiable to his People; His
Royal Spouse the Empress loved him with so tender an affection, that to
testify the sincerity of her Passion to him, she resolved to dye either with
or before him; The Prince being very pensive, and sollicitous how to prevent
greater disgraces, went together with those who accompanied him toward a
little Grove, at the entrance of which he stopped, and then the Empress
guessing at his design, approached to him, and giving him her last embraces,
she parted from that person which was the dearest to her of all things upon
Earth, with all the grief and sorrow that Humane Nature is capable of, and then
she entered all alone into the Grove, and with a Cord hanged her self upon one
of the Trees; A dreadful spectacle which might make even those who were more
senseless than the Trees, lament so direful a death of so great an Empress.
Presently after, the Emperor went and placed himself near his Wife, whom he
saw hanging upon a Tree, having finished her Life by a death as violent as that
which he had inflicted upon his Daughter; Then poor Prince he asked a little
Wine of one of the Lords which attended him, not that he was a lover of Wine,
but on the contrary, was the most sober, and moderate in his pleasures of all
the Princes which ever governed the Empire; And was so chaste toward women that
he never frequented his Seraglio, which made his Subjects call him the Chaste
Prince; It was not therefore for the love of Wine, but a little to revive and
refresh his Spirits; And doubtless he had need of great courage to put in
Execution what he designed; When the Wine was presented to him he sipped a
little of it, and then biting with violence one of his Fingers, and squeezing
out his blood, he writ therewith these following words.

The Mandorins (or Eunuchs) are all Villains; they have perfidiously betrayed
their Prince, they all deserve to be hanged, and it will be a laudable Act of
Justice, to execute this Sentence upon them; It is fit they should all suffer
death, that thereby they might instruct those who succeed them to serve their
Prince more Loyally; As for the People they are not Criminal, and deserve not
to be punished, and therefore to use them ill, will be injustice; I have lost
my Kingdoms which I recieved in inheritance from my Ancestors; In me is
finished the Royal Line, which so many Kings my Progenitors continued down to
me, with all the Grandeur, and Fame suitable to their Majestic Dignity, I will
therefore for ever close my eyes, that I may not see this Empire descended to
me, thus ruined and ruled by a Tyrant; I will go and deprive my self of that
Life for which I can never suffer my self to be indebted to the basest and
vilest of my Subjects; I have not the confidence to appear before them, who
being born Subjects are become my Enemies and Traitors; It is fit the Prince
should dye, since his whole State is now expiring; And how can I endure to
live, having seen the loss and destruction of that which was dearer to me than
Life.

The Prince, after he had thus writ what his just grief dictated to him, he
untied his Hair, and covering his face, presently with his own hands he hanged
himself upon a Tree, near to that on which the Empress remained strangled; This
was the Tragical Catastrophe of this unfortunate Monarch. The Emperor of China
remained thus hanging on a Tree, the Prince who was the Idol of his people, at
the very name of whom Millions of men trembled; The Sovereign of above an 100
Millions of Subjects, the Monarch of a Kingdom as spacious as all Europe; He
who counted his Soldiers by Millions, and his Taxes and Tributes by hundreds
of Millions; Finally, the Potent Emperor of the great Empire of China is
hanged upon a tree, and his Royal Consort the Empress upon another near him;
What a weighty load did the trunks of these trees support? But of what weight
had it need be, to make the great men upon earth duly weigh what all their
terrible and ambitious Grandeur is, which in so few moments passes from the
height of the felicities of this Life to an Abyss of misery; This unhappy
Monarch finished his Reign at the Age of 32 years; He dyed very soon, but it
was his misfortune he dyed no sooner; For whatever King or Emperor he be who
reckons his years which have been exposed to such direful Tragedies, cannot be
said to have lived such a number of years, but to have undergone a far greater
number of miseries and calamities.

The Report of the Emperors death being soon spread over the City, those Loyal
Subjects, who had hitherto resisted, abandoned their resolution; So that Ly
presently became Master both of the City and Court, taking up his quarters in
the Imperial Palace, where he saw himself possessed of all the prodigious
treasures of that vast State, and was soon after Crowned in the Court at
Pequin, and Proclaimed Sovereign Emperor of China, yet he enjoyed his
traiterous usurpation a very short time, for the Tartars reckoning all
Obligations of the former League of peace, made void by the death of Zunchin,
and all the Royal Family, Soon after invaded the Empire of China, and made an
absolute conquest thereof, forcing the Tyrant Ly to fly, and hide himself in
the Northern parts of the Kingdom, who has not since been heard of; Neither did
the treacherous Eunuchs escape vengeance, for they were in a little while most
of them destroyed and cut off by the Tartars. History of China, etc.

FINIS.
Advertisements.
There are lately published by R. Burton four very useful, pleasant and
necessary books. which are all sold by N. Crouch, at the Bell next Kemp's
Coffee-house in Exchange Ally, over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.

I. ADmirable Curiosities, Rarities, and Wonders in England, Scotland and
Ireland, or an account of many remarkable persons and places, and likewise of
the battles, sieges, prodigious Earthquakes, tempests* inundations, thunders,
lightnings, fires, murders, and other considerable occurrences and accidents
for many hundred years past, and among others: The Preaching of K. Hen. 3. to
the Monks at Winchester: The Quo Warranto sent over Eng. by K. Edw. 1. The
manner of the horrid murder of K. Edw. 2. The conspiracy at Oxford (and
Shrewsbury) against K. Hen. 4. discovered by the D. of York, and the Articles
charged against the K.: The battle of Bosworth, and the miserable death of
Crookbackt Richard. The beheading of the L. Cromwell, and the E. of Essex, with
their last Speeches. The Rebellion of the Papists in Cornwall, etc. against the
Common Prayer in King Edw. 6. time, and the K. letter to them. The Rebellion
under Kett the Tanner, and his Laws, Ordinances in the Oak of Reformation near
Norwich. The Association in Q. Eliz. time. The proceedings against Mary Q. of
Scots, Mother to K. James, with her last words on the Scaffold. The sighing and
groaning tree in Lincolnshire. The Lady riding naked through Coventry. The
dying speeches of Q. Eliz. Together with the natural and artificial rarities in
every County in Eng. and very many other observable matters, with several
memorable things, Price one Shilling.

II. WOnderful prodigies of judgment and mercy, discovered in above 300
memorable Histories, containing 1. Dreadful judgments upon Atheists,
blasphemers, perjured villains, etc. As of several forsworn wretches carried
away by the Devil, and how an horrid blasphemer was turned into a black dog,
etc. 2. The miserable ends of many magicians, witches, conjurers, etc. with
diverse strange apparitions and illusions of the Devil; 3. Remarkable
predictions, and presages of approaching death, and how the event has been
answerable, with an account of some Appeals to Heaven against Unjust Judges,
and what vengeance has fallen upon them. 4. The wicked lives and woeful deaths
of several Popes, Apostates and Persecutors; with the manner how K. Hen. 2. was
whipped by the Popes Order by the Monks of Canterbury; and how the Q. of Bohemia,
a desperate Persecutor of the Christians, was swallowed up in the Earth alive,
with all her followers, etc. 5. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants,
Murderers, etc. with the terrible Cruelties used by those monsters of men,
Nero, Heliogabalus, Domitian, and others upon the Christians; also how Popiel,
K. of Poland (a Cruel Tyrant,) his Q. and Child. were devoured by Rats; and now
a Town near Tripoly in Barbary, with the Men, Women, children, Beasts, Trees,
Walls, Rooms, Cats, Dogs, Mice, and all that belonged to the place, were turned
into perfect Stone, (to be seen at this day) for the horrid crimes of the
Inhabitants; also the wonderful discovery of several Murders, etc. 6. Admirable
Deliverances from imminent Dangers, and Deplorable Distresses at Sea and Land.
Lastly, Divine Goodness to Penitents, with the dying Thoughts of several famous
Men, concerning a future state after this life, as S. Austin, the Emp. Chapter 5.
Philip 3 K. of Spain. P. Hen. The E. of North. Galleacius. H. Grotius
Salmasius. Sr. F. Walsingh. Sr. P. Syd. Sr. H. Wotton. A.B. Usher. E. of
Rochest. L.C.J. Hales, and others; Imbellished with diverse Pictures. Price One
Shilling.

III. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and present State of
London and Westminster, showing the foundations, Wall, Gates, Towers, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Shcools, Inns of Court, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with an
account of the most remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and other
occurrences, for above 900 years past, in and about these Cities; and among
other particulars, the poisoning of K. John by a Monk. The resolution of K.
Hen. 3. utterly to destroy and consume the City of London with Fire, for
joining with the Barons against him; and his seizing their Charters, Liberties
and Customs into his hands. The Rebellion of Wat Tyler, who was slain by the L.
Mayor in Smithfield, and the speech of J. Straw at his Execution; the deposing
of K. R. 2. and his mournful speech at his resigning the Crown, with the manner
of his being Murdered. The D. of Y's coming into the Parl. and claiming the
Crown in K. Hen. 6. time. The Murder of K. Hen. 6. and likewise of Edw. 5. and
his Brother, by Rich. 3 called Crook-back. The Execution of Empson and Dudley;
the Insurrection in London in K. Hen. 8. time, and how 411 Men and Women went
through the City in their Shifts and Ropes about their Necks to Westminster. Hall.
where they were pardoned by the King: The speeches of Q. A. Bullen, the Lord
Protector, and Q. J. Gray at their several Deaths upon Tower Hill. With several
other Remarques in all the Kings and Queens Reigns to this Year 1681. And a
description of the manner of the Trial of the late L. Stafford in Westminster. Hall;
Illustrated with Pictures, with the Arms of the 65 Companies of London, and the
time of their Incorporating. Price one Shilling.

IV. THE 4th. Edition of the Wars in England, Scotland, and Ireland, being near
a 3d. part enlarged with very considerable Additions, containing an impartial
Account of all the Battles, Sieges, and other remarkable Transactions,
Revolutions and Accidents which have happened from the beginning of the Reign
of K. Chapter 1. 1625. to His Majesty's happy Restoration, 1660. And among other
particulars, The Debates and Proceedings in the 4 first Parl. of K. Chapter 1. with
their Dissolution. The siege of Rochel. The Petition of Right. The murder of
the D. of Buck. by Felt. The Tumults at Edenb. in Scotl. upon reading the
Common Prayer. The Insurrection of the Apprentices and Seamen, and their
assaulting of A.B. L's House at Lamb. Remarks on the Trial of the E. of
Strafford and his last Speech. The horrid and bloody Rebellion of the Papists
in Irel. and their murdering above 200000 in 1641. An Account of the Parl. at
Oxf. Jan. 22. 1643. with their Proceedings and Dissolution. The Death of A.B.
Laud. Mr. Chaloner and Tomkins, Sir J. Hotham, Sr. Alex. Carew, D. Hamilton, E.
of Holland, L. Capel, M. Love, M. Gibbons, Sr. H. Slingsby, Dr. Hewet, and
others. The Treaties and Propositions at Uxbridge and Newp. in the Isle Wight.
The Illegal Trial of K. Chapter 1. at large with his last speech at his suffering.
His Majest. Reasons against the pretended Jurisdiction of the H. C. of Justice;
With the most considerable matters which happened till 1660. And the K. most
Gracious Declaration from Breda. with Pictures of several Remarkable Accidents.
Price one Shilling.

FINIS.

