In December 1664

In Iannuary 1664/5

In April 1663

In August 1682.

In December 1680

The Five Blazing Stars seen in England since the year 1663. Page 154.160.182.18

London Printed for Nath: Crouch (...)



THE SURPRISING MIRACLES OF Nature and Art. In TWO PARTS.

Containing I The Miracles of Nature, or the Strange Signs and Prodigious
Aspects and Appearances in the Heavens, the Earth, and the Waters for many
Hundred years past, with an Account of the most famous Gomets, and other
Prodigies, since the Birth of our Blessed Savior, and the dreadful Effects of
many of them: Also a particular Description of the five Blazing Stars seen in
England, within Eighteen years last past, and abundance of other unaccountable
Accidents and Productions of all kinds, till 1682. II. The Miracles of Art,
describing the most Magnificent Buildings, and other Curious Inventions in all
Ages, as Solomon's Temple, The Seven Wonders of the World, and many more
Excellent Structures and Rarities throughout the whole Earth.


Beautified with diverse Sculptures of many Curiosities therein.

By R. B. Author of the Hist. of the Wars of England; Remarks of London;
Wonderful Prodigies; Admirable Curiosities in England; and Extraordinary
Adventures of several famous Men.

London, Printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Bell next Kemp's Coffee-House in
Exchange-Alley, over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1683.

To the READER.
THere is no Person of any Age or Understanding, but must needs acknowledge
that the last Forty Years has been as it were an Age of Prodigies and Wonders
in these three Kingdoms, so that it may be no former time can parallel so many
strange Transactations as have happened in so little space, and therefore as an
Ingenious Person says A Book of Prodigies is fit
In times Prodigious to be writ.


And another Learned Author says, The wise Creator of Heaven and Earth is wont,
when the measure of our wickedness comes to the height, rather to inflict upon
us Temporal, than Eternal punishments, and to use for our Amendment the
Occasion of these Natural Effects, thereby to affright us from the Terror of
those sights to a Repentance, and dutiful respect of him; And if we consult
History, we shall find, that there has never been any notable Apparition or
Prodigy seen in the Heavens, but it has been attended in the sequel with more
than Ordinary Changes or Troubles here on Earth; Neither is there any one
except he has no Religion, who is not affrighted at Lightning, the clashing
noise of Thunder, or an horrible Comet; For God speaks to men not only with the
Tongues of men by Prophets, Apostles, and Teachers, but sometimes also by the
Elements, and other Extraordinary signs in the Heavens, Earth, or Sea; Upon
these Considerations this small Collection of the most remarkable Prodigies
since the Creation cannot surely be unseasonable or ungrateful, but may by the
Blessing of Heaven cause some Profligate Persons to forsake their evil ways,
and thereby divert the just Judgments of the Almighty from being poured down
upon this wicked and adulterous Generation. Here are also added many wonders of
Art in the Magnificent Structures, and Curious Inventions of all Ages; and it
is very apparent, that notwithstanding our high Conceits of the knowledge of
this last Age, yet we are obliged to our Ancestors for many, if not most of our
present useful and Profitable Arts and Sciences.

R. B.

The Surprising Miracles of Nature in the Heavens, Earth, and Waters.
STrange and Wonderful have been the Miraculous Productions of Nature in all
Ages, or rather of the God of Nature, and Divine Providence: St. Auflin, that
Famous and Reverend Father of the Church, defines Miracles to be those things
which happen beyond the Expectation, or thought of the Beholder, and begets in
him a Miraculous Contemplation, yea, oftentimes horror and amazement; whereof
there are two kinds, True and False; the false Miracles are such as are not
really as they seem to be, but merely acted by the Power of Nature, although
obscure and hid; The True are performed by the Power of God, above and beyond
all the Faculties of created Nature, partly to procure Admiration, and partly
to confirm the Faith of Men; such were the bringing back of the shadow Ten
Degrees in the Dial of Ahaz, for Hezekiah; A Virgin to conceive with Child, and
yet remain a Virgin: To draw water out of a hard Rock: To cause the Sea to
divide asunder; The Sun to stand still: To cause Manna to fall from Heaven: To
turn Water into Wine; and many of the like kind recorded in the Holy
Scriptures; And these were formerly used for the Confirming of the Faith both
of Jews and Christians; but are not now necessary, since the Writings of the
Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles are so generally preached unto all.

Yet has not the Almighty left himself without Witness, nor mankind without
warnings of approaching Judgments, and Desolations, by Prodigious Signs, and
Wonderful Appearances in all times of the World; thereby if possible, to deter
them from their Evil Practices, and to induce them to repentance and
Reformation; of which the very Heathens were sensible, for we may find in the
Roman Histories, that there never happened any Remarkable Prodigy, but the
People of every Sex, Age, and Quality, flockt, and ran to their Temples and
Altars, making Prayers, and offering Sacrifices to their Gods for appeasing,
and pacifying their incensed Wrath; which may condemn the neglect and Contempt
that is in those who pretend to own the true Christian Religion, and may teach
us to repair to the true God, and implore his mercy and forbearance of pouring
his Wrath upon us; In order whereunto it cannot surely be unseasonable, nor
unprofitable to Collect out of very approved Authors, the most Remarkable
Prodigies or Miracles that have appeared cither in the Heavens, Earth, or
Waters, for some Thousands of years in this Kingdom, and many other parts of
the World; with the Tremendous Consequences that have succeeded diverse of them,
as to Wars, Fires, Famines, and other dreadful Calamities in several Nations;
upon some of which the Famous Dubartas thus Ingeniously Comments. page 14.

Here in the night appears a flaming Spire,
There a fierce Dragon folded all in Fire;
Here a bright Comet, there a fiery Stream;
Here Flying Lances, there a burning Beam:
Here seems a Horned Goat environed round
With fiery flakes, about the Air to bound;
There with long bloody Hair, a Blazing-Star
Threatens the World with Famine, Plague and War.
To Princes Death; to Kingdoms many Crosses,
To all Estates, Inevitable Losses:
To Herdsmen Rot; To Ploughmen hapless seasons;
To Sailors storms; To Cities, Civil Treasons.
I shall therefore proceed to give an Account of the most Famous, and
surprising Signs and Wonders which I find recorded in History.

I. In the time of the Carthaginian War, a River in Italy was observed for near
the space of a day, to run perfect Blood; no accident that might cause it being
perceived by any. In Hetruria the Heavens were seen to burn; In the City of
Arimini 3 Moons were seen in one night by the Inhabitants; all these Prodigies
appeared about the end of the first Carthaginian War; In the second War, after
Hanno was overcome by Scipio, a Child of a Month old was heard to cry in the
Street, Triumphi, Triumphi: In the Fields, near Rome, Ships were discerned in
the Sky, and Men in long White Garments were perceived to march toward each
other, but never to meet: It likewise rained Stones, and the Sun and Moon were
seen as it were to justle each other; and in the day, two Moons appeared in the
Heavens; At Phalascis the Heavens seemed to be rent in sunder, and at Capua the
Moon seemed to burn, and to bend down toward the Earth; A Green Palm Tree in
Naples took Fire, and burned away to Ashes; At Mantua a little Rivulet was
turned into blood, and at Rome it rained blood: An Ox was likewise heard to
speak these Words, Cave tibi Roma; Rome look to thy self. Soon after, several
large, tall Ships appeared upon the River of Taracina in Spain; The Sun at
diverse times appeared of a bloody color, many Temples and Houses in Rome were
beaten down with Thunderbolts from Heaven, some of the Cities Ensigns, or
Field-Colours were observed to sweat Blood; Two Suns appeared in the Heavens,
at one time; It likewise rained Milk and Stones: A Comet in the form of a
burning Torch was discerned to reach from the East to the West. In the
Vileterman Fields the Earth rent asunder in such huge and frightful breaches,
that Trees, and whole Houses were swallowed up in it, and it rained blood for
two whole days together, about which time Hannibal received that notable
overthrow by Scipio, which was the destruction of the famous City of Carthage,
and the Conquest of that Country to the Romans. Tit. Live. Hist.

II. In the year of the World 3417, when Cyrus overcame Craesus, King of the
Lydians in Battle, a Child of six Months old is said to have distinctly
foretold in a Prodigious and wonderful manner, That his Kingdom should be lost.
A Dog and a Serpent spoke very plainly and articulately to King Tarquinius, of
which Sir G. Wharton writes thus.

When Romes perverse and giddy multitude
Dissolved in Tarquin, their Great Monarchy,
To doom the Act unnatural and Rude;
It Is said, a Serp^nt barked --
In the year of the World 3842, at Veios in Italy, it rained Oil extremely, and
Wool was also rained out of the Clouds; In the year that the Great Mithridates
K. of Pontus was born, there appeared a huge Comet, which at first seemed but
small, but afterward spread it self so much that it came as far as the
Equinoctial Line, so that its extent equalized that Region of the Heavens,
which we call the Milky Way; Another Come^ likewise appeared in the first year
of his Reign, which shined so bright night and day for 70 days together, that
the whole Heavens seemed all to be on a lig^^t Fire; for the Tail of it covered
the fourth part of the Heavens, and exceeded the Sun in brightness, and also
its rising and setting took up the space of four hours. Just before the taking
of Aristonicus, a dangerous Enemy to the Romans, news was brought to Rome that
the Image of Apollo at Cuma had wept for 4 days together; The Southsayers were
so astonished at the Prodigy, that they had thrown the Image into the Sea, had
not the old men at Cuma interceded for it; but the more expert Astrologers
said, That thereby the Destruction of Greece was foretold, from whence that
Image was brought. Junius Syllanus going Proconsul into Asia, he with his
Company saw a spark fall from a Star, which increased in Bulk as it came nearer
the Earth, and being grown to the bigness of the Moon, it gave as much light as
if it had been a cloudy day, and when it drew up toward Heaven again, it grew
into the fashion of a Lamp; When Julius Caesar had crossed the River of
Rubicon, contrary to the Decree of the Senate, the Heavens, as foreseeing what
miseries were to ensue thereupon, rained blood, and there happened a horrible
Eclipse of the Sun of 10 parts and an half, of which Lucan thus speaks.

-- The Sun hides
(When mounted in the midst of Heaven he rides)
In Clouds his burning Chariot, to enfold
The World in darkness quite; Day to behold
No Nation hopes. --
The same day that the Battle between Caesar and Pompey was fought in the
Pharsalian Fields, the Image of Victory which stood in the Temple of Minerva at
Eulide, was seen to turn its face toward the Temple-door, whereas before it
looked to the Altar; At Antioch in Syria, such great noises, and Clamours were
heard twice a day about the Walls of the Town, that the People affrighted with
the supposed approach of the Enemy, ran out of the City in their Arms; In the
Temples of Ptolemais, Organs, and other Instruments were heard to play of
themselves, before Julius Caesar was slain in the Senate House; and there being
a Colony sent to be planted in Capua, according to the Julian Law, and some
Monuments being demolished to lay Foundations for New Houses; In the Tomb of
Capys, who was said to be the Founder of Capua, there was found a brazen Table,
wherein was engraven in Greek Letters. That whenever the bones of Capys
should be uncovered one of the Julian Family should be slain by the hands of
his own Party, and that his blood should be revenged to the great damage of all
Italy; At the same time also those Horses, which Caesar had consecrated to
Mars, after his passage over Rubicon, did abstain from all kind of Food, and
were observed to have drops falling from their Eyes, after such a manner, as if
they had shed Tears. Also the Bird Regulus, having a little branch of Laurel in
her Mouth, flew with it into Pomp^ys Court, where she was torn in pieces by
diverse other Birds that pursued her, where also Caesar himself was soon after
slain with Twenty three wounds, by Brutus, Cassius, and others. Shortly after
his Death about the time of the banishment of Antonius and ^^^idus, an Ox being
led out to the Plough, uttered these words to his Master, Why urge you me to
work, we shall want no Corn, but men: And a new Born Child did speak. A. B.
V^ers Annals. Pearson's Va^^^^es.

III. About the time that our Lord and Savior was born, which was in the year
of the World, 3849, and the 43 year of the Reign of Augustus Caesar, many
wonderful, and remarkable Prodigies showed themselves in the Heavens, and this
more frequently than in former years, as Jesphas in his Jewish Antiquities
testifies; which unusual sights occasioned the M^gi, or Wise Men of those
times, in their Predictions to conclude, That (...) more than Ordinary Person
would arise, or appear in the World: Which presages some Learned Persons
applied to Augustus C^^sar, who then reigned prosperously; But the more
divinely inspired, interpreted them to signify him, who (as the Prophet Isaiah
says) should have his Government upon his shoulders, Even the Savior of the
whole World; for besides what the Evangelists mention, as of the Angel
appearing to the Shepherds, and that Star which directed the wise men of the
East to find out the place (...).

As the Earth with a New Sun was blessed,
So the Heavens with a New Star is dressed.
It is likewise recorded by Paul Horatius, and Eutropius, Secretaries to
Augustus, and likewise by Eusebius, That at the time that Jesus Christ was
born, it happened in Rome, that in a public Inn was discovered, and broke
forth a Fountain of pure Oil, which for the space of a whole day continually
issued out in great abundance, and that at high Noon, in a clear and fair day,
a Circle was seen about the Sun, as shining and resplendent as the Sun it self;
About the same time, the Senate and People of Rome offered to Augustus the
Title of Lord, which he refused, and would not accept of, unknowingly
prognosticating that a greater Lord than he, was upon Earth, to whom that Title
belonged; Comestor in his Scholastic History affirms, That the same day of the
Birth of Christ, the Temple in Rome dedicated by the Romans to the Goddess Pax,
fell to the Earth ruined; adding that when it was first built by the Romans,
they addressed to the Oracle of Apollo, to know how long time it should endure,
who returned answer, Even until a Virgin should bring forth a Child; which they
judged impossible, and that therefore their Temple should last Eternally,
nevertheless at the Virgins bearing a Child, (even the King of Heaven) it fell
to the Earth. Lucas de Tuy in his Chronicle of Spain writes, That he has found
in the Ancient Histories of that Country, That by Computation of time; the
same night wherein our Savior was born, there appeared in Spain at midnight a
Cloud, which gave so great a Light, that it seemed like midday. I remember
also (says my Author) I have read in St, Jerome, That when the Virgin fled with
her Son into Egypt, all the Idols and Images of the Gods which were there,
tumbled from their Altars to the Ground; And that the Oracles and Answers which
these Gods (or rather Devils) used to give to such questions as were propounded
to them, then ceased, and never answered afterward: Rarities of the Creation.
p. 84.

IV. About the first year after the Birth of Christ, there were many Prodigious
Births in Germany; Armies in the Air were seen at Rome; A terrible Eclipse of
the Sun, and dreadful storms of Hail and Rain. Soon after, Tiberius obtains a
Victory in Germany, and subdues the Lombards; The Panonians Rebel: A very great
Famine in Rome: Varus is defeated, and kills himself. About the Twelfth year
there was a great Earth^^ake in C^prus, which overthrew many Cities: Jesus
Christ disputes with the Doctors, a great and terrible Comet then seen; The
Light of the Sun was seen apparently to fail; The Heavens seemed to burn: Fiery
beams fell from Heaven; Bloody Comets seen in other places: The River Tiber
overfloweth Rome, 13 Cities in Africa destroyed with an Earthquake; Noisome
Flys come in great Swarms and Companies into Germany; The Effects whereof were
judged to be, that a while after A^^^^s, a great Commander was slain by the
^all of an Horse, Calig^ia that Monster of Mankind was born, King Agrippa was
slain, and Julia Daughter of the Emperor Augustus was starved to Death; Caesar
dies; The Britains are subdued, In his 22 year Blood rained in Rome; Great
Flocks of Gra^hop^er; Armies seen fighting in the Air in Rome and Po^^^d; Fiery
Torches a blazing Star like a Sword; soon after, (...) Theater was burned:
Sejanus, chief ^^^ourite to the Emperor Tiberius, is executed for A^^^ition
his Son strangled, his Daughter first de^lowred by the Hangman, and then put to
Death; Drus^s the Emperors Son is poisoned; The Arabians defeat H^^od; the City
of T^^^ias is drowned, Tiberius turned T^^ant, and commits all m^nner of horrid
Cru^^ies upon the Romans. Natura Prodig. p. 43.

V. In the Thirty Fourth year of our Blessed Saviors Life, he was crucified by
the wicked hands of the^ Jews, which produced prodigious Effects, that were
afterward attested as well by Heathens, as Christians; at the time of his Death
a very great darkness happened in the day time, which continued from six a
Clock, till nine; and yet there was no Eclipse of the Sun, for it was at a full
Moon, so that it was miraculous, and contrary to the Order of Nature, and only
by the power of God, who deprived the Sun of its light for that space of time;
And therefore Dennis the Areopagite, being that day in Athens, and seeing the
Sun so darkened, and also knowing as a man learned in Astrology, and the course
of the H^avens, that such an Eclipse must needs be contrary to the Rule of
Nature, spoke with a loud voice, saying, Either the World is at an end, or the
God of Nature suffers: and upon this Account (say some Authors) the Wise Men of
Athens being astonished at this Prodigy, they presently caused an Altar to be
built to the Unknown God, after which St. Paul coming thither, reproved them
for it, declaring to them, that Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of the World, who
had suffered, was that Unknown God, whereby he Converted many of them to the
Christian Faith; which does also demonstrate that the darkness was over the
whole Hemisphere, since it was seen at Athens, and other places far remote from
Jerusalem; Yea the Moon being then at full, and having no light, but what she
has from the splendor of the Sun, and being then in the Firmament that is
under us, she came to be violently eclipsed and darkened, so that the darkness
was universal over all the World, because the Moon and Stars can give no light,
unless they receive it first from the Sun.

It was likewise very observable, and is acknowledged by the famous Historian
Plutarch, though a Heathen, that after the Death of Christ, not only the
Oracles of Egypt, but throughout the World ceased, of which he can give no
reason, (being ignorant of Christianity) but that there were some Devils or
Demons dead; However it was very remarkable, that Satan should so plainly
demonstrate himself to be subdued and overcome, immediately after the Death of
our Savior, that he could never after give any answers. The Words of Plutarch
to Emilius the Orator, a prudent, and humble man concerning this matter (of
which Eusebius writ to Theodorus as a thing of great note) are as follows,
That his Father coming one time by Sea toward Italy, and coasting by night
about an Island not inhabited, called Paraxis, when all in the ship were silent
and at rest, they heard a great and fearful voice which came from that Island,
that called upon Alaman, who was Pilot of the Ship, and an Egyptian born, now
though this voice was heard once or twice by Alaman and others, yet no man had
the Courage to answer, till at the third Call, he answered, Who is there, who
is it that calls, and what would you have? Then the voice spoke more high and
loud, and said to him, Alaman, I require that when you pass near the Gulf of
Laguna, you remember to cry out aloud, and make them to understand that the
Great God Pan is dead; At these Words all that were in the Ship were much
astonished, and at last after Consultation concluded, that the Pilot should
take no notice of the voice, nor slay in the Gulf to utter such words, if they
could possibly go beyond it; but go on in their Voyage; But coming to the place
which the voice had mentioned, the ship stood still, and the Sea was calm
without wind, so that they could sail no farther, whereupon they all resolved
that Alaman should perform his Embassage, and so he placed himself in the Poop
of the Ship, and cried out as loud as he could, saying; Be it known unto you
that the Great God Pan is dead; He had no sooner uttered these words, but there
were so many mournful cries, groans, and woeful Lamentations that all the Air
resounded again therewith; these Complaints continued for some time, and
extremely surprised those in the Ship; but having afterward a prosperous Gale,
they followed on their Course, and being arrived at Rome, told of this
Adventure, which coming to the Ears of Tiberius, the Emperor desired to be
informed of the Truth thereof, and had the former particulars fully confirmed
to him; whereby it is evident, that the Devils in all parts were chased and
banished from the World by the death of the Blessed Jesus, and it is to be
supposed that this Great God Pan is not to be restrained only to the God of the
Shepherds, but was rather some great Master Devil, who had now lost his power
and Empire, as the others had before. In the days of the aforesaid Tiberius,
the Emperor, Publius Lentulus being at that time President in Judea, writ an
Epistle sometime before this to the Senate of Rome, which was as follows.

There appeared in these our days a man of great Virtue called Jesus Christ,
who is yet living amongst us, and of the People is accepted for a Prophet, but
his own Disciples call him the Son of God; He raises the Dead, and cures all
manner of Diseases; A man of stature somewhat tall, and comely, with a very
reverend Countenance, such as the Beholders may both Fear and Love; His Hair is
of the Color of a Chestnut full ripe, and plain almost down to his ears, but
from the ears downward, somewhat curled, and more Orient of color, waving
about his shoulders: In the midst of his head goes a seam, or partition of his
Hair after the manner of the Nazarites: His forehead very plain and smooth; His
Face without spot or wrinkle, beautified with a comely red; His Nose and Mouth
so formed, that nothing can be reprehended; His Beard somewhat thick, agreeable
in color to the Hair of his Head, not of any great length, but forked in the
midst; of an Innocent look, his Eyes gray, clear, and quick: In reproving he is
severe in admonishing, courteous, and fairspoken; pleasant in speech, mixed with
gravity; It cannot be remembered that any have seen him laugh, but many have
seen him weep; in proportion of Body well shaped and straight; his hands and
Arms very delectable to behold; in speaking, very temperate, modest and wise; A
man for his singular beauty, exceeding the Children of men.

Josephus likewise, a Jew by Nation and descent, in his Antiquities has these
words; In these very times lived Jesus, a very wise man, if it be lawful to
call him a Man, because in truth he did mavelous things, and was Master and
Tutor to them that loved him, and sought the Truth; The Jews and Gentiles
Assembled unto him, and followed him in great Companies; And though he was
afterward accused by some of the Chief of our Religion, and crucified, yet he
was not forsaken by those who before followed him; and three days after his
death he appeared alive unto them, according as the Prophets inspired by God,
had foretold and prophesied of him; And now even in our time the Doctrine and
the name of Christians continues, and is spread over all the World; These are
the words of Josephus who writ of the destruction of Jerusalem, as an
eyewitness, which happened forty years after the Death of Christ. Josephus
Antiquit.

VI. In the 39 year, after the birth of our Savior, a very great Light was
seen in the Heavens, and a voice encountered Saul going to Damascus (to
prosecute the Christians with all severity) which said unto him, Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me, etc. This Prodigy was the Forerunner of St. Paul's
Conversion; At this time that Tyrannical Emperor Caligula, commanded himself to
be worshipped as a God, and executed diverse Roman Knights and Gentlemen for
refusing it. In 47. The Heavens seemed wonderfully to burn, and a Comet of a
very great magnitude appeared for many days together; Lightning fell from
Heaven upon the Standards of the Praetorian Soldiers; soon after Vespasian
goes into Britain, and takes the Isle of Wight; The Romans overcome the
Picts in Scotland; Herod dies; Twenty Thousand Jews are slain between the
Gates of the Temple; Messalina the Empress forces Silvis to put away his Wife,
and then is married to him, but they were both slain. In 50. A Phaenix was seen
in Egypt, and an Island of thirty Furlongs in length appeared in the Sea, which
was never before seen; Three Suns appeared at one time in Rome; and in and
about the Coasts of England, for certain days the Sea seemed as blood; A Comet
of a very great magnitude appeared for a long time together in Italy; The
Effects were, a very great Famine in Rome; Domitian the Roman Tyrant born, The
whole Country of Trevers in Germany is wasted by Clodomore; The Emperor
Claudius is poisoned by Agrippina; Three thousand Romans are defeated in
Scotland, Agrippa poysoneth Sylanus, also Narcissus for seventeen Millions of
Money, and likewise poysoneth Brittanicus: Nero begins his Acts of Villainy;
Cartismunda, Queen in Britain rejects Venutius her Husband; he makes War
against her, the King of Scots takes her, and buries her alive. In 59. There
was a terrible Eclipse of the Sun, so that the Stars were seen; Nero's Supper
was burnt with Lightning; an Earthquake happened at Rome, and the Sun was
Eclipsed again, and again, that is three times visibly in 3 years; Many Jews
perish in Caesaria; Nero commits Incest with his Mother, The Britains slay
Seventy Thousand of the Romans, and Suetonius destroys Fourscore Thousand
Britains, as he comes from the Isle of Anglesey; St. Mark writes his Gospel.

In 63. A great Comet appears, There was a very great Inundation in England;
The Ocean seemed to be blood; A Prodigious Accident was seen at Colchester in
England, where the Image of Victory turned backward of it self; An Earthquake
in Asia; A Comet appeared six Months, and three Suns together; Rome is fired
by the Command of Nero, who rejoices in that Villainy, playing upon his Harp,
and singing the Destruction of Troy; This year the Jews rebel against the
Romans, and many of them were slain, Gassius Florus being killed by them.
Boadicia Queen of the Britains being assisted by Corbred King of Scots,
kills Seventy Thousand Romans. Natura Prodig. p. 46.

VII. In the Sixty Seventh year after the Birth of our Savior, and about the
Fortieth after, the Jews had with cruel hands crucified the Lord of Life, that
innocent blood which they desired might fall upon them and their Children,
began to be revenged upon them; for soon after the Romans came, and burnt down,
and destroyed the City and Temple of Jerusalem, and killed multitudes of them,
as by the sequel will appear; but before these woeful Desolations happened,
there wanted not Prodigious Signs, and warnings from Heaven of their
Approaching Miseries: For the year before Vespasian came against them, there
was seen a Star over the Temple so bright, as if a man had held many drawn
swords in his hand; And at the same time which was the Passover, that whole
night the Temple was light and clear as at Noonday, and continued so seven
nights together; which wise men understood to be a very ill Prognostic, though
others thought it good. A Sword, and other Instruments of War were seen hanging
in the Air directly over the City, very dreadful to behold. The same time
likewise they brought a Heifer for a Sacrifice, which when she was knocked
down, she calved a Lamb; besides there was a certain Gate, called the
Eastgate, which could never be opened or shut without the help of Twenty men,
and the creaking of the hinges might be heard afar off; This Gate was found
open without any man's help, and they could not shut it, till a great number
joined their strength; Moreover there was discerned on the Sanctum Sanctorum,
or Holies of Holies, a whole night long the face of a man very terrible. There
appeared also at the same time four Chariots with Horsemen fighting fiercely
against each other, and great Blasts of Fire in the sky coming toward
Jerusalem; In the Feast of weeks the Priests heard a man walking in the Temple,
and saying with a wonderful terrible voice; Come let us go away out of this
Temple; let us make haste away from hence; At that time also there was this
writing found graven on an old Stone, At what time the building of the Temple
shall be brought to a four square, then it shall be destroyed; Now when the
Temple was besieged, and the Walls bruised, the Jews making haste to repair the
Ruins, without remembrance of the old writing, they made the Temple four
square; These words were likewise found in the Walls of the Sanctum Sanctorum,
When the whole building of the Temple shall be four square, then shall a King
reign over Israel, and that King and Ruler shall reign over all the Land of
Israel: Some interpreted this of the King of Israel, but the Priests said, it
was meant of the King of the Romans.

These were the dreadful Presages of their ensuing Calamities, which never
ended till the whole People were almost utterly destroyed, and they ceased to
be any more a Nation, which sad Judgment remains upon them to this day, and
whereof I shall here give a brief Account; The beginning of their troubles
happened in the time of King Agrippa, during whose Reign, the Wars began
between the Jews and Romans which never ceased, till the people of Judea were
led captive into the Provinces of the Romans, and the Temple was made desolate,
the rise whereof was on this occasion. In the Twentieth year of his Reign the
ninth day of the First Month, which is July, Nero, Emperor of Rome sent a
Present for a Burnt Offering to be offered at the Temple of Jerusalem,
requiring peace of the Elders of Judea and Jerusalem, and that they would enter
into League with him, saying, My request is that you would offer my Present to
the Lord your God, for his service and Religion pleases me very well;
therefore I desire you to join in Friendship with me, according as you have
done with the Emperors of Rome, my Predecessors in time past; I have heard what
Cassius the Captain of mine Army has done to you, which displeases me out of
measure, wherefore I assure unto you a faithful League, by the Consent and
Counsel of the Senate of Rome, that hereafter there shall never any Roman
Captain stir hand or foot against you, but rather your Magistrates, Rulers, and
Judges, shall be all Jews, and of Jerusalem; Yea Agrippa your King shall be
Lord of all your Rulers, and what he commands, you shall do it; the Romans
shall only be called your Lords, and shall have no more to do with you.

When these Ambassadors came to Jerusalem, they delivered their Message to
Anani the Priest, and placed Nero's present before him, which was, a Bull for a
Burnt-Offering, with a Crown of Gold upon his head, his Horns were also covered
with Gold; upon his Body was a Cloth of Purple, adorned with precious Stones,
before him some Persons carried Ten Talents of Gold, and behind a great number
of Sheep followed for Peace Offerings; But when Eleasar the Son of Anani heard
of it, he came and turned Nero's Presents out of the Temple, saying, We will
not profane and unhallow the Sanctuary of our Lord with the Offerings of
Strangers; for God will not accept either their Burnt-Offerings, or
Peace Offerings. When he had thus spoke, he sounded a Trumpet, and set his Men
in Array against the Guards of the Romans who were quartered in Jerusalem, and
falling suddenly upon them, slew many of them that day, with one of their
Captains, and took another of them alive, who being a Valiant man, and seeing
himself overpowred by the Jews, he cried out, save my Life, and I will yield;
upon which Eleazer the Rebel swore, That he would not kill him, but spare him
for his valor, he having slain many of the Jews in the Conflict, whereupon the
Captain yielded himself Prisoner; Then said Eleazer to him; Even as thy sword
has made many Women Childless, so shall thy Mother be made childless of thee
above all others; and thereupon, contrary to his Oath, he commanded his
Servants to kill him; King Agrippa seeing this, was extremely troubled, and
therefore as he stood in the street, cried out, O thou Rebel Eleasar, I pray
God that this mischief, of which thou art the cause, and thy wickedness may
fall upon thee, and thy Fathers House, which when it comes to pass, we shall
not be disturbed thereat; It seems hard to keep Peace and Tranquillity in thy
days, for they are not like to be continued by thee; How long will thou go on
to bring us into Briars, thou Enemy and hater of the Lord? Why do thou
destroy and wast the Vineyard of the Lord God of Hosts.

To whom Eleazar replied, Why take thou upon thee the Name of King? If thou
be a King, why do not thou command us to be punished? Where be thy valiant
Soldiers? Let us see them? Come thou and they together and chasten us, that it
may appear whether thou indeed be a King or no; Thou stand afar off, and
when thou speak, thy Feet are ready to run away, as if a Dog should set
himself against an armed Man, and bark at him, lolling out his Tongue. And upon
this he winked upon the Rebels his Companions to seize upon Agrippa, which was
observed by a spy appointed by the King for that purpose, who laying his hand
upon his head, gave a sign to the King to flee away immediately, or else, the
Seditious would destroy both him and them together; Agrippa perceiving this,
got away with all speed, the Rebels pursuing him, but in vain; for he got into
Japho a Town under the Romans, where he was in safety; from thence he went to
Rome, and gave an account to Nero both of the sedition, and the slighting of
his Offering; whereupon Nero joined him with Cassius to command a great Army,
wherewith they entered Judea, and won many walled Towns, and rased Japho, least
it should fall into the hands of the Enemy; After this they marched toward
Jerusalem, designing utterly to destroy the Rebels; which Eltaser, and other
Priests having notice of, they issued out against them, and found them encamped
in the way between Jerusalem and Japho, where many of the Jews were slain by
the Romans, and the residue Cassius and Agrippa put to flight, and following
the Chase to the Gates of Jerusalem, besieged the City three days; The Fourth
day the Priests and People issued out suddenly, and unawares, upon the Camp of
the Romans, and slew five Thousand Footmen, and a Thousand Horsemen, Cassius
perceiving that neither he nor his could escape, chose out Forty Thousand of
his best Soldiers, and placed them between his Camp, and the Priests,
commanding them to stand all the night sounding their Trumpets, and making of
Fires, and not to remove out of their places till the morning, that hereby, he
and Agrippa might escape; The Jews harkening to the sound of the Trumpets, and
not understanding the meaning, did not pursue the Romans, but perceiving in the
morning they were gone toward Caesarea three days Journey off, Eleasar with the
People followed, and found the Roman baggage strowed in the way, that they had
thrown away to escape the lighter, which they let alone, and pursued them to
the Gates of Caesarea.

But Cassius and Agrippa got safe into the Town, from whence they went together
to Rome, and gave an Account of their ill success to Nero, who soon after sent
Vespasian, and his Son Titus to revenge the Romans on the Jews, commanding them
to raze their walled Cities, and destroy whatever they found, without sparing
either Man, Woman, Child, Infants, sucking Babes, or Old Folks, but to slay
all; The Jews having Intelligence of this, chose out three Captains, Josephus
the writer of this History, Anani and Eleasar his Son, to be their Captains,
Vespasian first invaded Galilee, which being the lot that fell to Joseph to
defend, he departed from Jerusalem thither, and built up the Towns that were
destroyed, repairing the Walls, Gates, Bars, and Palaces; ordaining also
Captains over the People to lead and govern them, some of Thousands, and some
of Hundreds, etc. He instructed the People also in the Feats of War, and
choosing out Threescore Thousand Footmen, and some Horsemen, he marched to the
Cities of Agrippa that were in Judea, because he joined with the Romans with
all the power he could make; Joseph therefore first approached Tiara, a great
City that belonged to Agrippa, where his Treasure, and Ammunition, and all his
Jewels were, and offered Peace to the Inhabitants upon Condition they would
open their Gates, and deliver him all the Riches and Treasures of Agrippa,
which if they would do, they should be safe in their Persons and Estates; upon
these Conditions they opened the Gates, and Joseph commanded about Six Hundred
Wicked Persons in the Town to be laid in Irons, and others who had aided
Vespasian to be put to the Sword; But the chief Governor of the Town he
apprehended alive, and carrying him out of the City, commanded one of the
Soldiers to cut off his hands; The Governor then besought Joseph saying, I
beseech thee my Lord let one of my hands only be cut off, and spare the other;
At which Joseph and his Soldiers laughed him to scorn, not judging him a man
of courage; Joseph then bid them give him his sword in his own hands, and to
let him cut off which hand he would; The Roman Captain took the Sword, and cut
off his left hand, leaving himself the Right, and so he was let go, who went
presently to the Camp of Vespasian, declaring what shame was done unto him.

After this the City of Zippory made a League with Vespasian, of which Joseph
being certifyed, he marched thither with his Army, but the Town endured the
assault, so that Joseph could not prevail against it, and therefore besieged it
a long while; In the mean time Askalon revolted from the Jews to the Romans,
which was thereupon besieged by some Jews from Jerusalem; but Antonius a Roman
Captain issuing out one morning before day, fell upon the Jewish Camp, and
before day light, had slain above Ten Thousand Jews; soon after those of
Jerusalem sent Eighteen Thousand Men more to Askalon to bury the bodies of the
Jews that that were slain, which they did without the least opposition of the
Romans, who kept themselves within the Town for fear of them; Then Joseph
gathering all his Forces together, assaulted Askelon with his whole Army, and
won it, slaying afterward Anthony and all his People with the Sword, so that
few or none escaped; He likewise burnt all the Villages and Hamlets about the
Town, and in all other Places which had entered League with the Romans, he flew
both Jews and Romans, and burnt their Houses to the ground; This done Joseph
returned again to Zippory, fought with them, and conquered them, burning their
Cities and Villages, and leading their Wives and Children Prisoners to
Jerusalem, and all the Romans he found there, he put them to death. Of which
Transactions, when Vespasian and Titus had an Account, they were very much
enraged, and therefore marching to Acho, where K. Agrippa then was with Forty
Thousand stout Soldiers; they joined with them, being likewise assisted with
very great Numbers of Men out of all the Nations round about Jerusalem; with
this vast Army they went from Acho to Galilee, and pitched their Tents in the
Mount; which Joseph hearing, issued out of Zippory with all his Army, set upon
them, and slew a multitude of them; Vespasian and Titus studying revenge,
resolved to surprise Joseph, and beset all the passages to that purpose, which
Joseph understanding, left Zippory, and went to Tiberias, whither Vespasian
followed; Joseph perceiving them coming, fled from thence to Jorpata, the
biggest City in Galilee, closed up the Gates, and there remained with his Army.

Then Vespasian sent several Noblemen as Ambassadors to Joseph, who thus
addressed themselves to him; Vespasian, General of the Roman Army sends to know
what it will avail you to be thus blockt up in a walled Town, he desires rather
that you would come forth, and treat peaceably with him, and enter into a
League together, for it will be for your benefit to serve Caesar Emperor of
Rome, whereby you may live, and not be destroyed, nor any of your People; Then
Joseph sent Ambassadors to Vespasian, desiring Truce for a few days, to consult
with the People about this matter; which he agreed to, and Joseph sent to the
chief Priests and Rulers of Jerusalem, and the rest of the People the following
Letter; Ye shall understand Brethren, that Vespasian General of the Romans,
sent his Ambassadors unto me inquiring what it would avail me to be obstinate
against them, and not rather to come forth and treat of Peace, and to join in
League together, that we may serve the Emperor of the Romans, so that we may
save our lives, and not be destroyed; And I beseech ye, why will you lose your
lives, with the lives of your Wives, your Sons, and your Daughters? Why will
you all fall together on the sword, The Dreadful Apparitious and Presages seen
over the City of Jerusalem Page. 14

whereby those that shall be left alive among you, shall be led Captive out of
your Country to a People which they never knew, and whose Language they
understand not; and likewise your Country shall be made desolate, your
Sanctuary laid wast, so that there shall not be so much as one man to enter
into it; Never suffer this you that are wise men, but rather receive my
Counsel, and come hither to us, that we may consult together, what conditions
of Peace we shall make for the safety of our Lives, rather than be destroyed,
and that we may enjoy the blessings of our Country and live at peace therein,
for Life and quietness is to be preferred before Death and Banishment.

But the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, with the Priests, Elders, and Noblemen of
Judea, and the rest of the People, returned this answer to Joseph; Take heed to
thy self that thou never consent to receive Conditions of peace from the
Romans, but be strong to fight, till such time as thou shall consume them, or
till thou, and all the People dye in Battle, and so shall thou fight the
Battles of the Lord for his people and his Sanctuary, and the Cities of our
God, in the mean season let it be as it will, but let not thy power be with
them. When Joseph heard this Resolution of the People for continuance of the
War, he was exceeding angry, and in great fury fell upon the Roman Army with
all his Forces; in which skirmish, very many of the Jews were slain, and from
that day forward Vespasian began more fiercely to War upon the Jews; He marched
thence to G^rara a great City in the higher Galilee, which he besieged, took,
and rased to the Ground, slaying all the people. Men, Women, and Children;
Oxen, Sheep, Camels and Asses, leaving nothing alive, and then said. Now I
begin to be revenged for the Romans which the Jews murdered in the Land of
Judea; From thence be came to Jorpata, where Joseph was; The first day he
encamped about it, refreshing his Soldiers with plenty of meat and drink, and
then furnished every man with Arms; The next morning early, the Roman Army gave
a great shout, and beset the City round about on every side, Joseph standing
upon an high Tower, beheld the mighty Army of the Romans, and thereupon
founding a Trumpet, gave a sign to the Battle, issuing out with the whole power
of the Jews upon the Roman Camp, at the foot of the Hill; and maintaining the
Fight from morning till night, at which time it being dark, the Jews retreated
into the Town, and the Romans to their Camp; the next day the Fight was
renewed, and so the third and fourth day, wherein many were destroyed on both
sides; For the Romans advanced confidently, and stoutly to the Battle,
boastingly saying, We will quickly vanquish this little Nation, as we have
subdued all others against whom we have fought, and they shall trouble us no
more, and then shall we be at rest; The Jews likewise on the other side
encouraged themselves against the Romans, saying, At this time we will all dye
together for the Zeal to the Sanctuary of our God, and will never suffer these
unclean Persons to pollute it, and having once destroyed them, we shall be
quiet ever after. So that what with the Pride of the Romans on the one side,
and the stiff-necked stubbornness of the Jews on the other, much people
perished of either Party.

At this time the Jews who dwelt about Jorpata, fled to the Camp of Vespasian,
and joined with the Romans, and always when Joseph skirmished with Vespasian
without the City, Vespasian sent a Party to assault the City, so that Joseph
and his Men fought with Vespasian without the Town, and the Jews within
defended the Walls against the Romans, but those within daily diminished, and
the chiefest of Joseph's Army were slain, except some few with whom Joseph fled,
and recovered the Town, and stopped up the Gates after him; But Vespasian
having a long time besieged Jorpata, he at length espied a Conduit of sweet
Water without the Walls, which ran into the City, the Citizens drinking thereof
because it was good, this he cut off, whereby the Inhabitants were destitute of
drink, having only Well-water, which Joseph perceiving, and judging that the
Romans would now think they might take them at pleasure, since they must dye
for Thirst; He thereupon took Garments, and dipped them in the Well-waters in
the Town, and hanged them over the Walls in several places to declare they had
plenty of Water. Then Vespasian commanded a Mount to be raised nigh the Town,
to plant an Iron Ram, wherewith to batter and beat down the Walls; which they
did so furiously, that Joseph perceiving them to shake, filled sacks of Chaff,
and hanged them down by the Walls, which by their softness prevented the Force
of the Iron Horns of the Ram; which Policy Vespasian observing, he sent
secretly into the Town some Jews as spies, who should cut the ropes of the
sacks, and then slip down the Walls with them, thereby to be secured from
danger, and several other devices were used on each side.

But Joseph perceiving the War to increase daily, he issued out with his
Forces, and made a great slaughter in the Camp of the Romans, burning the Mount
and Engines of War they had left behind them, and forcing them to retire from
the Walls; Vespasian perceiving his men shrink, stood up and encouraged them so
much with good Words and large Promises of Gold and Silver, that they continued
the Fight against Joseph till night; In the hear of the Battle, the Jews
wounded Vespasian in the Right beg with an Arrow, which much dismayed the
Romans to see the blood run down: Titus seeing his Father wounded, was much
disturbed, and ran to help him; to whom his Father said, How comes it my Son
that thou art so much astonished, Take heart to thee, and with undaunted
Courage revenge thy Father upon the Jews, who have now the better of us. The
Fight was that day exceeding bloody on both sides, very few being left of
Joseph's Party, who returned into the Town. The next morning the Romans raised a
new Mount, and renewed their Assaults; the City was now almost desolate, most
of the valiant men being already slain, so that Joseph with those few left, and
likewise the Women went to defend the Walls; The Engines throwing stones on
every side, it happened that a great stone struck a Woman with Child with such
violence, that it passed through her body, and carried the Child with it the
space of half a mile; another stone hit one of Joseph's chief Commanders with
such force, that it divided his head from his body, and made it fly a mile off;
At the same time a Roman Soldier was got under the Wall, and just going to
shoot Joseph with an invenomed Arrow, which he espying, cried out, Hold thy
hand wicked fellow, and do not kill me; at which the man starting aside, the
Jews out of the Town suddenly powered boiling Oil on his Head from the Walls,
whereby his skin was scalded off, and he ran away naked, howling and yelling to
the Roman Camp, where he dyed.

Vespasian and his Sun were fully resolved to continue the siege, which had
already lasted 47 days, and those within the Town were so tired out, that they
were no longer able to supply the watch upon the Walls, which Vespasian
understanding, he and his Son Titus one night scaled the Walls in a place where
the Watchmen were wanting, being followed by many other Roman Soldiers, who
went down on the inside, and breaking open the Great Gate of the Town, the
whole Roman Army entered thereat, and then sounded their Trumpets, and an Alarm
to battle; The Jews with the noise and Tumult awaked from sleep very much
afraid, however every man caught up his Arms, and with all speed repaired to
the Marketplace, which was made so large, that all the People of the City
might upon occasion meet together; As they were looking about, they saw the
Roman Army marching through the great Gate toward them, whereupon they
encouraged each other, saying, Let us dye here fighting, and never suffer our
selves to be taken alive: and then they fell upon the Romans, but being
overpowred, most of the Citizens were slain in the skirmish, they refusing to
yield or take quarter, because they would not trust the Faith of the Romans;
For a while before a certain Jew besought a Roman Soldier to save his Life,
which he swore he would, saying, God deal thus and thus with me if I kill thee,
therefore yield thy self to me: The Jew required him to give his right hand in
Token of his Fidelity, but the Roman reached him his left, which the Jew, being
extremely astonished, did not observe; But when the Roman had once hold of him,
he held him fast by that hand, and with his right hand slew the Jew with his
sword, who was then naked and unarmed, having cast away his weapon upon the
Oath made to him by the Roman; when the other Jews observed this Treachery,
they resolved to dye altogether, and never trust the Romans, and thereupon fell
on them, and slew many, yet at length the City was taken.

However, Joseph, and Forty stout men his Companions made their escape, and
fled into a Wood, where they found a certain Cave, and hid themselves therein;
of which Vespasian having notice, sent three Persons to Joseph to desire him to
come forth, and he should have his Life, and not be slain; upon which Joseph
debated the matter with the rest in the Denrequiring their advice; For my part
(says he) if you will follow my Counsel, I think it best that we go to them,
but upon this Condition; That they will give us such full security for our
Lives as we shall require, which being done, I doubt not but Vespasian when we
come to him, will extend his favor to us; But they perceiving that Joseph
inclined to yield to the Romans, were very much disturbed, and persuaded him,
That it would not be for his credit to save his life with the loss of his
Honor, and therefore resolved to kill each other, and dye like men; and
thereupon each man drew out his sword, and came to him in the midst of the
Cave, saying, Joseph our Prince hear thou; If thou will be ruled by us, we will
first kill thee as our Lord, and a great Prince, and thou shall choose what
Death thou will dye, that thou may dye Honorably; but if thou refuse to dye
bravely, assure thy self of this, that every man of us will set upon thee, and
kill thee: Joseph endeavored by many Arguments at large, to divert them from
their wicked purpose, as proceeding rather from desperation and cowardice, than
true Courage; But nothing would prevail, he therefore subtly told them; My
Brethren since you are determined to dye on your own swords, let us divide into
Couples, and cast Lots which Couple shall dye first, then shall they also cast
Lots which of then shall kill his Fellow, and he that remains shall choose one
of the second couple to kill men; likewise the second couple shall cast Lots in
the same ma^^^er, and so till all be slain, that we may not see the Captivity
of our people; and the last Couple shall either can upon each others swords, or
else cast Lots who shall ^^ve first; but since we are Forty one, and so cannot
be equally divided, let us cast Lots which shall first be slain, and when he is
once out of the way, let us divide as I have said.

Every man liked this advice, and desired him to divide the Men, Joseph
answered, But let us swear by the Name of the Lord that this device shall
stand: Which they accordingly did; Then Joseph cast Lots, who should be the odd
man, and it fell upon Jehoida a Galilean, a valiant man, and one of the
chiefest Counselors of Joseph, and the principal perswader of this wicked Fact
to kill themselves; After this he craftily divided them into Couples, so that
the Lot of his own Couple came forth last of all, who hoped to be saved,
trusting in God, and believing that he would deliver him from this abominable
deed; Then Jehoida chose him one of the first couple, who slew him; That done,
the first couple cast Lots between them, and the one killed his Fellow, and
chose him one of the second couple to kill him, and in this manner did they
all, till they were all slain, and none left alive but Joseph and his Fellow,
who said to Joseph, Come let us cast Lots, that we may go to our Brethren;
Joseph said, We will do so if you be so disposed but first hear me a few words,
have not these sinners rebelled against God in thus murdering themselves so
shamefully, neither could I by any means dissuade them, nor divert them from
their opinion, why should we sin so grievously against God and our own souls;
If thou say, how shall we do by reason of the Oath we have sworn? Do thou not
know that a wicked Oath is better broken than kept, and this is a breach of one
of the Ten Commandments, which says expressly Thou shall not kill. Now
therefore my Brother if thou will be ruled by me, thoushalt save both thy own
Life and mine, For I will not cast Lots, neither will I perform the Oath we
have sworn, as being directly contrary to the Law of God; but if thou will not,
I will fight with thee, and kill thee, and spare my self; And herewith Joseph
leapt back, and drew his Sword in his own defense, His Companion knowing Joseph
too strong for him, stirred neither hand nor foot, but said, Lo I am content,
do what thou think good, because thou art a man of God, and half saved thine
own life and mine.

Then Joseph called out of the Cave to Nicanor, offering to come forth with all
that were left alive upon security given, which Nicanor readily gave in
writing, after the manner of the Romans, and reached it into the Cave upon a
Spear, then Joseph and his Companion came forth, and Nicanor embraced him,
kissed him, and wept abundantly with him, especially at the Relation of the
cruel stubbornness of those self-murdering Jews; Then Joseph was brought to
Vespasians Army, who with Titus his Son, received him very kindly, and carried
him about with him through the Cities, together with King Agrippa; then
Vespasian marched to Caesarea a great City, where he had Intelligence that the
Citizens of Paphos spoiled the Islands with their Ships, upon which an Ambush
was laid without the Town, and when the Pirates were gone abroad to rove,
Vespasian entered the Town and took it without any great refistance, because
their Soldiers were absent; when the Rovers therefore returned with their
Navy, and saw the Romans in the City, they endeavored to land, but a huge
Tempest and mighty storm, drove all their Ships which were on the Seashore upon
the Rocks; where many were drowned, and those who swam to Land, the Romans
slew, so that hereby above Four Thousand stout Soldiers perished, which with
those that were slain in the Town, amounted to Forty Thousand, all Jews. Then
Vespasian sent his Son Titus, who with his Forces won all the walled Towns in
Galile, saving the Lives of those which yielded, and killing such as resisted:
He restored likewise to Agrippa all the Cities in Gallie which belonged to him,
except T^a^va. which he utterly rased, slaying all the men who were fit for
War, and selling their Wives and Children, this being the only (...) all
Galile, where T^tus showed such severity.

Then Ves^a^ian went to Gamala a City upon the top (...), near which was
another Town called (...); They both belonged to Agrippa, who therefore desired
Vispasian that he might go and treat with them, and thereby prevent the
destruction of the place, and accordingly the King went peaceably to them, and
they received him very courteously, (though they intended Treachery) saying;
Thou art our Lord and King, to whom therefore does all that is of any value, or
t^ be desired in all Israel belong but unto thee, therefore co^^near unto us,
and debate the matter with thy Servants: Agrippa crediting their words, came up
close to the Wall, and as he listened to those who talked with him, one threw a
great stone from the Wall, which fell just between his shoulders with such
violence, that it struck him to the ground, and broke his back almost, and one
of his Arms; His Servants stepped to him, and taking him up, carried him to
V^s^^sian who seeing him so terribly hurt, swore he would never go from thence
till he had taken the City, which he soon after accomplished, killing every
man, and leaving none alive; in like manner as at Tiarva; He came then to
Nascala, which was the only City of defense left throughout all Galilee, and
hitherto reforted many Cutthroats, and Wicked Persons of the Land of Judea,
amongst whom was Jehochanan a m^n learned and witty to do mischief, and of
cunning ^loquence; Titus was sent to offer them Peace, but (...) would not let
the Romans speak to the People, but told them, the next day was the Feast of
Weeks, or Whitsunday, and the third day they should have an answer; But the
night before the third day, Jehochanan, and his Accomplices got privately out
of the Town, and fled toward Jerusalem; the next day the People sent word they
desired friendship with the Romans; and Titus hearing that Jehochanan and his
Company were fled that night toward Jerusalem, he sent to pursue him, and
overtook some men, women, children and impotent Persons, and slew them all,
returning with great spoil.

Titus having gained all the Cities in Galile, Vespasian marched to Mount
Tabor, which is continually covered with Snow, the height thereof being Thirty
Furlongs, and upon the top is a Plain of Twenty three Furlongs; this Mountain
he took, and the Town which stood thereon; But Jehochanan being come to
Jerusalem, associated himself with a great number of Murderers, and
blood-thirsty Villains, who came out of all Judea, upon pretense to defend the
Sanctuary of the Lord, and Anani the High Priest received all that came; These
observing the valor and courage of Jehochanan, revolted from Anani, and joined
with him; and consulting together, they resolved to rob all the Rich men of the
City, and began quarrels with them in this manner, when they met any wealthy
Person, they thus accosted him: Art not thou one of those who sent Letters to
Vespasian, and the Romans to betray the City to them; Thus would they examine
them before the People, and when he would answer, God forbid I should do so;
Then would they bring in perjured Villains. Limbs of the Devil, of their own
Company to bear false witness against him, that he might be condemned as a
Rebel under a pretense of Law: Thus dealt they with several Noble men, and
chief Citizens, and their Riches, Jewels, and Goods, the seditious seized for
their own use; They likewise put the High Priests out of their Office, placing
ignorant Rusticks in their room; These wretched and illegal practices so
enraged the honest Citizens, that they resolved to join themselves together,
and withstand them by force, which they did accordingly, and the Fight was very
fierce on both sides, in the Streets, Marketplace, Temple, and the entrance
thereof, so that all the City was full of dead Bodies, and slain men; but at
length the people prevailed against the Ruffians, and forced them to fly into
the Temple of the Lord, shutting it after them; Anani the High Priest persuaded
the People not to fight with them there, lest they should pollute it with the
blood and dead Carcases of those wicked Persons, they therefore besieged the
Temple with six Thousand choice Soldiers well armed, to keep them from coming
forth; and Anani sent to Jehochanan, offering Conditions of Peace, which he
refused, expecting relief from the Ed^mites, and one night soon after twenty
two Thousand of them came against Jerusalem, whom with the Priest discoursed
from off the Walls, and represented their unworthiness in joining with the
Seditious and Murderers.

Whilst they were discoursing together, there appeared a great dark Cloud,
after which followed dreadful Lightnings with Fire, terrible Thunderclaps, and
showers of Hail, which wonderfully affrighted the People, so that they all fled
away, leaving the defense of the Wall, and Anani also alone; but Anani took
courage, and stayed to observe those horrible signs from Heaven, that he might
judge what they presaged; And he gave his judgment indeed, but not according to
Truth, for he foretold, That the Thunder and Hail with darkness signisied Gods
help; in hope whereof he persuaded them to defend the Sanctuary of the Lord;
and to this all the Elders which were with him likewise agreed, not foreseeing
that all these signs betokened the miseries that should come upon Jeru^alem,
and all Israel. Now when those who were be ^^^ged in the Temple perceived that
the Watch at the Gate were fled because of the Tempest, and that none in the
City durst look out of their Houses for fear of the terrible Apparitions in the
sky, the darkness being so great that they could not discern each other; then
came these desperate seditious Fellows out of the Temple without dread to the
walls, and with saws and other Instruments they cut asunder the Bars and Gates;
and when the crashing of the Thunder and hail was greatest, then they labored
hardest in wresting asunder the Locks and Bolts of the Gates, lest they should
be heard, and when the Thunderclap was past, they left off till it came again:
Thus they continued, till at last they had broken, and opened the Gates, and
let the Edomites into the City, who being entered, marched about contriving how
to destroy all the Citizens of Jerusalem; to which end their Confederates in
the Temple joined with them, they swearing to each other to be one People, and
one Army; Then they being confederated together, slew the same night Eight
Thousand Five Hundred of the Israelites, all valiant men of War, besides a
multitude more of the Common people.

In the morning they laid hands on the rich men, haling them before the Judges,
and the Seventy Elders called the Sanhedrin, and among others one Sechariahu a
just and virtuous Person and only guilty of being too rich, this man the wicked
Jehochanan brought before them, saying, Why do you not condemn those rich
Villains, who have conspired with the Romans to betray this Holy City into
their hands; The Priests and Elders knowing the innocence of the man, sighed
and wept very much, which Jehochanan perceiving, said, What do you begin to
weep before you see any Corpse, I wish I may never see the face of God, if we
do not sit in Judgment our selves, since matters are thus ordered, and you
shall be the first we will judge; Then the wicked multitude seized on
Sechariahu, and haling him from the place of Judgment, carried him to the top
of an high Tower at the East end of the Town, from whence they cast him down
headlong into the Vale of Jehosaphat where he dyed; The Priests and Judges
thereupon were much afraid, since Jehochanan had threatened them, that unless
they condemned every man whom he accused they should all go the same way;
Jehochanan then apprehended Gorinian a valiant man, who had often made great
slaughter of the seditious, and was well beloved by the Citizens, whom this
cruel wretch brought forth among the Rabble, and villanously killed him,
throwing his Body to the Beasts of the Field; In the mean time Vespasian drew
near to Jerusalem, having stayed the longer at Caesarea, because he understood
that the Jews were destroying each other, and so would be the more easily
conquered, which accordingly happened; For by the wickedness of Jehochanan, an
innumerable Company of them were destroyed; some were slain with swords, others
the seditious killed with short daggers; which they carried privately under
their Garments, wherewith they would suddenly stab innocent men to the heart.

Jehochanan having subdued the City, he sent an Army out of Jerusalem to take
the Cities that had made peace with Vespasian, which they sacked and rased to
the ground, and whomsoever they found therein, Romans or Jews, they slew; among
others they took the City Gerara beyond Jordan, where they remained; But the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and likewise of Gerara sent Ambassadors to Vespasian
to come and join with them against these Seditious Rascals; Jehochanan having
notice hereof, and hearing that Vespasian was marching toward Gerara, first
slew the chief Governor thereof, and then with his Companions fled out of the
Town, designing to secure themselves in a Wood; which Vespasian understanding,
sent out Poligorus after them, who overtook and made a great slaughter of them,
and in his return near Jordan met with many more going to join with the
Seditious at Jerusalem, whom Poligorus forced back to the River, and slew
Thirteen Thousand of them, the rest leaped into Jordan, and were drowned, in
all to the number of Ninety one Thousand Men, Women and Children with much
Cattle, who were all lost together in the River, insomuch that the Waters of
Jordan ran over its banks, being stopped up with dead Carcases, so that the
Fields and Plains were overflown; yet at length the Force of the Waters carried
the dead Bodies down the River, to the Sea of Sodom, and all the Banks of
Jordan lay full of dead Bodies:

After this Vespasian went into the Land of Edom, where he won two strong
Cities, and slew Ten Thousand of the People thereof, leading away the rest into
captivity; and at length came to Samaria and took it, and then repaired the
VValls of all the Towns he had conquered, placing Garrisons therein to aid him,
when he should besiege Jerusalem; He then returned to Caesarea, and mustered
his whole Army in order to prepare for that siege; But in the mean time news
came from Rome, that Nero the Emperor was dead, and it was at first reported,
that while he was hunting, Fire came down from Heaven upon him, and destroyed
him; After whom Galba reigned, but within one year he was slain by the Noblemen
of Rome; and Vitellius was made Emperor in his stead, he was a Fool, but yet a
very bloody man, and much given to drunkenness, so that upon all accounts he
was altogether unworthy of the Roman Empire; the Roman Nobility who were with
Vespasian hearing this, were much offended, saying, Was there never a Nobleman
in Rome lest, to be placed in the Empire, but a drunken Winesucker must be
chosen; Why did they not rather Elect the mighty Prince Vespasian here with us,
a wise and valiant Commander, who has conquered many Cities, and vanquished
diverse Warlike Nations; How many puissant Kings has he subdued to the Roman
Empire, and how has he enlarged it far and wide, And now when the Empire ought
to have been bestowed upon Vespasian, or some Person of the like merits,
because no such could be found among them, they have bestowed it upon a Fool,
and a sottish Drunkard, wherein they have done very undiscreetly, however we
are resolved the Empire of Rome shall suddenly have a better Emperor, and
thereto let God say, Amen. Hereupon the Princes who were present, consulted
together, and decreed to make Vespasian Emperor; and going all together to him,
they said, Thou shall be our Head, for the Empire belongs to such a one as
thy self, and thou shall have Dominion over us; But Vespasian refused to take
it on him, and would not be persuaded to consent thereto; however they
compelled him, placing him in the Throne of Majesty, and setting the Crown on
his head, which he would have taken away, and pulled off with his hand, because
he would not be Emperor; upon which the Roman Captains drew their Swords and
said, Thou shall be Emperor, and Reign over us, therefore refuse it not, if
thou do, thou shall dye upon our swords: Vespasian therefore seeing himself
constrained, being afraid of his Life was content to suffer himself to be
proclaimed Emperor; then all the Army swore Allegiance to him as he sat upon
the Royal Seat, as Emperor, and King of Kings.

In the mean time the Civil Wars at Jerusalem increased daily by reason of
Jehochanan that Limb of the Devil, who had escaped thither again; There was
likewise another Cutthroat Ruff^^n called Schimeon, who was discarded from his
Command for his Villanys, by Anani the Priest; After which gathering together a
rout of Thieves, Rebels and Murderers throughout all Galilee, to the number of
Twenty Thousand, he came toward Jerusalem to vex the Israelites, who
encountered with him with various success, sometimes one Party prevailing, and
then the other; but at length one Jacob a great man among the Edomites joined
with him, and helped to subdue his own Country; with whom being strengthened,
they approached the Walls of Jerusalem, destroying the Corn and Fruits of the
Ground; Jehochanan having intelligence of his intentions to besiege the Town,
and being too weak to encounter him, he issued out of the City, and lay in
Ambush for Schimeon, at which time it happened that Schimeon's Wife, (who was
fled out of Jerusalem with her Men and Women Servants, for fear she should be
killed for her Husbands sake,) passed by the place of Ambushment, whom
Jehochanan took, not a little proud of such a prey, and carried into the City,
thinking Schimeon would comply upon any Terms to gain his Wife whom he dearly
loved; This came to Schimeons ear just at the time he had taken many of
Jehochanan's men, and cut off their hands, sending them with such shame to
Jerusalem to their Master; He likewise sent Ambassadors to Jehochanan, to
return his Wife, or upon refusal he threatened him with the utmost Extremity,
since he was resolved to take the City ere long, and to Jehochanans shame would
cut off the Hands and Legs of all the Inhabitants; Jehochanan being afraid, (
Schimeon having with him Forty Thousand Fighting men,) he sent him his Wife,
whereupon he continued without the Town, while Jehochanan played the Tyrant
within, his Soldiers ravishing the Citizens Wives and Daughters, and shedding
much innocent blood, and whoever complained was presently slain; so that the
Condition of the Israelites was truly miserably, for if any went out of the
City, they were slain by Schimeon, and those within were continually murdered
by Jehochanan; The Citizens being therefore tired by his Tyranny, assembled
together, and encountered with Jehochanan, where a multitude of them were slain,
and if the Edomites who were fled to Jerusalem from the Tyranny of Schimeon had
not come in to their relief, the whole People of Jerusalem had been utterly
destroyed, and slain every Mothers Son by Jehochanan, his power was so great.
Then Anani the High Priest, and other Grave Men not being able to suffer the
wickedness of Jehochanan any longer, resolved to deliver the City to Schimeon,
hoping he would slay Jehochanan; who was at length prevailed with, and promised
to assist them against the Seditious, but being entered with his whole Army, he
broke his promise, and joined himself with Jehochanan, so that these two Rebels
reigned in Jerusalem by course, one of them one Month, and the other another;
yet within two days they quarrelled about Eleasar the Priest, whom Schimeon
would have slain, but Jehochanan defended, so that ever after they fought one
against the other.

During these Transactions at Jerusalem, Vespasian had sent two Noblemen to
Rome to make away the Emperor Vitellius, whereby he might come and receive the
Imperial Crown there; They went therefore, and raised an Army, wherewith they
fell upon Vitellius and slew him, though not without much opposition, for there
were slain that day in Rome eighty Thousand valiant Soldiers; Then Vespasian
taking half his Army with him, left the other part with Titus his Son to
besiege Jerusalem, but to continue at Alexandria till further order; to whom
Titus at his departing said, I shall do dear Father according to your
Commandment, for to you it belongs to command, and to me to obey; Vespasian
took with him Agrippa, and Menas his Son, with Joseph the Priest, for fear they
should raise a Rebellion; As he approached nigh Rome, all the Citizens came
forth to meet him, and received him with great Joy, and mighty shows and
Triumphs; and soon after he was solemnly crowned Emperor; within a few days
Vespasian was displeased with King Agrippa, upon certain false Informations
that he designed some disturbance, upon which both he and his Son Munabas were
put to Death.

This happened three years and an half before the destruction of Jerusalem, at
which time the continual Sacrifice ceased for One Thousand, Two Hundred and
Ninety days, as it is written in the 12 of Daniels Prophecy; But Joseph was by
the clemency of Vespasian set at Liberty, and sent to Titus (who was then at
Alexandria in Egypt) with Letters from his Father, and was kindly received by
him; Titus soon after marched with a mighty Army to Caesarea, where he stayed
till the Winter was past, before he would besiege Jerusalem: But in the mean
time the quarrels and murders in that City ceased not, but Summer and VVinter
the Wars continued between Schimeon, Jehochanan, and Eleasar; for God had in
Judgment sent a Spirit of Giddiness among the Citizens, so that they were
divided into three Parts, The first and best sort of the People followed Anani
the Priest, who at that time had stained and suspended his Office of
Priesthood; Another part followed Seditious Jehochanan, and the third were for
Schimeon; So that in the midst of Jerusalem there was nothing but slaughter and
bloodshed, and without, the Roman Army made inroads from Caesarea, even to the
Gates of the City; between those three within, there were most cruel Battles
for the space of four days without breathing or ceasing, and every day very
many were slain, so that the blood of the Jews ran abundantly through the
Marketplaces and Streets, even to the Temple of the Lord, like a great Flood
which had been caused by showers of Rain; Then assembled the Priests, Elders,
and many of the People, beseeching these their Intestine and Domestic Enemies
not to pollute and defile the Temple with their slaughters, but they were
almost all slain for their pains by the villainy of the Seditious, together with
Anani and Joshua the Priests, and Sechariahu the Prophet of the Lord.

Then had the continual Sacrifice ceased Thirty six days, for even till that
time, some good men or other in Jerusalem still offered Sacrifice to the Lord;
But now when the Priests had laid the Sacrifice on the Altar, the seditious
would run upon them and kill them, so that the Priests and the Beasts they
would have Sacrificed, fell down dead to the ground together, and so they
likewise destroyed all that came ^hither for Devotions sake, so that scarce one
was left ^live; and the pavement of the Temple being Mar^le, was made so
slippery with the blood and fat of those which were slain, that no man could go
upon it without falling; Nay whosoever the seditious over^^ne, they set fire on
their Houses, which fired other great men's Houses nigh the Temple, and at last
caught hold of the Storehouses of Corn, Wine, and Oil, to the number of One
Thousand, Four Hundred, all filled full of Victuals against a time of
necessity, or the besieging of the Town; For when Vespasian was in Galile, the
Priests and Elders made up the Doors of these Garner-houses, and laid in
Victuals sufficient for Two Hundred Thousand men for 20 years, but now in this
one Fight of the Seditious, they were all burnt to the ground, with all within
them, which caused a sudden hunger and Famine in Jerusalem? At the same time
the seditious pulled down all the fair and goodly Buildings, that there should
be no sign nor Monument of any Noble House left in the City; Thus God visited
the Citizens of Jerusalem with four dreadful Plagues at once, Sword,
Pestilence, Famine, and Fire, to which this Fifth was added, the ruin and
destruction of all beautiful and glorious Buildings; So that whithersoever a
man turned himself, there were nothing but desolations, pollutions of the
Temple, and all holy things, and uproars, without all rest and refuge, no help,
no succor, but every corner of Jerusalem was full of howling and yelling,
weeping and wailing, sobbing and sighing of Women and Children; Here you might
hear the roaring and lamentation of men not quite dead, there the mourning and
throbbing of the Elders, with the woeful cries of young Children for bread, in
short, all manner of misery oppressed them, so that he was thought happy who
dyed before this day, and all those were in a woeful case, who were so
unfortunate to see it; when Joseph heard all these things at Caesarea, he tore
his Hair with his hands, cast Ashes on his Beard, and sitting with great sorrow
on the ground, he bewailed, and made Lamentation over the miserable City of
Jerusalem.

After this in the first year of the Reign of Vespasian, Titus his Son mustered
his men in the Plain of Caesarea, and he found them a vast number, so that they
seemed almost to cover the Earth; he then marched to Samaria, and being
received by the Citizens with great joy he spared them and did them no harm;
from thence he went to Ajelona, thirty Furlongs from Jerusalem, and there
pitched his Tents, and taking six Hundred Horsemen with him, he went to
Jerusalem to view the height of the Walls, and the strength of the Town, but
the Jews laid an Ambush, and slew sixty of Titus his men, and might have slain
him likewise, but that they designed to take him alive, whereby he took an
Opportunity to escape; The next day Titus brought his whole Army to Jerusalem,
and it being a little before the Feast of Unleavened Bread, an infinite number
of People who came to celebrate it, were shut up in the City, by which means
the City was soon oppressed with a cruel Famine, all manner of Food and
nourishment being consumed, and Oxens Dung was accounted good Meat, others fed
upon old Leather, and horrible dreadful things happened, for some Women boiled
their own Children, and eat them; many thinking to save their Lives by flying
to the Romans, were cut in pieces to search for their Gold and Jewels which
they had swallowed to prevent Discovery. Two Thousand were miserably destroyed
one night upon this Account; And on the Feast day which was April 14. Eleasar
having seized on the Inner Temple, opened the Gate that the People might
sacrifice, Jehochanan taking this opportunity, sent privately many of his
party, armed with short swords under their Garments, who being admitted with
the rest of the multitude, set upon Eleasar, and seized the Inner Temple with
the slaughter of many of his party; and thus the threefold Faction was again
reduced into two, that of Jehochanans who were Eight Thousand Four Hundred, and
the other of Schimeons, with whom were Ten Thousand, besides Five Thousand
Idumeans, or Edomites.

Titus approaching the Walls, pitched his Camp about the River Psephina, and
presently raised a Mount, and with a battering Ram first shook, and then beat
down part of the Wall, and May 7. broke into the City; The first wall being
beaten down, and the Jews retiring inward, he gained the North quarter of the
City, even to the Castle of Antonia, and the Valley of Cedron. On the fifth day
after a Tower on the second Wall being shaken, and battered down from the
North-quarter; Titus got the new lower City, from which he was repulsed again
by the Jews, but on the fourth day after, he regained it, and so addressed
himself for the assault of the third Wall; May 12. he commanded four Mounts to
be raised two at the Castle of Antonia, whereby he thought to gain the Temple
and two at the Tomb of the High Priest John, (...) he hoped to win the upper
City, which (...) ^^nished in 17 days, Jehochanan by a Mine from Antonia cast
down one of the Mounts, and burnt it; and Schimeon the second day after in a
Salley that he made fired 2 of the Mounts opposite to him, with the Rams, and
other Engines of the Romans, whom they fell upon in their Camp, but Titus
relieving them from Antonia, forced the Jews into the City again; These Mounts
being thus demolished, Titus in three days time encompassed the City with a
Wall of thirty nine Furlongs in Circuit, about which he built 13 Castles, each
10 Furlongs round, so that none could go in or out, whereby the Famine raged so
cruelly in the City; that with it, and the Pestilence, multitudes perished; so
that from April 14, on which day the siege began, to the beginning of July
following, an Account was taken that at one Gate, one hundred fifteen Thousand
and eight Hundred Carcases of poor people were carried out, who were buried at
the common charge, besides those privately interred by their Friends; a while
after it was known by those who fled to the Romans, that there were six hundred
Thousand carried through all the Gates to be buried; and after that there being
not enough to bury the Poor, they laid them upon great heaps in empty Houses,
and there locked them up, and the manner of burying others was only to throw
them over the Walls, and fill up the ditches with the dead Bodies.

In the mean time, Schimeon continued his Rapines and Murders within the City;
For he put to death Matthias the High Priest, upon pretense he would have fled
to the Romans, though by this man's means Schimeon was first admitted into
Jerusalem; He slew also three of his Sons, and fifteen of the noblest of the
people, all of them being unheard, and uncondemned, Yea he raged so cruelly,
that Judas, one of his Captains hating his Tyranny, contrived to deliver up a
Town to the Romans, of which he had the charge, but being discovered by
Schimeon, he and 10 others of the Conspirators were put to death; and
Jehochanan being necessitated thereto, converted to his own, and profane uses
the Holy things of the Temple as Vessels of Gold, Silver, and Money, nay, he
was forced to distribute to his Soldiers the very Oil and Wine which was
dedicated to divine services; But Titus fetching Materials from every place,
and cutting down all the Woods and Trees for 90 Furlongs about, he with great
labor in 21 days caused four new Mounts to be raised about Antonia, which
Jehochanan in vain attempted to destroy, and then placed a Ram against it, by
which a breach being made, they entered into Antonia, July 5. and pursued the
flying Jews into the Temple, but after a sharp fight, the Romans were for some
time repulsed, July 17. Titus commanded Joseph to exhort the seditious to
yield, which he did in a large Oration, but they obstinately refused; therefore
on the seventh day after, he brought his Mounts nearer; and by overturning the
Foundations of the Castle Antonia, he made an easy ascent into the Temple,
seizing on the North and West Porches without the Temple, part whereof joining
to Antonia, was burnt by the Jews, and soon after the other part by the Romans,
the Jews not attempting to quench the Fire, that the Porch might be entirely
separated from Antonia, July 27. the Jews again set fire on the West Porch
toward the Bridge that led to the Gallery, where many Romans getting up were
burnt, the Jews flying away on purpose to draw them on; The day after the
Romans burnt all the North Porch, even unto the East Porch; August 8. Titus
perceiving he prevailed nothing with his battering Ram against the Walls on the
Inner Temple, nor could undermine the Foundations of the Gates by reason of the
greatness, and strong cementing of the stones; He was forced to do that which
out of reverence to the place he had hitherto forborne; neither could the Romans
by their Ladders get up into the Porches, the Jews from above still beating
them down; therefore at last he commanded the Gates of the Inner Temple to be
set on Fire, which soon taking, the Porches which joined to them, were likewise
presently all in a Flame, the Jews beholding and wondering thereat, their
amazement being so great, that they neither endeavored to stop nor quench it,
so that these Porche^ burnt all that day, and thenight following.

And though Titus and some of his Captains inten^ed to keep the Temple from
firing, yet they could by no means effect it, for having appointed a Guard
charging them to preserve the Temple and Sanctu^ Sanctorum; the Seditious Jews
fell upon them August 10. and slew every man, which Titus hearing brought his
whole Army thither; at which time (...) Roman Soldier took a flaming
Firebrand, and gettin^ upon his Fellows Shoulders, cast the Fire through the
Golden VVindow into the Houses and Chamber^ that were built on the Northside of
the Temple, and others laid Wood to the Doors of the Sanctum Sanctorum which
were covered over with Gold, and then setting fire to it after the Gold grew
hot, and the timbe^ began to burn, the whole Temple was in a flame, an^ the
Sanctum Sanctorum was laid open to the view of all (...) This happened in the
second year of Vespasian, and the same day of the Month that it was formerly
burnt by Nebuchadnezzar. The Romans rushing into the Sanctum Sanctorum, gave a
great shout while it burnt, which when Titus heard, he hastened to quench the
Fire, and save the Sanctum Sanctorum, but he could not do it, because it was on
Fire in so many places; thereupon Titus commanded them to forbear, but they
would not hear him; for as a vehement Flood of Waters breaks down, and carries
away all things before it; with such furious violence, the Flames rushed
through all parts of the Temple; Titus then drew his sword, blaming the
Captains of his own People, and killing others; The Priests within resisted the
Romans stoutly till they were no longer able to lift up their hands; Therefore
when there was no other safeguard, they leapt into the Fire, and several other
Jews with them, and so burnt altogether, saying, Why should we live any longer
now there is no Temple; Yet Titus ceased not to strike the People, eventill his
strength failed, and then falling on the Ground, he forbore crying out on them
any further.

After the Sanctum Sanctorum was burnt, Titus arose, and entering thereinto, he
saw the glory and magnificence thereof, for as yet the Fire had not consumed
all, and then said, Now I well perceive that this is no other than the House of
God, and the dwelling place of the King of Heaven, neither was it for naught
that the Jews fought so earnestly in defense thereof; nor did the Gentiles
without good Cause send Gold and Silver to this Temple from the farthest parts
of the World, for great is the glory thereof, and it surpasses all the Roman
and Gentile Temples that ever I saw; The God of Heaven, who is the God of this
House, take vengeance of the Seditious, whose mischievous and heinous deeds
have brought this evil upon them. The Seditious who yet remained in Jerusalem,
seeing the Sanctum Sanctorum to be burnt, they set the rest of the Temple on
Fire themselves, with all the Houses which were filled with Treasure, and all
sorts of precious Jewels, and Victuals also, that the Romans should receive no
benefit thereby: After this the Romans quenched the Fire, and set up their
Idols and Images in the Temple, and after Titus had offered Sacrifice, and the
Roman Ensigns were set upon the Eastgate, the Army proclaimed him Emperor; and
Titus standing on a Gallery, persuaded the Seditious, who were fled into the
upper City to yield themselves, promising them their Lives, but they demanded
leave to depart with their Wives and Children into the Wilderness, which
Titus taking in scorn, threatened them with utter destruction, and commanded all
the lower City to be set on Fire, with the Palaces, and then assaulted the
higher City, which was seated upon a steep Rock, and having finished his
Mounts, on Sept. 7. he brought his Engines to the Walls, wherein having made a
great breach, the seditious fled in great fear and amazement, and the Romans
breaking in, destroyed all with Fire and Sword; And Titus commanded both the
City and Temple to be rased to the Foundation, and the ground to be plowed
according to the Roman custom, sparing only the West part of the Wall, with
the 3 Towers, Hippicon, Phaselus, and- Mariamne, which he left as Monuments to
Posterity of the strength and magnificence of this once famous City.

Titus having thus finished this dreadful and difficult War, the Neighboring
Nations that assisted him, would have crowned him Emperor, but he refused,
saying, He was unworthy of that Honor, for it was not he who was the Author,
and finisher of that work, but that he had only lent his hands to God, who had
thus showed his anger against the Jews; Then did Titus reward his Soldiers,
and committing the keeping of Jerusalem to the Tenth Legion, he went to
Caesarea, carrying with him all the Prey, spoils and Captives, because he could
not sail to Italy in the Winter; The two seditious Tyrants Jehochanan and
Schimeon were taken as they lay hid in the Vaults of Jerusalem, of whom
Jehochanan was condemned to perpetual Imprisonment, and Schimeon was reserved
to be carried a Prisoner to Rome, and there led in Triumph; In the same Vaults
were found Two Thousand Men, who either perished with hunger, or else killed
each other, rather than they would yield themselves to the Romans; while Titus
continued at Caesarea he celebrated the Birth day of his brother Domitian, on
December 30. upon which occasion the number of Jewish Prisoners who perished by
being forced to fight with wild Beasts, that were burned with Fire, and that
fell by being compelled to fight with each other, was above Two Thousand Five
Hundred; Afterward Titus went to Beritus in Phaenicia, where he solemnized the
day of his Fathers Coronation with great magnificence, at which time likewise
multitudes of the Captive Jews perished in like manner as before.

At last, Titus failed to Rome, where he was welcomed with a general Joy, and
together with his Father Vespasian, triumphed for the Conquest of Judea; In
which Triumph the two Captains Jehochanan and Schimeon, with seven Hundred
other Jews, who excelled in beauty and strength, were led in Chains, of all
whom, only Schimeon was put to death: The Book of the Law of the Jews was
carried also in this Triumph, as the last of the spoils, which together with
the Purple Vail of the Sanctuary, were laid up in the Imperial Palace. Soon
after, Lucius Bassus was sent Lieutenant into Judea, who took the strong
Castles of Herodian and Machaeron beyond Jordan by assault; About this time,
neither the Sun nor Moon were seen for twelve, others say, for fifteen days
space, which some think was foretold by our Savior, in St. Matthew. 24.29.
Immediately after the tribulation of those days, shall the Sun be darkened, and
the Moon shall not give her Light; etc. And Caesar writ to Tiberius Maximus the
Governor of Judea, that he should sell all the Lands of the Jews; He likewise
imposed a Tribute upon them wherever they dwelt, commanding them yearly to
bring into the Capitol Two Drams, which they used formerly to give to the
Temple of Jerusalem; Bassus being dead, Publius Sylva succeeded in the
Government of Judea, who April 15. won that almost impregnable Castle of
Massada; which had been seized upon by Eleaser the Nephew of Judas Galileus a
Captain of Thieves; whereupon all the Thieves in the Castle, being about nine
hundred with their Wives and Children, at the persuasion of Eleasar, slew each
other, having first set Fire to the Castle, and burnt all their Goods and
Furniture, lest they should fall into the hands of the Romans; But many of the
Thieves which were in Judea fled, and came to Alexandria in Egypt, where they
solicited the Jews to revolt; but the Common People, by persuasion of their
Rulers, fell upon them, and took six hundred, whom they delivered to the Romans
to be punished; the rest who escaped and fled into other places, were also
taken; when Caesar heard thereof, he ordered Lupus the Governor of Alexandria,
to pull down the Temple of the Jews which was in that City; Yet Lupus took away
only some Gifts out of it, and so shut it up; But Paul^nus his Successor having
taken away all the Gifts, and shutting up the doors, ordered that no Jews
should come thither, by which means there was not the least Footsteps of the
Jewish Religion left there.

A certain Jew named Jonathan, by Trade a Weaver, escaping out of Cyrene, about
this time raised a Tumult, and drew Two Thousand Jews after him into the
Wilderness, after whom Catulus Governor of Libya Pentapolis sending some Horse
and Foot, easily overthrew and slew them; and Jonathan himself being taken and
brought before him, he falsely accused the most wealthy of the Jews as the
Authors of this Revolt; To whose Accusations Catulus willingly harkening, he
put three thousand of them to death at once, confiscating their Estates to
Caesar's Treasury: He likewise sent Jonathan and some others with him Prisoners
to Rome, ^o Vespasian, where Jonathan accused the honestest of the (...), who
(...) at Rome, and Alexandria of designing (...) among others Joseph, who writ
the History of the Jews; But Vespasian knowing this Accusation not to be
legally brought against them, he at the request of his Son Titus, acquitted
them, and deservedly punished Jonathan, causing him first to be whipped, and then
burnt alive; Catulus through the mercy of the Emperor escaped at that time, but
not long after he was taken with a noisome and incurable Disease, and was
exceedingly tortured and tormented in his mind, imagining that he saw
continually the Ghosts of those whom he had unjustly slain and murdered before
his eyes, and at last his Guts and Bowels rotting, fell out of his body,
whereby he miserably perished; Josephus the Jew, and a Commander in this War,
writes, That there perished by the Sword and Famine a Million of People; and of
the rest of the Jews dispersed all the World over, and put to Death diverse ways
the number of Ninety Thousand, and Ninety seven Thousand more were made
Captives. But of the number that perished out of Jerusalem during the whole
seven years War, Justus Lipsius has made this Catalogue out of Josephus.

At Jerusalem first killed by the command of Florus, six hundred and thirty; By
the Inhabitants of Caesarea in hatred to them and their Relig on twenty
thousand; At Scythopolis a City in Syria, were slain thirty thousand; At
Ascalon in Palestine the Inhabitants slew two thousand five hundred, and at
Ptolemais two thousand; At Alexandria in Egypt by the command of Alexander the
President were killed 50000, and at Damascus 10000; At the taking of Joppa by
Cesius Florus, 8400; In the mountain of Cabulo, 2000; In a fight at Ascalon
10000; By an Ambuscado 8000; At Apheca when it was taken, 15000; slain at Mount
Gerizim, ten thousand six hundred; At Jotapata where Joseph himself was, thirty
thousand; when Joppa was taken, four thousand two hundred were drowned; slain
at Tarichaea six thousand five hundred; At Gamala there were slain, and threw
themselves down over the Walls nine thousand, neither was any one of that City
saved, but only two Women who were Sisters; killed in the Flight, when they
forsook Giskula two thousand; slain of the Gaderens thirteen thousand, besides
an infinite number who leapt into the River; killed in the Villages of Idumea ten
thousand; at Gerazion, Macheron, and in the Woods of Jardes five thousand seven
hundred; In the Castle of Massada nine hundred and sixty slew themselves, and
three thousand were killed in Cyrene by Catulus the Governor; All which
numbers being added to the Million and one hundred thousand who perished in the
siege of Jerusalem, amount to one Million, three Hundred thirty seven thousand
four hundred and ninety, besides an innumerable Company that perished by
Famine, banishment, and other miseries, and Josephus adds, That the Posterity
of Herod Agrippa, though it was very numerous, yet within the space of an
hundred years, it wholly failed and was extinct; A. B. Vshers Annals. p. 900.

And St. Jerome writes, that in his time, on that day of the year wherein
Jerusalem was taken by the Romans, you might see decrepit Women, ragged old
men, and many other wretched people, (but pitied of none,) who with blubbered
Cheeks, Black Arms, discheveled hair, went howling and lamenting for the Ruins
of the Temple and Sanctuary, wearing and bearing in their habits and Bodies the
sad Characters of divine vengeance, of whom the Soldiers likewise exacted a
Fee for Liberty of further weeping; so that they who formerly sold the blood of
the Blessed Jesus, were then forced to buy their own Tears; And the Relics of
this wretched People were dispersed into all Nations under Heaven, having no
Magistrates of their own to protect them, but were, and still are altogether at
the Will and discretion of the Princes and Governors, where they are suffered
to live; so that no people in the world are so vile and contemptible as they,
being made a scoff and a by word in all Countries; Though still their hearts
are so hardened, that upon all occasions they have discovered their malice
against and contempt of Jesus Christ, and his Religion; It is likewise worthy
Observation, how that Prophecy of our Savior was fulfilled concerning the
irreparable ruin of the last Temple of Jerusalem, which although Julian the
Apostate labored to invalidate, and prevent; yet his design by the most just
Judgment of God could never take effect; For Ammianus Marcellinus a Roman
Historian gives this following Relation thereof.

Julian, says he, designed with excessive cost and charges, to rebuild the
sometime most magnificent Temple at Jerusalem, which by Vespasian and his Son
Titus were with great difficulty won by assault; This Affair Julian committed
to the care of Alypius, who did vigorously apply himself to the work, being
assisted therein by the Governor of the Province^ (...) but there brake out
dreadful Balls of Fire near the ^^^ndation of the Walls, which with their
frequent Irruptions, made the Place unapproachable, several Workmen being
consumed by the Fire, and (...) this manner a full period was put to their
further proceeding therein; But Nicephorus Colistus ^^ves a more large and full
Narrative thereof as follows; The Jews says he, having got together as many
as were skilful in the Art of Building, and having provided Materials for it,
and fully cleansed the place, they prepared Spades made of Silver, their
charges being allowed out of the public stock, with such earnestness and
Alacrity did they labor herein, that the very Women carried away the rubbish
in their Laps, and whatsoever Jewels, or precious Ornaments they had, they
expended on the business; When they had dug up the remainders of the old
Building from the lowest Foundations, and had cleared the ground, so that there
was not a stone left upon a stone, according to our Blessed Lords Prediction:
The next day coming to the place, they say, there was a great Earthquake,
insomuch that the stones were cast out of the Foundation, so that many of the
Jews were slain, who either came to see the work, or had the oversight thereof;
The Public buildings which were nearest the Temple, were likewise loosned and
falling down with great violence, buried those who were in them in their
ruins; some who attempted to fly away, were found half dead; other lost their
Legs, Arms, Hands, and other Members according as the force of that sudden
accident (...) upon them.

The Earthquake was scarce over, but those who remained, fell to work again,
but when they attempted it the second time, sudden flashes of Fire violently
(...) out of the Foundations, and other sire fell furiou^^ from Heaven, and
destroyed more than before, cons^^ing to Ashes the Hammers, Graving Tools,
Saws, Hatch^s, Axes, and all other Instruments which the Workmen had brought
for their service; the flames continuing a whole day together; When Cyril, who
was at that time Bishop of Jerusalem, saw these things, he considered in his
mind the words of the Prophet Daniel, to which Christ also had set his Seal in
the Holy Gospel, and then told them all; That now was the time, when the Oracle
of our Savior had its accomplishment, which said, That a stone should not be
left upon a stone in the Temple; which when he had said, a dreadful Earthquake
assailed the remaining Foundations, and casting out all the rest of the stones,
dispersed them abroad, and a fearful storm arose, which whirled into the Air
many Thousand Bushels of Lime and Plaster, and sudden flames of Fire flashing
from beneath, burnt up in a moment an innumerable Company of People, who were
either laboring in the work, or coming to behold it: Thus did the wicked
Julian fulfill Christ's Predictions concerning Jerusalem, by the same means
whereby he designed to make them void.

These Prodigies (says Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History) are sufficient
to prove the truth of these Prophecies, but what I shall now declare, being
very wonderful will further confirm them, which I shall relate as I find them
in the Archives and Records, as follows; when the Foundations of this New
Temple were laying, there was a stone to which the bottom of the Foundation was
fastened, that slipped from its place, and discovered the Mouth of a Cave which
had been cut in the Rock; Now when they could not see to the bottom by reason
of its depth, the Overseers of the work being desirous to find the bottom, tied
a long Rope to one of the Laborers, and let him down into it; being come to
the bottom, there was water therein up to his Ankles, and searching every part
of that hollow place, he found it to be foursquare, as far as he could
conjecture by feeling, then returning toward the Mouth of it, he happened upon
a little Pillar not much higher than the water, and laying his hand on it,
found a book thereon, wrapped up in a piece of thin clean Linen, which taking up
he gave notice by shaking the rope to be drawn forth, which done, he showed
them the book, which struck them with admiration, because it seemed very fresh
and untoucht, though found in so dark and obscure an hole; The Book being
unfolded and opened, surprised not only the Jews, but the Graecians, for they
found in the entrance thereof these words written in Capital Letters; IN THE
BEGINNING WAS THE WORD, AND THE WORD WAS WITH GOD, AND THE WORD WAS GOD; And to
speak truly, says the Historian, that Scripture did plainly and manifestly
contain the whole Gospel, which the Divine Tongue of the Virgin Disciple St.
John had declared; This together with the other Miracles which at that time
were proclaimed from Heaven, did demonstrate that not any word of our Lord
should fall to the ground which had foretold the utter desolation both of the
Temple and City of Jerusalem. Eusebius Eccles. Hist. lib 3.

Thus severely were the Judgments of Heaven executed upon the Jews, which did
not yet end here, but continued to their posterity; For in 434. The Jews in the
Isle of Creet were deluded by the Devil, affirming himself to be Moses, who led
the Israelites through the Red Sea, and persuaded those poor Creatures, That he
was sent from God to lead them through the Sea to their own Country the holy
Land; This these poor Creatures soon believed, and disposing of all their Goods
to others according to his persuasion, they followed this seducer, who had
spent a whole year in going from one City to another; he then led them with
their Wives and Children to the top of a steep Rock that hung over the Sea;
when they were come hither, this Mock Mises commanded them to wrap their heads
in their upper Garments, and so to throw themselves from the Rock into the Sea,
assuring them of a safe Passage, they readily obeyed him, and in that manner a
great many of them perished in the Waves, and more would have followed, had it
not pleased God that some Christian Fishermen were there at that instant, who
took up many of them as they were flooting upon the waters, and ready to
perish; These afterward returning to the rest of the Jews, told them how they
had been cheated and deceived, and how narrowly they had escaped; whereupon
they being upon good reason all very much enraged, sought far and near for this
seducer to put him to death; but when he could not possibly be found any where,
they thereupon fully concluded, That it was the Devil himself, the old man
slayer, who had appeared to them in humane shape, and diverse of the Jews being
moved by this Calamity, became Christians. Eusebius Hist.

In the Reign of Trajan, the Jews rebelled in Egypt and Cyrene, where they slew
many Greeks and Romans, and did eat their flesh, and girded themselves with
their Guts, imbrued themselves with their blood, and clothed themselves with
their skins; Many they sawed in sunder, from the Crowns downward; others they
cast to wild Beasts, so that they destroyed Two Hundred Thousand of them; and
likewise Two Hundred and Fifty Thousand by the same abhorred Cruelty in Egypt
and Cyprus; whereupon Trajan sent an Army against them under Martius Turbo, who
destroyed many Thousands of them, and fearing lest the Jews in Mesopotamia
should break out into the like outrages, he commanded Lucius Quietus utterly to
destroy, and root them out of that Country, which he performed so effectually,
that the Emperor to recompense his service, made him President of Judea. Dion
Hist.

Adrian the Emperor rebuilt the City of Jerusalem, though not in the same
place, for he changed the situation thereof somewhat Westward, and called the
name thereof Aelia, according to his own name; To despite the Christians, he
built a Temple over our Saviors Grave, with the Images of Jupiter and Venus,
another at Bethlem to Adonis the Gallant of Venus, and to inrage the Jews who
abominate Swinesflesh, he set up the Picture of a Swine over the Gates of the
City; who storming at the profanation of their Land, broke out into open
Rebellion, but were subdued by Julius Severus the Emperors Lieutenant, an
experienced Captain, who by reason of their multitudes would not try it out in
a set Battle, but proceeding more warily, and taking his opportunity, he by
degrees took 50 of their fortifyed Castles, rased nine hundred and fourscore of
their best Towns, and slew five hundred and eighty thousand of their men,
besides an innumerable multitude who perished by Famine, Sickness and Fire; so
that almost all Judea was left destitute; With them likewise was slain one
Benchoahab their (Counterfeit) M^ssias, for so he termed himself, that is, The
Son of a Star, usurping that Prophecy out of Jacob, a star shall arise; Though
he proved but a fading Comet, whose blazing portended the ruin of that Nation;
The Captives by order from Adrian were transported into Spain, and the Holy
Land was laid wast, which parted with her people and fruitfulness both
together. Indeed Pilgrims here and there find Parcels of rich ground in
Palestine, which God may seem to have left, that men may taste the former
sweetness of the Land, before it was scourged for the Peoples sins, and that
they may guess the goodness of the cloth by the fineness of the shreds; But it
is barren for the generality, the streams of Milk wherewith it once flowed, are
now drawn dry, and the whole face of the Land looks sad, not so much for want
of dressing, as because the Almighty God has frowned on it; Adrian
aforementioned banished Five Hundred Thousand Jews into Spain, whence they were
again banished by Ferdinando and Isabella in 1492, at which time there were
driven out of Spain, One Hundred and Twenty Thousand Families; From thence they
passed into Tuseany and the Popes Dominions, but were again banished by Pope
Paul 4. and Pius 5. But it would be endless to show what miseries they have
endured in all Nations, ever since their Predecessors committed that great and
grievous sin of Crucifying the Lord of life, and Glory, and thus much of the
Jews as we find them mentioned by Josephus, Eusebius, Mr. Clark, and other
Ancient and Modern Authors; I shall now proceed in the series of the History of
Comets, and other Prodigies according to the Order of time, which this
digression has somewhat diverted.

VII. In the 70 year after the Birth of our Savior, th^^^ was a great
Earthquake, and a strange Bird of a notable greatness was seen at Rome, also a
blazing Star, and two Eclipses of the Moon, and contrary to Astronomical
demonstration, she appeared black and bloody; Armed men were seen in the Air,
and many strange and wonderful Voices were heard in the Heavens; In 77 another
great blazing Star or Comet appeared, and three Cities in Cyprus sell to the
ground by an Earthquake; A little before Nero slew his Mother Agrippina, the
Sun was strangely darkened, as abhorring to behold such a sight; and a Woman in
Rome brought forth a Serpent. In 81, A Terrible Comet appeared; The Tomb of
Augustus Caesar opened of it self, and blood ^a^ned in Germany; Three Suns were
seen at once in Poland, and there happened much Lightning and Thunder, which
consumed many brave buildings. An Elm Tree saluted Apollonius Tyaneus, and
spoke to him with an audible voice; The Sun is this year Eclipsed, and there
was a great Earthquake in Naples. These Prodigies were judged to portend the
following accidents; The Emperor Otho kills himself; Dardanus Tyrannizeth in
Scotland, and was slain by Corbred; A very great Pestilence in Rome; Most part
of England is subdued by Agricola, he puts Karenoth the King to flight, and
the Scots also; Vespasian dies of a Flux; Haldanus the Sweed is restored to
his Kingdom, from which he was expelled; The Emperor Titus dies; Lynius a
Bishop of Rome Martyred; Domitian turns away his Wife, and marries the Widow of
Titus; He sends two Armies against the Goths, and they are both routed;
Philosophers and Mathematicians are Banished out of Rome; Britain is reduced
into a single Province, and at the Emperors own dispose; Cocceius Nerva dies;
Two Saxon Kings rebel against Froto, he overcomes them, and makes them his
Tributaries, St. John writes his Epistles; Rome and France fall at difference;
The third Heathen Persecution against the Christians began.

About the Year 105 in the Beign of Trajan, who raised the third Persecution
against the Christians October 22. there fell out one of the most terrible
Earthquakes that ever was; First there arose furious and violent winds, which
tore up trees by the roots, made Birds fall to the Earth, uncovered and
overthrew many houses; Then followed Thunder and Lightning which made the night
like noon day, then dreadful Thunderbolts, which broke down stately buildings,
and slew many men. The Sea was wonderful tempestuous, after which came such
violent heat, that people not being able to endure it, stripped themselves, and
then hid themselves under ground; The Sky was so dark, and the dust so great,
that one could not see another, so that rushing together many fell down dead;
Diverse Cities were ruined, much people perished; Several Mountains and Hills
sunk, and became Plains, many Rivers were dried up; Fountains and Springs broke
out where never were any before; Almost all the houses in Antioch were
destroyed. Dion. Hist.

VIII. From the Year of our Lord 107 to 167, those following Prodigies
happened. A very great Earthquake in Asia, many prodigious fights in the Air,
as fightings, etc. observed in Spain. An Earthquake in Galatia; At Rome
Lightning from Heaven consumes the Temples of the Gods; An Earthquake at
Antioch; Great Lightnings, strange unusual winds, together with horrible noises
in the Earth; Two great Earthquakes at Nice, and two others in Palestine; Milk,
rained at Rome, and an Earthquake happened there; and Three Hundred and Forty
Houses, though invi^oned with water, were destroyed by a great Fire in that
City; A great Serpent was seen in Arabia; and it rained Frogs at
Constantinople, three Suns likewise appearing, and at the same time, a Star and
a Rainbow; A very great Earthquake in Bythinia; The waves of the Mediterranean
Sea in a Calm elevated themselves to the top of a Mountain far distant from it,
and cast the foam a great way upon the main Land. In this space of time, the
French and Saxons plant Colonies in Germany. The Saracens and Arabians are
subdued; A Bishop of Jerusalem is Crucified; Babylon and Seleucia are taken;
Nero's house is burnt; The Jews rebel in Egypt, and kill Two Hundred Thousand
Men, Ptolomy King, of Egypt encounters them, slayes Thirty Thousand Jews at
once, and forced those who survived to eat up their dead Carcases; About the
same time the Jews slay Two Hundred and Forty Thousand in Cyprus, and at last
are slain themselves; The Chaldeans, Britains, Scots and Picts, rebel;
Christians are put to death in Asia, Apollodorus is Cain by Hadrians Rollearpus
is Martyred; Aurelius Caesar seeing a wonderful Fire at Rome, causes the
Persecution to cease by an Edict from himself, Hermogenes ran out of his wits
and dyed; The Britains repine against the Roman oppression, and rebel,
Agricola subdueth them; The Fourth Persecution began.

IX. From 167 to 219 were these unusual Accidents; A wonderful fire was seen in
the Heavens, which seemed to pass from East to West; Wolves came in flocks near
to Rome howling hideously; Crosses were seen to sweat with Tears; Rain mingled
with Fire falls from Heaven at Prema. A great and terrible Earthquake, and many
inundations at Rome; Diverse strange fires seen in the Air, and some to fall
from thence; Great swarms of Locusts covered the ground, and destroyed many
Fields and Meadows. A great Earthquake in Asia; The Stars were seen all the day
long at Rome, and some apparitions hung streaming down in the very middle of
the Air; And there fell a wonderful Lightning from Heaven upon the Capitol, and
the fire increasing, burnt the Library and all the houses near it; All kinds of
Creatures contrary to their natures brought forth prodigious Births this year;
Flames of Fire descend from Heaven; There were seen at Rome three Stars about
the Sun very glorious; An Eagle alighted on the Image of a Soldier; Bees
wrought their Combs upon Soldiers Ensigns; A sudden fire in the Air toward the
North, A great lowing and fire in the Earth; A Whale comes ashore in the Haven
of Augustus; A Comet for many days together was seen at Rome: A wonderful
Lightning fell from Heaven upon the Image of Severus, and blotted out three
Letters of his name; These things were judged to portend the ensuing effects;
The Germans with an Army enter Italy, Pertinax is sent against them, and beats
them back; The Senate adjudges Cassius an enemy to the State, and he is slain
by the Soldiers. About this time was great jarring among the Bishops and
Churchmen of most Nations concerning Religion; Smyrna in Asia is quite
destroyed; Perennius and his son are executed for Treason, Apollonius being
accused for a Christian is sentenced and executed; Cleander who succeeded
Perennius, is executed to please the People; Two Thousand dye in a day of the
Plague at Rome; The Emperor Commodus removes the head from a Colossus or Great
Image, and putreth one of his own upon it, he grows ridiculous, and the People
taking notice thereof, he executes many of them, he is at last strangled by
Martia his Concubine; In his Reign there appeared in the Sky diverse fearful
signs; Stars were seen continually in the day time, and blazing Comets of a
huge length, hanging as it were in the midst of the Air; All sorts of Creatures
contrary to their kinds brought forth monstrous and deformed Births, but that
which most grievously afflicted the City of Rome, and amazed them with the
presage was, that the Temple of Peace, the most stately and dainty Monument in
Rome, was on a sudden without any Tempest foregoing (but only a little
Earthquake) quite burnt to the ground, whether by Lightning or Fire out of the
Earth was uncertain; That Temple was the richest and strongest of all others,
and was curiously adorned with gifts of massy Gold and Silver, yea all Persons
of Quality had there deposited, and laid their Principal Treasures; but the
fire happening in the night, made many rich men suddenly poor; When the fire
had consumed the Temple, it burned down also many of the most beautiful
buildings in the City, continuing its rage for many days together. Horodian
Imp. History, Pertinax is Emperor 87 days, and then is slain by the Soldiers;
The King of Scots is slain by a Musician, for causing one of his Kindred to be
executed; Severus goes against Niger, whom he beat three times, and then slew
him at Antioch; Herod besieges Byzantium (now Constantinople) three years
together; Satrahel coming to rule Scotland, kills many of the old Lords of the
Kingdom; Constantinople is taken by Famine, Satrahel is strangled by his
Servants: The Britains are beaten by Severus, and the head of Albinus is sent
to Rome. About this time Scotland received the Christian Faith. The fifth
Persecution began; Many fled from Jerusalem into the Wilderness to avoid the
Persecution; The Romans wast Arabia; Strange Heresies broached by Praxeus;
Severus went into Britain, but never returned thence, Fifty Thousand of his
Army dye; Many of the Scots upon a Rebellion were cruelly massacred.

X. From 219 to 257 the following signs appeared, which were accompanied with
remarkable Accidents; An Eagle flying, takes away the Cap of Diadumenus, and he
is slain within 14 months after; The Britains rebel, and invade the Roman
Territories; Streams of fire, and strange Lightnings are seen at Rome; Armed
men appear in the Air in Muscovia and Poland, the Persians invade Armenia, and
wast the Roman Territories, Alectus is slain in Battle; The King of Scots is
killed by his Guard, the Emperor goes into Persia, and is overcome. A Blazing
Star is seen at Rome, which exte^^^d it self a very great length, and was seen
both to burn and blaze many nights together; Maximilian comes out of Germany,
and is slain by his own Soldiers, his body is given to be torn and devoured of
Dogs; The Goths at this time became terrible to the Roman Empire. In 241 was an
Eclipse of the Sun, which (says my Author) was so great that it made the day
seem as dark as the night; Athirco King of Scotland kills himself, strange
Heresies spread themselves; The Persians are vanquished and expelled Syria. In
244 the Sun was totally Eclipsed, and there was a great Earthquake which caused
the Earth to gape so exceedingly, that several Cities together with their
Inhabitants were swallowed up and destroyed, great Thunder is heard in the
Earth with terrible darkness, and another Earthquake, The Goths take Chalcedon
and Nice, and ruin them both; The Plague rages in the Roman Army: The Goths
burn the Temple of Ephesus, and enter Macedonia and Asia; The Thirty Tyrants
about this time engrossed and parcelled out the Roman Empire among themselves;
And the Sarmates subdued and robbed all Austria and Hungaria; The Germans
passing through France, entered Spain, to the City of Terragona which they
ruined, and the Empire was almost utterly destroyed; Yea it was not only thus
molested by men, but the very Heavens and Elements conspired against it, to
plague it; For the Heavens were darkened in such a manner that for many days
space they never saw the Sun, and the Earth opened and discovered great Vaults
and Caves, out of which there issued great streams of Salt Water; and such
horrid noises were heard as many dyed for fear; The Sea broke its bounds,
overflowing and drowning many Cities; After which there fell out the most woeful
Pestilence that ever was read, or heard of, so that in Rome there dyed thereof
Five Thousand Persons in one day. Imper. Hist. Page 158.

XI. In 257 the Sea overwhelmed many Cities in Europe and Afri^a; This year
there were many exceeding great Earthquakes, and darkness for many days
together, spears also were seen in the Element at Rome; The Germans and
Scythians wast the Empire; The French destroy Italy; Claudius Censorinus was
made Emperor in Italy, and slain there; Donald usurped the Crown of Scotland,
and kept the Nobility in fear, by threatening to kill their kindred whom he had
got into his hands. In 300 there was an horrible Earthquake in Tire, which
destroyed many buildings, and an innumerable Company of People; Many Monsters
were also born this year; Dioclesian the Roman Emperor assumeth the Title of a
God, and would have Divine Honors given him; Many Christians are burnt in a
House in Nicodemia; The Tenth bloody Persecution began, One Hundred and Forty
Four Thousand Christians are put to death in Egypt, and Seven Hundred Thousand
Banished. In 314 a Banner with a Cross was seen in the Air, and diverse Armies
fighting; A hand was seen in Lateran at Rom^ without a body, which in the sight
of many men writ upon the Wall these words, Hodie venenum Ecclesiae infusurus;
To day is poison poured into the Church. This was interpreted to foretell the
extraordinary Indulgence of Constantine the Emperor, toward the Christian
Bishops, and his heaping Estates, Riches and Honors upon them, whereby they
soon after lost their former Piety and Humility; He was surnamed the great: and
was the first Christian Emperor who publicly countenanced and embraced the
Gospel, which he is said to have done on this occasion. At the same time that
he was saluted Emperor in Britain, Maxentius was chosen at Rome by the
Praetorian Soldiers; being pensive and sollicitous upon these Distractions, he
cast his Eyes up toward Heaven, where he saw in the Air a lightsome Pillar in
the form of a Cross, wherein he read these words in Greek, In this thou shall
overcome, and the next night a vision appeared to him, commanding him to bear
that figure in his Standard, and he should overcome all his enemies, this he
performed, and was accordingly victorious, from which time he not only favored
the Christians, but became a zealous Professor of the Faith and Gospel; Before
his time it is observable that few (if any at all) of the Roman Emperors dyed a
natural death, (they being 40 in all from the time of Julius Caesar,) though
after they generally did. Rome was likewise beautified by Constantine, and
Lamps and Wax Candles were first used in the Church in the day time; Arius
begins to broach his Heresies, and is condemned by the Council of Alexandria.
The French aid the Sarmatians against the Romans, and in a Battle kill Forty
Six Thousand Men. In 323 a Fountain ran with Oil in Italy, there was also a
terrible Comet seen for many days together at Rome; Constantine overcomes
Licinius at Chalcedon; Octavian flees into Scotland, and by the aid of
Fincomore recovers Britain, Licinius is put to death.

XII. In 340 there was an Earthquake in A^a which overthrew many Cities. A
Child of six months old prophesies in Rome; Constantine the El^^^^ is ^ain,
Constans subdueth the Gauls; Athan^sius the Bishop is banished. In 343 was a
great and terrible Eclipse of the Sun, and an Earthquake, whose force was so
great that it overthrew many Cities in the East; Hermogenes is slain in a
Tumult; Constantius persecuted the Clergy; Julius entertaineth Athanasius and
other banished Catholics; Arius his Here^^es spread at Antioch; The Christians
are persecuted in Persia and Constantius is beaten there; The Heathen Temples
are shut up. In 349 was a great Earthquake, which overthrew a whole City into
the Sea except the Church; The City of Dirachium was swallowed up by an
Earthquake, and Rome was shaken three days and nights together, with diverse
Cities in Campania. Constantius overcomes the Persians in Battle, but his
Soldiers being drunk with Wine and Beer, as well as with success, the Persians
came suddenly upon them, and make a great slaughter. In 362 an Earthquake did
very much harm in Persia, and the City of Nicodemia was overthrown thereby; An
Ox is said to have spoken in Italy; Constantius makes Peace with the Persians,
and soon after dies, the Christians are much Persecuted; Julian the Apostate
being at Constantinople to prepare for the Persian War, is slain at Chresiphon;
The Temple of Apollo Daphneus is burnt. In 369 was a great inundation or
overflowing of waters in Sicily, and a general Earthquake throughout the whole
World; Romachus defeateth Augusian and the Picts in England; He tyrannizeth,
and the Nobles cut off his head; Valence puts Athanarius to flight. In 337
appeared a Comet of wonderful greatness, and another general Earthquake in
Sicily: The Scots and Picts are set at variance by Maximus, the Goths turn
Arians, and wast Thrace, Thessaly and Epirus: The Emperor Gratian kills
thirty five thousand Germans. In 384 there was visible a terrible sign in the
Heavens in all parts like unto a fiery Pillar, and the River Tiber overflowes
her banks again; Maximus kills Gratian treacherously, and possesses
Britain, France, Spain and Africa: The Va^dals and Lumbards quarrel:
Priscillian is Executed at Trevers by Maximus, after an appeal to him from the
Council of Bordeux. In 392 a new Star is seen in the Heavens which appeared in
the form of a sword for forty days together; Armed men and Castles were seen in
the Heavens in Greece: Valentinian is strangled at Vienna, Eugenius is made
Emperor, Honorius wars against Eugenius; The King of France is slain in battle,
the Romans impose a tribute on the French.

XIII. In 399 strange fiery clouds are seen in Constantinople, an Earthquake,
and great hail, a Star like a sword is seen at Rome, in many places hailstones
fell which were bigger than a stone of eight pound weight: A deep Snow, great
Eclipse of the Sun, and other strange Meteors; the Goths divide into Factions,
and consume themselves with Civil War; Gildo their King kills his children,
is forced to fly, and at last is taken and strangled; Heathen Temples and Idols
are destroyed: The Sybyls books are burnt at Rome. In 412 the Earth at Vtica in
Italy seemed as if it mourned for seven days together, with a horrible lowing:
At Rome great flocks of Grasshoppers were seen in the Air; Arthaulphus warreth
with the Vandals; The Spaniards Country is parted between them and the Swedes.
Pelagius a Monk in Britain broacheth his Opinions; Heraclian is slain by his
own Soldiers. In 434 it rained blood in Savoy: A Comet of wonderful Magnitude
appeared in the Heavens; In Sweden a Dragon was seen flying in the Air; There
was a great Famine in Constantinople, Pope Bassus dies: The French besiege
Archillas: The Emperors makes peace with the Vandals: The Goths break Peace
with the Romans: The Britains war with the Scots. In 445 were apparitions in
the Heavens in England, burning Spears were seen at Rome, many Earthquakes, the
Moon Eclipsed; A Comet this year appeared ten weeks together: Aelius the Roman
General is slain, Cartigern and Horsa are killed in battle at Aylesford in
Kent. The Britains beat the Saxons, and drive them into the Isle of Thanet,
the King of the Goths is slain. In 463 happened a great Earthquake in Rome, and
many parts of Italy, with terrible showrs, and great storms of hail; The Goths
wast Illyria, Beorgok is slain in Italy by Ricimer; The Popes usurpations are
opposed by Hilarious a Deacon of Rome. In 471 was an Earthquake at Vienna;
Wolves, and other Beasts wander all the year through that City, and devour men,
the Emperors Palace is consumed by fire, Ricimer aspireth, and being discovered
flees to Milan, he proclaims war against the Emperor, besieges Rome, and
kills Arthemius: Portugal and Burgundy are wasted by the Goths. In 483 Armies
of men were seen in the Air in Russia; An Earthquake also, and two wonderful
Blazing Stars appeared, a Rainbow likewise seemed to incompass two Suns which
were visible at once; Giles King of France is slain, and Clovis takes many
Cities: A Persecution of learned men in Africa; Zeno the Emperor gives up
himself to riot and cruelty, putting many to death. In 507 there fell a great
and fiery dart from Heaven in Africa, and dark spots were observed in the body
of the Sun. The Emperor gives the Goths money to depart his Dominions, Clovis
warreth against Alaricus for Religion, and Italy is wasted by Clorus with an
hundred ships, and eight thousand men. In 529 happened wonderful Lightning at
Antioch, and an Earthquake at Constantinople; Legible Letters are seen in the
Air at Rome, it rained blood in the Valleys of Lucern and Piedmont four days
together. The Persians war against the King of Colchos, and the Emperor; The
Vandals put their General to death, the Jews are suppressed, the Emperors
General Mundus defeateth the Getes who wasted Thrace.

XIV. In 539 a famous Comet appeared in the Royal sign Sagittarius, and vast
Flocks of Ravens were seen at Rome: The Persians take Antioch, and wast the
Eastern Provinces; The Emperor purchases his peace. People are ordered to pray
toward the East in their Churches. In 546 the Sea flowed up four miles into
Thrace, and drowned many people: There was a very great Earthquake in
Constantinople: The Goths soon after setting upon the Romans at the siege of
Septa, were all slain; Totilas the Goth besieges Rome, and takes it;
Belisarius recovereth it. In 555 a fiery Lance in the Element appeared from the
North to the East; The Heavens seemed to open in France, and lights shined out
for two hours space, an Earthquake shook Constantinople for six weeks, and the
Sun for the greatest part of the year gave so little light, a^ was only equal
to that of the Moon, though the Sky was clear, and no Clouds or any thing to
overshadow it; After which there followed a great Famine, Earthquakes, and much
War and bloodshed. Narses wins Liguria and Venice from the French: The
Romans rout the Persians at Phasido; The Jews and Samaritans persecute the
Christians, and burn their Churches in Caesarea. In 570 at York in England the
Fountains ran blood; Likewise blood fell from the Clouds in Lombardy, in Kent a
Boy laughed in his Mothers Belly, and at London, Trees seemed to be on fire;
This year the Persians begin a war with the Romans; The Huns break into
Germany, and are expelled by the French: There was so great a Famine in
England, that the People assembled together in flocks, to throw themselves into
the Sea. In 590 was a great inundation in Constantinople: there was a Comet
this year which Blazed a Month together; In the River Tyber at Rome was seen a
Dragon, and many Serpents, and the water thereof overflowed the City, an
infinite company of Grasshoppers are seen in Lombardy, and many Locusts in
France. Not long after so great a Plague was in Rome that eight hundred men
fell dead in an hour in the time of Procession, Antharis is poisoned at Papia:
The Huns invade Italy and France, the Emperor goes against them but was forced
to return. In 597 a dreadful Comet is seen at Constantinople, the Elements seem
to burn in Poland, a fiery lance is seen in the Heavens at Rome; An horrible
Earthquake in Palestine; A sign in the Heavens like a sword flamed thirty days
together; A Comet was seen for a month together at Jerusalem. Soon after the
Sclavi wast Thrace: The Britains and Scots invade the Saxons; France and
Poland are miserably wasted; Brunchild a Daughter of the Royal Blood of France,
being found guilty of the death of Ten Kings, she is tied by the hair of the
head, and by the Arms to wild horses, and torn to pieces; The Romans and
Persians differ, and the Emperor is defeated in Thrace.

XV. In 639 was an Earthquake at Antioch, and Horsemen were seen in the Air in
Muscovia, and blood rained at Naples; A wonderful storm at Constantinople which
spoiled the Fields and Gardens, a fiery Dragon was seen in the Air there also;
After this the Saracens or Turks become Lords of all Mesopotamia; Sigebert King
of the East Angles dies; Dagobert becomes sole Monarch of France, the Pope is
imprisoned at Constantinople, and afterward banished and starved. In 674
appeared so horrible a fire, and a Rainbow in the Element, that many cried out
the world was at an end, this was accompanied with Rain, Thunder and Lightning,
which slew both Men and Beasts in Italy. This year the Saracens besieged
Constantinople, and the s^ege continued 7 years, till at last thirty thousand
of them were slain, and their Fleet is fired by Cariniceus who revolted from
them; Bamba warreth against the French; Egbert of Kent dies; King Lothari is
slain with a dart; The Goths overcome the Gascoigns. In 687 there was a very
great Comet at Christmas and several Mocksuns were seen in England, the next
year it rained blood seven days together through all Britain. In Campania
Wheat rained from Heaven, also Barley and Pulse in other parts of Italy, two
Comets of great magnitude were seen this year; It rained blood seven days
together through all Britain, and the milk, cheese and butter turned into
blood. Soon after happened great controversy in Rome about a new Pope: The King
of Scots is slain by the Picts: The Emperor defeateth the Sclavonians: Kenwin
the West Saxon dies; The French enter into Germany, and subdue the Bavarians
and Almains: Italy began to choose themselves several Dukes this year. In 735 a
most Prodigious Hail fell in England: Fire was seen to flame in the Heavens at
Rome. About this time Gregory the great being sent to the Emperor at
Constantinople about some Ecclesiastical Affairs, at his return to Rome the
River Tyber swelled to such an immeasurable height, that it ran over the Walls
of the City, and drowned a great part of it, breaking into diverse great houses,
and overthrowing many Ancient Monuments, flowing into the Granaries that
belonged to the Church, and carried away many thousand measures of Wheat;
Presently after which inundation there came down the River an innumerable
company of Serpents, and amongst the rest one so monstrous that it was as big
as a great beam, all which swimming down the River into the Sea, were there
choked, and their Carcasses being cast upon the shore, rotted there, by the
stink whereof the Air was inf^^^ed, so that a dreadful Plague followed, whereof
the (...) many Thousands; Yea Arrows were visibly seen s^^ (...) Heaven, and
whoever was struck with them d^ed immediately, and among others Pelagius Bishop
of Rome. This Judgment so raged in the City that many houses were wholly
emptied of their Inhabitants. An inundation likewise happened in Constantinowe;
Oil raired in Spain, a Comet appeared in the fashion of a sword. Cro^^^ fell
from Heaven upon men's Garments; An Earthquake in Palestim; Fire rained from
Heaven in many parts of France; The French about this time enter the
territories of the Goths, and destroy their Ca^^^es; A mighty Pestilence in
Constantinople for three years, which devoured so many that they wanted men to
bury their dead; Selred the East-Saxon is slain; The Emperor beats the Saracens
in Cyprus, the Huns General slain in Transylvania.

XVI. In 761 in the month of September happened a very great Eclipse of the
Sun; A Blazing Star was seen in the East for many days together; This year the
King of Scotland invadeth Northumberland, and is slain; There was a Rebellion
in Galloway; The Bulgarians invade the Empire. Dominico the great Duke is
deposed by the Venetians for his Tyranny, and his eyes put out. About this time
the Turks brake forth from the Caspian Sea, and there was such an extraordinary
cold Winter that the Euxine Sea was frozen thirteen foot thick, and men walked
on the sea for an Hundred Miles into the Sea; Yea all the Countries from Lycia
to Danubius, and on the other ^^de as far as to Euphrates were so joined
together by the Frost as if they had been all one Continent; And at the end of
Winter began a very dry Summer, so that the Fountains of water were dried up;
Some pieces of Ice as big as Mountains fell upon, and beat down the Walls of
several Cities; Stars were seen falling from Heaven, so that men thought the
end of the world had been come. In 778 was another great Eclipse of the Sun;
Armies of men were seen in the Heavens in France. This year it rained blood,
also Earth and Ashes fell from Heaven at Rome: There were Meteors in the Air
like unto fiery Serpents, which fell in many parts of England. Soon after
Telerick King of Bulgaria is expelled by his people. King Etheldred flies from
England: King Aswald is Murdered by Siga: The Emperor slayes Six Thousand
Saracens. In 794 the River of Tiber overflows its Banks, and does much
prejudice, a very great Earthquake happened in Creet and Constantinople; the
event was, that Alphonsus King of Spain killed Seventy Thousand of the Moors,
and took Lisbon in Portugal from them. The Danes invade England, but almost all
of them perish; The Armenian Legions rebel. In 798 the Sun was darkened for
seventeen days together; This year Irene the Empress of Constantinople first
governed the Empire with her son Constantius: but she afterward deposed him,
put out his eyes, and lastly murdered him. In 808 the Sun and Moon were
Eclipsed contrary to nature; Armies of Men appear in the Heavens; The Star
Mercury is seen in the Sun like a black spot; Blood rained in Holland; At this
time, the Picts wast Scotland; The Bulgarians kill six thousand Greeks, and
take Sardis; The Danes subdue Friezland, the Saracens disperse themselves into
diverse Countries under six Princes. In 820 a great and wonderful storm of Rain
fell, which rotted all the Corn in the Fields, and such mighty floods and
inundations followed, that hindered the Contrymen from sowing their seed;
Fiery apparitions were often seen in the Elements; The effects that followed
were, a great Famine and Pestilence in France: The King of England is slain by
the East Angles; Asia is wasted, Constantinople besieged; and Reyner King of
Denmark is expelled his Kingdom.

XVII. In the year 840 sparks of fire like Stars were seen to run up and down
the Heavens: A great Comet appeared, and the Sun was much Eclipsed, swarms of
Bees were seen at Westchester in England: This year was prodigious for many
wonderful Earthquakes, Hails, Whirl-winds, Thunders and Lightnings which
happened in most parts of the world. Soon after, the people of Spain rebel, the
Scots overcome the English who aided the Picts: The Saracens are overcome by
the Emperor, and soon after Lothair their King with his Brethren, and one
hundred thousand men were slain. The Danes enter the Thames with two hundred
and fifty ships, and take Canterbury and London, and expel the King of England.
In 870 were great Hail, Thunders and Lightning at Rome: a Church at Worms burnt
by it, an Earthquake in England: In Brixia near Italy, it rained blood for
three days and three nights together; At this time the Danes were beaten out
of Holland, and the Saracens out of Italy: The Danes land in Scotland, and
challenge Pictland for their King. In 882 the Sun was so much obscured that the
Stars appeared in the Sky in the day time. There was an Earthquake in Normandy,
and a Blazing Star hung just over Spain; Now the Britains invaded Scotland,
Constantine their King was killed: The Saracens break into Italy, and are
expelled by the Emperor. In 912 four Rainbowes were seen at once in Scotland:
Fiery Torches are seen in the Air; Many great floods happened in Saxony; A
great Comet, and Stars were seen to run glittering to and fro in the Heavens.
Diverse Mocksuns were visible in Italy and Spain; This Winter was very wonderful
for excessive cold; The Sun appears for certain days as if it bled, three
Comets for a fortnight together were seen just over Germany; About this time
the Vandals invade Greece, and the Saracens, Calabria, and take many Cities in
Italy; the Emperor dies, his death being judged to be occasioned by his losses
to the Hungarians; The Pope is imprisoned and strangled; The Scots assist the
Danes, but are overcome; Gonsalvo poysoneth Sancho King of Spain. The Russians
in a malicious manner persecute the Christians; The French King and the Emperor
are reconciled, and diverse Conspirators against the Emperor are executed.

XVIII. The year 956 produced many strange prodigies, as a wonderful hail at
Oxford in England; strange Lightning, killing many Priests in France; Mighty
Thunders, Tempests, etc. Soon after the Hungarians invade the Emperor, but are
reconciled to him. The Bishop of Strasburg calls one hundred thousand
Hungarians into Batavia; they are all slain there, and the Emperors eyes plucked
out; The Italians make war with the Pope. In 968 Fire falls from Heaven, there
was a great Earthquake in France, a Comet appeared, there was wonderful
increase of Vermin, as Rats, Mice, etc. This year the Empress murders the
Emperor Nicephorus: Donald murdered the King of Scotland for refusing to
pardon a thief of his acquaintance. In 979 was an Earthquake in Scotland;
Armies of Fire were seen a whole night together in the Air; A Child was born in
Rome with two heads, not long after Harold King of Denmark is slain by an
arrow: The Danes land in Scotland, and wast diverse places, the Scots put them
to flight, they land in Kent, and spoil the Isle of Thanet. In 992 Fire rises
out of the River Rhine (says my Author) and burns many places in Germany. In
Spain three swords appeared in the Heavens like fire; Now the Duke of Bavaria
dies; The Danes invade England with a very great Fleet: the King of Denmark is
slain by one of his own servants. In 1002 a Fountain of water in Lorrain is
turned into blood. A Comet very horrible to behold was seen, casting out flames
of fire on every side; The Danes being routed at Oxford fly to the Church, and
are there all burnt: The Emperor Otho is poisoned with a pair of Gloves. In
1022 swarms of Locusts came into France. It rained milk at Rome, there was a
very great Eclipse of the Sun, and this year the weather was so unseasonable
that many dyed through too much heat; Diverse Polonians rebel against the
Christians; The Emperor overcomes the Greeks in Italy, the Polanders subdue
Ruisia, and make it tributary; The Vandals wast Saxony, and take Brandenburg.
In 1043 five Suns at once appeared in England, and a hairy Comet very large was
visible, the Emperor overcame the Russians, who invaded his territories. A
great Famine happened in Germany and France; The Prussians invade Poland, and
fifteen thousand of them are slain, and twenty thousand taken Prisoners; The
Irish and Welsh enter the River Severn, and do a great deal of harm. In 1033
when the Pope (the great Antichrist) was come to his height, and the darkness
of superstition and Idolatry had overspread the Christian world, upon June 29
at six a Clock in the Morning, the Sun began to be Eclipsed, continuing till 8
a Clock in a very strange manner, the body of the Sun was of the Color of a
Sapphire, so that the Countenances of men looked pale and wan as if they were
dead, and whatsoever was in the Air seemed of a yellow Saffron Color to the
great terror of all men. Imper. Hist.

XIX. There was a great increase of Rats and Mice in the year 1058; And stones
of a mighty bigness mixed with Hail fell from Heaven, and killed many, two
Blazing Stars this year hung over Poland; The Saxons rebel against the Emperor,
twenty six thousand are drowned in a Pitfall by the stratagem of two Bishops in
Holland, as they came against the Earl of Flanders. In 1064 a little before the
coming of the Normans to this Kingdom about the Feast of Easter, there was seen
for a week together a Blazing Star of an hideous and fearful form, which
occasioned in men's minds a fore-feeling of some dismal events. In 1076 three
Suns at once were seen in Naples. A fiery Dart ran up and down in the Heavens,
in Italy women appeared in the Air of admirable shapes, which mightily amazed
the Beholders. The Emperor deposes the Pope, and the Pope him, and also
excommunicateth him; The Turks take Rhodes and Cyprus: The Hollanders overcome
the Frisons: Northumberland in England is wasted. In 1086 a great inundation
happened in Italy; Four Moons were seen at once in France and England: Many
tame Fowl became perfectly wild; In Flanders a fiery Dragon was seen flying in
the Air, casting flames out of his mouth: shortly after followed the burning
Plague, called Ignis sacer or Holy fire. The Saxons defeat the Emperor, the
Turkish Emperor dies, King William the Conqueror dies, Prince Edmund and
Ethelred are banished Scotland by Donald their Uncle, and dye in England. In
1094 a fiery dart was visible in the Heavens, which through its violence flew
from North to South; There was a great Earthquake in England: Horrible noises
and strange groanings were heard in the Earth about Rome. Soon after the King
of Poland being envied by his Nobles causes many of them to be banished, Pedro
of Spain takes Osca, and kills thirty thousand Moors; The English invade
Normandy again; Bretislaus gains the Kingdom of Bohemia by the aid of the
Hungarians. The year 1101 was very remarkable for Monsters; Syracuse in Sicily
is shaken with an Earthquake; Three Suns, a Sword and Crown, are seen in the
Air in Germany, and likewise a Comet of wonderful bigness, after this Conradus
the Emperor dies in Italy: The Russians invade Poland, but are expelled by
Boleslaus; In England the Earl of Shrewsbury warreth against King Henry 1. The
Earl of Flanders takes Cambray; A League is concluded between the English and
Scots. In 1106 a great Comet appears for fifty days together; The Emperor
Henry 4. dies, as supposed of grief, that his Son had lately rebelled against
him; About the same time, which was when the Christians were engaged in
Palestine in the Holy War for the recovery of Jerusalem, three Suns appeared,
one on each side the true, but smaller both in quantity and light, a great
white circle invironing them, and in it a Rainbow of four Colors, the Bow
being toward the Sun, and reaching to the other two Suns, and shortly after the
Stars of Heaven seemed to ram.

XX. In 1116 fiery Armies in the Heavens were seen in Germany, with many
Earthquakes, and very great Whirlwinds, then Bruges in Flanders was burnt,
Poland was wasted; And the Emperor is Excommunicated by the Pope. In 1135 was a
very great inundation in Flanders, Holland and Freizeland, in England was a
great Earthquake, and Whirlwinds happened in France, the light of the Sun
appears sensibly to fail and decay; Now many people perished in Flanders: Judea
is miserably wasted by the Saracens; Henry I. King of England surfeits of
Lampreys and dies; Baldwin de Rivers fortifies Exeter against King Stephen, he
is taken and banished. In 1147 were great Thunders at Rome, and an Earthquake
in England; Several Globes of Fire were seen in the Heavens, a multitude of
small worms were vi^^^e; it rained blood, and there were strange Lightnings at
Rome; Ling Lew^s of France about this time invades Syria, he (...) taken
Prisoner by the Greeks, but rescued by the ^^ing of Sic^^y: Al^^^^s^s King of
Spain took L^sbon and St. Iren from the Moors, the King of Sueden is slain,
and soon after King Stephen of England dies. in 1158 a very great Pillar of
fire appeared in the Heavens in Germany; There was a great Eclipse of the Su^^;
Two Dragons were seen to fight in the Air in (...). This year the Emperor goes
against the A^^^^^s; The Pope submits to the Emperor, but soon after repents
thereof, and excommunicateth him; The Venetians deny aid to the Greek Emperor
against the King of Sicily. In 1169 there appeared three Suns, and three Moons
beside the true ones, and also a Comet, there happened likewise a very great
Earthquake; not long after, the Sultan of Egypt is flain by Syraconus; The
English invade Cumberland: Malcolm King of Scots dies; Catania in Sicily is
destroyed and nineteen thousand People are swallowed up by an Earthquake, The
Romans raze the City of Alba.

XXI. In 1178 there was a wonderful inundation in ^^gland; Two Armies were seen
in the Heavens in Italy to fight a fierce battle; The Sun was this year greatly
Eclipsed; At which time the English and Scots quarrel; The Spaniards take
several places from the Fr^^ch; Wars were between the French and Flemmings. In
1185 was another very great Eclipse of the Sun, and likewise a great
Earthquake; also an Eclipse of the Moon, ^^d Armies were seen in the air in
Greece, surrounded with fire; At this time, the Moors were defeated by the
Spaniards, and their King slain; The greatest part of Bruges in Flanders was
burnt; Baldwin the fifth King of Jerusalem was poisoned by his Mother; A
rebellion happened in England; The Greeks lose 70 sail of Ships by Pirates. In
1198 great stones fall from Heaven, there was an Earthquake in the East, which
overthrew many Cities; It rained blood in England; Two fiery swords are seen in
the Heavens in Spain; Soon after the Kings of Castille and Aragon invade Navar;
The Sultan (...) Iconi^^^ is swallowed up by an Earthquake; About this time
says A. B Spot^wood, Adam Bishop of Cathness was barbarously used by some
wicked people suborned by the Earl of Cathnes; He was assaulted at his own
house, and his servant with a Monk who did ordinarily attend him were killed,
the Bishop was by force drawn into his Kitchen, and when they had scourged him
with Rods, they let the Kitchen on fire, and burnt him therein. King Alexander
2 was at that time upon his Journey toward England, and ^having notice of this
cruel fact, turned back, and went in haste to Cathnes, where he brought the
Offenders, and their Partakers to Trial; Four Hundred by public sentence were
executed, and all their Male-Children gelt, that no succession should spring
from such wicked seed; and the place where there Genitals were cast is to this
day called, the Stony-Hill; The Earl because he did not help to rescue the
Bishop, had his Estate forfeited, but yet he did not escape divine vengeance,
being murdered by some of his own Servants, who conspired to kill him, and to
conceal the Fact, set the House on fire, and burnt his body, whereby he was
paid home in the same measure he had used to the Bishop. A. B. Spotswood
History Scotland. Page 110.

XXII. In the year 1212 a dreadful Comet appeared for 18 days together; Shapes
all bloody were seen in the Heavens; A Star with a Cross and an half Moon was
visible in Italy; Not long after the Spaniards kill Two Hundred Thousand Moors;
The Pope gives away England from King John to Prince Philip of France, who
lands there, and striveth for it; The Flemish with the English take three
hundred sail of Ships from him, and burn an hundred more; The King of Aragon is
slain, William King of Scots, and soon after King John both dye. In 1234 a
great Eclipse of the Sun happened, and strange sights appeared in the Moon, for
whereas she usually seems round, she now visibly appeared with six squares; The
Sun was darkened so much that the Stars were seen; This year the King of
Bulgaria puts out the Emperors eyes; Vienna is subjected to the Empire;
Constantinople is besieged by the Turks, but released by the Venetians; King
Henry III. of England and his Nobles quarrel but are reconciled; The King of
Poland dies. In 1243 was a great Comet fearful to behold, A Hill of a vast
greatness removes it self out of its place; A noise like Trumpets is heard in
the air in Italy; These were followed by a great Plague in Greece, and a
miserable Famine in Constantinople, the King of the Cumans is slain, and the
Turks take Jerusalem, and kill many Prisoners. In 1255 a great Comet appeared;
Strange Lightning fell from Heaven; The Sea overflowed in many places in
England; Dismal and strange noises are heard in the air; At this time the
Geneveses take Venice, and are expelled again; The Duke of Lithuania invadeth
Prussia; five petty Kings are expelled Spain, the Venetians take Padua:
E^^^line comes thither, and kills twelve thousand Citizens. Not long after
Henry III. King of England dies. In 1277 there was a very great Rain about the
Rhine in Germany, the Sky was as bright in Poland at midnight as if it had been
noon day, Four Suns were seen in Russia, and there was an Earthquake in
England; Now the Turks won all the lesser Asia from the Greeks: The Pope is
killed by a fall, the Emperor slayes fourteen thousand Bohemians: King Edward
I. of England forces the Welsh to a Peace. In 1285 a great Earthquake happened
in Italy; A Comet of notable greatness was seen this year: A great swarm of
diverse colored Flies, and mighty floods of waters were in England: There was
likewise about this time a battle or fight of Dogs in France (says Mr. Camden)
at a place called Genelon Castle, wherein every one killed another being in
number about Three Thousand, no Dog escaping alive but only one; Upon this
followed the Invasion of Denmark by the Norwegians; Hungaria is ruined by the
Cumans, the Helvetians war against the Emperor, but are subdued; The King of
Sicily dies, and there was a great battle fought between the English and Scots,
wherein many of the Scots were slain, the Sun the same day appeared as red as
blood as long as the fight continued.

XXIII. Lances and Darts of fire were seen in the Heavens in the year 1300, a
great Snow fell, and a Comet of a wonderful magnitude appeared; In Germany Men
and Horses were visible in the Air; At this time the English beat the Scots;
The Turks invade the German Empire, and commit great mischiess, the Pope writes
himself, Universal Lord in Spirituals and Temporals. Flanders is invaded, and
many Nobles are taken Prisoners: Andrew King of Hungary dies. In 1310 was an
Earthquake in England: The Elements seem to burn many days together; A Boy was
born with four Arms, and two Bodies; Soon after the Polonians subdue Pomerania.
The Isle of Rhodes is taken from the Turks, Robert Bruce King of Scotland
wastes that Country, and drives out the English, the Earl of Cornwall is
banished, and the Emperor burns Brixia. In 1322 the Sun in England for six
hours together appeared like blood. There was a great Earthquake in Germany,
and two Crosses appeared in the Heavens, and a fiery Circle was seen about the
Sun; At this time the Scots oppose King Edward II. of England, and put him to
flight; The King of Bohemia conquers Silesia, and diverse places in Lusatia: The
Emperor is taken in battle, and imprisoned 3 years. The King of England dies.
In 1337 were two Comets seen together, one of which continued four Months, the
other but three: Blood rained in Rome, wonderful flocks of Crows and Daws were
seen in Germany; The Lithuanians burn themselves, their Wives, Children and
Goods to avoid taking; The French burn Southampton: The Scythians wast Thrace,
and take many Captives: the King of Sicily dies. About this time there
happened a fearful Earthquake in the City of Venice, which overturned diverse
Steeples and Palaces, and among other dreadful Effects, it caused many hundred
women to miscarry in Childbirth, and a terrible Plague sollowed it, which
reduced the City to such an height of misery, that it was almost depopulated,
whereupon the Senate made a Decree, that as many as would come to dwell at
V^^ice, should after they had continued there two years be free Ci^^^ens. In
1341 a terrible Comet with many other apparitions were seen in the Heavens: The
Emperor A^^ronious about this time suffered death in an unheard of Tragical
manner. And the next year (says Mr. Camd^n) October 11, when the Moon was
eleven days old, there were seen two Moons at Dablin in Ireland, the one
according to the ^ourse of nature in (...) West, the other in the East, casting
but a mean and slender Light. In 1348 Diverse Mocksuns appeared in the Sky, and
the Heavens seemed to burn; There were several small Beasts rained from the
Elements in the Eastern parts of the World: There followed a great Piague in
England, the English beat the Scots, and recover much from them; The Po^anders
^^solutely conq^er Russia. In 1365 armed men were seen in the Heavens in
England, and fiery ^ance^ in Italy, Grasshoppers cover Switzerland like Snow.
Soon after the Russians who rebelled in P^land were s^bdued; The King of France
is ex^^lled his Kingdom; The King of Sweden is taken Prssoner in Dattel: the
T^rks expel the Christians from Adrianople. In 1375 a Comet with a beard was
seen many nights together in the Heavens: Grasshoppers eat up all the green
things in France: Mighty inundations in Germany, and a very great Earthquake
there; After this five thousand Houses were burnt at Gaunt, and seventeen other
Towns in Flanders drowned, the Christians kill twenty thousand Turks in Bosnia
by a stratagem: The Scots burn Roxborough, there were great Calamities in
Italy; Prince Edward, commonly called the Black Prince dies, and not long
after Edward III. King of England: The French take the Isle of Wight, and burn
Rye and Hastings. In 1378 a general Plague in a most miserable manner invaded
the greatest part of the world: It raged most among young Persons and Children;
In the City of Lubeck only in Germany, it swept away ninety thousand persons:
there dyed of it in several places, of barefooted Friars one Million, two
hundred forty four thousand four hundred thirty four. The Jews were said to
have poisoned the Fountains of water, for which they were every where seized
upon and burned; About the same time likewise it rained blood, and two
Mountains were swallowed up by an Earthquake, strange fires, flames, and a
burning beam were seen in the Air.

XXIV. In 1382 A. Bishop Ceurtney appointed a Convocation to be held in London,
principally against Wickliff, and those who declared against the many
corruptions of the Romish Church, at which time this memorable accident fell
out, when they were all met together at the Gray-Friers in London just at that
very instant when they were beginning there business against Wickliff, there
fell out a wonderful, and terrible Earthquake throughout all England, whereupon
diverse of the Bishops being affrighted with the terror of it, thought good to
leave off their further proceeding therein. In 1388 a Blazing Star appeared in
the Heavens, which burned for two Months together; At Oxford the Image of a
head spoke thus, Caput decidetur etc. The head shall be cut off: The head shall
be lift up: The feet shall be elevated above the Head; This was followed by a
Sedition in Oxford among the Scholars, many of whom dislike the Government; an
Army of Forty Thousand are raised by the Duke of Gloucester, Earls of Warwick,
Derby and Nottingham: Fifty Thousand Christians are slain in the Plains of
Casovia, very great Factions are at this time in France. In 1390 a great Comet
appeared, after which King John of Castile dyed with a fall from his horse;
Presently after John Hus and Jerome of Prague oppose the Pope; Mary Queen of
Hungary dies. In 1399 a running River in Bedfordshire divides it self, a
Blazing Star was visible this year which shot wonderful Beams of fire from it.
About this time Scotland is wasted by the English; The Frizons in Holland
rebel; King Sigismund executed 32 of the Nobles in Hungary; The Pope is
imprisoned by the King of France: the Duke of Hereford being banished, returns
into England, and soon after King Richard II is deposed and murdered, the Duke
succeeding by the name of King Henry IV. In 1402 a mighty Comet was seen in the
Heavens, and so the year after: at this time Tamerlane Emperor of the Tartars
enters Asia, calling himself Iram Dei, and Vastitatem Terrae: The wrath of God,
and the Destroyer of the earth. He kills Two Hundred Thousand Turks, takes
Baj^zet Prisoner, shackles him, and puts him in an ^ron Cage, and earries him
Captive through all As^a, making him his Footstool when he ascended his horse;
John Hus is condemned, and burnt for an Heretic at Constans: In 1415 strange
Prodigies were seen in Britain, a Dragon encountering a Lion in the air: armies
of fire were seen fighting, and one party overcoming in the Heavens, a great
Eclipse of the Sun, at which time the English fight with the French under King
Henry V. at Agincourt, the French lose twenty thousand men ten thousand b^^ng
killed upon the place, and as many taken Prisoners: Pope Gregory dies, the
English invade Norman^^: The King of Spain sells the Canaries to the King of
Sevil, the Valentians are made Tributary to the Turks. In 1421 another Comet
appears in the Heavens; King Henry V. of England dies, and the next year
Charles VI. King of France dies, Zisca routs the Emperors Forces; and burns
Cathna, which place for the sake of the Silver Mines, he called The Purse of
Antichrist, he commanded that after his death his skin should be flead off, and
put upon a drum, supposing that as he had been victorious against his enemies
while he lived, so that might have the same effect against them after his
decease. Not long before this there was such a terrible Earthquake at Lar in
Persia as overthrew Five Hundred Houses.

XXV. Very great Snows fell in Germany in the year 1428, and a mighty
Earthquake happened in Italy: The Winter was wonderful cold, especially in all
the Northern Countries; after this the Danes spoil Thirty Ships of great value
which belonged to the Vandals and Hambnrgers, the Turks take Thessalonica from
the Venetians; The English lose much in France. In 1439 a Comet of a mighty
magnitude is seen in Poland; Swarms of Bees in England go in progress, a great
Earthquake happened in Hungaria. Soon after an Universal Pestilence rages
throughout the whole world; Albertus the Emperor dies, and likewise the King
of Bohemia: The Marshal of France is burnt for Sorcery and Witchcraft; Amurath
the Great Turk wastes Hungary, but is at last expelled by Corvinus Huniades; The
French are twice beaten by the English in Normandy; The Polanders wast Silesia.
In 1450 another great Comet appeared, Amurath Emperor of the Turks dies at the
siege of Croia: Scanderbeg the great overcomes Mustapha his Competitor.

XXVI. In the month of June 1456 appeared two Comets, and the same year, August
24 there happened most tempestuous winds in Tuscany, such as never had been
before heard of, which wrought most mavelous and memorable effects, for an
hour before day, there arose from the Sea toward Ancona a great and dark cloud
crossing Italy, and entering the Sea toward Pisa stretching two Miles in
compass; This storm was furiously carried either by natural or supernatural
force, and seemed divided into many parts, as it were fighting among
themselves, and of those broken clouds, some were hoised up toward Heaven, some
violently cast down, and others with wonderful speed were turned round, but
always before these Clouds, came a Wind, with Lightnings and flashings of fire,
such as cannot be expressed, of these broken and confused Clouds, and of those
furious Winds and great Flames, there grew so strange a noise as moved the
People to greater fear than any Earthquake or Thunder ever had done, insomuch
that every man thought the World was ended, and that the Earth, the Water, and
the Heavens would have returned to its first Chaos and Confusion, this fearful
storm wheresoever it passed wrought mavelous and wonderful offects, but the
most remarkable of all, happened about the Castle of St. Cassiano; This Castle
is built upon a Hill, which parts the vales of Pisa and Greive, 8 Miles
distant from Florence; Betwixt this Castle and the Town of St. Andrea built
upon the same Hill, this furious Tempest passed, not coming to St. Andrea, but
at St. Cassiano threw down diverse Turrets and Chimnies, and near to it
subverted whole houses even to the ground, and carried away the roofs of the
Churches of St. Martino a Bagnolo, St. Maria della pace, whole, bearing them
from thence unbroken above a Mile, one man a Carrier was taken up, and in the
Valley near the Highway both he and his Mules were found dead: Also all the
greatest Oaks, and ^strongest Trees which would not bend at the fury of the
Tempest, were not only blown down, but violently carried from the places where
they grew. The next day after this horrible tempest, when some of the
Inhabitants, who fled for fear thereof, returned, they were strangely
astonished, for they found the Country desolate, and laid wast, the houses and
temples overthrown, the people lamenting at the sight of their houses being
blown down, and under them their Goods, their Cattle, and their Parents slain,
which occasioned wonderful compassion in the beholders and hearers thereof, by
this means it pleased God rather to threaten than punish Tuscany, for if so
great a Tempest had fallen upon any City full of Houses, as it fell upon these
Oaks and Trees, and small Houses one far from another, without all doubt the
destruction would have been greater then the mind of man could have conceived;
But it pleased God by that small example to revive in men's minds the memory of
his power. The same year there perished about Pivel and Naples forty thousand
People by an Earthquake; Mahomet the Great Turk is beaten from the siege of
Belgrade by Hunniades, who soon after dies; Ladislaus King of P^land and
Alphonsus King of Naples both dye. Matchiavil Hist. Florence Lib. 6.

XXVII. In 1460. a most terrible Comet appeared to fight; This year King Henry
VI. of England is made Prisoner at Northampton: The Civil Wars in France begin;
Charles VII. King of France and Adolphus Duke of Holsatia both dye; Cra^ovia a
great City in Poland is destroyed ^^ith Fire and Sword: Mahomet II. Emperor of
the Tarks after many victories, cruelly kills David the Emperor of Trapezund
and his two sons: the Duke of York is slain at the battle of Wakefield in
Yorkshire. In 1477 a Blazing Star of the color of the Star Saturn appeared:
there ensued a most terrible Plague: The Helvetians killed seventeen thousand
French, and Charles Duke of Burgundy: The Turks wast Carinthia, and the
Tarta^^, Pod^lia. In 1484 happened a wonderful deep Snow in Germany, and fiery
darts were seen in the Sky, the Sun was likewise much Eclipsed. In England
three Suns appeared about this time, and in Poland there was seen (says my
Author) an Image of Christ Crucified with a Sword in his hand, passing along
the Air from West to South for two hours together: The English invade Scotland
but are repulsed; The Venetians make war against the Turks: The quarrel
continues in Germany about the Archbishopric of Mentz; A Rebellion was raised
in France against the Queen for the Princes death. In 1470 Hail of wonderful
greatness fell at Rome, the stones whereof weighed eight ounces, in Germany
Hailstones fell as big as Goose eggs; Soon after the Turks take Sabotz in
Hungary, and wast Germany: The King of Sicily with the Venetians fight against
them, and spovl Leshos and Pergamus.

XXVIII. In the Year 1478 the Sun is darkened without an Eclipse, swarms of
Grasshoppers are seen in Italy; A Glorious Star is seen to run along the
Firmament; Armies are observed fighting in the Air in Switzerland; After this
the Hungarians defeat the Turks, and take Thirty Thousand Captives from them;
The Spanish Inquisition is first instituted in Castile against the Mo^s and
Jews; The Transilvanians overcome the Turks; About this time King Charles VIII,
of France marched into Italy with an Army for the Conquest of the Kingdom of
Naples, a little before which, were many strange Prodigies, whereby diverse
Persons foresaw, and foretold, that there would be greater changes, and more
horrible accidents than in many years before had happened in any part of the
world. For there were seen in the night at Poville in Italy three Suns in the
midst of the Firmament, and many Clouds about them which sent forth most
dreadful Thunders and Lightnings. In the Territory of Aretzo were manifestly
seen in the Air infinite numbers of armed men upon mighty Horses with a
terrible noise of drums and Trumpets; The Images of the Saints (says my
Author) did plainly sweat in many parts of Italy; In several places diverse
Monsters were brought forth, both of women, and other Creatures, with many
other things against the order of nature, which happened almost all at one time
in diverse places; And whilst the French Army was in the City of Millain, there
happened an accident of no less wonder than fear, which extremely astonished
the Soldiers, as if the Heavens by manifest signs had forewarned them of their
future calamities; For upon St. Peter's day, the Sun being set, and the Air and
Firmament clear, there fell down from Heaven a Light, and a Fire just before
the Gate of the Castle, where at that time stood many barrels of Powder, which
were brought out of the Castle to be sent to other Places; This Flash of fire
seized upon the Powder, with an horrible noise, by the violence whereof the
fair Tower of Marble which was over the Gate, on the top of which stood a
stately Clock, was thrown down, and rased from the very Foundation to the top
thereof; In which fury the Walls and Chambers of the Castle, with other
buildings adjoining to the Tower had the same fate; Yea in one instant the
whole body of the Castle, and the whole City of Milain trembled and shook with
the fury of the blow, which carried into the Air from several places many great
and huge stones, which in their fall hurt and slew diverse Persons; And as in a
common calamity a multitude have a share, so it fell out here, for many who had
escaped the fall of the stones, were overwhelmed by the ruins of the Walls,
under which they were smothered and pressed to death; with these ruins the
Castle green was so overspread and covered, that it was very dreadful to behold
such a sudden alteration, but it was mighty surprising even to the most
courageous to see stones of such an incredible bigness to be thrown with the
fury of the fire above five hundred paces from the place; This happened at that
very hour, wherein people of all sorts were walking for their Recreation upon
the Castle Green, whereby there were slain above five hundred men who belonged
to the Castle. Guichardines Hist. Italy. Page 785.

XXIX. In the year 1492 a great Comet is visible in the Heavens, Three Suns are
seen in Poland, another Comet appeared for two Months; In Rome the Sky was seen
to be on fire for many nights together; These were succeeded by great
Inundations and Floods in England; The English go against the French, the Jews
are expelled Spain. A Rebellion at Gaunt in Flanders: The Hungarians enter
Mysia, and return back with much booty; A rot of great Potentates; Pope
Innocent VIII. dies, Alphonsus King of Portugal dies by a fall from his Horse;
Frederick Emperor of Germany and Casimer King of Poland both dye; A great part
of Cracovia is burnt. In 1500 a great fiery Dragon, and of a monstrous shape is
seen in Savoy; A Comet of wonderful Magnitude appears for 18 days in Poland, an
Inundation in Germany; Soon after the King of Sweden, and the Queen of Bohemia
dye; The State of Millain rebel, and are suddenly subdued again; Next year
Prince Arthur Son to Henry VIII. dies, and the Wife of King Henry VII. of
England. The Turks take Modone, and many other places from the Venetians, and
destroy abundance of them, together with diverse French and Spaniards. In 1506
there appeared two Comets, the first on April 11. which lasted but five days;
the second in August following: Alexander King of Poland dies, together with
the King of Spain, and Philip the son of Maximilian the Emperor. In 1509 there
was a great and terrible Earthquake in Constantinople, and the Countries
thereabout, by the violence whereof a great part of the Walls of that City,
with many stately buildings both public and private were quite overthrown, and
thirteen thousand People overwhelmed, and destroyed therewith; The terror
thereof was so great, that Bajazet the Emperor himself, and the People
generally forsook their houses, and lay abroad in the Fields: It continued for
a Month together with very little intermission, after which ensued a great
Plague whereby that City was almost made desolate, there dying above an hundred
and threescore thousand people, Turkish Hist. Page 476.

XXX. The next year 1510, there happened a Prodigy which is very strange to
relate, for in this year (says my Author) there fell Twelve Hundred Stones
from Heaven, some weighing threescore pound, others more? Nay it is affirmed,
some of them weighed an Hundred and Twenty Pound, which if true, serves for a
good Argument to prove that some other Stars or Planets may be habitable
besides the Earth; At this time the Lubeckers wast Denmark, King Henry 8. goes
into France, and besieges Turwiu; Bajazet the Great Turk is poisoned: The
Spaniards take Tripoly, and make war in Navar: The Lubeckers worst the Danes at
Sea, the Switzers invade France, and do much mischief there. In 1512 there
appeared a great Comet in Leo: Pope Julius 2. and John King of Sweedland dye.
James 4. King of Scotland is slain at Flodden Field: The King of Poland being
at war with the Emperor of Muscovia, kills forty thousand of his men in a
pitched battle. In 1521 three Suns with a Rainbow were seen at Vienna in
Germany, and suddenly after a great burning Torch was visible in the Heavens
which continued a Month; A Circle and Cross appears with the Moon, and a
burning Pillar is seen in Germany: Soon after the Venetians aid the Hungarians
against the Turks: The French lose Millain; The English and French quarrel; The
Emperor invades Picardy in France: King- Henry 8. writes against the Pope.
Christian King of Denmark is expelled his Kingdom. In 1530 a Blazing Star of
wonderful greatness appeared, and was visible through all Europe. This year
four hundred and four Parishes were drowned by a great Inundation of the Sea in
Holland, with all their People and Cattle, the Turks take Buda in Hungary, the
Great Cardinal Woolsey dies, the English Clergy are fined, and pay to the King
an Hundred Thousand pound for diverse misdemeanors, the next year about
Fourteen Hundred Houses were overthrown by an Earthquake at Lisbon in Portugal,
and about six Hundred more so extremely shattered, that they were ready to
fall, and many of the Churches were thrown to the ground. In 1533 a very great
Comet was visible in the Heavens, this year Pope Clement 7 dies: Alphonsus Duke
of Ferrara, and the Duke of Millain dye, strange factions and seditions are
raised about Religion in Hungary; A great Plague at Noremburg in Germany. In
1538 a fiery Comet appeared in the Sign Pisces, with a long tail; Charles Duke
of Gelderland dies; This year was made famous for diverse things; For then the
Kingdom of Denmark embraced the Gospel; The Emperor and, King of France met
together to treat of Peace, the Bible was Printed in English at Paris, the
Overseer of which work was Bishop Bonner; The University of Strasburg was
erected: The Sect of the Antinomians was detected; The Duke of Brandenburg
embraced the Augustan Confession; The Sea upon the Coasts of the Kingdom of
Naples was wholly dry for eight Miles together, out of which Fire and Ashes
broke forth so abundantly that many places were miserably destroyed thereby.
This year Alexander Medices who was made by the Pope Duke of Florence, was
Married to Margaret Daughter of the Emperor Charles 5. the Nuptials were
celebrated with great Pomp, and Military Revels, at which time a great part of
the body of the Sun was darkened, whilst they were at the Feast, which much
astonished the Guests, and the very next year after, this Alexander was
murdered by his Kinsman Lorenzo Medices, who was always very great with him,
and privy to all his debaucheries. Strada Wars Low Countries.

XXXI. In 1539 a bloody Star and Cross were seen flying in the Air: Armed men,
swords and funerals were visible in the Heavens in Germany, there likewise
appeared a Blazing Star: This year John Duke of Cleve dies, a great fire
happened in Constantinople, which burnt the Jayl, and consumed seven hundred
Prisoners therein; John King of Hungary dies, the Irish invade the English; and
are beaten, George Duke of Saxony dies; The People of Gaunt in Flanders mutiny,
and behead their Magistrates; Isabella Empress of Germany dies, and shortly
after Katherine Queen of England is beheaded by King Henry 8. In 1545 a Comet
appeared in the West, in color like blood; Lodowick Prince Elector dies,
Martin Luther dies, and the next year a war in Germany breaks out. A bloody
French Massacre was now perpetrated: King Henry 8. of England, and Francis 1.
King of France both dye: The Earl of Surrey is this year beheaded in England.
In 1548 November 6 there was a great chasme, or opening in the Heavens, and in
some places fire fell to the Earth, and flew up into the Air again: This Jasper
Crucifiger saw, and thereupon much bewailed the great Commotions and Divisions
in the Church, which he foresaw by this Prodigy, and accordingly it came to
pass. In 1550 it rained Corn from Heaven in Carinthia; Three Suns were seen in
England an Earthquake and Globes of fire were visible in the Elements, Armies
of men appeared in the Air in Saxony: The Sun seemed to cleave asunder, after
this followed great troubles in Antwerp, and the sweating sickness in England.
The French make war with the Emperor, the Duke of Somerset in England is
beheaded, the Queen of Sweden dies, the Turkish Pirates carry six thousand
Christians into Captivity, out of the Isle of Gaul near Malta: The next year a
very great multitude of Men and Cattle were drowned by a terrible Tempest, the
Clouds suddenly dissolving, and the waters pouring down with such a stupendous
violence, that the strong and massy Walls of many Cities, with diverse
Vineyards, and fair Houses were destroyed thereby.

XXXII. That may be looked upon as a Prodigy in the highest degree, (says Mr.
John Gadbury) which my worthy friend Captain George Wharton in his Ephemeris
for the year 1655 has transcribed from one Tackius a German Doctor of Physic,
who likewise takes it out of one Casper; That in the year 1554 not far from the
City of Harmsted in Transylvania, there were observed in fair and legible
Characters to be read in the Heavens the following Letters. I. N. R. I. M. D.
L. V. I. I. A. R. E. I. N. E. N. D. E. D. I. S. E. S. R. E. I. C. H. S. Nay
that Author further affirms, that at Friburg in Germany the same year, on a
very fair day, Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum Iridi insidentem conspectum
fuisse; Our Lord Jesus Christ was beheld sitting upon a Rainbow, as if upon his
Tribunal, to denounce the Universal Judgment. In 1558 there was seen a Blazing
Star in Spain, at first somewhat dim, at which time Charles the 5th. Emperor
and King of Spain sickned, but as his disease increased, so it grew in bigness,
at last shooting its fiery streams point blank against the Monastery where he
lay, in the very hour the Emperor dyed the Comet vanished; The same year in the
Month of August, a Comet in the form of a spit appeared, of a pale envious
color, denoting a more then ordinary mortality of great Potentates; Queen Mary
of Hungary and Bohemia, and Queen Mary of England both dye: Christian the 2.
King of Denmark dies in Prison, after 26 years imprisonment: Henry 2. King of
France is slain by running at Tilt; Pope Paul 4. dies, and likewise the Dukes
of Venice and Ferrara, with fifteen Cardinals, besides many other Princes. In
1562 an Earthquake happened in Constantinople; Clashing of Weapons in the
Elements, and armed men seen there; Much Thunder was heard in England, and five
Suns seen in Holland; After this the English take many Towns in France; There
was a great Plague in England, the Muscovites invade Leiseland, and the Danes
and Lubeckers, Sweden, the Polanders beat the Livonians; Nine Thousand men were
slain at Dreux in Normandy, and among them the King of Navar; The same year
December 19. Mr. John Calvin lying in his bed sick of the Gout, it being
Sunday, and the North Wind having blown strongly for two days together, some
Friends coming to visit him, he said unto them; Truly I know not what is the
matter, but I thought that the last night I heard warlike Drums beating very
loud, and I could not persuade my self but it was so; Let us go to Prayers, for
surely some great business is at hand. And indeed this very day there was a
great Battle fought between the Papists and Protestants not far from Paris in
France, news whereof came to Geneva a few days after. Clarks Examp. 2 Part,
Page 564.

XXXIII. In 1568 were many Locusts in France; The Heavens seem all on fire in
Hungary. In England, when the true Moon was under the Earth, there appears a
Moon, and a Cross with a refulgent Star at the top thereof. Soon after the
Third Civil War in France began, the King of Sweden is deposed and imprisoned;
The Prince of Conde is taken and shot to death with a Pistol; The Earls of
Northumberland and Westmorland rebel against Queen Elizabeth; Selymus Emperor
of the Turks invadeth Cyprus; The Polanders and Danes fight at Sea. About this
time the Duke of Alva came first into the Low Countries, and the future
calamities of his Government, were presaged by a boy born at Liege, with two
heads, four legs, and as many hands, the terror whereof was increased by a fire
happening immediately after in the City of Mechlin, by a spark falling amongst
Gunpowder, which took hold of threescore Barrels, and caused such an horrid
Thunder and Earthquake, that in most of the Cities of Flanders the Men and
Houses trembled at the dreadful noise; Not long after when the Prince of Orange
brought an Army against the Duke, in the behalf of the Protestants, there were
seen in diverse places on a clear night two Armies in Battalia, brandishing
their glittering Pikes, as if they were ready for a charge; The next year a
Comet appears at the setting of the Sun, near the Planet Jupiter; Then followed
a Famine in Austria, Sweden, Bohemia, Bavaria, Rustia, Lithuania, Joachimus 2.
Elector of Brandenburg dies, and a little after Four Hundred Thousand People
are drowned in Flanders and Holland besides Cattle. In 1572 there appeared a
Comet or New Star in Cassiopeia, which continued Six teen Months. Soon after
which Charles 9. King of France, who was the Author of the bloody Massacre in
France, dyed of extraordinary bleeding, which issued from diverse parts of his
body, cursing and swearing in a most dreadful manner, says Mr. Camden in his
History of Queen Elizabeth. Sigismund King of Poland likewise dies; The Duke
of Norfolk in England is beheaded; A great Rebellion in Ireland.

XXXIV. In 1577 Another Blazing Star of great magnitude appeared; Sebastian
King of Portugal dyed the next year of two wounds which he received in his head
in his expedition for Africa. In 1579 a fiery Dragon, and great Troops of
Ravens flew through the Air in Germany; A mighty Tempest happened in Bohemia,
and an Earthquake in Holland; Armies are seen in the Heavens at Antwerp; Two
armed men are visible in the Air in Gelderland; That which followed was, the
Polanders take Livonia and Polotia from the Moscovite; The Popish Clergy are
expelled out of the City of Antwerp by the People; The Emperor forbids the
Protestant Religion at Aken; In 1585 a Comet appeared for many weeks together,
and the next year it rained Locusts in Thracia, and Ducks and Geese in Croatia,
as Leonclavius testifies, who was an eyewitness thereof; The Locusts fell in
such multitudes that they devoured all the Country, and on the contrary, the
Geese and Ducks fed and nourished many; Cluverius Hist. World. Soon after Osman
Emperor of the Turks, and Stephen King of Poland both dye. In 1593 there was
another terrible Earthquake at Lar in Persia, which overthrew Three Thousand
Houses, crushing to death above Three Thousand Persons in their Ruins: yea the
Castle though built upon the top of a solid Rock, groaned in the like
affrighting downfall; Herberts Travels. In 1598 Feb. 25 which was a little
before the Earl of Essex, went into Ireland, the Sun being almost totally
Eclipsed, it was so dark for the time that the like had never been seen in the
Memory of Man.

XXXV. In the year 1602, there was an Earthquake in England, a very great
Blazing Star appeared; Armies of men were seen in the Air in France; and warms
of Grasshoppers are visible in Germany; asster this the Spaniards invade
Ireland, but are beaten thence; The Swedes in vain attempt Livonia; The Turks
loose Alba Regalis, and therein Threescore Thousand men, Queen Elizabeth of
England dies. In 1607 another Comet appeared; There were great Wars between
the Swedes and Danes, and Charles Duke of Lorrain dies. In 1610 fiery Darts
and Lances were visible in the Heavens; Four Crosses appeared in the Air at
once in Spain; where likewise happened Thunder, and a very great Earthquake;
Now the Danes war against the Swedes: The Persians invade Babylon, and kill
Twenty Thousand Turks; Henry 4. ^^ing of France is murdered, the Polanders
overcome the Moscovites, and Nine Hundred Thousand Meors are banished out of
Spain. J. G. This year the strong City of Strignnium in Hungary being besieged
by the Turks, during the siege there appeared a dreadful fiery Meteor in the
Air in fashion much like a Rainbow, of a bloody red color, which arising some
height, and continuing for a space of time, at length vanished away. In 1611
three Suns were seen in the Firmament over Vienna in Germany and three years
after, the Heavens over the same Town grew so red, and soon after so fearfully
dark on a sudden, that the Inhabitants were much amazed, apprehending either
the last day was come, or that there would follow some horrible effusion of
blood. In 1616, about the same time, which was not many years before Frederick
Prince Elector Palatine was chosen King of Bobemia, about the midst of October,
there appeared in the Firmament over the City of Prague, a Crown which gave a
very great Light, and about it Armies of men fighting, as if it were who should
have it; diverse Mocksuns were seen in the West of England; An Inundation
happened in Holland: The Shape of an Elephant appeared in the Air in Germany; A
Lion was heard, (as my Author says) to roar in the Air, the Venetians at this
time make war with Ferdinand of Austria; The Hollanders beat the Spaniard in
the South Sea; The Tartars invade Podolia, burning four Cities, and four
hundred Villages, carrying with them thence much booty. J. Gad. of Comets.

XXXVI. In 1618 a mighty Blazing Comet appeared in the Heavens, it was first
seen November. 18. and continued till the December. 16. following, taking its
compass over most parts of the known world in twenty eight days time, and
sometimes extending its Blazing Locks forty five degrees in length; Toward its
Declination December 11 it passed over London, and so more Northwards, even as
far as the Orcades in Scotland; What miserable effects of war, ruin and
devastation followed thereupon over all Europe, (especially to Germany, of
which I shall give a more particular account hereafter) was obvious to all men;
There likewise was seen this year in the night over Constantinople a Comet in
the form of a crooked sword of a vast bigness, at the first appearance it was
somewhat whitish, but the higher it rose the redder it was, even like unto
blood; There were also strange sights seen in other places, inundations of
Rivers, and the Ocean, Earthquakes, monstrous births, waters turned into blood,
unusual and impetuous Winds and Tempests which overthrew several Towers, and
tore up many Trees by the Roots; Pleurs a Town in Rhetia near Switzerland was
overwhelmed by an Earthquake, a great Hill falling suddenly upon the City, and
destroyed Fifteen Hundred Persons. This year the Emperor Matthias, and soon
after his Empress, together with Anne Q. of England dye; J. Gad. of Prodigies.

XXXVII. Mr. Knowls in his Turkish History Page 1348 relates, that in the year
1620 there was a strange Apparition or Vision seen by the Turks at Medina,
where there Prophet Mahomet lies buried, which continued three weeks together,
and exceedingly terrified the whole Country; and it was this. About September
20 there fell a very great Tempest about midnight, attended with dreadful
Thunder, but when the Clouds were dispersed, and the Element clear, the People
might read in Arabic Characters these words in the Firmament, O why will ye
believe in Lies, and between two and three a Clock in the Morning there
appeared a Woman in white compassed about with the Sun, having a cheerful
countenance, and a Book in her hand, and over against her were Armies of Turks,
Persians, Arabians, and other Mahometans, in battle array ready to fight with
her, but she keeping her Station, only opened the book, at the sight whereof
the Armies fled away, and presently all the Lamps about Mahomets Tomb were put
out; For as soon as the Vision vanished, which was commonly an hour before
Sunrising, a murmuring wind was heard, unto which they imputed the
extinguishing of the Lamps. The ancient Pilgrims of Mahomets race (who after
they had visited this place never use to cut their Hair) were much amazed,
because they could not concieve the meaning of this Vision, only one of the
Dervices or Priests (which is a strict Religious Order among the Turks like the
Capuchins among the Papists, and live in Contemplation) stepped up very boldly,
and made the following Speech to the Company,

That the World had never but Three true Religions, every one of which had a
Prophet; First God chose the Jews, and did wonders for them in Egypt, and
brought them forth by their Prophet Moses, who prescribed them a Law, wherein
he would have maintained them, if they had not been obstinate and rebellious,
and fallen to Idolatry, whereupon he gave them over, and scattered them upon
the face of the Earth; Then presently after God raised a new Prophet, who
taught the Christian Religion: This good man the Jews condemned, and Crucified
for a Seducer of the People, being not moved with the piety of his Life, his
great miracles, nor his Doctrine: yet after his death, the preaching of a few
Fishermen did so move the hearts of men, that the Great Monarchs of the world
bowed to his very Title, and yielded to the commands of his Ministers; But it
seems they in process of time grew as corrupt as the Jews, their Church being
disjointed with the Title of Eastern, and Western, committing Idolatry again by
setting up Images, with many other idle Ceremonies, besides the corruption of
their Lives, so that God was weary of them too, and not only sent divisions
among them, but forsook them, and dispossessed them of their chiefest Cities,
Jerusalem and Constantinople; Yet God is still the Governor of the world, and
himself has raised up another Prophet and People, even our great Mahomet,
giving way to our Nation, so as no doubt we shall be happy for ever, if we can
serve this God aright, and take warning by the fall of others; But alas! I
tremble to speak it, we have erred in every point, and wilfully broke our first
Institutions, so that God has manifested his wrath by evident Signs and
Tokens, keeping our Prophet from us who prefixed a time to return with all
happiness to his People, so as there are now forty years past by our account;
wherefore this strange and fearful vision is a prediction of some great
Troubles and Alterations; For either the opening of the Book in the woman's hand
does foretell our falling off from the first intent of our Law, whereat these
armed men departed, as confounded with the guilt of their own Consciences; Or
else it signifies some other book wherein we have not yet read, and against
which no power shall prevail: So that I fear our Religion will be proved
corrupt, and our Prophet an Impostor, and then this Christ whom they talk of,
shall shine like the Sun, and set up his Name everlastingly; Hitherto the
Company was silent, but hearing him speak so boldly, they were much incensed
against him, charging him with Blasphemy, which their Law makes a Capital
Crime; whereupon they presently condemned him, and having obtained the
Beglerbegs consent and warrant, they put him to death; The Truth of this
Relation was confirmed by Isuf Chaous a converted Turk, who came to London
about the year 1656 which vision, he said, did much affect him, but he added,
that the grand Seignior commanded none should speak of it upon pain of death.
In the year 1625 June 29, there began a most terrible Tempest in
Constantinople, with such violent and continual Thunder and Lightning, that all
the City appeared as if it had been on fire, at the end whereof fell such a
storm of Hail that it brake the Tiles and Glasses, so that stones were taken up
weighing an hundred and fifty drams, the next morning others were weighed that
were about 7 or 8 ounces apiece, wherewith many were very much wounded; and
July 3 after, there happened another Tempest of Thunder and Lightning, which
burnt a Woman and a Child, and slew much Cattle in the Fields. Turkish. Hist.
Page 1452.

XXXVIII. And now I shall relate the Desolations and miseries of Germany, with
the wonderful signs foregoing, as I find them recorded in credible Authors. The
dreadful Blazing Comet which appeared in 1618 aforementioned, seemed to be a
forerunner thereof; It was seen often in a clear Sky in the East; In Bohemia
and Austria it appeared at first with red, in other places with a Saturnine
pale-red color for the space of twenty seven days, and in some places longer;
And it seemed here to be completely effected what has been usually said, that
never did a Comet appear which was not accompanied with much evil and misery,
and Claudian the Poet writ thus concerning them, -- Bella canunt ignes,
subitosque tumult is etc.
They show fierce Wars, Fire, Sword, and s^dden broyls,
And by Domestic Plots, surprising T^ils,
Uncivil Civil Jars, and homebred Flames
They signify;


And Lu^^n the Heathen Poet expresses the Prodig^es before the Civil Wars of
Rome in this manner.

-- Superique minaces
Prodig^^s T^^^as implerant, Aethera, Pontum, etc.
-- The threat^ing Gods
(...) and Earth, and Sea with Prodigits,
Vn^^^ of Star^ of night ad^rn the Skies,
H^aven ^^ems to flame, and through the welkin fire
(...) ^lyes; State changing Comets dire
(...) to us their blood-portending hair,
Deceitful Lightnings fla^h in clearest Air;
Strange formed Meteors the thick Air had bred
Like fa^^l^is long; like lamps more broadly spread;
Lightning wit^out one clap of Thunder brings
From (...) North his winged fires, and flings
Them^g^^^st our Capitol; Small Stars that use
Only be night their Lusire to dissuse,
Now s^ine in midst of day. etc. --
Such Civil Wars it seems were never without strange Prodigies, and no man can
be ignorant of the miserable condition of Germany about this time, nor think
thereof but with a sorrowful heart; and as the beginning of their miseries were
threatened by this terrible Comet, so their continuance was still presignified
by many strange things that happened out of the common course of nature, which
I shall endeavor to declare as follows; In December 1619 the water which
runs through Sixto a City in Hungaria, (where a mighty battle was fought
between the Turks and Christians in 1583) was turned into blood, and the ^ce
therein was likewise blood-red; Two years after which Bethlem Gabor routed the
whole Army of the Imperialists in or near that place, killing above Two
Thousand of them in the Field; In the same Year and Month December. 19. 1619 at
Groningen in Brunswick appeared another great Blazing Star, and two Armies one
in the East, and another in the North, fighting in the Heavens, till the
Northern Army seemed to be slain and defeated; Not long after a dreadful battle
was fought within a few Leagues of this place betwixt the King of Denmark, and
the Imperial General Tilly, in which the King lost the Field with Four Thousand
of his Army who were slain and taken Prisoners; And at another place not far
off about the same time* Five Hundred men were slain, and in the City of Munden
in the same Dukedom, Two Thousand Five Hundred Citizens and Soldiers were
miserably slain by the Imperialists; In the same year 1619, at Vienna in
Austria, the water in the ditch appeared like blood for the space of 8 days,
likewise three Rainbows were visible at once; And that very year in the same
place and City a bloody fight happened between the Bohemians, and the Imperial
General Bucqu^y, wherein four thousand five hundred of the Imperialists were
slain, and about a thousand Bohemians, and very many wounded. In 1620 it rained
blood in Poland so abundantly, that the drops fell very fast from the tops of
the houses; Soon after the Tartars with an Army of Forty Thousand men invaded
Poland, exercising incredible Cruelty, killing in one place above Three
Thousand Polanders; The same year likewise, the Turks with Ninety Thousand men
fell into Walstady, where they had a bloody encounter with Twelve Thousand
Poles, led by the great Chancellor of the Kingdom, who himself with the whole
Polish Army were slain, very few or none of them escaping.

XXXIX. In March 1621 two Armies were seen in the Air at Noonday in Austria,
fiercely fighting together, with great Thundering like Ordnance and Canon, and
the next year at Lintz in the same Country, just over that City, two Swords
were observed standing against each other, and two stout Armies fighting a
pitched battle to the great terror of the Inhabitants; This City of Lintz was
afterward besieged, and many times assaulted by the Boors of Aus^^ia, but were
beaten off with the loss of five hundred men; yet being many Thousands, they
defeated some Imperial forces under the Duke of H^^^^i^; which was afterward
re^^^^^ by Count Pap^^^^im, who with an Army of six (...) Horse and Foot fell
upon them, killing (...) on the place, and taking many (...), who were
afterward executed in the City of (...); In 162^ Three S^^^, and three Rainbows
were (...) at Pr^g^^ and H^^d^lburg in Germany; After (...) happened near the
City of Pra^^^, between the (...) and the Saxons, where (...) Hundred ^^^^ts,
and almost every man else, were ^ut (...) by the Sax^^s before the Gates; The
^^ry of (...) was the same year besieged, (...) length taken by the
Imperialists with great slaughter of the Inhabitants, and another small Town
cal^^d W^^kermund about 3 Miles off, was at the same time surro^^ly assaulted
by the Imperialists, whe^rin the Garrison, making some resistance, all the
Inhabitants both Men. Women and Children were put to the Sword. Some years
after the City of Prague was bes^eged by the Saxons and Swedes, who for 3 days
briskly fired upon the Town with their Canon, and were answered in the same
manner with great loss on both sides, Nine Thousand Saxons and Swed^s being
slain, and the Imperial Garrison within, consisting of Fourteen Hundred men,
Six Hundred of them were slain. The same year 1622 in the Country of
Darmistadt Trees were found whose leaves dropped blood; and that very year many
bloody Encounters happened between the Imperialists and Duke Christian of
Brunswick in that Country, but especially one between him and Count Tilly,
whose Army consisting of Twenty Two Thousand Foot, and 140 Troops of Horse,
fought six hours together, till the (...) overpowring them with number,
dispersed them, who flying to the Bridge, so thronged and w^^ged in one
another, that a great many were thrust into the River Main, wherein there were
as many drowned as were killed in the Battle; The same year there was an
Earthquake in Italy, and many Prodigious Lightnings and Rains in France;
Circles were seen about the Sun and Moon in England; At this time the Jesuits
and Papists were expelled the Netherlands, The Duke of Brunswick lost his Arm
in battle; There was a great Famine in M^ravia and Silesia; The City of Bergen
in Norway was almost consumed by fire. July 16. 1622 in the Dukedom of
Wittenbarg it rained blood on the hands and clothes of the laboring men, and
likewise upon Trees, stones, and other places in the Fields; in these parts at
the bloody battle of Norlingen, many thousands were slain on both sides,
Commanders, and others of all sorts.

XL. In 1623 in the County of Podibrat in Bohemia, a Well for some days was
turned into blood; At Tursin a Town three or four Miles from Egra, in a
Citizens house, the Table, the Walls of the Parlour, and the Chairs all sweated
blood, so that it began to run along the Room; Several bloody encounters
happened the next, and other years in those places, Four Thousand Bo^^^ians,
and Three Hundred Imperialists being there slain, five Troops of the Duke of
Saxony's Horse were ^illed by the Imperialists, few escaping, and the D^^^^ of
Fridland Generalissimo of the Imperialists, with (...) other ^hief Commanders
were soon after killed a^ Egra; This year in diverse Towns and Villages near the
R^ine, several bloody signs and tokens were seen, and about that time Two
Thousand Imp^^ialists were there slain by Count Mansfield, the ways by the
Rhine being strowed with their dead bodies, and the next year in another battle
with Count Tilly, Five Thousand were slain upon the place; about Mayenfield and
M^lantz, the ^^^k^^s, and the hands of the Laborers as they were mowing in the
Fields were seen to be bloody, and soon after the Spaniards exercised great
cruelty in those parts, the Inhabitants being miserably Massacred without
respect to Age, Sex or Quality, and among other Cruelties it is remarkable,
that the Spanish and Imperial Army coming from the Rhine passed by the City of
Gall, where the Papists to secure themselves from being plundered, marked their
houses with the sign of the Cross, but they were the first who felt the effects
of their Insolency, being woefully pillaged, and murdered without distinction;
Men and Women in Religious Orders being forced out of their Monasteries, and an
Agent was sent to them from the States of the Province, who threw them down
from the top of an high Rock, and so they were dashed to pieces.

XLI. In December, 1624, in Bohemia the Sun for 10 or 12 hours was changed into
diverse colors, at length fiery Beams proceeded from it, and for some time
seemed to oppose the Sun, till all vanished like Smoke in the Air, and at last
descended with a noise like Rockets; Two days before two Armies were seen in
the Air, who continued a great fight and skirmish for some time against each
other; The following years many bloody skirmishes and sights happened in those
Countries, particularly the siege of Frankford upon the Borders of Silesia,
which the King of Sweden took by storm, and Two Thousand Imperialists were
killed on the place, besides others who were drowned, found dead in Cellars,
Chambers, and other places, who amounted to near as many more; Not far off, 300
Swedish Soldiers being over-confident of their valor, were put to the Sword
by the Croats, and 300 Imperialists were killed soon after by the King of
Sweden not far from thence, with the loss of 600 of his own; In May, 1624, at
Gierslet in the Dukedom of An^ait, a strange Prodigy appeared in the Heavens,
which continued from 6 till 8 a Clock at Night, and was observed by the
Inhabitants of that Town in this manner; First, an ancient man came out of the
Clouds in a red Hungarian habit, after him some grave men in the like habit,
then issued out a Chariot with two Horses of diverse colors, and then another
Chariot with four Armed Horses; Soon after an infinite number of People, like a
swarm of Bees issued out of the Clouds in the same Hungarian habit, with hats
and great Feathers on their heads; After them followed a man on horseback, in a
great long Robe, putting the people before him; Next appeared a Comet like an
Eagle, with his head hanging down; A quarter of an hour after came forth
another Army, consisting of many Horse, Foot, and Chariots, having hoods with
broad brims, and Feathers; In the midst of the Army appeared a man alone,
drawing a long Red Cross, before which he made some Prayers with hands held up;
These Forces the first Army presently routed, and defeated; All the rest
marching to Asherleben, etc. at last vanished away in several Red Clouds. Not
long after Three Thousand of Mansfields men, and a Thousand of the Imperialists
were slain at this place; The day before it rained blood at Weinsham in
Bohemia, and two Armies appeared in the Sky skirmishing together; It likewise
rained blood at Friburg in Silesia, and two Armies also appeared in the Heavens
fighting for a long time together; Soon after the Duke of Freidland sending
Colonel Pechman with Seven Thousand Horsemen and Dragoons to pursue the Danish
and Weinmari^h Troops, there began a hot skirmish between them, where at last
most of the Danish Forces were killed, and ten Companies of them taken
Prisoners, and Pechman himself with diverse other Officers were slain. The same
year May 8. a strange Tempest happened at Ratisbone, for it being calm, and
only a small rain, two dark Clouds on a sudden met together, and instantly a
Wind mingled with Fire proceeded from thence, which immediately raised a mighty
Tempest, which tore up Trees by the Roots in a Wood near the City, carrying
them afar off; and thence extending it self to the City, in a short time it
overturned above Two Hundred Houses in the Town and Suburbs, neither was a
Chimney left standing, the Windows of the Church of the Emerans was much
shattered, one of the Steeples laid flat on the ground, and the other was broke
off in the middle; Two other Principal Steeples, and a Cloister were likewise
blown down; This was supposed to be raised by some damned Sorcerer, who by the
assistance of the Prince of the Air, had caused this mischief. The Instrument
of this desolation was limited both to time, place, and persons; the time was
not above a quarter of an hour; the Herricane (if we may so call it) did not
foread beyond the City, only ren^ing up some few Trees, and killed 4 men; some
years after, this City of Rati^bone was straightly besieged, and assaulted by
the Imperial and Bavarian Army, consisting of Thirty Thousand Foot, and Fifteen
Thousand Horse, being battered night and day with an Hundred Pieces of
Ordnance, but were valiantly repulsed by the Swedish Garrison, with the
slaughter of Four Thousand Imperialists in the last assault; they defending the
place to admiration, the Imperialists confessing they lost Eight Thousand men
upon the place, and Six Thousand who ran away; They made Fifteen Thousand Canon
shot upon the Town, and cast above Two Thousand Grenades into it, endured Four
Hundred Sixty Five Sallies from within the City, and at last they surrendered it
to the Imperialists upon Honorable Terms.

XLII. In the year 1625 near Troppaw in Sil^sia a great multitude of little
Crows or Jackdaws appeared in the Air, who fought as it were in a set Battle,
and skirmished so eagerly that abundance of them were slain, and the Boors
gathered some sacks full of dead ones, which they brought into the City. The
year after the Weinmar^h Forces killed Four Thousand Imperialists near this
Town, and a while after in another battle the Saxons killed Five Thousand more
of the Imperialists. In February the same year, in diverse places in Silesia
were exceeding great Tempests accompanied with Thunder and Lightning; At
Breslau the spires of two Chief Churches, the Foundation of the Statehouse, and
many other curious buildings were overturned into the Town, great Trees, and a
new strong built Bridge were torn up, and driven to diverse places, so that the
next day nothing of them remained; At Nissa another City, the chief Church was
struck with a terrible Thunderclap, and the Steeple thereby battered to the
very ground work; Not long after at Breslau the Moon appeared bigger than
ordinary, and four great Ordnance or Canon were visible in the Air, to the
great terror of the Inhabitants, which afterward seemed to be shot off, with
incessant Thunders and Volleys against each other; Soon after the Swedes and
Saxons beat the Imperialists near this City, Twelve Hundred of them being
slain; May 3. 1627, a Circle appeared about the Sun at H^mborough, and in the
edge thereof five other Suns were visible, with a Rainbow between them;
Afterward two other Suns with another part of a Rainbow were seen, one of them
extending toward the West, the other toward the South, at last all vanished in
a burning smoke. Some Miles from this City soon after, the Imperialists ^^t in
pieces 300 Danes, and took three Thousand of their Horsemen who stuck in the
Moorish places Prisoners; Another Conflict likewise happened, between
Hamborough and Sto^d about this time, where a Sweedish Regiment of (...), and
four Companies of Monroes were all killed by Papenheim, 19 Colors, and some
Captains and Officers being taken Prisoners; This year a great Beam was visible
in the Air in France; An Earthquake happened in England; Now the Polanders
recover many places from the Tartars; The Persians beat the Turks; The English
take the Isle of Rhee, and lose it again. The Hollander beats the Spaniard in
the Indies. Jo. Gad. of Prodigis.

XLIII. The year 1628 was full of portentous Prodigies, which were seen in many
places; at Sunderburg in Pomerania, the Heavens being open, an Army appeared
coming from the North, in the Van were Muskets and Pioneers, after whom
followed Canons and Ordnance, the Rere was brought up by Horsemen; Another Army
came forth on the other side against them, where began a hot fiery skirmish
between them, but the victory inclined to the Northern Army, at last a Beam
with fiery Rays hovered over the head of the Northern Conqueror, which
continued thus prodigiously for many hours; A great Astronomer of the English
Nation gave his Judgment upon the great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter. July
18. 1623 to this purpose, that the effects thereof would be felt in the North,
and North-East parts of Europe in particular; and in general, that it would
produce Wars, Famines, Plagues, etc. over all; and the places subject thereunto
he names, that is Italy, France: Bohemia, Silesia and Germany; Of Provinces he
likewise names, Prussia, Brandenburg, Stiria, Hassia and Saxony; Yea he
descends to Cities, naming, Rome, Prague, Magdenburg, Coblentz, Ulme,
Brunswick, Ausburg; He says likewise it will go hard with the Roman Empire,
Clergy, and Jesuits; He speaks of a King of a true Religion, who should do all
this, and that much happiness should succeed. How this Observation was
verified, was visible to all; For in the year 1630 Gustavus Adolphus King of
Sweden having conquered many Towns from the King of Poland both in Prussia and
Livonia, came with an Army of about Twelve Thousand men out of a Northern
Corner of the World, and landed first in Pomerania, not far from Sunderburg,
where the aforesaid Prodigy was seen, from whence he first beat out the whole
Imperial Army, and never returned without the Olive Branches of Victory, so
that it will be judged rather Romance then true History in Ages to come to
relate these German Conquests of his. For how can it be easily believed, that
two thirds of Germany should in about two years space be wrested from so
puissant an Emperor, formidable for his greatness, and confident upon the
power of his Colleagues and Upholders, vast in extent, terrible for its Armies
and Commanders, beyond expectation succesful in all its Enterprises, and which
knew no bounds but the Alps and the Ocean; And yet that this Empire with its
Forces and Garrisons, which held so many Princes at a bay, was at last it self
constrained to take the Sweedish Yoke, which was put upon it by him who entered
into it with only Eleven or Twelve Thousand men, and performed it all in two
years and an half; This I say is truly admirable, and if he had gone on another
year what might he not have performed. In this year 1628, March 11. at Bishein
a Village near Strasburg a poor woman was delivered of a strange Monster, which
was, two Females, whose Bodies were joined together about the middle, their
hands, feet and heads being perfect and whole, but there was only seen in them
one Heart, and one Lungs; This Prodigy might presage the great mischiefs,
damages, depredations, and vast impositions which usually accompany the Wars,
and the unruly Soldiers, and fell very severely upon the Inhabitants in and
about Strasburg; Strange was that Thunderclap which happened at Brig in
Silesia the same year, wherein the immediate power of God appeared; About Noon
May 29, 1628 a Thunderbolt fell upon one of the Churches of that Town, broke
down the door, and slew a poor woman in the Porch as she was praying, wounding
in its passage many other Women and Children; After this it went to another
Church in the Suburbs, where the Minister was reading, doing him no more harm,
but only singing the hair of his head, neither were the People hurt thereby,
who at the same instant fell down flat with their faces on the ground; October
13, the same year a terrible Thunder fell upon the Church at Sagan, another
Town in Silesia, from whence it burst out of a Window, attended with such Wind,
Rain, Hail, and Tempest, that it tore up the Trees by the very Roots, blasted
the Herbs and Fruit trees, and so harrassed the Country for a League about,
that the damage was very considerable; After the Thunder and Tempest, there
appeared just over the Church fiery beams like a sword and a rod, the Bells in
the Steeple began to sound and ring without the help of man, and 3 miles off,
the Heavens for the space of an hour seemed open and fiery; Not long after a
terrible fight happened between this Town of Sagan and Sternaw, both in
Silesia, where the Swedes and Saxons killed about two thousand Imperialists,
and not far thence soon after two thousand more were slain.

XLIV. In 1630 a very miraculous thing happened at Geismar in Hassia, two
soldiers lying for safety in that Town, one of them complained to the other
who was in bed with him, that he was very cold, the other answered, he could
not believe it, in regard that his own body was very hot and wet, entreating
him to touch and feel his side; which when he had done, finding his hands
exceeding wet, and as it were glued and congealed together, he suspected
something extraordinary, and looking on his hands by the light of the Moon he
judged them to be bloody, whereat being much terrified, he called for a Candle,
and found his fellow soldier very weak, and his left side, and the sheets of
the bed to be bloody, and endeavoring to wash off the blood from his side,
presently more blood issued (...); at length after the space of an hour, it
ceased of it self, About three handfuls of blood were taken out of the sheets,
this, with the relation of other circumstances they presented in the morning to
their Commander, who inquired of him how he had felt himself that Night; the
soldier answered, That he had been extreme ill for some time, but was
afterward restored to his former health; The two next years after this Prodigy,
this goodly Country of Hassia was miserably harrassed by several Armies, and
the Inhabitants were barbarously and inhumanely treated by the Emperors' Army,
and if the Prince or his poor subjects did at any time complain and petition
for Justice or redress, they were only scorned and rejected for their labors,
so that they were forced to endure quarterings, taxpatiens, burnings, robberies
and sacking of their Towns and Villages, yea the slaughter of innumerable
innocent Subjects of all sorts, without being able to obtain any pity or
compassion from their enemies; The same year 1630, in May the Noremberg
Carrier, and several Passengers in their journey toward Hamborough, passing by
the Town of Coburg at night, they observed with great admiration a prodigious
fire going in and out of the Town, and heard a mighty noise like the
discharging of Canons; Two years after which General Wallestein assaulted this
Town with his Soldiers, and great Guns, but was so stoutly entertained by
those within, that after the loss of a great many of the Imperialists, he was
forced (though he had besieged it above Twenty Months) to break up his siege
and depart.

XLV. In May 1631 at Hall in lower Saxony, the water was turned into blood, and
about the middle of this Month, this Town was taken by Tilly, and afterward
retaken from him by their natural Lord, and presently again repossessed by
Tillies Forces; and he himself after the battle of Leipsick made his escape
thither that night, and had his wounds dressed by the Town Barber; Whilst
Tilly's Army lay in the Town, one of his Chief Officers saw blood prodigiously
dropping from the House wherein he lay, whereupon he said, What? Must we bleed?
will the King of Sweden beat us? That Is impossible; But it happened otherwise,
for Hall was not above 7 Dutch Miles distant from the place of battle, wherein
the Imperial Army was utterly routed, and miserably destroyed in the chase, and
if the King had but had 3 hours more of daylight, it was judged that hardly a
Thousand of the Enemy had escaped, one of their own Relations affirming, that
there were Fifteen Thousand of the Imperialists slain upon the place, and in
the pursuit that night, and the day following; Its said Tilly's courageous
heart could not refrain from tears, when he perceived such woeful destruction
among his brave old Soldiers, his Army consisting of Forty Four Thousand stout
men being usually termed I^vincible. The next day the King besieged Hall, which
was yielded to him and soon after the Castle; But a while after, Pappenheim and
the Imperialists again retook this City, exercising all manner of Barbarism
upon the Inhabitants; This year likewise in the time of the siege of Magdeburg,
a City Captains Wife dying in Childbed desired to be ripped open, which being
done, they found a Boy almost as big as one of 3 years old, who had an
headpiece, and an Iron Breastplate on his Body, great boots of the French
fashion, and a bag by his side with two things therein like Musket bullets;
This horrible Prodigy no doubt portended the deplorable destruction of that
City, which happened May 10. 1631, when a general assault was made upon the
Town by the Imperialists, the Walls were mounted in an instant, the Town
entered, and the Soldiers fell to killing; At the same instant a fire, none
knew how, broke out, and it being a very windy day, on a sudden all became one
mighty Flame, the whole Town being in twelve hours time turned to Cinders,
(except some few Fisher-houses) six Goodly Churches were burnt, the Cathedral
by the diligence of the Monks and Soldiers being preserved; There were at
least Twenty Thousand People killed, burnt and smothered, beside Six Thousand
drowned in the River Elbe; Two days after Tilly came into the Town, and finding
some Hundreds of Women and Children in the great Church, he gives them their
lives, and some bread to maintain them.

XLVI. June 18. 1631, at Asherleben in the lower Saxony toward Evening two
strong Armies were observed in the Heavens, who prepared themselves to fight,
one came out of the North, and the other out of the South, after a long fight
the Northern Army obtained the victory; This Prodigy was seen two days in a
clear Sky for the space of an hour, after the battle, a Person in a long
Garment appeared two several times, shooting with a Bow at the Leader of the
Southern Army; The very next Month, July 8. happened a sharp conflict between
this Town and Tangermond, where the ^ing of Sweden routed Twenty Companies of
the Imperialists, and took 14 Ensigns, and soon after 1500 more were slain;
These slaughters Count Tilly resolving to revenge, sets forward toward the King
with twenty six thousand men, and fell upon him in his Trenches, but were
beaten off with a miserable butchery, so that it was judged Tilly lost in the
whole by these encounters near seven thousand men. In this year 1631 upon the
fatal seventh of September, in the bloody battle of Leipswick, General Tilly
himself was wounded twice or thrice with Pistol shot, and his whole Army routed
as aforementioned; Upon the place of Battle which the Enemy had left for the
King of Sweden there sat a flock of Birds, which springing up, at the King's
coming took their flight directly over Tillies Army, and fetching a Circle
about them (which the Romans would have counted a happy presage) they turned
again toward the Kings Army, as it were to fetch him victory; But the King had
a better presage on his side than a Flock of Birds, God with us, was his
Watchword, which together with his Valor, and his Sword, obtained him the
Victory.

XLVII. In 1632 General Tilly received another shot of a Musket, a little above
his Knee at a skirmish between the King of Sweden and himself, whereof he dyed
April 20, after having 4 splinters cut out of his Thigh; A few years before
that long, cruel, and bloody battle was fought at Lutzen, the water of the
Ditch in that Town was turned to blood, which Prodigy seemed accomplished
November 6 this year, wherein the Swedes after nine hours continual fighting
absolutely overthrew the Imperial Army; The morning wherein this great battle
was fought was very misty, the King of Sweden had a Divine to pray with him,
and other Ministers at the head of every Regiment; about 10 a Clock the Fog
cleared up, and the King going first to his own Subjects, spoke to this
purpose, My dear Brethren carry your selves bravely this day, fight valiantly
in Gods Name for your Religion, and your King, which if you do, Gods Blessing,
and the Peoples praises shall be your Reward, and (...) shall for ever retain
an honorable memorial, nor will I forget to reward you Nobly; But if you play
the Cowards. I here take God to witness, not a bone of you shall ever return
again to Sweden; To the Germans, who joined with him, he thus expressed
himself, My Brethren, Officers, and Fellow Soldiers, I most earnesily entreat
and beseech you to make full Trial of your valor this one day, fight manfully
against your enemies this day both with me, and for me; be not faint-hearted in
the battle, nor upon any account discouraged, set me before your eyes, even me,
who without the least fear or dread, am ready for your cause to adventure both
Life and Blood; if you do this, no doubt God himself will reward you from
Heaven with a most glorious victory, of which your selves and your posterity
shall have the benefit, if you do not, farewell for ever to your Religion, and
your selves must for ever remain in slavery. The Soldiers of both Nations
answered the King with joyful Acclamations, who thereupon added; Now my hearts
let us fall bravely on our enemies, and the God of Heaven prosper our
endeavors; and so casting up his Eyes to Heaven with a loud voice he said,
Jesus, vouchsafe this day to be my strong helper, and give me courage to fight
for thy glory, and for the honor of thy Name. Then drawing his sword, he waved
it over his head, and advanced the foremost of all his Army; Amongst the Kings
own Guard were several English and Scottish Gentlemen; He himself was attired
in a plain Buff Coat, without Armor, and being required to put on his Corslet,
he said, The Lord God is my Armor; His word was God with us; The Imperialist
was, Jesus Maria, The King said, I thank God I have both Wind and Sun to favor
me.

The Field where the Battle was fought was a plain Champian Country, but yet
it had many Ditches, which served Wallestein the Imperial General for
Breastworks, and the Kings Horse in passing over them were some of them
overthrown, there were likewise two little Hills upon which Wallestein had
planted his Great Guns, and his Army was so large that it extended 2 Miles in
length, the Armies coming within view, the Canon began to play on both sides,
but those of the Imperialists being planted upon steady and fixed Batteries, did
very great Execution; Whereas the Kings gave fire in motion, which he
observing, and not liking the sport, caused his Army to advance upon the very
mouth of the Canon; The Imperialists kept their ground, expecting the Swedes
fury would be over before they could get over the Ditches, and beat out the
Musketeers; yet they overcame these difficulties, and their left Wing engaged
with Wallesteins right; Then the Ring advancing with his right Wing, and
observing where the Croats or Crabats stood, and where the Curassiers were who
were covered with black Armor from head to foot, calling Colonel Stalbansh to
him he said, As for those Fellows the Crabats, I care not for them, (...)
charge me those black Fellows soundly, for they are the men that will undo us;
The King fought at the head of his Squadron, himself being foremost with his
Pistol in one hand, and his Sword in the other, and thus charging upon the
Curassiers, he was there overlaid with numbers, insomuch that his men being in
danger to be encompassed, were forced to give ground, and retire toward their
body; where the King received a snot in his Left Arm, which he not feeling at
first; would have led on still, but soon after perceiving the blood to issue
out abundantly, and that part of his bone was broken, he called to Duke Albert
of Saxon Lavoenburg, saying, Coren I am sore wounded, help me to make my
retreat; which whilst the Duke and his Assistants were about to do, an Officer
of the Curassiers who too well knew the King comes up, and said. This is the
right Bird, and so discharging his Pistol, shot him through the body, and
himself was presently shot dead upon the place; The King was held up in his
saddle, but presently fell; His horse also was shot, and so ran away without
his Master;

Just at this time fell a great mist, the Sun which before shined very
brightly, on a sudden muffling up his face in a mourning Cloud, as if not able
to look upon the fall of the King of Sweden; The Imperialists being now masters
of the Kings Body fell to stripping it, one getting his spurs, another his
sword, another his Ring, and another his Buff-coat, etc. every one being greedy
to get some part of his spoils; But before they could carry away his Body, the
Swedes returned, and so charged their Enemies that they were forced to retreat,
whereupon Stalhaush recovering his Body, carried it away in an Ammunition
Wagon privately, so that few of his own Army knew of his death; All this while
the four Swedish Brigades of Foot were hotly engaged, and got ground of the
Imperialists; The horse likewise after an hours fight drove them back, and got
possession of seven Pieces of their Ordinance; but by this time the mist was so
extremely thickened by the smoke that the Swedes could not see to pursue their
advantage, yet it pleased God to strike part of the Imperial Army with a
pannick fear, that above a thousand German Horse ran all away together, one
amongst them crying out; Oh I know the King of Sweden well enough, he is best
at the latter end of the day; But the Chiefest fright was amongst the Ladies,
and the Captains Wives, and other Women in the Rear of the Army, many of whom
getting out of their Coaches, cut asunder the harness, and mounted stradling
upon the bare Horses backs, and so scudded away among the Soldiers; Several
Women and Children were there trodden to death, nor did the Horsemen stay till
they had fled diverse Miles; But in the heat of the Battle, Count Pappenheim one
of the Imperial Generals who was before sent for, came in with his Horse and
Dragoons, by whose coming the charge was again renewed, but just as he was
ordering his Horse he was shot with a Falconet Bullet, whereof he presently
dyed; His Officers flocking about him cried out, O our General is slain, Our
General is slain; and thereupon turning their Horseheads, they ran out of the
battle without a stroke striking; But the other Imperialists who were
encouraged by his coming, maintained the fight with admirable resolution, yet
the charge was sustained by the Swedes with much Gallantry for two full hours,
wherein the greatest loss fell upon two Brigades of old Swedish Soldiers whom
the King did much rely upon, for these old Blades stood their Ground, till the
Earth was covered with their bodies, yet they dyed not unrevenged, for they
slew many of the Imperialists. and amongst them diverse of great Quality.

Duke Bernard was very severely beset by the right Wing of the Imperialists
that day, but no man ever behaved himself more gallantly than himself, charging
his enemies no less than twelve several times; A little before Sunset the Mist
cleared up, and then Duke Bernard took a survey of his Army, which he could not
do since he heard of the Kings death till now; He spoke cheerfully to the
Officers and Soldiers, encouraging them to a new engagement, and though he
found the most part of his Army in great disorder, yet with much pains he
rallyed them for a new onset, though not without much regret in the Soldiers
one saying to another, alas Comerade, what must we fall on again; The other
replying, Come, if we must, let us do it bravely, and make a day of it. The
hearts of the Imperialists quaked for fear, seeing the Swedes advancing in such
good order against them; and thereupon their horse began to retreat, which the
Swedes perceiving, they charged so home with their Great Guns, as put them into
great confusion; But then again so great a mist fell, that the Swedes could not
discern to pursue their Enemies, so that the fight was only maintained about
the Wind-mills, which continued with much briskness till six a Clock at night,
when the Imperialists gave it quite over; This cruel and bloody Battle lasted
above nine hours, and then Count Wallestein marched away toward Leipswick,
leaving the Field and Victory to the Swedes, who lodged upon the ground all
night, where they heard the lamentable groaning of the dying and wounded on
both sides, it being a frosty cold night, wherein many a gallant man dyed of
his wounds, who probably with seasonable help might have recovered.

The next morning the Swedes found the Imperialists had left all their Great
Guns behind them, there were slain of the Swedes Three Thousand, and of the
Imperialists about Four Thousand upon the place, besides which the Boors killed
near a Thousand more of them who fled straggling away; The wounded were as many
more as the slain, on the Swedes side were lost the King himself whose death
can never be sufficiently lamented, his enemies themselves giving him this
Honorable Testimony, That he was the bravest Enemy, and the best Captain that
ever was in Christendom, so that the Swedes and Protestants found themselves to
have gotten but a doleful, and a woeful victory, losing that incomparable
Conqueror, who was alone worth many hundreds of others; But he is dead, and was
as heartily bewailed of the Germans as of his own Subjects, who yet professed,
That their loss was unspeakable, and in both their Chronicles shall his
honorable memory be for ever famous, and his name shall live in their mouths
in after Ages; Yet did not this glorious King dye, without some singular and
miraculous Prodigies, which happened about that time in his own Kingdom of
Sweden; Amongst others, at the very same hour and time when this battle of
Lutzen was fought, there appeared just over the Castle, and Royal Palace at
Stockholm a Virgin or Damsel holding in one hand a burning Candle, and in the
other a white handkerchief which she waved about; It was likewise noted and
observed, that all the doors in the Castle though they were shut and locked, yet
they three several times opened of themselves; At the same time a considerable
River in Sweden was suddenly dried up, so that for a whole day any one might go
over it dry foot; Also in Smaland a Province of that Kingdom, the Bells without
the help of any man began to ring, and sound out, to the great astonishment of
the Inhabitants.

Several other brave Swedish Commanders fell with their King, and many great
men of the Imperialists; General Wallestein at first intended only to make a
retreat to Leipswick, but the Imperial Soldiers as soon as they heard the
Drums beat a retreat, fell immediately to running, and the fright was so great
that most of them never came into order again, the Chief Officers confessed, That
if the Swedes had sent but one Thousand Horse after them, they might have cut
off their whole Army. The King of Sweden was of a Majestic Countenance and a
gallant Stature, above six foot high, of a strong Judgment, natural vigilance,
and unweariedness; A sudden danger seldom astonished his Judgment, still
showing most vigor, where there was most need of it; He was exceeding temperate
in his Diet, his feeding was upon strong and souldierly Meats; But that which
was most commendable in him was his Religion, both Public and Private; He was
frequent in Prayers and Thanksgivings upon every emergent occasion; He would
pray a Shipboard, on Shore, in the Field, in the midst of a Battle, as if
Prayers alone were the surest piece of his whole Armor; He was a strict
observer of Martial Discipline, and a severe punisher of Misdemeanors in his
Camp; when he first came into Germany, he saw that many women followed his
Army; whereupon coming to a great River, his Men and Wagons being passed over,
he caused the Bridge to be broken down, hoping thereby to be rid of his lumber,
but they on a sudden making a terrible shreik, the Soldiers on the other side
vowed not to stir a foot till the women were fetched over; whereupon the King
finding that this ill humor was so generally dispersed amongst his men, that
it was dangerous to purge it all at once, smiled out his anger for the present,
permitting what he could not amend, yet this abuse he afterward reformed by
degrees: His Army won the day though they lost their King, which occasioned one
to compose this brief Elegy.

Upon this place the Great Gustavus dyed,
Whilst victory lay bleeding by his side.
A little before his death being in discourse with his Chaplain Dr. Fabricius,
he said, That he thought God would ere long take him away, because the People
did so overvalue and deify him; At his first coming into Germany having a
design upon Stetin, and his Army being now upon the shore, and his Boats ready
on the River to imbark them, but the Wind having been contrary for several days
before, the King observing it, kneeling down in the sight of his Soldiers with
his hands lifted up to Heaven, thus expressed himself; O thou most just God,
thou certainly know that I did not at first undertake this Enterprise out of
any rashness or ambition, but for the glory of thy most Holy Name, and the
defense of the Truth of thy Gospel, here now therefore I call upon thee O God,
and most humbly beseech thee, that with the Air of thy favor, and with a
prosperous wind, thou would be pleased to breath upon this my undertaking for
Christ his sake, Amen; No sooner were his Prayers ended, but through Divine
Providence the Wind turned about with so full a Gale, that the whole Fleet
passing up the River Oder, in two hours time sailed up Twenty Miles, and
unexpectedly came to an Anchor within a Mile of Stetin, whereby he wonderfully
defeated the Designs of the Imperialists, who intended within two days after
to have laid siege to that City, had they not been thus miraculously prevented;
When this King came first to the Crown, he resolved to lay siege to Nottenburg
Castle, which the Muscovite had given his Father for some Assistance which he
had afforded him; This Castle stood in an Island in the mouth of the most
raging and swift River of Nerva, his Commanders despairing of taking it, and
being unwilling their young King should receive a Repulse in his first
attempts, they labored to dissuade him from the action, yet he continued
resolute to pursue it, and see how Almighty God wrought for him; The Besieged
Muscovites were stricken with such Thrushes, Warts and Blisters in their
Throats and Mouths, they could neither chew their Meat, nor swallow it down,
whereupon they parlied and yielded up that impregnable Castle to him, wherein
he found a whole years provision of Victuals, besides abundance of Ammunition.

Not long after this, he had a difference with the Dantzickers, and they had
prepared twenty or thirty stout men of War, intending with the first opening of
the Spring, to have burnt up the Kings Navy in their Harbor; but toward the
end of Winter, when this narrow Swedish Sea was frozen a yard or two deep, this
young King caused his Boors to cut open the Ice for ten or twelve Miles
together, which done, he came suddenly one night with his Fleet upon the
Dantzickers, and burnt, sunk, and took most of their Fleet; Also in his Wars
with the King of Poland, he conquered so many Towns from him in Prussia and
Livonia, that he enforced him by the mediation of King Charles of England, to
make peace with him; In these wars with the Polanders his Army was never great,
having for the most part not above Five Thousand Men, and yet with them he
fought several Battles, beat and wearied out two Imperial Armies, took in the
great and strong City of Elbing with diverse others and finally obtained his end
upon his Enemies, though they were able at the same time to have come upon him
with such a number of Horse as had, according to humane Reason, been sufficient
to have carried him away, and five such Armies as his was; He was slain in the
Battle at Lutzen, Nov. 16. 1632. in the 38 year of his Age.

XLVIII. At Bushein a Village near Friburg in Germany, there happened this
strange Prodigy, there appeared in the Heavens a Twofold Rainbow, one white as
Snow, and the other exceeding black, besides another of a fiery color: The
next day from eleven, till two after Noon, another Aspect of a very white
color appeared: And about the time at Franestein hard by a Woman having bought
some bread, and carrying it home, when she came to cut it, blood issued out
from it; This Franestein is a pretty Town upon an Hill some sixteen English
miles from Dresden, it was taken by the Imperialists in the year 1632 by
Scalado, and meeting with some opposition, they in revenge cruelly put all,
both Soldiers and Inhabitants to the sword: And October 4. they assaulted
Friburg a handsome Town upon the River Mulda some 10 English miles to the West
of Franestein, and taking it by storm, they likewise miserably destroyed the
Inhabitants; near this place, Count Holcks men, (who was then Commander of
those Imperial Forces) taking displeasure against a Minister of excellent
Learning in that Country, they first hewed him all to pieces with their
swords, and then flung his mangled Limbs to the Dogs to be eaten; But the Dogs,
as if astonished at such savage cruelty, would not so much as touch his flesh,
or lick a drop of his blood; whereupon his Friends gathered up his pieces the
next day, and buried them; and one of their own Authors relates, That the
Crabats showed themselves ingenious to invent New Torments for the poor
Protestants, and that it was frequent with them for want of Dogs meat to feed
them with humane flesh, which if so, we may truly say, Thatthough the Dogs were
the Man-eaters, yet certainly the Crabats were the Cannibals.

XLIX. In the month of August, 1632. at Kempten in Swabeland a strange Monster
was born of a Citizens Wife, the head was altogether fat, and without ears, the
hands were stretched out, and appeared all bloody between the flesh and the
skin, in the left hand there was a Rope, the Belly had two wounds as if pricked
by a Sword, and the left knee seemed as if it had been twice broken, a cord
being tied about it: This goodly Town of Kempten was held by the Imperialists,
and after many furious assaults was taken by the Swedes in 1633. The Imperial
Commander went to Reitaw, where he was beheaded, because he had so soon
surrendered the Place; Many other bloody skirmishes happened about this Town,
and what miseries that, and the Country thereabout endured, when it was
besieged, and re-taken by the Imperialists can hardly be expressed; It was
brought to such extremity of Famine, not much inferior to those dreadful ones
of Samaria, and Jerusalem recorded in Holy Scripture, or of Saguntum in Spain;
Perusium in Hetruria, or Tuscany in Italy mentioned by other Authors; Many
brave Citizens out of this and the Neighbor Towns were compelled by necessity
to bear Arms for a livelihood; Horseflesh was sold at high rates, Dogs, Cats
and Vermin were counted as good as Venison; For all Commerce and Trade being
hindered, bread-corn was at an excessive rate, and hardly to be purchased for
money; In February, 1633. at Dobenshutz a Village in Althenburg, blood sprang
out of a Fish Pond, with such a filthy savor, that if it were touched, they
could not wash off the stink in 2 or 3 days; This Country was the same year
lamentably ruined and plundered, and the beastly cruelty and licentiousness of
the Soldiers was exceeding monstrous: Many fine Towns and Villages were robbed
and burnt to Ashes for defending themselves, and the Inhabitants thereof, as
well as of Dobenshutz miserably slaughtered: The Women, yea Ladies and
Gentlewomen, were tied and coupled together like Beasts and ^ogs, and sent into
the Woods to be ravished, and for making resistance, they had their clothes
stripped off, their Bodies whipped, and their ears cut off, and in this deplorable
posture were sent home again; The Soldiers and Crabats got many Thousand head
of Cattle together and what beast soever did not readily follow them, they
killed them, lest they should serve some Heretics; many other horrid
Barbarisms were committed by them, as if they had believed that a Country was
never thoroughly conquered, till it were utterly destroyed by Sword and Fire.

L. In 1633. March 6. about 8 a Clock in the Evening over the Town of Bibrach
two long swords were seen in the Air, one Fiery, and the other red as blood;
many fierce encounters happened about this time and place between the Swedes
and Imperialists, Count Horn the Swedish Field Marshal killing near fix hundred
Crabats, and as many more Spanish and Italian Soldiers who came to aid the
Emperor, perished by Cold, Famine and Sword by the way, that betwixt Vlm and
Bibrach a thousand dead Carcases were found, so that a third part of the Army
were lost; some Months after, four Regiments of the Imperialists were surprised
and killed by the Swedes betwixt this Town and Isne; and six hundred other
Imperialists being abroad were also taken, and most of them slain. In March
1634, Gustavus Horn besieged the City of Bibrach, wherein were thirteen hundred
men, offering the Imperial Governor good conditions upon his first approach,
which being refused, he battered the Town so long with his Ordnance, that he
won the Enemies works, and made a breach into the Walls. Then the Governor
sending out a Trumpet, desired reasonable Terms, or else he would defend it to
the last man, and threatening first of all to blow up all the Protestant
Citizens, whom he had already locked up in the Townhouse, and into a Cellar;
But having already refused fair ofters, the Swedes denied them now, and
prepared all things ready for another assault, advancing toward the Breach,
when at the same instant, the Protestant Ministers with several Women came out
of the Town, making most pitiful Lamentation to the Swedish General, signifying
that it would certainly cost them all their Lives, because the Townhouse was
already undermined, and the Mine filled with Powder, and that they fearfully
expected to be blown up immediately. Out of Commiseration therefore to these
poor people, another Agreement was offered to the Governor, and Liberty
granted them to march out with their Swords only, which was accepted, and the
Protestants thereby saved.

LI. In 1634 June 23. another Prodigy happened at Dresden in Saxony; About five
a Clock in the Evening the Sun first appeared white as Snow, and then suddenly
became dark as if covered by a Mist; It appeared first in the form of a Crown,
and then like a Feather, and then red as blood, in which posture it continued
for about half an hour, and then returned to its natural shape, but retained
its sanguine color till it went down, and the Moon at her rising retained the
same bloody Aspect, till she was no longer seen in that Horrison; About the
same time at Berlin in the Marquisate of Brandenburg it rained blood and
brimstone; and the next year in November, at Itz^^o a Town in Holsiein it
rained thick blood, whose drops being used as Ink, represented true natural
blood in writing; It is scarce credible how many bloody Conflicts and
Encounters happened between these two Countries, the same year, and the next
following; but more especially that sore and bloody Battle at Witstock, wherein
seven Thousand Imperialists were slain by the Swedes, six whole Regiments being
wholly cut off, with several great Commanders; Fifteen Hundred Prisoners,
Fourteen Pieces of Ordnance, and Eight Thousand Wagons were also left to the
Swedish Conqueror; Of the Swedes likewise were a Thousand slain upon the place
of Battle. In the same year, 1634. July 24. at Melnick where the Saxon Army
quartered, there was a strange Apparition in the Air, which was thus related by
Eyewitnesses; About Evening, when the Elector of Saxonys Chaplain was at
Prayers, there appeared a sign in the sky like a fiery Beam, and a while after,
another in the form of a Scepter fiery red, just over the House where he was
Preaching, as soon as Sermon was ended, and the Chaplain had pronounced Amen,
the sign vanished out of sight; After this the same Apparition was seen again
of diverse others; That year, and some others following, the Crabats like
Vermin in a warren, ransacked, plundered and pillaged what places soever they
came to, sparing neither Churches, Cloisters, nor Noble men's Houses, but robbed
and dismembered the Country people, ravished the Women, defloured the Maids,
burnt the Villages and Towns, and committed all manner of mischievous
Insolences and Villainies.

LII. About this time Man and Beast and Fowls of the Air all seemed now to be
at irreconcilable difference, and Germany was the Stage wherein they acted
their Tragedies; At Hessen in March 1635. there met together two Armies of
strange Birds, which fought as it were in a set Battle; And near Straubinge
upon the River of Danube multitudes of Dogs had their Rendevouz, who fought so
furiously, that all the Neighborhood were affrighted at the Prodigy; And as if
they would admit of no Agreement, but such as pleased themselves, when the
Governor of Ratisbone had sent out against them four Companies of his Foot
Soldiers, with Muskets, and other Arms to assault and slay them, they left
their hostility among themselves, and joined together against the Common Enemy,
falling upon the Soldiers, and in despite of their shot and weapons, killed
and devoured nine of them. This year 1635. A great Inundation of Water happened
at Rome, and after that, a mortal sickness; Five Moons were seen at once in
Normandy, and in Italy many Monsters^ were brought forth; At this time there
began Divisions in Scotland about Religion; The Hollanders and Spaniards fight
at Sea; There was a great Plague at Venice, the Spaniards beat the French. J.
Gadbury of Prodigies.

LIII: The next year strange Prodigies terrifyed the hearts of the People; For
while the Princes and Peers were in their jollity at the Diet at Ratisbone,
War, with its grim Attendants, Famine, Pestilence, Fire and Destruction raged
abroad in the Roman Empire; In 1636: December 19. the Spire of Shotten Steeple
at Vienna being newly built, fell suddenly down, and demolished the new built
Church; This happened about the time of the Coronation of the new King of the
Romans at Ratisbone; And about the same time, a great Blazing Star appeared at
Rome for some time, and then vanished away suddenly over St. Paul's Church in
that City, with a great noise, and diverse Monuments placed in that Church fell
down, and were utterly defaced; Now though it might seem overmuch boldness
(says my Author) to peep into the Ark of Divine Secrets, nor can we conclude
any particular consequences from the Accidental fall of this Steeple; yet
doubtless the Comet, though caused by the meeting of secondary and natural
Causes did very much presage what happened about that time, and soon after; For
within one Month, the Emperor Ferdinand 2. who had been ill at Ratisbone, and
then removed to Vienna, gave up the Ghost; some Prodigies likewise happening in
other places of the Empire, before the meeting of the Electoral Princes at
Ratisbone, did much dishearten the common people, and caused them to despair of
any good success by that Treaty; One was, that at Wells in Austria the Emperors
house of Pleasure where he then lodged, was suddenly uncovered by a violent
Tempest; and this was accompanied by two others at Lintz, the first was the
sudden fall of an Arch of the Bridge made over the River Danubius, which the
Emperor had no sooner passed over, but it tumbled into the River; The second
was, that three carved Eagles placed upon the House of a Burgess of Lintz,
being broken down by the fury of this Tempest, were again raised up into the
Air by the same violent blast, and shattered three several ways, and one of
them at last fell upon the House appointed for the Assembly of the Province, an
other upon the Statehouse, and the third upon a public Conduit or Aqueduct.
This happened in 1636. and gave occasion to the distracted minds of men to
project terrible things from that meeting of the States.

LIVE. And this indeed was a bloody time in the Dukedom of Saxony, and there was
a general fear that the fury of the War would not be confined to that Country,
which was the more heightened by a strange Prodigy, which (though it admits of
no particular Interpretation) was as terrible as portentous; In the vear 1637,
the Conduit at Ise^ach situate in the midst of the Marketplace, instead of
Water, suddenly poured out Blood and so continued for two hours, before the
Water returned again; About which time many bloody skirmishes happened between
the Imperial and Swedish Forces few days passing without much bloodshed; and
the condition of the Dukedom of Saxony was exceeding deplorable, caused not
only by the Swedes their Enemies, but also by their seeming Friends the
Imperialists, who usually burnt those Places to the Ground, where they did not
find as much Provision for their Soldiers as they demanded; So that the Boors
and poor Contrymen did now long for Peace, which they were then so much
strangers to, desiring that their Swords might be turned into Plowshares, and
their Pikes into Shepherds Crooks; the Merchant longed for an open Trade, and
Persons of all Conditions desired an end to these Troubles and Distractions,
but it seems the miseries of that Country were not yet come to the height: In
the same year 1637, the Water at Weimar was again turned to blood; A strange
Worm in the shape of a Man, with perfect Lineaments, and a Golden Crown on his
head, was found in a Sallad at an Herb-womans shop in Collen, which (if not
Prodigious) was yet very dreadful. A Woman appeared in a mourning habit in the
Churchyard of St. Stephens, the Cathedral Church of Vienna, June 18. 1637. who
with a doleful voice from eleven to twelve a Clock at night yelled out these
terrible Words; Woe unto you; Woe unto you; Often repeating them, and no other;
The Bells without any help of men, suddenly rung out to the great affrightment
of the people who descanted upon these sad Omens, doubting that such horrid
Consequences would ensue as presented themselves to their several Fancies; And
indeed not without cause, for after this, a new time of trouble began, the
sword raging in the most and best part of Germany; and Fire likewise, not only
by chance, but by the Will and Choice of such as used that devouring Element to
the damage of their Enemies, and the General Ruin of their Country.

LV. Thus have I (with my Author) run over the Prodigious Signs and Warnings of
Germany, with a brief Account of the miserable Events which ensued; But having
met with a larger Relation of the dreadful Consequences of these amazing
Prodigies as they were published by Dr. Vincent a Learned English Physician,
who was an Eyewitness thereof; during the Woeful Calamities of that Country. I
do not think it amiss, nor any unprofitable digression to relate them in his
own Words; It is generally concluded and believed that the Burning Beacon, or
Blazing Star in 1618 was a sad forerunner of the merciless fury of War which
has reigned, and played the Tyrant in Germany ever since, the best Astrologers
expounding it to be The Sword of Germany; I have seen a Prophecy long since in
a Book belonging to a Canon of Nimmegen, and now in the Library at Zutphen,
That a time should come when one Frederick should be King, and then should the
Princes of Germany, the Nobility of Bohemia, and the People of both be very
much oppressed, and War should rage beyond the Precedent of former Ages. This
if ever is now fulfilled in our days, and if in such disorder it be possible, I
will keep this Order in speaking thereof. 1. Of the Exactions and Extortions
that have been committed. 2. The Tortures and Torments which have been
exercised. 3. The Rapes and Ravishments perpetrated. 4. The Robberies and
Pillaging, 5. The Bloodshed and Murders. 6. The Burnings and Destructions
committed by the Popish Armies in those Countries: These shall be the Scenes of
this first Act; Famine and Pestilence shall stand for the other Acts of this
direful Tragedy; In which as no Action or Passion was simple or single, so I
cannot rehearse them without sometime intermixing one with the other.

LVI. And first for Extortions and Exactions; As no Province or part of Germany
can boast of her Freedom from these miseries, though some have been more
oppressed than others; So there is no Prince nor State which has not suffered
therein; nay no City, no Town, nor almost no Person whatsoever; Every weeks
Relation tells us of Hundreds, Thousands, Millions of Rix-dollars or Gilders,
imposed, exacted, and extorted by the Conquerors or Spoylers, for the
redemption of men's Lives or Liberties, Goods or Houses; strange and almost
impossible to be paid have been the Ransomes taxed upon the Burgers at the
taking of some Towns; to which end they have threatened, imprisoned, and abused
the Magistrates till they condescended: At Cryphenberg they kept the Senators
shut up in the Common Hall, vexing and tormenting them so long with Hunger and
Smoke, that some of them dyed. In Heidelburg Castle many Burgers, and Reverend
Ministers were imprisoned, and fed with Bread and Water till the Charity of the
Reformed Churches could relieve them; After those at Frankendale had upon
necessity surrendered that Town, they could not enjoy the Articles granted them
by the Enemy, but the grave Counselors and other Magistrates were forced to
accept of such Conditions as were fitter for Slaves and Dogs than men; some
were thrown into Prison, and so severely used, that many of them dyed through
grief and sorrow; others though much impoverished, were forced to redeem
themselves with unreasonable Ransoms; The Goods of those which fled were
confiscated; and though the Inhabitants would willingly have left their Houses
and rich Furniture as plunder to those bloody Villains, yet they were detained
in the City, and their destruction was most cruellyplotted and designed; After
the same manner they dealt with many others, as well contrary to all Oaths and
Promises as to the Laws and Common Faith of all Nations.

LVII. But not to insist on these, let us in the second place consider the
Tortures and Torments which the Licentious Soldiers exercised upon the Persons
of the Inhabitants, without the least respect to Age, Quality, or Sex, which
discovered them to be rather Turks and Infidels than Men of Arms; For even
Princes, whose Persons are sacred, though they never bore Arms, as the old
Lantgrave of Hesse and others; yea, some of the Female Sex, as the old Duchess
Dowager of Wittenburg, have without any regard or pity been imprisoned, reviled
and abused by these Miscreants: Some of Tillies Soldiers caused the D. of
Saxonys Subjects to be tortured by half strangling them, and pressing their
Thumbs with wheels, they forced others to eat their own Excrements, which if
they refused, they thrust down their Throats, thereby choking some of them,
and those they suspected to have money, were exquisitely tortured to make them
confess; yea, Princely Personages have suffered the like cruelty with meaner
men. They tied strong Matches or Cords about the heads of some, which were
twisted, till the blood came out of their Eyes, Ears and Noses, yea, till their
Eyes started out of their heads; Others had burning Matches tied betwixt their
Fingers, to their Noses, Tongues, Jaws, Cheeks, Breasts, Legs, and Secrets,
even those parts which Nature hides, they either filled with Powder, or tied
bags of Powder to them, and so giving fire to them, in an horrible manner burst
their bellies, and killed them; They pierced and raced the skin and flesh of
some, as Artificers deal with Leather; and have drawn Cords through their
Thighs, Legs, Arms, Noses, Ears and Lips; Others they hung up in the smoke,
drying them with small Fires, and for fear they should dye too soon, they
sometime refreshed them with small drink or cold water; Some they burned or
smothered in hot Ovens, and roasted others with straw Fires, so that it was a
great favor to be hanged or strangled; they bound the hands and fee of some so
hard, that the Blood sprouted out at the end of their Fingers and Toes, and
tied the hands and feet of others backward together, stopping their Mouths with
Clouts to hinder them from Praying: Some were hanged up with Ropes tied to
their Privy parts, and hearing their roaring, they have endeavored to outroar
and drown their cries as in sport; yea, which is yet more detestable, when they
found any poor Creatures troubled with Ruptures, or burstness, they have
enlarged them, and then filling those parts with Gunpowder, have villanously
blown them up as with a Mine: Many they trussed up on high, hanging Stones and
Weights on their Feet to stretch out their bodies; They have planed the Faces
of others with Chisels and other Instruments, pretending to make it even; some
men they have openly gelded in the presence of their Wives and Children: The
Mouths of some they opened with Gags, and then poured stinking water, piss, or
other nasty Liquors down their Throats, saying it was a Swedish draught:
whereby growing sick, and their Bellies swelling like a Tun, they have dyed by
leisure with the greater Torment; They thrust a knotted clout down the Throats
of others, and plucked it up again with a string, thereby even moving the very
Bowels out of their places, by which cruel Torments they made some Deaf, Dumb,
and Blind, others Lame, and miserable Cripples, if they did not kill them
outright. If a Husband entreated for his Wife, or a Woman for her Husband, they
then tortured the Petitioner before the others Eyes, and which seems almost
incredible, when these poor Creatures were dying under their merciless hands,
and cried to God in their pain and anguish, these hellish Executioners would
command and force them to call upon, and pray to the Devil; Infinite almost and
unspeakable indeed were the Cruelties exercised by the outrageous Soldiers on
all sides; nay some were so damnably wicked as to make it their study to invent
new Tortures; they took an ancient Reverend Divine, and stripping him, bound
him upon a Table on his back, and fastened a great strong Cat upon his Belly,
beating and pricking the Cat to make her fix her Teeth and Claws in the poor
man's Belly; So that the Man and Cat partly through Famine, and partly through
pain and anguish both dyed under their Tormentors; some of the cursed Croats,
or Crabats endeavored to teach their Horses to eat the flesh of Christians,
and contrived worse Tortures than Phalaris, Nero, Dionysius, or any of those
monstrous Tyrants of former ages ever arrived to, so that we may say, Caucasus
bred them, Tigers fed them, and Hell taught them, the last of which, without
deep repentance, was probably their eternal Lot.

LVIII. I have said much of the former particular, though not the Tenth part of
what was acted: I will now thirdly speak a little of the ensuing Abomination;
Rapes and Ravi hments hardly to be imagined, and beyond all humane modesty did
they commit, Virgins, Matrons, Widows, and Wives without distinction have they
violated and forced even in the presence of their Parents, Husbands and
Neighbors, yea, Women with Child, and even in Childbed; No Ghappel, Church, or
other place has been free from their filthiest pollutions, and barbarisms; The
very Hospitals and Bedlam-houses have not been spared, their Devilish
Debaucheries have there found Subjects for their Lusts. In the Land of Hesse, a
poor lean mad woman who had been kept in chains above Twenty years, was by
these Hell Hounds let loose; to whom they brought diverse others like her self,
some mad, others dumb, all wretched Creatures, they tied their Coats about
their ears, and then shamefully abused them; In Pomerania they ravished the
handsomest Virgins of that Country, before their Parents faces, forcing their
Friends to sing Psalms to them all the while. In Italy I have heard the
Villainies of the German Troops recited with Tears; Among others, a beautiful
Maid was hid by her Parents in a Dunghill, but they discovering her, ravished
her, and then barbarously cutting her in pieces, hung her quarters up in the
Church, and bid her Friends pray to the Saints for her relief: In the Land of
Brunswick two Soldiers took a Girl of ten years old, and carried her into the
Wood to ravish her. The Mother with hands held up, came running after our Coach
(says my Author) crying out to my Colonel, but he being a stranger had no
command there, and could not relieve her, soon after wesaw the 2 Horsemen come
out of the Wood, whether they left the poor Child dead or alive I know not:
Some virtuous and chaste women they have offered to kill, or thrown their
Children into the Fire to make them yield: They spared not the very Nuns, but
after they had broke into their Cloisters, and pillaged them of all their
goods, they have likewise ravished and killed some of them; Some Women have
leaped into Rivers and Wells; others have killed themselves, because they would
not be subject to the lusts of these Hellish Furies; nay not only sick and weak
Virgins and Women have been violated till they dyed, but these wretches have
committed filthiness with the dead Bodies.

LIX. But fourthly as to Robberies and Pillaging, they were so numerous, that
no man could pass any where in Germany, but he was robbed, stripped, and perhaps
killed; The Merchants of Frankford, Noremburg, Leipswick, Hamburg, etc. have
had too woeful experience thereof; The Merchants of Basil returning from the
Mart of Strasburg and other Fairs, were set upon by the Imperialists in their
Lodgings; and though they offered to prove themselves Merchants, and so ought
to pass freely, yea, though they begged their Lives upon their knees, yet they
villanously murdered Ten of them, saying, They must dye because they were
Heretics: The rest leaving their Goods and Clothes behind, escaped stark naked
in the night by flight. Yea, the very Convoys who pretended to guard
Travelers, were often times as bad as the Enemies, watching all occasions to
cheat them of their money, goods, and Horses, spoiling their Wagons when they
made a stand, and rifling and stripping the meanest person if he stragled in
the least from the Company; Two Countesses of great Nobility, with their fair
Daughters, were entertained by us (says my Author) in the Castle of
Heidelburg, and when provision grew scarce, they went away with the Enemies
pasport, notwithstanding which they were robbed and ri^^ed in their Coaches of
all they had, not leaving them the very Garments that covered them; yea they
shamefully plundered the Danish Ambassador, though privileged by his Office in
all Nations; so that the case was strangely altered in Germany, where not long
before a man might have rid with an hundred pound in his pocket, and only a
whip in his hand through all those Countries without the least fear of being
injured; But now the very Soldiers even robbed one another if they found them
in the least out of their quarters; neither did they acknowledge God nor Devil,
but in their cursed Oaths and Blasphemies, nor was there any action so vile,
but they were ready to commit it, and this introduces the next particular.

LX. Which is, Fifthly to relate the Bloodshed and Murders committed by them,
to report the whole of which will be equally impossible, and incredible;
Alstedius says, that before the K. of Sweden came into Germany, the Wars had
consumed an Hundred Thousand, and if so, how many Millions have miserably
perished; The cruelty of the Soldiers toward the Inhabitants of those
Countries is inexpressible, all persons having the same measure without
distinction; At Lanshood in Bavaria, the Soldiers entered by force, killing not
only all they found in Arms, but the very Priests kneeling at the Altars, and
the poor Peasants and Country People were killed upon every slight occasion;
There were among the Imperialists a base rascally sort of Horsemen called
Croats or Crabbats aforementioned, the tenth part whereof were not of that
Country, but a miscellany or mixture of all Nations, without God, or Religion,
having only the outsides of men, and scarce that neither, but were bloody
Monsters within; These Rakehels made no Conscience of murdering men and women,
both old and young, yea, of very innocent Babes, whom like the Wild Beasts
among which they were bred, these Villains inhumanely eat, when they might have
had other food; By these the poor people were barbarously knocked down in the
Fields, and Highwayes, and likewise slaughtered, stabbed and tortured; I have
seen them (says my Author) beat out the brains of poor, old, decrepit Women
only in sport, and commit many other outrages too long to relate; yea it was so
common for the poor people to see others killed, that as if there had been no
Relation, Affection, Neighborhood, or Kindred, none pitied them, or had any
compassion upon them, hardly any cried out, Oh my Father, Oh my Brother, etc.
The Croats very seldom gave Quarter, but killed all that were at their mercy;
and others received Pay, for bringing the Noses and Ears of their Enemies to
their Masters: Tilly after the defeat of the D. of Brunswick at H^uxt on the
River Main, drew out of that Town Threescore Soldiers, and caused them all to
be killed in cold blood before the Gate, saying, That he sacrificed them to
Count Mansfield their Master.

LXI. Lastly, For Burnings, pulling down and ruining of Churches, Cities,
Villages, the like has never been heard; The Swedish Army burned above Two
Thousand Villages in revenge of the Cruelties acted in the Palatinate; But
their Enemies spared neither Friends nor Foes, what goodly Houses of the
Nobility and Gentry were on every side defaced or burnt to Ashes; So that all
men betook themselves to Arms: No tilling of the Land, no breeding of Cattle,
no place secure but the Camp, no Plow to follow but the War, for he that was
not an Actor with the rest, must of necessity be a miserable sufferer^; If they
should have sowed any thing one year, the next year the Soldiers would have
devoured it, so that they judged it better to sit still than to labor, and let
others reap the benefit thereof, from whence proceeded an Universal Desolation;
most of the People and Inhabitants swarmed as banished men in other Countries,
as in Switzerland, France, Italy, and the Venetian Territorys. From Basil to
Strasburg, and from thence to Heidelburg, and Marpurg, which was some Hundreds
of miles, I scarce saw a man (says my Author) in the Fields and Villages;
Little better was it in traveling from France to the middle of Bohemia, and
from the Alps about Auspurg to the Baltic Sea, though a compass of ground of
above Two Thousand miles, and not much less than three times all Britain, the
greatest part of the People being destroyed and extinguished by Wars, length of
time, and all manner of miseries.

LXII. Famine comes in the next place, a thing so grievous that David
preferred the Pestilence in his Choice; To see men slain by the Sword, or dye
of Contagious Diseases is not yet so grievous as to see them dye of Famine, or
to kill and eat one another; when Samaria was besieged by Benhadad K. of Syria,
the Famine was so great that an Asses head was sold for fourscore pieces of
Silver, and the fourth part of a Cab of Doves Dung for fifty pieces of Silver;
Two Women agreed to eat their own Children, and when they had boiled and eaten
one, the other Woman hid hers; In the siege of Jerusalem, Mice, Rats, and Hides
were good meat, and Women did dress and eat their own Children, the smell
whereof drew others who were hunger-starved to come to share with them: But
that Cities which were not besieged, and a Country naturally fruitful, should
be so ruined, as not to be able for so long a time to afford Bread to a poor
remnant of people, but that they must be forced to eat Carrion, and dead men,
yea one another whilst alive, this was lamentable, and hitherto never heard of;
Had not I been provided (says my Author) with victuals at my coming out of
Switzerland, Famine had arrested me in Germany, for there was not any where
meat to be had for money; The Italians and Spaniards who had been at the fight
at Norlingen, and being disarmed, wandered about, were so black and feeble for
hunger, that had I not given them part of my provision, I believe they had torn
me in pieces, and eaten me; Traveling from Newstadt toward Frankendale in a
snowy day, I unexpectedly met with the Army of Duke Bernard, whose straggling
Forerunners came riding up to me by couples, and when I looked for a worse
errand, they asked only for a little Bread, which my Guide bestowed upon them
so long as we had any; From thence to Manheim and Heidelburg many dead men lay
strawed on the way, especially on the places where they had made Fires, who
perished through cold and want. When we were besieged in the Castle of
Heidelburg, our Soldiers at first killed more Horses in a day then they could
eat, least they should dye of themselves for want of hay; therefore what was
left they threw out of the Castle down the Rock, which the Enemy in the night
drew into the Town, though some of them were slain in the Action, and so they
heartily eat our Horseflesh; At which time the Sergeant Major with fifty men
issued out upon three hundred of the Enemy entrenched on the East side of the
Castle, many were slain; others broke their necks down the Rocks; Our Soldiers
being Masters of the Trench, fell to ransack the Enemies knapsacks which they
had left behind them, but found nothing in them except our own Horseflesh,
which yet was not unwelcome, for it grew scarce with us; so that now we were
compelled to kill the Horses which stood fasting and sleeping on the Dunghill,
not out of compassion to them, but for our own necessity; Another Sergeant
Major had two very fine Horses, our Soldiers took one and eat him; but he
thinking to make sure of the other, fastened him to the Wall with a strong
Chain and a Padlock, but they taking their opportunity, cut off the Horses
Neck, and left the head in the Chain, carrying away the body, and greedily
eating it. At length Dogs and (...) me in request, so that we could smell our
meat (...) off, and yet on the Table it was still more loathsome, the taste being
answerable to the smell, yet we eat it exceeding savourly, but our bread at
last failing, we yielded to necessity.

For the Armies every where overrunning the Country, devoured both Corn and
Cattle, so that those who had any goods lest, offered to give all for a little
food; But that being not to be obtained, they were fain to lie in the streets
and highwayes, (much contrary to their former way of living) to beg something
for Gods sake, wherewith to refresh their dying Souls; yet no sooner had they
swallowed what was given them, but they presently gave up the Ghost; Memorable
is that relation which Reinmannus records of the Famine in Alsatia, that
Valentine Engelin a Citizen of Rufack, with the Sexton of the Church deposed
before a Magistrate upon their Oaths, That Ann^ the Daughter of John Ebstein
confessed to them, that she came from Colmar, where she had waited many days
before the Hangmans door in hope to get a piece of Horseflesh to satisfy her
hunger, but not prevailing, she was now come to Rufack entreating them, that if
there were the body of any young man or woman unburied, they would give it her
to eat to preserve her Life; And that two other women and a boy made the same
request; affirming that they had lived a long time upon dead men's flesh; After
which the Churchyard of St. Nicholas where the dead bodies lay, was shut up;
Lastly they declared that four young maids had cut in pieces the dead body of
another maiden of eleven years old, and had eaten every one their part of her;
Many who survived the loss of all they had, sustained themselves for a long
time with Roots, Acorns, green Fruits, grass, Thistles, and other Weeds, which
the very beasts would not have eaten, upon which several of them grew
distracted and died; In some places the poor famished people were so faint,
that they had not strength to bury one another, so that the dead bodies have
been devoured by Dogs, Foxes, and Wolves; Yea some Persons have run mad for
mere hunger; In some Cities the Inhabitants have by this Famine been
constrained to kill and sell all manner of Vermin in public shops, as Dogs,
Cats, Mice, Rats, etc. A woman at Hanover who used commonly to sell Dogs flesh
to the Soldiers; was in the street assaulted by Dogs, and had all her cloths
torn off her body, so that she was forced to sit down on the ground to hide her
shame, and had she not been timely rescued, she had been torn in pieces by the
Dogs. If any had a Beast left which he carefully kept for his necessity, some
or other of his Acquaintance would, if possible, steal it from him and eat it;
They snatched from each other with great eagerness, the very stinking Carrion
which had lain 5 or 6 weeks dead, and full of Maggots, yea, they fought and
beat one another to get a morsel thereof, as it happened at a place called
Dubach; It moved the Grandees and Governors to compassion to see their People
in such extreme want; Insomuch that the Noble Earl of Falkenstein seeing his
Subjects crave sustenance of him, commanded his Servants to give them his
Hounds to satisfy their hunger, whom they presently killed, and eat with all
greediness.

And as the Famine increased, when no more food was to be got, men were like
enraged Beasts one against another, and gathering together by Troops, watched
one another upon the Highways, and so murdered, dressed, and eat each other, so
that none could pass safely on the way, or in the streets without a guard, or
very well armed, and though some have been taken and severely punished by
Justice, yet others continued lurking to seize upon Passingers; Three Maidens
at Odenheim near Worms agreed to live together and take their chance, but as
the Proverb says, Necessity has no Law, and hunger is a sharp Thorn, for in a
while they were all so extremely pinched with Famine, that they sought to take
away one another lives to save their own, Two of them conspired to kill the
third by strangling her in bed, or some other way, and after to dress and eat
her up. All which they did accordingly; Then the second resolved to strangle
her Companion, and cut off her head, which when she had done, and devoured her
flesh, her heart was so hardened, that she went to a Village called Ridisheim
to a Woman of her Acquaintance called Margaret, whose Husband was absent for
fear of the Soldiers; the woman entertained her kindly, rejoicing that she
came to see her; But in the night lying by the woman, she barbarously cut off
her head, and binding the dead body upon a board, brought it to her house at
Piedessen, but being pricked with the sharpness of hunger, she had not patience
to cut the body in pieces, but only cut off the head and both the hands, which
she washed and dressed: The Husband coming home missed his wife, and inquiring
of the Neighbors, they told him such a maid was seen with her; upon which he
went immediately to her house, and knocking at the door, asked her if she had
not seen his Wife, she answered him, no; But such deeds of cruelty are hard to
be concealed, Murder will out, as they say; The man goes into her house, and
casting his eyes round, looks into every corner, at length he spies an hand to
stick out of the Pot which hung over the Fire; Hereupon being overcome with
grief, he rages against the Murderess, and threatens her so severely, that she
presently confesses the whole truth to him; thereupon he complains to a
Justice, the woman is seized and brought before the Lords of Justice sitting in
the Judgment Seat; They deliberate a great while about her punishment, some
were of opinion that what she had acted was not as a Rational Creature, but as
a Brute. since the desire of Food is common to us with Beasts. But others
alleged such horrid wickedness ought severely to be punished for a Terror to
others; Upon which she was led to the common place of Justice, her head was cut
off, and her body being bound to a wheel, was left as a spectacle to all
Passengers of the horror of the Fact.

That which follows (says my Author) I cannot write without Tears, no man ever
hated his own flesh, says the Scripture, and such are the Children of our
Bodies, so that it is even against nature to destroy such fruit; Yet the
dreadful sharpness of hunger has brought this to pass; Oh what is that
miserable necessity which makes us even break stone Walls, which causes us to
forget our nearest and dearest Relations, that vanquishes our most natural, and
most powerful Passions, and tempts us to destroy that which we before so dearly
loved, and so carefully cherished: At Oterburg in the Palatinate, a Widow woman
living near the Churchyard, her name well known, had a Daughter of about nine
or ten years old; This child was grown so faint with hunger, that one time with
sorrowful eyes looking upon her Mother, she said, Sweet Mother, I would
willingly dye so I were rid of my The Terrible Prodigies during the Wars and
Desolations in Germany Page. 125

pain, Oh that you would make an end of me, then should I go from whence I
came, or if I should kill you, then you would be rid of your pain; The Mother
looking earnestly upon her again, with a woeful sigh replied, And what would
thou do with me Child; The Girl very mournfully replied I would then eat you,
for they say that man's flesh is very sweet; The Mother at these words fell a
weeping, and being wonderfully distracted in her own thoughts, like a Ship
tossed between the two Rocks of Desperate Neceffity, and Motherly Affection; at
length the first of them prevailed, and suddenly catching the Child by the
head, and untying her hairlace, twisteth it about the neck of this innocent
Lamb, and so presently strangled her, being dead, and she having no knife to
cut the Body in pieces, she took a Spade, and therewith hewed it into Gobbets,
and so dressing the head, and part of the Body, eat it up; Some part thereof
she sold to her Neighbors for about six pence a pound; Her Child being long
missed, her acquaintance asked her where it was, and how she came by that
Flesh, she replied, It was Hogs flesh which she had got of the Soldiers who
passed that way; But perceiving the truth would be discovered, she freely
confessed all; whereupon she was taken and Imprisoned, being allowed half a
pound of bread, and a Kann of Water a day till her sentence; Being after
examined before the Lords, she told them, That she was happy, since she came to
Prison, and would be glad to lie there all her life for now she had wherewith
to abate her hunger and thirst, her dreadful pain was thereby much abated: This
so moved the Judges to compassion, that they freed her from Prison, and let her
go as Innocent, as being compelled thereto by woeful Necessity; I cannot but
record another story of the like nature; A Woman of Hornbach having been newly
brought to bed, and wanting milk to nourish her Babe, she kissed and embraced
it a thousand times, drowning it almost with her Tears, and after a long
Conflict with her own disturbed Soul, she killed it with a knife, and afterward
dressed and eat it; When it began to be known, she was examined before the
Judges, who asked her Why she killed her Child, she answered, That mighty and
intolerable hunger had forced her to do it, and that it was the fruit of her
own body, which she thought she might better make use of, than of any other;
However she was condemned to dye, and accordingly executed for a terror to
others.

I am even weary (says he) of these lamentable Relations, yet more miserable
Accidents, if more miserable can be, followed these; They traced and followed
the dead bodies to their place of Burial, and then digging them out of their
Graves, dressed and eat them; so that in diverse places, at Worms especially,
they were forced to set watch at the Churchyards, and over the Graves to keep
the dead from being stolen and eaten; Yea to that extremity were they brought
that some constrained by hunger, took Poison to dispatch themselves, nay the
very Wild Beasts in Woods were starved for want of Prey; The Earl of Arundel
traveling to Frankford in his way toward England, a Boor or Peasant of the
Country being their Guide, and having his Legs bare, a Fox pursued him even
amidst the Earls Servants, and would not forbear biting of his Legs and heels
for extreme hunger, till they gave him a blow on the neck, and so took him
alive; The eyes of the Fox were sunk in his head, his bones stuck out, and he
was so extreme lean, that his ribs almost clung together; they carried him
alive with them in the Coach, and after a few days he dyed; Another English
Gentleman who came about that time through Germany into England, by the by-ways
thereby to escape the Soldiers, reported that Wolves, Foxes, and other Wild
Beasts lay dead for want of Food, and that in some Places men lived only upon
Robbery, and the spoil of Strangers, or of one another, so that Thievery was
the only Trade then practiced among them.

LXIII. Thus much of this tremendous Judgment of Famine, In the last place let
Pestilence, Sickness and Diseases bring up the Bear of this lamentable Scene of
sorrow. These Distempers are oft-times the Companions or Effects of War, it is
very rare for a great Army to stay long in a place, and not to leave some
Infection behind them; Beyond the River Dona, after the Swedes departure from
thence with their Forces, the Plague, and several unheard of Diseases swept
away a multitude of people, the like happened in the Palatinate and Bohemia;
After Mastricht was taken, the Town and Country were grievously afflicted with
Fevers, Fluxes, and the Pestilence above all, and the same year the Armies of
the Duke of Lorrain, and the Rhinegrave dyed miserably in the like kind in
Alsatia; The Army of the Prince of Orange having taken Rhineberg left such
infection in Brabant, that the Inhabitants the year after were afraid to live
in their own Houses; About the same time General Holck being sent with six
thousand men to invade Saxony, he plundered the City of Leipswick, and
committed as great outrages as Tillies Army had done before, but such a Plague
overtook both him and his Army, that most of his Soldiers dyed like rotten
sheep, and being infected himself, he offered six hundred Rix dollars for a
Protestant Minister to instruct and comfort him, But both he and his Soldiers
had so behaved themselves, that no Minister was to be found: In the mean time
all his Friends and Servants forsook him, except his Concubine, who stayed with
him to the last; He had been both Protestant and Papist, but revolted from
both, so that being guilty of his own perfideousness, and the execrable Murders
and Rapines he had occasioned, he dyed utterly despairing of future happiness;
In the City of Basil above Twenty Thousand dyed of the Plague; Their Popish
Neighbors of the City of Trent rejoiced at their sufferings, as being their
Enemies in Religion, but their Joy was very short, for the Winter following the
Pestilence raged dreadfully among them, and though that City was not great, yet
above Three Thousand Persons were buried out of it; This Plague was
extraordinary virulent, and altogether incurable; Some dyed raging, others were
killed with their Carbuncles, others were swollen and discolored as if they had
taken poison, and some dyed most strangely spotted; If any Soldier were but
slightly wounded, it presently turned to a malignant Ulcer, defying all means
of Cure; when the Infection got into a Kindred, it destroyed Parents, Children,
and most times all of the blood; which demonstrates that a divine hand was very
conspicuous in this woeful visitation, though the Food and Air might also much
conduce to impoyson the Bodies; In the Siege of Hannover above twenty two
thousand People were buried of the Sickness, and had not it pleased God hereby
to diminish their numbers, they had yielded the Town for want of Victuals; In
the same Seige Soldiers who went seemingly well, and with their Eyesight upon
the Guard, came off again in a few hours struck stark blind, even Thirty at a
time were thus afflicted, but the Disease afterward falling into their Legs,
most of them recovered.

About this time almost all Germany felt this punishment in a grievous manner;
In Swaben, Tyrol, and all along the Rivers of Rhine and Main, the Plague raged
furiously; The King of Hungary was fain to dissolve his Court, and send his
Servants away to other Cities for their security; The Inhabitants of Memingen,
Campden, and Isnen in Swaben were utterly consumed, and none left alive; In the
Country thereabout formerly inhabited by above Thirty Thousand men, there were
not Four hundred Souls to be found; In the Confines of Bavaria the living were
not sufficient to bury the dead, but Rats and Mice devoured their Carcases to
the great horror of Passingers; Holland and the Low Countries smarted very sore
likewise; The University of Leyden buried Thirty Thousand; The Country
Villages and the Hague were miserably afflicted, and also Brussels and Antwerp;
The Cities of Nimegen, Emerick, Rees, Guelders with other places near, were not
only visited therewith, (whereof the Marquess of Avtona the Spanish General,
and other Commanders dyed) but there happened new contagious Diseases, among
others, strange Fluxes, and a Pox hitherto unknown; The Emperors Army forraging
and dispersing themselves all over the Country scattered the Contagion from
their Quarters at Hailburn to the Land of Wirtenburg, and many places became
hereby utterly depopulated; But after Gallas his taking in the Towns upon the
Rhine, such an Infection happened through the stink of the dead unburied
bodies, that in the Bishopric of Mentz alone there dyed of this and Famine
Twenty Four Thousand People; In Saxony, Brandenburg, Pomerania, Mecklenburg,
etc. the Pestilence and other Diseases were so Universal, that these and the
Sword seemed to contend which should be the greatest destroyers; It consumed in
Saxony no less than Sixteen Thousand Souls in two Months time; Thus as by the
print of the foot of Hercules you may guess at his stature, so by these few
particulars of the miseries of some places, we may judge of the lamentable
Condition of the whole Country, where these dreadful Judgments have left such
wounds, as perhaps posterity for some Generations will see the scars of; And so
I have done with this particular Relation of the Prodigies and Miseries of
Germany for several years, and shall now proceed more generally according to my
former method.

LIVE. In the year 1638. Six Suns were seen at once in Cornwall, and several
Apparitions of men in the Heavens preparing to fight with each other; Also
Navys of Ships were visible in the Sky; The Scots at this time make an
Insurrection, the King goes in Person to appease them, they renounce the
Bishops and Prelacy, and set up Presbytery in Scotland; In this year 1638.
happened a terrible Earthquake in the Island of St. Michael one of the Agores,
or Tercera's belonging to the Spaniard in the Atlantic Ocean Westward; Upon
June 26. (...) Island began universaly to quake and tremble (...) which
continued eight days, so that the People leaving the Cities, Towns and Castles,
were forced to (...) in the open Fields: After which this Pr^^digy succeeded;
Six miles distant from the (...) or Pick of (...), at a place called (...),
where Fishermen with their Boats use to fish in Summer, They at this time
caught such a multitude, that no Boat returned with less than Ten Thousand
Fish; At this very place in July this year, Fire broke forth with such
unexpressable violence, notwithstanding the depth of the Ocean, which had been
fathomed one hundred and twenty foot deep, that the very Sea it self was not
sufficient to extinguish such mighty flames; The space of this boiling Fire was
about two Acres, and the Fire arose with such mighty force, that it reached
even to the clouds, carrying with it Water, Sand, Earth, Stones, and much other
matter, which like Feather-beds flew into the Air to the terror of the
Beholders afar off, and falling down again into the water, resembled a kind of
Pultis or Frumeatie; and had not the Wind by divine Providence blown off from
the Isle into the Sea, and thereby driven back this outrageous Fire, without
doubt the whole Country had been utterly burnt up and destroyed by this
formidable Combustion; soon after it cast forth stones of so vast a bigness, to
the height of above three lances, that they seemed rather like entire Mountains
than Stones, which in their fall meeting and dashing against others they broke
into a Thousand pieces, with a terrible noise and Rattling, which afterward
being taken up mouldred into a black Sand. Moreover out of this vast quantity
of matter thrown out, a new Island arose even in the midst of the deep Ocean;
In the beginning it was not above five Acres, but increasing continually in
four days after, it took up the length of five mile; so vast a multitude of
fish perished by this burning, that eight Ships of Jndia could hardly contain
them, and being dispersed about all parts of the Island were gathered together,
and buried in deep Ditches by the Inhabitants for eighteen miles round about to
prevent any Contagion which might arise from them, but the Sulphur or Brimstone
was smelt twenty four miles. This year the Hollanders beat the Spanish Fleet
upon the Coast of England.

LXV. The same year, 1638. the Learned Kircherus made a search and discovery
into the burning Mountain of Vesuvius in the Kingdom of Naples, so famous for
fiery Irruptions for many Ages, which being one of the most tremendous Miracles
of Nature I shall relate in his own words; After so great Dangers sustained by
Sea and Land in diligently searching out the incredible power of nature working
in Buroughs and Passages under ground, I had a great desire to inform my self
concerning Vesuvius, I went therefore to Porticus (the Porch or Entrance) a
Town situate at the Foot of the Mountain, where hiring an honest Countreyman
for a true and skilful Companion, and guide in the way, not without a
considerable reward, I ascended the Mountain at midnight through, difficult,
rough, uneven, and steep Passages; when I came to the top or mouth I saw what
is horrible to be expressed; I saw it all over of a light Fire with a dreadful
combustion, and stench of Sulphur and burning Bitumen; whereat being
astonished, methoughts I beheld the habitation of Hell, wherein nothing seemed
to be wanting but the Apparitions of Ghosts, Devils, and damned Spirits; I then
observed horrible bellowings and roarings in the mountain, and unexpressible
stink, smoaks mixed with darkish Globes of Fire, which both the bottom and sides
of the Mountain continually belched forth from eleven several places, and made
me belch, and ready to vomit; O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! How incomprehensible are thy ways! If thou show thy power
against the wickedness of mankind in such formidable and portentous Prodigies
and Omens of nature? What shall it be in that last day wherein the Earth shall
be destroyed by thy wrath, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat? In
the morning as soon as it was light, that I might with the more diligence,
search into the Bowels of the Mountain, I chose a place to set my feet secure
upon, which was an huge Rock, plain on the top, where talting forth my
Pantometer (or Universal Measure) I took the dimensions of the Mountain, and
found by Geometrical Computation, the compass of the Mouth to be almost three
hundred paces, but the depth thereof eight hundred paces; The Mountain was
every where up and down cragged, and broken, yet no gradual declining, for any
passage to the inward parts, but descended in its compass of an equal bigness
like a Well, and although the bottom seemed narrower, yet I judged it only to
proceed from the exceeding great depth and distance from our sight; In the very
middle of the bottom, Nature seemed to have made a Shop or Workhouse of Fire,
with everlasting gushings forth and streamings of smoke and flames, which seem
to be employed for boiling of Sulphur, Bitumen, and other Minerals in
preparation for deadly ruins and slaughters afterward to be committed, since
the vapors contained therein not having room, endeavor to free themselves
with such great force and violence, accompanied with horrible cracklings and
noise, that the Mountain seems to be tossed with an Earthquake or trembling, upon
which the higher and softer parts of the Mountain that are clung together of
Ashes, Cinders, Rains, and other Refuses of Minerals being shook in pieces, and
loosned by this quaking, and so falling like Hills into the bottom of this
Hellish Gulf, cause such terrible noises as are often heard, which are so
great and fearful as may daunt the most stout and courageous Spirit; The matter
which was continually belched forth from the center or bottom of the Mountain
made as it were a new Mountain, which had wonderful variety of Furrows or
hollow Channels, with various kinds of melted Minerals, formed as it were by
the ingenious Pencil of Nature, sometimes of a greenish color from Brass; then
yellow from Sulphur, Arsnick, and Sandarack; presently after Red from Cinabar,
Red-Lead and Vermilion; afterward Black from Vitriol mixed with water, or of an
Ashy color from the very Cinders. Thus far the laborious Kircher.

LXVI. Hear now what our ingenious Countryman Mr. G. Sandys relates of this
fiery Mountain Vesuvius, It is situate in Campania Faelix, about eight miles
from Naples, which City has received great injuries and prejudices by its
Cinders, and violent throwing out of stones even to its Walls and Houses; This
Mountain has vast Fountains of Fire, and was heretofore high on every side
before the inward parts were consumed; it usually utters smoke by day, but by
night, Flames; its manner is to send forth a loud sounding or roaring noise and
bellowing first, and then to belch forth a huge quantity of Cinders to the
great danger of those who pass by, but if a vehement wind blow upon it, the
Ashes or Cinders are raised so high and driven so far in length, that it is
certain they have sometimes been carried as far as Constantinople though many
hundred miles distance, and so affrighted them that they have all ran to their
Prayers to implore the averting of Divine Wrath; The Mountain has a double
top, that toward the North ends in a Plain, the other toward the South aspires
higher, which when covered with Clouds, prognosticates rain to the Neopolitans,
In the top there is a large deep hollow in form of an Amphitheater, in the
midst is a Pit which leads into the Entrails of the Earth, the matter thrown up
is ruddy, light and soft, the uttermost brow of the Hill flourishes with Trees,
and excellent Pasturage, the midst is shaded with Chestnut Trees and others,
bearing diverse fruits; The lower parts are admirably clothed with Vines which
afford the best Greek Wines in the World; It has at diverse times made dreadful
Eruptions and Devastations which (as well as Mount Aetna of which hereafter)
have been accounted ominous, and to portend some woeful Calamities to ensue.

But never any thing appeared so horrible (faith my Author) as what happened in
the Reign of the Emperor Titus eighty years after Christ, For then it disgorged
such boiling Waves and Floods of Fire as consumed the Neighboring Cities; And
then it was that Pliny the Second, that great searcher into Nature, and the
famous Author of the Natural History, and then Admiral of the Roman Navy, being
desirous to discover the reason thereof, was choked and suffocated in
approaching too near to discover so great a mystery of Nature, yet not wilfully
I suppose, though some Authors ^^sert that he threw himself into it, because he
could not understand the natural cause of (...) Condagration; At that time
there issued (...) so great a (...) that the very Sun seemed to be (...) an
(...), and likewise huge Stones, and such plenty of (...), that Rome, Africa
and Syria were even covered with them, and besides, Beasts, Fish, and Fo^l
which were desir^^ed, it overwhelmed Herculan^ and Pumptins two adjoining
Cities with Pumi^e Stones, together with all the People sitting in the Theater;
There were also heard dismal noises all about the Province, and Giants of
incredible bigness were seen to stalk up and down the top and edges of the
Mountains (if the Peoples san^ies were not imposed upon (...) their
astonishment) which extraordinary (...) was judged either a cause, or Presage
of a (...) which reigned in Rome and Italy long (...) the Roman Historian
relates, (...) the (...) transported in the Air, obsoured and darkened ^^l
Europe, and that the Inhabitants (...) wonderfully affrighted therewith, (...)
their Emperor Leo forsook the City, and that in memorial of the same they
celebrated yearly the 12 of November; It likewise burnt in the 6 year of
Constantine the Fourth, and groaned, but ejected no Cinders; Platina writes,
that it flamed in 685, prognosticating the Death of Pope Benedict 2. with the
ensuing Slaughters, Rapines, and Deaths of Princes; During the Papacy of
Benedict 8, and 9. it is said to have done the like, and though it has made
diverse dreadful devastations, yet the fruitful Ashes thrown about did seem to
repair the foregoing losses with a quick and mavelous fruitfulness; At the
foot of the Hill there are diverse holes and vents, out of which exceeding cold
winds do continually issue, and which at Padua they let into their Rooms at
pleasure, to qualify the heat of Summer; In the year 1610 in February,
Vesuvius began to flame, to the great affrightment of the Neapolitans, and
solemn Prayers and Supplications being ordered, they went in Procession with
the head of Januarius their Patron, and the defender of their City carried
before them; whereby the deluded people were persuaded that the destruction
which hung over their heads was prevented, In 1631 was a new Eruption, and
again in 1635 was an Earthquake in (...).

LXVII. In the year 1633 likewise the industrious Kircher made a discovery of
the Phlegrean, or Fiery Plains in the Fields of (...) near Naples, which being
another wonderful Prodigy of Nature, may be worth relating; Passing by Naples
(says he) I could not let slip the opportunity of inquiring and looking into
those Sulphurous Plains so much celebrated in all Ages; Having therefore gone
through a Passage under ground, called the Grotte, arched and made hollow, to
the Mountain Pausilippus; not far from Puteoli, between the Jaws of the
Mountains a large Plain presents it self to view, altogether dreadful and full
of horror, in length about Twelve hundred Foot, in breadth a Thousand; The
whole Plain is surrounded with Hills of high and steep Rocks, which were
formerly very lofty, but are since devoured by perpetual Fires; In the bottom
little hills are seen to burn and flame, with a strong smell of Brimstone which
is carried by the Winds through all the Neighboring Regions, even as far as
Naples, some parts of the Plain have an infinite number of holes, and are
yellow with a Sulphurish matter; the ground when it is touched by those who
walk thereon, sounds and rattles like a Drum by reason of the hollowness
thereof, and you may feel as it were, not without astonishment, boiling waters
under your feet, and thick fiery fumes to hiss and flow from one place to
another with a great crackling noise through the Pipes and Passages under
ground which are made by these fiery Exhalations; the force of this is very
great as you may experience by stopping any of these holes with an heavy stone,
or the like; for then you shall observe the violence of the smoke presently to
throw it up, and belch it forth again; But an huge Laky Ditch in the same plain
did wonderfully affect me; It is full of boiling waters, very frightful for
their blackness, that one would imagine it were a Kettle, or Caldron boiling
with Pitch and Rosin; It is likewise admirable, that the swallowing Gulf casts
forth these boiling waters eight or ten foot above a man's height, in the
fashion of a spire Steeple, or Pyramid; In the Mount^^ns and Rocks wherewith
this Vulcanian Plain is encompassed, there are Pas^a^es like Ch^mneys, some
whereof breath out a continual Wind, with a terrible sound and ra^ling and also
with such strength, that if you cast a stone thereinto, it is struck back again
to your hand with great fury; some of these breathing holes dart forth smoke
mixed with flames; you would here think your self almost in the midst of Hell,
where all things appear horrid, sad, and lamentable, and you are even struck
bre^^hless with the stench of Sulphur, Bitumen, Napthe, and other Earths,
Clays, Marls and Minerals;

We must not here omit Mr. Sandys his Relation of a^most memorable Earthquake,
and burning which happened near the City Puteoli in 1538. with the new formed
Mountain; For the famous Lake Lucrinus hard by, extended formerly to the deadly
Sulphurous Lake Avernus, supposed the entrance into Hell by ignorant Antiquity,
where they offered Infernal Sacrifices to Pluto their God of Hell, and to the
Manes or Ghosts of their deceased Friends, who were there said to have returned
answers to what was demanded of them: This place is now only a little watery
plash, choked up by the horrible and astonishing eruption of a new Mountain,
whereof as often as I think, I am apt to give credit to whatsoever is
wonderful; For who is there in this place but knows, or who elsewhere will
believe, that a Mountain should arise partly out of a Lake, and partly out of
the Sea, in one day and a night to such a height, as to contend in altitude
with the highest Mountains adjoining, yet so it was; For Sept. 29. 1538. the
Country hereabout having for several days before been tormented with perpetual
Earthquakes, that no one house was left entire, but all men expected an
immediate ruin; After the Sea had retired two hundred Paces from the Shore,
leaving abundance of Fish and Springs of fresh water rising in the bottom, this
Mountain visibly ascended about the second hour of the night, with an hideous
roaring noise, horribly vomiting Stones, and such store of Cinders, as
overwhelmed all the buildings thereabout and the healthful Baths of Tripergula
celebrated for so many Ages, consuming the Vines to Ashes, and killing Birds
and Beasts; The fearful Inhabitants of Puteoli flying away in the dark, with
their Wives and Children, naked, defiled, crying out and detesting their
Calamities, Manifold mischiefs had they suffered by the Turks, and Barbarians,
yet none like this which Nature Inflicted; This Mountain is to be seen at this
day, the top whereof is above a mile from the Foundation, the stones upon it
are so light and pory, that they will not sink when thrown into Water; when it
was newly raised, it had a vast number of Vents or Issues, some of them
smoking and likewise flaming, others disgorging little Rivers of hot water,
keeping a dreadful rumbling, and many miserably perished who ventured to go
down into the hollowness above; But that hollow on the top is now an Orchard,
and the Mountain throughout is bereft of its Terrors, no more smoke, fire or
flames issuing any longer therefrom, But to return.

LXVIII. A little before the Marquess Hamilton came with the Scotch Army into
England, two Armies were seen in York hire in the Air, discharging and shooting
against each other, and after a long fight the Army which rose our of the North
vanished; Likewise about the same time at (...) in Northumberland it rained
blood, which covered the Church and Churchyard. In 1642, at the time of the
bloody Rebellion in Ireland, when the Papists murdered above Two Hundred
Thousand Innocent Protestants without the least Provocation, these Prodigies
happened in that Kingdom as they were deposed upon Gath by diverse Persons
ex^mined about the same; At Portendown Bridge in the Province of V^^er, the
Iri^h Inhabitants thereabout were so affrighted with Cries and Noises made
there by some Spirits for Revenge, that they were forced to remove their
habitations, not daring to return thither again; Likewise the blood of some of
those Innocents who were massacred there, remained long upon the Bridge, and
could not be washed out; There appeared also the shapes of Men and Women breast
high above Water, who did lamentably and scarfully screech and cry out for
vengeance against the Iri^h who had murdered their Bodies there; December 20.
1641. the bloody Rebels having at one time drowned one hundred and fourscore
Protestant Men, Women and Children in this River by the Bridge, about nine days
after a Spirit in the shape of a man appeared in that place breast high above
the Water, with his hands lifted up, standing in that posture several times,
till the latter end of Lent next following, and was seen by very many; And a
Mother of some of those Children who were drowned there, going one Evening to
the Bridge with some other Women whose Husbands had likewise been drowned, upon
a sudden there appeared to them a Vision of a Woman naked to the wast in the
water, with elevated and closed hands, her hair hanging down very white, her
Eyes seeming to wrinkle, and her skin as white as snow, often repeating the
word, Revenge, Revenge, Revenge. Further, Thirty Women and young Children, and
Seven men were flung by these barbarous Rebels into the River of Belte^^^t, and
when some of them swum for their Lives toward the bank, they were knocked on
the head with Poles by these merciless Tigers; Being dead, their Bodies
appeared not as usual, till about six weeks after, at which time one Mulmore O
Rely, who had commanded them to be murdered, coming to the place, all the
Bodies came floating up to the Drid^e. Sir C^^ Mac Gennis with his Soldiers
murdered one Mr. Trug^ Minister of Newry, but shortly after f^^^^ng sick, upon
his death bed he was terribly (...), seeming always to see the same Mr. Tr^^^^^
his presence; Also Dr. Robert Maxwel Archdeacon of Down testified upon his
Oath. That the Rebels themselves assured him, that most of those who were
thrown from that Bridge were daily and nightly seen to walk upon the River,
sometime singing Psalms, sometimes brandishing Swords, sometimes skreiking out
in a most hideous and fearful manner.

LXIX. In 1642, before the Fight at Edghil three Suns were seen in the North.
In 1645. Many other Apparitions were visible in the North, with diverse
P^^r^^^'s or Mocksuns, and an Eclipse of the Sun; All England says Mr. Gadbury
was at this time together by the Ears: The next year the Scots return home
again, The English go into Ireland, and subdue the Rebels there; In the Month
of May this year it rained Brimstone, at Wittenburg in Germany; and a great
Wood belonging to the Dukedom of Norimburg, in that Country, of eight thousand
Acres of Land, fell on Fire, and was burned to Ashes; In January 1648, there
was seen a great Fiery Meteor in the Air near Bristol on the Southside of the
City for diverse nights together, of a long form, with fiery Beams shooting out
East and West, which was but a week before the Martyrdom of his late Majesty;
also the day before his Death, a great Whale ran himself ashore three miles
from Do^^er, where he dyed; He was sixty six foot long, a thing rarely seen in
this Island. this I was informed (...) by an Eyewitness says Mr. Clark. I
very well remember (says Mr. John Gadbury) that in (...) year 164^; the very
year wherein Charles late King of England was beheaded, it was generally, (I
will not say truly) reported, that he without his head was seen to hover in the
Air over Whitehall, the place where he suffered, for many nights together; Nay
I have heard some affirm, That he was seen sometime with his George upon his
Breast in the manner and form as he wore it when he came upon the Scaffold, and
that sometimes again he was seen to appear in his Watchet Wastcoat only;
Neither of these sights did I ever see (says he) nor can enjoin any ones faith
to believe; However if the report were true, (and I know not what advantage any
man can reap by reporting such things as these if they were not) it may very
well be accounted a thing Prodigious and Remarkable. J. Gadbury.

LXX. In 1650. Jan. 18. In the night time was a terrible storm, and Armies and
armed Troops in every place for twelve miles compass about Molton in Yorkshire,
were heard to ride and march through the Towns. The Cattle and Beasts in those
Places were so affrighted that most of them broke out of their Pastures, some
by leaping broke their necks, others their Legs, some ran away above four miles
off, who when found were extremely heated, One Ox that lay in a stackyard lame,
and could not rise without help, in this fright broke forth, and was found a
mile off, and was brought home upon a sled. In March following, 3 glorious Suns
were seen at once in Cumberland to the astonishment of many Thousands which
beheld them; In April the same year, about 5 a Clock in the afternoon in the
Countys of Cumberland and Westmorland was a genetal Earthquake wherewith the
People were so affrighted, that many of them forsook their Houses, and some
Houses were so shaken, that the Chimneys fell down. The same year, 1650, the
Island of Santorin, at the bottom of the Streights in the Mediterranean Sea,
not far from Candia, had formidable Fires and Earthquakes; This Island was
formerly called Thera, but now Santorin, and started up out of the Sea, for
Baronius out of Pliny thus writes; In the year 726 a vapor was seen to bubble
forth out of a Chimney of Fire, between the Islands of Theresia, or Santorin,
from the very bottom of the Sea, which continued some days, and the Fire and
Smoke growing thicker by degrees, spread it self abroad with mighty flames, and
with the vastness of its strength, it cast out huge Rocky Pumice Stones, and
great heaps of other matter, which it carried through all Asia, Lesbos, and
Abydus, and the Seacoasts of Macedonia, so that the whole Surface of the Sea
was covered with these Pumices; But in the middle of so great a Fire, there was
an Island made from the heaping up of that matter, and joined to the Island,
called The Sacred, which never was in being before; There was likewise another
Island next to this formed in 1570, not without great terror of those of
Santorin; Since the burning lasted for a year, as some ancient People who saw
it with their Eyes did lately testify; But in the middle of this smaller new
Island which is now called little Camena there is to be seen to this very day
an huge deep Ditch, which being narrow toward the bottom, grows bigger by
degrees like a Funnel, out of which as out of a Chimney those mighty Stones and
Rocks did burst forth, which being mixed with Cinder and Ashes composed the rest
of that Isle.

But if ever these Fires pent up in the ^owels of the Earth exercised their
force, it was mo^^ remarkable upon September 24. 1650. which shook the Island
till the ninth of October, with such mighty and frequent Earthquakes, that the
People of Santorin fearing that their immediate ruin was approaching, were on
their knees night and day before their Altars; It cannot be expressed what an
horror invaded all men, especially when those yictorious flames breaking
through all Obstacles, strove to make themselves a way through the midst of the
Waters of the Ocean about four miles Eastward from Santorin; For the Sea all on
a sudden swelled Thirty Cubits upward, and extending it self wide through the
Neighboring Lands, overturned all in its way; Insomuch that it broke in pieces
several Ships and Galleys in the very Haven of Candia, with its extraordinary
violence, though fourscore miles distant from thence; The Air being darkened
with those sulphurous stinking vapors, put on innumerable Forms and
Appearances, as of Fiery Lances, and Swords brandished and shaken, bright and
glittering Arrows darting forth; Here terrible Serpents and Dragons seemed to
be flying, There hideous Thunderclaps, Lightnings and Thunderbolts; And yet
they could scarce see, for the Peoples Eyes were so hurt with those sharp,
pricking, sulphurous smoaks, and vapors, that almost all became blind for 3
days, with such grievous pains in their Eyes, that they wept continually, and
bewailed their most miserable Fate; But when their eyesight returned, they saw
all their Silver and Gold, both Vessels and Garments, and Pictures, spread over
with a yellow color; and such a vast multitude of Pumice stones did this fiery
Gulf vomit forth, that it covered the Sea, so that they could scarce pass in a
Vessel; It is most certain that they were carried many hundred miles, even to
Smyrna and Constantinople, and all the Shoars and Coasts were filled therewith;
The fury of this Burning wa^ greatest for the first two Months, which caused
the Neighbor Sea to bubble like a boiling Pot, and night and day huge Globes
and Flakes of Fire, and exceeding thick smoke mounted up to the Heavens; which
if at any time it was carried by contrary winds to any places near at hand,
besides a most grievous s^ink, it brought certain destruction upon Birds and
Beasts, yea, upon men themselves; As it happened in October and November this
year, that fifty Husbandmen miserably perished thereby, besides an innumerable
multitude of Birds, Sheep, Oxen, and Asses; The like happened to nine Mariners,
who passing that way in their ship by night, after 3 days were all found half
burnt, and were buried in the Island Nio threescore miles from Santorin; But
the other 4 months (for it flamed six in all) though that Hellish Hearth or
Furnace abated much of its vigor and fierce heat, and could scarce lift it
self above the Waves, yet it still seemed to cast out Pumice stones, and to be
laboring to form a new Island which though it does not yet appear above Water
yet in a calm Sea, it is observed to be very shallow thereabout, the Water
being in that place not above eight Cubits deep.

LXXI. In 1651. The River of Sein, which runs through Paris in France swelled
so much, that all the Houses near it were in danger to have been ruined
thereby, and very much hurt was done; The same year, March 4, the day before
the Burial of the late Prince of Orange, a full Tide of the Sea broke the Dam
or Bank of St. Anthony in Holland, and overflowed all that part which is called
Diemer Mere; There happened likewise thereby, very great damage in
North-Holland, but at Amsterdam the water grew so high, that the People were
compelled to go in Boats through the Streets, besides which, it came into their
Cellars and Warehouses, thereby spoiling a vast quantity of Merchandises to the
value of many Tuns of Gold. The same year Sept. 14, a Prodigious Judgment
happened at Bi^boa in Spain, whereof I have a Letter by me written by a
Merchant of good credit (says Mr. Clark) which thus relates it. Sir I presume
that before this comes to your hands, you will hear of Gods great Judgment upon
this To^^ which has caused such a destruction as is impossible to bed^scribed,
and at present it is not thoroughly known what damage it has done; upon the
eighth of this Month it pleased God (not by any extraordinary rains from
Heaven to our thinking) to open the Mountains like Fountains, and to cause the
Seaso to swell, that in less than four hours it overflowed the Town throughout
sixteen foot high, which prevented us not only from saving our Goods, but also
with great hazard of our lives have we escaped; yet many lost their Lives with
great destruction both of the Houses and Walls; For my own part I feared my
life, for my house trembled under me extremely, so that not only my self, but
my whole Family had been destroyed, had it continued but a small time longer,
though the Water ebbed not for Twenty four hours; Many Iron Mills were
destroyed, many Thousand Loads of Charcoal were carried away, many bags of Wool
spoiled; All their Shops with their Goods were much damaged; God knows the
trouble we underwent, and still I am every day in the mud half my height,
looking after my Goods, and am fain to keep many men digging to find them, and
am looking out for bread to maintain my Family; a little Chicken costs us two
shillings in Spanish Plate; In brief, neither Horse, Mule, Hog, nor any other
Living Creature that goes upon the ground has escaped drowning, but only such
as fled to the tops of the Mountains, The destruction and losses of ^his Town
are unspeakable, the very pavement and ground being carried away at least Ten
Foot deep, and the River has altered its Chanel; The first work that we now
set upon (by command of Authority) is to throw away the Fish which the water
brought with it, which being tainted, smells so abominably, that we fear it
will bring the Plague amongst us, but we hope by to morrow night to throw it
all into the River, and thereby be rid of this stink, and our next work must be
to cleanse the River.

LXXII. In 1652, There was a great Eclipse of the Sun, and Two Eclipses of the
Moon: A Two handed Sword was seen in the Air in Cheshire, and Armies of men
encountering each other, appeared in the North, a Comet was visible in the Signs
Gemini and Taurus from December 11, to the 30. This year the English subdued
Scotland, and beat the Dutch at Sea; They beat the French at Sea this year
also; The English Parliament, firnamed the Long, are turned out of Doors by
their own Army. In 1653, Oliver Cromwell a private Gentleman by Birth, but then
General of the Army, assumes the Government of Great Britain by the Title of
Lord Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland; The King of the Romans, and
the Pope in two years after dye; strange and unheard of Alterations in Law and
Government here in England, new Courts of Justice, Council of State, Major
Generals. In 1654 was another Eclipse of the Sun, and an Earthquake in the West
of England; Apparitions are visible in the Air in the North of England; A very
great Rain falls in Bohemia; At this time the English take Jamaica, and make
War with Spain. The English and Swedes unite; In 1655. Castles, Cities and
Towns appear in the Air in England, and seem to be besieged, the different
Actions and Gestures of Men, both Commanders and Soldiers being plainly
visible; This year Cardinal Guisi is made Pope by the Title of Innocent the 10.
The Polanders are routed by the Swedes: In 1656, An Earthquake happened in
Cheshire, doing much harm, sinking the Ground, and rending up many Trees by the
Roots, to the great damage of the Country. In November a fiery Dragon was seen
in the Air in Scotland; This year the English land in Flanders, and take
Mardike from the Spaniards, they become angry thereat, and Wars between them
grow high; The King of Denmark was twice invaded by the King of Sweden; There
fell such abundance of Rain at Vienna in Germany, that the River Danubius
swelling above its banks, the violence of the Waters broke down all the
Bridges, and most of their Mills; Yea, the Water came into their Suburbs,
called, The Jews Suburbs, drowning many Persons, and carrying away a very great
number of Cattle, and did so great mischief to the Country that the loss was
thought inestimable, there being sixteen Towns and Villages swept away by the
Flood. Gadbury de Comet.

LXXIII. In 1658, A great Whale came up to Greenwich near London, a thing
seldom known before; This year Dunkirk was taken by the English; Sir Henry
Slingsby and Dr. Heuit being condemned by an High Court of Justice as they
called it, were beheaded at Towerhill, and Sept. 3. following, which used to be
a great day of Triumph in Olivers Court for two great Victories at Dunbar and
Worcester, was turned into a day of Mourning by the Death of their Protector
who dyed about 4 or 5 a Clock that day; and Richard Cromwell confidently
succeeds him in the Government, as if it had been his just due; Nay some People
in England send such sugared Addresses to him, that he believed himself to be
what they flatteringly styled him: The King of Sweden loses much this year and
dies. In 1659, there was a very great Inundation in Holland, which overflowed
Thirty Six Thousand Acres of Ground: Also a great Eclipse of the Sun in
Scorpio, November 4. Lofty and strange unwonted Winds, In May 1659, the Long
Parliament returned, and turned out Richard Cromwell, but were soon after
turned out themselves by Lambert and the Army; A Committee of safety is set up;
The L. General Monk being troubled to behold the Confusions of the English
Proceedings, marched out of Scotland, and after the Committee of Safety was
fallen, brings in the secluded Members of the Long Parliament, who soon after
dissolve themselves, and call another Parliament who restore His Royal Majesty
King Charles 2. to His just Rights and Privileges, whom God preserve with a
Long and Happy Reign over us. Gadbury of Prodigies.

LXXIV. In 16^0. Feb. 20. At Dantzick in Poland, when the Sun was going down,
there were seen seven Suns together very distinctly in the Heavens, three of
them colored, and three white, besides the True Sun it self, about which was a
Circle much like a Rainbow. In 1661. Jan. 28. There is a Relation that near
Worsup in Nottinghamshire there was an appearance of a gallant Troop of Horse
marching, which a Justice of Peace having notice of, related to a Person of
Honor, thinking them to be real Men and Horses, but upon a strict inquiry, it
was concluded to be only an Apparition; The same Relation says about that time,
there happened a strange and dreadful storm of Hail at Northampton, and fire
mingled with the hail in some places, and that it did run upon the ground in
great sheets of Fire for a considerable way together: It fell upon some part of
Wellinborough Town in Northamptonshire: Upon February 18. this year very early
in the morning began a dreadful storm of Wind accompanied with Thunder,
Lightning, Hail and Rain, which killed diverse Persons by the fall of Houses and
Chimneys, and did very great damage in many places of England. In 1662, about
six a Clock in the Evening, there appeared (says my Author) in the Heavens
near Dover, on the South Side of the Town, a fiery Meteor in the form of an
Ensign and Banner, broad at one end, and narrow at the other, according to the
Judgment of the Spectators about 14 yards in length, it was of a fiery red
color, and flew with great swiftness from about the Seamark called the Devils
drop toward Dover Castle, and so over the Castle about a mile in length,
winding in its motion, and then gradually vanishe. This was attested by the
Spectators themselves.

LXXV. In 1664. About the beginning of December a Comet appeared in Europe, the
body whereof was very large, and its Tail of a very great length, it pointed
Westward both as it arose and as it sat, and this constantly from the
beginning of its appearance to the time of its vanishing; They writ from
Edenborough, that it was very remarkable in that it had a stream issuing from
the side of it like a red flame out of the mouth of a Furnace, and Mr. Gadbury
relates that a Letter which he received from Cranfeild in Bedfordshire gives an
Account that upon December 27. not far from the Comet was the appearance of a
blue and purple color, all full of Leprous Spots, it was round, and as big as
five Moons; not long before this, says Mr. Gadbury, we had news of the shape
of a black Coffin seen in the Air at Hamburg, and other parts in Germany and
Flanders; And the very day that the last Prodigy was seen, says he, I met with
a Letter in our News-books dated from Erford in Germany, December. 27. the
Contents whereof were these; We have had our part here of the Comet as well as
other places, besides which, here have been other terrible Apparitions and
noises in the Air, as Fires and Sounds of Canon and Masket-shot, and here has
likewise appeared several times the resemblance of a black man, who has made
our Sentinels to quit and run away from their Posts; Now, says he, though I
have no great Faith in Apparitions of this Nature, as knowing that Melancholy
heads by the strength of Fancy and Imagination, may conceit they see such
things that really are not; yet when such Fancies shall really possess the
General Opinion, it is to be presumed that something more than common, will
befall mankind, and our fears do seem to prepare us for the embraces of that
mischief we dread. This year began a War with the Hollanders and His Majesty's
Fleet off Portsmouth took an hundred and twelve Ships small and great from the
Dutch, most of which were adjudged Lawful Prize.

A Mountains of Cinders

B The Eruptions

C The Castle of Catania

D River of Fire runs into if sea

The Lamentable Irruption of Aetna the Burning Mountain in 1669. Page. 161.



LXXVI. And here I cannot omit what I find related in the History of Ceilon an
Island in the East Indies, published by Captain Robert Knox, who was a Captive
there for near Twenty years; It happened, says he that in December 1664. there
was a dangerous Rebellion in this Country against their King, about which time
there appeared a fearful Blazing Star; Just at the instant of this Rising the
Star was right over our heads, and one thing I very much wondered at, that
whereas before this Insurrection the Tail stood away toward the West, from
whence this Rebellion sprung, yet the very night after, for I well observed it,
the Tail was turned and stood away toward the East, and by degrees it
diminished quite away; At this time I say, the People of this Land having been
long and sore oppressed by this Kings unreasonable and cruel Government,
contrived a Plot against him: He used to shed a great deal of blood without the
least Reason, his Cruelty appearing both in the Tortures and painful deaths
which he inflicted, and in the extents of his punishments in destroying whole
Families for the miscarriage of one Person; For when he is displeased with any,
he does not always command to kill them outright, but first to torment them,
which is done by cutting and pulling away their flesh with Pincers, burning
them with hot Irons clapped to them to make them confess their Confederates,
whereby they many times confess more than they ever saw or knew to be rid of
their Torments; After Confession he sometimes commands to hang their two hands
about their necks, and to make them eat their own flesh, and Mothers to eat
their own Children, and so to lead them through the City in public view to
terrify all, to the place of Execution, the Dogs following to eat them; who
are so accustomed to it, that seeing a Prisoner led away, they follow after; At
the place of Execution, there are some always sticking upon Poles, others
hanging up in Quarters upon Trees, besides what lie killed by Elephants on the
ground, or by other ways; His wrath is not appeased (as aforementioned) by the
Execution of the Malefactor, but often times he punishes all his Generation, it
may be he kills them altogether, or gives them all away for Slaves; so far is
he from regarding the good of his Country, that he rather endeavors the
destruction thereof, for being now between seventy and eighty years old,
therefore Nature tells him he must leave it; However there is no love lost
between the King and his People, which occasioned them to enter into the
aforesaid Conspiracy against him; The Design was to assault the Kings Court in
the night, and to slay him, and make the Prince his Son King, He being then
about 15 years of Age, and was with his Mother the Queen in the City of Cande;
The time appointed to Act it was December. 20. 1664, at twelve a Clock at night,
and having got about two hundred men, (not needing any more.) since they had so
many Confederates at Court, in the dead of the night, they came marching into
the City of Nillemby where the King then was, The Captain of the Watch was
thought to be of their Party, but if he were not, it was not in his power to
resist them, however he was afterward executed for it, Being entered the City,
they hastened down to the Court, and fell upon the Great men who lay then
without the Palace, upon the Guard; Many who were not entrusted with the Design
were killed, and those that could make their escape, got in unto the King, who
was secured only with a Clay wall thatched, which was all his strength; yet
these People were afraid to assault his Person, lying still till the morning;
At which time the King made his escape unto the Mountains with only Fifty
Persons, There were some Horses went with him, but the ways were so bad, that
he could not ride; They were fain to drive an Elephant before him to break the
way through the Woods, that the King with his Followers might pass. As he fled,
the Conspirators pursued him, but at a great distadce for fear of some
exceellent Fowling Pieces which he had with him, and so he got safe to the
Mountain Gauluda about 15 miles off, where many of the Inhabitants thereabout
resorted to him; But if the Rebel Party had been resolute, who were the greater
number, even almost all the Kingdom, this Hill could not have secured him, but
they might have driven him from thence, there being many ways by which they
might have ascended.

The People having thus driven away, the old King marched away to the City of
Cande, and proclaimed the Prince to be King, telling us English, that what they
had done was not rashly, but upon good Consideration and advice, the King by
his evil Government having occasioned it, who went about to destroy both them
and their Country; As in detaining Ambassadors; hindering of all Trade, making
Prisoners of all people that come upon his Land, and killing his Subjects and
their Children, not suffering them to enjoy, nor to see their Wives; And that
all this was contrary to reason, and as they were informed to the Government of
other Countries; The Prince being young and tender, and having never been out
of the Palace, nor ever seen any but those that attended on his Person, was
affinghted to see so many coming, and bowing down to him, and telling him that
he was King, and his Father was fled into the Mountains; neither did he say or
act any thing, as not owning the business, or else not knowing what to say or
do; This much discouraged the Rebels, to see they had no Thanks for their
pains, and so all things stood till, D^^emo. 25. 1664, at which time they
intended to march and fall upon the old King; But in the mean time the Kings
Sister flies away with the Prince from the City, into the Country near the
King, which so amazed the Rebels, that the Money, Cloth and plunder which they
had taken, and were going to distribute to strangers to join with them, they
scattered about the Town, and fled away; Others of their Company seeing the
business was overthrown, to make amends for their former Fact, revolted and
fell upon their Consorts, killing and taking Prisoners all they could; The
People were now all up in Arms against each other, killing whom they pleased,
(only saying they were Rebels) and taking their Goods; By this time a great Man
had drawn out his Soldiers into the Field, and declared for the old King, and
so went to seize the Rebels that were scattered abroad; but understanding they
were all fled, and no wh^le Party or Body left to resist him, he marched into
the City, killing all he could catch; And so all revolted, and came back to the
King again, whilst he only lay still upon his Mountain; The King needed to take
no care to seize or execute the Rebels, for they themselves out of their zeal
to him, and to make amends for what was past, imprisoned, and killed all they
met, the Plunder being their own; This continued 8 of 10 days, which the King
hearing of, commanded to kill no more, but only to imprison them till
examination, which was not so much to save the Innocent, as that he might
torment the Rebels, and make them confess their Confederates, for he spared
none that seemed guilty, and some to this day lie chained in Prison, being
sequestered of all their Estates, and beg for their Living; The King could not
be insensible but that it was his rigorous Government which occasioned this
Rebellion, yet amended it not in the least, but like Rehoboam added yet more to
the Peoples yoke: And being thus safely reinstated in his Kingdom again, and
observing that the Life of his Son gave encouragement to the Rebellion, he
resolved for the future to prevent it by taking him away, and about a year
after, his Son being sick, the Hing takes this Opportunity to dispatch him, by
pretending to send Physic to him to cure him, but was really Poison, which
soon made an end of him; The People hearing of the death of the Prince,
according to the Custom of that Country when any of the Royal Blood dye, came
all in General toward the City where he was, with black, or else very dirty
Cloths, which is their mourning, the men all bare-headed, the Women with their
hair loose and hanging about their Shoulders to mourn and lament for the Death
of their young Prince; which the King hearing of, sent them word, That since it
was not his Fortune to live to sit on the Throne after him, and Reign over the
Land, it would be but in vain to mourn and a great trouble and hindrance to the
Country, and their voluntary good will was taken in as good part us the
mourning it self, and so dismissed the Assembly, and burned the Princes dead body
without Ceremonies or Solemnities; but one thing there is that argues him
guilty of Imprudence, and horrible Ingratitude, that most of those who went
along with him when he fled, of whose Loyalty he had such ample Experience he
has since cut off, and that with extreme Cruclty too; In Feornary two years
after, there appeared in this Country another Comet or Stream in the West,
with the head of it under the Horizon, much like that seen in England in 1680.
The sight of this did much daunt both King and People, having so lately felt
the sad Event of a Blazing Star; The King sent men to the highest Mountains in
the Land to look if they could perceive the head of it, which they could not,
it being still under the Horizon; This continued visible about a Month, and by
that time was so diminished as not to be seen; But there were no remarkable
Passages ensued upon it.

LXXVII. About five or six nights after the extinction of the first Comet which
was seen in England, and in the same Month of December another Comet was
visible, which continued till the middle of January following, it was much less
than the former, seeming about the bigness of an ordinary Trencher Plate, about
8 Inches over, and had prickly Rays dispersed round about it; In April 1665,
following, a Third Comet was seen much of the Nature and color of the first,
only a little more Jovial; This year, June 3. A great Victory was obtained by
His Majesty's Fleet under his Royal Highness the Duke of York against the whole
Dutch Fleet, wherein above Thirty Capital Ships were taken and destroyed, and
near Eight Thousand men killed and taken Prisoners; A great Plague began in
London, and this year there dyed in all ninety seven thousand three hundred and
six, whereof of the Plague sixty eight thousand five hundred ninety six; In
February this year, there was a great Tempest, accompanied with Thunder,
Lightning, and an Earthquake in diverse places; at which time the stately Spire
of Trinity Church in Coventry fell down, and demolished a great part of the
Church, killing only one man; and in Hampshire a Justice of Peace riding by the
way, was slain and burnt by Lightning; In August, 1666, Sir Robert Holmes
destroyed above one hundred and fifty Sail of Dutch Ships at the Fly in
Holland, and burnt the Town of Bandaris upon the Island of Schelling,
containing at least a Thousand Houses. Sept. 2. about one a Clock in the
morning, a sudden and lamentable Fire broke out in the City of London,
beginning in a place called Pudding-Lane, near New Fish-street, which in 4 days
time burnt down Thirteen Thousand Two Hundred Houses.

LXXVIII. In 1668, in Autumn, a great part of Asia, and some parts of Europe
were infested with extraordinary Earthquakes; The Cities of Constantinople and
Adrianople felt its sad Effects, but not with that violence and continuance as
in other Places; In some parts of Persia it continued for above fourscore days;
Torqueto and Bolio two considerable Cities, were by its great violence laid
even to the ground, and all or most of the Inhabitants buried in the Ruins,
above six thousand Persons perished in the first of them, and above eighteen
hundred in the latter; And in all the adjacent Cities it raged with
extraordinary fury, destroying and ruining the Buildings, killing many of the
People, and the rest were forced to quit the Towns, and take up their Lodgings
in the Fields. About the beginning of August 1669, there came two Whales and a
Grampas up the River of Thames, whereof one of the Whales, and the Grampas were
killed, and the other Whale which was the bigger, returned back into the Sea;
September 4. following, says Mr. Clark, news was brought to our Kings Majesty
of the Death of the Que^n Mother, who dyed in France July 31. in the Sixtieth
year of her Age.

LXXIX. In March the beginning of this year 1669, there happened a most
dreadful Earthquake and Irruption of Mount Aet^a in Sicily, of which before I
give a particular Account, it may not be unproper to describe the Mountain it
self, as it has been related by diverse famous Historians; Aetna or Mount
Gibello, called by Pindar the Celestial Column or Pillar, is the highest
Mountain in Sicily, from whence all the Island may be seen at once, and in a
clear day the Eye may even reach Africa, it rears up its top or Spire Thirty
miles into the Sky, and may be seen forty or fifty miles at Sea, but its
compass is sixty, others say an hundred miles space, it appears Eastward with
two shoulders, having an eminent head in the middle, The lower parts are
luxuriously fruitful, and the abundance of fat oily matter which is cast out of
it, makes the Soil thereof as well as of the whole Island Incredibly fruitful
in the best Wine, Oil, Honey, Saffron, Minerals also of Gold, Silver, Silks and
Allom, with variety of excellent and delicious Fruits, and abundance of all
sorts of Grain, so that it was called in old time, The Granary of the Roman
Empire; The middle of the Mountain is woody and shady, the upper part rocky,
steep, and almost covered with Snow; yet smoking in the midst like many
conjoined Chimneys, and vomiting intermitted flames, usually discernable only
by night, as if heat and cold had left their Contentions, and embraced one
another, for though it continually ^^rns, with most servent smoke and fire, yet
round about the top are seen perpetual and most deep ^nows, the uppermost top
is broken and cragged with unstable Cinders and Pumice stones, and cleavs open
with a most vast Crater or mouth twelve miles in compass, which in a steep
descent streightens it self narrower even to the bottom of Hell as it were; A
most horrible pre^^pice it is, exceeding formidable with flames and fumes from
the very bottom and sides of the Mountain, with an horrendous roaring and
bellowing not unlike the bursting forth of Thunders, so that the very
imagination and thoughts of the Fire and Ruins so nigh at hand, cannot but at
first sight amaze, and afright any humane Creature, and make him start from it,
as from the Infernal Gulf of Hell; On one side within are most dark and
dreadful Dens, one whereof is so vast, as to be capable to contain Thirty
Thousand Men; In many places you may see the tracts and paths of huge Torrents
of melted matter; In the very top, Snows and Ashes, or Cinders, as if they had
concluded an Eternal Wedlock, are seen to overwhelm all things with a sad and
doleful countenance, which are very dangerous to unwary Visitors, because under
them there lie concealed deep holes, and devouring Gulphs, without bottom or
end, which have swallowed up very many, coming unadvisedly too near without a
Guide, and by their ruin have left warnings to others not rashly to venture
upon these hidden deceits which have cheated mortals of their Lives; In the
utmost bottom of this Hellish Gulf the Fire is at no time extinguished, but
always sends forth either boiling heat, smoke or flame, yet outwardly it begins
to grow fierce and terrible only at certain intervalls of time more or less
according to the Combustible matter heaped together; and by how much longer it
has ceased, by so much it bursts forth with greater violence, and together
with the Flame, sends forth huge heaps of Sands, and Prodigious Stones of
wondrous weight.

These Fires have broke forth in several Ages of the World, to the great terror
and destruction of the Inhabitants, and all the adjacent Countries; As in the
year of the world 2600 when the Posterity of Janus went to seek new Colonies,
they first entered Sicily, where at that time there was so great a burning of
the Mountain, that the new Planters leaving the Island for fear of Desolation,
went to seek new habitations in Italy; after them followed the Sicaneans, who
were likewise driven away from these Eastern Parts, to the Western by these
dreadful Aetnean burnings. In the year of the world 3180, and for above four
hundred years after, this Mountain was all on fire with three huge burnings; A
little after the Mountain raging anew, it is said to have drawn Pythagoras
himself into the highest admiration; Also in the Reign of Hero, at which time
Histories deliver that Empedocles an Observer of the Mountain was destroyed. In
the time of Julius Caesar, about fifty years before Christ, Diodorus relates,
That Aetna raged most violently, which they said portended the Death of Caesar;
It is reported to have been so great, that the Sea with its fervor and boiling
heat burnt even the very Ships, even as far as the Vulcanello's, All the Fish
being destroyed and boiled to death; yea within twenty years, the Mountain
burnt four times. In the Reign of Caius Caligula forty nine years after Christ,
the Mountain raged so, that the Emperor at that time in Sicily was so
affrighted, that he betook himself to safer stations; yet they relate, that the
Emperor Adrian out of the greatness of his mind did ascend the Mountain very
far to consider more nearly such great Miracles; In several Ages after, it made
woeful irruptions, as from the year 1160, to 1169, all Sicily was shaken with
huge Earthquakes, and the Mountain Aetna foaming mightily, overthrew all the
circumjacent places with incredible Desolation, with the ruin of the Cathedral
Church of Catania about ten miles distant, in which Abbot John and his Monks
were overwhelmed; Many other fearful burnings have happened since that time,
but none more horrible for its mighty devastations than that in the year 1669,
The Right Honorable the Earl of Winchelsea His Majesty's late Ambassador at
Constantinople, in his return from thence, visiting Catania, was an Eyewitness
of this Prodigious Judgment, whereof he gave the following Account to His
present Majesty, King Charles the second, as soon as he came to Naples.

May it please Your Majesty,

In my Voyage from Malta to this place, I touched at the City of Catania in
Sicily, and was there most kindly Invited by the Bishop to lodge in his Palace,
which I accepted, that so I might be the better able to inform your Majesty of
that extraordinary Fire which comes from Mount Gibel, 15 miles distant from
that City; which for its horridness in the aspect, for the vast quantity
thereof, (for it is 15 miles in length, and 7 in breadth) for its monstrous
devastation and quick progress, may be termed an Inundation of Fire, a Flood of
Fire, Cinders and burning Stones, burning with that Rage as to advance into the
Sea 600 yards, and that to a mile in breadth, which I saw; and that which did
augment my admiration was, to see in the Sea this matter like ragged Rocks,
burning in sour fathom water, two fathom higher than the Sea it self; some
parts liquid and moving, and throwing off, not without great violence, the
stones about it, which like a crust of a vast bigness, and red hot, sell into
the Sea every moment, in some place or other, causing a great and horrible
noise, smoke and hissing in the Sea; and thus more and more coming after it,
making a firm foundation in the Sea it self. I stayed there from nine a Clock
on Saturday morning, to seven next morning, and this Mountain of Fire and
Stones, with Cinders, had advanced into the Sea 20 yards at least, in several
places; in the middle of this Fire, which burned in the Sea, it has formed a
passage like to a River, with its Banks on each side very steep and craggy, and
in this Channel moves the greatest quantity of this Fire, which is the most
liquid, with stones of the same composition, and Cinders all red hot, swimming
upon the Fire of a great magnitude;

From this River of Fire (under the great Mass of the Stones which are
generally three fathom high all over the Country, where it burns and in other
places much more,) there are secret Conduits or Rivulets of this liquid matter,
which Communicate Fire and heat into all parts more or less, and melts the
Stones and Cinders by fits in those places where it touches them, over and
over again; where it meets with Rocks or Houses of the same matter (as many
are) they melt and go away, with the Fire; where they find other compositions
they turn them to lime or ashes, (as I am informed,) The composition of this
Fire, Stones and Cinders, are Sulphur, Nitre, Quicksilver, Sal-Armoniac, Lead,
Iron, Brass, and all other Metals. It moves not regularly, nor constantly down
hill; in some places it has made the Valleys Hills, and the Hills that were
not high are now Valleys. When it was night I weat upon two Towers in diverse
places, and could plainly see at 10 miles distance, as we judged, the Fire to
begin to run from the Mountain in a direct line, the flame to ascend as high
and as big as one of the highest and greatest Steeples in Your Majesty's
Kingdoms, and to throw up great Stones into the Air; I could discern the River
of Fire to d^scend the Mountain of a terrible ^^ery or red color, and stones
of a paler Red, to swim thereon, and to be some as big as an ordinary Table. We
could see this fire to move in several other places, and all the Country
covered with Fire, ascending with great Flames; in many places, smoking ^^^e
to a violent furnace of Iron melted, making a noi^e with the great picces that
fell, especially those which fell i^to the Sea. A Cavalier of Malta, who lives
there, and attended me, told me, that the River was as liquid where it issues
out of the Mountain, as water, and came out like a Torrent with great violence,
and is five or six fathom deep, and as broad, and that no stones do sink
therein. I assure Your Majesty, no Pen can express how terrible it is, nor can
all the Art and Industry of the world quench, or divert that which is burning
in the Country. In 40 days time it has destroyed the habitations of 27
thousand persons, made two Hills of one, 1000 paces high a-piece, and one is
four miles in compass, Of 20000 persons which inhabited Catania, 3000 did only
remain; all their Goods are carried away, the Cannons of Brass are removed out
of the Castle, some great Bells taken down, the City-Gates Walled up next the
Fire, and preparation made all to abandon the City.

That night which I lay there, it rained Ashes all over the City, and (...)
Miles at Sea it troubled my Eyes. This Fire in its Progress (...) ^ith a Lake
of Four Miles in compass, and i^ was not only satis^^^d to fill it up, though
it was four fath^^ deep but hat^ made (...) it a Mountain. I send also to Your
Sacred Majesty the following Account in Print which the Bishop save me, as it
is ^^^ected one of diverse Relations from Ca^ama.

Mount (...) Gibello, a Mountain so Renowned throughout the World for its
heightand greatness, but more for ^hos^ Prodigious Flames, Smoke, and Ashes
which it has cast out from the top of it, whilst the other parts are
continually (even in the midst of S^mmer) covered with Snow, has been for many
Ages observed once, or sometimes oftener, in the space of above fifteen years to
throw up more than ordinary ^lames with much Smoke and Stones, and great
quantities of A^^es; which (though terrible to the Neighboring Towns and
Villages) was yet w^nt, in little time, to abate of its fury, and prove but
seldom more in^urious to the Country ^ear it* than by communicating largely its
ashes, which though for the present it did somewhat incommode them, they had
afterward a considerable Compensation in the product of their Lands, which by
this means were rendered more fruitful. But on Friday the 18th of March, 1669.
the Sun was observed before its setting to appear of a pale and dead color,
which (being contrary to what it ever before appeared to us) struck no small
terror into the Inhabitants, all Objects appearing also of the same color,
with a paleness received from that of the Sun: The same night happened in this
City as well as the whole Country hereabouts, a terrible and unusual
Earthquake, whose strong and unequal motions joined with horrible Roarings from
Monte Gibello exceedingly frighted the Inhabitants, but was so extraordinarily
violent in the Country adjacent, that the People were forced to abandon their
houses, and to fly into the Fields to avoid the danger threatened them from the
falling of their houses. The Village of Nicolosi was of all others the most
dreadfully handled by this furious Earthquake, the houses and other buildings
being shaken all in pieces, and buried in their own ruins; the poor people
(who had preserved their lives by a timely flight, with such little of their
goods as their hasty fears would permit them to carry out with them) continued
a night or two in the Fields beholding with grief and astonishment the ruin of
their habitations: but observing that by these violent concussions, the Earth
began to open in several places, and to threaten them with inevitable ruin,
they fled, though with much trouble and amazement to this City. These shakings
of the Earth being so frequent and violent, that the people went reeling and
staggering, with much difficulty supporting one another from falling, insomuch
as what with their want of sleep, the pains they were forced to take in
traveling, and the great terrors imprinted on them by what they had seen and
suffered, they appeared at their arrival in this City as so many distracted
people wholly insensible of what they did.

This dreadful convulsion of the Earth was immediately followed on Monday March
11. about 10 at night by 3 terrible Eruptions, much about the same time, and a
little distance one from the other.

These said Eruptions were observed to be on the side of Monte Gibello, about 2
miles beyond the Mountain called Montpileri, from whence with a terrible noise
it threw up its flames with much fury and violence about a hundred yards in
height, its noise not roaring only inwards from the belly of the Mountain as
before, but violently cracking like peals of Ordnance or thunder, from the side
of it, throwing out vast stones, some of them of 300 pound weight, which being
(as it were) shot through the air, fell several miles distant from the place,
whilst the whole Air was filled with smoke, burning cinders, and ashes, which
fell like a fiery rain upon the Country. In the mean time issued from the side
of this Prodigious Mountain a vast Torrent of Melted and burning Matter, which
like an Inundation, Drowned, as in a Flood of Fire, the Country on this side
of it. This Burning River ran down upon the Mountain Montpileri, which,
opposing its direct course, it divided it self into two Streams, which
encompassed the said Mountain; one of them taking its way by La Guardia, the
Convent of St. Anne and M^lpasso, the other by the Towns of Monpileri, and
Falicchi, which in few hours were wholly destroyed and lost, not so much as any
sign of them remaining, with several lesser Villages and Farms, and with them
the Famous Image of the blessed Lady of the Annunciata; which, though highly
Reverenced throughout the whole Island, esteemed the Wonder of Sicily and the
whole World, and to which the People with much Devotion resorted in Pilgrimage
from the remotest parts, was also swallowed up and consumed by this dreadful
Torrent.

This Fiery and burning Deluge immediately spread it self to above six mile in
breadth, seeming to be somewhat of the color of melted and burning Glass; but,
as it cooles, becomes hard and Rocky, and every where in its passage leaves
Hills and Pyramids of that matter behind it.

At the same time Monte Gibello from its top raged with dreadful Flames, which
with its noise and Concussions of the Earth which still continued, added not a
little to the Terror of the People, who ran with Cries and Lamentations about
the City and Country, expecting nothing but to be swallowed up or consumed by
Fire, having no other apprehensions but of Death, and a General Conflagration.
The two Torrents of Fire came forward, destroying all things in their way, and
by Wednesday, March 13th, had on the West Side branched it self into several
Streams, and overran Campo Rotundo, St. Pietro, and Mostorbianco, with La
Potielli, and St. Antonino; and on the East-part ruined the lower part of
Mascalucia, and Le Placchi, taking its way toward this City.

On Thursday the 14th, the Wind came Eastwards, on which fell abundance of
Rain, which abated not the Progress of the Fire; which on the East Side had
from Mascalucia made its way to St. Giovanni di Galermo, the lower part whereof
it destroyed; and passing on, seemed to threaten this City on one side, as did
that on the West Side the other. As the Fire approached, the Religious every
where appeared with much Devotion, carrying in Procession their Relics,
especially those of St. Agatha, the famous Martyr of Cat^nia, in which they
reposed no small confidence, followed by great multitudes of People, some of
them mortifying themselves with Whips, and other signs of Penance, with great
Complaints and Cries, expressing their dreadful expectation of the Events of
those Prodigious fiery Inundations.

Whilst the People were thus busied in their Devotions, and astonished by their
Fears, News was brought to the Magistrates of the City, that a considerable
number of Thieves and Robbers had taken the opportunity of this general
Distraction, to make a Prey of the already distressed People, and that they had
murdered several of them for their Goods; and that it was to be feared, that
the City of Catania it self, might run some danger from the great numbers of
them which were about the Country, and from thence took their opportunities to
get into the Town. Whereupon, consultation being had for the prevention of
farther mischief from them, the Commander of the Castle was ordered with a
considerable number of Horse, and a Party of Spaniards, to secure the Country
and City against these Robbers; who immediately sent out several Parties with
his Provost-Marshal, with Order to seize on all suspected Persons, and such as
were not able to give a good account of themselves: and, for such as were taken
in the Fact Robbing, to Execute them by Martial-Law, without any farther Trial;
and accordingly caused three pair of Gallows to be set up for their speedy
Execution; one before the Gate Di Aci, a second in the Marketplace, and a third
before the Gate Della Decima, setting strong Guards upon the Gates of the City,
and causing all suspected Houses to be searched, an Account to be given in of
all Lodgers, and such Persons to be secured, as could any ways fall under a
Suspicion. The poor People out of the Country being by this Prodigious Calamity
stripped out of all their Estates, and reduced to great extrem^ty, fled most of
them for refuge and relief to this City, with great Lamentations, moving the
Charity of the Magistrates, whho were readily inclined to give them the best
assistance they were able; and the Citizens, moved by their Complaints and
Sufferings, freely opened their Doors, filling their Houses with as many of
those distressed People as they could possibly receive; the Bishop, and all
persons of Quality and Estate, contributing largely for their support, till
better Order could be taken for the disposing of them.

The City of Messina also, and several other Cities (informed of this
extraordinary Calamity) sent hither large Supplies of Provisions, offering
their best assistance to this place, in case of extremity. All the Elements
seemed at this time to make War upon us, and to conspire together for the
punishment of the Inhabitants; The Air was continually darkened with Clouds and
Smoke, agitated by great and violent Winds, and oftentimes showred down great
Rains, insomuch as the Sun from the beginning of these Eruptions, very seldom
appeared to us, and when it did, (with extraordinary paleness,) for a little
time only, and (as it were, abhorring so dreadful a Spectacle) soon hid its
face again under a thick Cloud.

The Sea ran much higher than it was wont to do, and by its extraordinary
Roaring, and in some places overflowing its Banks, added not a little to our
consternation. The Land every where infested with Thieves, insomuch, that till
by the extraordinary care taken by the Magistrates and Officers severe
execution was done upon such as were apprehended in the Fact, no person was
able to stir abroad without danger of his life; whilst the Fire by this
prodigious overflowing of the Mountain, threatened to take possession of all.

On Friday the 15th. the stream of fiery Matter which destroyed the lower part
of St. Giovanni di Galermo divided it self into two parts, one of its branches
taking its way toward Mosterbianco, the other threatening the City of Catania,
but this last was observed to move with more slowness than before, having in 24
hours time scarcely gained 20 paces.

On the 18th being Monday, the Torrents being still seen to draw nearer and
nearer to this City, the Senate with Monsegnior Cambuchi the Bishop of this
place, followed by all the Clergy Secular and Regular, and an infinite number
of people went in a solemn Procession out of this City to Monte de St. Sofia,
carrying out with greatest Devotion their choicest Relics, and upon an Altar
erected in view of the Mountain, exposed them, where they celebrated Mass and
used the Exorcismes accustomed upon such extraordinary occasions, all which
time, the Mountain ceased not as before with excessive roaring to throw up its
smoke and flames with extraordinary violence, and abundance of great stones,
which were carried through the Air, some of them falling within their view,
though at ten miles distance from the Eruption; the Ashes which proceeded from
thence were scattered in great abundance, as well on this City as on the
Country adjacent, every where in the Fields with Cinders, and the heat of the
said Ashes destroying the Grass, which obliged the people to drive away their
Cattle to a farther distance, which would otherwise have perished for want of
food.

These streams of ruin daily crept nearer and nearer to this City, but by
uneven and irregular motions, according as it was more or less supplied from
its fountain; but on Wednesday the 20th. we perceived that that branch of it
which seemed most to threaten this City from St. Giovanni di Galermo was wholly
extinguished, and the other which bent its course toward Moster-bianco ran but
slowly, and gave us some hopes that its fury was also near spent, but the other
Torrent which had before overflown Mosterbianco, continued its motion with as
much violence as ever, being in breadth above a Musket shot over; but in
probability could not easily overflow to the Westwards which was defended by
its Rocky situation; another branch which ran by Santo Pietro was observed to
be much larger than the rest, and its stream more quick and active, but meeting
with some opposition in its way, it made some stop, only sending out a Rivulet
toward the Eastwards about three or four yards wide, of its most subtle and
active matter, which directed its course toward a small Village about a
Furlong distant from its main stream; another Branch threatened Campo Rotundo,
but bent its course westwards toward the Farm of Valcorrente, where its Fiery
body was scattered into several deep and rocky places, without any considerable
damage.

About this time we had hopes that the violence of this eruption had been over,
the Mountain not throwing out its flames with that violence as before, and its
noise and roaring in a great measure ceased.

Those who at nearest distance took a view of the Mountain, informed that the
top of it, was fallen in, and the Mountain supposed to want near a mile of its
former height; that the largest of the Mouths from whence these fiery streams
were vented, was about half a mile in compass, but the view of this dreadful
Inundation carried so much terror in it as they were not able to express; from
all these Mouths were vomited Rivers of a thick and fiery substance of stone
and metals melted, whose depth was various according to the several places it
filled in its passage, in some places 4, in others 8, 12 or 15 yards and
upwards; its breadth in some places 6 miles, in others much more; itsflame like
that of Brimstone, and its motion like that of Quicksilver; advancing
ordinarily very slowly, unless where it was provoked by the addition of a fresh
Torrent or some considerable descent. Wheresoever it passed, it left large
heaps of its congealed matter, with which it covered and burnt the Earth,
melting the Walls of Castles and Houses, throwing down and consuming all before
it, nothing being yet found able to resist its force, nor any thing able to
quench its burning, water being observed rather to add to its fury; wheresoever
it has passed, it has left its dreadful marks behind it, levelling some hills
and raising others, so much changing the situation, that not the least trace
of any place or Town remains, nothing being to be seen but confused heaps of
ragged stone, which yielding a noisome fume, strikes terror and astonishment
into all that behold it.

On Friday the 22, the Mountain again roared with much loudness, and threw up
from its Mouths a vast quantity of matter, which formed two large hills higher
and larger than that of Monpileri, with a large bank of the same matter to the
Eastward, sending down a violent stream of its liquid matter toward Malpasso,
much enlarging the former Current, and passing thence to Campo Rotundo and
Santo Pietro completed the ruins of those Towns, driving furiouflyi toward
Moster bianco; the other stream by Santo Giovanni de Galermo being wholly
diverted and extinguished. From this time till the 25th, the Mountain continued
silent, but then it burst out again with more force than ever before, its noise
much louder, like Peales of Ordnance, and so forcible and lasting, as for 24
hours it caused a shaking and trembling in our Buildings, the Air so filled
with Smoke and Ashes, as darkened the Face of the Sky. The Birds and Fowl about
this time, either through want of Food, or illness of Air, which was corrupted
with the noisome smells arising from these Burnings, were observed to lie dead
in all places.

On the 28th. the Grand Current was advanced near the City as far as the old
Capucins. which struck so great a Terror into the People, that most of them
left the City, only some Officers remaining with such persons as were under
their command, who have secured and sent away the Magazine and all the
Artillery from the Castle.

A Latter Relation from Catania, of April 27. gives this further Account, The
dreadful Inundation from Monte Gibello having destroyed many Castles and Towns,
with an infinite loss, and utter ruin to the Inhabitants, arrived lately with
a renewed Force at Mostor-bianco, which it has wholly ruined, from thence
passing on to Albanelli, in four days space destroyed all the Gardens and
Vineyards with 63 Thousand Vines. On Wednesday April 16. With an Impetuous
Fiery Torrent it came toward Sardanello, where all the remainder of the
Inhabitants of this City were Spectators of it, which resembled a River of
melted and burning Brass, about ten Else wide, running with swiftness to the
Arch of Marcus Marcellus, a famous Piece of Antiquity, and passing under it,
ruined about 6 Else of it, which was the breadth of the Current in that place:
from thence it ran to Madonna di Monferrato, which it wholly destroyed: then
falling down to Madonna delle Gratie, it entered in at one Gate, and passed
through another, without any considerable hurt, and running through the Gate
Della Decima, filled all the Plain Di Schiara Viva, where it was above six Else
deep. Then taking its way toward the Bulwark, on the Seaside, under the
Castle of this City, it ran by, two Else deep into the Sea; in which, (to the
great wonder of all that saw it) it has made its Progress a mile in length, and
as much in breadth, and is drawing toward the Gate of the Channel, which gives
us great Apprehensions, least it may that way Invade the City it self: Nor is
there less danger on the side Del Tindaro, where there runs a great Torrent of
the same Active matter, which draws near, and seems to threaten the Walls, and
is in that place about a mile in breadth, having overflowed and destroyed all
the Gardens, from the Gate Della Decima, as far as Medonna delli Amellati.

The names of the most considerable Towns and places ruined and destroyed by
the dreadful Earthquakes and Irruptions were, The Town of Nicolosi, wholly
ruined; Padara and Tree Castagne the greatest part destroyed; The Towns of La
Guardia, Malpasso, Campo Rotundo, Potielli, St. Antonino, St. Pietro,
Mosterbianco, Montpileri, La Anunicata, Fali^chi Placchi, all wholly overflowed
consumed, and lost in this fiery Inundation with all the Lands belonging to
them, no footsteps of them remaining; The Towns of Mascalucia, and St.
Giovanni de Galermo ruined in part; The large Gardens and Vineyards of
Albanelli overflown and destroyed: The famous piece of Antiquity of Marcus
Marcellus, much ruined; Madonna de Monferrato destroyed, besides many Castles,
Farms, and other Places, which have run the same Fortune, whose names we for
brevity pass over.

LXXX. West of the Isle of Sicily in the Tuscan Sea, within sight of Messina,
and 150 miles dist^^ from Mount Aetna are the Aeolian Islands, so caned from
Aeolus King thereof, who first raught the use of the Sail, and by observing the
Fire and Smo^^ which ascended from these Islands, (for heretofore they all
flamed) was from thence fabled to be the God of the Winds; These were anciently
seven, but are now eleven Islands, of which Liparis is the greatest, being ten
miles in circuit, the Fire went out here about an Age ago, So that at this day
Strombolo only burns, (though another called Vulcano smoaks continually). It
was formerly called Strongile, but by corruption Strombolo from the roundness
thereof, for it seems like an high round Mountain in the Sea, out of the top
whereo issues continually a flame like a burning Beacon, and exceeding clear,
so that by night especially it is to be discerned a wonderful way, A place so
full of horror to the neighboring Islanders, that the more ignorant Papists
are made to believe it is the very Jaws of Hell it self; The aforenamed Kircher
made Observations of this Mountain likewise, which he thus relates; That on a
certain day viewing Strombolo very curiously, about threescore miles distant,
he observed it to be more than ordinarily furious, for it appeared wholly
overwhelmed with Fire in so great plenty, that it seemed to belch out flaming
Mountains, a most horrendous Spectacle; And then, says he, I heard a strange
kind of dull murmur from the Mountain so far off, which seemed to come toward
us under the Earth, till it reached the subterraneous place where we stood, and
there uttered such horrible Thundrings within the Earth, with such formidable
Earthquakes, that none of them were able to stand on their Feet; After the
violence was over, getting up again with unspeakable Consternation, they beheld
the destruction and lamentable subversion of the famous Town of St. Euphemia
three miles off, which happened at that instant, the City being wholly
swallowed up, for seeking for the Town, they found instead thereof, what is
wonderful to be related, nothing but a dark stinking Lake sprung up in its
place, they could find no men nor Inhabitants; Thence passing on their Journey,
they found nothing else for Two Hundred miles, but the Carcases of Cities,
horrid ruins of Castles, Men straggling up and down in the open Fields, and
through horror and famine pining and withering away.

LXXXI. In April 1669, The Mountain Vesuvius aforementioned cast up more smoke
and Ashes than formerly, and for several Nights the neighboring places were
much affrighted with the great Flames which issued from it, accompanied with
unusual noises; At the same time they write, That the Vice Roy of Sicily having
compassion upon the miserable condition of above Thirty Thousand poor People,
who by their Flight had saved themselves from the Fire of Mount Aetna
aforementioned, which had destroyed 17 or 18 Towns or Villages, and by the
daily approaches to the City of Catania, seemed to threaten it with inevitable
ruin, so that the Inhabitants were leaving the place; And that he thereupon
sent one of his Officers to take order for the maintenance of those distressed
Creatures, and disposing of them into places of safety; In the same Month 1669
in the night, there was a cry made in the Town of Lichfeild in England of Fire,
Fire, and the Bells rang out, which frighted many; This was occasioned (says
Mr. Clark) by the sight of a sheet of Fire, which hung over that City for the
space of half an hour, and then disappeared, This says he, I had from one that
lay in the Town that night; Upon July 10. the same year at Weymouth in
Dorsetshire between six and nine a Clock in the morning, the Sea was observed
to ebb and flow 7 times, of which the greater notice was taken, because the
weather at that time was fair and calm, and the Tides very low, the like
accident having never been observed there but once before about three years
since; Upon June 20. this year at Jnspurg in Germany, a little after noon,
there was a very violent Tempest with extraordinary hail, rain, Thunder and
Lightning, accompanied with an Earthquake, which had such terrible Effects at
Schnatz a Town about 3 miles distant from Jnspurg, where the Emperor of Germany
had some Silver mines, that the River which runs through it overflowing,
drowned all the adjacent Fields, driving down, and destroying above Thirty
Houses, endamaging many more, and drowning above Two Hundred People; In July
1669, came Intelligence from Holstein in Denmark of Prodigious Tempests
accompanied with such dreadful Thunder and Lightnings as affrighted the Cattle
out of the Fields, and drove some Hundreds of them into the Sea, wherein they
were all drowned; From Mecklenburg likewise in Germany they write, that there
were several Fires kindled by Lightning in diverse parts of the Country.

LXXXII. In 1672, His Majesty proclaimed War against the States of the United
Provinces, and May 28. His Royal Highness engaged the whole Dutch Fleet in
Southwold Bay; and after a sharp dispute of 8 hours, the Hollanders retreated,
in which fight the Noble Earl of Sandwich was unfortunately slain; About this
time there happened a violent Fire at St. Katherines without the Iron-Gate near
the Tower of London, which consumed above an Hundred Houses; this year the
French overrun great part of Holland, taking as it is said, Thirty Cities and
Towns in Thirty days. In 1678, an horrid Popish Plot was discovered against His
Majesty's Person and Government, and soon after, Sir Edmondbury Godfrey (who
took the first Examination of Dr. Oats upon the Discovery thereof,) was
murdered by the Papists, for which three of them were executed. Several Popish
Lords were committed to the Tower, and December 1679, the Lord Stafford was
beheaded at Tower Hill for High Treason, In 1680, May 18. about 2 a Clock in
the morning there began a furious storm of Thunder and Lightning in London, so
extreme, that the Heavens seemed to be in a flame, which was accompanied with
very large Hail, and extraordinary violent and hasty Showrs of rain, which
continued for several hours, but about 10 a Clock in the morning a strange and
unusual darkness overspread the face of Heaven, and immediately after there
fell such a terrible storm of Hail, as the like was hardly ever seen in
England, before the storm, a great murmuring or rattling noise was heard in the
Air, the Hailstones were so very large, that some of them being measured, were
found to be four Inches, others five, others six in compass, nay it was
confidently reported, that some were seven, eight, and nine Inches about; it
continued not above a quarter of an hour, otherwise it might have done much
more damage than it did, yet abundance of Glass-Windows were shattered to
pieces, especially of those called Sky-Lights, The stones were of different
Shapes and Sizes, and the Fancies of People likened them to several things,
they fell with such violence, that they cut the Faces of some, and the heads
and hands of others, who were abroad, some others ran into the ground in the
Fields above an Inch, and being taken out, were found to be as big as Pullets
Eggs, and some larger, several of them were round, others square and flat, with
very sharp Edges.

LXXXIII. Not long before this, in the same year 1680, there fell a mighty
tempest of Rain, Hail, Lightning and Thunder at a Town in Oxfordshire, It began
about eleven a Clock in the morning, the Sky being for a considerable time
black and dark, when on a sudden there happened a great storm of Hail which by
the assistance of an East Wind fell with such violence, that the Hailstones
rebounded 3 Foot high from the ground; after which followed a fierce shower of
Rain, which seemed rather to come down in pailfuls, than in the common way; and
so affrighted the Inhabitants that they ran immediately into the Fields to save
their Sheep, Lambs, and other small Cattle, but had much ado to return with
their Lives; during this dreadful storm, the Heavens sent forth such huge and
frequent flashes of Fire, that notwithstanding that deluge of water, which at
that instant fell from the Skies, the Lightning took hold of some Houses, but
was happily quenched without any considerable damage, yet several Barns were
burnt down, with all within them, in one of which a man that was thrashing,
hardly made his escape; Among others a youth being overtaken in the storm,
endeavored to shelter himself in a Windmil, but the ill-natured Miller began
to swear and curse at him, asking him, if he was such a Fool and changling to
be afraid of a little Lightning and Thunder; the boy had scarce time to answer
before he was struck off the stairs, and the Miller was forced to go down and
take him up half dead; but this unkind Miller had hardly recovered the Youth,
ere he himself was struck down with the Thunder, and taken up without any
appearance of Life for the present, though it is said he afterward recovered.

LXXXIV. There is likewise a Relation of a strange Accident which happened this
year 1680, at a Town called Blois in France, That about one a Clock in the
morning an amazing Tempest of Wind arose with such violence, as soon affrighted
the most sleepy from their repose, and in a short time by its fury beat or blew
down all the Body of the Church of St. Soulucas, except the Belfry; also half
the Jesuits Church, and two fair houses into the Highstreet, the People whereof
were glad to run into the arched Cellars to save themselves, which they happily
did, for the ruins fell upon, and round about the Arch, but the Rubbish being
removed, they were afterward drawn out alive, This Tempest was likewise
accompanied with a most prodigious Hail, many Thousand stones being found as
big as a man's First, which without sufficient Authority would seem incredible;
This unusual Artillery of Heaven broke all the Slates wherewith the Houses are
covered, and the Glass Windows all over the Town, as if they had been beaten in
a Mortar; without the Town eight whole Parishes with the Fields adjacent were
wholly ruined by the Hail in such a terrible manner, that it seemed as if no
Corn had been sown, or Vines planted there; There were four other Parishes much
indamaged, and multitudes of Chimneys beaten down, so that the damages thereby
with the breaking of Windows and Tiles was valued to be above Two Hundred
Thousand Crowns, and the harm in the Vineyards and Cornfeilds invaluable; But
it pleased God the Protestant Church in that Town was wonderfully preserved,
though equally exposed to the Weather; without a Slate or any glass broken, the
direful marks of the Tempest being visible round about it; The same Divine
Providence was seen in that neither Man, Woman, nor Child were killed in this
dreadful desolation: There likewise happened an unusual Accident upon a Ship
riding at Sea, which being attaqued by a furious Tempest, was in great danger
of being cast away; but on a sudden there broke so dreadful a clap of Thunder
into the Ship, that they all imagined their Guns had been accidentally fired,
and in a moment the main Mast was split in sunder from top to bottom, as you
would split a rush; the main top Mast was shivered into small Pieces, and the
Pendant at the head of it, was burned to Ashes; the violence thereof was so
great, that it beat down fourteen men upon the Deck, and had like to have
thrown them into the Sea; and those that were within Deck, were likewise thrown
down, Five of them lay for dead a considerable time, no Pulse or Breath being
perceived, their Eyes and Teeth immovable, yet they had no visible hurt or
wound, only an intolerable smell of Brimstone; about half an hour after by
rubbing, forcing open their Mouths, and pouring down some Cordials, they all
recovered, but seemed much disturbed in their Senses; At the same time there
were six others miserably burnt, their flesh being scorched, and yet their
Garments not so much as singed, their skin was much discolored, and looked as
if burnt by a Coal.

LXXXV. In June this year 1680, in Pomerania in Germany, great and dreadful
streams of Fire were seen in the Heavens for a very considerable time; after
which there seemed to be a terrible Fight between two Armies, and the noise of
their shooting, and the fiery Bullets which seemed to fly in the Air caused
great Consternation, they giving great Light into their Houses, for four mile
round about; Likewise at Straelson in Sweden they saw dreadful Fires in the
Heavens about the same time, and diverse other unusual, and remarkable Flashes
and Appearances, and particularly they saw the Form of a great Bullet flying
through the Sky, which seemed to be as bright as the Moon, and from the Body
thereof, there proceeded great streams of Fire, which represented the Forms of
Snakes or Fiery Serpents, and several Suns were seen at once in the Firmament.
In December 1680, a great Comet appeared in the South-west, at its first
appearing there was seen an unusual and prodigious stream of Light arising out
of the South-west, it seemed broadest at the Horizon, growing sharper upward by
degrees, the Star from whence it proceeded was for some days not to be seen,
but a while after it became visible, and the shape seemed altered, the stream
being least and sharpest at the Star, and broader upward; the Tail or Blaze of
light altered, (as some Artists observed) turning every night more from the
North to the East, like the hand of a Watch; about the middle of January it
quite disappeared. In January 1681. there were very lamentable Inundations of
the Sea in Holland, Zealand and Flanders, the banks being broken down, and the
Water running a vast way into the Country, drowning many Thousands of Cattle,
and carrying away abundance of Hay and Corn, many Thousand Men, Women and
Children likewise lost their Lives before they could fly for succor; it rose so
high, that nothing was to be seen for some time, but the tops of Steeples and
Churches.

LXXXVI. In 1682, April 21, happened extraordinary Thunder and Lightning, and
excessive Rains which did much damage in several Places about London, and at
New-Brainford it carried away feveral houses, and filled the Cellars of many
others with Water. May 6. a strange and wonderful Birth happened at Ostend in
Flanders, where a Woman was delivered of two Female Children, which were joined
together by the Crown of the head; The Physicians consulted of parting them,
but concluded it not to be done without danger; they seemed to be distinct in
Life, Soul and Brains, from the several Actions they had, while one slept, the
other waked and eat; the heads were so joined, that when one turned it self the
neck of the other turned also; they lived for some time and were baptized, but
dyed soon after. May 12. there was an Earthquake in France, which produced very
terrible Effects, At Metz, the Watch-house of a Bulwark was thrown into the
Ditch with a Soldier in it; At Towers the Houses and Churches were so
dreadfully shaken therewith, as if several Coaches with six Horses had driven
along full speed through the streets; it threw down diverse Books on the side of
Bourbira^t; But at Raviere it was more ast^^^shing, where a certain River near
this place which fifty paces from its head turns a Gunpowder-M^ll, was never
known to cease running, yet in this ex^^aordinary Earthquake it remained dry
for half an hour, and then ran as before; The Powder Man surprised to see his
Mill stop, upon searching sound the Head or Fountain dried up; In Provence
their Houses, Beds, Windows were shaken, and the Doors and Windows forced open,
so that the Inhabitants were afraid to stay within; the Wine in several Cellars
was disturbed, and the Domestic Animals as Sheep, Cows, Horses, and Poultry
discovered their fear by unusual motions and cries; At Dion the day before, it
was observed that the Shepherds in the Grounds about that Town were not able to
stop their Flocks, nor hinder them from getting into their stalls at four a
Clock in the Evening, though at this time a year they used not to go home till
Sunset; Yea, the Earthquake was so violent there, that several Women big with
Child, came with the affright before their time, and that some of them lost
their Lives; Several other Cities and Towns in France felt the Effects of it,
but especially Callice and Bulloign, where diverse Persons were ^^^ed or lamed
by the ruins of the Buildings which (...) down by the violent shakings thereof;
there (...) almost the same thing in a late Earthquake at (...), and Piombieres
in France; at Remirement it threw down a Dozen Houses, and the Vaults of the
chief Church fell down, two Maidens were killed, and the People ran for
security into the Feilds, the Destruction and loss occasioned thereby, (besides
the lives of several Persons) is judged to amount to Five Hundred Thousand
Livers; some years ago there was a mighty Earthquake in France, which moved and
agitated the Waves of the Sea after such a manner, that though the Weather was
fair and calm, and without any appearance of a storm, yet there were Thirty
Vessels lost between Dover and Calais: Before this last Earthquake, they write
from Lions, Geneva, and other places, that there appeared Flames of Fire for
four days upon a Mountain near Geneva.

LXXXVII. In 1682, June 7. The Ship called The Jamaica Merchant, being in the
Gulf of Florida in the West Indies, about 12 at Noon happened a mighty Shower,
with such dreadful Thunder as was hardly ever before heard, which split the
Mainmast, and threw the Men down flat on the Deck, setting Fire between the
De^ks in several places, which immediately burst forth into dreadful Flames,
and with all their diligence could not be quenched, so that they were all
forced to betake themselves to their Longboat, and happily escaped to another
English Ship, not far off. In the Cazelt it is related, That the Letters from
M^s^o the chief City of Russia, of July 25. give an Account. That the late Czar
or Emperor Alexis, who married with a Polish Lady, having by her means taken a
great Affection to the manners and customs of that Nation, and designed to
introduce them among his own Subjects the more to civilize them, had thereby
raised a great hatred in the Boyars or Nobility, and other great Men against
him, who resolved to poison him, and his Queen, and accordingly effected it by
the means of a Jew; He had two Brothers, the eldest named John about 20 years
old, who had the same Mother, and was born blind of one Eye, the other named
Peter, about 9 years old, who was born of a second Marriage, and his Mother the
Princess Natalia was living; The Emperor being dead in few hours, after
suffering great Torments; The Chancellor of the Kingdom joining with the
Princess Natalia, and several Boyers, and other great Men, proclaimed the young
Prince Peter, Emperor, and at the same time the Princess Sophia Sister to
Prince John, General Komanski and many others espoused the cause of the Elder
Brother, and drew the Guards and Soldiers to their side, by persuading them
that the late Czar was poisoned, and that there was a design likewise to
destroy them; whereupon the said Guards rose and fell upon the Boyers, and
others who had proclaimed Prince Peter, and destroyed a great many of them;
After which Prince John was proclaimed Emperor, but without deposing Prince
Peter, so that there are now two Emperors, who were both Crowned June 24. last
past; The Emperor Alexis, left a young Son, of whom it seems no notice was
taken, he being yet in the Cradle; The two Emperors seem hitherto to agree very
well, and things at present are very calm and quiet there.

LXXXVIII. In 1682. The Gazett of July 31. gives an Account, that on the sixth
of that Month at Tortorica a Town in Sicily, about seven a Clock in the
Evening, after so great darkness that they could not discern each other four
paces asunder, there arose a great storm of Rain, Lightning, and Thunder, which
lasted 36 hours, that about one a Clock next morning, great Torrents of Water
caused by these Rains, fell from the Mountains with so great violence, that
they carried with th^^^ Trees of an extraordinary bigness, which threw (...)
the Wall and Houses of the Town they happened to beat against; The Waters were
so furious that they (...) the Church of St. Ni^^^las, and the Archdeacon of
the Town who retired thither, perished there with many other Persons; There
only remained one Abbey, and about fifty Hous^s, and those so shattered, that
they fell down soon after; about 600 of the Inhabitants were drowned, the rest
being abroad in the Field^ gathering their Silk, fled to the Mountains, where
they suffered very much for want of Provisions; The Goods, Trees, Stones, Sand,
and other Rubbish which the Waters carried away were in so great abundance,
that they made a Bank above the Water two miles in length, near the Mouth of
the River where the Water before was very deep; several other Towns were
likewise destroyed by this great Flood; It is added, that Mount Ae^^^ cast
forth such abundance of Water, that all the Neighboring Country was drowned.
They write likewise from Rome of July 4. That after having been two Months
without Rain, it began to Rain on Sunday June 25 at night, and that an hour
before day there fell a Thunderbolt in the Popes Palace of St. Peter, which
ran through several Rooms, and broke down the Ch^mny-Peice of the Apartment of
Cardinal Cibo.

LXXXIX. In the weekly Memorials published at Lord^^ we have the Extract of two
Letters sent to the Publisher by Richard Gips Esquire from Weltham-Hall in Suffolk,
dated the 22 and 29 of July 1682, concerning a gro^ing piece of Wood, to this
Effect; Sir, Myself, and many hundreds of Ingenious Men have seen at St.
Edmundsbury in Suffolk, a groaning piece of Wood, it was of an Elm-Tree sawn in
the middle, as I conceive, and I guess it to be of a very great Age; As soon as
a hot Iron was put on this Wood, it greaned like a dying man, so that it might
be heard a great way; It was very surprising to me when I heard it, for I could
not be persuaded to believe any such thing; The Wood was very firm on one side
of it, knotty and cracked in some places, nor would it groan when the Iron was
put twice in the same place, but it would at some little distance from it; At
the time when the hot Iron was put upon it, I laid my hand nigh the Iron, and
perceived something gather to the Iron before the Wood groaned, the groan was
no longer than that of a dying Man; This Wood was first discovered by a little
Girl, who playing with the Fire, by accident scattered a Coal on this Board
which lay very nigh the Fire, and it groaned so extraordinarily, that it
frighted the Child. The second Letter was thus, Sir, since my last to you, the
Groaning Plank is removed from Bury, but being informed of another Groaning
Plank, I this day went to see it, and was much more surprised at it, than at
the former, the groaning being much more audible than the other; This piece of
Wood was Witch-Elm, as the other also was, though much less and thinner, it was
about an Inch or two in thickness, a yard and an half in length, and 3 Foot
broad, It was an old and firm piece of Wood as the former; Sir, if you see any
Witch-Elm that is very old, you may assure your self, that if you burn it with
a very hot Iron, it will groan extraordinarily, I discoursed with a very
ingenious Gentleman, who thinks it is occasioned by reason of some Glutino^s
matter which is included in that sort of Wood, so that when the Fire comes it
rarifies it, and occasions that noise; but in regard I could not perceive any
Glutinous matter, but on the contrary that it was extraordinary dry, I could
hardly acqui^s^^ in his Opinion.

XC. In 1682. August 14. Another Comet or Blazing Star was visible in London,
at nine a Clock at night about North and by West from that City: Its head was
large, much like the Star Venus at the height, it was seen several Nights
after, and having about 30 Degrees of North Latitude it did never set; having
continued for some time, it disappeared; Aug. 25. the Gazett informs us from
Naples, that the Mountain Vesuvius did cast out Fire accompanied with a most
terrible and hideous noise, which from an hour after Sunset on Saturday, till 3
a Clock next morning was so great, that it caused a kind of Earthquake, the
houses in that City being plainly observed to shake; The Mountain likewise cast
out Ashes in great abundance, which were dispersed many miles by the wind, and
the Sunday after, all the Streets of Naples were covered with them, as if it
had been a deep Snow, These Prodigies very much terrified the people, and
Public Prayers were made for appeasing the Wrath of Heaven; It is added, That
many great Coals of Fire fell also, the dread whereof wrought so much upon the
Inhabitants, that they removed to other Cities; That the terrible Earthquakes
have thrown down near Three Thousand Buildings all about the foot of the
Mountain, and that it roared so loud as to be heard 40 miles distance in a
still night. It is written from Florence in Italy in the Gazete of Sept. 29.
That a few days before there happened one night such a terrible Tempest of
Wind, Rain, Hail, and Thunder, about 18 miles from that City upon the Mountains
of Bologna, that for eight miles in length, and two in brea^lth, it swept away
all the Branches from the greatest Trees, as Oaks, Chestnuts and Olives, and
much more from the smaller Fruit Trees; It destroyed all the Autumn Harvest
that was upon the ground, and lest not a Vine standing, it carried away all the
Roofs and coverings off from the Countreymens Houses, and some were quite
beaten down to the ground, and several people killed in their Beds, A Church
and Steeple were quite ruined, and the Bells carried above a quarter of a mile;
Many Wild Beasts and Fowl, as Deer, Hares, Foxes, Partridges; and small Birds
were found dead, and if it had happened in the day as it did in the night, much
Cattle, and many people must needs have perished, for the Hadstones were sound
to be from Three to Five Pounds in weight, the like not known in these parts,
and the loss is esteemed the greater, because not to be redeemed in seven years
time.

XCI. In 1682. Oct. 5. A strange Monster was born at Exeter in Devonshire,
having two perfect heads, one standing right as it should, the other being in
the right Shoulder, with Eyes, Nose, Ears, Mouth, and Tongue to each head
proper, it had but two Arms and Hands, and two Legs and Feet, all in good, and
comely shapes, they which were at the delivery say, that they were two as
handosme Faces as ever they saw, it was living when born, but soon expired,
only giving one sigh at its departure; It was soon buried, but after taken up
again, and exposed to the view of numerous Spectators, to the great advantage
of the Parents.

Thus have I briefly run over abundance of Strange Prodigies, Apparitions, and
Accidents which have happened in the Heavens, Earth and Sea in several
Countries for near Seventeen Hundred years past, but as to the Application of
the Effects of diverse of them to particular Persons or Places I have barely
collected most of them from that noted Astrologer Mr. John Gadbury in his
Treatise of Prodigies, and his Discourse of the three Comets in 1664, and 1665.
Though, as an Ingenious Gentleman lately observes, there may be much doubt and
question whether there be any great certainty in these Predictions, since they
have been judged sometimes to portend evil as well as good, for as he says,
Though that Comet which some interpreted to presage Luthers preaching against
Indulgences, and the Reformation which followed, bespoke evil it may be to the
Popes Kitchen, yet it was certainly the dawning of the Blessed Light of the
Gospel to the Western Parts of Christendom; But however, (as he adds) if the
terrorand rareness of these Prodigies do upon any Account whatsoever mind us of
our Mortality, and prepare us for our end (as it has effected upon some in
former Ages) or to reflect upon our ownor the public Crimes, which may call
down Gods; vengeance upon us, and to implore his mercy and fors bearance toward
us, it may be very useful and profitable, for sure it is, this Age has need
enough of Repentance, and without a Comet, we want not abundant Notices and
Warnings that if we do not forsake our horrid enormities, we cannot long escape
the signal vengeance of Heaven. But, says he, the making use of them, thereby
to read the destiny of Kings, Nations and Governments is Irrational,
Fantastical, and Heathenish, unbecoming either a Man, or a Christian, and
therefore instead of any dreadful Presages, The Blessing of the Almighty be
upon the whole Israel of God, Amen.

I cannot better conclude this Subject than by inserting the following Letter,
written by a famous Prelate of our Church, inferior to no man of this Age,
either for Piety or Learning, wherein he declares his thoughts concerning the
Comet in August last, 1682, which seems fully to comprize all that can be said
by the wisest of Mortals concerning Comets. The Letter is as follows.

My good Friend, It seems your Philomathematici (as your Almanack-^^^kers
usually (...) themselves) and Astrologers i^ London (...) their Judgment
concerning the New (...), (...) I shall tell you mine, though (may be) it may
signify as little as theirs when they do declare it. 1. Then (in the General)
It has been the opinion of (...) that all Comets portend some (...). Nations,
Countries, Cities, or particular Persons; (...) Greeks (...), All Comets are
forerunners of some Calamities; And a Latin Poet and a Pagan ^ould say,
Nunquam furilibus excanduit ignibus ^^her. 2. But in particular, I believe (and
I think there is good reason for it) there are three things concerning Comets
which may, and other three things which neither are, nor certainly can be
known; For instance, 1. Their Motion 2. Their Magnitude. 3. Their Altitude
(whether above or below the Planets) may by the Parallax, and a good
Mathematician be certainly known; But then there are other three things which
the best Mathematicians neither do, nor certainly can know; For Instance. 1.
Their Generation, how they are produced, and of what matter they are made; 2.
Their Signification, what it is which they do particularly portend, and to what
Country, City or Person it relates. 3. Their Exit and vanishing, how they come
to disappear, and what becomes of them afterward; These things none of your
Astrologers and Star-gazers do, or (by any ground in Nature or Scripture,
Reason or Revelation) can certainly know; They may guess, and so may you and I,
and it may be as well as they, but it is only Conjecture, not Science, they
having no ground from which they can certainly conclude their Conjectures to be
true; Nay I do confidently and truly add, (and there is evident Reason for it)
that neither the Pope, notwithstanding his Infallibility, nor the Devil
notwithstanding all his Subtilty, can certainly know what any Comet does
particularly portend, unless it please God, who only knows to discover and
reveal it to them.

FINIS.
The Surprising Miracles of Art, or an Account of the most Magnificent
Buildings, and Curious Inventions and Rarities in all Ages. Part II.
HAving related a multitude of Miracles and Prodigies of Nature. I shall now
proceed to those of Art; The Chinese look upon themselves as the wisest People
upon the face of the Earth, they use therefore to say, That they see with both
Eyes, and all other Nations but with one only, and thereupon they boast, though
I know not with what Truth and Justice that the most famous Inventions which
have been so lately known to us in Europe, have been no Strangers to them for
many Ages past; however I shall relate what are most observable both in these
and other Nations. It is likewise recorded, that Augustus Caesar having several
ways adorned and fortifyed the City of Rome, putting it into a condition of
bravery and security for after times, he thereupon gloried, That he found Rome
of brick, and left it of Marble; and certainly nothing makes more for the just
Glory of a Prince than to leave his Dominions in better State than he found
them; Yet the vast Expenses of some Princes and People had been more truly
commendable, and their mighty works more really glorious, had they therein
consulted more of the Public good, and less of their own Ostentation; However
it may not be unpleasant, nor unprofitable to describe them, and likewise to
relate the most curious Inventions and Rarities in all Ages even to these
times, which have been more favorable to Learning than the former, and wherein
Arts have been thereby improved to the height;

1. But first concerning Buildings, the most famous structure we first read of,
was immediately after the Universal Deluge, or Noah's Flood, for Nimrod the Son
of Chus, the Son of Cham, persuaded the People to secure themselves from the
like after-claps by building some stupendous Edifice, which might resist the
fury of a second Deluge; This Counsel was generally embraced; Heber only and
his Family (as the Tradition goes) contradicting such an unlawful attempt; But
the major part prevailing, the Tower of Babel began to rear its Head of Majesty
Five Thousand One Hundred Forty six Paces from the Ground, having its Basis and
circumference equal to its height: The Passage to go up went winding about the
outside and was of an exceeding great breadth, there being not only room for
Horses, Carts, and the likemeans of Carriage to meet and turn, but lodgings
also for Man and Beast; And (as Verslegan reports) Grass and Cornfields for
their nourishment; and admirable it is to consider, what multitudes of men
there were in the World in so short a space, there being but eight persons that
came out of the Ark, and now this Building was carried on by Five Hundred
Thousand Men, the Foundation of it was nine miles compass; But God by the
Confusion of Tongues hindered the Proceeding of this Building, one not being
able to understand what his Fellow called for; which Du Bartas wittily
describes.

Bring me (quoth one) a Trowel quickly quick,
One brings him up a Hammer, hew this brick,
Another bids, and then they cleave a Tree,
Make fast this Rope, and then they let it flee,
One calls for Planks, Another Mortar lacks,
They bring the first a Stone, the last an Ax,
One would have Nails, and him a Spade they give
Another asks a Saw, and gets a Sieve:
Thus crosly crossed, they prate and rail in vain,
What one has made, another spoils again,
This makes them leave their work, and like mad Fools
Scatter their Stuff, and tumble down their Tools.
II. We read in several Ancient Histories of The seven Marvels, or Wonders of
the World, The first whereof they reckoned to be The Walls of Babylon; This
City of Babylon was seated on the Banks of the River Euphrates, which ran
through the midst of it, over which Semiramuis built a strong and stately
Bridge of a mile long, binding each stone together with clips of Iron fastened
with melted Lead, and is the ancientest City of the World, first built by
Nimrod in the place appointed for the raising of the Tower of Babel, and by him
made the Imperial Seat of the Chaldea^ Kings, afterward much beautified and
enlarged by Semiramis the Wife of Ninus, one of his Successors, and finally
much increased both in bulk and beauty by Nebuchadnezzar, for he added a new
City to the old, which he compassed about with three Walls, and made therein
three stately Gates, and near his Fathers Palace, he built another more
stately, where he raised Stone Works like mountains which he planted with all
manner of Trees. He made also Pensile Gardens hanging as it were in the Sky,
borne upon Arches foursquare, each square containing four hundred foot, filled
above with Earth, wherein grew all sorts of Trees and Plants; The Arches were
built one upon another, even to fifty Cubits high; He likewise made Aqu^^iucts
for watering these Gardens; He erected an Image of Gold in the Plain of Dura
sixty Cubits high, and six broad; These stately Buildings puffed him up who
therefore arrogated to himself the whole Glory of them, saying in his Pride, Is
not this the great Babel that I have built, a City of great Fame and State; The
compass of the Walls were 365 Furlongs, or forty six, (some say threescore)
miles, according to the number of the days of the year, in height two hundred
Cubits, and fifty Cubits in breadth, that six Chariots or Carriages might meet
on the top, they were finished in one year by the hands of Two Hundred Thousand
Workmen; The City was foursquare, and fifteen miles from one corner to another;
Insomuch that Aristotle says, It ought rather to be called a Country than a
City, adding withal, That when the Town was taken, it was three days before the
furthest parts of the Town had any Intelligence thereof; which taking of the
Town must be understood of the surprise thereof by the Medes and Persians, in
the Reign of Beshazzar, when Daniel the Prophet interpreted to that King the
words Mean, Tekel, Peers, which were miraculously written by a hand upon the
Wall as he was banqueting with his Nobility, and foretold the very day before
it was taken that God had given his Kingdom to the Medes and Perfians; All
which was accomplished the might following, when Darius King of Media and
Persia besieging Babylon, took it on a sudden with the help of his Nephew Cyrus
the Persian in the time of a great Feast, when the King, Nobility, and People
contemning their Enemies being over-confident of their own strength, minded
only their Sports and Pastimes; which we read was surprised after this manner;
The River Euphrates ran quite through the Town, round about whose banks the
politic Cyrus cut many and deep Channels, into which he in a very short time
drained and emptied the River, conveying his own Forces into the Town all along
the dry and yiedling Channel, and in a little (...) made himself Master of it,
the Babylonians being (...) in Wine and Debauchery; In the Reign of (...)
Semiramis this City revolted from her, and (...) thereof coming to her as she
was ordering (...) she thereupon leaving her head half dressed, (...) besieged
it, never ordering the rest of her hair (...) had recovered it; Of this great
Lady it is recorded, That she was born in Ascalon a Town of Syria, and exposed
to the fury of Wild Beasts, but being born not to dye so ingloriously, she was
brought up by Shepherds, and at full Age presented to the Syrian Vice Roy, who
gave her in marriage to his only Son; going with him to the Wars, she fell into
acquaintance with King Ninus, who liking her Person and Spirit, took her to his
bed; This bred in him a greater Affection to her, so that he granted her at her
request the command of the Empire for 5 days, making a Decree that her Will in
all things should be punctually performed, which boon being gotten, she put on
the Royal Robes, and (as some writers report) commanded the King to be slain;
Having thus gotten the Empire, she exceedingly enlarged it, leading her Army
consisting of one hundred Thousand Chariots of War, three Millions of Foot, and
half a Million of Horse; A Woman worthy of Honor and Applause but only for her
insatiable Lusts, of which the Greek Writers charge her to be very guilty. This
Queen Semiramis caused an huge Obelisk or Pyramid to be cut out of the Armenian
Mountains, all of one entire stone, one hundred and fifty foot long, and twenty
four foot thick, which was foursquare, and was brought with much difficulty to
the River Euphrates, and from thence to Babylon, where she erected it to be a
matter of admiration to future Ages. Babylon likewise revolted from the
Persians in the Reign of Darius Hyslaspes, and that Victuals might (...) for
the Men of War, they strangled (...) of the Women, they being then it seems
(...) to be necessary Evils; when they had for (...) obstinately defended the
Town, that the (...) had very little hope of prevailing, Zopyrus one (...)
Captains mangling his body, and dis^iguring (...) Face by cutting off his own
Ears and Nose, ^ed to the Babylonians complaining of the Tyranny of the King,
as if he had been thus cruel to him; The Babylonians believing his Words, and
knowing his Courage, committed the charge of the whole Army to him, as a man to
whom such barbarous usage had made the King irreconcilable; But he taking the
best Opportunity, delivered both the Town and Soldiers into the hands of his
Sovereign, which made Darius often say, That he had rather have one Zopyrus,
than Twenty Babylonians; Here dyed Alexander the Great, after whose Death the
Grecian Captains regardful rather of their own Ambition than the Common
Loyalty, divided the Empire amongst themselves, leaving the body of the King
eight days unburied; A wonderful change of Fortune, that he who living thought
the World too small for his valor, being dead should find no place big enough
for his Body: The Walls of this City were built of Stone, and wonderful high,
strongly joined together with Lime and Ciment growing in the Mines of that
Country, but especially in the great Lake of Asphaltites in Judea, where
sometime Sodom and Gomorrah stood; within the Town were a great number of
Marble Temples and Golden Images, whole Streets shining and glittering with
Gold, and precious Stones; And among other Temples there was one of Belus built
by Semiramis, and dedicated to Cush, or Jupiter Belus fourfquare, each side
containing two Furlorys, or a Thousand Paces, with thick Towering Walls, and
entered by four Gates of polished Brass; In the midst thereof there was a Tower
sometimes reckon (...) one of the (...) Wonders, it had an hundred Bra^en
(...), and ^wo Hundred and Fifty Towers; and (...) a quar^^r of a mile both in
height and breadth, upon which were raised eight other Towers one above another,
with easy stairs to ascend up to the top; where there (...) a Chapel with a
sumptuous Bed, and a Table of ^old. In the top of this Chapel were placed
three Golden Statues, one of Jupiter 40 Foot long, weighing a Thousand Talents,
each Talent containing 63 pounds, 10 Ounces; Another Image of Ops weighing as
much, sitting in a Golden Throne, at her Feet were two Lions, and hard by
diverse huge Serpents of Silver, each weighing Thirty Talents; The third Image
was of Juno standing, in weight eight hundred Talents, to all which was added a
Common Table of Gold, forty foot long, and twelve broad, weighing 50 Talents;
There were also two standing Cups of 30 Talents; and 2 Vessels for perfumes of
the like weight; Besides 3 other Vessels of Gold weighing twelve hundred
Talents; All which the Persian Kings after the Conquest of it took away;
Finally such wonderful things are written by credible Authors of Artificial
Mountains, Orchards, and Gardens hanging in the Air, that they seem almost
incredible; All which demonstrates the wonderful Wealth and Glory of those
Monarchs in that time; But after the taking of it by the Macedonians, the
grandeur and magnificence thereof began to decline, lessening a fourth part in
the time of Quintus Curtius, and was reduced to Desolation in the days of
Pliny, and in the Reign of the Emperor Adrian, there was nothing left of
Babylon but a poor Wall, which served for a Park for Wild Beasts, in which the
Kings of Persia used to hunt, and those who have lately traveled thither,
relate it is now so full of Lions and Savage Beasts, yea, and of Robbers, and
Murderers, that Passengers are forced to have Soldiers to Guard them, from
whence we may by the way observe the exact accomplishment of the Prophecy of
Jeremiah. chapter 51. concerning this City, A drought is upon her Waters, and I
will dry up her Sea, and make her Springs dry, and Babylon shall become heaps,
a dwelling place for Dragons, an astonishment, and an hissing without an
Inhabitant; The Wild Beasts of the Desert, with the Wild Beasts of the Islands
shall dwell there, and the Out shall dwell there, and it shall be no more
inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from Generation to Generation, and the
Land shall be Desert and Dry. And it is certainly reported by Travelers that
there is not nowany Town or Village near that once famous City, nor so much as
a Tree or green Herb in all that Territory, but all is become a sandy Desert;
For Bagdat which is now called New Babylon, is a days Journey from the place
where the old City stood, and this barrenness is wonderful, considering the
admirable fruitfulness thereof in times past, which Pliny says, was the most
fruitful Country of all the East, and that the ground usually yielded two
hundred, and some years Three Hundred for one. Treasure of Time, Vol 1.

III. The Second Wonder of the World is reckoned to be, The Colossus of the
Sun, which was at Rhodes; It was the Statue or Figure of a man, dedicated by
the Gentiles to the Sun, and some say to Jupiter, it was composed of Brass, of
an incredible bigness, and in height like a mighty Tower, so that it can hardly
be imagined how it was raised, and made in that manner, Pliny says, it
contained threescore and Ten Cubits in height, and that it was twelve years
before it was made, though many able Workmen continually wrought about it, and
that it cost Three Hundred Talents, This Statue was so immeasurably great, that
it seemed as if the Earth could no longer sustain it, so that what was twelve
years in making, having stood sixty six years was pulled down in an instant by
an Earthquake; After this fall, which was in the time of Pliny, many went to
see, and wonder at it, for says he, there were few men who could embrace one
of its Fingers, the least of which was greater than any other man whatsoever;
standing with his two Legs striding over an Haven; between the Legs whereof
Ships might pass with their Masts and Sails up; This wonderful Colossus lay
there ruined for a very long time, the Rhodians being forbid by an Oracle to
erect it again, or possbly pretending such an Oracle to save that charge, yet
they held the Brass and the other Materials thereof almost sacred, which none
ventured to meddle with till Mnavias the Egyptian General in the year 600,
finding in himself no such scruple of Conscience, made a Prey thereof, for
after he had overcome Constance the Emperor in a Sea Fight, and had conquered
the Isle of Rhodes, he sold this Image as it lay on the ground to a Jew who
loaded nine hundred Camels with the Brass thereof. Treasury of Time. Vol. 2.

IV. The Third Wonder of the World, Historians have recorded to be The Pyramids
of Egypt, and if all be certain which they have written of them, they are truly
admirable, they were vast and stupendions Structures, many in number, three
most celebrated, and one the principal of all, situate on the South of the
City of Memphis, and on the Western Banks of Nilus, they ended in a sharp point
like a flame of fire, from whence they had their name; It is related that for
erecting them there were three hundred and threescore Thousand men employed for
Twenty years together; They were built by the vanity of the Egyptian Kings,
and used for their Sepulchers when dead, yet many times only to keep their
Subjects in employment, and upon these it is thought the Israelites were
employed by Pharaoh, when they cried to the Lord, and he delivered them by the
hand of Moses; The largest, and chief of the Worlds seven Wonders, is situate
most part of it on the top of a Rocky hill, which rises an hundred Foot above
the Plain, with a gentle and easy ascent, the height of the Situation, adding
to the Beauty of the Work, and the Rock to the Strength thereof; It was built
for the Sepulcher of Cheops an Egyptian King; Each side of this Pyramid is six
hundred ninety three Foot according to English measure, so that the whole
Circumference of the Basis and Foundation contains four hundred eighty thousand
two hundred and forty nine Square Feet, or eleven English Acres of ground, the
height and breadth are both the same, that is, six hundred ninety three foot;
The Ascent to the top is contrived in this manner, From all the sides without,
the Ascent is by degrees, the lowermost step is about four foot high, and three
in breadth, which running about the Pyramid in a level, makes on every side of
it a long, but narrow walk; The second now is like the first, retiring inward
from the first three feet and so runs about the Pyramid; In the same manner is
the third Row placed above the second, and so in order the rest, like so many
stairs rising one above another to the top, which is about nine foot square,
consisting of three Stones only, yet large enough for threescore men to stand
upon; No Stone in the whole Building being so little as to be drawn by any of
our Carriages, yet were brought thither from the Arabian Mountains, but how
brought, and by what Engine mounted is an equal wonder.

The Degrees by which men ascend, are not all of an equal depth, for some are
about four foot, others scarcely three, and the higher they ascend, the more
they diminish both in breadth and thickness; These are all made of massy and
polished Stones, the breadth of every step being one single and entire Stone,
containing thirty foot of stone, the number of these steps is two hundred and
seven; On the North-side ascending 38 feet upon an Artificial Bank of Earth,
there is a square and narrow Passage leading into the inside of this Pyramid,
containing in length ninety two feet and an half; The Structure of it has been
the labor of an exquisite hand, as appears by the smoothness and eveness of
the work, and by the close knitting of the joints; It is now an habitation for
great ugly Batts of about a foot long; At the end of this entrance, you must
climb up a massy stone eight or nine foot in height, where you enter into a
Gallery, the pavement whereof is of smooth and polished white Marble; the
breadth is above five foot, and the height the like, the length of this Gallery
is one hundred and ten foot; At the end of this, begins a second Gallery, a
very stately piece of work, not inferior in Curiosity of Art, or richness of
Marerials to the most sumptuous Buildings. It is divided from the former by a
Wall, at the end whereof is a Well about three foot over; the sides of which
are lined with white Marble; it is eighty six Cubits in depth, hewn through the
Rock where the Pyramid stands; About 15 foot thence, is a square Passage of
mighty Stones, exquisitely joined, containing one hundred and 10 foot, at the
end of which is an Arched Vault, or little Chamber, the length about twenty
foot, and breadth seventeen; The length of this second Gallery is 154 feet of
white and polished marble, both roof, Walls and bottom, and on each side
benches of the same.

At the end of this Gallery you enter into a square hole, which brings you in a
little room lined with rich and speckled Theban Marble, out of which through
another Passage of the same stone most curiously cut, you come to the North end
of a very sumptuous and well proportioned Room, wherein Art seems to contend
with Nature, the curious work not being inferior to the Rich Materials; It
stands in the heart or center of the Pyramid, the floars, sides, and roof all
of excellent Theban Marble; The Stones which cover this room are of a strange
stupendous length, like so many huge beams lying flat cross the room, and
bearing up that almost infinite weight, and mass of the Pyramids above; Of
these, there are nine which cover the Roof, the length of the Room is 34
English feet, the breadth 17, and the height 19 feet; In the midst of this
glorious room, stands the Tomb of Cheops aforementioned, of one piece of
Marble, hollow within, and sounding like a Bell, but empty; For, says
Diodorus, although the Egyptian Kings intended these for their Sepulchers, yet
it happened that they were not buried therein, For the People being enraged
against them for the slavery and toilsomness of the work, and for their Cruelty
and oppression, they threatened to tear in pieces their dead Bodies, and with
scorn and ignominy to throw them out of their Sepulchers; whereupon these
Princes commanded their Friends that when they were dead they should bury them
in some obscure place.

The Tomb is cut smooth and plain, without any sculpture or ingraving; The
outsides contain in length 7 Foot, 3 Inches and half; in depth 3 foot, 4
Inches, and the same breadth, the hollow part within is about six foot long,
the depth two foot, whereby it appears that men's bodies are as big now as they
were Three Thousand year ago, for it is near so long since this Tomb was made;
The charge whereof was so great, that though the workmen had no other Food but
Garlic, Radishes and Onions, yet it cost that King eighteen Hundred Talents.
Some with great labor and pains have climbed to the top of this Pyramid, but
being above, they have seemed as it were to lose their sight by looking down,
judging themselves to be above the clouds, whereby their Brains were much
troubled; Next to this in bulk and beauty, is said to be the Pyramid of a
Daughter of Cheops, who, as Authors report, to finish her Fathers undertaking,
and raise her own to the height, prostituted her body to all Comers, requiring
but one stone toward the work from each one of her Customers; Treasury of Time.

Not far from this Pyramid are the Egyptian Mummies, which are the Graves of
the ancient Egyptians, into which are descents like the narrow mouths of Wells,
some near Ten Fathoms deep, leading into long Vaults hewn out of the Rock with
Pillars of the same; Between every Arch lie the Corpse, ranked one by another of
all sides, which are innumerable, shrouded in a number of Folds of Linen, and
swathed with Bands of the same, the breasts of many being marked with strange
Hieroglyphick Characters; The Linen being pulled off, the bodies appear solid,
incorrupt, and perfect in all their dimensions; To keep these from
Putrefaction, they draw the Brains out at the Nostrils with an Iron Instrument,
filling the head with preservative spices, then cutting up the Belly with an
Ethiopian Stone they take forth the Bowels, cleanse the inside with wine, and
so stuffing it with a composition of Myrrh, Cassia, and other odours, they
closed it up again; The same the poorer sort effected with Bitumen, fetched
from the Lake of Sodom, whereby they have been preserved to this day having
lain there for above Three Thousand years. Clarks Mirror, First Part.

On the Bank of the River Nilus stood that famous Labyrinth, built by
Psammiticus King of Egypt, situate on the South side of the Pyramids, and North
of Arsinoe; It contained within the compass of one continued Wall a Thousand
Houses, ( Herodotus says, three Thousand five hundred) and twelve Royal Palaces
all covered with Marble, and had one only entrance, but innumerable turnings
and returnings, sometimes one over another, and all very difficult to such as
were not acquainted with them. The Building was more under ground than above,
the Marblestones being laid with such Art that neither wood nor cement was
employed in any part of the Fabric; The chambers were so ordered that the
doors upon there opening gave a Report no less terrible than a crack of
Thunder; The chief entrance was all of white Marble, adorned with stately
Columns, and most curious Imagery; Having got to the end of it, a pair of
stairs of ninety steps conducted into a gallant Porch or Portico, supported
with Pillars of Theban Marble, which was the entrance into a fair, and stately
Hall, the place of the General Convention, or meeting of the Nobles of the
Kingdom, all of polished marble, set out with the Statues of their Gods; A work
which afterward was imitated by Dedalus in the Cretan Labyrinth, though it fell
as short of the Glories of this as Minos the King who was at the charge
thereof, was inferior to Psammiticus in power and Riches. Heylins Cosmography.

The lake of Maeris was likewise a most admirable work, undertaken and finished
by Maeris one of the Egyptian Kings, which for greatness and color is like the
Sea; It is about six hundred furlongs from the City of Memphis, the
circumference thereof containing some hundreds of furlongs, the depth fifty
fathom or three hundred feet, many Millions of men were employed several years
about it, the benefit of it to the Egyptians, and the wisdom of that King
cannot be sufficiently commended, for since the rising of the River Nilus is
not always alike, and the Country is more fruitful by the moderateness
thereof; He dug this Lake to receive the superfluity of the waters, that
neither by the greatness of the Inundation, it should cause Marshes, or by the
scarcity of water the Earth should not yield her strength; ^he therefore cut a
ditch from the River to this Lake fourscore furlongs long, and three hundred
feet in breadth, by which sometimes receiving in, and sometimes diverting the
River, he gave at his pleasure a sufficient quantity of water to the
Husbandmen; In the midst of this Lake, King Maeris built a Sepulcher, and 2
Pyramids, each of them an hundred fathoms high, placing upon them two Marble
Statues, fitting on a Throne; one representing himself, the other his wife,
designing hereby to make his Memory Immortal; The Revenues which rise by the
Fish of this Lake, he gave to his wife to buy sweet Ointments, Ornaments and
Jewels, which was so great that it amounted to above a Thousand pound a day;
For it was mightily replenished with Fish of Twenty sorts, so that very many
were continually employed in catching, and salting of them. Diodorus Siculus
Hist.

5. The Fourth Marvel or Wonder of the World was the Tomb of Mausolus King of
Caria, a Province in the Greater Asia, built by his Queen Artemisia, who as
Historians report, so dearly affected her husband, that she is by many recorded
as an absolute pattern of Conjugal Affection; After his death she lamented his
loss with extraordinary Sorrow and Complaints, and resolved to erect a Tomb or
Sepulcher for him answerable to the extreme Love she had for him, and such
indeed it proved to be being accounted for rare workmanship, and costly
magnificence one of the Worlds Wonders; The Stone of the whole Structure was of
most curious Marble, four hundred and eleven foot in Circuit, and 25 Cubits
high, supported with Thirty gallant Pillars, excellently engraven; This
building was open on all sides, with Arches 73 foot wide, framed by the most
exquisite workmen of that Age, and the perfection of the work was so admirable,
that ever after all sumptuous and beautiful Tombs were called Mausolaea, of
which Martial thus writes, Mausolus Tomb which hangs in the sky
The Men of Caria's Praises Deifie.


It is recorded, that Artemisia after the death of her Husband lived in
continual Tears and mourning, and that she died before the Work could be fully
finished, having drunk the bones of her Husband beaten into Powder, which she
buried in her own body, as the choicest Sepulcher she could provide for him.

6. The Fifth Wender of the World was, The Temple of Diana at Ephesus in Ionia
a Province of Asia. Pliny says it was built by the Amazons, and contained four
hundred Twenty five foot in length, and two hundred and Twenty in breadth, so
artificially contrived that it was two hundred and Twenty years in finishing;
It was founded in a Lake, to prevent the danger of Earthquakes; and it is said,
that a great quantity of Coal-dust and Wool were laid under the Foundation to
secure the moist places; It had one hundred and Twenty seven Pillars of Marble
seventy foot in height, of which Twenty seven were most curiously engraven, and
all the rest of Marble polished each of these Pillars were erected at the
charge of so many Kings of Asia; The doors of the Temple were of Cypress, which
after four hundred years were as fresh as if they had been new made; The roof
was of Cedar; The Image of Diana, which the superstitious vulgar were made to
believe came down from Jupiter out of Heaven, was made by one Camesia, some say
of Ebony; others of the Vine, which having many holes was filled up with
Spikenard, the moisture whereof closed up the rifts; It was adorned with rich
and unvaluable Gifts, It was contrived by Ctesiphon, and after it was finished
was fired seven times; But last of all by Erostratus, who observing the
Sovereign Magnificence thereof, was resolved to burn it to get himself a Name;
which he did accordingly, but to disappoint him, the Princes of those Countries
(as some Authors affirm) forbid that any man should speak, write, or record his
name, yet all this was to no purpose, for latter Historians name him, and call
him Erostratas; This glorious Temple was burnt the same night that Alexander
the Great was born, which gave occasion to that witty scoff, That Diana (who
was counted one of the Goddesses of Midwifry) could not attend the Preservation
of her Temple, being then busied at the birth of so great a Prince; Some write,
that this Temple was afterward rebuilt, much more sumptuous and magnificent
than before, and that the Master of the work was named Democrates.

7. The sixth Wonder of the World, was the Idol or Image of Jupiter Olympas,
which stood in his Temple at Achaia, between the Cities of Elis and Pisa; This
Statue was much renowned as well for artificial persections, and admirable
Workmanship as for the greatness thereof, being no less than sixty Cubits high,
composed by that excellent workman Phidias of Gold and Ivory, Some say, that
Phidias was taxed with only one imperfection, that he had not proportioned the
Image to the bigness of the Temple, because he had made it sitting and so
large, that if the standing upright were considered the Temple would no ways
have been able to have contained it; In honor of this Jupiter the Olympicks
Games were instituted by Hercules, and celebrared on the Plains near this City
in the year of the World 2757. The exercises in them were for the most part
bodily, as running in Chariots, running on foot, wrestling, fighting with Clubs
and the like; But yet there repaired thither Orators, Poets, and Musicians, and
all that thought themselves excellent in any laudable quality to make Trial of
their several Abilities, the very cries who proclaimed the Victories contending
who should cry loudest, and best play his part; The rewards given to the
Victors were only Garl^^ds of Palm, or such slight remembrances, and yet the
Greeks no less esteemed this small sign of Conquest and Honor, than the Romans
did their most magnificent Triumphs, those who were Conquerors therein were met
by the Principal Men of the City wherein they lived, and a Passage was broken
through the main VValls of the Town for their Reception, as if the ordinary
Gates were not capable of so high an honor, or able to afford them entrance;
The Judges of these Games were some Citizens of Elis appointed for that
purpose; Of these Games Horace thus writes, Some in Olympic dust take Pride
Their Chariots and themselves to hide,
Whom the won Mark, and Palm so prized
Like to the Gods has Eternized.
Such as like heavenly Angels come
With an Elean Garland home.


VIII. The seventh Wonder of the World was The Tower of Pharos, which stood in
an Isse of that name near the City of Alexandria in Egypt, a mile distant from
the Land, but joined to the Continent by Cleopatra Queen of Egypt upon this
occasion; The Rhodians then Lords of the Sea, used to exact some Tribute and
acknowledgment out of every Island within those Seas, and consequently out of
this; Their Ambassadors being sent to Cleopatra to demand this Tribute, she
detained them with her 7 days, under pretense of celebrating some solemn
Festivals and in the mean time by making huge dams, and banks in the Sea, with
incredible charge and speed, she united Pharos to the shore, so that it was no
longer an Island; which finished, she sent away the Rhodians empty handed, with
this witty jeer, That they were to take Toll of the Islands, but not of the
Continent; A work of great Rarity and magnificence, both for the bigness of it,
taking up seven Furlongs of ground, and for that incredible speed wherewith it
was finished; As for the Watchtower called Pharos, by the name of the Island,
it was built by Ptolomy Philadelphus King of Egypt for the benefit of Saylors,
(the Sea on that coast being very unsafe, and full of flats,) to guide them
over the Bar of Alexandria, Deservedly esteemed one of the Worlds seven
Wonders; It was of a wonderful height, ascended by degrees, and having many
Lanthorns on the top, wherein Lights were burned every night flaming like a
Beacon for direction to Seamen; It was erected of Marble, mavelous in curious
Workmanship, and situate upon a Mountain encompassed with Water, the chief
Workman was Sostratus, who ingraved on the work this Inscription; Sostratus of
Cnidos, the Son of Dexiphanes to the Gods Protector for the Safeguard of
Saylors; This Inscription he covered with Plaster, and thereon ingraved the
name and Title of the King who was the Founder; to the end that the Kings name
being soon wasted and washed away, his own which was written in Marble might be
eternized to Posterity as the Founder thereof. Nigh unto Pharos, Caesar
pursuing Pompey into Egyt, and having discontented Plolomy the King thereof by
demanding pay for his Soldiers, Caesar's Navy lying here at Anchor, was
assaulted by Achilles one of young Ptolomys Commanders, Caesar himself being
then at Alexandria, but hearing of the skirmish, he hastened to Pharos,
resolving to succor his Navy in Person; but the Egyptians coming upon him on
all fides, he was compelled to leap into the Sea, and swim for his life, and
though to avoid their darts he sometime dived, yet he still held his left hand
above water, and in it diverse books (some say his Commentaries) which he
carried safe to his Ships, and encouraging his men, got the Victory; It is
said, That Egypt has only two doors, the one by Land, which is the strong Town
of Pelusium, or Damiata, the other by Water, which is this Pharos. Heylins
Cosmography, lib. 3.

IX. Having related The seven Wonders of the World I shall now proceed to some
other famous Structures, and among them we read of none more magnificent than
the Temple of Solomon, but that being at large described in the Holy Scriptures
in the Books of the Kings and Chronicles; I shall therefore rather give a
description of the City and Temple of Jerusalem as they were, when destroyed by
the Romans aforementioned, Jerusalem was compassed with a Treble Wall on every
side, save only that part which was enclosed with inaccessible Vallys, for on
that side it needed only one Wall; It was built upon two Hills, one opposite
to the other, separated by a Valley, which was wonderfully replenished with
Houses; One of these Hills whereon stood the upper part of the City, was far
higher and steeper than the other, which K. David compassing with a Wall,
called The City of David; On the other Hill, called Acra, stood the lower part
of the City, opposite whereunto was another Hill lower than that, which at
first was divided from it by a large Valley, but when the Asmonians reigned,
they filled up this Valley, and cut down the top of Acra, that it might not
hide the Temple; Within one of the Valleys was Siloam a Fountain sending forth
abundance of clear sweet water; The outmost Wall by reason of the Valley about
it, and the Rock whereon it stood was impregnable, being strongly built by
David, Solomon, and other Kings; A fourth Wall was begun by Agrippa; In humane
Reason had this Wall been finished, the City could never have been taken, for
the Stones were 20 Cubi^s long, and 10 Cubits broad, so that it could neither
have been easily undermined, nor battered with Engines, but he built this Wall
only 10 Cubits high, and then gave it over, fearing lest Claudius Caesar should
think he designed to rebel. Yet afterward the Jews raised this Wall twenty
Cubits high, made a battlement two Cubits high, and the Tower three Cubits, in
all 24 Cubits high, Besides upon the Wall were three Towers, twenty Cubits
broad, and 20 Cubits high, built foursquare very strongly; within these Towers
were rooms to dwell in, and Cisterns to receive rain water; The third Wall had
ninety of these Towers, and between every Tower were two hundred Cubits space,
the second Wall had 14 Towers, and the old Wall had 60, the compass of the
whole City being 33 Furlongs.

Between the North and West part of the City upon the outmost Wall stood the
Tower Psephina, which was raised 70 Cubits high, so that in a clear day one
might from thence discover Arabia, and the utmost Confines of Judea, even to
the Sea. Just opposite to this, was the Tower Hippicon built by Herod upon the
old Wall, which for bigness, beauty, and strength, surpassed all others in the
World, It had four Corners, each of which was 25 Cubits broad, as many long,
and 30 Cubits high, and in no place hollow; On the top was a Well to receive
Rain Water 20 Cubits deep; on the top of all were Houses 25 Cubits high,
divided into many Rooms; Above them were battlements two Cubits, and Turrets
three Cubits high, so that in all it was 85 Cubits high. Herod likewise built a
second Tower, in breadth, length and height 40 Cubits, in form of a square
Pillar all solid, and not hollow within, and above this a Porch 10 Cubits high,
adorned with Turrers and Pinacles; Over the midst of this Porch he built
another Tower, distinguished into very handsome rooms, and sumptuous Baths
beautified on the top with Turrets and Pinacles, so that the whole height was
near 90 Cubits; Lastly he built a third Tower which he called by his Queens
name Mariamne, 20 Cubits in height and breadth, all of solid stone, not hollow,
having more stately and magnificent Lodgings in it than any of the former, it
was in all 5 Cubits high. These Towers though they were very high, yet by
reason of their situation they seemed much higher, for the old Wall whereon
they were built stood upon a Rock which was 30 Cubits high, whereby their
height was much increased, neither were they built of ordinary stone, but all
of white Marble, each Stone being 20 Cubits long, 10 broad, and 5 Cubits thick,
which were so curiously joined together, that they seemed to be all but one
stone; Within the City was the Kings Palace, surpassing all in the World for
largeness, and curious Workmanship; It was environed with a Wall 30 Cubits
high, adorned with goodly Towers round about, Beautified with Houses for an
hundred of the Nobility* The Variety of the Marble wherewith it was built was
admirable, all sorts being therein used though never so scarce to be found; In
every room were many Vessels of Gold and Silver; and several Porches round
about adorned with most curious Pillars; There were in it very many pleasant
Walks, adorned with all manner of Trees, and Gardens beset with Fountains,
which spouted up water on high, and Cisterns beautified with diverse brazen
Statues from which ran out water continually.

The Temple was built upon a Rocky Mountain, the Plain on the top whereof was
at first scarce big enough for the Temple and Court, the Hill being very steep,
but the people every day bringing Earth thither, they at last made it plain and
large enough; and with wonderful Curiosity and Labor enclosed the Hill with a
Treble Wall, which was not effected in many Ages, with the cost of all the Holy
Treasure offered to God from all parts of the World; The Foundations of the
Temple were laid three hundred Cubits deep, and in many places more; The stones
thereof were 40 Cubits, the Porches were double, supported by many stately
Pillars 25 Cubits high, all of one piece of white Marble, the tops of them were
of Cedar so exactly wrought, as astonished the Beholders; These Porches were 30
Cubits broad, and the compass of all was six Furlongs, The Courts were
curiously wrought, and paved with all sorts of stones. The way to the inward
Temple was all enclosed with stones wrought like Lattice work which were 3
Cubits high of Curious Workmanship; To this there was an ascent by 14 steps,
and above it, was foursquare, and enclosed with a Wall by it self, 40 Cubits
high on the outside, and all covered with stairs to ascend up to it, and within
it was 25 Cubits high, At the top of the 14 stairs within the Wall, was a level
compassed with a Wall of 300 Cubits which had Gates in it, and between the
Gates were Porches opposite to each other, reaching from the Wall to the
Treafury, supported with mighty Pillars, All the Gates were covered with Plates
of Gold and Silver, only one was covered with Corinthian Brass, which for
beauty far excelled the other, dazzling and surprising the Eyes of the
Spectators, In every Gate were two Doors each of them 30 Cubits high, and 15
broad, and on each side they had seats 30 Cubits long, and 40 in height, each
of them supported with 2 Pillars, 12 Cubits thick, only the Gate which was
covered with Corinthian Brass was (...) Cubits high, and the Gates 40, more
richly adorred than the rest; Lastly the Holy of Holies, or Sanctum Sanctorum
was situate in the midst of all, and had 12 stairs to go up to it, the
forepart of it was an hundred Cubits high, and as many broad; backward it was
40 Cubits, on each side it had as it were two shoulders, rising up in height 20
Cubits; The first Gate was 20 Cubits high, and 25 wide, and had no doors, to
show, That Heaven was always open, etc. All the sore parts were gilded, and
all within was covered with fine gold; The inward part was divided into 2
rooms, whereof the first only might be seen, which was in height 90 Cubits, in
length 40, and in breadth 20. Round about the Wall was a golden Vine, whereon
hung many Grapes in Clusters all of Gold, every cluster being about six foot
long; It had golden Gates 55 Cubits high, and 16 broad; It had curious hangings
of the same length, admirably wrought with purple, violet, and scarlet silk,
all the Fabric was so exquisitely and richly wrought, that none could possibly
imagine any Workmanship it wanted; For it was all covered with a massy plate of
pure Gold which astonished the Beholders; The top was all set with Rods of
Gold, sharp like Pikes at the ends, lest Birds should sit thereon and defile
it, The stones wherewith it was built were 45 Cubits in length, six broad, and
as many thick; Josephus Hist. lib. 6.

Jerusalem was a principal City in Josua's time, when Adonth^zek was King, who
was slain by him, yet did the Jebusites hold it almost four hundred years
after, till David won it, though the Inhabitants did so much rely on the place,
that they boasted their lame and blind men should defend it. 2 Samuel 5.6. David
having conquered it, strengthened it with a Castle, and beautified it with many
Palaces. And after his time, Solomon enlarged, and further beautified, and
fortified it extremely. The Palaces, Gates and Walls could not be matched in
all the World; it had an hundred and fifty thousand Inhabitants besides Women
and Children; The Trench about it was sixty foot deep, cut out of the Rock, and
250 foot broad, the like scarce ever heard of; Not long after, Shishak Kin
Egypt took and sacked it, and became Master not only of Solomon's ^^^es, but of
all K. David's spoils which he had taken from many Nations. 2 Kings 14. It was
again plundered, and part of the Wall broken down by Joas King of Israel in
Amazia's Reign. 2 Kings 16. Not long after Ahaz the fifteenth K. of Juda
impoverished the Temple, to present Tiglathpilnezer with the Treasures thereof,
and Manasses lost what remained. 1 Chronicles 5. And Nebuchadnezzar laid this
glorious City with the Temple, Palaces, Walls and Towers thereof, even to the
Ground. 2 Kings 19. It was built again by Nehemiah, Chap. 12.34. and again the
Temple and City were spoiled by Bugoses Leiutenant to Artaxerxes, Then by
Ptolomeus the First; Then by Antiochus Epiphanes; And again by Apollonius his
Deputy; After which it was taken by Pompey, and robbed by Crassus in his
Parthian Expedition; yet all the losses that the Temple and City sustained,
were repaired by Herod the Great, who enlarged the City, new built the Temple,
and adorned it with many sumptuous Works, and left it in a more stately and
glorious condition than it was in the days of Solomon. Lastly about 40 years
after the Death of Christ, the sins of the Jews being come to the height, it
was destroyed by Titus the Roman General, who made it so desolate, that they
which saw it afterward, could scarce believe there had ever been such a City in
that place, only he left the 3 Herodian Towers, as well for Lodgings for the
Roman Garrisons, as to make his Victory more glorious; yet afterward some of
the despised Jews began to build and inhabit some part of the City; but after
65 years, as aforementioned, when they began to revolt again Aelius Adrianus
the Emperor slew many Thousands of them, and overthrew the three Towers of
Herod with all the rest, not leaving stone upon another as our Savior had
foretold; But when his fury was appeased, he took one part without the Wall,
wherein stood Mount Calvery and Christ's Sepulcher, and made it a capacious
City, which he called after his own name Aelia Capitolia; And in the Gate
toward Bethel, he caused a Sow to be cut in Marble, and set it in the Front to
despite the Jews, making an Edict, That thenceforth none of them should ever
enter into that City, not dare so much as to behold, or look toward it from any
high place; Yet the Christian Religion flourishing in Palestine, it was
inhabited by all Nations, especially Christians, and so it continued five
hundred years; And in 639 it was taken by the Egyptian Saracens, who held it
above four hundred years. In 1099 it was regained by Godfrey of Bullein, who
being elected King, refused to be crowned with a Crown of Gold, since Christ
for whom he fought, was there crowned with Thorns; It continued to him and his
Successors for 88 years, till in 1197 it was retaken by Saladine King of
Egypt, and lastly in 1517. the Turks beat out the Egyptians, and hold it to
this day, calling it in their Language Cuzumbarec, or The Holy City; Rawleighs
Hist. World.

X. The City of Nineveh as it was more ancient than almost any other City, so
in greatness it excelled all those that were famous in old time. The Plot or
ground of it is said to be four hundred and eighty Furlongs; The Walls were in
height one hundred foot, and the breadth of them such, that three Chariots
might meet on the top of them; On the Walls there were Fifteen Hundred Towers,
each of them Two Hundred Foot high, it was called Tetrapolis, as being divided
as it were into four Cities, Nineveh, Resena, Forum, and Cale, and was reckoned
three days Journey in the time of Jonas the Prophet.

11. The Capitol of Rome seated on the Tarpeian Rock seemed to contend with
Heaven in height, and no doubt but the length and depth were every way
answerable; The excessive charge that the Emperor Domitian was at in building
it, Martial after his flattering manner has wittily described, and which may
be thus translated.

So much has Caesar given the Gods above
That should be call it in, and Creditor prove
Though Jove should barter Heaven it self away
This mighty debt he never could repay.
We may partly give a guess at the Riches and Ornaments of it by this, that
there was spent only upon its gilding above Twelve Thousand Talents; It was all
gilded over, not the inner roof only, but the outward covering which was of
brass or Copper, and the doors of it were overlay'd with thick Plates of Gold,
which remained to the Reign of Honorius. After the great overthrow of the
Romans by the Gauls near the River Allia, those that escaped fled to Rome for
security, filling all the City with trouble and fear, but the People not
judging themselves safe there, got all away out of the Town, only a small
number of the most resolute put themselves into the Capitol, resolving to
endure all extremities; The rest escaped to the City of Veios, where assembling
together, they chose Furius Camillus (whom some time before they had
disobliged) to be their Dictator, but he would not accept of the Dignity unless
the Senators in the Capitol gave their Legal consent thereunto; This was very
difficult, because the Gauls had environed it round about with their Troops,
yet one Pontius undertook this dangerous enterprise, and coming to the River
Tyber, he swom over upon a piece of broad Cork, and landing on the other side,
he went softly, that way where he saw no light, and therefore supposed there
was no watch kept, and so climbing up the steep craggy rocks, he with much ado
got to the top where being espied by the Roman Sentinels they assisted him, and
brought him to the Senators, who received his Message, and immediately
dispatched him with an answer, so that he returned back to Camillus the same
night; Next day one of the Gauls walking about that place, chanced to espy the
prints and footsteps of a man upon the Rocks and Grass which grew thereon; this
he discovered to his Fellows, who thinking the Romans had now showed them the
way, they took the opportunity of a dark night and ascended the Hill the same
way without being discovered either by the Men, or the Dogs who both kept guard
there; but were now all fast asleep; But it was the good fortune of the Romans
that there were certain Geese, dedicated to Juno, and kept at the Public
Charge near her Temple, they being fearful by nature, and easily affrighted by
the least noise in the night, and being also kept very hungry by reason of the
scarcity in the Capitol, may be supposed to have slept the more lightly, so
that perceiving the Enemies with their glittering Armor, they flew against
them, and filled the whole place with a fearful and unusual cry, which awakened
the Romans who suspecting the matter* ran presently to the wall, and beat back
their Enemies, throwing them down headlong, by which unusual means the Capitol
was saved, all the Gauls being forced to hasten off, or to leave their dead
bodies at the foot of the Hill they had newly climbed; In remembrance whereof,
for a great while after, upon one day in the year they carried about in
Procession a Dog hanged on a Gallows, and a Goose sitting in a little chair of
state upon a rich and sumptuous Cushion. Camerareus Medit.

12. Suctonius thus describes that house of Nero, which Nero himself called
Domum Auream; The Golden House; In the Porch was set a Colossus, or Image
shaped like himself, of one hundred and Twenty foot high; The spaciousness of
the House was such, that it had in it three Galleries each of them a mile long,
a standing Pool like a Sea, beset with buildings in manner of a City; Feilds in
which were arable grounds, Pastures, Vineyards and Woods, with a various
multitude of tame and wild Beasts of all kinds; In the other part thereof all
things were covered with gold, and distinguished with precious stones, as
Mother of Pearl, etc. The Supping Rooms were roofed with Ivory planks that were
moveable, for the casting down of Flowers; and had Pipes in them for the
sprinkling of Ointments; The Roof of the Principal Supping Room was round,
which like the Heavens wheeled about perpetually day and night; This House when
he had thus finished and dedicated, he so mightily approved of that he said, He
then began to live like a Man. Suetonius Hist. Lib. 6.

XIII. The Amphitheatre begun by Vespasian, but finished and dedicated by Titus
was most famous, the height whereof was such, that (says Marcellinus) the Eye
of man could hardly reach it; It was built and reared up (says Cassiodore)
with Rivers of Treasure poured out; It contained only upon the Steps and
Degrees sufficient and easy Seats for fourscore and seven Thousand Persons, so
as the vacant Places besides, might well contain Ten or Twenty Thousand more;
And it is admirable to consider (says the L. Montaign in his Essays) what
mighty magnificence the Roman Emperors used in their Theaters, It was wonderful
(says he) to cause a great quantity of large Trees all full of green branches
to be brought from far, and planted in Plots yiedling nothing but dry gravel,
representing a wild shady Forest, divided in due and seemly proportion; And
the first day to put into the Theater a Thousand Estriges, a Thousand Stags, a
Thousand Wild Boars, and a Thousand Bucks, which were hunted and baited by the
common people; The next day in the presence of all the People, an hundred great
Lions, an hundred Leopards, and three hundred huge Bears were baited and torn
to pieces; The third day three hundred couple of Gladiators or Fencers
combated, and murdered one another, as in the Reign of the Emperor Probus; It
was also an exlent sight to see those huge wondrous Amphitheatres all inchased
with rich Marble, and curiously enriched on the outside with carved statues,
and all the inside glistering with precious and rare Imbellishments; All the
sides round about were environed and replenished from the ground to the very
top, with three or fourscore ranks of steps and seats all of Marble, covered
with gallant Cushions, where might be conveniently placed an hundred thousand
men, and all sit at ease; The plain groundwork of it where Sports were acted,
were so ordered by Art, as to open asunder with holes, and gaps like hollow
Caves, out of which issued wild Beasts appointed for the Plays; After which,
the whole floor of the Theater was immediately overflown with a very deep Sea,
wherein were all manner of strange Fishes, and Sea Monsters, with a great Navy
of Ships ready rigged, and provided for a Sea Fight; In an Instant all was dry
and smooth again, and the Fencers entered and fought with each other; Lastly to
complete the last Act of one day only, the whole floor was forthwith cleansed,
and strowed over with Vermilion and Storax instead of Gravel, and a solemn
banquet brought forth enough to entertain that almost infinite number of
People; they have sometimes caused an huge steep Mountain to arise in the midst
of the Amphitheatre, all overspread with fruitful, and flourishing Trees of all
sorts, on the top whereof gushed out streams of water as from a Fountain; Other
times they have brought forth a great tall Ship, floating up and down, which
opened and split asunder of it self, from whence issued out four or five
hundred wild Beasts to he baited, and then closing again, it vanished away
without any visible help; sometimes they caused water to spout gently from the
bottom of the Theater, which bubbling up to the very top, sprinkled and
refreshed that vast multitude; And to preserve themselves from the violence of
the weather, they caused that huge compass to be overspread sometimes with
purple Sails, all curiously wrought with the Needle, sometimes of Silk and
other colors, all which was done in the twinkling of an Eye, either to spread
or draw it back again; The Nets likewise which they used to put before the
people to save them from the danger of the wild baited Beasts, were all woven
of Gold Thread. Montaigns Essays. lib. 3.

XIV. The Bridge of Caligula was a new and unheard of Spectacle, it reached
from Puteoli to Bauli; three miles and a quarter, he built it upon Ships in a
few days; Over this he marched with the Senate and Soldiery in a Triumphant
manner, and in the view of the People; Upon this he feasted, and passed the
night in dalliance and Gaming; A Mavelous and great work indeed, but such as
the vanity thereof deprived it of Commendation, for to what end was it raised
but to be demolished? Thus sported he, (says Seneca) with the Power of the
Empire, and all in imitation of Xerxes a Foreign Frantic, unfortunate and
proud King, Hakewels Apology.

XV. Wales anciently extended it self Eastward to the River Severn, till by the
valor of Offa the great King of the Mercians, the Welsh or Britains were
driven out of the plain Country beyond that River, and forced to betake
themselves to the Mountains, where he caused them to be shut up, and divided
from England with an huge Ditch called Offa's Dike, which began where the River
Wie comes into the Severn not far from Chepstow, and extended fourscore and
four miles in length, even as far as Chester, where the River Dee is mingled
with the Sea; which was a very stupendous work; Concerning this Ditch, there
was a Law made by K. Harold, That if any Welshman was found with a Weapon on
this side of it, he should have his right hand cut off by the Kings Officers;
Heylins Cosmography.

XVI. China is bounden on the North with Altay and the Eastern Tartars, from
which it is separated by a continued Chain of Hills, and where that Chain is
broken off, with a great Wall of four hundred Leagues, or Twelve hundred
English miles in length; It was built (as they say) by Zaintzon the 117 King
thereof, it was six fathom high, and 12 yards thick, and was twenty seven years
in building by the continued labor of seven Millions, and Fifty Thousand men:
Herberts Travels.

XVII. Ptolomeus Philopater built a Ship (says Pancirollus) that the like was
never seen before nor since; It was two hundred and eighty Cubits in length,
fifty two Cubits in height from the bottom to the upper Decks; It had four
hundred Banks, or Seats for Rowers, four hundred Mariners, and four thousand
Rovers; And on the Decks it could contain Three Thousand Soldiers, There were
also Gardens and Orchards on the top of it, as Plutarch relates in the life of
Demetrius.

XVIII. The Escurial or Monastery of St. Lawrence in New Castile in Spain was
built by K. Philip 2. A place of such Magnificence that no building in times
past, or the present is comparable to it; The Front toward the West is adorned
with three stately Gates, the middlemost whereof leads into a most
magnificent Temple, or Monastery, wherein were one hundred Monks of the Order
of St. Jerome, and a College; the Gate on the right hand opens into diverse
Offices belonging to the Monastery that on the left hand to the Schools and
outhouses belonging to the College; At the four Corners are four Turrets of
excellent Workmanship, and for height Majestical; Toward the North is the
Kings Palace, on the South part are diverse beautiful and Sumptuous Gallerys,
and on the East side several Gardens and Walks very pleasant and delectable; It
contains in all eleven several Quadrangles, every one incloistered, and is
indeed so brave a Structure, that a Voyage to Spain were well employed, were it
only to see it and return. Heylins Cosmography.

FINIS.
Advertisements.
There are lately published by R. Burton five very useful, pleasant and
necessary books. which are all sold by N. Crouch.
I. EXtraordinary Adventures of several Famous Men; with the strange Events,
and many signal Mutations and Changes in the Fortunes of many Illustrious
Places and Persons in all Ages; Being an account of a Multitude of Stupendous
Revolutions, Accidents and Observable matters in many Kingdoms, States, and
Provinces throughout the whole World, Namely, The Adventures of Christoph.
Columbus, and the manner of his Discovery of America, or the New World: How
Bajazet Emp. of the Turks was carried about in an Iron Cage by the Emp.
Tamerlane. The Cruelties used by the Turks upon the Christians at Argiers,
their manner of selling Slaves, etc. The Travels of an Engglish Man into
Barbary and Morocco, with the Rarities thereof, and of the Villainy of the
English Renegadoes. The dreadful Mutiny in the City of Naples, about their
Privileges in 1647, and how Massanello a Fisher-boy ruled there for 10 days,
with greater Power than any King or Emperor. An Account of several Nations
destroyed, or driven from their Habitations by Gnats, Moles, Pismires,
Sparrows, Locusts, Hares, Conies, Fleas, Frogs, Mice, G^asshoppers, Serpents,
Worms, and other inconsiderable Creatures; The Tragical Deaths of John and
Cornelius de Wit, at the Hague in Holland. The strange Revolution in Portugal,
in 1640. The woeful Deaths of the Emp. of China his Wife and Daughter in 1640,
Remarks on the Life and Death of Sir W. Rawleigh, with his last Speech and
Behavior on the Scaffold; with abundance of other Remarkable Instances of
various kinds; some of them being lively described in Picture for their better
Illustration.

Price One Shilling. II. ADmirable Curiosities, Rarities, and Wonders in
England, Scotland and Ireland, or an account of many remarkable persons and
places, and likewise of the battles, sieges, prodigious Earthquakes, tempests,
inundations, thunders, lightnings, fires, murders, and other considerable
occurrences and accidents for many hundred years past, and among others: The
Preaching of K. Hen. 3. to the Monks at Winchester: The manner of the horrid
murder of King Edward 2. The battle of Bosworth, and the miserable death of
Crookbackt Richard. The beheading of the L. Cromwell, and the E. of Essex, with
their last Speeches. The Rebellion of the Papists in Cornwall, etc. against the
Common Prayer in King Edw. 6. time, and the K. letter to them. The Rebellion
under Kett the Tanner, and his Laws, Ordinances in the Oak of Reformation near
Norwich. The Association in Q. Eliz. time. The proceedings against Mary Q. of
Scots, Mother to K. James, with her last words on the Scaffold. The Lady riding
naked through Coventry. Together with the natural and artificial rarities in
every County in Eng. and very many other observable matters, with several
curious Sculptures Price one Shilling.

III. WOnderful prodigies of judgment and mercy, discovered in above 300
memorable Histories, containing 1. Dreadful judgments upon Atheists,
blasphemers, perjured villains. etc. As of several forsworn wretches carried
away by the Devil, and how an horrid blasphemer was turned into a black dog,
etc. 2. The miserable ends of many magicians, witches, conjurers, etc. with
diverse strange apparitions and illusions of the Devil; 3. Remarkable
predictions, and presages of approaching death, and how the event has been
answerable, with an account of some Appeals to Heaven against Unjust Judges,
and what vengeance has fallen upon them. 4. The wicked lives and woeful deaths
of several Popes, Apostates and Persecutors; with the manner how K. Hen. 2. was
whipped by the Popes Order by the Monks of Canterbury; and how the Q. of Bohemia,
a desperate Persecutor of the Christians, was swallowed up in the Earth alive,
with all her followers, etc. 5. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants,
Murderers, etc. with the terrible Cruelties used by those monsters of men,
Nero, Heliogabalus, Domitian, and others upon the Christians; also how Popiel,
K. of Poland, (a Cruel Tyrant,) his Q. and Child. were devoured by Rats; and
how a Town near Tripoly in Barbary, with the Men, Women, children, Beasts.
Trees, Walls, Rooms, Cats, Dogs, Mice, and all that belonged to the place, were
turned into perfect Stone, (to be seen at this day) for the horrid crimes of
the Inhabitants; also the wonderful discovery of several Murders, etc. 6.
Admirable Deliverances from imminent Dangers, and Deplorable Distresses at Sea
and Land. Lastly, Divine Goodness to Penitents, with the dying Thoughts of
several famous Men, concerning a future state after this life, as S. Austin,
the Emp. Chapter 5. Philip 3. K. of Spain. The E. of North. Galleacius. H. Grotius
Salmasius. Sr. F. Walsingh. Sr. P. Syd. Sr. H. Wotton. A.B. Usher E. of
Rochest. L. C. J. Hales, and others; Imbellished with diverse Pictures. Price
One Shilling.

IV. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and present State of
London and Westminster, showing the foundations, Wall, Gates, Towers, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Shcools, Inns of Court, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with an
account of the most remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and other
occurrences, for above 900 years past, in and about these Cities; and among
other particulars, the poisoning of K. John by a Monk. The Rebellion of Wat
Tyler, who was slain by the Lord Mayor in Smithfield, and the speech of Jack
Straw at his Execution; The Murder of K. Hen. 6. and likewise of Edw. 5. and
his Brother, by Rich. 3. called Crook-back. The Execution of Empson and Dudley;
the Insurrection in London in K. Hen. 8. time, and how 411 Men and Women went
through the City in their Shifts and Ropes about their Necks to Westminster. Hall.
where they were pardoned by the King: With several other Remarques in all the
Kings and Queens Reigns to this Year 1681. And a description of the manner of
the Trial of the late L. Stafford in West. Hall; Illustrated with Pictures,
with the Arms of the 65 Companies of London, and the time of their
Incorporating. Price one Shilling.

V. THE 4th. Edition of the Wars in England, Scotland, and Ireland, being near
a 3d. part enlarged with very considerable Additions, containing an impartial
Account of all the Battles, Sieges, and other remarkable Transactions,
Revolutions and Accidents which have happened from the beginning of the Reign
of K. Chapter 1. (...). to His Majesty's happy Restoration, 1660. And (...)
^articulars, The Debates and Proceedings in the 4 (...) Charles 1. The murder
of the D. of Buck. by Felt. The Tumults at Edenb. in Scotl. upon reading the
Common Prayer. The Insurrection of the Apprentices and Seamen, and their
assaulting of A. B. L's House at Lamb. Remarks on the Trial of the E. of
Strafford and his last Speech. The horrid and bloody Rebellion of the Papists
in Ireland and their murdering above 200000 in 1641. The Death of Archbishop
Laud. Mr. Chaloner and Tomkins, Sir J. Hotham, Sir Alex. Carew, Duke Hamilton,
E. of Holland, L. Capel, M. Love, M Gibbons, Sr. H. Slingsby, Dr. Hewet, and
others. The Treaties and Propositions at Uxbridge and Newp. in the Isle Wight.
The Illegal Trial of K. Chapter 1. at large with his last speech at his suffering.
His Majest. Reasons against the pretended Jurisdiction of the H. C. of Justice;
With the most considerable matters which happened till 1660. And the K. most
Gracious Declaration from Breda. with Pictures of several Remarkable Accidents.
Price one Shilling.

THE Young Man's Calling, or the whole Duty of Youth, in a serious and
compassionate Address to all young Persons to remember their Creator in the
days of their Youth. Together with Remarks upon the Lives of several excellent
Young Persons of both Sexes, as well ancient as modern, who have been famous
for Virtue and Piety in their Generations, namely, On the Lives of Isaac and
Joseph in their youth; On the Martyrdom of the 7 Sons and their Mother; and of
Romanus a Young Nobleman, with the invincible courage of a Child of 7 years
old, who was martyred. On the Martyrdom of diverse holy Virgins and Martyrs. On
the Life of that blessed Prince King Edw. 6. with his earnest Zeal for the
Protestant Religion, and his ingenious Letters to his Godfather, A. B. Cranmer,
when but 8 years old, with his last words and Prayer against Popery. On the
Life and Death of Q. Jane, as her learned Dispute with Fecknam a Priest, about
the Sacrament, her Letters to her Father the D. of Suffolk, to her Sister, and
to Harding an Apostate Protestant. On the Life of Q. Eliz. in her Youth, with
her many sufferings and dangers from bloody Bonner and Gardener, and her joyful
Reception to the Crown. On the Religious Life and Death of the most noble and
Heroic P. Henry eldest Son to K. James; And also of the young L. Harrington;
etc. With 12 curious Pictures illustrating the several Histories. Price
Eighteen Pence.

All six sold by Nath. Crouch.

FINIS.

