Jo. ^rap^nber Scul



England's MONARCHS: OR, A Compendious Relation of the most Remarkable
Transactions, and Observable Passages, Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military,
which have happened during the Reigns of the KINGS and QUEENS of ENGLAND, from
the Invasion of the Romans to this present.

Adorned with Poems, and the Pictures of every Monarch, from William the
Conqueror, to His present Majesty, our Gracious Sovereign, King CHARLES the
Second:

Together with the Names of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, the
Nobility, Bishops, Deans, and Principal Officers, Civil and Military, in
England, in the Year 1684.

By R. B. Author of the Admirable Curiosities in England; The Historical
Remarks in London and Westminster; The late Wars in England, Scotland, and
Ireland, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultry, near Cheapside.
1685.

TO THE READER.
IT is a common Imputation cast upon Englishmen by Foreigners, that they are
more solicitous to be acquainted with the Affairs and Transactions of other
Nations and Countries, than to be thoroughly informed of the most remarkable
Passages which have happened in their own; though I must assert, that I am not
of their Opinion, since having already published three small Tracts of the same
price with this; one called, Admirable Curiosities, Rarities, and Wonders in
every County of England, etc. Another Historical Remarks of London and
Westminster: And a third Entitled, The Wars in England, Scotland, and Ireland,
in the Reign of K. Charles the First: I have found they have received very
great acceptance with the English Nation, so that many thousands more of them
have been vended, than of others which have concerned Foreign Matters; this
gives me encouragement to emit this brief Collection of the most memorable
Occurrences during the Reigns of the Monarchs of England, from the Roman
Invasion to this present, wherein I have purposely omitted several very
considerable Passages, as being already inserted in the three Books
aforementioned, so that these four may now be reckoned to give a very
satisfactory account of all remarkable Revolutions and Accidents in England for
near sixteen hundred years past, which must certainly be very diverting, since
at so small a price, any Person may be accommodated with so many useful
particulars both for Instruction and Discourse, and may likewise observe, that
our Ancestors wanted nothing of the Wisdom, Conduct, and Gallantry of this
celebrated Age, and ought not therefore to be reckoned so rude and barbarous as
our brisk and gentiel Wits are apt (through ignorance, and in observance) to
imagine they were, since we may find the Policy, Valor, and Clemency of the
most renowned Roman Heroes to be matched, if not outdone by many of our noble
English Worthies; which may be a sufficient encouragement to every English
Spirit to read the following Manual, and thereby oblige,

their Humble Servant, R. B.

ENGLANDS MONARCHS: Or, An Account of the KINGS of ENGLAND, From the Invasion
of the ROMANS to this Time.
HIstorians conjecture, That Britain was inhabited before Noah's Flood; and
Jeffry of Monmouth relates. That it was Peopled by Brute with his Trojans,
about twelve hundred years after: But others think the whole of these Relations
to be merely Fabulous, affirming, That the first Inhabitants thereof were
derived from the Gauls, or French, by reason of their Agreement in Laws,
Customs, Speech, Buildings, and other Usages; though we may judge, that being
merely Barbarous, they took no care to transmit their Original to Posterity;
or, if they had writ any thing, it would probably have been lost in so long a
time, and such great Alterations of Affairs. Therefore the small Light we have
concerning them, is borrowed from Foreign Writers; of which I shall give this
brief Account.

The Ancient Britans painted their naked Bodies with diverse Pictures of Living
Creatures, Flowers, Sun, Moon, and Stars, thereby, as they imagined, to appear
more dreadful to their Adversaries: yet some of the Civiler sort were clothed;
and, as a great Ornament, they wore Chains of Iron about their Wastes and
Necks, and Rings on their middle Fingers. The Hair of their Head they wore
long, which was naturally curled in many; all other Parts they shaved, only
the upper Lip. They had ten or twelve Wives apiece, who lived in common among
their Parents and Brethren; yet the Children were only accounted his who first
married the Mother while she was a Maid: They were brought up in common amongst
them. They were moderate in their Diet, as Milk, Roots, and Barks of Trees, and
a little thing no bigger than a Bean, which for a great while took away both
Hunger and Thirst: Neither would they eat Hens, Hares, Geese, nor Fish; yet
would often dine upon Venison and Fruits. Their usual Drink was made of Barley.
They are reported by Plutarch to have lived very long, many to an hundred and
twenty years.

They were Idolatrous Heathens as to their Religion, using Man's Flesh in their
Sacrifices, and adoring a multitude of Idols. Their Priests were called Druids,
who managed their Sacrifices, and likewise acted as Temporal Judges in all
Civil Matters; and it was highly criminal not to abide by their Judgment. They
were excused from the Wars, and all Contributions. They had a Primate, who
commanded over them in Chief. Their Divinity was, That the Soul is Immortal,
and passes from one Body to another: Which Doctrine they taught not out of
Books, but by Word of Mouth. Their Buildings were low, mean Cottages, like
those of the Gauls, or Boors of France; yet they fortified several thick Woods
with Rampires and Ditches, which they called Towns. Brass and Iron Rings were
the Coin they used, which were of a certain weight; but afterward they grew
more Civil by Traffic, and had both Gold and Silver Money. Their chief Trade
was in Chains, Wreaths, Ivory Boxes, Bits and Bridles, with some Toys of Amber
and Glass. Neither was their Shipping more considerable, their chief Vessels
being made of light Wood, covered over with Leather. Their usual way of
Fighting was in Military Chariots; neither did they engage in great Bodies, but
had still fresh Men to succeed those who retired, or were weary. Their Weapons
were Shields, and short Spears, at the lower end whereof was fastened a round
Bell of Brass, with which they terrified their Enemies. Many times they fought
under the Conduct of Valiant Women, who were extraordinary Courageous. They
managed their Chariots so dexterously, that running down a steep Hill with all
speed, they could stop them in the middle of their Course.

When the Romans first arrived here, the Island was divided into Britannia
Prima, which contained the South part of England; Britannia Secunda was the
Western part, now called Wales; and Maxima Caesariensis, which comprehended all
the Northern parts beyond the River Trent. The first of which in the Britains
time belonged to the Archbishopric of London; the second, to that of Caerleon,
or Glamorgan; the third, to that of York. Julius Caesar, the first Discoverer
thereof, really imagined that he had found a New World, it being one of the
greatest Islands in the Universe. It was formerly called Samothea from Samothes
(as some report) the sixth Son of Japhet, who first inhabited here, two hundred
fifty two years after the Flood. It was also named Albion, (as is said) from
Albion a Giant, the Son of Neptune; who after he had conquered the Samotheans,
settled here, three hundred thirty five years after the Deluge. Some say it was
called Albion ab albis Rupibus, from the white Rocks toward France, which is
most probable. The Grecians called it Britain, for what Reason we know not; it
may be from Prittannia, which signifies Metals, they finding the Island full of
Brass, Tin, Iron, Gold, Silver, and Lead. Lastly, It was named England from
Engloen a Place in Denmark, which was neither changed by the Danes nor Normans,
and retained that Title eight hundred seventy three years, till King James came
to the Crown, and united England and Scotland, which is since called Great
Britain. It was accounted the Fortunate Island; and Pope Innocent, in the Reign
of Henry the Third, was so in love with it, that he would fain have come over
to see it, if the King would have permitted it.

England is thought to have embraced Christianity about sixty three years after
Christ, in Nero's time; and that Joseph of Arimathea was sent by the Apostle
St. Philip to preach the Gospel here; yea, some affirm, That both St. Paul and
Simon Zelotes were here likewise: though these are only Conjectures.

Julius Caesar tells us, That when he entered this Island, they were not under
one sole King or Monarch, but divided into no less than twenty eight petty
Kingdoms or Provinces. The most memorable of their Princes who opposed the
Conquest of the Romans, are these following. 1. Cassibelan, King of the
Trinobantes, who inhabited Middlesex, Essex, and Hartfordshire: For about the
Year of the Worlds Creation 3913. and fifty four years before the Birth of
Christ, the Fortunate Romans, under the Conduct of Julius Caesar, first landed
about Deal in Kent; the News whereof was so exceeding welcome to the Roman
Senate, that they decreed a Thanksgiving for twenty days; an Honor never
granted to any before, the greatest Victors having had but five, or at most but
ten days assigned them: At which time Cassibelan was chosen by general Consent
to withstand the Roman Invasion; which he did with very great Courage, beating
them twice off from the British Shore. His chief City was Verulam, near where
St. Albans now stands. 2. Cingitorix, Carvil, Taximagul, and Segonax. These
four reigned Kings of Kent together, and opposed the Romans at the same time;
but were vanquished by them, their Men being slain, Cingitorix taken, and the
other three forced to fly and shift for themselves. 3. Cunobeline. 4.
Togodumus. 5. Cataractus, a most renowned Prince of the Icenians, who inhabited
Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridgshire: He resisted the Romans gallantly for nine
years together; but was then betrayed, and carried to Rome in Triumph: yet for
the gallantry of his Spirit he was released from his Bonds, and taken into
Caesar's Favor. 6. Voadicea, or Boadicea, Wife to Prasagutus King of the
Icenians, who made the Emperor Nero his Heir, leaving his Noble Queen and her
two Daughters to the Emperor's Protection; but he abusing his Trust, she slew
in one Battle eighty thousand Romans, taking and plundering the Cities of
Verolamium, and Carnalodunum, now Malden in Essex; whereby she brought Terror
upon all: but being at length vanquished in Fight, she poisoned her self,
rather than to submit to her Enemies.

These, with diverse other Princes, were very stout Defenders of their Country
and Liberties against the Roman Power, for above an hundred years; neither had
they been then subdued, but by the unhappy Quarrels and Divisions among
themselves, whereby their Enemies took the advantage to ruin them altogether,
and become their Masters. The several Roman Emperors who commanded in Britain,
were, Julius Caesar, Augustus, Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Galba, Otho,
Vitellius, Vespasian, Titus, Domitian, and several others, even fifty two in
number; among whom Constantius Chlorus, the Father of Constantine the Great,
was very remarkable. He was a Wise, Noble, and Publick-spirited Prince: he
usually said, That it was more profitable for the State, that the Wealth of the
Land should be dispersed into the Commons Hands, than to lie locked up in the
Princes Coffers. He was so averse to Superfluity, that he had scarce
Necessaries; but herein he chiefly excelled, that he protected the poor
Christians, who were under a bloody Persecution from Dioclesian the Roman
Tyrant; he made his Court their Sanctuary: And to try the sincerity of their
Profession, he used Jehu's Policy, commanding all his Officers and Servants to
offer Sacrifice to the Heathen Gods, and threatening to discard the Refusers;
but, on the contrary, he rejected all that complied, with this Reflection, That
he who is disloyal to his God, can never be faithful to his Prince, Whilst he
was Governor here under the Emperor Aurelian, he married Helena the Daughter
of Coelius a British Prince, who converted him to Christianity, on whom he
begot Constantine the Great, in Britain. After he was Emperor he came hither,
and fought against the Picts; but returning from that Expedition, he fell sick
at York, which was his Imperial Seat: At which time his Son Constantine came
thither to him, at the sight of whom being much comforted, he sat up in his
Bed, and spoke to this effect: It now suffices, and Death is not terrible to
me, since I shall leave my Actions not yet accomplished unto thee, my Son, to
be performed; in whose Person I doubt not but that my Memory shall be
preserved, as in a Monument of succeeding Fame. What I did design, though now
by this my fatal Period I leave undone, be thou sure to do it; that is, Govern
thy Empire with Justice, protect the Innocent, and wipe away all Tears from the
Eyes of the Christians; for therein, above all other things, I have accounted
my self happy. To thee therefore I leave my Diadem, and their Defense, taking
my Faults with me to the Grave, there to be buried in everlasting Oblivion; and
leaving my Virtues (if I had ever any) to live and survive in thee. And here he
ended his Speech and his Life together.

The aforementioned Persecution under Dioclesian and Maximinian was very
grievous: It was called the Tenth Persecution, and continued for ten years,
with so great rage, that within one Months time seventeen thousand Christians
were put to death, and multitudes of others cruelly used, though escaping with
their Lives. And as in other Places, so in Britain, the Churches of the
Christians were demolished, their Bibles burnt, and their Bodies massacred;
diverse being killed at St. Albars, and other Places: yea, so many suffered at
Lichfield, that the Place became like another Golgotha; upon which account that
City has for its Arms a Field of Blood, whereon are many Martyrs. But the
chief Cause of these Miseries proceeded from the Christians themselves: For
(says the famous Eusebius) after our Conversation was through too much Liberty
and Licentiousness degenerated, and Holiness of Life neglected, whilst we did
envy, bite, and backbite each other, raising intestine War, and wounding one
another with opprobrious Words; whilst nothing but Hypocrisy was in the Face,
Deceit in the Heart, and Guile on the Tongue, whereby Vengeance and Wrath was
come to the height; even then it was that the heavy Hand of God began to visit
us. Nevertheless, when God had done using these his Rods of Correction, he cast
them into the Fire; for these two Emperors having renounced the Empire, and
being again become Private Men. Dioclesian poisoned himself, and Maximinian
hanged himself.

Marcus Antoninus was another of the Roman Emperors who commanded here; in
whose Reign the Christian Religion was first professed by Public Authority,
under Lucius the first Christian King in the World: At which time Elutherius,
then Bishop of Rome, sent Faganus and Damianus to him, upon whose Preaching the
Heathenish Flamens and Arch-Flamens, being twenty eight in number, were
converted to so many Bishops Sees, whereof London, York, and Caerleon upon Vsk,
in Wales, were made the Metropolitans. The first Archbishop of London was
Theanus. This Marcus Aurelius raised a horrid Persecution against the
Christians, wherein those famous Worthies Polycarpus and Justin Martyr
suffered, with many other zealous Christians: But in the Wars with the Germans,
what with the Pestilence, and want of Water, his Army was very sorely
distressed; but by the Prayers of the Christian Soldiers in his Host, such
plenty of Rain fell, that after five days parching Drowth and Thirst, the whole
Army was refreshed and strengthened; and at the same time his Enemies, on the
contrary, were utterly discomfited and overthrown by Thunder and Lightning from
Heaven: Whereupon the Emperor abated his Persecution, and named that Legion of
the Christians the Thundering Legion.

Theodosius was the last of the Roman Emperors that had Power in Britain,
which was in the Year of Christ 423. For about this time the Goths, who had
faithfully served the Romans above twenty years, being disobliged and slighted,
to revenge their Wrongs they chose for their Leader a violent Goth called
Alaricus, who shortly after proved the Scourge of Rome: For the Vandals, Alans,
and Suecians joining with him, they began a fierce War in Austria and Hungary,
increasing their Forces into such vast Multitudes, that the World stood amazed
and trembled at them. For soon after two hundred thousand Goths more resorted
to them, who with these united Forces overrun Thracia, Hungary, Austria,
Sclavonia, and Dalmatia, ruining and destroying all things in so dreadful a
manner, that it seemed rather the Ravage of Devils than Men. The Roman Empire
thus declining, they drew their Forces out of Britain: But a while after the
Britans were extremely distressed by the continual Disturbers of their Peace,
the Scots and Picts; therefore they sent their Ambassadors to Rome, with their
Garments rent, and Dust upon their Heads, bewailing their most miserable
Condition, and begging Assistance; whereupon the Emperor sent a Regiment of
Soldiers into Britain, under Gallio, who for a while secured them, but was soon
called back with his Legion into France, to secure the Country about Paris. At
his departure he advised the Britans to stand upon their Guard, and for the
future to provide for their own Safety, and not to depend upon any Succors
from the Romans, who had their Hands full of Troubles nearer home.

Thus the Romans, after they had commanded in Britain about five hundred years,
took their last Farewell thereof. During their continuance here, they had levied
so many Companies of stout Britans for their Wars in Armenia, Egypt, and other
Frontier Countries, that they had much dispeopled the Nation. Some of these
British Soldiers, after they were worn out in the Wars, had Armorica in France
assigned them by Constantine the Great for their good Service in the Wars, from
whom it was called Little-Britain. Unto this Country, in the time of Gratian
the Emperor, was Vrsula the Daughter of Dinoth Regent of Cornwall sent with
eleven thousand Virgins, who were to have been married to their Countrymen the
Britans; but they all perished e're they arrived; some being drowned in the Sea
by Tempest, and the Remainder put to the Sword by the barbarous Huns and Picts,
because they would not yield to their filthy Lusts.

THE GOVERNMENT of the SAXONS.
THe Southern or more Civilized Britans being extremely weakened by the Romans
exporting so many of their valiant Soldiers, and then forsaking them, and
likewise by Scarcity and Famine; their inveterate Foes, the Scots and Picts,
take this unhappy Opportunity to infest them with all manner of Cruelties and
Barbarities: So that being no longer able to defend and secure themselves, they
supplicate for Aid from Germany, inviting the Jutes, Angles, and Saxons, who
then inhabited Jutland, Holstein, and the Coasts along the River Rhene, to come
to their Assistance. Their Proposal was readily embraced, and nine thousand of
them, under the Command of two Brethren, Hengist and Horsa, entered the Land at
Ebsfleet in the Isle of Thanet in Kent, where they were received with great
Joy, and entertained with Songs, according to the Custom of the Britans, who
allotted them that Island to inhabit; and a while after Vortigern, then King of
the Britans, allowed Hengist so much Land as he could encompass within a
Bullhide cut out into Thongs, wherein he built a Castle, which from thence had
the Name of Thong-Castle. When it was finished, Hengist invited the King to see
it, who there fell in love with Rowena, the Daughter or Niece of Hengist; upon
which Match Hengist grew more bold, contriving to make the Island his
Inheritance; and thereupon sent for fresh Forces, who at their arrival caused
several Quarrels among the Natives, dispossessing the People of their Estates,
every Commander reckoning that part of the Country his own where he could
over-match the Britans, where they commanded as absolutely as Princes; whereby
the Country was burdened with seven Kings at once, each of them having
Sovereign Command within his own Limits, though still one seemed to be Supreme
over all the rest.

This was usually called the Saxon Heptarchy, or Seven Kingdoms. The first, and
chiefest, was that of Kent only, governed by Hengist and his Successors for
three hundred seventy two years. The next was the Kingdom of the South Saxons,
containing the Counties of Sussex and Surrey, continuing a hundred and thirteen
years. 3. That of the West Saxons, comprehending the Counties of Cornwall,
Devon, Dorset, Somerset, Wilts, Berks, and Hampshire; it lasted three hundred
years. 4. The East Saxons Kingdom, which was Essex, Middlesex, and part of
Hartfordshire. 5. The Kingdom of Northumberland, containing the Counties of
Northumberland, Westmorland, Cumberland, Durham, York, and Lancaster,
continuing three hundred seventy nine years. 6. The Kingdom of Mercia, which
was composed of the Counties of Oxford, Gloucester, Worcester, Salop, Cheshire,
Stafford, Warwick, Buckingham, Bedford, Huntington, part of Hartfordshire,
Northampton, Rutland, Lincoln, Leicester, Derby, and Nottingham, continuing two
hundred and two years. 7. The last Kingdom was that of the East Angles,
containing the Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, which lasted three hundred
fifty three years.

Yet during the time of this Heptarchy, many of the British Princes valiantly
defended their lawful Inheritances, and with great Courage endeavored to
prevent the Saxon Yoke from being imposed upon their Necks: Among whom was
Vortimer, the Son of Vortigern aforementioned; for Vortigern being after
sixteen years Reign deposed from the Government, for his Kindness to the
Saxons, his Son Vortimer was chosen King of the Britans, and presently engaged
against the Saxons, gaining so much in four famous Victories over them, that
they were almost extirpated. He erected a Monument in the Isle of Thanet, in
the Place where the Saxons were overthrown, which to this day is called the
Stowers, wherein he commanded his Body to be buried, that the Saxons might be
terrified with the sight thereof. He restored the Christian Religion, then much
decayed, and rebuilt the Churches destroyed by the Pagan Saxons. Rowena
procured his Death by Poison, after which his Father Vortigern was
re-established in the Government: But being oppressed by the Saxons, and
pursued by Aurelius, he fled into Wales, where, in a Castle which he built by
Merlin's Directions, in the Mountains, he, with his Daughter, whom he had taken
to Wife, were burnt to Ashes.

Aurelius Ambrosius was likewise very successful against the Saxons. He is said
to have built Stonehenge near Salisbury, in remembrance of the Massacre of
three hundred of the British Nobility who were there slain by the Treachery of
the Saxons. Vter Pendragon, who succeeded him, was no less fortunate. He was
named Pendragon, either because at his Birth there appeared a fiery Comet like
a Dragons Head, or from his Royal Banner, wherein was the Picture of a Dragon
with a Golden Head. He died of Poison put into a Well wherein he used to drink.
Arthur his Son and Successor won twelve Battles against the Saxons, and chased
Colgern their Captain from his Camp in Northumberland to York, from whence he
escaped into Germany. The Relics of Arthur's Round Table are to this time
shown at Winchester, with the Twenty four Seats. After him reigned Constantine,
Aurelius, Conanus, Vortiporus, Malgo, Canonus, and Careticus. This last King
raised a Civil War among his own Subjects the Britans, which made them forsake
him, and leave him to the Mercy of the Saxons, who pursuing him, he fled to
Cirencester in Berkshire for safety; but his Enemies taking several Sparrows,
fastened Fire to their Feet, and let them fly into the City, who lighting upon
Straw, and thatcht Houses, burnt the City to the Ground; but Careticus escaped,
and fled for security to the Mountains of Wales, where he died.

After twenty four years Civil Dissension Cadwan was made King. During these
Troubles, Austin the Monk, who was sent hither by Pope Gregory to convert the
Britans, carrying himself very insolently at a Meeting with the British
Bishops, at a Place thence named Austins Oak in Worcestershire, they could come
to no Agreement; whereupon, it is thought, Austin contrived this cruel Revenge:
There was a Monastery at Bangor in North Wales, situated in a fruitful Valley,
now called The English Mailor, containing in compass about a Mile and an half
of Ground: This Monastery, says my Author, was the Mother of all others in the
World; the Monks whereof divided themselves into several Companies, every one
consisting in about three hundred Souls, and all maintaining themselves by the
Labor of their Hands. Many of these Monks met at Caer Legion, now Chester, to
assist their Brethren the Britans with their Prayers against Ethelfrid the
wicked King of Northumberland, who with his Pagan Soldiers, by the Procurement
of Austin, as was judged, slew two thousand of these Christian Monks, and
discomfited the British Host.

Cadwallo his Son reigned after him, and was victorious over the Saxons,
slaying Edwin King of Northumberland, and his Son Osfride, in a bloody Battle.
He died in peace, say the British Writers, and was buried at St. Martins Church
in London; his Statue on Horseback in Brass being set upon Ludgate, for a
Terror to the Saxons.

Cadwalloder the Son of Cadwallo fought manfully against the Saxons; but the
Distractions amongst his Nobility much hindered his Proceedings. There was
likewise a dreadful Famine in his Reign, so that the Common People reckoned
Roots and Herbs to be dainty Food: This was followed by a woeful Mortality,
which was so raging and sudden, that great numbers of People were surpised by
Death while they were eating, drinking, walking, and speaking. These Calamities
lasted near eleven years, so that the Country was almost depopulated, the King
and his British Peers being forced to leave the Land, who went to his Cousin
Allan King of Little Britain in France. The Saxons taking advantage of these
severe Miseries, lamentably oppressed the wretched Britans, to whose Aid
Cadwallader, with the Assistance of his Cousin Allan, did once design to
return; but being diverted by a Dream which he had, he went on Pilgrimage to
Rome, and, according to the Superstition of that Age, he there turned Monk,
where he soon after died, and was buried; with whom died all the Hopes of the
Britans, he being the last King of the British Blood, whereby the Saxons became
Sovereign Lords and Masters of this Island. And thus was this unhappy Country a
second time conquered by Strangers, which happened about the Year of our Lord 689.

Yet the Saxons, according to the common Fate of Conquerours, after they had
subdued their Enemies, disagreed among themselves, and several of their Princes
incroached upon the Territories of each other, and so became petty Monarchs of
some part of Britain: These were reckoned to be fourteen in number, till at
last Egbert, the eighteenth King of the West Saxons, got command over all the
seven Kingdoms of the Saxons, and so became sole Monarch of England, which none
of his Predecessors before ever obtained. He had War fourteen Years with the
Cornish and Welsh, and took Westchester, their chief Hold, from them, making a
strict Law against any Welchman that should pass over Offa's Dike, or set one
Foot within his English Dominions. He slew Bernulf King of Mercia in Battle,
and drove the King of Kent out of his Kingdom. The East Angles and East Saxons
submitted to him, and likewise the South Saxons; whereupon he caused himself to
be crowned absolute Monarch at Winchester: And this Monarchy continued in the
Saxons, till the Danes first got, and then lost it again; and the Saxons Issue
failing upon their next entrance, it then fell to the Normans, as by the Sequel
will appear. In the fourteenth year of Egbert the Danes with thirty three Ships
landed in England, to whom he gave Battle, but had the worst of the Day, losing
two of his chief Captains, and two Bishops; but the Danes returning two years
after into Wales, and joining with the Welsh, Egbert overcame both Danes and
Welsh together.

Ethelwolph his Son succeeded; after whom reigned Ethelbald, Ethelbert,
Ethelred, and then Alfred, in whose time the Danes, under Rollo a Nobleman,
came over with a great Army, but by the Valor of Alfred were beaten. This
virtuous Prince divided the twenty four Hours of the Day and Night into three
equal Parts, which he observed by the burning of a Taper set in his Chapel,
Clocks and Watches being not then in use: Eight Hours he spent in
Contemplation, Reading, and Prayer; other eight, for his Repose, and the
Necessaries of Life; and the other eight, in Affairs of State. He divided the
Kingdom into Shires, Hundreds, and Tythings, for the better Administration of
Justice, and suppressing of Robbers and Felons; which had so good effect, that
the People might travel with all manner of security: yea, says my Author, if
Bracelets of Gold had been hung in the Highways, none durst have presumed to
have taken them away. He commanded all his Subjects who possessed two Hides of
Land, to bring up their Sons in Learning till they were at least fifteen years
old, asserting, That he accounted a Man Freeborn, and yet Illiterate, to be no
better than a Beast, a Sot, and a Brainless Creature: Neither would he admit
any into Office that were not so. He translated the Holy Gospel into the Saxon
Tongue, was devout in the Service of God, and a great Protector of Widows and
Orphans.

Edward his eldest Son succeeded him, against whom his Nephew Ethelwald
rebelled. His Sister Elfleda had very hard Travel of her first Child, whereupon
she ever after forbore the Nuptial Embraces, alleging it to be an over-foolish
Pleasure which occasioned such bitter Pains; and listing her self a Soldier
under her Brother, she performed many valiant Exploits against the Danes;
against whom Edward obtained a great Victory near Wolverhampton, wherein two of
their Kings were slain, with many of the Nobility, and a Multitude of Common
Soldiers, which procured him both Fear and Love from the People.

After his Death Ethelstane reigned, who is said to be the first Anointed King
of this Island: He enlarged his Dominions farther than he received them. He
overthrew Godfrey the Danish King of Northumberland, Howell King of Wales, and
Constantine King of Scotland, forcing them to submit to his Pleasure; after
which he again restored them to their Dignities, glorying, That it was more
Honor to make a King, than to be a King. These Actions procured him much
Renown from his Neighbour-Princes, who courted his Friendship, and sent him
curious Presents. Otho the Emperor, who married his Sister, sent him a
Curiosity richly set with Precious Stones, very artificially contrived, wherein
were Landskips with Vines, Corn, and Men seeming so naturally to move, as if
they had been real. The King of Norway sent him a sumptuous Ship, richly gilt,
with Purple Sails. The King of France sent him a Sword, which was said to have
been Constantine's the Great, the Hilt whereof was all of Gold, and therein, as
they said, was one of the Nails which fastened Christ to the Cross: He likewise
sent the Spear of Charles the Great, reported to be the same wherewith our
Saviors Side was pierced; also a part of the Cross* a piece of the Crown of
Thorns, and the Banner of St. Maurice. It is related, That this King
Ethelstane, or Athelstane, in the third Year of his Reign, was so harassed by
the Danes, that he was forced to shut himself up in Winchester City; who
propounded to him, either to submit, and hold the Realm of them, or to
determine the Quarrel between two Champions of each side. The King was much
perplexed at these Propositions, because his three valiant Knights, Guy Earl of
Warwick, (who lived in his Reign, or not at all) one Herand another courageous
Knight, and Earl Rohand, Guy's Father-in-Law, were gone to the Holy Land. In
this Strait, after he had prayed for Deliverance, it is said, he had a Vision,
wherein he was directed to rise early the next Morning, and taking two Bishops
with him, to get up to the top of the North Gate of that City, where he should
see a likely Man, clothed as a Pilgrim, barefoot, and on his bare Head a
Chaplet of White Roses, and that this should be the Man that should conquer
Colebrand the Danish Giant, (for so was his Name) and free the English from the
Danish Bondage. The next Day the King thus attended at the Gate, sees Earl Guy
so habited, being newly arrived from Jerusalem; whereupon Athelstane addressing
himself to him, desires him to accept the Combat, as being ordained by Heaven
to acquit this Realm from Tyranny. Guy replied, My Lord, you may easily
perceive that I am not in a Condition to take upon me this Fight, being
harassed and weakened by daily Travel; lay this Task therefore upon your stout
and hardy Soldiers, whom you were wont v ry much to esteem. Ah, said the King,
such indeed I had; but they are gone, some to the Holy Land, as one valiant
Knight, called Guy, who was Earl of Warwick: I had also a courageous Servant,
named Sir Herand de Ardene; Would to God they were now here, for then would
this Duel be soon undertaken, and the War quickly finished. In speaking which
Words the Tears trickled down his Cheeks, which made such impression upon the
Pilgrim, that he engaged to undertake the Combat. Upon the Day appointed, Guy
putting on the King's best Armor, the Sword of Constantine the Great, St.
Maurice his Lance, and one of the Kings best Coursers, he rode through
Winchester, appearing like a most accomplished Knight, and went to the Place
appointed, which was in a Valley called Chiltecumb, where Colebrand soon after
came, so loaded with Armor, that his Horse could scarce bear him, and a Cart
driven before him, filled with Danish Axes, great Clubs with Knobs of Iron,
squared Bars of Steel, and Iron Hooks to pluck his Adversary to him. Thus
marching disdainfully along, and seeing Sir Guy, in the height of Pride, he
commanded him to come off his Horse, and throw himself with submission at his
Feet: But the gallant Pilgrim, disregarding his Words, commending himself to
Heaven, put Spurs to his Horse* and at the first Encounter pierced the Giants
Shield with such Force, that his Lance broke into Shivers; which so enraged the
Giant, that coming up furiously, he killed Guy's Horse, who being dismounted,
dangerously wounded Colebrand. The Combat having lasted for some time, the
Giant fainted and fell with loss of Blood, and Guy immediately cut off his
Head, thereby freeing England at present from the insulting Dane. After all
which, he offered his Sword in the Cathedral of Winchester, which was long
after kept in the Vestry, and called Colebrand's Ax. The other Relics of Guy,
Mr. Drayton thus describes.

Thy Statue, Guy, Cliff keeps, the Gazers Eyes to please;
Warwick thy mighty Arms, (thou mighty Hercules)
Thy strong and massy Sword, that never was controlled,
Which, as her ancient Right, her Castle still does hold.
Thus much for Earl Guy, who lived in the Year of Christ 929. This King
Ethelstane, by the insinuation of his Cup Bearer, became incensed against his
Brother, as if he had contrived Treason against him, who therefore ordered him
to be put into a small Vessel without Tackle or Oars, and so be exposed to the
mercy of the Sea; wherewith the young Prince was so overwhelmed with Sorrow,
that he threw himself headlong into the Sea; whose Ghost the King endeavored
to appease, by a voluntary Penance of seven years, and building two
Monasteries. Neither did the treacherous Cup Bearer escape Vengeance; for on a
Festival-day, as he was busy in waiting, one of his Feet slipping, he
recovered himself by the help of the other, and thereupon pleasantly said, You
may see now how one Brother can help another: This Speech suddenly recalled to
the Kings Mind the Death of his Innocent Brother; whereupon he caused the
Cup Bearer, who was the Procurer thereof, to be immediately executed.

Edmund, the fifth Son of King Edward, succeeded; and after him, Edred, his
sixth Son: Then Edwy, or Edwin, the eldest Son of Edmund was Crowned at
Kingston upon Thames, who was of a lascivious temper; for it is related, That
on the very Day of his Coronation, he suddenly left his Nobility, and went into
a private Room, to debauch a great Lady, his near Kinswoman, whose Husband he
soon after slew. St. Dunstan, who was present, and then Abbot of Glastenbury,
followed the King into his Chamber, and leading him out by the Hand, accused
him before Odo Archbishop of Canterbury, by whom he was severely reproved, and
forbid the Company of that woman. The King was hereat enraged against Dunstan,
and banished him out of the Land, and became so great an Enemy to the Order of
Monks, that he expelled many of them out of their Monasteries, and put married
Priests in their Places. The People having a great Opinion of the Holiness of
Dunstan, and being offended at the Kings severity toward him, and other
Irregularities, they turned their Affections to Edgar his Brother, and removing
Edwin from his Princely Dignity, Edgar was made King in his stead; for very
grief whereof he soon wasted away, and died in 959.

Edgar was called the Peaceable: He maintained the Kingdom in great Glory and
Prosperity. His Navy Royal is said to consist of three thousand six hundred
Ships, with which he every Summer sailed round his Land, to secure the Sea from
Pirates. He caused Ludwall Prince of Wales to pay him three hundred Wolves
yearly, in stead of a former Tribute in Money, whereby England and Wales, which
were formerly very much overrun, were now so freed, that there was scarce a
Wolf to be found alive. He was very severe upon his Judges, if he found them
guilty of Bribery and Partiality, riding the Circuit himself every Year for
that purpose: Yet among all these Virtues, he is said to be very Voluptuous,
especially toward Women, not sparing the very Nuns; which sounded so ill, that
Dunstan took the boldness to reprove him for it; and coming into his Presence,
the King in Courtesy rose from his Royal Throne, to take him by the Hand, and
seat him by him: But Dunstan refusing the King his Hand, with a stern
Countenance and contracted Brow spoke thus to him. You that have not been
afraid to corrupt a Virgin dedicated to Christ, how can you presume to touch
the Consecrated Hands of a Bishop? You have defiled the Spouse of your Maker,
and do you now think by your flattering Service to pacify the Friend of the
Bridegroom; No, Sir, do not mistake your self; for I will be no Friend to him
who has Christ for his Enemy. The King thunderstruck with these dreadful
Words, and touched with remorse of Conscience, fell down at the Feet of
Dunstan; who raising him up, began to aggravate his Crime, and finding the K.
pliable to his Instruction, he enjoined him the following Penance for
satisfaction; That he should wear no Crown for the space of seven years; That
he should fast twice a Week; That he should distribute his Treasure lest him by
his Ancestors liberally to the Poor, That he should build a Monast. for Nuns at
Shaftsbury, that since he had robbed God of one Virgin by his Transgression, so
he should restore to him many again for the time to come: Likewise, That he
should expel Clerks or Priests of evil Life (meaning those who were married)
out of the Churches, and place Monks in their room. All this Edgar performed,
and the seven years being past, Dunstan (says the Historian) calling the
Nobility, with the Bishops, Abbots, and Clergy together, he before all the
People set the Crown upon the Kings Head at Bath, in the thirteenth year of his
Reign; Dunstan, who it seems ruled all, having hither to hindered it. The Nun
here mentioned was Wilfrid, a D's. Daughter, by whom he had a Daughter called
Editha: He had a Son likewise by Elfrida the Earl of Devonshire's Daughter,
which Dunstan, being now grown good natured, Christened: The words of the
Historian are these: The Child also which was gotten of the Harlot, he Baptized
in the Holy Fountain of Regeneration, and giving him the Name of Edward,
adopted him to be the Kings Son. There are abundance of ridiculous Miracles
related of this Dunstan: One, among many others, was, That a Vision appearing
to him, required him to take up the Body, of Editha the Bastard and Canonize
her fol a Saint a her Tomb being accordingly opened in the Church of Wilton,
where she was buried, her whole Body (says the Monkish Historian) was consumed
to Dust, save onley her Thumb, her Belly, etc. whereof she her self showed the
meaning, declaring That her Thumb remained entire, because she so often used to
cross her self therewith, and the other Parts did signify the extraordinary
Abstinence and Chastity. With such stuff were the People then abused, and
persuaded to worship for Saints the dead Carcases of those that were many times
of very profligate Lives while on Earth. In King Edgar's Reign there was a
great Famine, wherein Ethelwald Bishop of Winchester sold away all the
Church-Plate, and Vessels of Gold and Silver, to relieve the Poor, saying,
There was no reason that the senseless Temples of God should abound in Riches,
and the lively Temples of the Holy Ghost to be in want of them.

After the Death of Edgar there was great Division, many of the Nobility being
for Etheldred, the true and only legitimate Heir of Edgar; but the other
Nobles, and the Clergy, especially Dunstan, fearing the Married Clergy should
again prevail, he, with several other Bishops, meeting together, and carrying
the Cross before Edward, brought him to the Lords, and by many Persuasions
prevailed with them to accept him for their King. He was accounted a just, meek
Prince, and very charitable to the Poor: Yet enjoyed he the Crown but a short
space; for in the fourth Year of his Reign, as he was Hunting near Corf Castle,
where his Brother Etheldred and Queen Elfrida his Mother resided, while he was
discoursing and drinking on Horseback, as the Cup was at his Mouth, a Servant
of the Queens, by her Contrivance, struck him into the Back with a Knife or
Dagger; at which setting Spurs to his Horse to get away, and fainting with loss
of Blood, he fell from his Horse with one Foot in the Stirrup, and was dragged
up and down the Woods, till at last his Body was left dead at the Gate of Corf
Castle. When this Fact was committed, the Queen was so struck with remorse,
that to expiate her Guilt, she built two Monasteries Almsbury and Wormwell:
For, as Mr. Fox observes, most of these Religious Houses were founded either
upon the account of some Public or Private Murder.

Edward the Martyr, as he was called, being thus slain, Etheldred his younger
Brother, the Son of Edgar and Queen Elfrida, succeeded. He reigned thirty eight
Years, but was very unfortunate, and full of Troubles all his time. It is
related, That when Archbishop Dunstan Christened Etheldred, as he held him over
the Font, the Child was not very cleanly; whereupon the Bishop swore, By the
Mother of God, this Boy will prove an unhappy and slothful Prince; which happened
accordingly. At his Coronation a Cloud appeared, half like Blood, and the other
half like Fire. In his third Year the Danes invaded the Kingdom in several
Places, and the King paid them Forty thousand Pound yearly for his Quiet, which
much disobliged his Subjects; yea, the English were so low, that the Danes
commanded their Houses, Wives, Daughters, and all they had: Whereupon Etheldred
contrived, that all the Danes were massacred in one Day: But this did more
enrage them, so that first Swain, and then Canutus, came with two hundred Sail
of Ships, and landed in Cornwall, burning and destroying all before him, and
killing Nine hundred Monks and Nuns at one time, the Kings Counsels being all
betrayed by the Traitor Edrick: Whereupon he fled, with his Queen, Emma, and
her two Sons, into Normandy, to Richard, Duke thereof, who was her Brother. But
Swain being soon after killed by his own Men, they made his Son Canutus King:
After which Etheldred returns again to England, and perceiving the several
Treasons against him, and being unable to withstand their Fury, he soon after
died.

Edmund, the eldest Son alive of Etheldred, succeeded, surnamed Ironside, from
his great Strength and Courage. He was Crowned at Kingston: But the Danes were
then so powerful in England, that Canutus was accepted King at Southampton,
many of the Clergy and Laity swearing Allegiance to him; but the City of London
stood firm for Edmund, who fought several Battles against the Danes, and routed
Canutus four times in the plain Field and would in likelihood have freed the
Nation from the Danes, had not the ever-false Edrick, and other perfidious
Persons of the Clergy and Laity, prevented it. At length, to avoid further
Bloodshed, they made an Agreement to divide the Kingdom betwixt them; but
Edmund enjoyed the Benefit of this Accord a very short time, being soon after
murdered as he was easing Nature, by Edrick, and his Head presented to Canutus,
who, though he loved the Treason, yet commanded the Traitor to be beheaded.

THE GOVERNMENT of the DANES.
BY the Death of Edmund, the Saxon Monarchy came to a Period; for Canutus,
after his Death, seized upon the other half of England, none being able to
withstand; whereby the Danes made themselves sole Masters of this Island, after
it had been in possession of the Saxons about 566 Years: The English Nobles
owning Canutus for their Lawful King, and swearing Fealty to him at his
Coronation at London, in the Year of Christ 1017. Though Canutus had never the
better Opinion of them, considering, that most of them had sworn Allegiance to
Edmund their Natural Sovereign, and likewise that they were English Natives: He
therefore judged them treacherous Persons, and used them accordingly; for some
he banished, others he beheaded, and many by the just Judgment of Heaven died
sudden Deaths. Canutus, to establish his Government, called a Parliament of
Bishops, Lords, and Barons, in London, wherein many Laws were ordained, and,
among others, this following: We admonish diligently all Christian Men, that
they do always love God with an inward heart, and be diligently obedient to
Divine Teachers, and do subtly search Gods Learning and Laws often and daily,
to the profit of themselves: And we warn, that all Christian Men do learn to
know at leastwise the right Belief, and aright to understand the Lords Prayer
and the Creed, for that with the one every Christian Man should pray unto God,
and with the other show forth right Belief. He also ordained in another
Parliament at Oxford, That both English and Danes should observe the Laws made
by King Edgar, as judging them to be above all others most just and reasonable.
He married Emma the Widow of King Etheldred, and Sister to Richard Duke of
Normandy, with this Condition, That the Issue of her Body by him should inherit
the Kingdom of England. He went to Rome to complain of the excessive Extortions
of the Pope from the English Archbishops, upon receiving their Palls: And
having reigned twenty Years over England, he died.

Notwithstanding the former Agreement, yet Harold the Son of Canutus by Elgina
his first Wife, (in the absence of Hardiknute the Son of Queen Emma) succeeded
his Father; and the better to secure himself, he, by the assistance of the
treacherous Earl Godwin, who had married Canutus's D^ughter, endeavors to get
into his Power Edward and Alfred the two Sons of Queen Emma by King Etheldred,
whom he knew had more Right than himself; and to that purpose they counterfeit
a Letter in Emma's Name, whom Harold had abused, and robbed of her Jewels, the
Contents whereof were to this purpose.

EMma, in Name only Queen, to Edward and Alfred her Sons sends Motherly Gree
ings, Whilst we severally bewail the Death of our Sovereign, my Lord, and your
Father; and your selves (Dear Sons) are still more and more disposs ssed from
the Kingdoms of your Lawful Inheritance; I much wonder what you intend to do,
since you know that Delays in Attempts give the Usurper more leisure to lay his
Foundation and more safely to fix thereon his intended Building, never ceasing
to post from Town to City, to make the Lords and Rulers thereof his Friends, by
Threats, Prayers, or Rewards: But notwithstanding his Policy, yet they
privately signify, that they had rather have one of you, their Native
Countrymen, to reign over them, than this Danish Usurper. Therefore my Advice
is, That either of you do with all speed repair to me, that we may advise
together what is to be done in this so great an Enterprise. Fail not therefore,
but send me word by this Messenger what you intend to do herein. And so fare ye
well.

Your Affectionate Mother, Emma.


Messengers being sent to Normandy with this Letter, they met only with
Alfred, (Edward being gone into Hungaria) to whom delivering their Message, he
was very joyful, and made all possible haste to England, accompanied with
diverse Norman Gentlemen, and arriving at Southampton, was received by the
villainous Earl Godwin with much pretended Kindness and Friendship, who made as
if he would bring him to London; but being come to Gilford in Surrey, Godwin
commanded his Men to kill all Alfred's Company, and then carrying him to the
Isle of Ely, ordered his Eyes to be put out: Then opening his Body, they took
out his Bowels, and fastening one end of his Guts to a Stake, they drove him
round it with Iron Darts and Needles, till all his Bowels came clear away. Thus
died innocent Alured, or Alfred, the true Heir to the Crown, by the Treachery
of Godwin, to the great disgust of the English Nobility, who vowed Revenge.
This Harold, called Harefoot for his great swiftness, did not long enjoy his
usurped Dominion; for after four years he died.

After which Hardiknute, the Son of Canutus and Queen Emma, who was by his
Father made King of Denmark, is now by the States of the Land, both Danes and
English, invited over hither to take upon him the Government. He was a great
Oppressor of the English, by heavy Taxes, which so enraged them, that two of
his Collectors were slain at Worcester, for which their City was burnt, and
their Bishop Alfred expelled his Office, till with Mo^^ (...) had purchased his
Peace. Though this King (...), it cry vicious, yet it is said, he was more kind
to Edward his Half-brother, and made Earl Godwin purge himself for the Death of
Prince Alfred; though it is thought his bountiful Gifts to the King, prevailed
much more for clearing him, than his Innocence. One Present especially is very
remarkable, that is, A Ship whose Stern was of Gold, and fourscore Soldiers,
all richly habited, within her; on their Heads they all wore gilt Burgonets,
and on their Bodies a triple-gilt Habergeon, about their Wastes Swords girt
richly gilt, a Danish Battel-ax on their left Shoulders, a Target with gilt
Bosses on their left Hand, a Dart in their right, and upon their Arms Bracelets
of Gold of great Value. After two years Reign, Hardiknute died in the midst of
his drunken Debaucheries, and in him ended the Danish Race in England, three
Kings only of that Nation reigning here. This third Conquest was but of a
short continuance, yet were the Danes very insolent toward the English during
that time; for if an Englishman and a Dane met at a Bridge, or at a Door, the
Englishman must stand still till the Dane past by, and if he did not then bow
down very low to the Dane, he was certainly beaten and abused: Yea, it is
related, That while the English were drinking, the Danes would stab them, or
cut their Throats; to prevent which, when the Englishman drank, he desired his
next Companion to be his Surety or Pledge, from whence it is said the Custom of
Pledging one another did first arise. For these, and abundant greater
Insolences, after the Death of Hardiknute, the Danes were utterly driven out
of Engand, and never again returned.

THE GOVERN^^NT of the SAXONS RESTORED.
EDward called the Confessor succeeded next, in 1042. who was an absolute
Englishman, and the youngest Son of Etheldred and Queen Emma; being invited
from Normandy by all the English Nobility, who disdained the Danish Subjection,
and was entertained with great Joy. He first remitted that heavy Danish Tax of
Forty thousand pound a year, called Dane-gilt, imposed by his Father, and paid
forty years by all but the Clergy, who were exempted, Because the Kings reposed
more confidence in the Prayers of the Holy Church, than in the Power of Armies.
It is reported, Edward forgave that Tax upon this occasion: A great Sum of that
Treasure being brought into his Chamber, and laid in a heap, he being called to
see it, was at first sight much affrighted, protesting he saw the Devil dancing
with great Joy upon the same; and therefore commanded it should be again
restored to his Subjects, and released them from it for ever after. He married
Editha, Earl Godwin's Daughter, but never had any Conjugal Society with her,
though she was a Lady accomplished with all excellent Endowments both of Mind
and Body, so that this old Verse was written on her; Sicut Spina Rosam, Genuit
Goduinus Editham.
From prickled Stalk as sweetest Rose,
So Edith fair from Godwin grows.


Edward himself confessed upon his Death bed, That openly she was his Wife, but
in secret Embracings as his own Sister: But whether it were Infirmity or
Chastity, it seems he was willing to have her accused of Incontinency, whereof
if she were guilty, he could not be innocent, it being a great Injury to put
his Wives Virtue to so Tyrannical a trial. After this, some Differences arose
between him and Earl Godwin, and Forces were raised on both sides, but by the
Intercession of the Nobility, an Agreement was made: Yet Godwin escaped not
Divine Vengeance; for being charged by the King for the Murder of Alfred, he
wished if he were guilty he might never swallow down a bit of Bread again;
which happened accordingly: for the first bit of Bread he put into his Mouth
choked him, as he sat with the King at Table: A dreadful Instance of Gods
Severity against Perjury. This King is blamed for his Cruelty to his Mother, in
forcing her to pass over nine burning Plow-shares, barefoot and blind fold,
for a Trial of her Continency; which yet she performed without the least
damage. He is said to be the first King that cured the Disease called the
King's Evil.

It is related, That this King lying on his Bed one Afternoon, with the
Curtains drawn, a pilfering Courtier coming into his Chamber, and finding the
Kings Casket open, which Hugoline his Chamberlain had forgot to shut, he took
out as much Money as he could well carry, and went away: But finding such
Success, he came a second, and a third time, still carrying off more. At which
the King who had observed all, called to him to be gone with all speed, since
he had enough, if he could be contented; For, said he, if Hugoline should come
and catch thee, thou will go nigh to lose all thou have got, and may get a
Halter into the Bargain. The Fellow was no sooner gone, but Hugoline came in;
and finding the Casket open, and a great deal of Money taken out, he was much
incensed: But the King bid him not be moved; For, said he, he that has it,
has more need of it than we.

When this King Edward was hastening out of Normandy with a great Army, to
recover England from the Danes, being ready to give Battle, his Captains
assured him of Victory, and that they would not leave one Dane alive: God
forbid, said Edward, that the Kingdom should be recovered for me, who am but
one Man, by the death of so many thousands; better it is that I should live a
private and unbloody Life, than to be a King by such a Slaughter and Butchery.
This King having no Issue of his own, sent for Edward the Son of Edmund
Ironside out of Hungary, who for his long absence was called the Outlaw; but he
dying soon after, he declared Edgar, the Outlaw's Son, to be Heir, and surnamed
him Atheling, or Adeling, a Term appropriated to the Presumptive Heirs of the
Crown. He had also a Daughter, named Matilda, who was married to the King of
Scots, and was Mother to David King of Scotland, and Maud Queen of England.

When King Edward was on his Deathbed, he observed all present weeping and
lamenting for him, to whom he said, If you loved me, you would forbear weeping,
and rejoice; because I go to my Father, with whom I shall receive the Joys
promised to the Faithful, not through my Merits but by the free Mercy of my
Savior, who shows Mercy on whom he pleases.

After the Death of Earl Godwin, Harold his Son grew into great Favor with
King Edward, and was by him made Lieutenant of his Army against the Welsh; who,
with his Brother Tosto, or Toston, utterly subdued that Rebellion: After which
Harold still increasing more in favor with the King, there grew such Hatred
between the two Brethren, that Tosto coming to Hereford, slew all his Brothers
Servants, and cutting them in pieces, salted them, and put them into
Powdering-tubs. It happened afterward, that Harold going beyond Sea, was by
Tempest driven into Normandy, and being seized, and carried before Duke
William, he made him promise, That after the Death of King Edward he would
secure the Kingdom for him, according to King Edward's Will: Which Oath having
taken, Harold came back, and told King Edward what he had done, who seemed well
content therewith, says the Historian; which, if it were true, he had surely
forgot his former Declaration concerning Edgar Ath^ling.

However, after the Death of King Edward, Harold neither regarding his Oath to
Duke William, nor Edgar's Right, whom he despised for his tender Age, caused
himself to be Proclaimed King, without any great Ceremony or Celebration, none
much approving or disapproving thereof: And to ingratiate himself with the
People, he eased them of several severe Taxes laid upon them by his
Predecessor, and was affable and kind to all: But this was a short Calm before
a great Storm; for soon after Duke William sent his Ambassadors to him, to mind
him of his Oath; but he returned answer, That it was extorted from him in his
Imprisonment, and therefore was no way obliging. At this Answer the Duke was
much enraged, and prepared Forces for gaining the Kingdom by Force: Neither was
Harold idle, but made Provision to withstand him: At which time a dreadful
Comet appeared in the Heavens, which was then judged, and after proved to be a
fatal Omen.

During these Preparations, Tosto Brother to Harold, and Harfager King of
Denmark, with three hundred Ships, invaded the Country, landing in Yorkshire,
Harfager claiming the Crown as Son of Canutus; but the Nobility of those Parts
opposing them, were routed: which Harold hearing, marched against them, and at
Stamford-Bridge he encountered them, where his whole Army was withstood by one
single Dane, who slew forty of his Men, and made good the Bridge, till a
Soldier in a Boat rowing under the Bridge, thrust his Spear through a Crevice,
and so slew this valiant Champion: After which, the King fell upon the D nes,
and got an entire Victory over them, killing King Harfager, and Tosto his own
Brother: Olave the Son of Harfager, and Paul Earl of Orkney, were taken
Prisoners, with abundance more, who begging their Lives, the King ordered
Twenty of their Three hundred Ships to carry them to Denmark, with sad News of
the loss of their King and his whole Army.

No sooner was this Storm over, but a worse began; for Duke William having
prepared a great Army and Navy, resolved for England, having the free Consent
of his Nobility for his Voyage, many of them assisting him therein. But first
he sent to Pope Alexander to confirm his Title to the Crown, who did it
readily, and withal sent him a Consecrated Banner, an Agnus Dei, and a Hair of
St. Peter, with a Curse to all Opposers, to carry in the Ship wherein he
himself sailed. Being thoroughly furnished, he and his Men embarked at St.
Vallery, where they staid a long time for a Wind; at length setting Sail, Sept.
28. 1066. he arrived with his Fleet at Pevensey in Sussex, where as soon as he
landed, it happened one of his Feet stuck so fast in the Sand, that he fell to
the Ground; whereupon one of his Attendants catching him by the Arm, and
helping him up, said, Stand up, my Lord, and be of good Courage, for now you
have taken fast Footing in England; and observing that he had taken up Sand and
Earth in his Hand, he added, You have now taken Livery and Seisin of the
Country; it being the Custom, that when Possession is taken of Land, a piece of
Earth is given to the Possessor. A Wizard or Necromancer had told Duke William,
That he should safely arrive in England with his whole Army, without any
hindrance from Harold; which, after it came to pass, King William sent for this
Conjurer, to confer further with him; but it was told him, That he was drowned
in that Ship which alone of the whole Navy miscarried; whereupon the Conqueror
said, He would never put confidence in that Science which was of more benefit
to the Ignorant than the Skilful therein; for it seems he could foresee my good
Fortune, but not his own Misfortune.

After his Landing, the Duke set all his Ships on fire, to assure his Men that
they must either conquer or die. He then marched toward Hastings, declaring the
Cause of his coming to be to inherit the Kingdom, which was given him by King
Edward, and strictly charging his Soldiers not to wrong any of the People in
the least since they were so soon to become his Natural Subjects. He then sent
Messengers to Harold, either to deliver him up the Country, and be subject to
him, or to fight it out in the sight of both Armies in single Combat; or
lastly, to stand to the Pope's Determination: But he returned answer, That
unless he did suddenly depart, he would give him cause to repent this his rash
Invasion; and that the next day it should be tried by more Swords than One.
Accordingly Harold marches courageously against Duke William, who put himself
into a posture to receive him. It happened, that the Morning before the Battle,
William's Armourer, by mistake, put on his Backpiece before, and his
Breast Plate behind; which being observed by some of his Attendants, was judged
an ill Omen, and therefore they advised him not to fight that Day: To whom the
Duke replied, I value not such Fooleries; but if I have any skill in
Soothsaying, (as in truth I have none) I am of the opinion it does fore ell,
that I shall change my Condition, and of a Duke shall this day become a King.

The Armies being Marshalled, Harold placing the Kentish-men with their heavy
Axes or Halberts in the Van, the Battle began, both Parties fighting bravely,
one for the Liberty of their Country, and the other for a Kingdom. The Normans
perceiving they could not break the united Strength of the English, pretended
to fly, which the English believing, pursued them in disorder; whereupon the
Normans taking the advantage, rallied, and charging them furiously in that
disjoynted Posture, made a very great Slaughter among the English; and, among
the rest, King Harold, his Brother, and most of the English Nobility, fell that
day; and of the Common Soldiers, Sixty seven thousand nine hundred seventy
four: Others report, an hundred thousand were slain. Duke William had three
Horses killed under him, yet received not the least Wound, his Loss being
only, as is said, Six thousand Men. Thus died King Harold, after only nine
Months Reign, and was buried at Waltham Abbey in Essex. And it is very
remarkable, That whereas Harold, with his Father Godwin, had cruelly murdered
Alfred the true Heir to the Crown, and his Normans, he was now by a Norman
wounded in the left Eye with an Arrow, whereof he immediately died. This great
Battle was fought at Hastings in Sussex, on Saturday, October 14. 1066. The
English after this vast Loss had designed to make Edgar Atheling King, but it
was prevented by their private Animosities. And thus ended the Saxon Monarchy
in England, which from Hengist in 475. to this Year, had continued (save only
some short Interruptions by the Danes) Five hundred ninety one Years. And here
we shall begin to give a more particular Account of all the Monarchs who have
Reigned in England, till His present Majesty, King CHARLES the Second, whom God
preserve.

WILLIAM the FIRST, SURNAMED THE CONQVEROVR, King of England, and Duke of
Normandy.
portrait of King William the 1st

BY bloody Battles, Conquest, and by Fate,
Rich Englands Crown and Kingdom I surprised;
I topsie-turvie turned the English State,
And Laws and Customs strange and new devised:
And where I Conquered, there I Tyrannized,
In stead of Love, making the People fear;
In raising Taxes I was exercised,
And Tributes greater than the Land could bear.
Yea, and the Normans Fame the more to rear,
The English I forbid the English Tongue;
French Grammar Schools I instituted here,
And against this Nation added Wrong to Wrong.
At last my Crown, Sword, Scepter, Conquests brave,
I left, I lost, and scarce could find a Grave.
DUke William after the Fight (which from that time was called Battel-Field,
and an Abbey of that name built there) hastened toward London, wasting the
Counties of Kent, Sussex, Surrey, Hantshire and Berkshire; and crossing the
Thames at Wallingford, marched through Oxfordshire, Bucks, and Hartford hire,
and on Christmas day following was Crowned King at Westminster, by the enforced
Consent of the English Nobility, who with outward Applause, though with inward
Grief and Discontent, acknowledged themselves to be his Subjects, the
Kentish-men only excepted, by whom, as he went to possess himself of the
strong Castle of Dover, he was intercepted in his March, being encompassed by
many valiant Soldiers, who carrying green Boughs in their Hands, seemed to be a
moving Wood, suddenly environed him and his Followers, protesting, That rather
than they would basely lose their Privileges, and be deprived of their ancient
Laws and Customs, they were resolved every Man to die in the Place. The King
considering his own Danger, and their Resolution consented to their Demands,
and for their bold and generous Resolution, he ever after honored them with
this Pre-eminence, That the Men of Kent should lead the Van in the Field: And
thereupon the Earldom and Castle of Dover was delivered to King William Now
what the Kentish-men obtained by Arms, the Citizens of London procured by Art;
for one William a Norman being their Bishop, they so prevailed with him, and he
with the King, that he confirmed their former Charter, written in the Saxon
Tongue, and sealed with Green Wax, to this Effect.

William King greeteth William Bishop, and Godfrey Portreeve, and all the
Burgesses that in London be, French and English, Friendly: And I do you to wit,
That I will that you enjoy all the Law which you did in the Days of Edward
King. And I will, That each Child be his Fathers Inheritor after his Fathers
Days. And I will not suffer, that any Man any Wrong you offer. God keep you.

King William having thus conquered the Kingdom, used several Policies for
securing it to himself: For, presuming that he was obeyed by the Natives more
out of Fear than Love, 1. He took Hostages of those that were dearest to the
English, either Sons or Nephews, whom he sent into Normandy, for securing their
Fidelity. 2. He deprived the English of all Offices both of Honor and Profit,
conferring them on his Normans. 3 Because the Clergy were much reverenced by
the People, and concerned themselves in Temporal Affairs, he ordained, That
they should concern themselves only in Spiritual Matters. 4. To take away all
Hopes of regaining their Liberty, he disarmed all the Natives, and left them
utterly disabled to make any Resistance. 5. To prevent all Concourse or
Meetings where they might have opportunity to condole their Miseries,
especially in the Night, he commanded a Bell to be hung up in every Town,
Village, and City, to be rung at Eight a Clock every Night, at which every
Englishman was to put out his Fire, and to keep himself within his House. 6. To
diminish the English Nobility, he sent them to fight his Battles in Normandy;
and if any of them returned Victorious, they were much discountenanced, in
stead of being rewarded: The Common People were likewise used in the same
manner, being still ordered to endure the hottest Service in Fight, both in
France and Normandy. 7. He erected strong Forts and Castles in several places
of the Realm, commanded by his Countrymen, who made the least Crime committed
by the English to be Capital to them. 8. He deprived the Gentry and Clergy of
their Plate and Money, yea even that used in Churches, alleging, That Thieves,
Traitors, and Rebels had hid them there, to deceive him of his Forfeitures, and
support themselves against his Authority. 9. He published diverse severe Laws in
the French Tongue, whereby many English of great Estates did ignorantly
transgress, and the smallest Offenses were made sufficient to seize their
Estates, which were violently taken from them, without any Commiseration. 10.
He declared the Patents, Grants, and Charters of former Kings to be void, and
having seized them into his own Hands, he sold them again to the true Owners
for great Sums of Money; which if they could not procure, he gave them to his
French and Normans. 11. He took a general Survey of the Natives Lands and
Cattle, and then laid unreasonable Taxes upon them, not regarding their Cries
or Poverty. 12. He erected new Courts of Justice for administering his new Laws,
and caused his Judges constantly to follow his Court, that they might never act
any thing which should displease him, or gratify the English. 13. To give the
freer Access to the French and Normans, if the English should rebel, he
plucked down and ruined Thirty six Churches, with many Towns and Villages, for
many Miles, even from Salisbury to the Sea, making his New Forest there: But
this Offense did not escape unpunished; for in this very Forest, Richard the
Kings second Son was goared by a Deer, and died; William Rufus, his third Son,
was slain by an Arrow shot at an Heart; and his Grandchild, Robert Curtoyse,
being in pursuit of the Game, was struck by a Bough into the Jaws, and died
there. 14. His chief Pleasure being in Hunting, he seized all Chases and
Forests of the Kingdom into his Hands, making very cruel Laws against such as
presumed to hunt in them without License, as the loss of Eyes, Limbs, and the
like. 15. He gave large Territories and Farms to his Favorites, who leased
them out to their Slaves and Servants, creating them into Manors, and calling
themselves Lords thereof. He reserved some Tenures to himself, whereby his
Tenants were obliged to serve him in the Wars, or attend his Person, to which
they were sworn in Public Courts; by which Tenure he disposed of their Heirs
in Marriage, having Possession of their Estates till they were Twenty one years
of age: By which Example, other Great Lords did the like.

This was the Model of King William's sharp and severe Government, wherein he
rather used the Power of an insolent and lawless Conqueror, than the Legal
Administration of a gracious King; whereby he was feared by many, but loved by
few; and such as were most in favor with him, were discountenanced upon every
slight occasion. These violent Proceedings, especially in raising such
intolerable Taxes, occasioned a Rebellion in Devonshire, and another in
Northumberland, the second Year of his Reign; but his good Fortune soon
suppressed them, as it also did the next Year the Invasion of Swanus King of
Denmark, who was incited thereto by the English that fled thither for Succor
from the Cruelty of King William; but he no sooner saw them almost, e're he
made them fly back to their Ships; and to revenge the Infidelity of the
English, he utterly destroyed their fruitful Lands about York and Durham, so
that the Ground lay waste nine years after, and abundance of People died with
Want and Famine. The next year he summoned a general Convocation of the Clergy,
wherein he bitterly accused several grave and learned Bishops, Abbots Priors,
and others, of many pretended Crimes and Offenses, for which he absolutely
deprived them of their Dignities and Estates, which he bestowed on others,
either for Love or Money.

These insufferable Acts provoked Marcarus and Edwin, the Earls of
Northumberland and Mercia, with Egilwyn Bishop of Durham, to raise an
Insurrection: But the King quickly drove Edwyn into Scotland: Marcarus was
taken and imprisoned in the Tower of London, where he long continued; and the
Bishop was inhumanely famished to death in Abington Abbey. At this time great
difference arose about the Primacy of the Archbishops of Canterbury and York;
but at last it was adjudged in favor of the first, and York submitted
accordingly. In his fifteenth year, his eldest Son Robert, by the instigation
of Philip the French King, rebelled against him in Normandy, which occasioned
his Father to go thither with an Army, where he was so stoutly encountered, that
he was unhorsed, and in great danger of his Life, by his Son, unknown; but he
hearing his Fathers Voice, rescued him again, and was after reconciled, and
received Pardon of his Father; and the King with great loss returned again to
England. Soon after William, to revenge diverse Injuries and Affronts offered
him by King Phi ip in Normandy, went with a gallant Army into France; where
finding Odo Earl of Kent, and Bishop of Bayeux, his Brother by the Mother, to
hold secret Correspondence with the French King, he complained thereof to the
Lords; whereupon Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury advised the King to commit
him to Prison: What, says the King, are you for committing a Clergyman? You
need not, said Lanfrank* commit the Bishop of Bayeux, but you may very justly
imprison the Earl of Kent: Which was done accordingly. Sometime before this,
Pope Hildebrand dying, a Magician told Odo, That he foresaw he should succeed
him; upon which Odo, having already swallowed the Papacy in thought, sent Money
(the most prevailing Messenger) to Rome beforehand, and purchased himself a
Palace there, providing likewise for his Journey thither; but King William, for
his Presumption, and other Misdemeanors, staid and committed him, saying,
Offensive foolhardiness must be restrained in time.

While the King was in Normandy he fell sick, and the French King hearing his
Distemper was in his Belly, scoffingly said, Our Cousin William is now in
Childbed; Ah, what a number of Candles must I offer at his going to Church?
Sure an hundred thousand will hardly be enough. King William hearing of this
Jest, said, Well, I hope our Cousin of France shall be at no such Cost; for
after this my Childbirth, at my going to Church, I will (says he, swearing by
the Resurrection and Brightness of God) find him a thousand Candles, and light
them all my self: Alluding to the Candles that Women used to carry in that Age,
when they went to be Churched. And soon after he performed his Word, destroying
the People, Towns, and Cities on the Frontiers of France, with Sword and Fire;
but in burning the City of Mantz he came so near the flames, that with the heat
of his Harness he got a Sickness, which being increased by the Leaping of his
Horse, burst the inner Rim of his Belly, he being very Corpulent; of which he
soon after died at Roan. Upon his Deathbed he said, I appoint no Successor to
the Kingdom of England, but I commend it to the Eternal God, whose I am, and in
whose Hands all things are. He much lamented his Severity and Cruelty to the
English Nation. He was buried in the Abbey of St. Stephen at Caen in Normandy,
though his Funerals were interrupted by a Norman Gentleman, who would not
permit him to be buried, till he had received Satisfaction for that Ground,
which the Conqueror had unjustly taken from him. Thus this victorious
Conqueror, whose Mind could not be confined to one Kingdom while he lived,
being dead, could hardly get a place to be buried in. The Charters and
Conveyances in his Reign were not so tedious as now adays, but very short and
plain, as appears by this following, transcribed out of an Authentic Record.

I William King, the third of my Reign, give to Norman Hunter, to me that art
both leif and dear, the Hop, and the Hopton, and all the Bounds up and down,
under the Earth to Hell, above the Earth to Heaven, from me and mine, to thee
and thine, as good and as fair, as ever they mine were. To witness that this is
sooth, I bite the white Wax with my Tooth: Before Jug, Maud, and Margery, and
my youngest Son Henry; For a Bow and a broad Arrow, when I come to hunt upon
Yarrow. He caused a Seal to be made for himself, whereon was engraven, By this
acknowledge William of Normandy to be your Patron: But on the other side thus,
By this Seal you must know, that the same is King of England. In this Kings
Reign lived Bevois, or Bevis, Earl of Southampton, who not being able to endure
the Oppression of the Normans, gathered all the scattered Fragments of
Englishmen whom desire of Liberty, and hatred of the Conqueror, had made
willing to join with him; associating to him likewise the Strength of the Danes
and Welsh, who met at Cardiff in Wales: But Success not depending upon Valor,
being unable to encounter such expert Soldiers as the Normans, their Forces
were routed, and Bevis fled to Carlisle, after which no credible Author relates
what became of him: Though the Monkish Writers have been very injurious to his
Memory, as well as of others, who by repeating incredible things concerning
them, have made Posterity think there was no Truth in any of their Actions. His
Place of Residence is said to be Dunton in Wiltshire; and his Sword was till of
late kept as a Relic in Arundel-Castle, not equalling in length that of King
Edward the Third at Westminster.

King William left behind him three Sons; Robert, to whom he gave his Duchy of
Normandy; William Rufus, and Henry, who both successively were Kings of
England; and one Daughter, named Adela. He was of an indifferent Stature,
strong Make, and comely Behavior; of a stern Countenance, undaunted Courage,
resolute in Action, and quick in Execution. He was discreet and Politic in
managing his Affairs and Business; yet it seems he perceived his own defect in
some Cases, for want of Learning; and did therefore often excite his Sons to
learn, with this Saying, That an Unlearned Prince is but a crowned Ass: Which
Speech made such a strong Impression upon his Son Henry, that by his Knowledge
and Learning he obtained the Name of Beauclark, or Fine Scholar. King William
feasted and hunted much, coveted all, oppressed the Conquered, and still kept
his dearest Friends in an awful regard of him. He reigned Twenty years and ten
months, and died in the Sixty fourth year of his Age, 1087.

WILLIAM the SECOND, SURNAMED RUFUS.
portrait of King William the 2nd

WHat my Triumphant Father won, I held,
I taxed and poll'd this Kingdom more than he,
Great Tributes from my People I compelled,
No Place in Church or Commonwealth was free:
But always those who most would give to me
Their Suit obtained, whether wrong or right;
The Clergy I compelled to agree
To sell Church-Plate and Chalices outright.
Until at last, by the Almighty's Power,
My Kingly Force and Strength was Weakness made,
And all my Glory perished in an Hour,
My Pomp and Greatness vanished like a Shade:
For hunting in New-Forest, void of Fear,
A Subject slew me, shooting at a Deer.
AT the Death of William the Conqueror, Robert his eldest Son, Duke of
Normandy, being in Germany, William the younger Brother hastened to London, in
the Company of Morcar and Wilnoth, Sons to King Harold, both released from
Imprisonment in Normandy; where soon after, by the procurement of Lanfrank
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bishop Wolstane, who were reverenced by the
People, and by bestowing many costly Gifts, he was soon after made King, though
most of the Prelates and States were for Robert. Soon after Robert, by the
incitement of Bishop Odo, came into England, landing at Southampton, to regain
his Right, with a gallant Army of Normans, and many French, whom King Philip of
France had sent to his Aid; with whom joined several of the English: But
William, by his fair Pretenses and Promises to repeal the severe Laws and Taxes
in his Fathers Reign, prevailed with the People to appear for him; with whose
assistance he regained diverse strong Forts and Castles which were seized by the
Nobility for the Service of Robert; and, among others, he besieged
Rochester-Castle, wherein was Odo; to the gaining whereof, he sent out Orders,
That all should repair to his Assistance, under the Penalty of being accounted
a Niding, or Coward; whereby the People came in such Numbers, that the Castle
was soon surrendered, Odo banished, and his Estate forfeited. And afterward
Robert, out of his peaceable Inclination, and to prevent the effusion of Blood,
accepts of William's Proposals, whereby he was to hold the Crown during his
Life, paying to Robert Three thousand Marks a year; and that if he survived, he
should succeed William in England: and so peaceably returns back to Normandy.

King William having now more surely fixed himself in his Possession of the
Kingdom, began presently to follow his Fathers Example, endeavoring to humble
the innate Courage of the English by heavy Oppressions and Impositions, and
taking it for a Maxim, That Riches heightened, but Poverty debased the Spirits
of Men; he laid severe Taxes upon the People, which were levied with all kind
of despite and cruelty by his ravenous Officers. This caused much discontent,
of which Malcolm King of Scots taking the advantage, and being affronted at the
English Court, he invaded the North Parts with a great Army, killing, burning,
and destroying all before him, till at last he sat down before a strong Castle
in Northumberland, valiantly defended by Robert Mowbray the Earl thereof, who
at last pretending to surrender it, and coming out of his Castle-gate well
mounted, with the Keys thereof fastened to his Lance, in stead of delivering
them, in making low Obeisance to the King in token of Submission, clapping
Spurs to his Horse, he suddenly ran upon the King, and with his Lance pierced
him into the Eye, whereof he immediately died: After which, by the swiftness of
his Horse he made his Escape, leaving the amazed Scots to lament their
irreparable Loss, who returned back to Scotland with their breath'ess King.

Now Robert Duke of Normandy complaining of the Kings breach of Promise,
designed to transport an Army to England, having again Assistance from the
French. But William resolving to make an Offensive War abroad, raised Forces
here, with intent to invade^ Normandy, to the number of Twenty thousand, who
being ready to imbarque, he proposed, That whoever would give him 10 s. should
be excused from going to Normandy; which many willingly did, whereby he raised
a considerable Sum, part of which being privately sent to the French King, made
him forsake his Ally; so that Robert standing alone, was soon persuaded to come
to an Agreement.

After which, they both join their Forces against their youngest Brother Henry;
who having notice thereof, fortified himself in the strong Castle of Mount St.
Michael in Normandy, which they besieged, wherein William was in great danger;
for some of the Besieged sallying out, the King rode against them, and was
encountered by a Knight, who killed his Horse under him, and would have killed
him too had he not known him by his Voice: Whereupon, the Soldiers with great
respect mounted him on another Horse, and he asking furiously who it was
overthrew him, the Knight stoutly replied, It was he. By St. Luke 's Face,
says the King, thou art a brave Fellow, and shall be enrolled my Knight, with
a Maintenance suitable to thy great Valor. The Siege continuing long, Henry
was much distressed for Water, desiring the Favor of Robert not to deny him
what Heaven had made common to all: Upon which Robert ordered him to be
supplied; whereat William being enraged, What, says Robert, do thou more
value a little Water, which is to be found every where, than the Life of a
Brother, having only my self and him? In a short time Peace was made, and all
the Brethren were reconciled: After which, Duke Robert resolving to go to
Jerusalem, accompanied with several other Christian Princes, he mortgaged his
Dukedom to the King for Six thousand six hundred sixty six Pound; to raise
which Sum, King William laid heavy Taxes upon his Subjects; neither were
Churches and Monasteries Privileges, he forcing the Clergy to bring in vast
Sums.

Upon the Kings return to England the Welsh rebel, and secure themselves so
strongly in their Marshes and thick Woods, that the Army wherewith ^he marched
against them could not prevail to suppress them. At the same time Robert
Mowbray E. of Northumberland, judging himself not sufficiently rewarded for his
Service against Malcolm King of Scots, raised a Rebellion; against whom William
marched with great fury, and as soon as he met with his revolted Subjects, he
quickly put them to flight; and for terror to others, he cut off the Ears,
Hands, Noses, Feet, of several of the Prisoners, putting out the Eyes of
others; and Mowbray being taken was sent Prisoner to Windsor-Castle.

King William still continued his Exactions upon the People, selling all
Offices in Church and State for ready Money, and keeping many Bishoprics and
Abbeys vacant a long time, that he might receive the Revenues thereof, saying,
That Christ's Bread (meaning Church Lands) is sweet, dainty, and most delicate
Food for Kings. These things were sharply reprehended by Anselm Archbishop of
Canterbury; but finding no Redress, he appealed to Pope Urban the Third, which
the King prohibited him to do: The Custom, says he, from my Fathers time has
been, That no Person in England should appeal to the Pope, without the King's
License: He that violateth the Customs of the Realm, violateth the Crown and
Power of the Kingdom; and he that violateth and takes away the Crown, is a
Traitor and an Enemy against me. Yet the Bishop, upon pretense of Conscience,
and Obedience to St. Peter's Successors in Spiritual Matters, was resolved to
go, and went accordingly, though the King would not suffer him to carry any
thing with him, ordering all his Goods to be seized as he was traveling to
embarque himself.

King William, while he was at Dinner in New-Forest, had Advice sent him, That
the French King had besieged the City of Constantia in Normandy, and that it
was in great danger to be lost: Whereupon he swore (his usual Oath) by St.
Luke's Face, That he would not turn his Back till he had relieved them; and
thereupon commanded the Wall of the House wherein he was to be pulled down, and
leaving his Sports, bidding his Nobles follow him, he posted with great
expedition to the Sea, without any Preparations for such a Voyage; and finding
a Ship, it happened to be a very great Tempest; yet he commanded the Mariners to
set Sail immediately, which they dissuaded him from, as a thing extremely
desperate; but the King replied, Hoise up your Sails in God's Name, for I never
yet heard of a King that was drowned in a Tempest; you shall see, both the
Winds and Waves will be favorable to us: Which happened accordingly; and
arriving unexpectedly, the French were so extremely surprised, that they
presently raised the Siege, and departed. Such was the Courage and Resolution
of this fortunate Prince; which further appears by this Instance: Being
suddenly set upon by three armed Soldiers, who had just before unhorsed him, he
defended himself with his Saddle, in stead of a Buckler, in one Hand, and his
Sword in the other, till his own Men came to his Relief, who blamed him for
taking too much care to save his Saddle: By St. Luke, said he, I had rather
have lost my Life, than left my Saddle to the scorn of the Enemy. Another
Instance is, That in the late Surprise of the French before Constans, he took
Helias Earl of Flescia their Commander in Chief Prisoner, who when he saw
himself captivated, imputed this his Misfortune to the unlooked-for Arrival of
the King, threatening great matters if he were again at liberty: Whereupon the
King commanded him to be immediately set at liberty, and bid him do the utmost
he was able.

In the second year of his Reign a great Earthquake happened; and in his fourth
year, a very terrible Lightning, which left an intolerable Stink behind, and
burnt the Steeple of the Abbey of Winchester, rending the Rafters on the Roof,
and throwing down the Image of the Virgin Mary and a Crucifix, breaking one of
the Legs thereof. In his thirteenth year several other Prodigies happened, which
were judged Forerunners of his Death. In the Morning before he was slain, he
told his Attendants, That he dreamed the last Night, an extreme cold Wind
passed through his Sides. Whereupon some persuaded him not to hunt that day; but
he resolving on the contrary, answered, They are no good Christians that regard
Dreams. That very day, while he was hunting in New-Forest aforementioned, he
was slain with an Arrow, which being shot at a Deer, unfortunately glanced upon
him, and struck him dead.

Thus ended the Troublesome though Victorious Reign of William Rufus, so called
from his ruddy Complexion. He was the third Son of William the Conqueror. He
was of a wanton disposition, very much delighting himself among his Concubines,
and died without any Legitimate Issue. He was comely, strong, active, and
healthy of Body, of an high Courage and Constancy, not shaken with any Frowns
of Fortune; and withal very covetous: so that what with the Pestilence, and his
great Exactions, the Ground lay untilled, from whence proceeded great Famine
and Scarcity through England. Thus he lived; and after he had reigned Thirteen
years and ten months, thus he died, in 1100. getting much, and suddenly leaving
all.

HENRY the FIRST, SURNAMED BEAVCLARKE.
portrait of King Henry the 1st

MY Father and my Brother, Kings both, gone,
With joyful Acclamations I was Crowned;
And having gained the Scepter and the Throne,
I with the Name of Beauclark was renowned.
The English Laws, long lost, I did restore;
I made false Weights and Measures to hold true;
The Power and Strength of Wales I triumphed over,
And Normandy my Valor did subdue.
Yet I, unmindful whence these Glories grew,
My eldest Brother Robert did surprise,
Detained him, and usurped his Royal Due,
And most unnaturally plucked out his Eyes.
Kings live like Gods, but yet like Men they die,
All must pay Natures Debt; and so did I.
AT the Death of William Rufus, Robert Duke of Normandy, the elder Brother, was
fighting victoriously (with several other Christian Princes) against the
Infidels, in the Holy Land, being fortunate in all his Proceedings, save only
in his Succession to the Crown; for his Success was so great there, that he was
freely, offered to be made King of Jerusalem, which he as generously refused.
By reason of his Absence, his youngest Brother Henry, without the least trouble
or difficulty, ascended the English Throne, with the universal Approbation of
the Nobility and Commons, whose Inclinations were the stronger toward him,
because he was born in England after his Father was Crowned King, and from the
great Opinion they had of his singular Virtues, Learning, and good Temper. Yet
before his Coronation, the Nobles obliged him to swear, That he would ease the
People of the great Taxes, and many other Pressures under which they suffered;
which he accordingly performed.

After he was Crowned, for the better ensuring his Estate and Title against the
Claim of his Brother Robert, he freely distributed the great Treasures left by
King William, among those who upon all Occasions he judged would stand by his
Interest. He dignified the Wealthy with high Offices and Titles of Honor: He
abated the Rigor of the New Laws, and promised restitution of their old
Privileges: He regulated Weights and Measures, bringing them all to one
Standard: He freed the People from the heavy Tribute of Danegilt, and from all
other unjust Taxes and Payments imposed by the former Kings: He gave liberty to
the Nobility and Gentry to enclose Parks and Chases, with Game, for their
Recreation: He banished from his Court all Flatterers, as Traitors to his State
and Government; and all Luxury, Sumptuousness in Apparel, and Superfluity in
Diet, he utterly discountenanced: He ordained, That Thieves and Highway
Robbers should be punished with Death: With all manner of diligence and
Application he endeavored to reform the monstrous Pride, intolerable
Covetousness, and extreme Sloth and Negligence of the Clergy: He recalled
Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury from Banishment, and restored him to his
Bishopric, giving him full Power to call Convocations and Synods at his
Pleasure, for regulating the intolerable Abuses of the Church; yet leaving to
the Pope his Authority to invest Bishops, by giving them the Ring, the Pall,
and the Pastoral Staff. All such Ecclesiastical Dignities and Revenues which
his Brother, by the lewd Advice of Reynulph Bishop of Durham, had seized into
his Hands, he freely conferred upon Grave and Learned Persons, and committed
Reynulph Prisoner to the Tower of London, from whence he afterward escaped, and
earnestly invited Duke Robert, who was now returned with great Honor from the
Holy Land, to recover the Kingdom with his Sword; who thereupon raised a great
Army, with a Design to transport them to England.

In the mean time Henry having by his Proceedings endeared himself to his
People, confirmed them now further, by marrying Maud Sister of Edgar King of
Scots, and Daughter of Malcolm by Margaret his Wife, Sister to Edgar Atheling,
and Daughter to King Edward, the Son of Edmund Ironside, the victorious and
valiant King of the Saxons. Soon after Duke Robert arrived with his Army at
Portsmouth, many English joining with him, and great Expectations and Fears
arose of a bloody War; but by the discreet Mediation of Friends to both Sides,
a loving Agreement was concluded, upon almost the same Conditions as with
William Rufus, namely, That Henry should enjoy the Crown during Life, paying to
Robert Three thousand Marks a year: Whereupon Robert returned back, to the
great discontent of his own Nobility. Afterward Robert returned again to
England, to congratulate his Brothers good Fortune, where he was Royally
entertained, and at the Request of his Sister Queen Maud, he forgave the
Payment of the Three thousand Marks a year. Yet after a while the Ambition of
Dominion caused Henry, upon some slight occasion, to quarrel with his Brother;
which proceeded so far, that he went over to Normandy with an Army; where being
assisted by many of the Duke's discontented Nobility and Gentry, he so
prevailed against Robert, that he took the Cities of Roan, Ca^n, and Valois
from him; who being forsaken of all, fled from one Place to another to secure
himself.

King Henry returning victoriously into England, and Robert perceiving that his
Lords and People had utterly forsaken him, and refused their Assistance, and
Henry's Strength and Riches increasing, he came privately into England, and
presented himself to his Brother, referring himself and all his Concerns to his
own Determination: But the King, either knowing the Inconstancy of the Duke, or
being prepossessed by some Whisperers that he did not intend uprightly, turned
from his distressed Brother with a scornful and disdainful Countenance,
refusing to accept of this his humble Submission. The Duke being struck to the
Heart, returns back to his own Country, resolving to die like a Man in the
Field; but Henry soon routed his weak Forces, and brought him Prisoner into
England, committing him to Cardiff Castle in Wales, where endeavoring his
Liberty, his Eyes by Henry's Command were put out; after which, he lived
miserably Twenty years, and was buried at Gloucester.

About this time Robert Belasme Earl of Shrewsbury raised a Rebellion; but
being soon vanquished, he fled into Normandy, where finding William of
Mortaigne and Cornwall, who was offended with the King for keeping from him the
Earldom of Kent, he soon persuaded him to raise another Insurrection; and
joining their Forces, they designed great matters, but were presently routed by
the King's Forces, and kept Prisoners during their Lives.

The King being now freed from fear of Enemies, resolved to take the same
Advantages his Predecessors had done, as to the Investiture of Bishops, and
taking vacant Bishoprics into his Hands; whereat Anselm Archbishop of
Canterbury was so displeased, that he refused to Consecrate such new Bishops as
had received their Investitures from the King: But Girald Archbishop of York
freely performed it upon the King's Command. Hereupon Anselm went to complain
at Rome, and prevailed at last against the King by a Synod of the Clergy held
at London. Three years after Anselm died, and King Henry seized the Revenues of
his Bishopric into his Hands, which he kept five years; and if at any time he
were entreated by the Bishops to bestow it, he still answered, That he only
kept it for an able and sufficient Man.

Having enjoyed a few years of Peace, he was again rowsed out of it by Lewis
the French King, who joining with Fulk Earl of Anjou, and Baldwyn Earl of
Flanders, they all made great Preparations for Invading the Duchy of Normandy:
But Henry raising an Army of valiant Commanders and Soldiers, landed there, and
soon engaged with them in Battle, which continued nine hours, with so great
fury on each side, that though King Henry won the Field, and chased his flying
Enemies a long way, yet he would often say, That he then fought not for
Victory, but Life. Quickly after a Reconciliation was made between these four
Princes, and William, King Henry's eldest Son, was married to the Earl of
Anjou's Daughter: But in their Voyage hither, the two young Princes, two more
of the King's Children, and his Niece Lucy, with her Husband the Earl of
Chester, with near one hundred and fourscore others, were unfortunately drowned
by the carelessness of the drunken Mariners; at which the King was wonderfully
dismayed. The Welsh soon after rebelled, raising all the Power they could make;
which yet the King in a little time, and with small Loss, overthrew, suffering
his Soldiers to glut their Swords in the Blood of those Rebels, whom neither
gentle Usage, nor former Severity, could oblige to Loyalty.

The King returning from Wales with Honor, soon after sent his Daughter Maud
to be married to Henry the Fifth, Emperor of Germany, her contracted Husband,
with a Princely Portion of Silver and Gold. At the same time he erected the
High Court of Parliament, appointing it to consist of Three Estates, of which
himself was the Head; so that the Laws being made by the Consent of all, should
not be disliked of any. In his Twenty seventh year Henry the Emperor died
without any Issue by Maud, who being at that time Twenty four years old, was
courted by the greatest Princes in the Christian World: But the King, to
strengthen his Kingdom against the French, married her to Jeffry Plantaginet,
Son and Heir to Fulk Earl of Anjou, by whom she had three Sons, Henry, (who was
King after Stephen) Jeffry, and William, which gave much content to the King,
to think that his Race should succeed in the Crown; and the more to secure it,
he obliged his Nobility, and the Great Officers of the Kingdom, to take no less
than three solemn Oaths in five years time, That with their best Advice, and
the hazard of their Lives and Estates, they would support and defend the
Succession of his Daughter, and her Heirs.

It was a Custom in his time, that all Bills and Orders which concerned the
Servitors of the Court should be signed without a Fee: Now it happened that
Thurstan the Steward complained to the King against Adam of Yarmouth Clerk of
the Signet, for refusing to sign a Bill without a Fee. The King heard Thurstan
first, commending that old Custom, and reproving the Clerk for Exaction. The
Clerk answered, I received the Bill, and desired your Steward only to bestow
on me two Spiced Cakes, made for your own Mouth; which he refusing, I denied to
sign his Bill. The King then reprehending the Steward, commanded Adam to sit
down on the Bench, and then ordered the Steward to put off his Cloak, and to
fetch in a clean Napkin two of the best Spiced Cakes for the King's Mouth, and
humbly to present them to Adam; which being done, Adam signed the Bill, and the
King made them Friends, adding, That Officers of the Court ought to be kind to
Strangers, if they wanted their Assistance; and much more to gratify one
another.

Queen Maud his Wife was so devout, that she would go to Church barefoot, and
was still employed in Works of Charity; insomuch that David King of Scotland
her Brother coming to visit her, found her in her Privy Chamber, with a Towel
about her Middle, washing, wiping, and kissing Poor Men's Feet: which he
disliking, said, Sure if your Husband knew this, you should never kiss his
Lips. She replied, That the Feet of the King of Heaven were to be preferred
before the Lips of any King on Earth.

King Henry had a Pottle of Wine every Night set in his Chamber; but because he
seldom used to drink* his Chamberlain and Pages were wont to carowse it among
them. One time about Midnight the King called for Wine, whereat the Chamberlain
and Pages were much troubled, because they had left none: At length Pain being
called in, humbly confessed the matter, begging pardon. What, says the King,
have you but one Pottle a Night? That is too little for me and you; For the
future I will allow two; one for my self, and another for you and your Fellows.
For this Act the King was commended for Bounty and Clemency.

When King Henry had reigned Thirty five years and four Months, he surfeited by
eating of Lampreys, and died in the Sixty fifth year of his Age, 1135. and was
buried at Reading in Berkshire. He was Wise, Learned, and Valiant; yet more
inclined to Peace than War. He never levied but two Taxes on his People, one
for his Wars in France, and another for marrying his Daughter Maud the Empress.
He grew rich of his own, and was liberal. He made good Laws, which were
profitable to the Virtuous, but sharp against Malefactors, using more Severity
than Mercy; from whence he was accounted cruel by the Common People, but styled
the Lion of Justice by the Learned. He was gentle and grateful to his Friends,
rough to his Enemies, but easily reconciled: Yet was he too lascivious in his
Life, having many Concubines, by whom he had twelve Bastards, whom he owned. He
left no Legitimate Sons behind; and therefore in this King ended the Issue-Male
of William the Conqueror, and the Crown was devolved to his general Heirs.

KING STEPHEN.
portrait of King Stephen

BY wrested Titles, and usurping Claim,
Through Storms and Tempests of tumultuous Wars,
The Crown and Scepter, which were still my Aim,
I won, and wore, encompassed round with Jars.
The English, Normans, Scots, did all prepare
Their utmost Forces to oppose my Power;
Whilst England was oppressed with Woe and Fear:
And War, the Sword, and Want, do all devour.
But as Years, Months, Weeks, Days, do hourly waste,
And vanish all away, ^as things of naught;
My troublous Royalty decayed at last,
And unto naught was my Ambition brought.
This is the State of Transitory things,
Befalling meanest Men, and greatest Kings.
THe Experience of all Ages does inform us, That for the eager desire of Honor
and Riches, Men have broken all Bonds of Honesty and Friendship; but if a
Kingdom may be obtained, though with the breach of the most solemn Oaths and
Obligations, there is no scruple made of it, and Men will venture upon Perjury
and Damnation for gaining thereof; which was too truly verified at this time:
For though Stephen Earl of Bulloign, Son and Heir of Stephen Earl of Blois by
Adela the Conquerour's Daughter, was a Person whom King Henry had chiefly
obliged by many Solemn and Public Oaths, to further the Succession of his
Daughter Maud and her Children, yet after his Death, finding that all the
Nobility, who were equally sworn as himself, applied themselves to him, and
awaited his Commands, he either forgot or disregarded all his former Vows, and
caused himself to be Crowned King, partly by the procurement of his Brother
Henry Bishop of Winchester, but chiefly by means of Hugh Bigot, who took his
Oath that King Henry upon his Deathbed appointed Stephen to be his Successor,
having disinherited his Daughter Maud upon some disgust taken against her; the
Prelates swearing to obey him as their King, so long as he did preserve the
Privileges of the Church; and the Nobles swearing Allegiance to him, so long as
he kept his Covenants with them, and preserved their Rights; whereby he
acknowledged his Right to the Crown to proceed from their Election.

To confirm himself in his Dignity, he proceeded by the same Method as Henry,
bestowing his Uncles Treasure freely upon such as either by Arms or Counsel
might be useful to him. He created several Noblemen: He released the People of
all extravagant Payments, causing a large Charter to be drawn up for mitigating
the Severity of diverse Laws, and bound himself by a solemn Oath to observe the
same. He granted to the Church and Clergy as great Immunities as they could
demand, and fully exempted them from the Power of the Temporal Magistrate for
all Offenses whatsoever, without the Bishops License. And to prevent
Rebellions, he erected many Castles, Forts, and Bulwarks in diverse Parts of the
Land, and gave leave to the Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy to do the like, He
gave David King of Scots, and Uncle to Maud the Empress, because he should not
assist her, the whole County of Cumberland, and created his Son Henry Earl of
Huntington: Notwithstanding which, David soon after ravaged the Northern Parts
with Fire and Sword in her Quarrel; but being encountered by Thurstan Archbishop
of York, he was overthrown, and hardly made his Escape into Scotland, leaving
above Ten thousand of his Army dead behind him; which Victory was judged to be
chiefly occasioned by the Courage and Policy of Thurstan, who before the Battle
openly proclaimed, That whoever fell therein, should have full Pardon of all
his Sins, and certainly enter into Heaven; which much spirited the English.

In his sixth year Maud the Empress landed at Arundel in Sussex, with only an
hundred and forty Men, and was quickly enforced with the English who joined
with her, and her base Brother Robert Earl of Gloucester, and Reynulph Earl of
Chester, with a stout Party of Welchmen. Stephen made all expedition to meet
her, and a bloody Fight began, with equal Success, till at length King
Stephen's Soldiers left their King almost alone, who with his Battel-ax drove
back whole Troops of his Enemies, and afterward renewed his Assaults, till his
Sword flew in pieces; when being now disarmed, he was taken and carried to
Bristow-Castle, where he continued about three Months, and was at last set at
liberty in exchange for the Earl of Gloucester, who was taken Prisoner by King
Stephen's Queen. This Earl Robert was one of the most valiant Men of that Age;
he had one Stephen Beauchamp to his Servant, whom he made his only Favorite,
to the great dislike of all the rest of his Followers: And being one time very
much endangered in a Battle, he called to some of his Company for help; but one
bitterly replied, Call to your Stephen now to help you. Pardon me, pardon me,
said the Earl: In matters of Love and Wenching I make use of my Stephen; but in
Martial Affairs I wholly depend upon your Courage and Valor,

After this Victory Maud the Empress was triumphantly received into Circeter,
Oxford, Winchester, and London; but refusing to ratify King Edward's Laws, and
remit some severe ones, which she harshly denied, the Londoners contrived to
seize her; which she having notice of, fled suddenly to Oxford, where Stephen
presently close besieged her; who despairing of holding it, she and her
Followers escaped by clothing themselves in white Linen in a great Snow, and so
passed unknown to the Sea, and got away. The Empress being once in the Castle
of the Devizes, was there in great hazard likewise; whereupon she caused her
self to be put into a Coffin, as though dead, and bound fast with Cords, and
so, like a dead Corpse, she was carried in a Horse-litter to Gloucester; and soon
after being weary of these continual Troubles, she went into Normandy. King
Stephen presently seized all the Castles which were kept by the Barons against
him; to gain which the sooner, it is related he used this Course: Having taken
the Bishop of Salisbury, he put a Rope about his Neck, and so led him to the
Castle of the Devizes, held by his Followers, threatening to hang their Bishop
and Master, if they did not immediately surrender. The like he did by Alexander
Bishop of Lincoln, who held another Castle upon Trent, which was thereupon
delivered, and the King seized all the Treasure and Goods to his own use.

These Troubles being over, the Kingdom for some years enjoyed Peace; but Henry
called Shortman^le, eldest Son to Maud by Jeffry Plantagenet, married Eleanor
the Daughter and Heir of the Earl of Poictou, who had lately been divorced from
Lewis the Seventh, King of France, after she had brought him two Daughters: So
that Henry was now Duke of Normandy in the Right of his Mother, Earl of Anjou
by Descent from his Father, and Earl of Poictou in Right of his Wife, by whom a
while after he had likewise the Earldom of Toulouse. Prince Henry, by the
invitation of several of the English Nobility, and others, was much encouraged
to come into England and recover his Right, especially since Stephen, and
Eustace his only Son, did now endeavor to take in the Castles of several
Nobles whom they judged to be for Henry's Interest; who accordingly landed with
a considerable Army. King Stephen likewise gathered a very equal Strength to
encounter him. Both Armies lay near each other, and some went between them
every day. In the mean time Eustace the King's Son by mischance was drowned,
though others write, That being in a rage, he set fire to some Cornfieldsd
belonging to the Abbey of Bury, because the Monks denied him Money; and
afterward sitting down to Dinner, at the first Morsel of Bread he put into his
Mouth, he fell into a Fit of Madness, of which he died.

The King, though extremely grieved for the Death of his Son, yet began to
hearken to Terms of Peace; and at length he adopted Prince Henry to his Son,
proclaimed him Heir Apparent to the Crown, the Nobles doing Homage to him at
Oxford, and gave him many Gifts, assuring him of his Friendship. By this
Agreement Arms were laid aside, and Peace succeeded, the Prince with his
Followers returning into Normandy, where they were joyfully received. But King
Stephen being afflicted with the Iliack Passion, and with his old Distemper the
Hemorrhoids, died the next year at Dover, 1154. and was buried at Feversham in
Kent, though his Body was afterward thrown into the River, for covetousness of
the Lead wherein it was wrapped, having reigned Eighteen years and ten months:
And by the Succession of Henry, the Saxon Blood was again restored to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm.

HENRY the SECOND, King of England, Duke of Normandy, Guyen, and Aquitain, Lord
of Ireland.
portrait of King Henry the 2nd

TO the Empress Maud I was undoubted Heir,
And in her Right, my Title being just,
By Justice I obtained the Regal Chair.
Fair Rosamond I did debauch with Lust,
For which, Heavens Justice, hating Deeds unjust,
Stirred up my Wife and Sons to be my Foes,
Who strove to lay my Glory in the Dust,
And compassed me with cruel Wars, and Woes;
They poisoned my sweet, beauteous, tainted Rose,
By the Contrivance of my furious Queen;
My Children their own Father did oppose:
Such Fruit has Lust; such Malice, jealous Spleen.
Crosses and Troubles made me curse my Birth;
In them I lived, reigned, and was turned to Earth.
PRince Henry was in Normandy, besieging a Castle injuriously seized by the
French King, when the News of the Death of King Stephen arrived; whereupon his
Friends and Followers earnestly persuaded him to raise the Siege, and expedite
his Voyage into England, to prevent any Usurpation which might be designed: To
which Henry discreetly and courageously replied, The Kingdom of England shall
henceforth be at my command, in despite of all that dare oppose me; and so I
will make these intruding Frenchmen understand before I go from hence. This
Resolution gained him Honor among his Friends, and Terror to his Enemies, who
understanding his Determination, and fearing the worst, quietly surrendered the
Castle, and submitted to Mercy, which he graciously granted, and then settling
his Affairs there, attended with many Lords and Gentlemen of Quality, he
arrived in England, where he was soon after Crowned King, and then employed
himself in settling the Kingdom, by making good Laws, banishing Strangers, who
in Multitudes resorted hither, and by their sparing Diet, and extraordinary
Industry, enriched themselves, and beggared the Natives. He likewise exiled
many of the Nobility, who contrary to their Oaths adhered strongly to King
Stephen, judging them faithless, and unuseful to him. He caused all the Forts
and Castles built by the order or permission of his Predecessor, to be
demolished, as giving occasion of Insurrections upon the least Discontent. He
resumed into his Hands all Lands belonging to the Crown, as also the Counties
of Cumberland, Northumberland, and Huntington, which had been given to David
King of Scots by Stephen, to hinder them from disturbing him in his Usurpation.
He chose himself a Council out of the gravest and wisest Nobility, and
restrained the Insolences of some Grandees, which raised Discontents among
them, and Hugh Lord Mortimer raised Forces at Bridgenorth in Wales, against
whom the King went in Person, where he had been shot with an Arrow, had not
Hubert de Clare interposed, and received it into his own Body.

In his thirteenth year he married Jeffry his younger Son to Constance the
Daughter and Heir Apparent of the Duke of Britain; his Son Richard, to Adela
Daughter of Lewis King of France; and his Daughter Maud, to Henry Duke of
Saxony: about which time his Mother Maud the Empress died. Having quieted the
Rebels at home, he went into Normandy, where he did Homage to Lewis for his
French Provinces, Normandy, Anjou, Aquitain, Main, and Lorrain, some of them
his own by Inheritance, and others by his Wife Queen Eleanor, and then made an
Agreement between himself and his Brother Jeffry. In his nineteenth year he
sailed into Ireland with a mighty Army, and fought victoriously against five
Kings, who at that time reigned there, and at last conquered them all, and
became sole Lord of that Country, which he annexed to the Crown of England.
After his return, both out of fondness, and for securing the Succession, he
caused his eldest Son Henry, and his Wife Margaret, Daughter of the French
King, to be solemnly Crowned in his presence, at two several times, in the last
of which, he for that day degraded himself from being King, by waiting as a
Servant upon his Son, while he sat at Table: which young Henry did little
regard, boasting, That his Father did not hereby dishonor himself, since he
was only the Son of an Empress, whereas himself was Son both of a King and
Queen: Which proud Speech the unfortunate Father hearing, said privately to the
Archbishop then present, I repent, I repent me of nothing more than untimely
Advancements.

In his latter days many Quarrels happened between him and Lewis of France, in
all which, Henry, Jeffry, and John, his own Sons, Robert Earl of Leicester,
Hugh Earl of Chester, most unnaturally joined with the French against him, and
likewise William King of Scots; notwithstanding which, the Courage of King
Henry prevailed against them all, and upon submission he pardoned his Sons and
all the rest: Yet were they justly punished by Heaven, Henry dying before his
Father, in the flower of his Age; and John, after King, was poisoned by a Monk.
The History of this Kings Reign declares him to be Learned, Wise, Just, and
Valiant; and though he were concerned in many great Affairs, and Wars both in
France, Normandy, Anjou, Ireland, and other Places, and never received any
extraordinary Tax or Subsidy from his Subjects, yet he left to his Successor
above Nine hundred thousand Pound in Money, besides Jewels, rich Housholdstuff,
and all manner of Warlike Provisions. And though in most Transactions he was
prosperous and successful, yet in three things he was very unhappy. First, In
the unnatural Disobedience and Rebellions of his own Sons. Secondly, In his
inordinate Love to Rosamond, his endeared Concubine, who was admirably fair,
but exceeding wanton, and thereby wholly alienated his Affections from Eleanor
his renowned Queen, and enslaved himself to her Will and Pleasure; so that
while she lived, she was seldom from his Right Hand; and after her Death (which
Eleanor procured by Poison) he caused her with great Pomp to be solemnly buried
at Godstow near Oxford, fixing this Epitaph on her Tomb: Hic jacet in Tumba,
Rosa Mundi, non Rosa Munda;
Non redolet sed olet, quae redolere solet.
Within this Tomb lies the Worlds fairest Rose;
Though once most sweet, she will now offend your Nose.


The third Infelicity of his Reign, was the great Dissension between him and
Thomas Becket, the proud and insolent Archbishop of Canterbury, which continued
full seven years, with all manner of asperity and fierceness: For Theobald
Archbishop of Canterbury had so great a favor for Thomas Becket, a Londoner,
of mean Parentage, that he made him Archdeacon of his own Church, and still
advancing him, at last, by the Power he had with the King, made him Lord
Chancellor of England; which so pufft up Becket, that he grew extreme haughty,
yet still showed great Respect to the King, who thereupon constantly increased
his Lands and Revenues, which daily heightened him more. Theobald dying, the
King preferred Becket to be Archbishop; after which he began to discover his
ungrateful Humor: For going privately to Rome, he was there invested in his
Bishopric by the Pope, of whom he received the Pall, and was made Legate; and
then returning into England, he was much discountenanced by the King: but
Becket slighting it, on a sudden surrendered his Chancellorship and Great Seal;
of which the King desiring a Reason, he obstinately refused to give any. These
Quarrels encouraged the debauched part of the Clergy to commit many Insolences
and Villainies, for which they received small Punishment, though their Crimes
were Murder, Theft, and Robbery; for not being under the Jurisdiction of the
Civil Magistrate, but tried by those of their own Profession, their greatest
Offenses were connived at, or very slightly examined, whereby many grievous
Enormities happened in the Kingdom.

Whereupon the King summoned a Parliament wherein that Law of King Stephen,
exempting the Clergy from the Authority of the Temporal Judge, for any Crime
whatsoever, was repealed, and the ancient Laws again revived and enforced. This
was very much opposed by Becket, and some few Bishops more of his Faction; but
after several Conferences, these Laws were confirmed, and subscribed by all the
Bishops but Becket, who would by no means assent thereto, without inserting
this Clause, Salvo Ordine suo, Saving the Order of the Clergy, which would have
utterly invalidated all those Laws. At which the King being enraged, by the
persuasion of the other Bishops, who dreaded the Consequence, Becket took a
solemn Oath to allow of those Laws; whereat the King turned his Fury into
Kindness toward Becket, and immediately caused an Indenture to be drawn betwixt
himself and the two Archbishops, testifying their Submission to this Oath,
which was subscribed by the King, and the Archbishop of York; but Becket again
relapsing into his former Obstinacy, not only refused it, but expressed much
sorrow for his former Oath, and desired to be absolved there from by the Pope,
which was done accordingly, some private Penance only being enjoined him, who
required him not to yield, but to persist constantly in his opinion. Upon which
the King being again incensed against Becket, seises all his Estate and
Promotions into his Hands, and required an Account of 30000 Marks which he had
received when Chancellor; but Becket boldly affirmed. That the King had given
it him freely, and therefore he would give no Account thereof.

Then Becket went again privately to Rome, without License; and the King being
sensible that his Des gn was to incense the Pope against him sent his
Ambassadors with Letters to Rome, declaring how reasona^le his Demands were,
and the extraordinary Perverseness of Becket, desiring the Pope he might be
deprived of his Dignities, and promising to provide for him some other way: But
the Pope not only denied his Request, but in thundering Terms threatened to send
two Legates into England, who should curse the King and Kingdom, unless Becket
were presently restored to his Honors and Estate; and in the mean time the
Pope recommended Becket to be entertained as a Monk in the Abbey of Po^tiniack
in France. The King observing how Matters went, grew more exasperated, and sent
to the Abbot to turn Becket out of his House, and threatened upon refusal not to
leave one Monk of his Order in France. He also published certain Injunctions
against the Pope, and all Cardinals or Legates who should presume to enter into
his Kingdom without his License. He then deprived all Becket's Friends and
Favorers of their Dignities and Estates, banishing them out of the Kingdom, as
Abettors and Encouragers of Becket in his Obstinacy against the King.

These Proceedings, and especially his being turned out of the Abbey for fear of
the Kings Anger, much troubled Becket; yet then Lewis of France, though young
King Henry had married his Daughter, cherisht and entertained him: But the King
being tired with these Turmoils, goes privately into France, and in the
presence of the French King confers with Becket, offering him, That if he would
now take the Oath, and subscribe the Instrument, he should return into England,
and be restored to his Favor and Dignities, with all his Friends. But he
proudly answered, That if the King would let him swear and subscribe with this
Exception, Salvo Honor Dei, Saving the Honor of God, he would then consent.
This angered the King more than ever, as intimating, That those Laws were
dishonorable to Almighty God, and therefore he would obey no farther than he
pleased; but Becket undauntedly persisted, alleging, That he feared none but
God; and since those Laws did derogate from ancient Customs and Privileges of
the Church, and robbed God of his Honor, the King should never establish them
by his Consent as long as he lived.

The King thus disappointed, soon after two Legates came from Rome to curse him
and the Realm: Whereupon he again goes to Becket into Normandy, but finds him
the very same Man; and therefore he being willing to be quiet, consented that
Becket should return into England, which he did accordingly; but the King being
much discontented, was heard repiningly to say, That among all those whom he
had advanced, there was none would free him from such an insolent and dangerous
Enemy. He likewise received mean Welcome from the young King Henry, because
Becket had suspended three or four Bishops who assisted at Henry's Coronation,
for doing it without a License from him; upon which, young Henry now banished
him his Court, and confined him to his own House in Canterbury. But a few days
after, Becket being in the Cathedral of Canterbury, standing before the High
Altar, four Knights and Courtiers fell upon him, and slew him there; of which
Fact King Henry was accused by the Pope, but stoutly denied it: yet because of
his former Murmurings, he was forced to submit to the Popes Censure, which was,
To war three years in Person in the Holy Land, which he redeemed by building
three Monasteries; and to go to Becket's Tomb barefooted, which he did, and
suffered himself to be scourged with Rods by every Monk there. And thus the
King made a bad end of these Troubles.

But others soon succeeded; for about this time the young King Henry died, and
his Sons, Richard and Jeffry, again rebelled against him; but the younger was
soon after trod to death under the Horses Feet, at a Turnament at Paris: But
Richard yet lived, to the further Grief of his Father; for joining himself with
Philip King of France, he forced his Father out of the City of Mantz, the Place
where he was born, and loved above all others; which caused the old King to
say, That since his Son Richard had taken from him that day the thing which he
most loved in the World, he was resolved to requite him; for after that day he
would deprive him of that which ought best to please a Child, and that was his
Fathers Heart. And afterward finding his Son John the very first in the
Conspiracy against him in that Action, he bitterly cursed the Hour of his Birth,
wishing Gods Curse and his own upon his Sons; which he would never recall, by
any Persuasions: But coming to Chiron, he fell mortally sick, and causing
himself to be carried to the Church, before the High Altar, after humble
Confession of his Sins, he gave up the Ghost, 1189. having reigned Thirty four
years and eight months.

RICHARD the FIRST, King of England, etc. called Coeurdelion.
portrait of King Richard the 1st

THrough the Almighty's Mercy and his Aid,
Jerusalem I conquered, and set free;
The Turks and Saracens, who waste it laid,
I (...) from Judea soon to flee.
The Isle of Cyprus was subdued by me,
Sicily trembled at my Courage bold,
King Tancred bought his Peace, and did agree
To pay me Threescore ounces of pure Gold,
Whilst I abroad won Honor many ways,
Ambitious John, my Brother, vexed my Realm.
In Austria I was Prisoner many days.
Thus Floods of Troubles did me overwhelm.
At length I home returned, my Ransom paid,
But soon my Glory in the Grave was laid.
RIchard, the eldest Son living of King Henry, was in Normandy at the time of
his Fathers Death; and because there were many things amiss, he was resolved to
continue there some time; but yet gave immediate Order for the Release of his
Mother, Queen Eleanor, who was closely imprisoned by her Husband, for the Death
of Rosamond, and her continual reproving him for his lascivious Course of Life.
And because she was very discreet, virtuous, and wise, King Richard committed
the whole Government of the Kingdom, in his absence, to her management; who
having experimentally known the Troubles and Sorrows of Prisoners and Captives,
she released such as were committed for small Offenses, and paid the Debts of
diverse others, that they might be freed, and in all things used great
Moderation and Justice, till the return of her Son, who was received and
Crowned King with much Joy and Solemnity. And he imitating the mild Disposition
of his Mother, commiserating the Afflicted, provided in the whole Course of his
Government that Justice should be extended with Mercy toward all. He conferred
many Honors upon his Brother John, whom he created Earl of Lancaster, and gave
him the Counties of Nottingham, Devon, and Cornwall, marrying him to the
Daughter and Heir of the Earl of Gloucester, from whom he had the Lordship of
that County also; but in stead of obliging him, these Favors made him
Ambitious, and ingratefully to affect the Crown, and to boast that his Parts
and Endowments were sufficient to make him a King.

This King for his invincible Courage was the greatest Hero at that time in
the Christian World, so that he was called Coeurdelion, or the Lions Heart, who
would attempt any thing, though never so difficult, if it were honorable. His
Fathers great Treasure, which he left behind him, furnished him sufficiently
with Gold and Silver; but such was his contempt of Riches, that he freely
bestowed Gifts upon all deserving Persons, and in a little time, by his extreme
Bounty, had disposed of most of it, not considering, that future Occasions
might cause great Expenses, as it soon appeared: For in the beginning of his
Reign, the Pope, by many strong Solicitations, and Promises of his Blessings,
persuaded him to go in his own Person and fight against the Saracens in the
Holy Land, and to recover Jerusalem from the Infidels; which he at length
undertook, being assisted therein by Frederick Emperor of Germany, Philip
Augustus King of France, Leopold Archduke of Austria, and many other Christian
Princes, who had raised Men and Money, and made all other Provisions to that
purpose: All entering into Covenants, That their Rendezvous should be in Sicily,
and that all the Wealth and Booty they should meet with, should be equally
divided among them.

These things being concluded, though the Kings Liberality and Expenses had
made him necessitous, yet he was resolved not to burden his People with any Tax
to supply himself, but raised great Sums of Money out of his own Estate; and
among others, he sold the Castles of Berwick and Roxborough to the King of
Scots, for 10000 l. and the Lordship of Durham to Hugh Pudsey, the Bishop
thereof, creating him likewise Earl of it, laughing heartily while he was
investing him, and saying, I think I am very cunning, and a Crafts master in my
Business, that can make a young Earl of an old Bishop. He likewise sold diverse
Honors, Manors, Offices, Privileges, and Royalties, and many other things,
protesting, That for performing that great and honorable Service, ^^ would be
willing to sell his City of London, if he could find any able to buy it, rather
than he would be chargeable to others.

Having thus provided himself with all Necessaries for his Journey, and raised
a gallant Army, wherein were many Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, and gathered a
Sum of no less than 1100000 l. he left the Principal Command of the Kingdom to
William Longchampe Bishop of Ely, the Popes Legate, and Lord Chancellor of
England, concluding a firm Friendship with William King of Scots, he then set
sail for the Holy Land with a Royal Navy, to the Island of Cyprus, where
Isacius the discourteous King, in stead of relieving them with Necessaries,
pillaged and abused them; whereat King Richard being enraged, landed his Men,
and soon conquered the whole Kingdom, carrying away the King and his Daughters
Prisoners, and selling the Country to the Knights Templars for 30000 Marks.
From thence, according to Agreement, he sailed to Sicily, where he met Philip
the French King. Upon their first Enterview there was great Familiarity and
Endearment betwixt them; but Philip being denied any part of the Spoil of
Cyprus, both because he was absent, and likewise King Richard affirming, That
the Agreement extended only to such things as they should gain in the Holy
Land, Philip thereupon grew angry and discontented, which Richard disregarded,
declaring publicly, That let the French King do what he durst, he should never
be a Partner in that Booty.

Yet Philip knowing the Eyes of all Christendom were upon him, would make no
open Breach; and so they again embarked, Tancred the Usurping King of Sicily
having either out of love or fear given King Richard above 6000 Ounces of Gold
before his departure. Sailing from thence with a Navy of above 300 Ships, they
met with a rich Argosey or Ship with French Flags, but Manned with no less than
1500 Turks and Saracens, and all manner of Warlike Provisions, as Fireworks,
Barrels and Cages of venomous Serpents, all designed for the Relief of the City
of Acon, formerly called Ptolemais; this Vessel he took, drowning 1300
Saracens: and then landing at Acon, in company with King Philip, they sat down
before it, there being already Christians of diverse Nations, as Genoways,
Florentines, Flemings, Almains, Danes, Dutch, Pisans, Friezelanders, Lumbards,
and some English, under Hubert Bishop of Sarum, which the Knights Templars, and
several Asians. During the Siege Sultan Saladine beheaded 1500 Christian
Slaves; in revenge whereof King Richard killed 2500 Tarks, in sight of their
Army. After a long and sharp Siege the City of Acon was taken, upon the entering
whereof, a forward Knight advanced the Banner and Ensign of Leopold Archduke of
Austria; but King Richard seeing it, he himself ran up to the Wall, plucked
them down, and trampled them under his Feet; whereat the French King was still
more incensed, speaking high Words; but Richard slighting his Anger, affirmed,
That if any were offended thereat, they might do what they pleased, since he
had only righted himself in those Injuries done against him; and that he was
ready to maintain what he had acted with his Sword in the Field.

King Philip growing still more angry, and pretending to fear some secret
League between King Richard and the Turks, to the prejudice of himself and his
Followers, he withdrew all the Troops belonging to the Emperor, the Archduke,
and himself, and leaving the King of England, returned home: Yet did not this
discourage the gallant King Richard, but with his own Forces, and those of some
other Christian Princes who submitted to his Conduct, he prosecuted his Designs
victoriously in all Places where he came. It is related, That there being a
fair Opportunity for the taking of Jerusalem, King Richard and the Duke of
Burgundy marched in two Bodies from Acon to surprise it; but when they
approached near it, Burgundy envying Richard's Glory, signified to him, That he
would retire with his Soldiers, because it should not be said the English had
taken Jerusalem. While this Message was delivering, and King Richard grieving
that such a glorious Enterprise should miscarry by Emulation, an English
Soldier came suddenly, and cried out, Sir, Sir, come hither, and I will show
you Jerusalem: But Richard throwing his Coat of Arms over his Face, and
weeping, spoke thus aloud; Ah, my Lord God, I beseech thee that I may not see
thy Holy City Jerusalem, since I am not able to deliver it out of the Hands of
thine Enemies. The same Author writes, That this Prince was so renowned for
Valor, that he was more dreaded among the Saracens than any Christian King
ever was; insomuch that when their Infants cried, the Mothers to still them
would say, King Richard will come and take you; which would affright them into
stilness: Yea, when their Horses started at any time, the Turks would spur
them, and cry, What, you Jades, you think King Richard is here.

But while Richard was triumphant over his Enemies abroad, his Affairs in
England were very badly managed by the Bishop of Ely, who being the Grandson of
a Plowman, and the Son of a Cow-keeper in the North, after such high
Advancement as Lord Chancellor, and Protector of the Kingdom, he grew insolent,
and exercised unusual Oppressions and Tyrannies over all sorts of Persons both
in Church and State; yea, so ambitious and vainglorious was he, that when he
rid abroad for his Recreation, he would be attended by above a thousand Horse,
and would be waited on by the Sons of the Principal Nobility, to whom he would
marry his beggarly Kindred with little or no Fortunes: But perceiving himself
at length generally hated and abhorred, he resolved to forsake the Kingdom; and
disguising himself in the Habit of a Countryman, with a Piece of Cloth under
his Arm, he traveled toward Dover; but being there discovered, he was
furiously assaulted by the People, and dragged along upon the Sands; after
which, being sent to London, he was by the Nobility committed to the Tower,
where he cont nued till the King's Return, but was then restored to his Liberty
and Offices, though he enjoyed them not long; for he died soon after,
traveling to Rome, to the great Joy of the wronged English Subject.

King Richard heard of these Transactions, and of the great Discontent of his
Brother John, who out of hatred to the Bishop of Ely had seized diverse Towns,
Forts, and Castles into his Hands, and only wanted the Peoples Favor to make
himself King. He had advice likewise of the Inroads and Invasions of Philip the
French King into Normandy, in his absence. These Tidings enforced him, for
preserving his Royalty, to make a Peace with the Turks for three years, even
when he was in the height of Success, and to return home. In the way he again
won the Isle of Cyprus from the Knights Templars, to whom he had formerly sold
it, and then exchanged it with Guy of Lusignan for the City of Jerusalem, he
being the last Christian King thereof; upon which Richard was called King of
Jerusalem, and so were many of his Successors long after. Proceeding in his
Voyage homeward, he was by a violent Storm Shipwrecked upon the Coast of
Istria, near Venice; and traveling into the Territories of Leopold in Austria,
he was taken Prisoner, and by him sold to the Emperor Henry the Sixth, for
6000 Marks, who taking good Security of Richard for paying him 100000 l. he
gave him his Liberty. In short time he arrived in Normandy, and raising a stout
Army, he quickly revenged himself on the French for their Injuries against him,
and recovered all that had been unjustly taken from him.

While the King was thus employed, his Brother Jo^n came to him, and humbly
desired his Pardon, alleging, That what he had done, was only occasioned by
the unsufferable Pride and Insolence of the Bishop, and therefore he now freely
surrendered all again into his Hands. The King being mollified by this ingenuous
Confession, said, God grant that I may as easily forget your Offenses, as you
may remember wherein you have offended; and then not only gave him his Pardon,
but received him into his special Grace and Favor. He then returned into
England, and summoning a Parliament, he caused himself to be crowned the second
time, imposing very heavy Taxes upon the People for his Ransom, and seizing the
Treasures of several Monasteries: And to increase his own Revenue, he resumed
into his Hands all those Honors, Manors, Castles, Privileges, and Offices,
which he had formerly sold to his Subjects, forcing them to be contented with
the Profits they had received. By which ways he got together 80000 l. toward
his Ransom; the rest Leopold forgave him, being cursed by the Pope for making
Richard a Prisoner coming from the Holy War.

After this, the King transported another Army into France, where he fought
very successfully against the French, and in one Battle took 100 Knights on
Horseback, 200 great Horse, 140 of them being barbed and armed with Iron. In
these Wars Philip Bishop of Beavoirs, and Peer of the Blood Royal, fighting
valiantly in a Skirmish, was taken Prisoner, and ordered to be committed and
Irons put on his Legs, as being an inveterate Enemy to King Richard. This hard
Usage being complained of to the Pope, he writ earnestly to Richard not to
detain his dear Son, an Ecclesiastical Person, and a Shepherd of the Lords, but
to send him back to his Flock. The King in a pleasant Bravery sent the
Headpiece, Back, and Breast of Iron in which he was taken, to the Pope, with
the Question of Jacob's Sons to their Father, Behold, this we found him in: Is
this thy Sons Coat? Nay, says the Pope, it is the Coat neither of my Son, nor a
Son of the Church, but of some Son of Mars: therefore let him procure his
Liberty as well as he can, for I will not concern my self therein.

Soon after King Richard was cut off in the midst of all his Glory; for the
Lord Limoges having found a vast Treasure of Gold and Silver, he sent the
greatest part thereof to him, as Lord thereof: but the King resolving to have
all, came to besiege the Castle of Chalms, where he judged the Riches were. The
Garrison offered to yield themselves, and all therein, if they might save their
Lives and Limbs: But the King would accept of no Terms, bidding them defend
themselves, and that he was resolved to win it by his Sword, and hang them all.
Whereupon an Archer standing on the Wall, observing his opportunity, charging
his Steel Bow with a square Arrow, and praying that by that Shot he might
deliver the Innocent from Oppression and the King just then taking view of the
Castle, he wounded him in the Shoulder, which was made extreme painful by an
unskilful Surgeon. However, the Assault was renewed, the Castle taken, and
all put to the Sword, by the Kings Command, but this too skilful Archer, who
boldly owned the Action; for being demanded, How he durst shoot at the Person
of a King? he replied, That the King had slain his Father and his two Brothers
with his own Hand, and that he was exceeding glad he was now so happily
revenged. Notwithstanding this Answer, the King gave him 100 s. and his
Liberty; but yet after the King was dead, one of his Captains took him, flayed
him alive, and then hanged him. He died of his Wound, 1199. having reigned
victoriously Ten years, and in the Forty second year of his Age, leaving no
Legitimate Son behind him.

KING JOHN.
portrait of King John

ROme's mighty Metred Metropolitan
I did oppose, and was by him deposed:
In stead of Blessing, he did Curse and Ban,
And round with Wars and Troubles me enclosed.
English and Normans both resisted me,
Lewis of France my Kingdom did molest,
Whereby from Turmoils I was seldom free,
But spent my Kingly Days in little Rest.
At last the Pope was pleased me to restore,
Peace was proclaimed, and I was re-inthron'd;
Thus was my State often turned over and over,
Blessed, Cursed, Friends, Foes, Divided, and Atoned:
And after Sevent^^n y^ars were past, I fell
At Swinstead, poisoned by a Monk of Hell.
JOhn Plantagenet, Earl of Lancaster in his own Right, and of Gloucester by his
Wife, being the youngest Son of King Henry the Second, succeeded, and was
Crowned King, though Arthur Plantagenet his Nephew, and Son of Jeffry his elder
Brother, was living. The whole Course of his Government was attended with
continual Troubles, his two great Persecutors being Pope innocent the Third,
and Philip the Second of France. King Philip being envious at Englands Grandeur
took all Occasions to disturb John; as by entertaining Prince Arthur, animating
him to regain the Crown of England, and supplying him with Men and Money; and
the Normans joining with them, Arthur won many strong Places in Normandy: But
King John's Lieutenants made a stout Defense, till he himself went over with a
strong Army, and fought many Battles with his Nephew; but at last both Sides
being wearied with equal Losses, they made a Truce, which was again broken by
the incitement of the French King, who promising Arthur double the Forces he
had before, they both entered Normandy, plundring and burning many Towns and
Villages. But John, who wanted nothing but Money, was voluntarily supplied by
his Lords, Gentlemen, and Commons, with a large Tax, they being grieved to see
the English Territories thus destroyed, and all the stout Youth voluntarily
listed themselves for the Service; whereby John soon landed in Normandy, where
thousands more resorted to him, so that soon after the two Armies met, and
fought desperately; but at length the French gave way, and Arthur was taken
Prisoner, and sent to Roan, where leaping from the Walls, with design to
escape, he was drowned in the Ditch; though others write, That he came to a
violent Death by King John's Order.

However, the French King improved the Report to the best advantage,
peremptorily citing King John to come and do him Homage for the Dukedom of
Normandy, and likewise to appear at a set Day, to be tried by his Peers for
Treason and Murder. But John not obeying his Summons, was by the King and Peers
of France disinherited and condemned, and according to the Sentence they
proceeded against him: For several of the English Nobility joining with Philip,
and John being careless, the French with a powerful Army took in most of the
Towns in Normandy, which happened by the fault of the English Lords and Bishops;
for when the King was ready to embarque for Normandy, Archbishop Hubert forbid
him, and the Peers refused to attend him; upon which the King laid great Fines
upon them, and seized upon the Estate of Hubert, who died soon after.

But now Pope Innocent, his other Enemy, begins to play his Part, and vex him
more dangerously than Philip of France had done: For Hubert Archbishop of
Canterbury being dead, the Monks of St. Austins in that City, without the Kings
Knowledge or License, elected one Reynold a Monk to succeed him, and made him
take an Oath to go immediately to Rome, and to procure his Investiture, and
receive his Pall of the Pope. The King hereat was much displeased; so that to
appease his Wrath, they made a new Election, and with his Approbation chose
John Gray Bishop of Norwich; and the King presently sent Letters and
Ambassadors to the Pope, entreating him to confirm his Choice. But Innocent,
after the Example of his insolent Predecessors, confirmed the first Election;
whereat John was enraged: yea, diverse of those Monks who chose him, now joined
with the King against him, alleging the Election was made in the Night, and
not in open Day, and was therefore null and void.

At length the Pope, to end the Controversy, nominated Stephen Langton, a Man
in the Popes Interests, and ordered the Monks to elect him; which King John
forbid: But the Papal Command was obeyed, and Stephen was elected Archbishop of
Canterbury. This so exasperated the King, that in his Letters to the Pope he
solemnly protested, That thenceforward he would take strict Account of those
Subjects, who, for any Matters of Right and Justice, should run gadding to
Rome; alleging, That he had Bishops, Nobles, and Magistrates of his own, who
according to the Customs of the Kingdom could and should determine all
Controversies in Church and State; and, That he would rather expose himself to
a thousand Deaths, than basely and servilely subject himself and his Kingdom to
the insolent and unreasonable Commands of the Pope. But Innocent haughtily
answered, That the Election of Langton should stand; requiring the King to give
him quiet Possession, to recall such Monks as were banished on his Account, and
restore their Estates, or otherwise he did authorize four Bishops to interdict
and curse the King and the Realm.

King John observing that the four Bishops appointed grew very Arrogant with
their new Authority, and thought long e're he signified his Resolution, he
thereupon seized upon their Estates, and declared, That he resolved to take the
same Course with all those that received any Promotions or Investitures from
Stephen Langton, or went or appealed to Rome upon any Occasion, without
License; or that should execute any Command of the Pope within this Kingdom.
Upon this the Pope sent two proud Legates into England, Pandulphus and Durandus,
who persuaded the King to agree with Langton, and restore the Prior and Monks
of St. Austins to their Lands and Offices: To which John, for fear of the Popes
Curse, and to prevent any further Quarrels, yielded; only desiring to be
excused as to the Election of the Archbishop: yet protesting, That if another
might be chosen, he would prefer Langton to some other Bishopric. But the
Legates, in stead of gratifying the King in his Request, proceeded immediately
to excommunicate him, pronouncing the Popes Curse against him, and absolving
all his Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance toward him: Yea, he required
all Christian Princes to make War upon him, as the Arch and Grand Enemy of the
Church of God: Nay, he published the Sentence of Deprivation against him, and
gave his Crown and Kingdom to Philip the French King, of which he was to take
Possession as soon as he could expel or murder John, either by some secret
Plot, or by open Violence and Hostility.

Thus did this Unholy Father, out of his Usurping Arrogance and Hellish Pride,
presume to dispose of Kings and Kingdoms at his pleasure, and all on the cursed
Pretense of the Honor of God and Holy Church. But the King not fearing these
Thunderbolts, was resolved to stand his Ground; and to that end, took a solemn
Oath of his Subjects for his Defense, and their Fidelity: And then raising a
strong Army, he entered Scotland against King Alexander, for supporting diverse
Rebellious Clergymen, and others, who adhered to the Popes Authority against
him; but the King of Scots finding he should gain nothing but Ruin and
Destruction by Opposition, humbly submitted himself to King John, and an entire
Friendship and Amity was concluded betwixt them.

The French King resolving to take Possession of the Popes Gift, provided great
Forces to invade the Kingdom; but by the diligence of King John, 300 of his
Ships, laden with Corn, Victuals, and other Warlike Provisions, were seized,
and thereby Philip's vain Hopes at that time prevented. However, the Pope
accursed the King again and again; so that despairing of ever b^ing quiet,
without the Advice of his Council or Nobility, he all on a sudden submitted
himself upon his Knees to Pandulphus the Popes Legate, confessing his
Disobedience, and begging Pardon; and by a Public Instrument in Writing, under
his Hand and Seal, he resigned his Crown (and Scepter) to the Pope, which
Pandulphus kept four days for the Popes Use, and then gave them both back to
John and his Heirs, upon Condition to hold his Kingdom from the Pope, and pay
1000 Marks a year to him as a Tribute. This base Submission so alienated the
Affections of his Nobility, and Men of War, that they revolted from him, and
fled to his Enemy the French King, who resolved to make his Son Lewis Monarch
of this Realm, and sent him hither with a numerous Army, where he did much
mischief, though often encountered. But the Pope being now for King John, forbid
Philip to proceed any further against him, since he and his Kingdom were now
reconciled to him and the Church, and that the Crown was held from the Sea of
Rome. But the French King refused to obey, affirming, That no King could give
away his Kingdom, nor the Protection of his Subjects, which were committed to
him by God, without the Consent of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons; and that
therefore this Kingdom could not be holden of the Church of Rome, nor protected
by her. This Answer so vexed the Pope, that he presently sent Cardinal Guallo
into England, who cursed King Philip, and Lewis his Son, with all the English
Nobility who took part with them.

Though the wiser sort little regarded what the Cardinal did, yet the Common
People and Soldiers, who were ignorantly devout, were so amazed, that they fled
to their Houses and Ships, and others entered into the Houses and Grounds of the
Excommunicate Lords and Gentry, robbing and spoiling all before them, supposing
that their Robberies were pleasing and meritorious before God, by which means
the Lords were much distressed, and even ready to starve for want of
Sustenance, none daring to relieve them; so that they were at last necessitated
to throw themselves at the Kings Feet, and crave his Mercy: who, though by
their means he had been reduced to the utmost Extremities, yet being of a
merciful Disposition, he easily pardoned them, and restored them to their
Honors and Lands: By which means the French finding themselves forsaken, were
forced to return back to France, and all their vast Designs perished in a
moment.

But the Pope intending to make his Proceedings against King John a President
to other Princes, assembled a General Council at Lateran, wherein he gave a
full Account of all Transactions, with the Kings Grant of his Kingdom, and the
Tenure whereby it was held from the Church of Rome: And in the same Council,
Otho the Emperor, Peter King of Arragon, Raymond Earl of Toulouse, and diverse
other Sovereign Princes, were Excommunicated, and others Interdicted, with
their Kingdoms and Provinces, for Heresy, as was pretended, though the real
Design was to make Princes Slaves and Vassals to the Will and Pleasure of the
Pope, and to enrich himself with their Ruin: For in this Council, wherein they
say were 1215 Catholic Doctors, it was positively concluded, That the Pope
might depose Kings, absolve their Subjects from their Allegiance, and give away
their Kingdoms. Likewise, That such as spoke evil of the Pope, should be damned
in Hell; and that none should be Emperor, till he had sworn Homage to the
Pope, and had received his Crown from him. Also Auricular Confession and
Transubstantiation were then decreed and established.

And thus all these Troubles, which had continued ten years, came now to an
end: But the Clergy would by no means be reconciled to King John; for such was
their inveterate Hatred toward him, that under pretense of Kindness, he was
poisoned by a Monk at Swinstead Abbey near Lincoln, who to make all sure,
poisoned himself, that he might not fail to do the same to the King. And thus
died King John, when he had reigned Seventeen years, in 1216. and lies buried
at Winchester.

He was Politic, and exceeding Valiant, Bountiful and Liberal to Strangers,
not given to Revenge; for when he was showed how Honorably one of his
Rebellious Barons was Intombed, and advised to deface the Monument, No, by no
means, says he, I wish all (...) Enemies were as honorably buried. When
several Greeks came hither, and offered to prove that there were several
Errors in the Church of Rome at that time, he rejected them, saying, I will
not suffer our Faith which is established, to be called in question with
doubtful Disputations. He left behind him four Sons; Henry, who succeeded him;
Richard, created King of the Romans; William of Valentia, and Guido Disnay:
with three Daughters; one married to the Emperor Frederick, a second to
William Marshal Earl of Worcester, and the third to the Earl of Leicester.

HENRY the THIRD, King of England.
portrait of King Henry the 3rd

AMidst great Troubles and Confusions, I
In Youth ascended to the English Throne;
England was then oppressed with Misery
By Frenchmen, who by me were overthrown:
For the brave English, under my Command,
Did soon expel those their insulting Foes;
My Barons did my Sovereignty withstand,
And brought upon themselves and me great Wo^^:
For in each Battle none but I did lose;
I lost my Subjects Lives on every Side;
(From Civil Wars no better Profit grows)
Friends, Foes, my People all, that beat or died.
My Gain was Loss, my Pleasure was my Pain;
These were the Triumphs of my troublous Reign.
AFter the Death of King John, Henry his eldest Son, of nine years old, was
Crowned King; the Earl of Gloucester, who had married one of his A^^^s, and was
Learned, Wise, and Valiant, being made Protector of him and the Kingdom; who
administered Justice faithfully among the People. The Youth of the King, and the
Treachery of many of the English Nobility, encouraged Philip of France, and
Lewis his Son, to land fresh Forces in the Realm; to whom the Welsh likewise
joined all the Forces they could raise: But the new Protector raised an Army
against them, and in many Encounters defeated them: And Pope Honorius, finding
the French slighted his Thunderbolts, sent out new Curses, more sharp and
severe than any of his Predecessors; whereupon Prince Lewis seemed at present
to be affrighted, and to prepare for his Departure, though his Father Philip
still sent new Forces over: But Hugh de Burgh, Governor of the Ci^^u^-Ports,
preparing a gallant Fleet, valiantly encountered them at Sea, and took all their
Ships, This great Victory brought Lewis to treat of Peace; and being absolved
by Guallo the Popes Legate, and receiving a considerable Sum of Money, he
surrendered all the Forts, Towns, and Castles he had taken, and with all his
Forces sailed back to France, leaving his English Friends, who had assisted him
all these Wars, to the rigor of the Law, whereby they were cut off by
miserable and cruel Deaths.

The Kingdom having now time to breathe, a Parliament was called, wherein the
Laws of King Edward were revived, and the Grand Charter, called then Magna
Charta, containing several Laws for the Liberty, Ease, and Security of the
Subject, was confirmed; and a Tax granted for sending an Army into France, to
recover Poictiers and Gascoigne, under Richard the Kings Brother, which had
been injuriously seized by the French for some years: Those Provinces were soon
regained wholly back to the English, which in a short time produced a Peace
between both Nations. But then worse Troubles succeed it at home; for the King
confiding only in some lewd Officers about him, disregarded his Nobility, and
most Loyal Subjects, invading their Liberties and Estates, and vexing them with
many grievous and unnecessary Taxes, which were levied upon them by his
Officers with all manner of severity. At length a Parliament was called at
Oxford, wherein his Designs were altogether crossed, and the Proceedings
therein of such ill Consequence, that it was styled Insa^um Parliamentum, or
the Mad Parliament. For when Multitudes came to complain of their Wrongs and
Oppressions, the Lords and Commons for redress thereof established many things
which they judged necessary, but highly intrenching upon the Kings Prerogative;
for they chose Twelve of the most Considerable Persons in the Kingdom, whereof
the Earl of Gloucester, and Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester were Chief, who
were called Les Douze Pieres, or The Twelve Peers, to whom full and absolute
Power was granted by a Patent sealed by the King (though unwillingly) to
support and maintain the Laws they had made.

The Parliament being ended, the Commissioners began strictly to put those
Statutes into Execution, whereby they dismissed most of the Kings Menial
Servants from their Attendance on him, placing others of their Mind in their
State. This above all other things did most disturb the King, and thereupon he
grew extreme melancholy: But hoping for better Success, he summoned another
Parliament, wherein he, with extreme Passion and Grief, complained of his hard
Usage by the Twelve Peers; but the Lords and Commons were so far from remitting
any thing, that they further ratified all that had been done; and the
Archbishop, with nine other Bishops, publicly denounced a solemn Curse against
all that by Advice or Assistance should oppose those Laws, or the Authority of
the Twelve Peers. This still increased the Kings Discontent, who could take no
delight in any thing he enjoyed, and therefore went over to divert himself with
Lewis King of France, who treated him with all manner of Kindness and
Magnificence.

About this time Hugh de Burgh Earl of Kent was accused by the Bishop of
Winchester, and others, That he had scandalized and abused the King; That he
had enticed and traitorously defiled the King of Scots Daughter, whom he
married, in hope to succeed her Brother in her Right; That he stole out of the
Jewel-house a Jewel of such excellent Virtue, as to make those who had it
Invincible, which he had bestowed upon Llewellin Prince of Wales, the King's
Enemy. These and many other Articles was he charged with; who doubting the
Power of his Enemies, retired into Essex, where he was seized by Soldiers, who
sent for a Smith to make Shackles for him, to prevent his escape; but the Smith
understanding who they were for, fetching a deep Sigh, said, Do with me what
you pl ase, and God have mercy on my Soul; but as sure as the Lord lives, I
will never make Iron Shackles for him, but will rather die for most cruel Death
imaginable: For, is not this the most Loyal and Courageous Hubert, who has so
often preserved England from being destroyed by Strangers, and restored England
to England? Let God be Judge between him and you, for using him so unjustly and
inhumanely, requiting his most excellent Deserts with the worst of Recompenses.
However, the Commander bound him, and carried him Prisoner to the Tower of
London, from whence, by the means of the Bishop of London, he was a while after
released.

The King being continually tormented with the diminishing of his Regal
Authority, endeavored to procure some Remedy from abroad; and to that end with
great expense of Money, he secretly obtained tw^ Bulls from Pope Alexander the
Third, whereby the King, and all those who had sworn to maintain the new Laws
and Ordinances, and to support the Authority of the Twelve Peers, were freely
absolved, and discharged from keeping those Oaths. But this being kept private,
the Twelve Peers ruled all, and were so diligent in their Business, that they
left the King nothing to do; so that he was King in Name only, not in Power.
Soon after, Hugh Spencer, being Lord Chief Justice, and a great Favorite with
the King, was removed by the Twelve Peers, being charged with Corruption, and
Arbitrary Proceedings: They likewise dismissed such Sheriffs and Justices as
the King had made, choosing others in their Places; which so deeply wounded the
Kings Mind, that he resolved immediately to make use of the Popes Bulls, and
thereupon caused them to be solemnly proclaimed in England, Wales, and Ireland,
adding, That all who did any way support those Laws, or the Twelve Peers,
should be committed to Prison. He likewise took an Oath of all above twelve
years old, in and about London, to be true to him and his Heirs. But the Lords
were not to be frighted, declaring, That they were resolved rather to die, than
recede from the Acts of that Honorable Assembly: And judging that the King was
designing something against them, they went into the Marches of Wales, where
they raised a strong Army, and then humbly addressed themselves to the King by
Letters, protesting their Fidelity to him, and beseeching his Majesty, That for
the Honor of God, the Good of his Soul, and the Welfare of his People, he
would renounce and forsake those Counsels which were given him to suppress the
Ordinances of Oxford and the Twelve Peers.

The King was much displeased with these Letters, but returned no Answer:
Whereupon the Barons marched with a strong Army toward London, carrying a
Banner wherein the Kings Arms were curiously wrought. As they passed, they
destroyed and burnt the Houses and Estates of those that favored the Popes
Bulls, as undoubted Enemies to the King and Kingdom; and then approaching to
London, they were joyfully received by the Citizens. The King des^^ing to
divide the Lords, caused it to be published, That himself and the greatest part
of the Barons were agreed; and therefore required, that all Arms might be laid
aside, and Peace restored: But the Barons marched to Windsor, where finding
many Strangers in the Kings Palace, they rifled and removed them; but at
length, upon the Kings Motion, all Differences were referred to Lewis, the
French King, who upon hearing of both Parties, declared, That all the new Laws
and Ordinances should be made void, and the Power of the Twelve-Peers
dissolved. This Sentence the Lords judged Partiality, and therefore fly again
to Arms on th Marches, destroying all that belonged to Sir Roger Mortimer who
counseled the King to withstand them. Prince Edward likewise raises an Army,
and marches against them, but is overthrown. After this they marched to London
in Triumph; hut King Henry hearing that Peter and Simon Montfort had raised
Forces at Northampton he levied a strong Army, and took the Town by Assault,
making the two Commanders and many others Prisoners.

The Barons being powerful, were herewith nothing discouraged; yet still sent
Letters to the King, with humble Protestations of their Fidelity, if the new
Laws were observed: But Henry, his Brother Richard King of the Romans, and
Prince Edward, sent the Barons an absolute Defiance and wi h their Armies they
met at Jews in Sussex, where, after a bloody Fight, the two Kings, Prince
Edward, and several other Persons of Quality, were taken Prisoners, above 20000
being slain: After which, both Sides inclined to hea^^en to Peace, and at
length it was agreed, That the King by new Articles and Oaths should confirm
the Power of the Twelve Peers, and the other new Laws; yet that two Spiritual
and two Temporal Lords should review them, and alter what they thought fit; and
if they could not agree, the Duke of Britain was to be U^pire This being
concluded, the two Kings eldest Sons were delivered as Hostages to the Barons,
where they continued above nine Months. The King then called another
Parliament, wherein the Oxford Ordinances were again confirmed, and the King
again swore to maintain the Authority of the Twelve Peers, and those Laws, till
any thing were found amiss in them; and all who had defended them in the late
Wars, were pardoned by the King: whereupon the two Princes were enlarged.

Yet soon after, the two great Earls of Gloucester and Leicester differed about
these Laws; and Prince Edward joining with Gloucester, a cruel Battle was sought
at Evesham in Worcestershire, wherein Simon Montford Earl of Leicester, and his
Son Sir Hugh Spencer, were slain, and the Power of the Barons was utterly
defeated: And a Parliament being called, no Man durst then contradict the Kings
Will; so that all the Laws made at Oxford, the Authority of the Twelve Peers,
all Patents, Commissions, and Instruments whatsoever, relating to what was
Enacted in that called The Mad Parliament, were brought forth, and publicly
damned, cancelled, and made void. And thus King Henry regained his former Power
and Authority, to do as he pleased. After which, he humbled the City of London;
but upon their Submission, received them again into Favor.

When Pope Innocent the Fourth offered the Kingdoms of Sicily and Naples to
Richard King of the Romans aforementioned, with many impossible Conditions, You
might as well (said the Kings Agent at Rome) say to my Lord and Master, I sell
or give you the Moon, climb up, catch, and take it. Pope Alexander, his
Successor, desired to borrow a great Sum of Money of Richard, to whom he
replied, I will lend no Money to my Superiors, whom I cannot oblige to repay me
again. This Richard is said to be so very rich, that he was able to spend 100
Marks a day for ten years together; which was a great Sum in that Age. Wicked,
rather than witty, was that of a Dean, and High Treasurer of England about this
time, who it seems had carried himself so well in his Office, that when he
died, he made this wicked Will: I bequeath all my Goods and Possessions to my
Sovereign Lord the King, my Body to the Earth, and my Soul to the Devil.

Prince Edward full of Heat and Courage, now resolves to make himself famous,
and transporting an Army into the Holy Land, he there wrought Wonders, the
Turks not daring to engage in that Quarter wherein he was; and raising the
Siege of Acon, which they had long lain before with above 100000 Men: But since
Force would not, they resolved to dispatch him by Treachery, a villainous
Saracen wounding him unawares with a venomous Knife, though after much Pain and
Danger, and the extreme Love of his Queen Eleanor, who sucked out the Poison
with her Mouth, he recovered thereof. But in his absence King Henry died, when
he had reigned above Fifty six years, in the Year 1272.

EDWARD the FIRST, King of England, etc.
portrait of King Edward the 1st

MY Glorious Victories, and Valor tried,
My Mighty Actions, And never dying Fame,
Were all proclaimed throughout the World so wide;
By gallant Deeds I won Immortal Fame.
Rebelliouis Wales I utterly subdued,
And made them Vassals to my Princely Son;
I Scotland entered with Fire and Blood,
And almost all that Kingdom overrun.
Still where I fought, triumphantly I won;
Through Wounds and Death my Glory I obtained;
Yet when I these renowned Deeds bad done,
A costly Sepulcher was all I gained;
For though Grandees contend for Earthly Sway,
Death binds them to the Peace, and parts the Fray.
EDward surnamed Longshanks, from the Properness. of his Person, being informed
of his Father's Death, by great Journeys arrived in a short time from the Holy
Land to England, where he was joyfully received both by the Peers and People,
and soon after Crowned King, in the One and thirtieth year of his Age; at which
500 Great Horses were let loose, for any to take that would, in honor of so
Martial a Prince. After the Battle aforementioned, wherein Simon Montford Earl
of Leicester, his Son Henry, and many other Lords were stain, and the Lady
Eleanor his Daughter was banished, but kindly received by Philip the Hardy of
France, thereby to gain the Good Will of many English Lords, who being
discontented with the last Kings Government, were not well pleased with his
Son, who constantly assisted his Father against them. Philip being likewise
sensible of the Courage of King Edward, to prevent his own danger, he secretly
incited Lluellin Prince of Wales to rebel, promising him likewise the Lady
Eleanor in Marriage. But Edward having private notice of this Contract, and
that the Lady was coming over to Wales, he intercepted her at Sea, and kept her
Prisoner; upon which Lluellin took the Field, with many thousand Men, but mean
and thievish Fellows: On the other side, King Edward resolving to make himself
terrible to the Welsh, raised a very formidable Army, but Lluellin being
sensible or his inability to resist, and out of his extreme Love to the Lady,
submitted himself to the King, and made many solemn Oaths of his Fidelity to
the King against France, and all others; whereupon Edward, who was inclinable
to Mercy, freely granted him his Pardon, his Favor, and his beloved Lady; so
that all was ended without a drop of Blood: But a few years after, David his
Brother, of a mutinous Temper, and yet one much in favor with the King,
persuaded Lluellin to put himself again into Arms, and many sharp Conflicts
passed between him and Sir Roger Mortimer; but at length they were both taken,
and their Heads sent to the King, who caused them to be set upon the Tower of
London. Yet were the Welchmen so perversely bent to ruin themselves, that
within a few Months after they twice rebelled, but were soon subdued by many
terrible Slaughters, and severe Executions: And because they maintained their
Wars more by hiding and shifting among vast Woods and Forests, the King caused
all the Woods to be cut and burnt down; by which means they were reduced to
more Civility, and applied themselves to Arts and Trades, like other Men.

In his eighteenth year Alexander King of Scots fell from his Horse, and broke
his Neck, leaving no Issue behind him. He had three Sisters, the eldest married
to John Baliol, Lord of Galloway; the second, to Robert Bruce, Lord of Valley
Andrew; and the third, to John Hastings Lord Abergaveny in England. These three
contended for the Crown, losing many Men on all sides, and the Country much
ruined; whereupon King Edward, as their Sovereign Lord, went into Scotland to
compose those Differences; and in the end they were all contented to refer
themselves to his Judgment, by an Instrument under their Hands and Seals:
Whereupon King Edward chose Twenty Englishmen, and as many Scots, of good
Understanding and Discretion, who consulted thereof, and upon their
Determination he declared John Baliol, who had married the eldest Sister, to be
King; who thereupon received the Crown from King Edward, and did him Homage for
the same.

And now the French King wrongfully invading the English Territories in
Gascoign and Guyen, the King, to supply his Necessities, seized upon all the
Plate, Jewels, and Treasure of the Churches and Religious Houses within the
Kingdom, being advised thereto by William March Lord Treasurer, who alleged,
That it were better this money should be stirring, and according to the Name,
Current, and go abroad to the Use of the People, than to lie rusting in Chests,
without any Use or Advantage whatsoever. The King likewise compelled the Clergy
to give one half years Revenue of all their Ecclesiastical Dignities, which
when they scrupled at, affirming, That by a Canon lately made at the Council of
Lions, they were excused from all Temporal, Supplies, he told them plainly,
Since you refuse to help me I will also refuse to help you: If you deny to pay
Tribute to me as your Prince, I will deny to protect you as my Subjects: And
therefore if you be spoiled, robbed, or murdered, expect no Succor nor Defense
from me nor mine. But to get some Amends, they humbly petitioned the King to
repeal the Statute of Mortmain, (or the Will of a Dead Man's Hand) which forbad
all Persons to give any Houses or Lands to the Church, either at their Deaths,
or before, without leave from the King: But he resolving never to gratify them
in any thing, replied, That it was not in his Power, without the Consent of a
Parliament, to make void any Law whatsoever, So that they were forced to be
contented, though with much inward Vexation.

Having thus fleeced the Clergy, he laid a new Tax upon Wool and Hides
exported out of the Kingdom, and required the tenth part of every Man's Estate
to be paid him, to maintain his Wars. He caused the Clergy to bring into his
Treasury all such Sums of Money as they had promised to pay the Pope for the
War against the Turks, and took up 100000 Quarters of Wheat, which he sent to
his Armies in Normandy, where they fought with doubtful Success, sometimes
winning, and then again losing.

In his Twenty fifth year, 1296. John Baliol King of Scots, by the secret
incitement of the French King, and some others about him, sent a proud Defiance
to King Edward, and a Renunciation of his Fealty and Homage, and with a
tumultuous Army entered the Northern Borders, cruelly destroying all with Fire
and Sword. Whereupon Edward upbraiding him with his many Favors and Honors
received from him, resolved to revenge his Ingratitude, and with strong Forces
marched thither, taking the Castle of Berwick, with the Slaughter of 25000
Scots. He likewise won Dunbar, Edinburgh, and all other Places of Strength: The
King of Scots observing no Safety in Resistance, humbly submitted himself to
the King, and surrendered the Kingdom into his Hands, who with a strong Guard
sent him Prisoner to the Tower of London, but with large allowance of Liberty
and Attendance; and then committed the Government of Scotland to John Warren
Earl of Sussex, Sir Hugh Cressingham High Treasurer, and Wistiam Earnly Lord
Chief Justice of that Kingdom.

Having so happily performed this, he then turned his Arms to France, who, to
divert him, animated the Scots again to rebel; but King Edward resolving not
to leave the French, if possible, without fighting, continued still in Normandy
sending Orders to the Earl of Northumberland, and others, to suppress that
Rebellion, which they did with a very bloody slaughter; Upon which the French
King perceiving himself disappointed, would not venture to engage the English
Army, but sent honorable Propositions of Peace which were accepted by the
King, and a general Peace was proclaimed. After his return into England, he
restored the Citizens of London their Charter, which for some misdemeanors had
remained forfeited in his Hands twelve years. And then presently marches with a
stout Army into Scotland, the Rebels being again in Arms under the Conduct of a
Valiant Commander called William Wallace, who had routed Earl Warren's Forces,
taking an advantage against them as they passed over a Bridge near Sterling
Castle, Hugh Cressingham and many English being slain, the Scots fleaing off
his Skin, and cutting it in pieces, divided it among them. The King proceeding
toward Scotland, called a Parliament at York, and there summoned the Scots to
appear at a Day appointed, which they not regarding, he marched forward with
vast Forces, and coming near the Enemy, as he was putting his Foot in the
Stirrup, his Horse starting at the sudden shout of the Scots Army, threw him
down, and striking with his Heels, broke two of the Kings Ribbs, however he
proceeded to Battle, and the Scots by the encouragement of Captain Wallace
fought valiantly, but were at length defeated with the loss of seventy thousand
Scots, at a place called Fawkirk; after which he took several strong places,
and then returned into England, where in a Parliament holden at London and
Stamford, he confirmed Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta, and it was enacted,
That no Tax nor Subsidy should be laid upon the Kingdom, without consent of the
King, Peers, and People, and for the better satisfaction of the Parliament, he
lest these words out of his Grants, Salvo Jure Coron e nostrae, saving the
right of our Crown.

Upon the earnest request of the Pope K. Edward now enlarged John Baliol, who
traveled into France, and there remained; and soon after the Scots were again
in Arms, so that he entered the third time into Scotland with strong Forces,
where none durst abide him in the Field, the Lords and Gentry of the Castle
having fortified themselves so strongly in Sterling Castle that they thought it
impregnable; while he was employed in the Siege he was advised not to endanger
his Person so much, whom he answered in the words of David, A thousand shall
fall on my side, and ten thousand at my Right hand, but it shall not come near
me; yet doubting the Siege would be long, he used this Policy, he ordered two
Galleries to be set up in view of the Castle, and then by sound of Trumpet
proclaimed his free pardon to the Besieged, if they surrendered within the space
of three days, but othewise he denounced hanging too them all without respect
of Persons, or Quality; the Besieged trusting more to the Kings mercy than
their own defense, delivered up the Castle and themselves: King Edward then
taking fresh Oaths of the Justices, Mayors, and Governors of Castles and
Towns, and having settled the Kingdom, returned into England, bringing with him
as the Trophies of his Victory the Crown, Scepter, and Cloth of State: He burnt
their Records, abrogated their Laws, altered their form of Divine Service, and
transplanted their most learned men to Oxford; he brought their Marble Chair
wherein their Kings were Crowned to Westminster, whereon this Prophetical Verse
was graven.

Ni fallat fatum Scoti quocunque locatum
Invenient Lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem.
Unless Old Prophets fail, and Wizards Wits be blind.
The Scots shall surely Reign, where they this Stone shall find.
Which was judged to be verified by the coming in of K. James. After his return
from Scotland, the King made a general inquiry into the Misdemeanors and
Oppressions of his Officers of all sorts, whose number and offenses were so
many, that the Fines laid on them filled his Exchequer, and enabled him to pay
off all his old debts. At this time the Bishop of Chester complained grievously
against Prince Edward, that by the lewd advice of Pierce Gaveston, he broke
into his Park and destroyed his Game, for which the Prince was committed to
Prison, and Gaveston banished, not to return upon pain of death.

In his thirty third year a General Peace was proclaimed between England and
Scotland, and Robert Bruce with other Noblemen voluntarily swore Allegiance to
K. Edward; yet within less than a year after, Bruce and his Confederates
privately procured a Dispensation from Pope Boniface, with an Injunction, That
he should not meddle with the Scots, they being a Free Nation, and immediately
appertaining to the Roman Chapel, and that therefore the City of Jerusalem
could not but defend her Citizens, and help those that did trust in the Lord
like Mount Sion; and therefore enjoined Edward not to lay any claim to the
Sovereignty thereof; the King having read it, with a great Oath, said, I will
not hold my peace for Sion, nor Jerusalem 's sake, so long as I have breath in
my Body, but will prosecute my Right, which is known to all the World to be
just, and defend it to the Death: But the Scots threatened him, that if he would
not desist, the Pope would proceed further; to which the King with a disdainful
smile answered, Have you done Homage to me as to the Chief Lord of the Kingdom
of Scotland, and do you now think to frighten me with Threats and Lies, as if I
were not able to maintain my Right: Let me hear no more of this, for if I do, I
swear by the Lord, I will destroy all Scotland from Sea to Sea; To which the
Scots answered, that in defense of Justice and their Countries Rights they
would spend their last Blood.

Yet Edward to keep fair with the Pope, sent the Earl of Lincoln to Rome to
justify his proceedings, but the Pope continued resolute, whereupon in a
Parliament holden at Lincoln a full defense was made for the King, though with
this Protestation, that the thing did not exhibit the Trial of Cause, but only
gave the Pope an Account thereof, to satisfy his Conscience, the Barons
unanimously declaring, That their Kings Rights were not to be tried before any
Tribunal under Heaven, they resolving to defend the Independency of the Crown
of England with all their might, against all Persons whatsoever; to which
Declaration an hundred of the Peers Subscribed their Names: These high
Resolutions made the Pope decline his pretensions, leaving the Scots to
themselves, over whom Edward constituted the valiant Lord Segrave to be Custos,
whom yet the Scots soon after in a Skirmish discomfited, and took Prisoner; but
he was rescued with all his Company by Sir Robert Neville, without the loss of
one Man on his Part. After which the King marched thither with a great Army,
but the Scots fled to the Woods and Mountains, and the King returned to London,
whither not long after Captain Wallace, a Knights Son, being betrayed, was sent
Prisoner, and executed for High Treason, and his Quarters set up in diverse
parts of Scotland. Then Robert Bruce appeared with Forces, but was routed, and
forced into the utmost Isles of Scotland; yet afterward recruiting, he did
much mischief; against whom King Edward marching, fell sick at Carlisle,
commanding his Son Edward to prosecute the Scots, and to carry his dead Body
along with him through Scotland: For as long, said he, as thou have my Bones
with thee, thou shall certainly be victorious: And that he should send his
Heart to the Holy Land, with 140 Knights and their Retinue, for which Expense
he had provided 32000 l. in Silver,; and charging him upon pain of eternal
Damnation, not to divert the Money to any other use. Lastly, Commanding him
upon pain of his Curse, not to recall Gaveston, that wicked Debaucher of h s
Youth, without common Consent. And soon after he died, in the Five and
thirtieth year of his Reign, and Sixty ninth of his Age, 1307. and was buried
at Westminster.

EDWARD the SECOND, King of England, etc.
portrait of King Edward the 2nd

AS soon as e're my Father was Interred,
Greatness and Glory seemed to wait on me:
When to the Regal Throne I was preferred,
All did rejoice, to me all bowed the Knee.
But all these fickle Joys soon had an end,
My Love to thee, Pierce Gaveston, was so great,
My Dotage scarcely left me one true Friend,
My Queens, Peers, Peoples Hopes I did defeat.
Tormented both in Body and in Mind.
I by the Scots was beat at Bannocks Bourn,
And forced by Flight Security to find,
Yet seized on by my Queen. At my return
A red-hot Iron did my Bowels goar.
My woeful Misery all Men did deplore.
THe comely Personage and Majesty of Edward the Second, who succeeded his
Father, seemed to promise many Blessings from his Government; but his Mind
being grossly corrupted with vicious Company in his Youth, made him burdensome to
his Nobility, and a scorn to his inferior Subjects, which brought woeful
Calamities upon himself and his Kingdom. For no sooner was his Head adorned
with the Imperial Crown, but his Heart longed for the debauched Gaveston, who
though banished by his Father, and Edward having taken an Oath that he should
never return, yet hearing how things went, he soon came back, and was received
with extraordinary Joy and Content by the King. The Nobles being extremely
concerned, as fearing the ruin of Church and State by his Insolence, presumed
to put the King in mind of his Oath; but as his Conscience did not trouble him
for the breach thereof, so their Dislike increased his Love; so that Gaveston,
and none but Gaveston, managed all, being created Baron of Wallingford, Earl of
Cornwall, and Treasurer of all his Jewels and Treasure; who fearing a Storm,
privately sent beyond Sea a massy Table and Tressels of beaten Gold, with many
other rich Ornaments and Jewels. He likewise enticed the King to banquet and
drink without measure, and to leave the Society of Isabel his Queen, Daughter
to King Philip the Fair of France. The Nobles murmured; the Common People
talked boldly; his own Servants privately told him of the Villainies of
Gaveston: yet he disregarded the first, and frowned on the last. But yet
perceiving he should not be able to protect him against the Importunity of the
Lords, he was sent into Ireland, where he was no sooner arrived, but Messengers
with Letters of Comfort, Plate, Jewels, Gold, and Silver in abundance, and
Promises of Reward and Advancement, were sent him by the King; so that it
seemed rather an Honorable Ambassy, than Banishment.

During Gaveston's absence, the King was so melancholy and discontented, that
his Nobility, in hopes of his Reformation, moved the King for his return. When
he came back, his Pride and Insolence increased so much, that he publicly
gloried in his misleading the King, and abused the Lords to their Faces; so
that being no longer able to suffer his Impudence, they besieged him in a
strong Castle, whither he fled, which having won, they took Gaveston, and cut
off his Head; at which the King was so highly incensed, that he sought all ways
to revenge his Death: And to vex the Nobility, he took into his nearest
Familiarity and Counsels the two Spencers, Father and Son, Men as wicked, and
odious to the Lords and People, as the former, who persuaded him to frequent
the Company of Harlots and Concubines, and utterly to neglect his Queen. But
this evil Government of himself and his Kingdom kindled new Heats between him
and his Subjects, of which Robert Bruce taking the advantage, came from Norway
(whither he had fled) into Scotland, and was joyfully received, and crowned
King of that Kingdom; and raising a puissant Army, he entered England, burning
and destroying all before him, till he was encountered by the King; but Edward
fighting a Battle within Scotland, received an Overthrow, with the loss of many
thousand Soldiers, besides Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, forty two Lords,
and above fourscore Knights and Barons who were taken Prisoners, and he
shamefully forced to fly into England for Safety; where one John Powdras, a
Tanners Son of Exeter, confronted him, affirming, That he was the Legitimate
Son of King Edward the First, and that he was changed in his Cradle by his
Nurse for a Carters Child, offering several Proofs for the same, and, among
others, alleging the unkingly and base Qualities of Edward; upon which many of
the Vulgar flocked to him: But being taken, and confessing his Treason, he was
condemned and executed.

At the same time the almost impregnable Castle of Berwick was betrayed to
Robert Bruce, and such a great Famine and Murrain of Cattle happened as was
hardly ever known; Likewise about two hundred Highwaymen and Thieves, Clothed
like Gray Friars, Robbed and Murdered the Inhabitants of the North part without
respect to Age or Sex; the Scots also raised an Army, and made such
Devastation, that the Famine increased woefully, so that the living could scarce
bury the dead, and the rest were forced to eat Rats, Mice, Cats, Dogs, Horses
and the like. Edward marching to suppress the Scots, received a second
overthrow, more lamentable than the former, returning back with much disgrace,
leaving his Northern Subjects a merciless prey to their Barbarous Enemies. The
Nobility observing the miseries of the Kingdom daily to increase, complain of
the Misgovernment of the Spencers, telling him plainly, They had so much
interest in his Person and the Government, that they were bound to inform him
of his misdemeanors, and the mis-managment of his two Corrupt Counselors.

The King knowing their complaints to be true, yet resolving not to part with
his Favorites, contrived to surprise those Noblemen who most hated the
Spencers, and giving them a pleasing answer, presently after summoned a
Parliament, pretending to reform what was amiss, to the great joy both of Lords
and Commons; but the Barons suspecting treachery repaired to London with a
strong Army of their followers, all clothed in the same Livery, which highly
offended the King, because he was afraid they would deprive him of his dear
Minions, which happened accordingly; for it was enacted by Parliament, That the
two Spencers should be banished for ever, and not to return upon pain of death,
after which they were soon sent away; at which most Men were pleased, but the
King continually discovered his anger against the Lords, who had forced his
consent to their Banishment, which he made appear upon this occasion: The
younger Spencer having got a few Ships together, robbed and pillaged the
Merchants of England, and all other Nations in the Narrow Seas, upon which they
Petitioned that a Fleet might be set out to seize and Execute him as a Pyrate
and notorious Thief, the King smiled, seeming to rejoice thereat, and instead
of punishing him, pardoned them both, recalled them from Banishment, to
despite the Barons, and raised them to higher Honor and Offices than before.

The Lords enraged hereat, especially since the Spencers affronted them openly
upon all occasions, they resolved on revenge, and to that purpose immediately
raise a strong Army, and take the Field; and the King with the two Spencers,
and some other of the Nobles did the like, and many sharp encounters passed
between them, the Lords forgetting they undutifully fought against their
Sovereign, and the King, that his Cruelty had compelled them to take Arms: In
the end when many of the Barons, and thousands of their adherents were slain
they fled, and were pursued by the King who took the Earls of Lancaster,
Hereford, and many other Lords, two and twenty of whom were beheaded in diverse
parts of the Realm, to the great terror of the People. This success made the
Spencers yet more insolent, so that now they made their Will a Law in all
things, and presuming that all would be done they desired, they persuaded the
King to call a Parliament at York, in which he created his eldest Son Edward
Prince of Wales, and Duke of Aquitan; Old Hugh Spencer was made Earl of
Winchester, and Sir Andrew Harkly who was very active against the Lords, Earl
of Carlisle; he likewise exacted the sixth penny of all Men's Estates in
England, Wales, and Ireland, whereat the People grievously complained,
alleging, that they were quite impoverished by Famine, and Dearth, but
especially by reason of the disorders in the Government.

The Scots having notice that K. Edward resolved to revenge the wrongs
committed against his Subjects, under Robert Bruce their usurping King, to
divert him, invaded Ireland with strong Force, but the King being forewarned,
had sufficiently provided against their landing, so that most of them were
slain, and the rest forced to fly to their Ships, and return shamefully home:
The King now thinking himself invincible, marches with a brave Army into
Scotland, where the Scots being well-armed, and many thousands in number,
pretended to give him Battle, when they intended nothing less, for as Edward
approached, they withdrew into the Woods, Forests, and Mountains, whereby the
English Army were soon extremely distressed by Storms, Rain, Frost, Snow, and
Hail; and likewise with want of Provisions, which caused great Mortality, so
that without performing any thing Honorable, he began to retire, which the
Scots perceiving, they pursued him with all cruelty and violence, and falling
upon his Army, forced the King to save himself by flight, and leave behind him
his Treasure, Ordinance, and Provisions: This disaster happened by the
treachery of Sir Andrew Harkley, who having privately received Money of the
Scots, designed to betray the King, for which Treason he after lost his Head.

The Queen being sensible of the malice of the Spencers against her, who
estranged the King from her Company and Bed, and lamenting the late slaughter
of many of the Nobility, and the continued misery of the Nation, she with her
Son Prince Edward fled into France to her Brother King Charles, where she was
at first received with great joy and Promises of assistance; the Barons
likewise by Letters assuring her of their Service to her self and Son. But the
Spencers by unvaluable Presents to K. Charles and his Courtiers, soon took him
off, that instead of assistance he reproved his Sister for leaving her Husband;
the Pope being likewise obliged by the same means, required the French King
upon pain of his Curse to send the Queen and Prince to Edward, and she hardly
escaped being betrayed by her own Brother, but privately getting into the
Empire by means of Sir Robert Artois, her kinsman, she was joyfully entertained
by the Lord Beaumont and his Brother, who accompanied her and her Son with
three hundred Knights and Gentlemen, and landed in England, at which the Barons
rejoicing, soon joined with her, increasing hourly, so that the King hastened
to Wales to raise Forces leaving the Government of London to Walter Stapleton
L. Treasurer, and Bishop of Exeter, a great Favorite of the Spencers, and an
Enemy to the Queen, and therefore generally hated by the Citizens, who
abhorring his proud and insolent Government, caused his head to be struck off
at the Standard in Cheapside without any Legal Trial, and then violently
rushing into the Tower slew all they found there, keeping that and the City for
the Queen and Prince.

K. Edward upon this revolt, changed his purpose, and posting to Bristow
fortified the Town and Castle, Sir Hugh Spencer, the Father and Son being with
him, and the Earl of Arundel was made Governor, resolving to defend it with
all their might; but soon after the City was besieged and taken by the Queen
and Lords, and the Earl of Arundel and Spencer the Father taken Prisoners, but
the King and Young Spencer being besieged in the Castle, not trusting to the
strength thereof, got out privately in the Night, and put themselves in a small
Fisherboat, but every day for a whole week, when the Boat went to Sea it was
driven back again near the Castle, which the L. Beaumont observing, he with a
small Vessel chased the Boat and took her, wherein he found the King and young
Spencer, whom they so much desired, and brought them to the Queen, who
presenting them before the besieged in the Castle, they presently surrendered:
Old Spencer, the Earl of Winchester, and the Earl of Arundel whose Daughter was
married to the younger Spencer, were beheaded, and the King being in an
honorable restraint, the Queen, Prince, and Barons with a strong Army marched
toward London, carrying young Spencer in Triumph, before whom several Fiddlers,
and Pipers sung, danced, and played scornfully upon Reeds, through every Town
and Village as they past; where being come he was bound to the top of an high
Ladder, and his Heart and Privy-members being burnt, his Head was set on London
Bridge.

After which the Queen nobly treated and rewarded Sir John of Heynault, the
Lord Beaumont and their followers, who departed home, and were there received
with great honor. The Queen and young Prince to redress all disorders,
assembled a Parliament, in which the King by general consent was deposed, and
committed to Killingworth Castle with honorable atttendance, and Prince Edward
his Son Crowned King; not long after Edward was removed to Cors-Castle, where
he was barbarously murdered by his Keepers, who through a Horn thrust a burning
Spit into his Fundament; after he had reigned almost nineteen years, and in the
forty first of his Age, 1307.

EDWARD the THIRD, King of England, etc.
portrait of King Edward the 3rd

IN Peace and War I still Triumphant stood,
Fortune for me seemed to fix her Wheel;
I did revenge my Fathers Death and Blood,
And forced France my valiant Arm to feel.
I warred on Scotland with victorious Steel;
The slaughtring Sword and Fire did all devour:
A Kingdom so divided needs must reel,
Betwixt the Bruces and the Baliols Power.
Thus every day my Grandeur mounted higher;
With Black Prince Edward, my victorious Son,
Unto the top of Honor we aspire,
By glorious Victories, and great Actions done.
But all my Triumphs, Fortunes, Force, and Strength,
Old Age, and Death, to Nothing brought at length.
AT the Age of Fifteen years Edward the Third was Crowned King, his deposed
Father being then alive. He was chiefly counseled in his younger years by
Queen Isabel his Mother, Edmond Earl of Kent, and Sir Roger Mortimer; which
Knight, to ingratiate himself with the Queen, was a chief Instrument in the
Murder of the late King. In his second year the Scots proclaimed War against
England; whereupon King Edward with an Army of fifty four thousand Men, and
attended with Sir John Heynault, the L. Beamont, and five hundred Lords and
Gentlemen, marched into Scotland, where he pursued his lurking Enemies who fled
into Woods, Mountains, and Hills, and thereby tired the English Army, so that
he returned without any memorable Action, and then married Philip the Daughter
of William Earl of Heynault, and calling a Parliament at Northampton, the two
Spencers, and Walter Stapleton were attainted of High Treason; at which time by
the advice of the Queen and Mortimer, a dishonorable Peace was made with the
Scots, whereby that King was discharged from doing homage to Edward, and the
great Charter called Ragman, whereby the late King of Scotland, and all his
Nobility under their Hands and Scals did acknowledge their Subjection to the
Kings of England, was delivered up, and the Kings Sister Jane was married to
David Son and Heir to K. R. Bruce.

Roger Mortimer was now made Earl of March, which did much discontent the
Nobility, especially after they saw, that by his power with the King, and
Familiarity with the Queen, he had trecherously procured the Earl of Kent the
Kings Uncle to be beheaded; but by Divine Vengeance, Mortimer himself was
charged by the State with these Traiterous Articles. 1, That he had wickedly
procured the murder of the late King. 2. That by false and malicious
accusations he had caused the King to cut off the Head of his Uncle, who was
Noble, Religious, Valiant, and a main Pillar of the Commonwealth. 3. That he
had too familiarly conversed with the Queen Mother, to her just reproach, and
the Kings dishonor. 4. That for a Bribe of twenty thousand pound, he had
procured the release of the Scots Homage. Lastly, That he had cheated the King
of his Jewels and Treasure, converting them to his own use. For these horrid
Treasons he was condemned and Executed in the same manner as young Spencer; and
Q. Isabel was committed to a strong Castle, where she continued above thirty
years after, and then died.

In his fifth year Philip the French King sent to require King Edward to do
Homage for the Duchy of Guyen, which he unwillingly performed, his Lords being
therewith offended, alleging, That in the Right of Queen Isabel his Mother,
the Crown of France belonged to him, and that he therefore ought not to have
acknowledged any Fealty at all. The King then sent to David King of Scotland to
restore the Castle of Berwick, and do him Homage for the Kingdom; but David
stoutly answered, That his Father won that Castle by Conquest, and he would
hold it by the Sword; and, That his Father never acknowledged any Subjection;
and if any had been due, yet King Edward had released him from it. The King
being of a great Spirit, was resolved to revenge these Affronts, by conquering
both Scotland and France; and to that end, he presently sent an Army against
the Scots, and overrun the better part of that Country without resistance,
taking Berwick, and Crowning Edward Baliol King of Scotland, to whom he
committed the Government of Berwick Castle; and two years after he again
marched into Scotland, and settled this new King on his Throne, receiving his
Homage, and restored several English Lords to their Estates, which by the Peace
with King Bruce they were deprived of. David the deposed King fled into France,
and after two years, by the assistance of the French King, landed some Forces
in Scotland; but King Edward soon encountered and routed them, and then returned
victoriously into England.

In his tenth year Philip the French King gave the Earldom of Artois away by
Sentence from Robert Artois, to Maud Countess of Burgundy, and Aunt to this
Robert; which so incensed him, that he said, By me Philip was made King, and by
me he shall be again deposed. For these Words he was proclaimed a Traitor to
the Crown throughout all France, so that to save his Life he fled into England,
where, for his former Service to Queen Isabel and her Son when in France, he
was honorably received and entertained by King Edward, who knew him to be a
wise and valiant Man, and therefore made him Earl of Richmond, and loved him so
entirely, that he never undertook any Matter of Consequence without his Advice.
This Noble Knight continually informed the King of his Right to the Crown of
France, by his Mother Queen Isabel, and that with such convincing Reasons and
Persuasions, that Edward began now in earnest to contrive the attaining
thereof, negotiating privately with the Earl of Heynault his Wives Father, and
Brother-in-Law to the French King, and with Sir John of Heynault Lord Beaumont
his Brother, and several other Princes and States of Germany, who encouraged
and assisted him therein, creating him Vicar General of the Empire, by which he
had Power to command the Nobility and Commons of those Countries to aid him in
his Enterprise.

Whilst these things were secretly consulting in England, Philip of France
little suspected he was to fight for his Crown with the English, and therefore
at the Importunity of Pope Benedict the Eleventh, he had prepared a greater
Army for the Holy Land, than ever any Christian Prince did before him, which
were provided with all Necessaries for three years; and the Government of his
Kingdom he committed to his eldest Son John Duke of Normandy. Being just ready
to depart, he had News of the Pretensions and Preparations of the English, and
therefore thought it more necessary to defend his Kingdom at home, than to go
upon such a frivolous Errand abroad. In the mean time King Edward having by
many Politic Devices drained his Subjects Purses, insomuch that for want of
Money a fat Ox was sold for a Noble, a fat Sheep for Six pence, six Pigeons for
a Penny, and a Quarter of Wheat for Two shillings, he with his Queen sailed to
Antwerp, where he concluded the Methods of the War with the Princes of Germany,
and then returning into England, raised a strong Army of 27000 fighting Men,
which he landed in France about Autumn.

The French King having an Army of 60000 Soldiers, and accompanied with the
Kings of Bohemia, Navar, and Scotland, with Five Dukes, Twenty six Earls, and
above 4000 Lords and Knights, entered the Field, where he found Edward prepared
for Battle; but by the Mediation of the Countess of Heynault, King Philip's
Sister, and Mother to King Edward's Wife, a Cessation was concluded, and King
Edward with his Nobles and Soldiers returned to England. Yet four years after,
Edward again met with the Princes of Germany at Brussels, who desired the
Flemings to join with them; but they refused, unless Edward would entitle
himself King of France, and Quarter the Arms of France with those of England;
and lastly, would, as King of France release them from a Bond of Two Millions
of Florens, whereby they were obliged not to make War with the King of France.
King Edward soon yielded to all their Desires; whereupon they obliged
themselves by a solemn Contract in Writing, under their Hands and Seals to
assist him to the utmost. In the mean time the French Kings Navy landed some
thousands of Men at Southampton, burning the Town, and Villages thereabouts.
Upon his return the King called a Parliament, who raised so great a Tax, that
the People turned their Prayers into Curses: He likewise borrowed great Sums of
his richest Subjects, and of London 20000 Marks. He coined abundance of Gold
and Silver Money, wherein he quartered the Arms of France, and entitled himself
King of England and France.

Having raised an Army of 10000 stout Soldiers, he imbarqued them in 200 Ships,
and sailing toward Sluice, he fortunately met with the French Fleet, whereon
were 40000 Men of diverse Nations, whom the King fell upon with his whole Navy,
and after a fierce and bloody Fight, very few of the French escaped, being all
either sunk or taken. This Loss was so very considerable, that they were afraid
to discover it to the French King, lest it should too much discompose him, and
therefore they contrived his Jester should do it, who often repeating in his
hearing, Cowardly Englishmen, Fainthearted Englishmen, Dastardly Englishmen;
The King observing him, asked him why; Because, said he, they had not the
courage to leap into the Sea, as our brave Frenchmen did; whereby the King
began to have some knowledge of this grand disaster. Edward received but small
Loss, so that the next day he landed at Gaunt, and soon after besieged Tournay;
but by the importunity of the aforesaid Countess of Heynault a second Truce was
concluded for one year.

In King Edward's absence, the Scots disliking their King Edward Baliol,
because he would not engage against the English, and calling in David Bruce,
they invade Northumberland, destroying all before them, and laying close Siege
to Newcastle; but at Midnight 200 resolute Men issued out, and secretly entered
into the Earl of Murray's Tent, seizing him, and killing many, to the great
terror of the Scots Camp: whereupon David finding stout Resistance, raised the
Siege, and marched to Durham, which he took, plundered, and burnt, slaying all
the Inhabitants, and then sat down before Roxborough Castle, defended by the
beautiful Countess of Salisbury, and her Brother Sir William Mountague, who
being continually assaulted, expected no Help but from the King: and to give
him notice of their Extremity, the valiant Knight himself, mounted on a swift
Horse, rid full speed through thousands of his Enemies, sending word to King
David as he rid along, That in a short time he should again hear of him. Upon
which the Scots pushed on the Siege with all vigor, yet could not carry it,
and therefore suddenly raised it, and returned home. King Edward arriving there
that very day, was much discomposed that he had missed them; yet by the
Mediation of several Honorable Personages, a Truce was concluded for two
years. The King, after the Scots were gone, disarmed himself, and with ten or
twelve Persons of Quality entered the Castle, where he was soon inflamed with
the Love of the fair Countess; but her Virtue resisted all Temptations, so that
he departed from her in Discontent.

The King then made a Royal Feast for all his Nobility and Foreigners that
came thereto, wherein were acted several Martial Sports in one of which the
Lord Beaumont a Noble Knight was unfortunately slain. After this the King
called a Paliament at Westminster, wherein he created his eldest Son Edward
Prince of Wales, and a Tax was raised for the Wars in France, for which the
King confirmed Magna Charta, Charta de Foresta, and several other Statutes. The
next year the King for encouraging Virtue and Valor, instituted the Order of
the Knights of the Garter at Windsor, and then sent an Army into France under
the Command of the Earl of Darby, John the French Kings eldest Son having
closely besieged the Castle of Aguil^on in Gascoin with near 100000 men. King
Edward with his Son, eight Earls, fifteen Barons, and many Gentlemen of
Quality, with an Army of 14000 men, by the advice of the Lord Harcourt a
banished Nobleman of France, landed in Normandy, and took the strong Town of
Harflew, plundering diverse others, whereby every Common Soldier was made a
Gentleman with the Spoil, and his Army increasing, he took the City of Caen,
and abundance of other Towns and Castles, the English pursuing their good
Fortune so far, that they were on a sudden encompassed with 100000 French on
the one side, and a River on the other, yet passing on the Sand at low Water,
he at last got clear, with the slaughter of a very great multitude of French,
and marching toward Cressy, the French King was there resolved to try the
fortune of a Field Battle, and the English after Prayers to God for sucess,
with great Courage prepared for fight; the King had given the Vanguard to his
Son Edward, who for his Valor was called the Black Prince; the Second
Battalion was led by the Earl of Northampton, and the third by the King himself.

The Signal of Battle being given, both parties furiously engaged, wherein the
Black Prince was very hard put to it, and sent to his Father for succor, who
stood on a Windmil hard by to observe the Fight, but the King refused him any
aid, saying, Let them send no more to me whatever happens, while my Son is
alive, but let him either conquer or dye, since if it please God he escape, I
am resolved the honor of this day shall be only his; when the Prince heard
this, he was forced to put out his utmost Courage and Vigor whereby he obtained
a glorious Victory, the greatest part of the French Army lying dead before
them; so that in two days wherein the Fight continued, there were slain of the
French 11 Princes, 80 Barons, 1200 Knights, and above 30000 Common Soldiers;
the French King himself hardly escaping by flight. After the Battle, King
Edward kissing and embracing his Son, said, Fair Son, God send you
perseverance, that you may always succeed as you have prosperously begun; you
have Nobly acquitted your self, and worthily deserve the Government of a
Kingdom bestowed upon you for your Valor. King Edward perceiving, that after
this Victory the French King made no Preparations to resist him, marched toward
Callice, burning and destroying all before him, and begirt it with a close
Siege, which after it had continued a whole year the French King with an Army
of 200000 men came to the relief thereof, which not being able to effect, the
Passages thereto being so well fortified by K. Ed^ (...) went back again,
leaving the poor Townsme^ (...) mercy of King Edward. During this Sieg^ (...)
King of Scotland invaded England with an Army of 50000 men, by the procurement
of the French King, but the Queen with 12000 stout Soldiers, fought with him,
routed his Army, took King David Prisoner, and several other Persons of Honor,
killing diverse more, and above 15000 Scots.

After this Victory, the Queen attended with a Troop of handsome Ladies and
Gentlewomen, whose Husbands or Kinsmen had long lain at the Siege of Callice,
sailed thither, and were entertained by the King and his whole Army with great
joy; the Town being despairing of Relief, begged the Kings mercy, which he
denied unless six of the chiefest Citizens came out to him in their Shirts,
barefoot, and bareheaded with Halters about their Necks, to be disposed of at
the Kings pleasure, which hard condition some of them undertook to perform,
presenting the King with the Keys of the Town and Castle, which Edward
receiving, commanded them to be all presently hanged, but his Commanders
interposed strongly on their behalf, which yet could not prevail, the King
threatening to make them examples for the wrongs done to the English Nation at
Sea; at length the Queen with Prayers and Tears on her Knees procured their
Pardon. The King having got possession of this important Town, returned to
England, and was received at London with great Triumph; and by the Popes means
a Truce was concluded with the French for two years; which being expired,
Edward sent a strong Army under the Conduct of his Son the Black Prince into
Gascoyn, destroying all in their march.

But King John, who succeeded his Father Philip, resolved to stop this Current,
(and the Black Prince having only 10000 men with him) John raised a vast Army,
and accompanied with his young Son Philip and the Flower of the Nobility of
France, made all speed toward Prince Edward, who was at Poicters ready to
receive him. The Fight was very bloody, but the English Archers galling the
French Horse with their Arrows, soon disordered their Army, and notwithstanding
the utmost conduct of the valiant K. John, they were put to the rout, the King
and his Son being taken Prisoners, who being brought before the Prince, he
bowed to the King, and giving him comfortable words, feasted him and his Son
Philip very nobly, and lodged him in his own Bed. With this Prize the Black
Prince returned into England, and was joyfully received by all. In this Fight
were taken seventeen Earls, above fifty Lords, and a multitude of Knights and
Gentlemen of Quality, so that every Soldier who had least had two Prisoners,
all which with the Spoil of the Field, the Prince freely gave the Soldiers,
and every man had Gold and Silver in abundance, costly, Armor and other
valuable things, being left on the ground as worth nothing.

King John lived some time at the Savoy, and after at Windsor, being as kindly
treated by the King as he could desire; and after four years Imprisonment a
Peace was concluded, whereby it was agreed, That King John should pay 500000 l.
Ransom, of Sterling Money; and several Countries were freely resigned to the
English by John; and the French King never to assist any King of Scotland
against England. About which time, David King of Scotland, who had been a
Prisoner in England ten years, for a Ransom of 100000 l and giving his Oath
never again to bear Arms against England, was released. About two years after,
three Kings came at once to visit King Edward, John King of France, David King
of Scots, and the King of Cyprus. The next year the Black Prince went into
Normandy, and was made Governor of the English Conquests, who assisted Peter
King of Castile, and restored him to his Crown, of which he was dispossessed by
his Bastard brother Henry; but soon after Henry with fresh Forces suddenly fell
upon King Peter, seized him, and put him to death.

By reason of Peter's Death, the English Soldiers under the Black Prince
despairing of receiving their Pay, and being in great necessity, daily
petitioned the Prince for Relief; who finding no other means to supply them,
imposed several Taxes upon the Inhabitants of Aquitain, who finding their
Privileges invaded, complained thereof to the French King, who summoned the
Prince to appear before him at Paris, contrary to the express Articles of Peace
lately concluded, and presently proclaimed War against England; and the Prince
not being in a Posture of Defense, all those Countries, Towns, and Forts daily
revolted to the French: so that King Edward, who had been Victorious forty
years, lost all those Provinces almost in one. The French provided a Navy
likewise, wherewith they commanded the Narrow Seas. But John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster going over to Callice with a brave Army, soon made the Frenchmen feel
his Fury, and recovered many Towns; but after John's departure, another Army,
commanded by Sir Robert Knowls and the Lord Fitzwater, by reason of some
Quarrel between the Commanders, was defeated by the French King, and 1000
English slain, whereby all the Garrisons were again delivered up to the French.

The King much disturbed at these Misfortunes, called a Parliament, wherein the
Temporalty freely gave him a Subsidy of 15000 l. but the Clergy denied him any
Supply; whereupon he removed them from all Honors and Offices, and placed more
grateful Subjects in their room. The French King had now besieged Rochel almost
a year, for whose Relief a Fleet was sent under the Earl of Pembroke; but he
was fought with by Henry the Bastard of Castile, and the Earl, with 160 more,
taken Prisoners; the rest with much terror and difficulty escaped to England.
Upon the News of this Defeat several other Towns and Provinces revolted to the
French King. After this John of Gaunt landed with strong Forces at Callice, and
joining with the Duke of Britain, ravaged the Country till they came to
Bourdeaux, where the Black Prince lay very sick, and John was made Governor of
those Provinces. Prince Edward died soon after, and was buried at Canterbury,
the King himself not living long after, dying in the Fifty first year of his
Reign, and the Sixty fifth of his Age, 1377. and was buried at Westminster.

RICHARD the SECOND, King of England, etc.
portrait of King Richard the 2nd

A Sunshine Morn often brings a Showry Day;
A Calm at Sea sometimes foretells a Storm;
All is not Gold that appears bright and gay;
A bad Mind does a handsome Shape deform.
So I, who was by Blood, Descent, and Form,
The perfect Image of a Gallant Prince,
Because my Vices I did not reform,
No Faith's in Face or Shape, I did evince.
My Royal Name and Power a Mock was made,
My Subjects madly in Rebellion rose,
Mischief on Mischief still did me invade,
Opposed, Deposed, Exposed, Enclosed in Woes.
With doubtful Fortune I in Trouble Reigned;
At length by Murder, Death and Rest I gained.
KIng Edward the Third in his last Sickness created his Nephew Richard (Son to
the Black Prince deceased) Prince of Wales, Earl of Chester, and Duke of
Cornwall; committing the Regency of the Kingdom to John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster. After his Death, Richard, the Second of that Name, of Eleven years
old, was Crowned King of England. In the whole Course of his evil Government he
slighted his Nobility, and taxed his Subjects severely, to throw it away
prodigally upon his ill-deserving Favorites; despising the Advice of the Wise,
and harkening to the Follies of his young debauched Companions. In his first
year, Charles King of France presuming on his Minority, being assisted by the
King of Castile, landed in England, burning the Towns of Plymouth, Dartmouth,
Portsmouth, Rye, and others on the Sea; and would have proceeded further, had
they not been encountered by the Earls of Cambridge, Buckingham, and others, who
beat them back to their Ships.

At the same time a valiant Scot, named Alexander Ramsey, (at the instigation
of the French King) with only forty men desperately scaled the Walls of Berwick
Castle, and finding the Captain and Guards sleeping, they took it without
blows, designing to have taken the Town too, but the Inhabitants from the great
noise in the Castle, suspecting mischief, cut down the Stairs of the Drawbridge
on the Townside, so that when the Scots let it fall, the Chains broke, and the
Bridge fell into the Castle Ditch, whereby the Scots not being able to get out,
were made Prisoners by their own Victory. They then endeavored to fortify the
Castle, but it was soon besieged and taken by K. Richard's Forces, who gave
quarter to none but only Ramsey their Captain.

Soon after the French again landed in England, doing great mischief at Dover,
Winchelsey, Hastings, and Gravesend, where they got much Booty. To prevent and
revenge these injuries, a Parliament was called at Westminster, wherein four
Pence was laid upon every person above fourteen years old, the levying whereof
caused a dangerous Rebellion under Jack Straw, Wat Tyler, John Wall a Factious
Priest and others, who styled themselves The Kings Men, and the Servants of the
Commonweal of England, declaring that all Men ought to be equal in Dignity and
Estate, as being all the Sons of Adam; they marched through several Countries
to London, the mean sort of People joining with them, so that they became very
formidable, committing all manner of Insolences, and making bold demands of
the King, and the Lord Mayor, which so incensed the Mayor, that he struck Tyler
off his Horse with his Sword, where he was killed immediately, upon which the
Rebels who were above 20000 soon dispersed, no less than fifteen hundred being
Executed for the same, with several cruel Deaths and Torments in diverse parts
of the Realm. And thus in an instant vanished this great cloud which threatened
the destruction of King and Kingdom.

In his tenth year, the King forsaking the advice of his gravest and most
experienced Nobility, was persuaded to commit many illegal and disorderly
Actions by the Counsel of Michael de la Pool his Chancellor, Robert de Vere
Earl of Oxford* Alexander Archbishop of York, and Robert Tresillian Lord Chief
Justice, who without cause exasperated him against the Duke of Gloucester his
Uncle, and the Earls of Warwick and Arundel whom they intended to surprise at
Supper, if Nicholas Exton Lord Mayor of London would have assisted them: But
failing herein, they resolved to impeach them in Parliament; but they being
jealous of the Kings intent, came thither strongly guarded; while they were on
their way, in a Wood near the Court, the King asked the Opinion of several
about him, what he should do in the case, at length he merrily demanded of one
Sir Hugh Liun, who had been a good Soldier in his days, but was now
distracted, what he would advise him to do; Issue out, quoth Sir Hugh, and let
us set upon them and kill every Mothers Son, and when thou have so done, by
Gods Eyes thou have killed all the faithful Friends thou have in England. But
K. Richard doubting the success of any violent course, that Design was
defeated, and the King demanding a great Tax of four fifteens, is not only
denied, but several misdemeanors of his Government are declared to him, and at
length Michael de la Pool his favorite is by the Lords found guilty of many
offenses, Condemned, Fined, and Imprisoned, and Commissioners were appointed to
examine the Crimes of all the Kings Officers, the King taking an Oath not to
recall that Commission without consent of Parliament, and it was enacted, That
all those who should persuade the King to infringe the same, should for the
second offense suffer as Traitors to the King and Kingdom. Notwithstanding
which this Parliament was no sooner ended, but Pool, Vere Tresillian and
others, persuaded him, contrary to this Solemn Oath, to assemble the Judges at
Nottingham, where they pronounced the Duke of Gloucester and the thirteen
Commissioners and diverse others to be guilty of High Treason, for compelling
the King to ratify the Commission under his Great Seal; which Judgment they
confirmed under their Hands as agreeable to the Laws of the Kingdom.

The Truce with France being ended, that King sent 1000 Persons of Quality into
Scotland, who joining with their Army of 30000 they therewith invaded England,
committing many violences; but hearing King Richard was marching toward them,
they turned into the craggy Mountains of Wales doing much mischief to the
Inhabitants, and in the mean time K. Richard entered Scotland with 68000 men,
burning and destroying Edinborough, St. Johnstons, Sterling, Dundee with many
other places, and then returned home. The Scots and French returning, found
little or no sustenance by reason of the late ruins, so that the Frenchmen were
forced to return home without Horses, Arms or Money, but the Admiral and
several Grandees were kept as Pledges by the Scots till the French King had
satisfied the losses and damages which they had sustained merely for his sake,
upon whose account they entered into this War; whereupon he was forced to send
what Money they demanded, to redeem his Commanders.

The French King vowing Revenge against the English for these Disgraces,
prepared a very great Army, which he designed to transport into England in a
Navy of no less than 1200 Ships: Against whom King Richard soon raised vast
Forces, consisting in above 100000 Men. But all these mighty Preparations soon
came to nothing; for the French Soldiers, in their March toward the Ships,
committed such horrid Insolences, that they were hated and cursed by the
Inhabitants, who did them all the mischief possible, and hid their Provisions
from them, so that they were forced first to sell their Arms, then their
Horses, and last of all their Clothes, to keep themselves from starving; after
which, the French King finding how odious they were to the People, and not
being able to give them fresh Supplies of Money and Victuals, he suddenly
disbanded them, and lost his Honor, his great Hopes, and Money, all at once.

After this, the Barons humbly beseech the King to confirm his former Oath, and
to expel those wicked Counselors aforementioned, and banish those flattering
Judges, who to please him had subscribed such Illegal Opinions; but the King
absolutely denied their Request: Whereupon, to prevent their own and the
Kingdoms Ruin, as they declared, they raised a strong Army of their Friends
and Abettors, wherewith they marched toward London, with full resolution to
have those former Laws confirmed: Upon which those vile Favorites fled all to
the French King for Aid against the Lords. The King having tried the Affections
of his People, and finding they would not fight against the Barons, especially
the Londoners, seemed to agree with the Lords, assuring them, he would call a
Parliament, wherein those Favorites should answer to all charged against them;
and if convicted, should suffer such Punishment as they should judge fit. This
unexpected Condescension so highly contented the Lords, that they returned the
King hearty Thanks and presently disbanded all their Forces; but the Kings Mind
was soon altered, for he permitted Robert Vere Duke of Ireland to raise 5000
Men for the Guard of his own Person; which the Lords observing, they in an
instant got their Confederates together, and suddenly encompassed the Duke and
his Army near the Thames, so that he was forced to swim cross on Horseback,
from whence he presently fled into France, where about five years after, as he
was hunting, he was slain by a Wild Boar.

Yet such was the Affection of the King toward him while he lived, that he
caused his dead Carcass to be embalmed, and brought into England, and to be
apparelled in Princely Robes and Ornaments, putting about his Neck a Chain of
massy Gold, cove^ing his Fingers with Rings, and solemnizing his Funeral with
all manner of Pomp and Magnificence. But to return: After the Duke had escaped
as aforesaid, the Barons executed several of his chief Companions, for terror
to others, but commanded the Multitude to return home with all speed; and then
marching to London, were highly treated and enterta ned by the Citizens. The
King, who kept his Court in the Tower of London, was now willing to admit of a
Conference with the Lords, where it was concluded, That a Parliament should be
called; who being met, the Kings Counselors and Judges were condemned for High
Treason against the King and Kingdom; John Earl of Salisbury and Sir Nicholas
Brember were beheaded, and Tresillian the Lord Chief Justice was hanged at
Tyburn, and the rest of the Judges had suffered the same Fate, had not the
importunate Request of the Queen changed it into Banishment. And thus were all
things in a great measure settled and composed.

The next year the Scots invaded the Land, and did much mischief; but by the
Discretion of the States a Truce was concluded for seven years: And soon after,
John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster raising a strong Army, transported them into
Spain, where he demanded the Kingdom of Castile in the Right of his Wife
Constance, eldest Daughter of Peter the deposed and slain King; and, with the
assistance of the King of Portugal, he performed many great services, forcing
the King of Spain to sue for peace, who married Constance, the Dukes Eldest
Daughter by his said wife, and gave him eight Wagons laden with massy Gold,
paying also ten thousand Marks yearly, to him and his Duchess during their
Lives. He likewise married his younger Daughter Ann, to the King of Portugal*
and then returned to England, with great riches and honor.

In his sixteenth year the usurped Jurisdiction of the Pope was abridged, for
it was enacted in Parliament; That the Popes pretended Authority within this
Kingdom, shall thenceforth cease, and that no appeal upon any Account should be
made to the Court of Rome, and the penalty of perpetual Imprisonment, and
Forfeiture of Lands and Goods, In his seventeenth year his virtuous Queen Ann
died, and two years after K. Richard married Isabel Daughter to Charles the
Sixth of France, upon which a peace was concluded betwixt both Nations for
Thirty years, and K. Richard rashly delivered up the strong Town and Castle of
Breast to the Duke of Britain, which much discontended the Nobility especially
the Duke of Gloucester, the Kings Uncle, who plainly told him, That it was not
convenient to deliver up that without blows, which his Ancestors had gained
with so much expense of blood; whereas the King enraged, resolved upon revenge,
and therefore hearkened to all manner of false informations against him, and
among others he was told, That the Electors designed to have chosen him Emperor
of Germany, had not his Uncle and others represented him as altogether unfit
and unable to Govern an Empire, who could not rule his own Subjects at home.

This false suggestion still aggravated the Kings Anger against the Lords, so
that under pretense of friendship, and with the breach of his Oath and honor,
he caused the Duke of Gloucester, and the Earls of Warwick and Arundel, to be
suddenly apprehended, and then summoning a Parliament, Sir John Bushie Speaker
of the House of Commons, a man of a proud and insolent Spirit, in a long speech
magnified the King, profanely attributing to him the highest Titles of Divine
Honor, and condemning to Hell all that as he said had traitorously conspired
against his Majesty, and particularly impeaching the Archbishop of Canterbury,
who sat next the King, and was silent, because the King under pretense of
favor, had enjoined him not to answer, and to absent himself for the future,
protesting that no damage should arise to him; yet for want of answering these
false Accusations, he was with the Kings consent banished the Realm; the Earl
of Arundel was beheaded for High Treason, and the Earl of Warwick, escaped upon
great submission, and confessing many Crimes whereof he was altogether
Innocent, but the good Duke of Gloucester without Trial or sentence, was sent to
Callice, and by the Kings order, Thomas Mowbray Earl of Nottingham, caused him
to be there stiffled betwixt two Feather-beds, for which good service he was
made Duke of Norfolk.

The King likewise procured both Houses of Parliament, to grant full and
absolute power, to six or eight such Persons as he should nominate to enact and
determine what they should think Convenient in all causes, whereby many
mischievous things were decreed to the damage of the Kingdom; and to please
his Guard, who were most Cheshire men of mean birth and fortunes, he styled
himself Prince of Cheshire, as if that were more honorable then to be King of
the Realm; and to sweetten these things, honors were bestowed upon diverse
Noblemen; his Cosen Henry Bullingbroke, Earl of Darby, Son and Heir apparent
to the Kings Fourth Uncle, John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster was created Duke of
Hereford; his Cosen Edward Plantaginet Earl of Rutland, was created Duke of
Albemarle, and several others were advanced; He also granted free pardon to all
but fifteen, whom he should name, whereby he kept the Nobility in fear and awe,
so that if any offended him, he would declare him to be one of the fifteen, and
put his life upon Trial for pretended Treason. It happened about this time that
the Duke of Hereford, hearing daily complaints of the Kings misgovernment, and
his extreme arbitrary and illegal proceedings, he privately disclosed his grief
thereat to the Duke of Norfolk, entreating him to inform the King thereof, and
to beseech him to be more favorable to the Lords, who were with too great
severity condemned for High Treason.

The Duke of Norfolk regarding more his own advancement, then the Common good,
resolved to rise by the fall of his friend, and therefore told all to the King,
with the most malicious and aggravating circumstances imaginable, whereat the
King enraged summoned his Cosen to answer, who freely acknowledged what he had
privately, and friendly desired might be reformed, but denied the false
suggestions added thereto, and challenged the Duke of Norfolk, to a single
combat to vindicate himself, which was accepted and consented to by the King,
but when the day came, and they entted the Lists for fight, the King would not
suffer them to proceed, but banished the Duke of Norfolk, for ever, who soon
after died, at Venice, and the Duke of Hereford for six years, who went into
France, and was honorably received by that King, and not long after his Father
John Duke of Lancaster died, and the King unjustly seized all his honors and
estate into his hands, which he divided among his Flatterers and Minions, which
unworthy act so much displeased his Uncles, the Duke of York, and the Duke of
Albemarl, that they left the Court, and retired to their own Houses.

In the mean time the King was wholly misled by the lewd conduct of William
Scroop Earl of Wiltshire, Sir James Bagot Sir John Bushie, and Sir Henry Green,
by whose advice, without consent of his Counsel, he raised a great Army,
farming the whole Revenues of his Kingdom to these his favorites for several
years, and sailing into Ireland, wholly subdued that rebelling Nation; but in
his absence, Henry now Duke of Lancaster (with his old friend Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury) returned to England to claim his Duchy of
Lancaster, and landing in the North, great numbers of armed Troops admiring his
Nobility and virtues, joined with him, so that within a few days he marched to
London, and was there received and entertained with much joy. King Richard
returning, soon raised great Forces, which he conducted against the Duke, but
perceiving his Subjects daily revolt from him, and hearing that his three
unworthy Favorites Scroop, Bushie, and Green, on whom he most relied, were
taken, and beheaded, he voluntarily came to the Duke of Lancaster, and
confessing his own insufficiency and weakness to govern well, praised the
singular Qualities of the Duke, as worthy of a Kingdom, offering to resign it
to him, if he would accept thereof.

Though the Duke was very willing to wear a Crown, yet hoping to have it by the
free consent of all the Nobility and People, he caused the King to be guarded
to the Tower of London, and then calling a Parliament, twenty four Articles of
Misgovernment were publicly charged against the King, and sent him by both
Houses of Parliament, who not only confessed them to be true, acknowledging his
inability to Rule better, but by an Instrument in Writing under his Hand and
Seal, resigned his Crown and Kingdom to Henry Duke of Lancaster, which being
read, and generally approved of by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons, they deposed King Richard, and made Henry King, and his old Friend
Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury installed him in the Royal Throne, Richard was
then sent to Pomfret Castle; but Henry fearing his Government could not be safe
while Richard lived, he was soon after assaulted by Sir Pierce of Exton and
eight more with Bills and Poleaxes in his lodging, and after valiant resistance
made, was overpowered and murdered by them in the twenty second year of his
Reign, and the thirty third of his Age, 1399.

In this Age lived Sir John Mandevil of whom so many Fictitious Relations have
been written, that it may be judged he was never in being. But very credible
Historians assert, that there was such a person, born at St. Albans in
Hartfordshire, who attaining to Learning, had an earnest desire to visit Asia
and Africa, which he accordingly performed, traveling thirty four years, into
Scythia, Armenia, Egypt, Lybia, Arabia, Media, Mesopotamia, Persia, Chald^^a*
Greece, Illyria, Tartary, and diverse other Kingdoms of the World, and committed
what he had observed to Writing at his return, wherein, though there may seem
some things incredible, yet it may be supposed many of them were taken from
fabulous Authors, and added to his Book, and others were written by report from
others; for that he did not design to relate lies may appear, because he kept
his Religion after all his wanderings and and did often complain of the
corruptions of that Age, saying often, Virtus cessat, etc. In our time it may
be certainly said, that Virtue is departed, the Clergy err, the Devil reigns
and Simony bears sway. Some Authors write, he died at Liege in Germany, where
they show the Furniture of his Horse and Spurs worn in his Travels, yet the
Town of St. Albans will not allow of it, but claim the honor of his Interment,
and have a riming Epitaph for him upon a Pillar near where they judge his Body
lies, which Mr. Weaver says in his Monuments, being set to some lofty tune, as
the Burning of Antichrist, or the like, will be worth singing. It is as
follows, All you that pass by, on this Pillar cast Eye,
This Epitaph read if you can,
'Twill tell you a Tomb stood once in this room
Of a gallant Spirited Man.
John Mandevil by name, a Knight of great fame,
Born in this honored Town,
Before him was none that ever was known
For Travel of so high renown.
As the Knights in the Temple cross legged in Marble
In Armor with Sword, and with Shield,
So was this Knight graced, which time has defaced,
That nothing but ruins does yield,
His Travels being done, he shines like the Sun
In Heavenly Canaan,
To which blessed place, O Lord of his Grace
Bring us all, Man after Man.


HENRY the FOURTH King of England, etc.
portrait of King Henry the 4th

From misled Richard I the Crown did wrest,
Which wrongfully upon my Head was placed.
Uncivil, Civil Wars the Realm molest,
And Englishmen do England spoil and wast,
Fathers their Sons, and Sons their Fathers slew,
Undutiful, unkind, unnatural
This War. Now York, then Lancaster great grew
As Conquest did on either side befall;
But I the Crown and Scepter still did hold,
For, what by wrong I got, by force I wore,
And Prince of Wales I made my Son so bold;
But as my greatness still increased more,
By fatal Fate, my Vital Thread was cut,
And all my Glory in a Grave was put.
THough by right the Crown of England, if K. Richard should dye without issue,
ought to have descended to Edmond Mortimer Earl of March, Son and Heir to
Edmond Mortimer by Philip his Wife, who was Daughter and Heir of Lionel Duke of
Clarence the third Son of King Edward the third; yet his Cosen Henry of
Bullingbroke Duke of Hereford, and Son and Heir of John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster, the younger Brother of Lionel was Elected and Crowned King. For
after the Resignation of K. Richard was read openly in Parliament, Duke Henry
rising from his Seat made his challenge to the Crown as follows. In the name
of God Amen, I Henry of Lancaster claim the Realm of England, and the Crown
with all the Appurtenances as coming by the Blood Royal from King Edward the
third, by that Justice which God of his Grace has sent to me, and by the help
of my Friends for the recovery of the said Realm, which was in point of
Perdition to be lost through default of Government, and breach of Laws. After
he had thus spoke, the States acknowledged him for King, and placed him on the
Royal Throne, though the whole proceedings against Richard were publicly
condemned by John Bishop of Carlisle as hateful to God, and Traiterous toward
their Prince, he not having the favor of Thieves and murderers, who are tried
by indifferent Judges, and condemned after full proof against them: But the
Bishop had no sooner ended his Speech, e're he was seized by the Earl Marshal,
and committed close Prisoner in the Abbey of St. Albans. In this Parliament the
Crown of England was intailed upon King Henry and his Heirs for ever, and the
King created his eldest Son Henry Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of
Chester.

The Parliament was no sooner ended but several of the greatest Lords who
pretended most Joy for Henry's advancement conspired to take away his life at a
solemn Justs or Triumph at Oxford, contr ved for that purpose. In this Treason
were engaged Edward Plantaginet Duke of Aumerle, Son and Heir apparent to
Edmond of Langley Duke of York, Thomas Holland Duke of Surrey, and John his
Brother Duke of Exeter, both half Brothers to King Richard, John Montague Earl
of Salisbury, Hugh Spencer Earl of Gloucester, Sir Thomas Blunt, and one
Magdalen a Servant to King Richard, and in Stature and Countenance much like
him. All the Conspirators except the Duke of Aumerle met at Oxford at the time
appointed with strong Guards, who going to visit his Father, the old Duke
snatched a Writing out of his bosom wherein the whole Plot was displayed; who
thereupon made haste to discover it to the King at Windsor, but his Son
outriding him another way, came first, just as K. Henry was providing to go,
and disclosing all, received the Kings Pardon, who perceiving his danger went
presently to the Tower of London, preparing to raise a great Army. The
Conspirators upon this discovery being desperate, put Magdalen into Royal Robes
affirming him to be K. Richard escaped out of Prison, and with great Forces
they marched toward London to meet the King, who going courageously against
them with 20000 Men, the common Soldiers were so discouraged that they
generally run away, and left their Lords* who were most of them taken, and put
to death in several parts of the Kingdom.

Thus was King Henry delivered from this Danger; and to prevent the like for
the future, he caused King Richard to be murdered at Pomfret Castle, as
aforementioned. When the French King, Charles the Sixth, Father-in-Law to King
Richard, heard of his Deposing, he sent Letters of Defiance to King Henry, and
raised an Army-Royal in Picardy, resolving to revenge his Wrongs; but when he
heard certainly of his Death, he desisted. After this, the Welsh and Scots made
Invasions; but King Henry with Fire and Sword soon quelled them: Yet the next
year the Scots again entered the Northern Borders with barbarous Cruelty, but
were encountered by Henry Hotspur Son of the Earl of Northumberland, with 10000
stout Men, who gave them a bloody Overthrow, killing above 10000 Scots in the
Field, and taking above 500 Prisoners, and among them, the Earls of Douglas,
Fife, Murray, and Angus.

The next year the French King sent 1200 Lords and Commanders to Wales, to
assist Owen Glendour in his Rebellion; but meeting with a Storm, twelve of his
greatest Ships were cast away, with all the Men and Arms, and the rest with
great difficulty returned to France: Which Misfortune caused the English to
scoff and scorn the French Kings unprosperous Expedition, which so exasperated
him, that he immediately sent another Army of 12000 Men, who landed safely, and
joined with 10000 rebellious Welsh then in Arms. King Henry being sensible of
his own danger if he should make but one false Step, presen^ly provided a very
brave Army, and marched with all expedition into Wales; which when the
Frenchmen had notice of, distrusting the fickle Nature of the Welsh, and
fearing they would forsake them in time of danger, and fly to their Woods and
Mountains, like Men amazed, they run back to their Ships, and cowardly returned
to France, without effecting any thing; upon which the Welsh likewise
disbanded; so that King Henry dissolved his great Army, and returned home
without Blows.

In his third year King Henry demanded the Scotch Prisoners taken in the last
Battle by Henry Hotspur, the Earl of Northumberland, Earl of Worcester, and
others; who refused to deliver them, alleging, That by the Law of Arms they
belonged to them; upon which great Discontents arose between them: For the
Piercies resolved to restore their Cousin Edmund Mortimer, the true Heir to the
Crown, and to depose King Henry: To which end, they first earnestly petitioned
the King to ransom him, he being taken Prisoner by Own Glendour in fighting for
King Henry; but the King not granting their Request, as not desiring his
Liberty, caused it to be published, That he had voluntarily made himself a
Prisoner, to give some color for the Treasons the Lords had contrived on his
behalf. The Piercies being much disturbed at this Proclamation, paid his Ransom
to Glendour, and redeemed him, entering likewise into a League with Glendour of
mutual Defense, and for deposing King Henry; and several Scottish Lords joining
with them, they raised considerable Forces, publishing Six Articles of High
Misdemeanors and Misgovernment against King Henry, for which they defied him,
as a Traitor and Usurper, and vowed his Destruction.

King Henry now finding his Crown lay at stake, levied a stout Army, and first
fell upon the Scots at Shrewsbury, before they could join their Confederates,
whom he routed, as he did likewise Hotspur and Worcester, killing thirty six
with his own Hand: The Earl of Worcester was taken, and beheaded; and several
of the principal Confederates were hanged and quartered, and their Heads set
upon London bridge. Prince Henry likewise went into Wales against Owen
Glendour, who was suddenly forsaken by his Army, and hiding himself in the
Woods, being encompassed by the Princes Forces, was miserably starved to death.
Henry Hotspur was slain in the Field; but his Father, the Earl of
Northumberland, came voluntarily and submitted himself to the King, protesting
himself innocent of these Treasons: which though the King did not in the least
credit, yet he gave him good Words, and suffered him to depart at pleasure,
because he had Berwick Castle, and other strong Places in his Possession.

These Troubles being ended, Lewis Duke of Orleance, Brother to the French
King, sent a vainglorious Challenge to King Henry, requiring him with an
hundred stout English, to fight with him and the like number of French, for
Honors sake, at a Place appointed: But the King discreetly answered, That his
former warlike Actions sufficiently cleared him from the infamous Title of
Coward; That Kings ought not to be so careless of their Kingdoms, or prodigal
of the Blood of their Subjects, whom God had committed to their Charge, as to
fight for any Cause, unless for the Defense of the True Religion, their own
Rights, or to secure their Realms from Foreign Enemies, and revenge their
Peoples Wrongs; That a Sovereign Prince, by the Laws of Arms and Honor, was
not obliged to any Challenge in the Field, except against one equal to him in
Dignity: Yet that he would be always ready to repress any Violence or Wrong
which the Duke should rashly or unadvisedly attempt against him or his People.

The haughty Duke having received this mild Answer, grew enraged, and
immediately sat down with a great Army before the Town of Vergie in Guyen,
which he besieged three Months, giving many fierce Assaults, and receiving such
stout Repulses, that despairing of Success, he was compelled to raise his
Siege, and return disgracefully into France. The Duke of Burgundy likewise
judging that King Henry durst not leave the Kingdom to make War abroad, desired
leave of the French King to attempt the regaining of Callice, and to that end
raised great Strength; but the French Kings Council being informed of King
Henry's vast Preparations to defeat them, commanded Burgundy to desist; which
he imputed to the Pride of the Duke of Orleance, lest he should gain more
Honor than himself.

No sooner was Henry freed from this Danger, but another presently succeeded,
contrived by Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland, Richard Scroop Archbishop of
York, Thomas Mowbray Earl-Marshal, the Lords Hastings, Faulconbridge, Bardolf,
and others; but the Conspiracy being privately revealed, he unexpectedly
marched with an Army into the North, and surprised all the Lords except
Northumberland and Bardolf, whom he immediately beheaded. Northumberland fled
into France, and from thence came back a while after into Scotland, where he
was promised Aid against the King; but Prince Henry being sent thither, burnt
and destroyed all before him, taking in the Castles of Berwick and Anwick, and
forcing the Scots to beg for Truce, which was granted them for a few Months
only: But three years after, Northumberland and Bardolf animating the Scots to
a new War, entered Northumberland, and did much mischief: Whereupon King Henry
raised Forces to suppress them; but before his coming they were routed by Sir
Ralph Rooksby Sheriff of the County; and the two Lords with diverse others being
taken, they cut off their Heads, and sent them for Presents to the King. After
which, till his Death, which happened in two years, he enjoyed Peace and
Quietness, and then died at London of an Apoplexy, having reigned Thirteen
years and five months, and lived Fifty six, 1412. and was buried at Canterbury.
In his Admonition to his Son at his Death, he spoke thus: As long as Englishmen
have Wealth and Riches, so long shall thou have Obedience from them; but when
they are Poor, they are still ready for Commotion and Rebellion.

HENRY the FIFTH, King of England, etc.
portrait of King Henry the 5th

FRom the Lancastrian Line successively
I Englands Glorious Golden Garland got;
I mixed Justice still with Clemency;
Much Blood I shed, yet Bloodshed loved not.
Time may my Bones and Sepulcher destroy,
But Time can never blast my endless Fame;
Oblivion my great Acts can never annoy,
Or make Forgetfulness forget my Name.
In France a Game at Tennis I did play,
With roaring Rackets, thundering Guns and Drums;
And what I played for, still I brought away,
The Spoils triumphantly transporting home.
Yet at the last grim Death my Life assailed,
And as I lived, I di'd, loved, and bewailed.
WHilst Henry the Fifth was Prince, he accompanied with several rude debauched
Persons, with whom he committed many extravagant Actions; but after the Death
of his Father, being Crowned King, he became a new Man, banishing all those his
loose Companions from his Presence and Court, and electing grave, discreet
Counselors and Officers in all Places, for Administration of the Government,
and Courts of Justice: He applied himself to reform all kind of Abuses, and
especially the Pride, Covetousness, and other Enormities of the Clergy,
enjoining them to apply themselves to Prayer, Preaching, and Hospitality. He
executed the Laws with moderation upon his People; and to prevent any
Irruptions of the Scots and Welsh, he built diverse Forts and Castles on the
Frontiers, Garrisoned with some thousands of stout Soldiers.

In his first year he ordered the Body of King Richard the Second to be removed
with great Pomp and Solemnity from Langley to Westminster, and buried it with
Queen Ann his first Wife. In his second year he called a Parliament at
Leicester, in which he was earnestly petitioned to suppress the Religious
Houses throughout the Kingdom, as being now only the Nurseries of Idleness,
Gluttony, Letchery, and Pride, the Revenues whereof were reckoned to be worth
20000 l. a year, which would then maintain 15 Earls, 1500 Knights, and above
6000 Soldiers, besides an Allowance to a great number of Almshouses. To divert
this dangerous Motion, the fat Abbots and Priors, the idle Monks, wanton
Friars, and whining Nuns, jointly beseeched the Archbishop of Canterbury to be
their Friend who in a Learned Oration discovered the Kings Right to the Crown
of France, proposing an easy Method for attaining thereto; and lastly, as a
more prevailing Argument, he offered the King, as a free Gift from the Clergy,
an incredible Sum of Money, for furthering him therein.

This Proposal laid all those Petitions asleep, being approved of both by King,
Nobles, and People, and nothing was discoursed of but Englands recovering of
France: To which purpose, the Duke of Exeter the Kings Uncle, the Archbishop of
Dublin, the Lord Gray High Admiral, and the Bishop of Norwich, attended with
500 Horse, were sent Ambassadors to the French King Charles the Sixth, who in
the Kings Name required the peaceable Surrender of the Kingdom of France, with
the entire Dutchies of Aquitain, Normandy, Anjou, Poictou, and Mayn; proposing,
That if without effusion of Blood the French King would yield to his Demands,
he would then vouchsafe to take his Daughter Katherine in Marriage, and would
endow her with all the aforementioned Provinces, and allow the French King all
Honor and Respect: But if he refused to deliver his Patrimony without Blows,
he would then endeavor to gain it by the Sword, wherein he must expect his
People would suffer all the Calamities of a War.

The French King and Nobility were much surprised at this unexpected Message,
and therefore desired time to deliberate on so weighty an Affair; but the
Dolphin, the Kings eldest Son, despising the Youth and unlikely Attempt of King
Henry, sent him as a Present a Tun of Tennis-balls, as more agreeable to his
Years; which Henry receiving, said, That he would shortly send him such London-
Balls, as should shake Paris Walls; and thereupon soon levied a strong Army.
Which the Dolphin being informed of, (who by reason of the Sickness of the King
managed all Affairs) he sent Ambassadors to Henry, That if he would desist from
all Hostility, and live in Peace, and take his Sister Katherine to Wife, he
should have with her a considerable sum of money, and some small Territories in
France; but the King returned answer, that Unless Aquitain Normandy, Anjou, and
all the other small Seigniories, were delivered to him, as justly appertaining
to his Crown, he would neither disband his Army, nor wave his Title to the
Crown of France, but would attempt to gain it by fire and Sword.

As soon as the French Ambassadors were gone, the King having left considerable
forces upon the Borders of Scotland, and provided all things necessary, sent
his Letters of defiance to the French King, and was just imbarking for his
voyage, when at that very instant, a dangerous conspiracy was discovered,
either to deliver him up to the French, or murder him in his Tent, contrived by
Richard Earl of Cambridge, Brother to the Duke of York, Henry Lord Scroop, and
Sir Thomas Gray, three of the most valiant Commanders in his whole Army; who
being apprehended, and brought into his presence freely confessed the whole
contrivance, and that they were corrupted by rewards from the Dauphin; upon
which they were the next day executed as Traitors. The Wind serving the King
transported his Army into Normandy, in an hundred and forty ships, and the Town
of Harflew being delivered to him after a seige of thirty seven days, was
ransomed from plunder by the Citizens, with great sums of Gold and Silver; the
King then resolved to march to Callice through the very Borders of France,
though the Dauphin had an Army of thirty thousand, and the English were only
two thousand Horse, and thirteen thousand Archers, many of them wanting health,
victuals, and sleep, and having plenty of nothing but silver and Gold, which in
that place would not give them the least supply of what was truly necessary for
preserving their Lives.

It much disturbed the French King, who lay at Roan, that the English should
march on thus without control, and therefore he sent K. Henry a defiance, and
that he would be with him in a few days, and accordingly bringing an Army of
threescore thousand Horse into the Field, encamped near a Town called
Agen-Court, making great jollity the night before the battle, as assuring
themselves of the victory, being so very numerous, and the English so
inconsiderable and sickly; on the contrary K. Henry and his little Army spent
the night in Prayers and Devotions, as knowing that they must either conquer
valiantly or dye basely; upon Friday, Oct. 20. 1414. The battle began, wherein
both sides fought with great courage, but at length K. Henry obtained a
glorious victory, there being slain, the High Constable and High Admiral of
France, the Dukes of Alanson Brabant and Bane, thirty four Earls and Lords,
eight thousand Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen, and about sixteen hundred
Common Soldiers, besides ten principal Dukes and Lords taken Prisoners; on
King Henry's side were not slain above six hundred Soldiers, and two
Commanders. After this K. Henry marched safely to Callice, where having
refreshed themselves they took shipping for England, being enriched with Gold,
Silver and costly armor in abundance, and the King was received with all
manner of Joy and Triumph into London.

The French King was extremely troubled at this great overthrow, but the
Dauphin especially, insomuch that he died, as was thought for mere vexation
soon after; The Earl of Arminiach being made High Constable, the Duke of Exeter
the Kings Uncle, Governor of Harflew, understanding he was going that way with
some forces, suddenly issued out upon him, and defeated his whole party; which
so enraged the new Constable, that with all speed he besieged Harflew, on every
side with five hundred ships at the mouth of the River Seyn, which K. Henry
having notice of, he presently sent a stout Army embarked in two hundred Ships,
who falling upon the French Fleet in sight of the Town, utterly destroyed them
with a vast slaughter of men, and thereby forced the Constable immediately to
raise the siege, and King Henry then calling a Parliament, and declaring to
them his right to France, they freely gave him great sums of money, wherewith
sailing into Normandy, he won the strong Town of Caen; in the mean time such
private quarrels arose between the French Nobility, as much advantaged K.
Henry, who daily won the chiefest Towns in Normandy, and then laid a formal
siege to the great City of Roan, which was strongly fortified, and well
provided, so that K. Henry gave many terrible assaults in vain; upon which
being informed that there were above two hundred Thousand Men, Women and
Children within the Walls, he resolved to gain it by famine without blows, and
to that end casting a deep ditch about the City, pitched full of sharp stakes
and guarded with Archers, the Inhabitants could neither pass in nor out, so
that in two months time, the Famine increased so grievously, that the Citizens
drunk nothing but Vinegar and Water, and were forced to eat Rats, Mice, Cats,
Dogs, and Horses; and the poorer sort being turned out, perished miserably
between the Gates and the English Trenches; the Famine still growing more
outrageous, they sent four Knights, four Scholars, and four of their chief
Burgesses clothed all in black, as Commissioners to the King, who spoke to this
purpose.

Great and renowned Prince, In all ages Kings and valiant Captains, have gained
the greatest glory, and reputation by subduing their proud and haughty enemies
with their Swords and valor, and it has been always reckoned a note of
baseness and Cowardice in a Prince, to overcome by Famine, and want of food,
wherein there is neither wise conduct nor true courage; That your highness may
therefore equal the greatest Conquerors in generosity, we desire you to
sufferour sick and wounded men, with our women and Children to pass safely
through your Camp, and if afterward you dare assault our walls and forts, and
by your courage should happen to become our Lord, you may then deal with us as
you please; and by this action may make your self famous among those Heroes,
who scorn all mean attempts, and regard nothing so much as unspotted honor and
reputation.

The King having with some trouble, heard this bold Oration, he presently
returned this undaunted Answer. Proud and vain glorious Frenchmen, Do you
imagine that I am so weak a Scholar in the Art of War, as not to have yet
learned the principles thereof, are not the Sword, Fire and Famine, the three
principal Instruments, wherewith the most renowned Kings and Gallant Captains
have ever, and do still endeavor to subdue their enemies; and being joined
together, are they not able to conquer the stoutest nation in the World; it was
my goodness and Clemency, that I did not assault your walls with my Sword,
because I would not willingly be the death of any, but those who wilfully seek
their own destruction, neither do I intend to consume so fair a Jewel as this
City is with Fire, but desire to preserve it, as being my own Right and
Inheritance; if I then use the mildest of the three, that is Famine to correct
you, and bring you to reason, you may if you please quickly free your selves
from it by delivering this City into my hands, which if you shall obstinately
refuse; I will make you sensible that every impudent, talking fellow, is not
fit to instruct Princes in martial affairs, neither ought bookish,
unexperienced Plebeians to read warlike Lectures to me who am their enemy; you
desire, nay you saucily require, that your sick and starved People, may pass
into the Country through my Army, and then if I dare I may assault your Town;
the World will certainly wonder at your cruelty, who have barbarously and
uncharitably thrust out of your Gates multitudes of innocent poor distressed
People, of your own blood, kindred, and Country, on purpose that I should
unmercifully kill and destroy them, yet such has been my mercy, that I have
often relieved and succored them, but since I find your obstinacy still
continue, I henceforth resolve not to give them any comfort, and if they perish
with Famine, as they needs must, God will require their blood at your Hands,
who would most wickedly expose them to these calamities, and not at mine, who
would willingly preserve them if I could have my right; be you therefore
assured, that since you remain so obdurate, they shall not pass through my
Army, but die at your Gates, unless your hard Hearts yield them some pity. And
when I see cause I will assault your Town to your cost, but will not be
directed how, nor when, by you; in the mean time I would have you know, that he
who does thus invade, and march through the very bowels of your Country, he
who has already taken as strong though not so great Cities as this, and he who
with the death and destruction of your chiefest Nobles, Captains, and most
valiant men at Arms, has forced his way thus to besiege your Town, dares also,
if he please, assault it, and doubts not in the least to win it when he shall
think fit.

The King having thus spoke ordered that the French Commissioners should Dine
with his great Officers of State, and with a frowning Countenance turned from
them; after Dinner the Frenchmen consulting among themselves humbly begged of
the King a Truce for eight days to consult what was to be done, which the King,
naturally inclined to Clemency, freely granted, during which daily conferences
passed between both partys, but nothing was concluded; upon which the Townsmen
desired only one day more, which was frankly assented to, in which the Common
People hearing nothing was done, fell into a dreadful mutiny, and threatened to
cut their Commanders Throats, for suffering them to starve like Dogs for their
own pleasure, and therefore they forced them to deliver up this great and
strong City. The French being much disheartened at these disasters, a Treaty of
Peace was begun, in which K. Henry being denied all his demands, was very
angry, and told the Duke of Burgundy the Regent of the Kingdom, That he would
have the Princess Katherine to Wife, and all those Countries and Provinces he
required, or else he would drive both his Master and himself out of the
Kingdom. The Duke replied, Such words were spoke with much ease, but it would
cost him much trouble and pains to make them good. Which King Henry was
resolved to do, and therefore suddenly too^ the Town of Poictois in a dark
night, with scaling La^^ (...) without blows, and thereby laid the way open to
P^ before which the Duke of Clarence the Kings Brother (...) with his Troops
two days, and much affrighted (...) ^itizens, but being ^^able to assault it
with so (...) a number, he rose from thence, and within se^^ ^ays took all the
Towns, Cities, Castles, and Forts in Normandy except Mount St. Michael.

The Duke of Burgundy finding that the want of an entire friendship between him
and the Dauphin, was the chief cause of the destruction of France, resolved to
agree with him, but the Dauphin being irreconcilable, upon their meeting
caused the Duke to be trecherously murdered, which yet seemed to be a just
revenge upon him, he himself having caused Lewis the Duke of Orleance to be
murdered upon a like enterview in the tenth year of K. Henry the Fourth.
Philip the Dukes Son was extremely enraged with this horrible accident, and to
be quit with the Dauphin, he with the Earl of Flanders used all means to
conclude a Peace betwixt the Kings of England and France, and so turn all their
Forces against the Dauphin, who acted upon his own account, and had lately
deprived the the Queen of France of her Treasure, who therefore hated and
abhorred him; and to that end it was agreed, that K. Henry should meet with
Charles the Sixth K. of France, Isabel his Queen and the Lady Katharine, where
a firm Peace was soon agreed on, and K. Henry was married with great triumph to
the Lady Katharine, and was proclaimed sole Regent, and Heir apparent of the
Crown of France both in England and France. King Charles only to have
Possession during life.

After this Peace which consisted of twenty Articles, very advantageous to
Henry, and that the Nobility of both Kingdoms had sworn to them, the two Kings
accompanied with James the young and valiant King of Scots, the Duke of
Burgundy, Prince of Orange, with a great many Lords and Knights besieged and
took all the strong Towns and Castles in the Duchy of Burgundy which joined
with the Dauphin; and then they all marched to Paris where K. Henry was again
proclaimed Heir apparent of France, and soon after a great Assembly was called
at Paris, where both Kings sat as Judges, and the Duchess of Burgundy appealed
against Charles the late Dauphin, and seven others as murderers of her Lord;
and no defense being made for them, they were all summoned to appear at the
Marble Table in Paris by a certain day, which they refusing, were Banished out
of all the Territories of France, and to forfeit all their Honors, Dignities,
and Estates.

The Dauphin having notice thereof went to his old Friend the Earl of Arminiach
late Constable of France, who espoused his cause, and assisted him with Men,
Money, and Arms, and soon after the Duke of Clarence the Kings Brother meeting
with a Body of his Forces, under the Command of the Duke of Alanson, and being
falsely informed of their strength by a treacherous Lombard, he fell upon them,
but was overpowered and slain, with several other English Noblemen, and near
two thousand Common Soldiers.

K. Henry was much grieved with this unexpected overthrow, resolving to be
revenged of the Dauphin and his adherents, and to that end called a Parliament,
who gave him a plentiful supply, but because it would be long in gathering, he
pawned his Crown to his Uncle the Bishop of Winchester for 20000 pounds, with
which soon raising an Army of 30000 stout Men, he lands at Calice, with John
Duke of Bedford, and with the assistance of Philip Duke of Burgundy, the Earl
of Flanders, and James K. of Scots, he took several Towns from the Dauphin, who
not daring to venture a Battle, fled from place to place, designing to tire out
the Kings Army in pursuit of him; about which time K. Henry had notice that his
Q. Katharine was delivered of a Son at Windsor, upon which with a Prophetic
Spirit, as was judged, he said, I Henry born at Monmouth shall continue but a
short time, and gain much; but Henry born at Windsor shall Reign long and lose
all; which happened accordingly. The King still won more Forts and Castles from
the Dauphin, who finding the King was gone far from him, raised another Army,
and straightly besieged the City of Cos^^y in Burgundy, who agreed to deliver
it to him if not relieved within ten days, of which K. Henry having advice,
marched with sufficient Force to succor it, but fell so sick by the way, that
he could travel no further; however, John Duke of Bedford proceeded on, of
whose Courage and Conduct the Dauphin being afraid, raised the Siege and
retired.

The Kings sickness increasing, he was carried to Boys in Vincennes, where he
in a few days died; before his death he made his Brother John Duke of Bedford
Lieutenant General of Normandy, and Regent of the Kingdom of France, and his
other Brother Humfrey Duke of Gloucester Protector of England, and of his Sons
Person, and then exhorted them with the rest of the Nobles present to maintain
true friendship with his faithful Confederate, Philip Duke of Burgundy, to be
at Unity among themselves, to be True and Loyal to his Son King Henry, to
assist by all means his sad and mournful Queen, and to maintain by Wisdom and
Courage what he by Gods help and his own valor had gotten. He died in the
thirty eighth year of his Age, and the ninth of his Reign, 1442. and his Body
being conveyed into England, was buried with great Pomp and Solemnity in
Westminster Abbey, upon whose Tomb his Queen caused his Royal Statue to be laid
covered over with Silver Plate gilt, the Head thereof being Massy Silver, but
in the time of K. Henry the eighth, the head, and the other Silver was stolen
away, yet the Headless Monument is to be seen at this day with the following
Verses on the Tomb.

Dux Normanorum, verus Conquestor eorum
Haeres Francorum, decessit and Hector eorum.
Here Normans Duke, so styled by Conquest just,
True heir of France, Great Hector lies in Dust.
HENRY the SIXTH, King of England, etc.
portrait of King Henry the 6th

MY Father (Englands Warlike Mars) being dead,
And I an Infant but of eight Months old,
The Diadem was placed upon my head,
In Royal Robes the Scepter I did hold:
But wonderful are the Almighty's Ways,
And past Man's Reason e're to comprehend;
For I had naught but sad and woeful Days,
Even from my Birth, unto my Tragic End.
Against me the House of York their Force did bend,
(Both Peers and People weltred in their Gore)
That Crown and Scepter they from me did rend,
My Sire and Grandsire both had worn before
Twice was I Crowned, uncrown'd, often blessed, often croft;
At last my Life and Kingdom both I lost.
THough King Henry the Sixth was not above eight Months old at his Fathers
Death, yet by the wise Conduct of his two Uncles aforementioned, the
Government was managed with all manner of Prudence and Discretion. But soon
after the Death of Henry the Fifth, Charles the Sixth of France died likewise,
and the unconstant Frenchmen began to renounce their Oaths and Allegiance to
the English Crown, and generally revolting to Charles the Dauphin, now King of
France, endeavored to extirpate the English Nation and Sovereignty from among
them: To which purpose, their new King seized upon Pont Melance, a Town on the
River S^yn, without any warning, and slew most of the Engli^h Garrison therein;
but Thomas Montacute Earl of Salisbury, a great Champion in that Age, by the
Regents Order regained it, and caused the Inhabitants again to swear Allegiance
to King Henry, which they soon after again forfeited; and the Parisians invited
Charles to come to their City, but the Regent having notice thereof, though he
was then engaged in Mirth and Triumphs, as having at that time married the Duke
of Burgundy's Daughter, yet made such speed with his Army, that he was at their
Gates before they were aware; and having seized on the principal Conspirators,
and executed them publicly by diverse cruel Deaths, he secured the City by
diverse new Forts, a strong Garrison, and a severe Governor. The Protector
still furnishing the Regent with fresh Supplies of all things from England, he
daily won diverse strong Towns and Fortresses, the French King not daring to
engage in fight with him, though he often showed himself, and boasted of his
Valor.

While all things succeeded well, there happened an unfortunate Accident at Mons,
where the French suddenly surprised the English within the City, and killed
them all without the least pity or compassion; but the Garrison-Soldiers got
into the Castle, which the French resolving to besiege, and starve them out,
gave themselves over at present to Ease and Jollity: Of this the Lord Talbot
was advised, who the next Night marched thither with 700 Men, and got into the
Castle, and then issuing out under their Governor the Earl of Suffolk, they
rushed violently into the Town, crying out aloud, St. George, A Talbot, a
Talbot; wherewith the sleepy drunken Frenchmen were so amazed, that some leaped
naked over the Walls in their Shirts, and broke their Necks; about 400
Gentlemen were slain and taken Prisoners, the Common People being released:
After which, 30 Citizens, 20 Priests, and 15 Friars were put to death with
diverse Torments, as Conspirators, for delivering the Town to the French, which
was thus gallantly regained to King Henry.

The Duke of Exeter, Tutor to the Kings Person, dying at this time, the Earl of
Warwick was sent to England to take that Charge; and the Renowned Earl of
Salisbury, with an Army of 10000 Men, was sent into France, with which he
besieged the strong City of Orleance upon the River Loyer, which had been
lately strongly fortified; where, after two Months Siege, the Earl was slain,
and the Earl of Suffolk succeeded as General, who pressed the Siege so close,
that the Besieged being hopeless of Succor, offered to surrender the Town to
the Duke of Burgundy, who refused it without the Consent of the Duke of Bedford
the Regent, who though persuaded thereto, would by no means consent, since he
himself had undergone all the Trouble hitherto. This Answer pierced the Duke of
Burgundy to the Heart, so that from thenceforward his Affections grew cold
toward the English, and he became a secret Well-willer to the French.

During this Parley, a young Maid of about eighteen years old was presented to
the French King at Chinon, who pretended she was sent from God to deliver
France from the English Bondage, and thereupon she was called The Mother of
God; however she in this extremity was believed by the Common People, and being
armed like a Man, she rides to Blois, and, in company with the Admiral and
Marshal of France, enters Orleance with fresh Forces and Provisions; which so
encouraged the Besieged, that they issued out at midnight, and fell upon the
English, staying 600 of them in an instant; but assaulting the Bastile, where
the Lord Talbot was, he issued out so courageously, that they were forced to
fly on every side, and with very great Loss hardly escaped into the Town; but
however, the next day the Earl of Suffolk raised the Siege. This Deliverance
was attributed by the Citizens of Orleance to the Conduct of the Martial Maid,
who was called Joan of Arc; and therefore they erected a Monument, wherein she
and Charles the Seventh King of France were represented kneeling in Armor,
with their Hands and Eyes toward Heaven.

After this, the English had very doubtful Success; for the next day after
raising the Siege, the Lord Talbot won the strong Town and Castle of Laval; and
a few days after the Duke of Alanson, with Joan of Arc, took the Town of
Jargeux, and in it the Earl of Suffolk and one of his Brothers Prisoners,
killing another. The Duke of Alanson's Army being newly reinforced to near
20000 Men, happened to meet with the Lords Talbot, Scales, and Hungerford, who
were marching with only 5000 to fortify another Town; upon whom the French
fell with great fury, insomuch that the three Lords were taken Prisoners, and
1200 of their Men slain, the rest flying into the Town. Upon this Defeat,
several Cities, Towns, and Castles immediately surrendered to the French King,
who soon after took Rhemes, and was there Crowned, which gained him a great
Opinion, and caused many more Places to be delivered to him, and then attempted
to take the City of Paris; but by the Valor of the English were repulsed and
defeated. The Duke of Bedford observing the Success which followed upon the
Coronation of King Charles, caused King Henry likewise to be Crowned at Paris,
in the Tenth year of his Age and Reign, having been Crowned two years before at
Westminster.

About this time a Truce was concluded for Six years, which yet lasted not
Three? And now the Duke of Bedford's Lady, who was Sister to the Duke of
Burgundy, dying soon after her Brother forsakes the English, and joins with the
French King, which was followed with the taking of St. Dennis; and within two
years after the Regent died, and was buried at Roan; whereat the Citizens some
years after complained to Lewis, who succeeded Charles, but the King publicly
protested, That he deserved a more sumptuous Sepulcher, who in his Lifetime
scorned to stir a Foot back for all the Power of France; and that there was no
greater Sign of Baseness and Cowardice, than to insult over those when dead,
whom they durst not withstand while alive.

The French King now proceeds victoriously; and Joan of Arc aforementioned,
accompanying the Duke of Alanson, takes in many Towns, and endeavoring to
raise the Siege of Champaigne, they enter the City in despite of the English;
but afterward sallying forth, their Troops were beaten, and Joan her self taken
Prisoner, by John of Luxemburgh, a Burgundian Knight, who for the value of
10000 l. and 300 Crowns a year, delivered her to the English, who sent her to
the Bishop of Bevoirs, in whose Diocese she was taken, by whom, for Sorcery,
Bloodshed, and unnatural use of Manly Apparel, she was burnt to death at Roan.
Many Opinions were held of her: Some thought her miraculously raised for the
Deliverance of France; others, that she was a Cheat and Impostor; and her
Epitaph seems to infer the same.

Here lies Joan of Arc, the which
Some count Saint, and some count Witch;
Some count Man, and something more;
Some count Maid, and some a Whore.
Her Life's in question, Wrong or Right;
Her Death's in doubt, by Law or Might.
Oh Innocence! take heed of it,
How thou too near to Guilt do sit.
(Mean while France a Wonder saw,
A Woman rule, against Salique Law.)
But, Reader, be content to stay
Thy Censure till the Judgment-day,
Then shall thou know, and not before,
Whether Saint, Witch, Man, Maid, or Whore.
After the death of the Noble Regent the valiant Duke of Bedford, Richard Duke
of York succeeded in his room, to the great regret of Edmond Duke of Somerset
the Kings Cousin, which occasioning private Hatred, made way for public
Mischief: For soon after the City of Paris revolted, and diverse others followed
that Example. At this time Queen Katherine the Kings Mother died, who after the
King her Husbands death, married a handsome Gentleman named Owen Tudor, who
though of mean Estate, yet was descended from Cadwallader the last King of the
Britains* by whom she had two Sons, Edmund and Jasper, the eldest of whom was
by King Henry the Sixth created Earl of Richmond, and married Margaret sole
Heir to John Duke of Somerset, on whom he begot Henry the Seventh. In a little
while the Duke of York is removed, and the Earl of Warwick is put in his Place
by the Council of England; and from henceforth the Affairs in France succeeded
worse every day, which was occasioned by the Wisdom of the French Nobility, who
grew sensible of their miserable Divisions, and now united against the English.
Another Reason was, the unhappy Marriage of the King with Margaret the Daughter
of Reyner King of Sicily a poor Prince, so that he had nothing with her; and
which was worse, King Henry was obliged by the Articles of this Marriage to
give to her Father all his Right and Title to the Counties of Anjou and Mayn,
which bordered upon Normandy, and much weakened the Kings Army, so that soon
after all Aquitain was lost. Another Cause was, the horrid Murder of the
innocent Duke of Gloucester; for the King being of a mild, patient, and virtuous
Temper, and the Queen, on the contrary, of a proud, politic, revengeful
Humor, despised the soft Disposition of her Husband, and could not endure that
the King, being now of full Age, should be any longer under a Governor, and to
that end, was resolved to dismiss the good Duke of Gloucester from his
Protectorship, being much encouraged therein by the Duke of Buckingham, the
Duke of Suffolk, the rich Cardinal of Winchester, and the Archbishop of York;
and a Parliament being called, the Duke of Gloucester, by their procurement was
arrested and committed to Prison for High Treason, and the next morning was
found dead in his bed, and judged by all to be barbarously murdered.

And now the Duke of Tork, secretly conspired with his accomplices, to set up
his Title to the Crown, and the Duke of Suffolk ruling all, used several
oppressive methods against the People, whereby no man nor money was raised for
France, and the Counsel not able to manage any thing to the honor of the King,
either at home or abroad, so that in a short time, all Normandy was lost, for
which the Duke of Suffolk was accused in Parliament, and committed to the
Tower, but the Queen suddenly dissolving the Parliament, restored him again to
favor, yet afterward upon the importunity of the Commons, he was banished for
five years, but being taken by an English man of War, as he was sailing to
France, they landed him at Dover, and cut off his head on the sands, whereby
the innocent blood of the Duke of Gloucester, was in some measure revenged. When
the English had thus lost France, a French Captain scoffingly asked an
Englishman, when they would return again to France; who seriously replied, when
your sins shall be greater and m re grievous in the sight of God than ours,
then shall the English again Conquer France. It has been observed, that from
the Reign of King Edward the first to this time, which was about two hundred
years, there was an extraordinary concurrence of martial men, prudent Counsels,
and excellent conduct, so that this Nation was renowned throughout the
Christian World, but why they did all afterward decay, must be left to the
learned to discuss.

The Duke of York being sent into Ireland to suppress a Rebellion there, and
hearing how matters went both in England and France, began to declare his right
to the Crown, as being descended from Philip, Daughter and Heir of George Duke
of Clarence, elder Brother to John of Gaunt, great Grandfather to Henry the
sixth; these things being whispered by the Duke of York's friends and Allies in
England, and likewise that the Kings understanding was weak, the Queen proud
and ambitious, and the Council base and treacherous, and that all France was
lost because of the usurpation of King Henry, it caused great dissatisfactions
in the minds of the People, upon which Jack Cade, calling himself John
Mortimer, made an insurrection in Kent, and with a rude multitude marched
toward the King, then at Greenwich, sending a Message, that he intended no harm
to his Royal Person, but would only displace some of his evil Counselors, who
were great oppressors of the People; the Queen soon raised an Army to suppress
them, but they were defeated by Cade, who marched to London, and did much
mischief; but the Kings General Pardon being Proclaimed, his followers left
him, and Jack Cade was slain, fighting for his Life. This cloud being past, a
greater suceeded, for many of the Nobility and Commons hating the ill
Government of the Queen and her adherents, sent for the Duke of York from
Ireland, the chief of his friends being the Duke of Norfolk, the Earls of
Devonshire, Salisbury, Warwick, and the L. Cobham, who concluded to raise an
Army, to remove the Duke of Somerset, from the King and Queen, as a deceiver of
the King, a friend to his enemies, and the chief occasion of the loss of
France; the King fearing the worst, likewise raised an Army, but to take away
all pretense, he committed the D. of Somerset to the Tower, upon which the Duke
of York dissolved his Army, and came privately to Court, where he found the
Duke of Somerset with the King, by whose procurement the Duke of York was
committed some few days Prisoner, but being again at Liberty he made fresh
complaints of the disorders of the Government, and the Duke of Somerset, and
strengthening himself with the power of the chief of the Nobility he caused
Somerset to be arrested for High Treason on the Queens great Chamber, from
whence he was sent to the Tower, but was presently after released and made
Captain of Callice.

Upon which the Duke of York again l^^ieth an Army, and was met by another on
the Kings part at St. Albans, where a bloody battle was fought, above eight
thousand, and among them the Duke of Somerset being slain, and King Henry taken
Prisoner, and brought to the Duke of York, who used him courteously, and having
called a Parliament at London, the Duke of York was made Protector of the Kings
Person, the Earl of Salisbury Lord Chancellor, and the Earl of Norwich his Son,
Captain of Callice, who managed affairs to the general satisfaction of the
Nobility and People, but the Duke of Buckingham, having lost his eldest Son,
and the new Duke of Somerset his Father, resolved upon revenge, and joining
with the Queen, they called a great Council at Greenwich, by whose Authority
the Duke of York, and the Earl of Salisbury were removed from the Government,
the Queen designing by all means to cut them off, of which the Duke of York
being sensible, resolved now to maintain his claim to the Crown in the open
Field, and to that purpose raised an Army, but his intention being discovered
too early to the King, he fled with his youngest Son to Ireland, his eldest Son
the Earl of March got to Callice, where he was joyfully received, from whence
returning by the encouragement of several of the Nobility, and landing at
Sandwich in Kent, he soon gathered an Army of Twenty five thousand men, with
which he met the Kings forces at Northampton, where after a furious fight, the
King was routed with the loss of ten thousand men, and himself taken Prisoner.

The Duke of York having notice of this Victory, returns suddenly to London
from Ireland, where a Parliament being called in the Kings name, the Duke
sitting down in the imperial Throne, in the House of Lords, in an eloquent
speech, declared his right to the Crown; whereupon after mature deliberation,
it was enacted by both Houses, That King Henry should retain the name and
honor of a King during life, that the Duke of York, should be proclaimed Heir
Apparent of the Crown, and to be a present Lord Protector of the Realm, and
that if King Henry, or any of his confederates should infringe this Agreement,
that then the Duke of York, should have present possession of the Crown; the
Duke having thus got the Government of the Kings Person and Dominions, sent
Letters to Scotland, in the Kings name to the Queen, and several of the Lords
with her, to appear with all speed before the King; but they not only refused
his Command, but marched boldly toward London, with an Army of eighteen
thousand English and Scots, but at Wakefeild, the Duke of York met the Queen,
and persuaded her to submit, which not prevailing, another bloody battle was
fought, wherein the Duke was worsted, himself, his younger Son Edward, and
three thousand of his men being slain, and the rest fled.

The Queen having taken the Earl of Salisbury, beheaded him and diverse others,
whose heads she caused to be set upon the walls of York, in despite of that
party; which was fully revenged in a short time upon the King, Queen and
Prince, and a great number more of the Lancastrian faction. The Earl of March,
now Duke of York, hearing of this overthrow, though his Army were only three
thousand men, fell upon Jasper Earl of Pembroke, the Kings half brother, Owen
Tudor his Father, and their Confederates; which he soon routed, killing four
thousand of them, and taking Owen Tudor, Father in Law to King Henry, and
diverse others Prisoners, who were immediately beheaded. But the Queens Army
about the same time, having encountered the Duke of Norfolk and his forces, made
them fly, and leave K. Henry behind; whereat the Queen was extreme joyful and
insolent, but hearing of the success of the young Duke of York, she retired
into the North, and raising an Army of 60000 Men she met the Dukes Army of
forty nine thousand at a place called Towton, where after a cruel fight,
wherein thirty six thousand Englishmen were slain, the Duke obtained an
absolute Victory.

The King, Queen, and Prince Edward their only Son fled to Scotland, and were
kindly received by that King, delivering to him the Town and Castle of Berwick,
but the Duke rid Triumphantly to York, from whose walls he took the heads of
his Father, and Friends, and set up those of the Earl of Devonshire, and others
in their stead. King Henry hopeless of succor sufficient from Scotland, sent
his Queen and Son to Reyner her Father, and the French King, for aid, he
himself remaining in Scotland, patiently expecting the event of his future
state. And here we may properly end his Reign, as being after this only the
Tennis-ball of Fortune, for though he were sometimes put in hope of having his
Kingdom established, yet he was enthroned and dethroned in so short a time,
that it seemed rather like the acting of a Tragedy than of matters really
performed. He reigned 38 and lived 49 years.

EDWARD the FOURTH, King of England, etc.
portrait of King Edward the 4th

I York's Great Heir, by the strange Chance of War,
Was Crowned, Vncrown'd, and then again Enthroned.
I wholly crushed the House of Lancaster,
Whilst woeful England under Misery groaned.
Fathers and Mothers, Childless made, did grieve,
These bloody Bickerings lasting threescore Years,
E're they to Peace and Quiet did arrive;
Wherein were slain above an hundred Peers.
But Age and Time all Earthly things destroys:
Through Terrors, Horrors, Mischief, and Debate,
By Truth, by Treason, by Hopes, Fears, and Joy,
I got, I kept, I left, I lost the State.
Thus as the Powers Divine do smile or frown,
Glories or Troubles wait upon a Crown.
EDward Duke of York having thus overthrown King Henry and his Queen, and
executed many of his chief Opposers, returned triumphantly to London, where he
was joyfully received, and Crowned June 19. 1461. and a Parliament being
called, Aubrey Vere Earl of Oxford, and his Son, with some other Counselors of
King Henry, being attainted of Treason, were beheaded. And to strengthen
himself, King Edward created his eldest Brother George Duke of Clarence, and
Richard he made Duke of Gloucester, and several others were advanced to Honor;
and the Duke of Somerset, Sir Ralph Pierce, with other inveterate Enemies of
King Edward, finding no hope of success, submitted, and received Pardon. In the
mean time Q. Margaret coming from France with her Son, and going into Scotland,
many Scots joined with her, and marching with her Husband to Berwick Castle,
raised considerable Forces in Northumberland and Durham, Somerset, and Piercie,
treacherously going to her, but being encountered by John Nevil, Lord Montague,
they were soon routed and fled, only Sir Ralph Pierce died valiantly fighting;
and pursuing his Victory, he utterly overthrew King Henry's Army, the Duke of
Somerset with seven other Lords being taken and Beheaded. Henry fled back to
Scotland; Edwards Army went forward, and recovered diverse Castles and Forts in
Northumberland, and among others Bamborough commanded by Sir Ralph Gray, who
had formerly sworn Al^egiance to K. Edward, whom they Beheaded after he had
been degraded of his Knighthood, by hewing off his Spurs tearing in pieces his
Coat of Arms, and breaking his, Sword over his Head.

In his third year K. Henry traveling toward London in disguise, was taken in
the North, and being brought to King Edward, was committed close Prisoner to
the Tower. And now the King designing to marry sent his most intimate Favorite
Richard Nevil the Valiant Earl of Warwick, and Brother to the L. Montacute, to
propose a match with the Lady Bona the French Kings Daughter; which was soon
agreed to, and concluded. In which time K. Edward hunting in Wickwood Forest,
and coming to the Manor of Grafton, set his Eyes on Elizabeth the Widow of
Sir John Gray, who was slain as he fought for King Henry at St. Albans, and
counting her very warmly to satisfy his pleasures, was modestly and constantly
denied, which inflamed him the more, as having seldom met with refusals upon
such an account; what therefore he could not obtain unlawfully, he resolved to
gain by Marriage, and accordingly without any further delay or advice, made her
his Wife, she having assured him, That as she accounted her self too mean to be
his Wife, so she thought he self too good to be his Harlot. King Edwards Mother
would fain have dissuaded him from it, alleging among many other reasons, that
her Widdowhood was a sufficient cause why he should not dishonor himself with
Bigamy in his first Marriage; to which he merrily replied, She is indeed a
Widow, and has Children, and by Gods blessed Lady, I am a Bachelor and have
some too, and each have good proof that neither of us are like to be barren;
and therefore pray Madam be contented; for I hope I shall get a young Prince
that shall please you very well, and as for the Bigamy or Widdowhood let the
Priest charge me with it when I come to take Orders, for I have heard it is
forbidden to a Priest, but never yet thought in was so to a Prince.

But however pleasing this Marriage was to the King yet it proved very
unsatisfactory to his Subjects, and unfortunate to himself; for the Earl of
Warwick having News thereof, was extremely displeased at so great an affront,
and secretly contrived mischief against him, to whom the Duke of Clarence, who
had been disobliged by his Brother, joined himself, and married Warwick's
Daughter, and soon after with other great Lords and Confederates, they raised a
Rebellion in Yorkshire, and were so strong that at Banbury King Edwards Forces
were overthrown and 5000 of them slain, the Lord Rivers the Queens Father, and
the Lord Strafford being beheaded. Yet King Edward preparing another great
Army, marched toward the Rebels, but many of the Nobility endeavoring to
procure a Peace, obtained a Parley; during which King Edward being less
watchful of himself, was seized in his Bed by the treacherous Earl of Warwick,
and secretly sent Prisoner to Middleham Castle in Yorkshire, to be there kept
Prisoner by his own Brother, the Archbishop of York, who likewise joined with
Clarence and Warwick against him, from whom either accidentally or willingly he
soon after made his escape, and at last came safe to London, where by the
procurement of the Lords, the King, the Earl of Warwick, and the Duke of
Clarence met (upon security given) in Westminster Hall, where Warwick used such
high Language to the King, upbraiding him for his Ingratitude, that all parted
in high discontent, and soon after at the Battle of Loosecoats, the Rebels were
beaten by King Edward, throwing off their Coats for haste to make their escape*
in which fight were slain 10000 men.

The Earl of Warwick and Duke of Clarence hearing of this misfortune, fled in
despair with their Ladies and other Gentlewomen to Callice, but were denied
entrance by the Governor, though the Duchess of Clarence was then in Labor,
and delivered on Shipboard, whereupon they went to Deip in France, and were
kindly entertained by that King, where diverse others repairing to them; they
consulted to restore King Henry, and Prince Edward, Henry's Son married the
Earl of Warwicks second Daughter, whereat the Duke of Clarence was much
concerned, and resolved to submit to his Brother upon the first opportunity.
All things being in readiness, Warwick and his Confederates imbark for London,
and land at Dartmouth, where his Forces soon increased very much, and he then
made Proclamation in all places for all men to come to his aid against the Duke
of York, who falsely and traitorously called himself King. In the mean time
Edward levied a strong Army wherewith he marched toward the Rebels, but being
informed of the general love of the People to Warwick, and hearing me then loud
shouts of King Henry, King Henry, a Warwick, a Warwick; he suspected the
fidelity of his own Forces, and with 800 of his best Friends, left his Army and
fled in the Night to Lincolnshire, and from thence to Holland to the Duke of
Burgundy.

As soon as it was known that Edward was gone, the Earl of Warwick come to
London, and taking Henry out of the Tower, carried him triumphantly through the
City to Paul's, and from thence to the Bishops Palace where he kept his Court.
Then a Parliament being called, Edward and his Adherents were attainted of High
Treason, and their Estates confiscate to the King, the Duke of Clarence is
declared Heir of the Dukedom of York, and the Crown is intailed upon Henry and
his Heirs, and in default of his issue to the Duke of Clarence and his. In a
short time Edward by the assistance of the Duke of Burgundy lands in England
with small Forces, and few joining with him, he declared he came not to
challenge the Crown, but only his inheritance of the Duchy of York, upon which
the People flock't in to him, and at last the Lords told him, They durst not
join with him unless he would style himself King, which he did accordingly, and
the Earl of Warwick with other Nobles coming against him with a strong Army got
into Coventry, they suspecting the Duke of Clarence, who joining accordingly
with King Edward, they defied the Earl of Warwick, who durst not venture
without the Walls.

King Edwar'd hereupon leaves Coventry, and marches toward London, where he was
again joyfully received, and King Henry was again committed to the Tower, and
was soon after followed by the Earl of Warwick, who at Barnet was slain with
his Brother the Marquess, and 10000 men slain. After this Queen Margaret
landeth from France, and some Nobles joining with her, the two Armies met at
Teuksbury in Glocestershire, where King Edward again remained Victor, killing
3000 of his Adversaries; and the Queen and her Son Edward were taken Prisoners,
the Prince being then cruelly murdered by Richard Duke of Gloucester; and soon
after King Henry was found dead in the Tower, being wickedly stabbed by the
same bloody Richard. After this King Edward makes his claim to France, and to
gain it craved aid of his Subjects by way of Benevolence; and among others a
covetous Widow gave him twenty pounds, which the King who was there present
unknown to her, observing, not only gave her Thanks, but came and kissed her,
telling her, That she should have a kiss from a King for her Money; whereat the
old Woman was so transported, that she told him a Kings kiss was worth more
Money, and thereupon gave him twenty pound more.

The King having got an Army together, sailed to France, but the French King
fearing his power, chose rather to buy his Peace of the Kings Courtiers; which
he did accordingly with great Sums of Money paid yearly to the English
Nobility. Among others he sent two thousand Crowns to the Lord Hastings, Lord
Chamberlain, the Messenger desiring a Receipt for his own security, which the
Lord Chamberlain scrupling at, said, Sir, What you desire is very reasonable,
but the Gift comes from the good Will of your King, and not from my Request, If
you please to give it, put into the Pocket of my Sleeve, and no other
Acquittance shall you have of me, for it shall never be said, that the Lord
Chamberlain of England was a Pensioner to the King of France, neither shall my
Acquittances be ever found in the Chamber of Accounts in France. After this the
Lord Chamberlain was more esteemed by the French, and had his Money paid
without a Receipt. About this time the Duke of Clarence being sent to the Tower
for High Treason, was drowned in a Butt of Malmsey, and soon after King Edward
himself died after he hid lived 40 years, and reigned twenty two. 1483. He was
a very complete Person, exceeding Valiant, but too wanton; he used to say he
had three Mistresses of different Qualities, one of them the Fairest, another
the Merriest, and a third the Holiest Harlot alive, whom he could never send
for to his Bed but she was always at Prayers with her Beads.

EDWARD the FIFTH, King of England, etc.
portrait of King Edward the 5th

IF Birth or Beauty, Innocence or Youth,
Could Pity raise within a Ty^ants Heart,
Then surely Richard would have found it Truth,
And not have acted such a bloody Part.
What Glory then to be of Royal Race?
What Joy is there in Beauty, Strength, or Wit?
What is Command, great Honor, and high Place,
When Treason lurks where Majesty does sit?
Unhappy I, had too much Proof of this,
Nipt in my Eud, and blasted in my Bloom,
Deprived by Murder of all Kingly Bliss,
And in Three Kingdoms could not find a Tomb.
By Treason thus my Greatness did decay;
Ere the Fruit grew, the Tree was cut away.
KIng Edward left behind him two Sons; Edward of the Age of thirteen years, who
unfortunately succeeded him; and Richard Duke of York, two year younger; with
five Daughters, and one only Brother Richard Duke of Gloucester, who being of
an ambitiou^ and bloody Nature, took the Opportunity of the youn^ Kings
Minority, to raise himself upon the Ruins of his Brothers Family. At the death
of the King, Prince Edward kept his Court at Ludlow in Wales, to restrain the
Welsh from Mischief; and Anthony Earl of Rivers the Queens Brother, and Uncle
to the Prince, was by King Edward made Protector of his Person, all Places of
Honor and Profit being disposed of by the Queen and him, which Richard did
much disdain, and therefore often consulted with the Duke of Buckingham, and
the Lord Hastings, about removing the young King from them, who contrived to
take him into their Custody, thereby to have the Honor and Benefit thereon The
Queen, with her Brother, and the Lord Gray he Son, and her other Friends, were
now marching (...) London with strong Forces, in order to Crown the King and
the Duke of Gloucester, knowing the Business mu^ be done before that was
performed, persuaded t^^ Queen by Letters to dismiss the Soldiers, lest such ^
great Army should cause suspicion of some ill Desig^ and suddenly seizing the
King at Stonystratford, the waited upon him toward London, committing the Ea^^
Rivers, Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Vaughan, and some others, to Pomfret Castle in
Yorkshire, where they were soon after beheaded without any Trial, upon the same
day that the Lord Hastings, who had conspired with Richard against them, was
beheaded by his Order in the Tower, as you read hereafter.

Then Richard and his Confederates removed all the other Officers and Servants
from about him, declaring that those Noblemen who suffered, had resolved to
destroy all the Lords of King Edward's Blood. The Queen hearing of the fatal
Murder of her Brother, Son, and Friends, repented her disbanding the Soldiers
by Richard's cunning Persuasions, and fearing the Event, she, with her five
Daughters, and her youngest Son Richard Duke of York, took Sanctuary at
Westminster. The young King also mourned extremely at the miserable Slaughter
of his Friends; but the two Dukes of Gloucester and Buckingham endeavored to
comfort him, expressing their Loyalty by a thousand Protestations, and bringing
the King toward London, he was met by the Lord Mayor and above 500 grave
Citizens, before whom Richard behaved himself with so much reverence and
submission to the King, that he persuaded them, as well as the Council of
State, to declare him Protector of the King and Kingdom, which was the great
thing he aimed at; but not having the Duke of York in his Hands, he grievously
complained against the Queen, for detaining him as a Prisoner, and hindering him
from keeping company with his Brother; which he enforced with so many plausible
Reasons, that the Council sent and commanded her to deliver him up, which she
unwillingly did, kissing, and weeping bitterly over him, praying God to deliver
him from all danger, and telling the Archbishop of York, who was sent for him,
That she would require that poor and innocent Child at his Hands. When the
lovely Youth was put into the Protector's Hands, he before the whole Assembly
took him in his Arms, kissing, hugging, and embracing him, and often solemnly
protesting upon his Soul, That nothing in the World except the King himself was
so dear to him as that young Child, though he then designed to sacrifice them
both to his cursed Ambition: And bringing the young Duke to the King, who was
extremely pleased with his Company, he conveyed them through London with great
Pomp and State to the Tower, upon pretense of Security in these troublous
Times, whenas there were no Troubles but what were occasioned by himself, and
his wicked Accomplices.

Having thus betrayed these poor innocent Lambs into his Slaughter house,
Richard then contrives how he might most commodiously Butcher them. At first he
doubted whether he should reveal his Design to the Duke of Buckingham; but upon
promising his Daughter to Buckingham's Son, and the Earldom of Hartford as a
Dowry, he soon gained him, and bestowing on him a great Sum of the Kings Money,
he soon persuaded him to assist him: But because the Lord Hastings, whom the
Protector for former Friendship had newly made Lord Chamberlain, had been
always true to Edward the Fourth, and was hearty for the Service of the young
King, they despaired of gaining him, and therefore resolved to dispatch him.
Hereupon he called a great Council of the Lords in the Tower, proposing to them
the speedy Coronation of the King, though it was least intended by him; and
then grew very pleasant with the Lords, and told Dr. Morton Bishop of Ely, whom
he loved not, That he heard he had fine Strawberries in his Garden in Holbourn,
entreating him to send for some; which he willingly did, being very glad the
Protector was so kind to him.

Upon a sudden Richard rises from the Board, desiring the Lords to proceed in
the Matters before them, and that he would go out, and return again presently;
which he did within an Hour after: And being set in his Chair, he bent his
Brows, bit his Lips, wrung his Fists, and looked fiercely on the Ground. The
Lord being much disturbed at this Alteration, sat all silen^ for some time,
expecting what he would say; at length he demanded, What they deserved who had
wickedly plotted to destroy him, being Uncle and Protector to the King? The
Lords being absolutely innocent, sat like Men amazed, not one of them uttering
a Word; at length, the Lord Hastings, who was most familiar with him, replied,
Those that have transgressed the Law, deserve the severest punishment thereof:
To which all the Lords assented. Then quoth the Protector, That Sorceress,
(meaning the Queen) and that Strumpet Shore 's Wife, have conspired together to
take away my Life by Witchcraft; and to confirm it, do but see how my Left-arm
is already wasted and consumed: and therewith plucked up his Sleeve, and
confidently showed his naked Arm, though all present knew certainly, that his
Arm had been never otherwise from his Mothers Womb: Neither could they be so
foolish to believe that the Queen and Shore's Wife should join together, above
all Women, since she was King Edward's Concubine; besides, the Queen was known
to be Mild, Virtuous, and Religious.

The Lord Hastings, who since Edward's Death had taken Shore's Wife for his
Concubine, and having left her that Morning in his own Bed, endeavored to
appease his Rage against her, and said, My Lord, If the Queen and she have so
done -- The Protector furiously interrupting him, Thou Traitor, said he, do
thou tell me of If 's and And 's? I tell thee they have done it: And therewith
struck his Hand very hard upon the Table, upon which the Room was presently
filled with Soldiers, one of whom at his entrance struck at the Lord Stanley's
Head with an Halbert, who to save his Life fell under the Board, though not
without much loss of Blood. The Protector himself seized upon the Lord
Hastings, and accusing him of Treason in general, without any Trial or Answer,
caused him to be beheaded upon a Log on the Green in the Tower: Which Execution
happened the same day and hour that the aforementioned Lords suffered without
Trial at Pomfret, by the Advice and Consent of this very Lord Hastings. After
this, the Protector committed the Archbishop of York, the Bishop of Ely, and
the Lord Stanley, to Prison; and presently putting himself and Buckingham into
ragged Clothes, he sent for several eminent Citizens, to whom he declared with
great passion, That the Lord Hastings and his Confederates had conspired to
take away his Life this Morning at the Council, had he not timely prevented it
by the sudden Execution of him, and seizing the rest. Within two hours after
the Lord Hastings's his death, a long Proclamation, written fairly in
Parchment, under the Great Seal, was read in diverse parts of the City by an
Herald at Arms, with great Solemnity; whereby it appeared to be contrived and
written some days before.

Richard having thus dispatched those that he thought stood in his way, he
caused Dr. Shaw, a wicked Priest, in a Sermon at Paul's Cross the Sunday after,
to display the Honorable Birth of the Protector, with his Virtues and Valor,
and to defame King Edward for his Wantonness with Shore's Wife, and others, and
stigmatized his Children for Bastards, as being before his Marriage contracted
to Elizabeth Lucy. He likewise charged the Protectors own Mother with
Incontinency, when King Edward and the Duke of Clarence were born, and that
none of her Children were Legitimate but Richard, whom he extolled to the Skies
for his Goodness and Virtues; at which time Richard appeared among the People,
the Doctor expecting they should have shouted, and cried, God save King
Richard; but every one stood silent, and astonished, to observe how unworthily
and villainously things were managed to make the Protector King. The next day
the Duke of Buckingham endeavored by the same Arguments to persuade the
Londoners at Guildhall to acknowledge Richard for the true and undoubted Heir
of the Crown, which they then did not assent to; yet the next day they were
forced against their Wills, at Baynards Castle, to accept of him for their
lawful King, praying him to undergo that Burden for their Security; which he
often hypocritically refused, yet at last, with a pretended unwillingness,
accepted. And here ended the short Reign, and soon after the Life of this young
innocent Prince, having enjoyed it only two Months and 13 days, being murdered
by his barbarous Uncle in the 13th. year of his Age, 1483.

RICHARD the THIRD King of England, etc.
portrait of King Richard the 3rd

A Moition that never is content,
Which Angels threw from Heaven unto Hell.
That for a Plague upon mankind is sent;
Ambitiously made me Aspire, Rebel;
Ambition that damned Necromantick spell,
Made me clime high with shame to tumble down.
By Blood, and Murder I did all expel,
Whose Right, or Might debarred me from the Crown.
My smiles, my Gifts, my favor or my frown.
Were mischievous; in blood I took delight,
By cruel Tyranny I sought renown,
Till Heaven's just Judge me justly did requite,
By Blood I go, by Blood I lost the Throne;
Alive, detested; Dead, bewailed of none.
RIchard being crowned King, used all means possible to ingratiate himself with
the people, and t^ough he heard that the Lord Strange Son to the Lord Stanley,
was raising forces in the North for the relief of his Father the Lord Stanley,
who was wrongfully imprisoned by Richard, he took no notice thereof, but
instead of punishing him set him at liberty, and made him Steward of his House;
he likewise enlarged the Arch Bishop of York, but committed Morton Bishop of
Ely, as a Prisoner to the Duke of Buckingham, which was afterward the cause of
Richards destruction, as well as his own; he conferred great honors upon
several, creating his only Son Edward, Prince of Wales, John Howard, was made
Duke of Norfolk, his Son Thomas, Earl of Surrey, the Lord William Barkley, was
made Earl of Nottingham, and Francis Lovel, viscount Lovel; having firmly
settled himself, as he imagined, he sent Ambassadors to the French King, to
conclude a Peace with him, who so much abhorred his detestable cruelties, that
he would neither see, nor give audience to their Message. This affront and
several others so tormented him, that he thought he should never be
acknowledged, nor honored as King whilst the young Princes lived, as though
such horrible murders could ever gain him love, or reputation among the People.

Having, with his confederate the Devil, contrived this execrable villainy, he
took his progress toward Gloucester, as if he intended to honor the place of
his Title and Dignity, vainly imagining, that if this heinous fact were
committed in his absence, he should be thought innocent thereof; and first he
attempted to persuade Sir Robert Brachenbury, whom he made Lieutenant of the
Tower, to perpetrate this cursed act; which he generously refusing, Richard
swore, and stormed like a fury, but remembering there was a needy, profligate
fellow, belonging to the Tower, named James Tirrel, he by Letters earnestly
persuades him to commit this hellish murder, with promises of great reward; who
quickly assenting thereto demands, by Richards Letters, the keys of the Tower
to be delivered to him by the Lieutenant, and then next night he sends Miles
Forest, and John Dighton, two Imps of Hell into the innocent Childrens
Chamber, who smothered them both in their beds, and buried them at the stairs
foot, from whence they were removed, and privately buried in some unknown
place. The news of the death of the two young Princes, raised a lamentable
consternation in the minds of the Nobility and People, only the Tyrant and his
favorites gloried in this admired peace of policy, whereby they thought
Richard had now securely settled himself and his posterity in the Kingdom, but
soon after Edward his only Child died to his great grief and trouble.

And now returning to London from his progress, he called a Parliament, and
made diverse good Laws, and by his executing them with mercy, his liberality to
the poor, and his courtesy to all persons, he endeavored to insinuate himself
into the favor and affections of all, which it seems had effect upon some, for
several Gentlemen of diverse Counties in England, offering him a Benevolence of
a good sum of money, he refused it, saying, I had rather have your hearts, than
your money; which, considering his savage nature, it may be doubted in what
sense the words were spoken. The Bishop of Ely being a Prisoner to the Duke of
Buckingham, he by often discoursing with him became so intimate, that the Duke
opened his whole mind to him, complaining of the bloody villainies and Tyranny
of the King, which the Bishop endeavored by all means to aggravate, repeating
all the murders and other crimes he was guilty of, and at length persuaded him
to endeavor the deposing of Richard, and advancing the Earl of Richmond to the
Throne, and thereby unite the two Houses of Lancaster and York, by Richmond's
marrying the Lady Elizabeth K. Edward the Fourth's eldest Daughter, he being
Son and Heir apparent to Margret, Countess of Richmond, Daughter and Heir of
John Duke of Somerset, son to John of Gaunt, Fourth Son of Edward the Third,
and therefore a lawful Heir to the Crown, and that hereby all occasion of
Faction and Civil Wars, would be removed, and the World would be rid of a
Master, who was loathed and hated by all good men.

The Bishop having by these and many other Arguments confirmed Buckingham, in
his Resolution of attempting against Richard, he then prevailed with him, to
let him go into the Isle of Ely, from whence he fled to the Earl of Richmond in
Flanders; King Richard having notice hereof, sent many rich gifts and presents
to the Duke of Britain to deliver up Richmond to him, but could not prevail,
and tho the Plot of the Bishop was very secret, yet Richard had intelligence
thereof, and resolved to take off Buckingham, either by fair or foul means, and
therefore sent for him kindly to Court, but the Duke knowing that Richard never
spared the Blood of any who stood in his way, sent submissive excuses, as not
being able to travel; the King soon perceived his sickness was more in mind
than body, and therefore sent Letters full of threats, peremptorily commanding
him to come; the Duke rather desiring an open enemy, than a false friend,
boldly returned answer; That he would not venture his life in the hands of such
a Monster, Murderer, and usurping Tyrant as he was; and thereupon presently
fled to Arms, raising considerable forces in Wales, Sir Edward Courtrey and his
Brother, the Bishop of Exeter did the like in Devonshire, Sir Richard Guilford
and others in Kent, and the Marquess of Dorset in Yorkshire.

Richard preparing an Army, marched with all speed to meet Buckingham, before
he joined with his confederates, who resolving to confront him designed to
bring his Army over the Severn to Gloucester, but the night before it rained
extremely, and continued so to do for ten days after, which caused a very great
flood, and laid all the Country under water, drowning Towns, Villages, and
abundance of People; this delay caused scarcity in the Dukes Army, upon which
the inconstant Welsh, ran away and left him alone, so that he was forced to fly
to one Humfry Banister near Shrewsbury for security, he having been his
Servant, and raised by the Duke to a handsome estate; the Lords hearing of the
Dukes ill success, got to Sea and arrived safely in Britain; Richard offered a
thousand pound to any who should discover the Duke of Buckingham, upon which
that ungrateful Wretch delivered him up, and without any Legal Trial, he was
instantly beheaded.

In the mean time Richmond hearing nothing of these misfortunes, having got
together about five thousand men, imbarqued them for England, but was beaten
back by a storm, and much shattered; yet being relieved by the French King, he
soon after got into Britain, where he met his noble friends, by whom it was
concluded to attempt landing in England once more, Richmond swearing to marry
Elizabeth, K. Edward the Fourths eldest Daughter; But K. Richard to prevent the
match, persuaded the old Queen with large promises, and great sums of money to
deliver her five Daughters into his custody, and soon after he caused it to be
reported, that his own Queen was dead, which she hearing of, was much troubled,
and in a week after was found dead indeed; which Richard so little regarded,
that he presently made love to the Lady Elizabeth, who considering her own and
Sisters danger, durst not deny him absolutely, but persuaded him to stay till
he had defeated the Duke of Richmond, and settled himself in Peace.

At this time his Court flatterers persuaded him, that Richmond and his Party
received such small encouragement, and assistance from the French King, that he
was unable to make any attempt against him, which Richard readily believed, and
therefore discharged the forces which were in Garrison, on the Sea Coasts,
whereby it pleased God to infatuate the council of this Bloody Politician; and
to bring him to his deserved fate: for soon after by the aid of the young
French King, the Earl of Richmond, with a very inconsiderable force, landed at
Milford in Wales, where he saw little appearance of assistance, but the
Welchmen being put in mind that Richmond, being the Son of Owen Tudor, was of
their own Country and Blood, and that he would have a special kindness for
them; that he would marry the Lady Elizabeth, and thereby perfectly settle the
Kingdom, they soon flockt yea thronged unto him with willing and resolved
minds, under several Gallant Commanders; the Earl of Shrewsbury likewise sent
in two thousand men, and Sir Thomas Bouchier, Sir Walter Hungerford, and the
Lord Stanley came with five thousand more; all these were lieved by King
Richards order, but revolted to Richmond, as judging it lawful to forsake a
Tyrant, and submit to a more legal Power; Richard was much disturbed at this
disappointment, however he raised an Army of about twenty thousand, and with
his true friend John Duke of Norfolk, marched toward Bosworth, in
Leicestershire, where the Armies met, and fought two hours, K. Richard, acting
the part of a valiant Commander, but at length was slain, as it is said by the
Earl of Richmonds own hand, August 22. 1485. a thousand of his men being
killed, and among them the Duke of Norfolk, and not above an hundred of
Richmonds; after the battle, Thomas Howard, Earl of Surrey, Son and Heir to the
Duke of Norfolk, was taken Prisoner, fighting for King Richard, of whom the
Earl of Richmond demanded, How he durst bear Arms, for that Tyrant Richard; who
answered, He was my Crowned King, and if the Parliamentary Authority of England
set the Crown upon a stock, I will fight for that stock; and as I fought then
for him, so I will fight for you when you are established by the same
Authority. And so he did for his Son Henry 8. at Flodden Field. Camdens Remains.

King Richard being killed, his Crown, which he that day wore, being found
among the spoils, was brought to Henry Earl of Richmond, by his Father in Law,
the Lord Stanley, and the Soldiers shouting loudly, and crying King Henry,
King Henry, he crowned him therewith in the open Field; King Richard had three
wicked Councellers who incited him to cruelty, Sir Richard Ratcliff, Sir
William Catesby and the Lord Lovel, and Richard gave the Hog for the supporter
of his Arms, whereupon one Collingborn made the following Rhyme, and was
executed for the same as a Traitor.

The Rat, the Cat, and Lovel the Dog,
Rule all England under a Hog.
Thus lived, and thus died King Richard after he had reigned as a Tyrant two
years, two months, and two days, and of his Age thirty nine, 1485.

HENRY the SEVENTH, King of England, etc.
portrait of King Henry the 7th

I Was the Man by Providence assigned
To purchase to this restless Kingdom rest;
I York and Lancaster in one conjoined,
That by long Wars each other had oppressed;
My Strength and Wisdom both by Heaven were blessed
With good success, even from first to last,
And the Almighty turned to the best
A world of dangers which I over past.
I did unite the White Rose and the Red,
By a Conjugal, Sacred Marriage Band;
Traitors and Treason both, I quite struck dead,
For I was guarded by a Mighty Hand
In Honor and Magnificence I Reigned,
And after death a glorious Tomb I gained.
HEnry Earl of Richmond being Crowned by the name of King Henry the Seventh, he
according to his Oath and Promise, married the Lady Elizabeth eldest Daughter
to King Edward the Fourth, thereby uniting the two Houses of Lancaster and
York, whose differences had been the death of many. Thousand gallant men. He
then chose a select number of men for the security of his Person, whom he
called the Yeomen of the Guard or Crown, and rewarded his Friends with Honors
and Offices, and among others Edward Stafford Son of the Duke of Buckingham was
restored to his Fathers Dignity and Estate, and calling a Parliament at
Westminster, all Acts which made him and his adherents guilty of High Treason
were repealed, and cancelled, and the Crown was intailed upon him and his
Heirs. In his second year Francis Lord Lovel, Humphrey and Thomas Strafford who
had taken sanctuary for their safety at Colchester, animated many People in the
North to a Rebellion; but King Henry soon raising an Army and pursuing them,
their Commanders fled, and left the poor Rebels, who upon submission were
pardoned by the King. Strafford again took Sanctuary in an Abbey near Oxford,
but was violently forced from thence, as not being sufficient enough to protect
Traitors, who being condemned was executed, but his Brother was pardoned, as
Acting by his instigation.

No sooner was this Fire quenched, but another broke out, for the next year Sir
Richard Symond a knavish crafty Priest, knowing that Edward Plantaginet Son and
Heir to George Duke of Clarence, Brother to King Edward the Fourth, who was now
seventeen years old, had from his Infancy been kept Prisoner by the two last
Kings in the Castle of Sherry Hutton in Yorkshire, and that he had been lately
removed from thence to the Tower by King Henry, he got a young Boy named
Lambert Simnel a Bakers Son whom he instructed in all Court accomplishments,
and then told him that he was the only Son of the Duke of Clarence, and first
Heir Male of the House of York. The Youth being Ingenious was soon fired with
this Discourse, so that he could talk thereof very subtly, as if he had
received his knowledge by Inspiration. This Priest having thoroughly instructed
this apt Scholar, he conveyed him into Ireland, and was soon entertained, and
believed by that barbarous and fickle Nation, who gave him all Honor and
Reverence, yea diverse of the Nobility after much conference with him, did
really believe what he affirmed to be true, and among others, the Lord
Chancellor, and Sir Thomas Gerandine, pitying his condition, were very liberal
toward him. He then gave private notice thereof to the Lady Magaret Duchess
Dowager of Burgundy, and Sister to King Edward the Fourth, who though she
certainly knew he was a Countefeit, yet bearing a mortal hatred to King Henry,
and the House of Lancaster, and hoping if the Design succeeded, it might
procure the enlargement and advancement of her true Nephew Edward to the Crown,
she published the report thereof in England, and all other places, and that the
Irish had received him for their Sovereign, neither would she be wanting to
support him with Men, Money, and Arms to the utmost.

These vain reports caused her Sister Eiizabeth, the Lord Lovel, and several
other of the discontented English Nobility, to transport themselves to her into
Flanders, and she having raised about 2000 men, sent them to Ireland to join
with 2000 more, all resolving for England. In the mean time King Henry to
discover the Cheat, caused Edward the young Earl of Warwick to be brought
publicly through the City, from the Tower to St. Paul's Church, where vast
numbers of Nobility and Commons discoursed with him. And now Lamberts Forces
landed near Lincoln, to whom Henry sent an Army, who soon routed the Irish for
want of Arms, and dispersed the rest, most of their Commanders being slain,
Symonds the Priest, and Lambert, were taken Prisoners, the first being
committed to perpetual Imprisonment, and Lambert was first made Scullion Boy,
and afterward the Kings Falkoner. In his fourth year, a Tax being raised by
Parliament for assisting the Duke of Britain against the French, the Country
People in Northumberland and Durham refused to pay it, and cruelly murdered the
Earl of Northumberland, who was employed in raising thereof; and increasing in
number, they committed many Insolences, but the King sending a complete Army
against them under the Earl of Surry, and following himself in person, the
Rebels as Men amazed, soon fled, after which followed severe execution upon all
whom the King suspected to dislike his Government.

In his seventh year King Henry sailed with an Army into France, and Besieged
Bulloign assaulting it fiercely, but the French King by the Mediation of his
Friends and Money, soon procured a Peace very honorable to Henry. About which
time his ancient, and inveterate Enemy the Duchess of Burgundy set up another
Pageant against him, having instructed a Dutch Boy called Perkin Warbeck, to
personate Richard Duke of York second Son to Edward the Fourth, and Brother to
King Edward the Fifth, instructing him exactly in the Pedegrees of the Houses
of Lancaster and York, and telling him she resolved to advance him to the
Crown, whereby the youth in a short time became as expert in the Language and
Lineage as any Englishman whatsoever.

The French King expecting daily an English Army to be raised in Britain, sent
for Perkin, and promised to assist him in regaining his Kingdom, honoring him
with all manner of magnificence, so that the youngster could not but strongly
imagine that he was born to be a King. But in the midst of his flattering
hopes, the Peace between France and England aforementioned was concluded; upon
which for fear he should be delivered up to King Henry, he fled secretly out of
France to his Titular Aunt the Duchess, who received him joyfully,
entertaining him like a Prince, with plenty of Money and costly Apparel, and
ordering thirty Gentlemen of Quality to wait on him as his Guard. She then
caused it to be published in England, that her Nephew Richard was alive, and
expected the assistance of all his loving Subjects to restore him to his
Kingdom, as being the undoubted Heir Male of the House of York, these reports
wrought much both upon the Gentry and Common People, so that many resolved to
assist him, and sent Sir Robert Clifford secretly into Flanders to enquire
whether he were really such as was pretended, who by the Subtilty of the
Duchess, and the Ingenuity of the Lad was really persuaded that he was King
Edward the Fourth's youngest Son, of which sending an account into England, his
Friends and Partakers daily increased.

This Design extremely disturbed King Henry, who therefore strongly fortified
all places upon the Sea, coast, and likewise sent diverse Spies to the Duchess
of Burgundy, who under pretense of joining with her, discovered what Persons in
England intended to join with Perkin, upon whose information, and after Legal
Trials, the chiefest of them were executed as Traitors. In the mean time an
Insurrection happened in Land n against the Easterlings, the Apprentices of
London breaking up their Warehouses at the Stillyard and doing much mischief,
but they were soon dispersed by the Lord Mayor, and afterward all pardoned by
the King. And now Sir Robert Clifford upon his repentance, and the Intercession
of his Friends was pardoned by King Henry, who coming over discovered all the
Contrivances of the Lady Margaret and Perkin, with the rest of the
Conspirators, but named only Sir William Stanley, at which the King admired,
because he was much beloved by him, and had received great rewards, who upon
clear Conviction was beheaded.

In the mean time Perkin being furnished with Ships by the Lady Margaret,
manned with abundance of Villains and Outlaws, who landing in Kent were beaten
back with great loss, and 160 taken Prisoners, who where executed in diverse
places. Having such ill success he lands next in Ireland, and goes from thence
to Scotland, where he was entertained by that King, though he knew he was a
Counterfeit, who assisting him, they marched into Northumberland, and almost
utterly destroyed it. Upon this King Henry calls a Parliament, who laying a
severe Tax on the People, the Cornishmen rebel, and march toward London, but at
Blackheath King Henry got an absolute Victory, with the slaughter of 2000
Rebels. And then turning his Arms toward the Scots, they fled before him, so
that he entered Scotland without resistance, destroying many considerable Towns
and Forts, the Scotch King not daring to relieve them, though he with his Army
were sometimes not a mile distant. Upon this followed a Truce for some years,
upon condition that Perkin should be banished out of Scotland, who sailed from
thence into Cornwall, where the Cornishmen though so lately defeated, yet being
desperate, joined with him, and Besieged Exeter very closely, but at length
left it, and sat down before Taunton, but the King marching toward him with a
Formidable Army, Perkin with his chief Captains fled and took Sanctuary at
Beauly near Southampton, several of the rest were taken and executed, and the
Rabble pardoned, and Perkin being Besieged in his Monastry, yielded himself, and
was brought to the King, who pardoned him, only he was set in the Stocks upon
an high Scaffold in Cheapside a whole day with a Paper pinned at his back
declaring his ignoble descent and Pedigree, and was then committed Prisoner to
the Tower, where practicing with Edward the young Earl of Warwick, and others
to raise disturbances, he was by Law condemned and executed for High Treason,
together with young Warwick, who was extremely pitied by all for his innocence.

King Henry soon after sending an Embassage to Philip Duke of Burgundy, by
Warham Archbishop of Canterbury; the Doctor in the end of his Speech, gave
this severe remark on the Duchess, That after she was threescore years old,
she had brought forth two Monsters, Lambert and Perkin, and those not in the
ninth and tenth Month, as Women usually do, but in the hundred and fourscore
Month (for they were both above fifteen years of age, when she brought them
abroad as it were out of her Belly, neither were they Crisoms or Infants, but
such lusty lads, that as soon as ever they were born, they were able to make
War with a Mighty King.)

These troubles being over, his eldest Son Prince Arthur of fifteen years old,
was married to the Lady Katharine daughter to Ferdinando King of Spain, and the
next year James the Fourth King of Scots married the Lady Margaret eldest
Daughter to King Henry; but these joys were soon over, for Prince Arthur died
within five Months after he was married. And now King Henry resolving to humble
his People, took advantage of the breach of the Penal Laws, employing Sir
Richard Empson and Edmond Dudle^ therein, who being attended with a Band of
Cheats and Informers ruined abundance of People in many Countries in England,
so that no man thought himself secure of any thing he enjoyed.

In his twenty first year the King and Queen of Castile being driven by storm
into England were entertained by the King with all kind of magnificence, and
the next year King Henry grew sick and infirm, and perceiving his time was
short, he deprived those Caterpillars of their power, who during his Sickness
Plagued the People more than ever, he likewise pardoned all Offenses, and
restored great sums to those who had been robbed by those wretched Cormorants,
being extreme penitent for the wrongs and injuries he had committed upon his
Subjects; and having reigned twenty three years, and lived fifty two, he died,
and was buried in a sumptuous Chapel built with great cost by himself at
Westminster in the year 1508.

HENRY the EIGHTH, King of England, etc.
portrait of King Henry the 8th

TO both the Royal Houses I was Heir;
Of Two, that long contended, I One made:
This Nation rent, and almost in despair,
I did revive, settling Commerce and Trade.
I banished Romish Usurpations vain;
In France I Bulloign, Tyrwin, Tournay wa^;
The Style of Faiths Defender I did gain;
Six Wives I had, three Anns, two Kates, one Jane.
In my Expenses Royal beyond measure,
Striving in Noble Actions to exceed,
Accounting Honor as my greatest Treasure:
Yet various Fancies did my Frailty feed;
I made, I marred, I did, and I undid,
Till all my Greatness in a Grave was hid.
HEnry, the only surviving Son of Henry the Seventh, succeeded his Father at
Eighteen years of Age, 1509. And having a Dispensation from the Pope, he
married the Lady Katherine, his Brother Prince Arthur's Widow. To oblige his
People, he made open Proclamation, That he would hear the Complaints against
Empson and Dudley; and finding they had committed notorious Rapines on his
Subjects, he caused them to be beheaded at Tower Hill, and their Confederates
were Pilloried in several Places of the Kingdom. At this time the French King
Lewis the Twelfth made War with the Pope, whereupon Henry offered himself a
Mediator, but was rejected by the French King, and therefore proclaimed War
against France; upon which occasion, and for writing against Martin Luther, the
Pope styled him Defender of the Faith. Henry sending a Fleet and an Army
thither, took the Towns of Tyrwin and Tournay. At the same time James the
Fourth King of Scots, though he had married Margaret King Henry's eldest
Sister, contrary to his Oath and Articles, invaded England with an Army of
100000 Fighting Men; but the Earl of Surrey with 26000 Men marching against
them, utterly routed the whole Scotch Army at Flodden field, King James himself
being slain valiantly fighting. After this succeeded a Peace, and the French
King married King Henry's second Sister, Mary.

And now Cardinal Wolsey, of mean Parentage, grew extreme Great, by the Kings
extraordinary Affection toward him; and among other extravagant Actions, he
procured a License from the Pope to pluck down several small Abbeys and
Priories, and to settle the Lands upon two Colleges which he had built, one in
Ipswich, and another in Oxford; which President occasioned King Henry, some
years after, to pull down all the rest.

In his eighth year a Riot happened in London against Merchant-Strangers, and
Artificers, for which many were condemned of High Treason, but were all
pardoned by the King. The Truce with France was soon broken by the French King,
whereupon King Henry sent an Army thither, who won and burnt Morlaix, and
several other Towns, returning home with great Booty.

In his twentieth year the Kings Marriage with Queen Katherine of Spain is
questioned, which was thought to be cunningly contrived by Cardinal Wolsey;
whereupon the King refrained her Bed, and it was judged unlawful by six Foreign
Universities: so that notwithstanding the Popes Opposition, who would have had
it referred to him, it was made null and void by the next Parliament; upon
which the Pope caused his Curse to be set up at Dunkirk against the King,
pronouncing the Marriage lawful: But Henry little regarded those Paper Pellets;
for hereby the Pope lost his Supremacy in England, and Bishop Fisher and Sir
Thomas More were beheaded for defending it. The King soon after married Ann
Bullein, Daughter to the Lord Rochford, who was judged a Favourer of
Protestants, and therefore disliked by Cardinal Wolsey, who for abundance of
Misdemeanors was found guilty of a Praemunire, and all his Estate and Honors
were taken from him, for grief whereof he soon after died.

In his twenty sixth year the King was by Parliament declared Supreme Head of
the Church, within all his own Dominions, in all Ecclesiastical Causes; and all
Popish Bulls and Indulgences were made void, and several Religious Houses of
Nuns and Monks, whose Revenue exceeded not 200 l. a year, were suppressed. The
next year Queen Ann, the Kings dearly-beloved Wife, was beheaded, though she
protested her Innocence at her death, being accused for prostituting her Body
to her own Brother the Lord Rochford, who with some others were put to death
for the same.

This Tragedy being over, the King within twenty* days married Jane the
Daughter of Sir John Seymour, by whom he had the Virtuous Prince Edward, who
succeeded him; but within few days after the good Queen died. James King of
Scotland being slain, as aforementioned, his Queen, Margaret, eldest Sister to
King Henry, was afterward married to Archibald Douglas Earl of Angus, who had a
Daughter by her called Margaret; this young Lady the Lord Howard married
without the Kings leave, for which, she being of the Blood Royal, he was
beheaded as a Traitor. The Kings Proceedings against the Pope caused a
Rebellion in Lincolnshire; but they were soon dispersed, and Captain Cobbler
their Leader, with others, executed. This was no sooner suppressed, but an
Insurrection begun in the North, of above 40000, who called themselves The Holy
Pilgrims; but upon the Kings Pardon, they all quietly departed ^ome. A third
Rebellion succeeded in Westmorland, upon the same account; but was likewise
defeated, and seventy of the principal Conspirators executed.

In his twenty eighth year several Persons were executed for denying the Kings
Supremacy, and the Lord Cromwell is made Vicegerent in all Spiritual Matters, by
whom all Images and Shrines in Churches were taken down and destroyed, and the
Houses and Lands of Abbots, Priors, Monks, and Nuns, for their many
Misdemeanors, were all taken away, and their yearly Revenues, amounting to
above 200000 l. settled on the King, who freely exchanged them for other Lands
with diverse of his Nobles and Gentry, thereby preventing, as much as possible,
the restoring them to their former Uses. After the Lord Cromwell had performed
this great Business, he persuaded the King to marry Ann of Cleve, whom he never
liked, so that though he was married to her four Months, he never conversed
with her as a Wife, the Clergy soon after dissolving the Marriage, and the King
married Katherine Howard, Daughter to the Lord Howard, Brother to the Duke of
Norfolk. The King then began to frown upon Cromwell, which his Enemies, who were
many, observing, procured his Downfall; for he was attainted in Parliament, and
without being suffered to defend himself, was condemned and executed for High
Treason; and about this time the Lord Hungerford and the Lord Leonard Gray were
put to death.

King Henry was very unfortunate in his Wives; for soon after his last
Marriage, he was informed that his Queen Katherine had before Marriage lived
very lasciviously with one Francis Derham, and Thomas Culpeper; whereupon the
Queen, and the Lady Rochfort who was privy thereto, were soon after attainted
of Treason by Parliament, and beheaded; and the other two hanged at Tyburn.

About this time an Act of Parliament was made, declaring it High Treason to
deny the Oath of Supremacy, or to acknowledge the Authority of the Pope. Yet
though the Discipline of the Church was altered, the Doctrine remained almost
the same; for there were six bloody Articles likewise enacted, and it was made
Heresy, and thereupon burning, to deny any of them. They were these: 1. That
after speaking the Words of Consecration by the Priest, the real and natural
Body and Blood of Christ, as he was conceived and crucified, was in the
Sacrament, and no other Substance. 2. That the Communion in both Kinds is not
necessary to Salvation. 3. That Priests may not marry. 4. That Vows of Chastity
ought to be observed by the Law of God. 5. That Private Masses ought to be
continued. 6. That Auricular Confession is necessary and expedient to be
retained in the Church of God. The refusal of these Articles caused the Death
of very many Protestants, as the denying the Kings Supremacy cut off several
Papists; so that at the same time Protestants were burnt on one side of
Smithfield, and Papists hanged on the other; which made Foreigners admire, not
understanding what Religion King Henry was of.

In his thirty third year the King married Katherine Parr, Sister to the
Marquess of Northampton, and Widow to the Lord Latimer, who was likely to have
lost her Head, if her Virtue, and the Kings sudden Death, had not reserved her
for better Fortune; for being studious in the English Bible, which was forbid
to be read, she thereby began to hearken to those who declaimed against the
Abuses of the Roman Church, and thought her self so well instructed in her
Religion, that she would debate thereof with the King, who impatiently heard
her, both by reason of the anguish of his sore Leg, and because he hated to be
contradicted, especially in his old Age, and by his Wife, as he said. This was
so much aggravated by Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, a bitter Enemy to
the Reformation, as being against the Six Articles, and the Proclamation
against Prohibited Books, that the King gave leave to him and Wriothsley the
Chancellor to draw up Articles against her, which they presented to the King,
and were subscribed by him, so that they only expected a Warrant to carry her
to the Tower; which the Queen accidentally hearing of, fell into a great
Passion, extremely bewailing her Misfortune; of which the King having notice,
came himself to her Chamber, where compassionating her Condition, he used such
kind Words as did help to recover her; so that the next Night coming into the
Kings Chamber, he began to talk of Religion; but she wittily excusing her self
by reason of the weakness of her Sex and Judgment, said, She would refer her
self in this, as in all other Causes, to his Majesty's Wisdom. Not so, by St.
Mary, quoth the K. you are become a Doctor, Kate, to instruct Us, as We take
it, and not to be instructed or directed by Us. But the Queen replying, That
what she said was rather to pass away the time, and make him forget his Pain,
than to hold an Argument; and that she hoped, by hearing his Majesty's Learned
Discourse, to receive some Profit thereby: The King answered, And is it even
so, Sweetheart? Then are we perfect Friends again; and therewith lovingly
kissed her. But her Enemies knowing nothing of this Reconcilement, prepared to
send her to the Tower the next day, according to the Kings Warrant; when she
being merrily talking with him in the Garden, the Lord Wriothsley with forty of
his Guard came in whom the King sternly beholding, and after calling to him at
some distance from the Queen, so expostulated the matter, that at last he
reviled him, and commanded him out of his Presence: yet at the Kings return,
she humbly begged his Pardon; to whom the King answered, Alas, poor Soul! thou
little know how ill he has deserved this; for I assure thee, he has been a
very Knave to thee. And thus by her opportune Submission she escaped, though
Winchester absolutely designed her Ruin.

Not long before King Henry sailed to Callice in a Ship with Sails of Cloth of
Gold, and the Emperor of Germany served under him as a Soldier, at 100 Crowns
a day. The King sat down before Bul^oigne, and in six weeks time it was
delivered to him. This was succeeded by a War with Scotland, by the instigation
of the French King; whereupon Henry sent an Army of 20000 Men to invade
Scotland, who burnt and plundered several Towns and Villages; but James the
Fifth of Scotland, an active and warlike Prince, having raised Forces, marched
toward the Borders, with a resolution to fight the English, though dissuaded by
his Nobility, who remembered the Miseries of the former War, and the loss of
their last King. James having made Oliver Sinclair, a Favorite of mean Birth,
General, the Lords were so much disgusted, that upon the appearance of only
500 English Horse, apprehending them to be the whole English Army, the Scots
threw down their Arms and fled. Many Prisoners were taken, as the Earls of
Glencairn, Cassils, the Lords Maxwell, Sommervill, Oliphant, Gray, and Ol.
Sinclair, with above 200 Gentlemen, and 800 Soldiers. The News of this Loss,
with the murdering of an English Herald, being brought to King James, together
with the Birth of a Daughter, when he earnestly desired a Son, so oppressed him
with Grief and Despair, that he fell into a Fever, and died, the thirty third
year of his Age, and the thirty second of his Reign, leaving only his Infant
Daughter Mary to succeed him.

This turn of Affairs put Henry upon new thoughts of uniting England and
Scotland, by procuring a Marriage between his Son Prince Edward and the young
Queen of Scotland; whereupon the King having magnificently treated the Scotch
Nobility, represented to them this fair Occasion of ending all Quarrels between
the two Nations; who approving thereof, the Match was confirmed both by the
Parliament of England and Scotland. But Cardinal Beaton, Archbishop of St.
Andrews, fearing that the Consequence of it would be a Change in Matters of
Religion, opposed it, as likewise the French, which caused continual Wars, and
great Devastations. And then the King fell again upon France, who were ^routed
by him in diverse kirmishes; but in his thirty eighth year a Peace was concluded
between England and France: And soon after, the Duke of Norfolk, and his Son
the Earl of urrey, were convicted of High Treason, only for Quartering the
Arms which they said properly belonged to the King; for which the Earl was
beheaded, to the great grief of the People; but the Duke, by reason of the
Kings Sickness, and Death soon after, was preserved: For he was grown excessive
Corpulent, and the Inflammation of his Leg cast him into a lingering Fever,
whereby he finding his Spirits decay, made his Will, wherein he ordered that
his only Son Edward should succeed him, and he dying without Issue, his
Daughter Mary; and after her, if without Issue, his Daughter Elizabeth should
succeed; appointed the Principal Men of the Kingdom for his Executors: And
finding his last Moment approaching, he sent for Archbishop Cranmer, then at
Croyden, who coming, found him speechless. The Archbishop desired him to give
some Sign of his dying in the Faith of Christ, upon which he squeezed his Hand,
and presently departed, after he had reigned thirty seven years and nine
months, and lived fifty six. Thus died King Henry, whose Reign had been fatal
to his Queens, burdensome and cruel to his Subjects; yet glorious in respect of
his Victories over his Enemies, and that the Ax was then first laid to the Root
of Superstition, and the Door first opened to Truth and Reformation.

EDWARD the SIXTH King of England, etc.
portrait of King Edward the 6th

I seemed in wisdom aged, in my youth,
A Princely Pattern, I reformed the time.
With Christian Courage, I maintained Gods Truth.
And Christian Faith, against Antichristian crime;
My Father did begin it, in my prime,
And Bial, and Belial from this Kingdom drove,
And I did still endeavor all my time:
By all means to advance Gods Truth and Love,
To add Grace unto Grace, I always strove.
I lived beloved both of God and Men,
My Soul unto its maker soared above,
My Mortal Part returned to Earth again.
Thus death my just proceedings did prevent;
And Peers and People did my loss lament.
EDward was born at Hampton Court, Oct. 17. 1537. Being the only surviving Son
of K. Henry the 8. by Q. Jane Seymour his third wife, who died soon after her
delivery; He was very carefully educated by his Father, and had such a happy
Genius, that in a short time he attained to a perfect use and knowledge of the
ancient and modern Languages, and was exceedingly skilled in all the liberal
Arts; He was of a beautiful body, a mild and gracious disposition, and an
Heavenly wit, so that the renowned Cardan calls him a Miracle of Nature; After
K. Henrys Death, Edward by unquestionable right succeeded him, his Father
having appointed twenty eight Councillors to assist him in the Government till
he came of Age, who chose the Earl of Hartford, afterward Duke of Somerset, to
be Protector of the King, and Kingdom. After his Fathers funerals were past,
several Persons were advanced to honors, in order to his Coronation, which was
performed February, 20 1547. At which three Swords were delivered to him, as
King of England, France and Ireland, and having received them he said, There
was yet another Sword to be delivered to him; whereat when the Lords wondered, I
mean, said he, the sacred Bible which is the Sword of the Spirit, without which
we are nothing, neither can do any thing.

King Henry before his death, strictly charged the Lords of the Council, to use
their utmost endeavor for perfecting the marriage of his Son Edward, with the
young Queen of Scots, in prosecution whereof, the Protector entered Scotland
with a considerable Army by Land, and a fleet of sixty Ships under the Lord
Clinton scoured the Seas; upon which the Governor of Scotland erected the
Firecross, which was two firebrands set in the fashion of a Cross, and pitched
upon the point of a spear, with a Proclamation that all above sixteen years of
Age, and under sixty, should resort forthwith to Musselborough, and bring
provision of victuals with them, upon which so many came in, that the most
serviceable only were retained; the English, approaching, a Fierce Battle
ensued, but at last the English remained victors, wherein were slain fourteen
thousand cots, with the L. Fleming, and other Persons of Quality, and of
English, only Fifty one Horsemen, and one Footman, though many wounded, this
sight was at Edmonstone Bridge, near Musselborough, there were fifteen hundred
Prisoners taken, the chief whereof were, the Lords Yester, Hobley and Hamilton,
the Master of anepool, the Lord Weems, and the Earl of Huntley, who being
demanded how they were stood affected to the Marriage, answered, That they
liked the match well enough, but did not approve of this kind of woing. After
this the English plundered and fired ^eith, and took several other places, so
that the Earl Bothwell and other Gentry of Tiviotdale, came and submitted to
the Protector, entering into Terms of Peace with him.

The Protector returning to London, called a Parliament, wherein the six
Articles were repealed, and those Colleges and Chapels that K. Henry had not
seized, were given to the K. and the Churches were ordered to be purged of
Images; no Beads, Processions, Prayers to Saints, or for the Dead, or in an
unknown Tongue to be used, Masses and Dirges were likewise abolished; upon
this, diverse Bishops refusing to comply with the Injunctions in Religion, were
removed and committed to Prison; It was likewise ordained that the Eucharist
should be received in both kinds, that Bishops should be made by the King,
under his Letters Patents, without any other pretended Authority, and that all
persons exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction should have the Kings Arms in
the eals of their Office, after which they confirmed the Kings Supremacy. In
the mean time the young Queen of cots was conveyed into France, and married to
Francis the Dauphin, at six years old.

These Alterations of Religion, caused diverse Insurrections, for the
Commissioners going into the Country, to execute the aforementioned orders, as
Mr. Body one of the Commissioners, was performing his office in the West of
England, by plucking down Images, he was stabbed to the heart by a Popish
Priest, and the Common People joining with the Priest, upon the instigation of
other Papists, they took Arms, to the number of ten thousand, refusing the
pardon offered them, and besieging Exeter, which was Gallantly defended, but at
length the King sending his Forces, soon dispersed them, several of the
Ringleaders being taken and executed in London.

This was succeeded by another Insurrection in Norfolk under one Ket a Tanner,
who issued out warrants in his Majesty's name, acting the part of the Kings
Deputy, without his Authority, and calling the Tree near Norwich, wherein he
pretended to administer Justice, The Oak of Reformation, but the Earl of
Warwick, marching against them, upon offer of a General Pardon, they laid down
their Arms, sixty of them being before executed by Martial Law, and nine hanged
upon the Oak of Reformation. A third Insurrection happened upon the neck of
this in Yorkshire, raised by one Ombler a Gentleman, Dale a Parish Clerk, and
Stephenson a Priest; who gathered four or five thousand to assist them, upon
conceit of a Prophecy, That the time should come, wherein there would be no
King; the Nobility and Gentry should be destroyed, and the Land ruled by four
Governors, elected by the Commons, holding a Parliament in Commotion, which
should begin at the North Seas of England. And this they thought to be the
time, and that the Rebels in Devonshire, Yorkshire, and Norfolk, should join
together to accomplish this Prophesy, but hearing of the bad success of their
friends, and having a pardon sent them by the King, they forsook their Leaders,
who were taken and executed at York.

At this time some heats arose at Court, between the Wives of the two Brothers
the Lord Protector, and L. High Admiral about precedence, whereupon the Admiral
was accused of attempting to get the Kings Person and Government into his
hands, with diverse other matters for which he was condemned by the contrivance
of the Earl of Warwick, and by his Brothers Warrant beheaded upon Tower Hill;
And now Cardinal Pool was upon the Death of Paul the third elected Pope, which
being told him, he desired them to consider well, whether they were swayed by
no passion of mind, or did any thing for favor or affection, but only for the
honor of God and the Church; they taking this for a kind of denial, presently
chose Cardinal Montanus, who took the name of Julius the third. During these
domestic troubles, the French had diverse times attempted Bulloign, and had now
got seven thousand men, and all other provisions necessary to surprise it, but
being come within a quarter of a Mile of the Fort, the Garrison had notice
thereof, who put themselves into such a posture to receive them, that they were
repulsed with a great slaughter, fifteen Wagons being laden with the dead
bodies; afterward they attempted Guernsey and Jersey, with no better success,
being beaten off with the loss of a thousand men; upon this succeeded a Peace,
whereby it was agreed, that Bulloign should be surrendered to the French, with
all the Forts, Artillery and baggage, upon the payment of Four hundred thousand
Crowns, to the King of England.

The Duke of Brunswick now desired the Lady Mary, the Kings Eldest Sister in
Marriage, but there being a treaty about marrying her to the Infanto of
Portugal, it was retarded; In the mean while the Emperor of Germany, demanded
by his Ambassador, that the Lady Mary might have free exercise of the Mass, but
neither promises nor threats could prevail with the King to allow it, being as
he said against his Conscience; a treaty was likewise set on foot for a
Marriage, between the Lady Elizabeth the Kings youngest Sister, and the King of
Denmarks Eldest Son, but when it was almost concluded, the princess could by no
means be prevailed upon to consent thereto. And soon after several of the
Nobility were sent in an Ambassy to the French King, to Treat of a Marriage
between King Edward and his Daughter, which at length was agreed on, the French
being to give her two hundred thousand Crowns as a Portion, but it was never
consummated by reason of the Kings Death.

The Earl of Warwick was now created Duke of Northumberland, and having an
irreconcilable hatred against the Duke of Somerset Lord Protector, resolved
upon his ruin, which Somerset was not insensible of, and therefore used all
imaginable caution to defeat him, but being of a mild disposition, though
persuaded by his friends, to prevent his own ruin by Northumberlands
destruction, he was unwilling to taste any violent course, only he was
persuaded by some treacherous acquaintance to go privately armed to the Council
Table, where being apprehended his bosom was opened, and he thereupon committed
to the Tower, tried and found guilty upon a new Law, which made it Felony to
design the Death of a Privy Councellor, and was soon after beheaded on
Tower Hill, together with Sir Michael Stanhope, and Sir Thomas Arundel, Sir
Ralph Vane, and Sir Miles Partridge, being hanged there at the same time.

Mean while the Duke of Suffolks three Daughters, which he had by Francis
Daughter of Charles Brandon and Mary Queen of France, were married at Durham
House, the Eldest Jane Gray to the Lord Guilford Dudley, Fourth Son to the Duke
of Northumberland, the Second Katherine to the Earl of Pembroke, the youngest
being somewhat deformed to Martin Keys, the Kings Gentleman Porter; the Duke of
Northumberland having so far advanced his designs, as to procure an Alliance
with the Royal family, now hoped to arrive to the height of his ambition,
though the people generally hated him for his practices against those two
gallant men the Duke of Somerset, and the Lord Admiral the Kings Uncles; For
the King now grew very weak, and in a languishing state of body, which whether
occasioned by grief for the Death of his Uncles, or whether caused by poison,
which, as some reported, was infused into a Nosegay of Flowers, presented to
him on new years day, as a great rarity, or whether by a defluxion of Rheum
upon his Lungs is yet uncertain, however he fell into an Hectic Fever, which
the Physicians declared would suddenly cause his Death; whereupon the Duke of
Northumberland, used several stratagems to secure the Lady Mary, and persuaded
the King to exclude his two Sisters, in regard if the Lady Mary succeeded,
Popery and Idolatry would be again introduced, and she could not be put by
unless her other Sister the Lady Elizabeth were likewise excluded, since their
Rights depended upon one another; but if he pleased to appoint the Lady Jane,
his own next Kinswoman to succeed, he might be sure, the true Religion would be
maintained, to Gods great Glory; so that the sick Prince out of Love to
Religion, was prevailed with to exclude his two Sisters, and to ordain by his
will, the Lady Jane to be his Successor, which will was subscribed by all the
Council, Bishops, and Judges, except Sir John Hales; Bishop Cranmer likewise
made some difficulty to sign it, but at length did as others; and a few days
after this pious Prince departed this Life at Greenwich, July 6. 1553. in the
Seventeenth year of his Age, when he had reigned six years, and five months,
being buried at Westminster near his Grandfather Henry the Seventh.

MARY Queen of England, etc.
portrait of Queen Mary

AS soon as I ascended to the Throne
The True Religion I banished quite,
Rome, Spain and I were all conjoined in one,
To persecute, to burn, and put to flight
All that the Gospel of our Lord professed,
All who opposed blind Error, and the Pope,
All such with grievous tortures were oppressed
With the Ax, with Fire, with Faggot, and the Rope;
Scarce any Nation underne^th the Sky,
Afflicted was as I caused this to be.
But when my thoughts and hopes were grown most high,
Then Death at five years end arrested me,
No Bail would serve, I could command no aid,
But in the Prison of my Grave was laid.
MAry eldest Daughter of King Henry the Eighth by Queen Katha ine of Spain was
born at Greenwich, 1518. at whose birth, though great numbers of the Nobility
were at Court, yet there was not observed to be the usual joy upon such
occasions, which some thought proceeded from a secret impulse, that she was
rather born for a Scourge than a Blessing to the Nation, as it after happened;
when she grew up, she was committed to the Tuition of the Countess of
Salisbury, who above all things instructed her in the Romish Principles, which
may be thought the reason of her furious Zeal therein, and especially since
Stephen Gardener a keen enemy to the Reformation was her Ghostly Father, of
whom she once demanded, What he thought of those that were not of her Opinion.
He told her, They would infallibly be damned, since there was no Salvation in
any Church but that wherein the Pope, Christ's Vicar was the Head, and that it
was dangerous to converse with them, but a mortal sin to spare any of them if
she had advantage against them, it being pleasing to God to destroy them as
obstinate Heretics; which pernicious Counsel as soon as she had power she
fully put in practice.

After the death of King Edward the Lady Jane was proclaimed Queen, which the
Lady Mary who was at her Manor at Hovesdon in Herefordshire having notice of,
she sent a Letter to the Lords of the Council to deplore her Brothers death,
and demand the Crown as her right; but they writ her an answer, wherein they
insisted on the lawfulness of her Mothers divorce, whereby she was made
Illegitimate, and by several Acts of Parliament yet in force, uninheritable to
the Crown Imperial of this Realm, together with the Will of King Edward, and
the proclaiming of Queen Jane, and therefore desired her to be quiet and
obedient to the present Government. This was Signed by above twenty of the
Council, diverse of them being Executors of the Testament of the last King. The
Lady Mary perceiving their Resolution to stand by Queen Jane, went to
Framingham Castle in Suffolk, resolving to get what Forces she could, and try
her Right by Arms; being there, diverse of the Nobility and Gentry resorted to
her, offering their aid to establish her in the Throne, provided she would make
no alteration in Religion, which she faithfully promised with many solemn
Asseverations, yet soon made it appear, That no Faith is to be kept with
Heretics.

The Lords hearing she raised Forces, they did the like, and sent them under
the Duke of Northumberland against her, but his Commission being limited that
he could do nothing without daily orders from the Council, he was forced to
march slowly which was his utter ruin, for the Lady Mary sent to several of
the Nobility to come in to her assistance, as the Earls of Sussex, Oxford, and
Bath, and other Lords and Gentlemen, who came with their Tenants and other
Commoners, relying upon her Promise not to alter Religion, but especially the
Suffolk men, and yet Mr. Fox observes, that she burnt and put to death more of
that County for Religion than of any other County in England; so fatal was the
belief of her promises to them. The Fleet which was sent to surprise her,
joining likewise with her, and the People in general being for her, the Council
saw it in vain to withstand, and therefore sent to the Duke of Northumberland
to dismiss his Army, whereupon the Lady Mary was proclaimed Queen, and the Lady
Jane, who had only personated a Queen for ten days, was sent to the Tower.

Soon after the Duke of Northumberland was condemned and beheaded, with Sir
John Gates, and Sir Tho. Palmer. And a Parliament being called, all the Laws
concerning the Illegitimacy of the Queen, and those against the Pope and his
Usurpations were repealed. In her second year, and the thirty seventh of her
Age, the Queen began to think of marrying, and at last was Contracted to Philip
King of Spain, and Son to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, which caused great
dissatisfaction among her Subjects, fearing that the Spaniards having once got
footing in England would enslave the Nation, and deprive them of their Ancient
Laws and Customs. This alienated them from the Queen, so that several private
Consults were held about deposing Queen Mary, and re-establishing the Lady
Jane, who remained under Sentence of death in the Tower of London, but these
contrivances, being discovered, the Fomentors had recourse to Arms for their
own security, the first of them was Sir Thomas Wiat, who made an Insurrection
in Kent, and by declaring himself for the defense of his Country and Religion
raised 3000 of the Commons. The Duke of Suffolk, his Brother the Lord Gray, and
Sir Peter Carew of Devonshire and others designed the like in Cornwall,
Devonshire, and Suffolk, but resolving not to show themselves till the
Spaniards landed, they were detected and forced to fly; However Wiat increased
daily in power, and threatened the Herald who was sent with a Pardon, to Pistol
him if he endeavored to withdraw the Soldiers from him and one Colonel Bret
made an encouraging Oration to them to this purpose.

Valiant Countrymen, we now engage our selves in a cause to vindicate our
Common Liberties against the Insolences of the cruel Spaniard, you whose
degenerate Spirits can endure slavery, continue in it in Gods name, but as for
me I had rather undergo the most painful death than betray my Rights to the
Spaniards, and I here enroll my self under Wiats Colors, and am confident that
some of you for the Vindication of the Ancient Glory of the English Nation will
follow my example. He had scarce ended this Speech but they threw up their
Caps, and cried out, a Wiat, a Wiat, so that the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of
Arundel, and Sir Henry Iirningham who approached them at Rochester Bridge,
turned Tail and fled. In the mean time the Queen mistrusting the Londoners,
whom she knew hated Popery, came to Guildhall, and in a Speech declared to
them, that though Wiats pretenses were against the Match with Spain, yet his
real design was to plunder, and therefore she left with them the Lord Howard
and the Lord Treasurer to assist the Lord Mayor in defending the City against
the Rebels.

At length Wiat arrived in Southwark, and with his great Guns beat down diverse
Houses, but being opposed by the Queens Forces, and about twenty of them slain,
he soon after submitted upon hope of Mercy, and was committed to the Tower, his
fol^owers dispersing themselves, and twenty pair of Gallows were set up in
diverse places in the City whereon many were executed. This Rebellion being
suppressed, the Popish Faction reflected on the Lady Jane as the cause thereof,
and soon after she and her Husband the Lord Guilford Dudley were beheaded. Wiat
in hope of pardon accused the Lady Elizabeth and the Marquess of Exeter as
Accomplices, but at his Death he again cleared her. Then the Duke of Suffolk
and his Brother suffered, as likewise Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, and ^he Lady
Elizabeth was in great danger of her life at this time, and indeed all the
Reign of her Sister, yet still happily escaped.

The Queen having removed all obstacles, Philip of Spain arrived in England,
and married her. Upon which succeeded the Reconciliation of the whole Kingdom
by Cardinal Pool, which he did in these words, Our Lord Jesus Christ, whom the
Father has appointed head ^ver all the Church, absolve you, and we by the
Apostolic Authority given us by the most Holy Lord Pope Julius the Third his
Vicegerent on Earth, do absolve and deliver you, and every of you, with the
whole Realm and the Dominions ^hereof from all Heresy and Schism, and from all
and every ^udgment, censures, and pains, for that cause incurred, and also we
do restore you again to the Unity of our Mother the Holy Church, as in our
Lettters of Commission more plainly shall appear. The Queen next endeavored to
prevail upon the Parliament to restore the Abbey Lands, but they were so divided
among the Nobility and Gentry, that it proved ineffectual. And being now thirty
eight years old, it was reported she was with Child, and ^ll things were
provided for her lying in; yea, a Popish Priest ventured to describe the
excellent Features of the Infant before it was born, and Bells and Guns
^roclaimed the joy, but at length it came all to nothing, which caused much
laughter.

The Reign of Queen Mary seemed hitherto only sprinkled with Blood, but now the
blessed Martyrs come thick to Act their parts, for the Protestant Clergy were
not only deprived of their Livings, but all sorts without respect of Sex, Age,
or Quality began to feel the severity of her Laws, the pourtraicture whereof
cannot be better expressed than in the words of the Reverend Bishop Jewel in
his vindication of the Protestant Religion against the Romanists, wherein he
thus deciphers their hard usage toward the Reformers.

You have, says he, imprisoned your Brethren, you have stripped them naked, you
have scourged them with Rods, you have burnt their Hands and Arms with Flaming
Torches, you have famished them, you have drowned them, you have summoned them
being dead to appear before you, out of their Graves, you have ripped up their
buried Carcasses, burnt them, and thrown them out upon Dunghils, you took a
poor Babe falling from his Mothers womb, and in a most cruel and inhumane
manner threw it into the Fire.

By all which several ways and means, the Martyrs in all parts of the Kingdom
in the five years reign of Queen Mary, amounted to the number of 277 Persons,
for there perished by these Flames, five Bishops, twenty one Divines, eight
Gentlemen, eighty four Artificers, an hundred Husbandmen, Servants and
Laborers, twenty six Wives, twenty Widows, nine Virgins, two Boys, and two
Infants, one sprung out of his Mothers Womb as she was burning at the Stake,
and most unmercifully flung into the Fire at the very birth, sixty four more in
those furious times were persecuted in their Faith, whereof seven were whipped,
sixteen perished in Prison, twelve buried in Dunghills, and many more lay in
Captivity condemned, who were happily delivered by the glorious entrance of
Queen Elizabeth.

Such havoc did Queen Mary's flaming Popish Zeal make among her innocent
Subjects. Mr. H^ywood the witty Epigrammist was a great Courtier, and the Queen
telling him, that the Priests must now forsake their Wives, he merrily
answered, Your Grace must allow them to have Lemmons then, for the Clergy
cannot live without Sauce. Another time she asking him what wind blew him to
Court, he replied, Two especially, one to see your Majesty: We thank you for
that, said the Queen, but pray what was the other? That your Grace, said he,
might see me.

The Queen, against her Articles, did now assist King Philip her Husband
against France, and sent an Army under the Earl of Pembroke to the Siege of St.
Quintins; the French attempting to relieve the place with Victuals, a Battle
happened, wherein the Chief of the Nobility were taken, and diverse killed, upon
which the City surrendered; this Victory was imputed to the English, but was
soon after recompensed with a greater loss, for the strong Town of Callice
having more Forces drawn out of it than could be spared, was assaulted by the
Duke of Guise, who would not slip so fair an occasion, and though repulsed, yet
he again came on so briskly, that the City was forced to surrender to the
French, after it had been possessed by the English 211 years. This loss so
grieved the Queen that she shortly after fell sick of a burning Fever, which
with the Dropsey, and the unkindness of her Husband, brought her to her end,
she telling her Physicians, That if they opened her Body after her death they
would find Callice written in her Heart. It was observed that after she began
to destroy the Professors of the Gospel, who next under God advanced her to the
Throne, her undertakings were altogether unsuccessful, Dearths, Mortal
Sicknesses and losses by Sea and Land succeeding each other, and in fine, her
Reign was the shortest of any since the Conquest except Richard the third, who
was alike cruel, she only Reigning five years and four Months, and was cut off
in the 40th year of her Age, when her Sister Elizabeth who succeeded her in a
more mild Government ruled near nine times as long, and lived almost twice her
Age.

ELIZABETH Queen of England, etc.
portrait of Queen Elizabeth

WHat griefs, what fears, what sorrows and what toils;
What slights, tricks, snares still for my life were laid?
Popes, Prisons, Poisons, Pistols, bloody Broils,
All these incompast me (poor harmless Maid)
But I relying on the Almighty's Aid
Was still d fended by the Power Divine,
My Glory and my greatness were displaid
Almost as far as Sun and Moon do shine,
Gods mingled Service I did re-refine
From Romish Rubbish, and from Humane Dross
I yearly made the Power of Spain decline,
France and the Netherlands I saved from loss.
Pattern of Arts, and unto Arms a Patron,
I lived and died a Queen, a Maid, a Matron.
AFter the death of Mary her Sister Elizabeth was joyfully received and Crowned
Queen, who by Parliament revoked all the Laws in favor of Popery, and restored
the Title of Supremacy, and being desired by her People to marry, she said, She
intended to live a Virgin, and to have no Husband but her Kingdom, and
therefore do not, said she, upbraid me with the miserable lack of Children, for
every one of you, yea every Englishman is my Child and Kinsman, of whom if God
deprive me not (which God forbid) I cannnot without injury be accounted barren.
She then settled the Reformation according to the pattern of Edward the Sixth,
settling the Protestant, and excluding the Popish Bishops. Yet Instructions
were sent to Sir Edward Carne the English Agent at the Court of Rome, to
acquaint the Pope with Queen Mary's death, and her succeeding, desiring that
all good Offices might mutually pass between them, but the Pope according to
his usual haughty Style answered, That the Kingdom of England was held in fee
of the Apostolic See, that she could not succeed, being Illegitimate, and that
it was a great boldness to assume the name and Government of it without him,
yet being desirous to show Fatherly Affection to her, if she will renounce her
pretensions and refer her self wholly to him, he would do whatsoever might be
done with the honor of the Apostolic See.

The Queen having made her Complement, neither expected nor regarded his
Answer. In the mean time King Philip who had been long absent from his Wife
hearing of her death, proposed a match with her, which much perplexed her,
considering his kindness to her during her troubles, but yet she thought it
unlawful to marry her Sisters Husband (though Philip promised to procure the
Popes Dispensation) and therefore she put him off though with all manner of
Civility. And resolving to promote the Reformation, the Litany, the Lords
Prayer, the Creed and Ten Commandments were required to be said in the English
Tongue, the Sacrament of the Mass was abolished, and the Litany re-revived and
confirmed. The like Reformation was designed in Scotland, where they broke down
the Altars and Images, and demolished the Religious Houses, in diverse places,
being countenanced therein by the Nobility, whereupon the Queen Regent,
provided Forces to suppress them, but Queen Elizabeth assisted them, because
the French were sending such great succors into Scotland, as might endanger
the invasion of England; the English proceeding with much vigor in Scotland,
obliged the French to treat of Peace, which was soon after agreed on.

About this time broke out a Rebellion in Ireland under John O Neal, a man of
great repute among the Irish, but the Queen having sent some forces thither,
soon forced him to submit himself to mercy; After which the bloody Massacre at
Paris, happened by procurement of the Guises, whereby the poor Protestants were
causesly deprived of their Lives and Estates, whom therefore the Qeen thought
her self obliged in honor and Conscience, to assist in endeavoring to rescue
the French King and his Mother, out of the hands of so dangerous a Faction, by
aiding such of the French Subjects, as preferred the service of their
Sovereign, and Country, above all other respects, and for preserving the
reformed Religion from universal destruction and maintaining her own subjects
in Peace and safety; this she published in a Manifesto to the World, and
accordingly assisted the Hugonots with Ships, Ammunition, and six thousand men.
The Papists apprehending the Queen would lay the Ax to the Root of their
Religion, contrived several horrid and dangerous Conspiracies against her life,
which were all happily prevented.

Differences growing great between the Queen of Scots, and her Nobility, they
imprisoned her, from whence she escaped into England, and put her self under
the Protection of the Queen, who after mature deliberation concluded to detain
her as one taken by the Right of War, and not to dismiss her till she had made
satisfaction for assuming the Title of England, and the Death of Darnley her
husband, who was an English subject born, and Commissioners were appointed to
examine the cause at Tork, and Murray the Regent of Scotland, was summoned to
answer the complaints of the Queen of Scots, who entered a Protestation against
these proceedings, as being a free Princess, and obnoxious to no earthly
Princess; on the contrary the English alleged, that they would in no wise
admit of her Protest, as being in prejudice of the rights which the Kings of
England have anciently challenged, as Superior Lords of Scotland; At last after
she had continued Prisoner in England eighteen years, she was brought to a
Trial, and being charged with having been privy to several conspiracies against
the Queens Life, the Commissioners of the Star Chamber pronounced sentence
against her, and she was soon after beheaded, though after her Death, Queen
Elizabeth was very much troubled and grieved.

The Duke of Alva, a man of Tyrannical and Arbitrary Principles, being sent
Governor into the Low Countries, by the Court of Spain, a War broke out with
great fury, for he being an enemy to their nation, destroyed all their
privileges, brought in the Inquisition, and endeavored by all manner of
cruelties, to extirpate the Protestant Religion; whereupon the Hollanders
confederate together, in a League Offensive and Defensive, constituting the
Prince of Orange, their Commander in chief, but finding their Forces too weak
to oppose the King of Spain, they sent an honorable Ambassy to Queen
Elizabeth, offering her the Sovereignty of Holland and Zealand, as she was
descended from the Earls of Holland, by Philippa the Wife of K. Edward the
third; after consideration the Queen thanked them for their good Intentions
toward her, but added, she could not receive those provinces into her
protection, yet would endeavor to prevail with the King of Spain, for
concluding a Peace.

Yet she afterward sent them twenty thousand pound, which, with several other
provocations, both upon the account of Policy and Religion, so enraged the Pope
and Spaniard, that they conspired her utter destruction, the King of Spain
having prepared a Navy, which the Pope Christened The Invincible Armado,
wherewith he designed to conquer and take possession of the Kingdom of England,
bestowed on him by the Pope; but Queen Elizabeth providing a Fleet under the
Lord Howard, Sir Francis Drake, and other valiant Commanders fell upon them,
and after several days fight, utterly defeated them, insomuch that the
Spaniards lost in this expedition, above fourscore Ships thirteen thousand five
hundred Soldiers, and above two thousand Prisoners taken in Ireland, Zealand,
and the Low Countries, so that there was no considerable family in Spain, but
either lost Son, Brother, or Kinsman in this great defeat.

The French King, Henry the Fourth, afrer long Wars with the House of Guise,
and the confederate Papists of the Holy League, fearing that they would at last
destroy him, now turned from the Protestant Religion, and having acquainted
Queen Elizabeth, with the necessity thereof, she endeavored to divert him,
therefrom writing to him in these very terms; Alas! What grief, what anxiety
of mind has befallen me, since I heard this news? Was it possi^le that
worldly respects should make you lay aside the fear of God? Could you think
that he who has hitherto upheld and kept you, would now at the last leave you?
It is a dangerous thing to do evil that good may come thereof, but I hope your
mind may alter; In the mean while I pray for you, and beg of God, that the
hands of Esau may not hinder the blessing of Jacob; To which K. Henry replied,
That though he had done this in his own Person out of necessity, yet he would
never be wanting to those of the reformed Religion, but would take them into
his special care and Protection. However this his compliance did not save his
life, for having raised a great Army, one Ravilliack a bloody Villain murdered
him in his Coach in the Streets of Paris, declaring the chief motive thereof to
be, because he suspected him still a Hugonot, and that those Forces were
designed against the Pope.

The Queen now assisted the Hollanders, with considerable Forces under the Earl
of Leicester and others, and sent the Earl of Essex with a gallant Navy who
took Cales, the Castle being redeemed for 580000 Ducats and a vast quantity of
Ammunition and Money found in the Town. The Spaniards offered Sir Walter
Rawleigh two Millions of Ducats to free their Ship from firing, but he said,
He was sent to destroy Ships, not to dismiss them upon Composition; the loss
was judged 20000000 of Ducats by this Expedition.

In the mean time Tyrone breaking into Rebellion in Ireland got a great victory
over the English, and after some debate the Earl of Essex was sent thither with
ample Authority, but not meeting with expected success he returned to England
without the Queens permission, whereupon he was committed to custody and
brought to a private Trial; but upon his submission was again set at liberty,
yet being reproached with want of Courage by some of the Cabal, he turned
Malecontent and used all means to gain the Peoples love, resolving to seize on
the Queen, but being disappointed, he retired into the City endeavoring to
engage the Citizens on his side, which not being able to effect, he at length
surrendered himself to the Lord Admiral, and was sent to the Tower, with his
great friend the Earl of Southampton, both whom being Tried, were found guilty
of Treason, and Essex was beheaded, but Southampton pardoned, several of their
confederates being likewise executed. Soon after Queen Elizabeth died at
Richmond in her Bed, after she had wonderfully escaped abundance of Popish
Conspiracies against her life, there being above 100 Persons executed at
several times during her Reign for designing to destroy her, whereof sixty
seven were Jesuits; she reigned forty four years, lived sixty nine, and died
March 24. 1602. of whom this Epitaph was written.

None like Elizabeth was found, in learning so divine,
She had the perfect skilful art of all the Muses Nine,
In Latin, Greek and Hebrew, she most excellent was known,
To Foreign Kings Ambassadors the same was daily shown.
The Italian, French, and Spanish Tongue she well could speak and read,
The Turkish and Arabian Speech grew perfect at her need.
JAMES King of England, etc.
portrait of King James

EPITAPH.
WE justly when a meaner Subject dies
Begin his Epitaph with, here he lies,
But wherein King, whose memory remains
Triumphant over-death with, Here he Reigns.
Now he is dead to whom the world imputes
Deserved admirable Attributes.
For shall we think his Glory can decease
That Is honored with a style, The King of Peace;
Whose happy Union of Great Britany
Calls him, The blessed King of Unity,
And in whose Royal Title it ensu'th,
Defender of the Faith, and King of Truth,
These girt thy Brows with an Immortal Crown,
(Great James) and turn thy Tomb into a Throne,
BY the death of Queen Elizabeth the Sovereignty of the Tudors expired,
yielding place to the Stuarts to succeed, the first of whom was James the sixth
King of Scotland, who united both the Kingdoms, was of the same Religion with
his Predecessor, happy, because he obtained the Kingdom by lawful Succession no
way imbroiled with Wars and Tumults, but settled in exceeding great Peace; yet
as a storm succeeds a calm, soon after his entrance a Conspiracy was
discovered, and the Lord Cobbam, Sir Walter Rawleigh and others, were accused
and condemned for designing the destruction of the King, to change Religion, to
raise Tumults, and to introduce Foreigners, some of whom were put to death and
others Imprisoned. He was Crowned at Westminster by Archbishop Whitgift, at
which time there raged so great a Plague in London, that 305, 78 died thereof
in one year. He caused the Bible to be newly translated out of the Original
Languages.

Now though the King had made Peace with Spain, yet the Popes Sons thought to
have brought ruin upon the King and Kingdom all at once, during the sitting of
the Parliament, to which purpose they had hired a Cellar under the Parliament
House, wherein they placed thirty six barrels of Gunpowder, and upon them
several Bars of Iron, Faggots and other things for doing Execution, but this
Hellish Design was happily discovered by a Letter sent to the Lord Monteagle
Son to the Lord Morley by some of the Conspirators, wherein they advised him
not to appear in the House the first day of sitting; this Letter being showed
to diverse of the Nobility, they could not comprehend the meaning thereof; but
being seen by the King he presently conjectured that the design was to blow up
the House with Gunpowder, and search being made, it was happily discovered, and
the Conspirators fled, Piercy and Catesby being pursued, were shot to death
before they could be taken, others were burnt to Death by drying Gunpowder by
the Fire, Sir Ever. Digby, John and Christopher Wright, Guy Fawks, Grant,
Winter, ^ates, and Keys were hanged and quartered as principal Plotters, some
of them designed an Insurrection in Northampton and Warwickshire but it was
soon blown over.

In his tenth year the Countess of Essex accus^ng her Husband of Insufficiency
was divorced, from him, and married to the E. of Somerset, who was thought to
have made love to her before in an unlawful way, and therefore Sir Thomas
Overbury dissuaded him from the Match as being a Vicious Woman, which she
having notice of, they contrived his death, and having persuaded him to refuse
an honorable employment offered him by the King, he was sent to the Tower for
his contempt, where with the help of Sir Gervas Elway the Lieutenant, Mrs.
Turner, one Franklin an Apothecary and Weston, his death was effected by
Poison, which being after discovered they were executed for the same, and the
Earl and Countess of Somerset condemned but reprieved.

Fredrick Count Elector Palatine came now to London to marry King James's
Daughter, which was solemnized with all manner of Joy, but soon overclouded by
the death of the Virtuous and Heroic Prince Henry, Nov. 6. 1612. about which
time the gallant Sir Walter Rawleigh after fourteen years imprisonment,
Petitioned the King that he might make a Voyage into America, which the King
granted, giving him a Commission under the great Seal to set forth Ships and
Men for his Service; his reputation and merit caused many Gentlemen of Quality
to venture their Estates and Persons with him, many considerable Adventures
happened; as the burning of St. Thomas, and others; of which Information being
given to Count Gondamor the Spanish Ambassador, he continually importuned the
King for satisfaction: Of which Rawleigh, as soon as ever landed at Plymouth,
having notice, endeavored to escape from thence in a Bark to Rochel; but being
taken, he was brought to London, and committed to the Tower. Gondamor looked on
him as a Man of great Courage and Ability, but as having much Animosity against
his Master, being one of those Scourges employed by Q. Elizabeth to vex him;
and was therefore resolved to use all manner of means to ruin him: In
consequence whereof, in October, Rawleigh was brought to the Kings Bench Bar,
before the L. Chief Justice, where the Record of his Arraignment at Winchester
was produced, and he demanded why Judgment should not be put in execution
against him? Rawleigh replied, That the Judgment was made void by the Kings
Commission for his late Expedition: The L. Chief Justice replied, The Opinion
of the Court was to the contrary; and thereupon he was sentenced: and requiring
time to prepare for Death, it was answered, The time appointed was the next
Morning: And accordingly he was the next day beheaded in the Old Palace-yard,
Westminster.

About this time Queen Ann died; and the Palsgrave, who had married the Lady
Elizabeth, having at the Instance of several of the German Princes been chosen
King of Bohemia, the Emperor was wonderfully enraged thereat, and proclaimed
War against him, driving him first out of Bohemia, and afterward out of all
Germany: yet at last he was received and found bountiful Entertainment in
Holland. During this Kings Reign the English Plantations were settled in the
West Indies; namely, Virginia, first discovered by Sir Water Rawleigh, who gave
it that Name in Honor of his Virgin-Mistress Q. Elizabeth: Also Bermudas, and
New England, to which a multitude of Inhabitants quickly resorted, and made
themselves very commodious Habitations.

James was K. of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, he was Son to Henry
Stuart L. Darnly who was Grandson to the Lady Margaret eldest Daughter to King
Henry the seventh of England by her second Husband. His Mother was Mary Queen
of Scotland Grandchild to the Lady Margaret, by her first Husband James the
Fourth K. of Scotland, so that the Lady Margret was great Grandmother to King
James both by the Father and Mothers side. He Reigned twenty two years and
three days, and was the forty fourth Sole Monarch of England. He died of the
Spleen on Saturday March 27. 1625. in the fifty ninth year of his Age, and was
buried at Westminster.

CHARLES the FIRST, King of England, etc.
portrait of King Charles the 1st

THough clogged with miseries and woes,
Palm-like deprest I highher rose,
And as the unmoved Rock outbraves,
The b isterous Winds and raging Waves;
So Triumphed I, and shone more bright
In sad afflictions darksome Night:
My splendid, but yet toilsom, Crown
Regardlesly I trampled down,
With joy I took a Crown of Thorn,
Though Sharp yet easy to be born,
The Heavenly Crown already mine,
I viewed with Eyes of Faith divine,
I vain things slighted to inchace
Glory the just reward of Grace.
CHarles the third Son of James the sixth King of Scots, and Ann his wife
daughter of Frederick the Second King of Denmark, was born at Dumfermling in
Scotland Nov. 19. 1600. At the Age of two years he was created D. of Albany. In
1603. K. James had news by Sir Robert Carry, one of the younger Sons of the L.
Hunsdon that Q. Elizabeth was dead, contrary to the opinion of many of his
Scotch Courtiers, who being wearied with the tediousness of their expectation,
did believe at last that it would never be acknowledged by the Lords of
England, that the Q. was dead, as long as there was any old woman of that
Nation left to wear good clothes, and take the name of Q. upon her; for
bringing which news the D. of Albany was committed to the Governance of Sir
Robert Carys Lady, and he himself ever after much esteemed by him. This news
being seconded by that of the proclaiming of K. J. for her lawful successor,
the K. prepared to go for England; at which time a certain Lord of the
High-lands, though very old, came to Court to take his leave of him, and after
his prayers for his Majesty's long life and prosperity, he next applied himself
to D. Charles, without taking any great notice of Prince Henry, and when the K.
told him he mistook himself in his Addresses to the Infant, as not being his
eldest Son, and Prince of Scotland, he answered, That he knew well enough what
he did, and that it was this Child in whom his name and memory was to be
perpetuated to future Ages; with other speeches of the like nature; which were
then disregarded, but after the death of Prince Henry were thought to have
somewhat prophetical in them.

In the sixth year of his age, he was taken from the charge of the Women, and
committed to the Tutorage of Mr. Tho. Murray, under whom he advanced
exceedingly in learning, the weakness in his legs, rendering him more bookish
and studious, than he had otherwise been, which Prince Henry taking notice of
he jestingly one time took Archbishop Abbots Square Cap, and put on his
brothers head, telling him, That if he continued a good boy, and followed his
book, he would make him one day Archbishop of Canterbury; which the Child took
in such disdain, that he threw his Cap on the ground, and trampled it under his
feet, which afterward was taken as an ill presage to the Church; but it was
altogether groundless as to him, since there never was a more gracious Patron
to the Church, nor a more resolute Champion for the Hierarchy than he.

When he was twelve years old his brother Prince Henry died, and Charles
succeeded in the Principality of Wales, Dukedom of Cornwall, and all the
Royalties thereof. In 1622. he took Ship at Dover, arrived at Bullen in France,
and from thence rid Post to the Court of Spain, upon this occasion; Frederick
Prince Palatine, being disspossest of his ancient patrimony, by the Emperor of
Germany, as aforementioned, the upper Palatinate, being conferred upon the D.
of Bavaria, and the lower on the K. of Spain, it was held most expedient to
negotiate a marriage between Prince Charles, and the Infanta of Spain, for the
recovery of the whole; which being managed by the L. Digby, he was fed with
delays from one time to another, whereupon K. James resolved to send the Prince
in Person, either to consummate, or break off the treaty, and accordingly he
went, accompanied with the D. of Buckingham, Mr. Endimion Porter, and Mr.
Francis Cottington; when ^ews came of his arrival at Madrid, though the English
Subjects were glad for his safety, yet they were afraid of his danger, because
he had put himself into the power of the King of Spain, which no body durst
acquaint the King withal, but Archee the Jester, who going boldly to the King
as he found him in a good humor, told him, That he was come to change Caps
with him; Why, said the King? Marry, says Archee, Because thou have sent the
Prince into Spain, from whence he is never like to return. But, says the King,
What will thou say when thou ^est him come back again? Marry, says Archee, I
will then take off the Cap which I put upon thy head, for sending him ^hither,
and put it on the King of Spain, for letting him return. At which words it is
reported the King was much concerned, not having before apprehended the danger
of that Adventure. Dr. Heylins Life K. Charles, p. 25.

But the Spaniard had no such design, and therefore the Restitution of the
Palatinate being denied, the Match broke off, and a Rupture was like to follow;
whereupon K. James proposed a Marriage with Henrietta Maria of France, whom the
Prince had seen when he passed incognito into Spain, which afterward took
effect. It is reported, that when she was told that the Prince of Wales had
been at the Court, and was gone to Spain, she said, That if he had went to
Spain for a Wife, he might have had one nearer hand, and saved himself a great
part of the trouble. During these Preparations for a War and Marriage, King
James departed this life at Theobalds, and Prince Charles was proclaimed K. of
G. Britain, France, and Ireland.

But having already published a little Book of the same price with this,
called, The Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland; or, An Account of the Reign
of King Charles the First, his Illegal Trial, and deplorable Martyrdom, with
all Passages to His present Majesty's happy Restoration; I shall not here
repeat any part thereof, but collect some few Remarkable Occurrences which have
happened from the year 1660 to this time.

King CHARLES the Second
NO Voice more soft than Thunder can express
Our present Joy, or our past Heaviness.
None can the largeness of this Joy set out,
Unless at once he makes three Kingdoms sho^
To God on High, in Thankfulness and Prais^t
Who without Blood did Crown our King wit^ Bays;
Brought from three Conquered Nations, whichh he
Holds in subjection, but to make them free.
Without a War Great Charles his Kingdoms won;
Thus straight, when Heaven please the thing is done.
Now let us thankful be, and sing his praise
Who for our Cypress, has bestowed Bays.
May we give God and Caesar all their due,
And always Peace and Loyalty pursue.
AFter His Majesty's most Wonderful and Joyful Restoration in the year 1660,
he was April 23. following Crowned with all manner of Magnificence at
Westminster, and the next year His Majesty, and Donna Katherina Infanta of
Portugal, were married by the Lord Bishop of London at Pertsmouth. June 14.
1662. Sir Henry Vane was beheaded on Tower Hill for High Treason. In December
three Ambassadors came from the Emperor of Russia with rich Presents to His
Majesty. In July 1663. the Lord Warriston was Executed at Edenborough,
according to the Sentence in Parliament on a Gibbet twenty two foot high. In
January, Twenty one Persons were condemned for High Treason in Yorkshire. In
March 1664. War was proclaimed against the Dutch, for which the Parliament gave
His Majesty a supply of Five and twenty hundred thousand pounds. June 3. 1665.
His Royal Highness obtained a G^^^t Vi^tory against the Hollanders, wherein
above Thirty of their Capital Snips were taken and destroyed, and near Eight
thousand Men killed and taken Prisoners. Of the English were slain the Earls of
Falmouth, Portland, and Marlborough, and the Lord Muskerry. A great Sickness in
London; for in this year there died Ninety seven thousand three hundred and
six; whereof of the Plague Sixty eight thousand, five hundred ninety six. In
June 1666. another Victory was obtained against the Dutch, by His Majesty's
Fleet under Prince Rupert, and the Duke of Albemarle, after a sharp Engagement
of three days, in two of which the Duke of Albema le maintained the Fight with
Fifty Ships against above Eighty of the Enemy. In September this year a sudden
and lamentable Fire broke out in London, which burnt down Thirteen thousand two
hundred Houses in four days time.

June 11. 1667. Some of His Majesty's Frigates took twelve Dutch Prizes, and
sunk two upon the coast of Norway. In March. 1668. several Apprentices and
other idle Persons about London, got tumultuously together, under the notion of
pulling down Houses of ill fame, eight of whom were taken and indicted of High
Treason, four whereof were Executed at Tyburn. Jan. 4. The Duke of Albemarl
died at the Cockpit, and the 23d his Duchess likewise died. May 25. 1670. His
Majesty and His Royal Highness went to Dover, where the Duchess of Orleance
Landed the next day. May 9. Colonel Blood and others attempted to carry away
the Royal Crown out of the Tower of London.

March 14. 1672. Sir Rob. Holms with six of His Majesty's Ships met with the
Dutch, Smyrna and Streights Fleet, conveyed by eight of their Men of War, of
Portsmouth, and upon refusing to strike and lower their Topsails, fought them,
and took five of the richest of them, March 28. His Majesty's Declaration of
War aga nst the States General of the United Provinces was Proclaimed. In May
there happened a violent Fire at St. Catherines, near the Tower of London,
which consumed above an hundred Houses. May 28. His Royal Highness engaged the
whole Dutch Fleet in Southwold Bay, and after a sharp Encounter of about eight
hours, the Dutch Fleet gave way and retreated. In this Engagement that gallant
Commander the Earl of Sandwich was lost, as likewise Sir Fretchevill H^llis,
Capt. Digby, and Sir John Cox.

May 17. 1673. The English and French Fleets joined together in the Downs, and
soon after they engage against the Dutch, and after a sharp Dispute, forced
them to retreat, and shelter among the shallows. Aug. 11. A third Victory was
obtained against the Hollanders under the Command of Prince R^pert, where that
valiant Seaman Sir Edw. Spragg was unhappily drowned.

Her Royal Highness, with the Duchess of Modena her Mother, arrived at Dover
November. 21. where they were met by His Royal Highness the D. of York, in order
to the Consummation of their Marriage. Feb. 9. The Treaty of Peace concluded
between His Majesty and the Dutch, was signed by His Majesty's Commissioners,
and the Spanish Ambassador commissioned by the States thereunto.

December. 18. 1674. His Majesty having been pleased at His Entertainment at
Guildhall London, on the Lord Mayors day before, to accept of the Freedom of
the City; This day the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen waited upon His Majesty
at Whitehall, and humbly presented him with the Copy of the Freedom of the
City, in a Box of massy Gold, the Seal thereof hanging in a Golden Box, set
over with Diamonds, to a very great value. Aug. 20. 1675. A Hurricane happened
at Barbados, which destroyed at Sea eight Ships and Ketches, and at Land 300
Houses, and about 200 Persons. Sept. 3. The whole Town of Northampton was near
burnt to the ground by an accidental Fire. November. 7. 1677. A Marriage was
solemnized between the Prince of Orange, and the Lady Mary, at St. James's by
the L. Bishop of London.

Sept. 29. 1678. Titus Oats, and Dr. Tongue were examined before the Privy
Council, in order to the discovering a Plot against His Majesty's Person and
Government: Next day Mr. Edw. Coleman was committed to Newgate. October. 10. Sir
Edmunbury Godfrey, having been missing three or four days, was found dead in a
ditch, with his own Sword thrust through him, nigh Primrose Hill, and the
Coroners Jury gave in their Verdict, that he was murdered by a Confederacy of
Assassinates. On the 19th a Proclamation was issued out for discovery of the
Murderers. October. 21. The Parliament met, and the next day Oats was examined
before the Commons, and the next day after before the House of Lords, October.
24. Mr. Will. Bedlow came in for a discoverer of the Plot, and Sir Edmundbury
Godfreys Murder. October. 30. A Proclamation was published for a General Fast:
Another commanding all Popish Recusants to depart ten miles out of London:
Another, That no Officer nor Soldier in His Majesty's Guards should be a
Papist. Nov. 11. Will. Staley, a Goldsmith, was Executed at Tyburn for Treason.
Nov. 30. His Majesty gave His Royal Assent to an Act to disable Papists to Sit
in either House of Parliament. December. 3. Edw. Coleman was Executed. A false
Alarm happened of the French Landing in the Isle of Purbeck. Jan. 24. Ireland
and Grove were Executed, being convicted of High Treason, for carrying on the
Pop^sh Plot Feb. 21. Green, Bury, and Hill, were hanged for the Murder of Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey.

April 4. 1669. Articles of Impeachment were drawn up by the House of Commons
against the E. of Powis, L. Stafford, L. Arundel of Warder, L. Petre, and L.
Bellasis, upon which they were committed Prisoners to the Tower. April 21. The
King dissolved His Privy Council, and constituted another consisting of thirty.
May 3. Dr. Sharp, Archbishop of St. Andrews in Scotland, was there barbarously
murdered in his Coach by twelve Assassinates. May 29. A Rebellion broke out in
the West of Scotland, where they proclaimed the Covenant, and set up a
Declaration, but were soon dispersed by His Majesty's Forces. June 21.
Whitehead, Harcourt, Gavan, Turner and Fenwick, all Priests and Jesuits, being
condemned at the old Bailey for the Pop^sh Plot, were executed at Tyburn; and
soon after Mr. Langhorn upon the same account.

December. 29. 1680. The L. Stafford was beheaded on Tower Hill, June. 15. 1681.
Oliver Plunket and Edward Fitz-Harris were hanged at Tyburn; July 2. The E. of
Shaftsbury, was committed to the Tower; one Stephen College, a Joyner, was
likewise sent Prisoner thither, and a Bill being brought against him to the
Grand Jury at the Old Bailey, they returned it Ignoramus; a while after he was
sent to Oxford, and found guilty of High Treason, committed there, for which he
was there executed, Novem. 24. a Commission issued out for the Trial of L.
Shaftsbury at the Old Bailey, but the Grand Jury brought in the Bill Ignoramus.
July 12, 13, and 14. 1683, Willam L. Russel, Thomas Walc^t, William Ho^e, and
John Rous were endicted and condemned for High Treason; the L. Russel was
beheaded in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, and the others executed at Tyburn, December. 7.
Algernon Sidney Esquire, was beheaded on Tower Hill, upon the same Account.
June 20. 1684. Sir Thomas Armstrong was hanged and quartered upon an Outlawry
for High Treason; James Holloway, likewise executed some time before at Tyburn,
upon the like Outlawry for High Treason.

The Names of the Principal Officers, Civil and Military, in England, 1684.
The Right Honorable the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
33.
Lord A. Bishop Canterbury. Lord Gilford, Lord Keeper. E. of Radnor, L.
President. Mar. Hallifax, L. Privy Seal. Duke of Ormond. Duke of Albemarle.
Duke of Newcastle. Duke of Beaufort. Marquess of Winchester. Earl of Lindsey.
Earl of Arlington. Earl of Oxford. Earl of Huntington. Earl of Bridgwater. Earl
of Peterborough. Earl of Chesterfield. Earl of Sunderland. Earl of Clarendon.
Earl of Bath. Earl of Craven. Earl of Ailsbury. Earl of Nottingham, Earl of
Rochester. L. Viscount Faulconbridge. Lord Bishop of London. Lord Dartmouth.
Henry Coventry Esquire Sir ^^oline Jenkyns Knight. (...) Ernle. (...) Chichely.
(...) L.C. Justice. Sidney Godolphin Esquire Edward Seymour Esquire
The Great Officers of the Crown, 9.
L. High Steward of Engl. L. Keeper, Lord North. L. High Treasurer, at present
in Commission. L. President, E. of Radror. L. Privy Seal, Mar. Hallifax. L
Great Chamberlain, Earl of Lindsey. L. High Constable. Earl Marshal, D. of
Norfolk. L. High Admiral, at present in Commission.
His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State, 2.
Earl of Sunderland. Sidney Godolphin Esquire
Officers of His Majesty's Household.
Ecclesiastical, 3.
Dean of the Chapel, Lord Bishop of London. Clerk of the Closet, Lord Bishop
of Durham. L. Almoner, L. B. Rochester.
Civil, 9.
L. Steward, D. of Ormond. L. Chamberlain, E. Arlington Master of the Horse,
Duke of Richmond. Treasurer, Lord Newport. Comptroller, L. Maynard. Cofferer,
Lord Brounker. Master of the Household, H. Bulkly Esquire Clerks of the Green-cloth,
Sir S. Fox Sir W. Boreman. Clerks Comptrollers, Sir Win. Churchill, Sir R.
Mason.
Gentlemen of the Bed chamber.
E. of Bath, first Gentleman, and Groom of the Stole. Duke of Newcastle. E. of
Dorset and Middlesex. Earl of Mulgrave. Duke of Albemarle. Earl of Lindsey.
Earl of Oxford. Earl of Arran. Lord Latimer. Earl of Sussex. Earl of Rannelagh.
Earl of Litchfield. Earl of Rochester.
Vicechamb. H. Saville Esquire Keeper of the Privy Purse, Baptist May Esquire Treasurer
of the Chamber, Edward Griffen Esquire Surveyor-General of His Majesty's Works, Sir
Christopher Wren. Master of the Robes belonging to His Majesty's Person, Hen.
Sydney Esquire Master of the Jewel-house, Sir Gilbert Talbot. Master of the
Ceremonies, Sir Charles Cotterel. Master of the Wardrobe, Ralph L. Mountague.
Master Falconer, Duke of St. Albans.
Clerks of the Council.
Sir J. Nicholas Knight. of the Bath. Sir Philip Lloyd. Sir Thomas Dolman. Francis
Gwyn Esquire
Masters of the Requests.
Sir Charles Cotterel. Thomas Povey Esquire Sir William Glascock. Charles Morley
Esquire
Clerks of the Privy Seal.
Sir Charles Bickerstaff. John Matthews Esquire Thomas Watkins Esquire John Richards
Esquire
Clerks of the Signet.
Sir John Nicholas Knight. Bath. Sidney Bear Esquire Nicholas Morice Esquire Dr. William
Trumbull. Knight. Marshal, Sir E. Villiers. Usher of the Black Rod, Sir Thomas
Duppa. Serj. Porter, Sir H. Progers.
Military.
Capt. of the Band of Pensioners, E. of Huntington. Lieut. Fra. Villiers Esquire
Standard Bearer, Sir Humphrey Winch. Captain of the Yeomen of the Guard, L.
Viscount Grandison. Lieut. Tho. Howard Esquire Ensign, H. Dutton-Colt Esquire Clerk of
the Check, Charles Villiers Esquire
The Judges and Principal Officers of Justice, 12.
Of the Kings Bench.
Sir Geo. Jeffreys Knight. and Bar.
L. C. Justice of England.
Sir Francis Withens Knight. Sir Richard Holloway Knight. Sir Thomas Walcot Knight.
Of the Common Pleas.
Sir Tho. Jones L. C. Justice. Sir Hugh Windham Knight. Sir Job Charlton Knight. Sir
Creswel Levinz Knight.
Of the Exchequer
Will. Mountague L.C. Baron. Sir Edw. Atkyns Knight. Sir William Gregory Knight. Sir
Thomas Street Knight.
Of the High Court of Chancery.
Fra. L. Guilford L. Keeper. Sir Harbottle Grimston Master of the Rolls.
The Eleven Masters in Chancery.
Sir John Coell Knight. Sir W. Beversham Knight. Sir Samuel Clark Knight. Sir Edward Low D.
L. Sir Miles Cook Knight. Sir Lac. Will. Child Knight. Sir John Hoskins Knight. Sir John
Franklyn Knight. Sir Adam Otley Knight. Sir Robert Le Guard Knight. Sir James Astrey Knight. Sir
R. Sawyer Attorney Genesis H. Finch Esquire Solicit. Genesis
The Court of the Duchy of Lancaster.
Chancellor, Sir T. Chichely. Vicechancell. Sir J. Otway. Attorney Gen, Sir J.
Heath. Receiver Genesis Sir J. Curson. Auditors, J. Fanshaw Esquire Edw. Webb Esquire
Clerk, Cheek Gerard Esquire
The Chief Officers of His Majesty's Revenue.
The Commissioners of the Treasury.
Earl of Rochester. Sir John Ernle Knight. Chancellor of the Exchequer. Sir Edward
Deering Bar. Sir Stephen Fox Knight. Sydney Godolphin Esquire And under these Lords,
The Commissioners of the Customs.
Charles Lord Chene. Sir Dudley North Knight. Andrew Newport Esquire Sir Richard Temple
Baronet. Sir Geo. Downing Knight. and Bar. Sir Nicholas Butler Knight,
Commissioners of the Excise^ and Fire-Hearths.
Sir Denny Ashburnham Bar. Francis Parrey Esquire Robert Huntington Esquire Charles
Davenant Esquire John Friend Esquire Felix Calvert Esquire Nath. Horneby Esquire Patrick Trant
Esquire William Bridge Esquire Treasurer, Sir Cornw. Bradshaw Knight.
Commissioners for Wine-Licences.
Henry Deering Esquire William Young Esquire John Tailor Esquire Michael Brighouse Esquire
Robert Ryves Esquire
Commissioners of Appeals for Excise.
Robert Spencer Esquire Charles Fanshaw Esquire Sir Paul Neal Knight. George Dodington Esquire
Edward Seymour Esquire
Of the High Court of Admiralty.
The Commissioners for Executing the Office of L. High Admiral of England.
Earl of Nottingham. Sir Thomas Meers Baronet. Sir Humphrey Winch Knight. Sir
Edward Hales Baronet. Sir John Chichely Knight. Henry Saville Esquire Arthur
Herbert Esquire Vice Admiral of England, Duke of Crafton. Rere-Adm. Ar. Herbert Esquire
Judge of the Admiralty, Sir Leoline Jenkyns. Treasurer of the Navy, L.
Falkland. Comptroller, Sir Richard Haddock. Surveyor, Sir John Tippet. Clerk of
the Acts, James Southern Esquire
To whom are joined these Commissioners.
Sir John Narborough Knight. Sir Phineas Pett Knight. Sir Richard Beech Knight. Sir John
Godwin Knight.
Constable of the Tower of London, Lord Allington. Lieutenant of the Tower,
Thomas Cheek Esquire Master of the Ordinance Lord Dartmouth. Lieut. Sir Chr.
Musgrave. Surveyor of the Ordnance, Sir Bernard de Gome Knight. Treasurer, Cha.
Bertie Esquire Clerk of the Ordnance, Sir Edward Sherburne Knight. Storekeeper, W.
Bridges Esquire Keeper of the Records in the Tower, Sir Alg. May. Knight.
The Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, and the Wards whereunto each long.
Above the Chair.
Sir Henry Tulse Knight. Lord Mayor. Breadstreet. Sir W. Turner. Castle Baynard.
Sir W. Hooker. Cornhil. Sir Robert Vyn r. Langborn. Sir J. Edwards. Candlewick.
Sir John Moor. Walbrook. Sir W. Pritchard. Bridge without.
Below the Chair.
Sir Ja. Smith. Portsoken. Sir R. Jefferies. Cordwainer. Sir W. Rawstern.
Limestreet. Sir J. Peake. Billingsgate. Sir T. Beckford. Aldgate. Sir J.
Chapman. Towerstreet. Sir Si. Lewis. Bassishaw. Sir Jo. Reymond. Bishopsgate.
Sir Dud. North. Faringdon without. Pet Rich Esquire Aldersgate. Sir P. Daniel
Sheriff. Bridge within. Sa. Dashwood Esquire Sheriff. Cheapside. Sir B. Bathurst.
Cripplegate. Sir J. Buckworth. Colemanstr. Sir Ben. Newland. Vintry. Jacob Lucy
Esquire Dowgate. Chapter Duncomb Esquire Broadstreet. Pet. Paravicini Esquire Queenhith. B.
Thorogood Esquire Faringdon within. Recorder, Sir Tho. Jenner. Chamberlain, Mr.
Ailworth. Com. Sergeant, H. Crisp. Esquire Townclerk, W. Wagstaff Esquire Vicechamberl.
J. Lane Esquire
The Colonels of the Six Regiments of the Trained Bands of London.
The Red, Sir R. Vyner. Green, Sir Ja. Edwards. Yellow, Sir John Moor. Blue,
Sir Will. Pritchard. Orange, Sir Ja. Smith. White, Sir John Peake.
Post master of England, E. of Arlington; and under his Lordsh. P. Froud Esquire
His Majesty's Lieutenants of the several Counties of England.
Berks, Duke of Norfolk. Bucks, Earl of Bridgwater. Bedford, Earl of Ailsbury.
Bristol, Duke of Beaufort. Cheshire, Earl of Derby. Cumberland, E. of Ca^lisle.
Cambridge, Lord Alington. Cornwall, Earl of Bath. Devon, Duke of Albem^rle.
Dorset, Earl of Bristol. Derby, Earl of Devon. Durham, L. Bish. of Durham.
Essex, Duke of Albemarle. Gloucester, Duke of Beaufort. Hereford, Duke of
Beaufort. Hertford E. of Bridgwater. Huntingdon, E. of Ailsbury. Hampsh. E. of
Gainsborough. Kent, Earl of Winchelsea. Lancashire, Earl of Derby. Leicester,
Earl of Rutland. London, L Mayor, and the Lieutenancy. Lincoln, Earl of
Lindsey. Monmouth, D. of Beaufort. Middlesex and Southwark, Earl of Craven.
Norfolk, Duke of Norfolk. Northampt. E. Peterborough. Northumberl. D.
Newcastle. Nottingham, D. Newcastle. Oxford, Earl of Abingdon. Purbeck Isle, D.
of Beaufort. Rutland, E. of Gainsborough. Suffolk, Earl of Arlington. Surrey,
Duke of Norfolk. Shropshire, Visc. Newport. Stafford, Earl of Shrewsbury.
Somerset, D. of Somerset. Sussex, Earl of Dorset. To were Hamlets, L. Alington.
Worcester, E. of Plymouth Warwick, E. of Sunderland Wilts, Earl of Pembroke.
Westmorland, E. Carlisle. North and South Wales, Duke of Beaufort. East Rid.
York, D. Somerset. West Rid. E. of Burlington. North Rid. V. Faulconbridge.
Under these are Deputy Lieutenants, who are most of the Principal Gentlemen of
each County.
The Officers of His Majesty's three Troops of Horse Guards.
The Kings Troop.
Captain, Duke of Albemarle. Lieutenants, Aston Esquire Edw. Villiers Esquire Edw.
Griffin Esquire Cornet, Sir Walter Clerges. Guidon, Major Binns.
The Queens Troop.
Captain, Sir Philip Howard. Lieutenants, Sir Geo. Hewit, Sir John Fenwick.
Cornet, Charles Orby Esquire Guidon, Ph. Darcy Esquire
His Royal Highness's Troop.
Captain, Earl of Feversham. Lieutenants, Colo. Worden, Colonel Oglethorp.
Cornet, Philip Darcy Esquire Guidon, Major Edm. Meine.
The Kings Regiment of Horse under the Earl of Oxford.
Lieut. Col. Aubrey E. Oxford. Major, Sir Francis Compton.
The Foot Guards.
The Kings Regiment.
Colonel, Duke of Grafton. Lieut. Col. John Strode Esquire Major, William Eyton Esquire
The Coldstream Regiment.
Colonel, Earl of Craven. Lieut. Col. E. Sackville Esquire Major, John Huitson Esquire
His Royal Highness's Regiment.
Colonel, Sir Chapter Littleton. Lieut. Col. Ol. Nicholas Esquire Major, Richard Baggot
Esquire
The Holland Regiment.
Colonel, Earl of Mulgrave. Lieut. Col. Sir Tho. Ogle. Major, Windram Esquire
Governors of Countries, Islands, Cities, Towns, Forts, and Garrisons.
Barbados, Sir Ric. Dutton. Bermudos, Sir Hen. Heydon. Berwick, D. of
Newcastle. Carlisle, Lord Morpeth. Chepstow, Duke of Beaufort. Chester, Sir
Geof. Shakerley. Dover and Cinque Ports, Col. John Strode. Gravesend and
Tilbury, Sackville Tufton Esquire Guernsey, Visc. Hatton. Holy Island, Sir J.
Fenwick. Hull, Earl of Plymouth. Hurst Castle, Ireland, Duke of Ormond. Jersey
Island, Sir J. Lanier. Jamaica, Sir Tho. Lynch. Languard Fort, Sir R. Manly
Leeward Islands, Sir Will. Stapleton. St. Maws, Sir Jos. Iredenham. Maryland,
Lord Baltimore. New Engl. H. Cranfield Esquire New York, Col. Dungan. Pensylvania,
Mr. Will. Penn. Pendennis Cast. L. Arundel. Plymouth and St. Nicholas Island,
Earl of Bath. Portsmouth, E. Gainsborough Sandown Cast. Sir A. Jacob. Sherness,
Sir Cha. Littleton. Scilly Is^. Godolphin Esquire Scarborough Cast. Sir Tho.
Slingsby. Surat, Jo Child Esquire Presid. Tinmouth, Sir Ed. Villiers. Virginia, L.
Howard of Effin. Upnor Cast. R. Minors Esquire Isle of Wight, Sir R. Holmes.
Windsor Castle, Constable, Duke of Norfolk.
General Officers.
Commissary General of the Musters, H. Howard Esquire Play Master Gen C. Fox Esquire
Secretary at War, William Blathwayte Esquire Judge Advocate, Clarke Esquire
His Majesty's Consuls in several Parts of the World.
Alicant, Tho. Jefferies Esquire Alexandria, Mr. Browers. Aleppo, Mr. G.
Nightingale. Argiers, Mr. Sam. Martin. Bayon, Mr. Jo. Westcomb. Barcelona,
Seignior de Roca. Cadiz, Sir Martin Westcomb. Canaries, Mr. Rich. Owen.
Carthagena, Mr. Hen. Petit. Cyprus, Mr. Sauva^. Genoa, Mr. John Kirk. Lisbon,
Tho. Maynard Esquire Legorn, Sir Tho. D^reham. Ma^aga, Jam. Pendarvis Esquire
Marseilles, Mr. Rob. Lang. Messina, Mr. Chapter Ball. Naples, Mr. Geo. Davies. St.
Sebastian, Mr. Morgan. Sevil, Tho. Rumbold Esquire Smyrna, Mr. Will. Raye. Tunis,
Mr. Fr. Baker. Tripoly, Mr. Rich. Baker. Venice, Mr. Jo. Hobson. Zant, Mr.
Pendarvis.
The Names of the Nobility, Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Knights of the
Garter, and Deans, of the Kingdom of England, 1684.
Dukes and Dutchesses.
James D. of York and Albany, only Brother to His Sacred Majesty. Henry Howard
D of Norfolk. Cha. Seymour D. of Somerset. Geo Villiers D. of Buckingham Chr.
Monck D. of Albemarle. Jam. Scot D. of Monmouth. H. Cavendish D of Newcastle.
Barbara D. of Cleveland. Lovisa de Querovalle D. of Portsmouth. Cha. Lenos D.
of Richmond. Chapter Fitz Roy D of Southampt. Hen. Fitz Roy, D. of Grafton. James
Butler D. of Ormond. Hen. Somerset D. of Beaufort. Geo Fitz Roy D. Northumberl.
Chapter Beauclaire D. St. Albans.
Marquesses.
Cha. Paulet M. of Winchester. Geo. Saville M. of Hallifax.
Earls and Countesses.
Aubrey de Vere E. of Oxford. Cha. Talbot E. of Shrewsbury. Anthony Gray, E. of
Kent. Will. Stanley E. of Derby. John Manners E. of Rutland Th. Hastings E. of
Huntingd. Will. Russel E. of Bedford. Tho. Herbert E. of Pembroke. Edw. Clinton
E. of Lincoln. James Howard E. of Suffolk. Charles Sackville E. of Dorset and
Middlesex. James Cecil E. of Salisbury. John Cecil E. of Exeter. Jo. Egerton E.
of Bridgwater. Phil. Sidney E. of Leicester. Geo. Compton E. of Northampt. Edw.
Rich E. of Warwick and Holland. W. Cavendish E. of Devonsh. Will Fielding E. of
Denbigh. John Digby E. of Bristol. Gilb. Holles E. of Clare. Ol. St. John E. of
Bolingbroke. Cha. Fane E. of Westmorland. C. Mountague E. of Manchest. Tho.
Howard E. of Berkshire. Jo. Sheffield E. of Mulgrave. Tho. Savage E. of Rivers.
Robert Bertie E. of Lindsey. Hen. Mordant E. of Peterbor. Tho. Gray E. of
Stamford. Hen. Finch E. of Winchelsey. To. Pierrepoynt E. of Kingston. Chapter
Dormer E. of Carnarvon. Ph. Stanhope E. of Chesterfield. Tho. Tufton E. of
Thanet. Tho. Weston E. of Portland. W. Wentworth E. of Strafford. To. Spencer
E. of Sunderland. Rob. Leake E. of Scarsdale. Ed. Mountague E. of Sandw. Hen.
Hyde E. of Clarendon. Algernon Capel E. of Essex. Rob. Brudenel E. of Cardigan.
Arth. Annesley E of Anglesey. John Greneville E. of Bath. Cha. Howard E. of
Carlisle. Will. Craven E. of Craven Robert Bruce E. of Ailsbury. Rich. Boil E.
of Burlington. Hen. Bennet E. of Arlington. Anth. Cooper E. of Shaftsbury.
Will. Herbert E. of Powis. Ed. Henry Lee E. of Lichfield. Tho. Osborne E. of
Danby. Tho. Lennard E. of Sussex. Lewis Duras E. of Feversham Cha. Gerard E. of
Macklefeld. John Roberts E. of Radnor. Will. Paston E. of Yarmouth. Geo.
Berkley E. of Berkley. Eliz. Countess of Shepey. Dan. Finch E. of Nottingham.
Laur. Hyde E. of Rochester. Jam. Bertie E. of Abingdon. Ed. Noel E. of
Gainsborough. Con. Darcy E. of Holderness. Tho. Windsor alias Hickman E. of
Plymouth.
Viscounts.
Leicest. Devereux V. Hereford. Fra. Brown V. Mountague. W. Fiennes V. Say and
Seal. Tho. Bellasyse V. Fauconberg. Cha. Mordant V. Mordant. Fra. Newport V.
Newport. Tho. Thynne V. Weymouth. Horat. Townsend V. Townsend Christoph. Hatton
V. Hatton.
The Archbishops, Bishops, and Deans, 1684.
Bishops names. Deans names. Bishoprics names. Dr. Sandcroft Dr. Tillotson
Cant Arch Bish. Dr. Dolben Dr. Wickham York Arch Bish. Dr. Lloyd Dr. Stratford
St. Asaph. Dr. Lloyd Dr. Humphries Bangor. Dr. Mew Dr. Bathurst Bath and Wells.
Dr. Gulston Dr. Thompson Bristol. Dr. Rainbow Dr. Smith Carlisle. Dr. Pierson
Dr. Ardern Chester. Dr. Carleton Dr. Stradling Chichester. Dr. Wood Dr. Addison
Coventry and Lichf. Dr. Womock B. of the Chapter St. David's. Dr. Crew Dr. Sudbury
Durham. Dr. Gunning Dr. Spencer Ely. Dr. Lamplugh Dr. Annsly Exon. Dr. Frampton
Dr. Marshal Gloucester. Dr. Crofts Dr. Benson Hereford. Dr. Bew Dr. Gamage
Landaff. Dr. Barlow Dr. Brevint Lincoln. Dr. Compton Dr. Stillingfleet London.
Dr. Sparrow Dr. Sharp Norwich. Dr. Fell Dr. Fell Oxford. Dr. Lloyd Dr. Patrick
Peterborough, Dr. Turner Dr. ^astillion Rochester. Dr. Ward Dr. Pierce Sarum.
Dr. Morley Dr. Meggot Winchester. Dr. Thomas Dr. Womock Worcester. Dr. Spratt
Westminster.

Dr. Bridgeman Bishop of the Isle of Man.

Baron and Baronesses.
Geo. Nevill L. Abergavenny. James Touchet L. Audley, and E. of Castlehaven in
Irel. Cha. West L. de la War. Tho. Parker L. Morley and Monteagle. Robert
Shirley L. Ferrers. Cha. Mildmay L. Fitz-Walter. Hen. Yelverton L. Gray.
Frances Lady Ward. Will. Stourton L. Stourton. Conyers Darcy L. Conyers. Henry
Sandys L. Sandys. Vere Cromwell L. Cromwell, and E. of Arglas in Irel. Ralph Eure
L. Eure. Philip Wharton L. Wharton. Tho. Willoughby L. Willoughby of Parham.
William Paget L. Paget. Francis Howard L. Howard of Effingham. Cha. North L.
North, and L. Gray of Rolleston. James Bruges L. Chandois. Robert Carey L.
Hunsdon. John Petre L Petre. Digby Gerard L. Gerard of Bromley. Henry Arundel
L. Arundel of Warder, and a Count of the Empire. Cath. O Brien Bar. Clifton.
Christoph. Roper L. Tenham. Fulke Greville L. Brook. Ralph Lord Mountague of
Boughton. Ford L. Gray of Warke. John Lovelace L. Lovelace. John Paulet L.
Paulet. Will. Maynard L. Maynard. John Coventry L. Coventry. Will. L. Howard of
Escrick. Charles Mohun L. Mohun. Hen. L. Herbert of Cherbury. Thomas Leigh L.
Leigh. Thomas L. Jermyn. William Byron L. Byron. Richard L. Vaughan, and E. of
Carbery in Ireland. Francis Smith L. Carrington. William L. Widdrington. Edward
Ward L. Ward. Tho. Colepeper L. Colepeper. Jacob Astley L. Astley. Charles
Lucas L. Lucas. John Bellasyse L. Bellasyse. Ed. Watson L. Rockingham. Rob.
Sutton L. Lexington. Marmaduke L. Langdale. John L. Berkley of Stratton.
Francis Holles L. Holles. Charles L. Cornwallis. George Booth L. Delamer.
Thomas Crew L. Crew. Rich. L. Arundel of Treryse. James L. Butler of Moor-Park,
E. of Ossory. Hugh L. Clifford of Chudleigh Rich. L. Butler of Weston. Susan
Lady Bellasyse. Rich. Lumley L. Lumley. Geo. Carteret L. Carteret. John Bennet
L. Ossulston. George Leg L. Dartmouth. William L. Alington. Ralph Stawel L.
Stawel. Francis North L. Guilford.
The Knights and Companions of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, as they were
filled up at Windsor, April 8. 1684.
2 King of Denmark. 1 SOVEREIGN of the Order. 1 King of Sweden. 2 Duke of York.
3 Prince of Orange. P. Elector of Brandenburgh. 3 4 Prince Elector Palatine. P.
George of Denmark. 4 5 Duke of Ormond. Duke of Buckingham. 5 6 Earl of Oxford.
Earl of Strafford. 6 7 Duke of Monmouth. Duke of Albemarle. 7 8 Duke of
Beaufort. Earl of Bedford. 8 9 Earl of Arlington. Duke of Southampton. 9 10
Earl of Mulgrave. Duke of Newcastle. 10 11 Earl of Danby. Duke of Grafton. 11
12 Duke of Richmond. Duke of Hamilton. 12 13 Duke of Somerset. Duke of
Northumberland. 13

There are lately published the three following Books, which with this of
Englands Monarchs, may be reckoned a very satisfactory History of England, and
the affairs thereof for above a thousand years past; they are to be had single,
or all bound together, of Nath Crouch at the Bell in the Poultry, near
Cheapside.
I. ADmirable curiosities, Rarities, and Wonders in England Scotland, and
Ireland; or An account of many remarkable persons and places, and likewise of
the Battles, Sieges, Prodigious Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Thunders,
Lightnings, Fires, Murders, and other considerable occurrences, and accidents
for many hundred years past: Together with the natural and artificial rarities
in every County in England, with several curious Sculptures. Price One Shilling.

II. Historical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and present state of
London and Westminster; showing the Foundations, Walls, Gates, Towers, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Schools, Inns of Court, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with an
account of the most remarkable Acccidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and
other Occurrences, for above Nine hundred years past, in and about these
Cities; to the Year 1681. and a description of the manner of the Trial of the
late Lord Stafford in Westminster Hall; Illustrated with Pictures, with the
Arms of the 65 Companies of London, and the time of their Incorporating. Price
One Shilling.

III. The Fifth Edition of the Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland; being
near a third enlarged with very considerable Additions; containing an Impartial
Account of all the Battles, S^iges and other Remarkable Transactions,
Revolutions and Accid^^^s which have happened from the beginning of the Reign
of K^^g Charles the First, 1625* to His Majesty's happy Restoration, 1660. The
illegal Trial of King Charles 1. at large, with his last Sp^ech, at his
Suffering. And the most considerable matters which happened till 1660. with
Pictures of several remarkable Accidents. Price One Shilling.

Nine other very useful, pleasant, and necessary Books, are lately published,
all sold by Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultry near Cheapside.
I. DElights for the Ingenious; In above Fifty Select, and choice Emblems,
Divine and Moral, Ancient and Modern, Curiously Engraven upon Copper Plates;
With Fifty Delightful Poems and Lots, for the more Lively Illustration of each
Emblem; Whereby Instruction and Good Counsel may be promoted and furthered by
an honest and pleasant Recreation. To which is Prefixed.

An Incomparable Poem, Entitled Majesty in Misery, or an Implor^tion to the
King of Kings, written by his late Majesty, King Charles the First, with his
own Hand, during his Captivity in Carisbrook-Castle in the Isle of Wight, 1648.
With a curious Emblem. Collected by R. B. Price Half a Crown.

II. Two Journies to Jerusalem, containing first, A strange and True Account of
the Travels of two Engl sh Pilgrims some years since; Secondly, The Travels of
Fourteen Englishmen in 1669. from Scandaroon to Tripoly, Joppa, Ramah,
Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Jericho, the River Jordan, the Lake of Sodom and
Gomorrah. and back again to Aleppo, By S. B. With the rare Antiquities,
Monuments, and, memorable places and things, mentioned in the Holy Scripture.
Beautified with Pictures. Price One Shilling.

III Unparalled Varieties, Or the Matchless Actions and Passions of Mankind;
Displayed in near four hundred notable instances and examples; Discovering the
transcendent effects; 1. Of Love, Friendship, and Gratitude, 2. Of Magnanimity
Courage and Fidelity, 3, Of Chastity, Temperance and Humility; and on the
contrary, the Tremendous Consequences, 4. Of Hatred, Revenge and Ingratitude,
5. Of Cowardice, Barbarity and Treachery, 6. Of Vnchestity, Intemperance and
Ambition. Imbellished with Proper Figures. Price One Shilling.

IV. Surprising Miracles of Nature and Art, in two parts containing, 1. The
Miracles of Nature, or the wonderful signs, and Prodigious Aspects and
Appearances in the Heavens, Earth and Sea; With an account of the most famous
Comets and other Prodigies to 1682. Likewise a true Account of the Groaning
Board. II. The Miracles of Art, describing the most Magnificent Buildings, and
other curious Inventions, in all Ages, as the Seven Wonders of the World, and
many other excellent structures and rarities throughout the Earth Beautified
with sculptures. 1 s.

V. Extraordinary Adventures of several famous Men; with the strange Events,
and signal Mutations and Changes in the Fortunes of diverse Illustrious Places
and Persons in all Ages; Being an account of a multitude of St pendous
Revolutions, Accidents and observable matters in States, and provinces
throughout the whole world. Price One Shilling.

VI. Wonderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy, discovered in above 333
memorable Histories, containing, 1. Dreadful judgments upon Atheists,
Blasphemers, perjured Villains. 2. The miserable ends of many Magicians,
Witches, Conj rers, etc. with diverse strange apparitions and illusions of the
Devil. 3. Remarkable predictions and presages of approaching death; and how the
event has been answerable, 4. The wicked lives, and woeful deaths of several
Popes, 5. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants Murderers, etc. 6. Admirable
Deliverances from imminent Dangers, and Deplorable Distresses at Sea and Land.
Lastly, Divine Goodness to Penitents, with the Dying Thoughts of several famous
Men, concerning a future state after this Life, Imbellished with diverse
Pictures. Price One Shilling.

VII. The Young man's Calling, or the whole Duty of Youth, in a serious and
compassionate Address to all young Persons to remember their Creator in the
days of their Y^uth Together with Remarks upon the Lives of several excellent
Young Persons of both Sexes, as well ancient as modern, who have been famous
for Virtue, and Piety in their Generations; namely; on the Lives of Isaac and
Joseph in their youth. On the martyrdom of seven sons and their mother; of
Romanus a young Nobleman, and of diverse holy Virgins and martyrs. On the Live
of K. Edward 6. Q. Jane, Q. Elizabeth in her Youth, P. Henry; eldest Son to K.
James, and the young L. Harrington, etc. with 12 curious Pictures, Illustrating
the several Histories. Price Eighteen Pence.

VIII. A Guide to Eternal Glory: Or, Brief directions to all Christians, how to
attain to Everlasting Salvation: To which are added several other small Tracts:
As 1. A short Directory for Self-Examination, 2. A Brief Dialogue between a
Learned Divine and a Beggar, 3. Cordial Meditations* or Beams of the Spirit,
Enlivening, Enlightening, and Gladding the Soul. Lastly, Divine Hymns upon the
Lords Supper; with some others. Price six Pence.

IX. Excellent Contemplations, Divine and Moral. Written by the Magnanimous and
truly Loyal A. L. Capel, Baron Hadham; Together with some Account of his Life,
and his Affectionate Letters to his Lady the day before his Death, with his
Heroic Behavior and last Speech at his Suffering: Also the Speeches and
Carriages of D. Hamilton, and the E. of Holland, who suffered with him: With
his Pious Advice to his Son the Late E. of Essex. Price One Shilling.

All Sold by Nathaniel Crouch at the Bell in the Poultry near Cheapside.

FINIS.

