The English EMPIRE in America By R. B


London Printed for Nath: Crouch

The English EMPIRE IN America: Or a Prospect of His Majesty's Dominions in the
West Indies.

Namely, Newfoundland New England New York Pensylvania New Jersey Maryland
Virginia Carolina Bermuda's Barbuda Anguilla Montserrat Dominica St. Vincent
Antego Mevis, or Nevis S. Christophers Barbados Jamaica


With an account of the Discovery, Situation, Product, and other Excellencies
of these Countries.

To which is prefixed a Relation of the first Discovery of the New World called
America, by the Spaniards. And of the Remarkable Voyages of several Englishmen
to diverse places therein.

Illustrated with Maps and Pictures.

By R. B. Author of Englands Monarchs, etc. Admirable Curiosities in England,
etc. Historical Remarks of London, etc. The late Wars in England, etc. And, The
History of Scotland and Ireland.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.
1685.

TO THE READER.
VAriety and Novelty are the most pleasant Entertainments of Mankind, and if
so, then certainly nothing can be more divertive than Relations of this New
World, which as our English Laureat Sings, is so happy a Climate.

As if our Old World modestly withdrew,
And here in private had brought forth a New.
Here nature spreads her fruitful sweetness round,
Breaths on the Air, and Broods upon the Ground:
Here days and nights the only seasons be,
The Sun no Climate does so gladly see,
When forced from hence, to view our parts, he mourns,
Takes little Journeys, and makes quick returns;
Nay in this Bounteous, and this Blessed Land,
The Golden Ore lies mixed with Common Sand,
Each down fall of a flood the Mountains pour,
From their Rich Bowels, rolls a Silver Shower;
All lay concealed for many Ages past,
And the best portion of the Earth was wast.
I need say no more in commendation of this Land of Wonders, but only to add,
that the continued Encouragement I have received in publishing several former
Tracts of this volume, especially those which had reference to His Majesty's
Dominions in Europe, have induced me to proceed upon those Gallant
Achievements of our English Hero's in this New World, and to give my
Countrymen a short view of those Territories now in possession of the English
Monarchy in the West Indies, of which many have only heard the names, but may
here find the nature, commodities and other Excellencies therein, which I doubt
not will sufficiently recommend it to the perusal of every Ingenious Reader. So
wishes

R. B.

THE First Discovery of the New World called AMERICA.
CHAP. I.
HAving already given an account of His Majesty of Great Britains three famous
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, we shall now ship our selves for a
New World, and therein discover the Acquisitions and Dominions of the English
Monarchy in Amercia.

The New World is the most proper name for this immense Country, and new, as
being discovered by Christopher Columbus, not two hundred years ago, in 1492.
The Ancient Fathers, Philosophers, and Poets, were of opinion, that those
places near the North and South Pole were inhabitable, by the extremity of
cold, and the middle parts, because of unreasonable heat, and thought it a
great solecism or contradiction, to believe the Earth was round, for holding
which opinion Pope Zachaus was so zealous against Bishop Virgil, that he
sentenced him, To be cast out of the Temple, and Church of God, and to be
deprived of his Bishopric for this perverse Doctrine, that there were
Antipodes, or people whose feet are placed against ours, though this discovery
of America has fully confirmed these opinions, and evinced that there is no
such torrid Zone, where the heat is so noxious, as to unpeople any part of the
Earth, and the yearly compassing of the World, evidenceth the necessity of
Inhabitants, living on all parts of this earthly Globe; The next inquiry may
be, whether the Ancient had any knowledge of these Regions, which many incline
to think they had not; for though Seneca says in his Msdea, That new Worlds
shall be discovered in the last Ages of the World, and Thule in Norway, shall
be no longer the utmost Nation of the World, yet this seems only to intimate
the common effects and discoveries of Navigation; And Plato's Atlantis, cannot
intend this Country, because he places it at the mouth of the Streights or
Mediterranean Sea, which is separated from America by a vast Ocean, and says
it is not now in being, but was by an earthquake sunk and overwhelmed in the
Sea: Other Authors since that time have mentioned some Islands in that Great
Sea, but they seem rather to be some of those on the Coasts of Africa, than
America, it being improbable, if not impossible, any should undertake such long
and dangerous Voyages, before the compass was found out, when they were only
directed by the motion of the Sun and Stars.

Yet is it not incredible but that in former Ages, some Ships might by Tempest
or other Casualties be driven to these parts, whereby some parts of America
were peopled, but it is likely none ever returned back again to bring any news
of their voyage. The most probable Relation of this kind is that of Madoc ap
Owen Gwyneth, who upon the Civil dissentions in his own Country of Wales,
adventured to Sea, and leaving Ireland on the North, came to a Land unknown,
where he saw many very wonderful things, which by Dr. Dowel and Mr. Humfrey
Lloyd is judged to be the main Land of America, being confirmed therein, as
well by the saying of Montezuma Emperor of Mexico, who declared that his
Progenitors were Strangers as well as the rest of the Mexicans, as by the use
of diverse Welsh words amongst them observed by Travelers; the story adds, that
Madoc left several of his People there, and coming home, returned back with ten
sail full of Welchmen, yet it is certain there are now left very few footsteps
of this British expedition, and no signs thereof were found at the Spaniards
Arrival; they indeed used a Cross at Cumana, and worshipped it at Acuzamil, but
without the least memory or knowledge of Jesus Christ, and the Welsh words are
very few, which might happen by chance to any other Language. Mr. Bretewood,
and other learned writers are of Opinion, that America received her first
Inhabitants from those parts of Asia, where the Tartars first inhabited the
Coasts of both Countries, being in that place not far asunder, and the likeness
of the People favoring the same, though the Indians in general are so very
ignorant as to ascribe their beginning, some to a Fountain, and others to a
Lake or Cave; But leaving these uncertainties, let us give a brief account of
the real discovery thereof by Columbus, which is thus related by Gomara and
Mariana, two Spanish writers.

A certain Caravel sailing in the Ocean, was carried by a strong East wind of
long continuance to an unknown Land never mentioned in the Maps or Charts of
that Age; this Ship was much longer in returning than going, so that all the
company perished by famine or other extremities, except the Pilot, and three or
four Mariners, who all likewise died soon after their arrival, leaving to
Columbus their Landlord their Papers, with some account of their Discoveries;
the time, place, Country, and name of this Pilot is uncertain, and therefore
other Authors affirm it to be a fable or Spanish contrivance, as envying that
an Italian and Forreigner should have the glory of being the first discoverer
of the Indies, and the more judicious Spaniards account it a Tale, and give a
more probable Relation thereof, and of the cause which moved Columbus to this
mighty undertaking, and not the Pilots Papers or reports; For they write, that
Christopher Colon or Columbus, was born at Nervi in the Territories of Genoa,
and bred a Mariner from his Childhood, trading into Syria and other Eastern
Countries, after which he learnt the art of making Sea Cards, and went to
Portugal to acquaint himself with the Coasts of Africa, and there married; In
sailing about these Seas, he observed, that at certain seasons of the year, the
winds blew from the West, for a great while together, and judging they came
from some Coasts beyond the Sea, he was so concerned, that he resolved to make
a Trial thereof; He was now forty years old, and propounding to the State of
Genoa, that if they would furnish him with Ships, he would find a way by the
West to the Islands of Spices, they rejected it as a dream or idle fancy; Being
thus frustrate of his hopes, he goes to Portugal, and communicates his design
to King Alphonsus, but with the same success; upon which he sent his Brother
Bartholomew Columbus, to King Henry the Seventh of England, to solicit his
assistance, while himself went into Spain, to impiore aid of the Castilians.

Bartholomew was unhappily taken by Pirates in his voyage to England, who
robbing him and his company of all they had, he at length arrived, and was
forced to get a mean livelihood by making Sea Cards, and in a short time
presents a Map of the World to King Henry, with his Brothers offer of
discovery, which the King gladly accepted, and sent for him into England; But
he had sped in his suit before in Spain, for coming thither, and conferring
with two able Spanish Pilots they advised him to apply himself to the Dukes of
Medina Sidonia, and Medina Caeli, who giving him recommendation to the Queens
Confessor, he arrived at the Court of Castile, in 1486. but Ferdinando and
Isabella then King and Queen of Spain, being engaged hotly in the Wars of
Granada against the Moors, he at first found but cold entertainment. Thus he
continued for some time in a mean and contemptible Condition, till at length
the Archbishop of Toledo procured him audience, where he was favorably
received, and promised dispatch upon concluding the Wars in Granada, and
accordingly he was furnished with three Caravels at the Kings charges, and
sixteen thousand Ducats in money.

In 1492. August 3. Columbus accompanied with about one hundred and Twenty
Persons, set sail for Gomera, one of the Canary Islands, where having refresht,
after many days, they encountered the Sea called Sargasso, from an Herb like
Sampire, wherewith it is so covered, that it appears like a green Field, with
empty berries, like a Gooseberry, and is so thick, that the Water cannot be
seen, hindering the passage of the Ship, without a strong wind; these weeds are
thought to reach to the bottom of the Sea, though there exceeding deep, and
above four hundred miles distant from the Coast of Africa; This strange
accident much surprised the Spaniards, and had occasioned their return, had not
the sight of some birds encouraged them with hopes of Land not far off; After
thirty three days sailing, despairing of success, the company mutined,
threatening to throw Columbus into the Sea, disdaining that a Genouse stranger
should thus abuse them, but at length by soft words, and strong promises he
qualified their anger, Oct. 11. following, one Roderigo di Triana, cried out,
Land, Land; the best music that Columbus could desire, who to pacify the
Spaniards, had engaged, that if no Land appeared in three days he would then
return; one of the company the night before had descried Fire, which raised his
expectation of having some great reward from the King of Spain, of which being
frustrate at his return, he in a rage renounced his Christianity and turned
Moor.

With Tears of Joy, the late mutinous Mariners behold the desired Land, and
they that Yesterday were ready to destroy, now as far distracted with contrary
passions, embrace and almost adore their dear Columbus, for so happily bringing
them to this Land of Promise; On shore they go, and felling a Tree, make a
Cross thereof, which they there erected, and took possession of this New World,
in the name of the Catholic King; They first landed in an Island called
Guanah^ni, one of the Lucai, which Columbus named St. Salvadore, from whence he
sailed to Baracoa, an Haven on the North side of the Isle of Cuba, and landing,
inquired of the Inhabitants for Cipango, or Japan, which they understanding to
be Cibao in Hispaniola, where are the richest Mines, they made signs to them
that they were in Haiti, which name they gave to Hispaniola, and some of them
went with him thither; but no earthly joy is without some disaster, for here
their Admiral split upon a Rock, but the men were saved by the help of other
Ships; This happened on the North part of Hispaniola, where they saw some
Inhabitants, who for fear of strangers, instantly fled into the Mountains: One
woman they got, whom they used kindly, giving her meat, drink and clothes, and
so dismissing her, who declaring their civility to the rest, they soon came in
Troops to the Ships, judging the Spaniards to be some Divine Nation sent from
Heaven; Though before they thought them Canibals or Man-eaters, and such indeed
they afterward proved in some sense, not leaving in some few years after their
arrival above two hundred Indians, alive, of four Millions that before
inhabited these Countries.

Before the discovery of this Island by Columbus, the People were informed
thereof by an Oracle, for one of their Kings being very importunate with their
Zemes, or Gods, to know future events, fasted five days together, spending his
time in continual mourning; After which the Zemes declared; That some years
after there would arrive a strange Nation, clothed, bearded, and armed with
shining Swords, which would out a man asunder in the middle, who should destroy
the ancient Images of their Gods, abolish their Ceremonies, and slay their
Children. In remembrance of which Oracle they composed a solemn Elegy, which
upon Holy days they used mournfully to sing. Nothing more pleased the Spaniards
than the Gold, which the Innocent Inhabitants exchanged with them for Bells,
Glasses, Points, and other Trifles. Columbus got leave of the King of
Hispaniola to build a Fort, and leaving 38 Spaniards therein, taking with him
six Indians, he returned to Spain, and was highly caressed by the King and Q.
and being honored with the Title of Admiral, and enriched with the Tenths of
the Spanish gains in the Indies, he is sent a second time (with his Brother
Bartholomew, who was made Viceroy of Hispaniola,) with seventeen sail of
Ships, and fifteen hundred men; when he arrived, he found all his men were
murdered by the Indians, who laid the blame on their insolent carriage toward
them.

Columbus now built the Town of Isabella, and afterward Saint Domingo, and Fort
St. Thomas, but in both places the Spaniards died of Famine; for the Indians
being unwilling to have such Neighbors, refused to plant their Maiz and Jucca,
and so starved both themselves and their new Guests. At this place the
Spaniards got that terrible disease called since the French Pox, of the Indian
women, and in requital brought among them a more mortal and infectious
distemper, that is, the Smallpox, which destroyed Thousands, and was utterly
unknown before in that Country. After this Columbus discovered Cuba, Jamaica,
and other adjacent Isles, and likewise part of the main Land of America; He
repaired his Fleet at Jamaica, where some of his men were sick, and others
mutinous, which the Indians observing, refused to bring him in provisions,
whereupon being straightened, he thought of this Stratagem, sending for some of
the Islanders, he assured them, that if they did not furnish him with
necessaries, the Divine wrath would consume them, a token whereof would be,
that within two days, the face of the Moon should be darkened, at which time he
knew there would be an Eclipse of the Moon, which these simple People finding
to happen accordingly, they came and humbly submitted themselves to him,
offering all the Assistance and supplies he desired. Another time some
difference happening among the Spaniards, Columbus sent a Letter to reduce them
to Peace by some of the Indians, who had extraordinary reverence for it,
thinking the Paper to have some Spirit or Deity enclosed in it, whereby they
could understand one another minds at so great distance. Columbus at length
returning into Spain, he there died in 1506, and was buried at Sevil; after
whose example several others made further Discoveries, till at last this New
World, is now almost wholly come to the knowledge of the Old.

II. Among other great Adventurers Hernando Cortes may be recorded, who in
1485. sailed out of Spain, being but 19 Years old, to the Island of St.
Domingo, where being kindly received by Ovando the Governor, he discovered
many new Provinces, and designed further Westward, because he heard there were
Mines of Gold; and having first made the Inhabitants Swear Allegiance to the
King of Spain, to whom he said the Monarchy of the Universe did belong, he
Sailed up the River Tavasco, where a Town which stood thereon refusing him
Victuals, he took and plundered it; the Indians hereat enraged, raised an Army
of Forty Thousand Men, but Cortes by his Horse and great Guns, soon defeated
them, they imagining the Horse and Man to be but one Creature, and when they
heard them Neigh, thought the Horses could speak, and inquired what they said,
the Spaniards answered, these Horses are very much offended with you for
fighting with them, and would have you severely punished; the Innocent Indians
hereupon presented Roses and Hens to the Beasts, desiring them to eat, and to
pardon their Miscarriages. The Spaniards named this Town Victory, containing
near twenty five thousand Houses, many of them Built of Lime, Stone and Brick;
he then sailed farther West to St. John de Vlla, where the Governor of the
Country came to him, with four Thousand Indians, adoring and burning
Frankincense and little Straws dipped in his own blood to Cortes, and then
presented him Victuals, Jewels, Gold, and curious works of Feathers, which
Cortes requited with a Collar of Glass, and other things of small value; a
Woman Slave given him at the Town of Victory, was his Interpreter, by whom
Cortes informed the Governor, that he was Servant to the greatest Emperor
upon Earth, at which the other much wondered, thinking there had been none so
mighty as his Sovereign Montezuma Emperor of Mexico, to whom the Governor
sent the Pictures of these bearded Men, their Horses, Apparel, Weapons, great
Guns, and other Rarities, Painted in Cotton Cloths, with an account of their
Ships and numbers, which were conveyed by Posts to Mexico in a day and a night,
though two hundred and ten Miles distant.

Cortes asked the Governor whether Montezuma had any Gold, who answered him,
yea, I am very glad of it, said Cortes, for I and my Companions are troubled
with a Disease at the Heart, to which Gold is the only Sovereign Remedy, and
therefore we desire him to furnish us with the greatest quantity he can
possible of that Metal. Montezuma upon receipt of those things, sent back
Cotton Cloths of diverse Colors, many tuffts of Feathers; with two Wheels, each
two yards and an half broad, one of Silver representing the Moon, the other of
Gold like the Sun, the whole Present being in value Twenty Thousand Ducats; he
likewise expressed much Joy to hear of so great a Prince, and such a strange
People, and promised all kind of necessaries, but was very unwilling Cortes
should come to visit him, though Cortes was resolved to see him; the Indians
came daily to his Camp, to see these strange sights, and when the great Guns
were discharged, they fell flat on their Faces, thinking the Heavens were
falling; among the rest were diverse Indians of differing habit, taller than the
rest, the Gristles of their Noses slit, and hanging over their Mouths, and
Rings of Jet and Amber fastened thereto; they had holes in their lower Lips,
wherein were put Rings of Gold, and Turkess Stones, so heavy, that their Lips
hung over their Chins, leaving their Teeth bare; Cortes understood these
deformed Gallants were of Zempoallan, a City a days Journey off, whom their
Lords had sent to discover what Gods were come in those Temples (meaning the
Ships) for they daily expected the God of the Air to appear. They were not
willingly subject to Montezuma, neither converst with any other Indians, and
therefore Cortes resolved to make use of them against him, upon the first
occasion.

He sailed from thence to Panuco, a little Town, where was a Temple ascended by
twenty Steps, in which they found Idols, Bloody Papers, much Blood of Men
Sacrificed, the Block whereon they cut them up, and the Razors of Flint
wherewith they opened their Breasts, which struck horror into the Spaniards;
Cortes then proceeded to Zempoallan, where he was Solemnly received, and lodged
in a great House of Lime and Stone, whited with Plaster that shined like
Silver against the Sun; then causing all his Ships to be sunk, that there might
be no hope of return, he persuaded the Natives to submit to the Spaniards, and
join with them against Montezuma, which they readily complied with; leaving a
Guard in this his new Town, he marched with four hundred Spaniards, fifteen
Horses, six pieces of Artillery, and thirteen hundred Indians to Zaclotan,
whereof Olintler was Governor for Montezuma, who to testify his Joy; and
Honor Cortes commanded fifty men to be Sacrificed, whose Blood lay fresh upon
the Ground, and his People carried the Spaniards in triumph upon their
Shoulders; he boasted as much of the power of Montezuma, as the Spaniards did
of their Emperor affirming that he had 30 Vassals, or petty Kings under him,
each of whom were able to bring an hundred Thousand Soldiers into the Field,
and then Montezuma Sacrificed some years Fifty Thousand Men to his Gods; this
was a great Town, having 13 Temples, in each of which were Idols of Stone of
several fashions, before whom they Sacrificed Men, Doves, Quails, and other
things, with Perfumes and great Veneration; here Montezuma had five Thousand
Men in Garrison.

Cortes went from hence toward Mexico, passing by the Frontiers of Taxallan,
who were Enemies to the Mexicans, and whom Montezuma might easily have subdued,
but reserved partly to keep his Subjects in continual Exercises of War, and
partly to Sacrifice them to his Gods; these Taxallans raised an hundred and
fifty Thousand Men against Cortes, judging him to be a Friend and Confederate
of Montezuma's, and yet they every day sent the Spaniards Guinney-cocks and
Bread, as well to espy his strength, as that they scorned to obscure their
Glory, by Conquering People already starved; but when in many Skirmishes, they
could not prevail against that small handful of Spaniards, they then believed
them to be preserved by Enchantments, and sent Cortes three Presents with this
threefold Message; 1. That if he were that cruel God, who eats Man's F^esh, he
should eat those five Slaves which they had now sent, and then they would bring
him more. 2. If he were the meek and gentle Deity, they then presented him with
Frankincense and Feathers. 3. If he were a Mortal, then let him take and eat
Bread, Fowl and Cherries; but at length they submitted, and delivered Taxallan
to him, a great City by a Rivers side, having four Streets, each of which had
their Captain in time of War; their Government was by the Nobility, under which
were 28 Villages containing above an hundred and fifty Thousand Households, the
Men very Valiant, though very Poor; there was one Marketplace so large, that
thirty Thousand People came thither daily to exchange Commodities, for Money
they had none.

Montezuma had formerly promised, whatever Tribute the King of Spain should
desire, and now he sent again to Cortes, not to depend on the beggarly
Friendship of the Taxallans, and they on the contrary advised him to repose no
trust in Montezuma; however Cortes resolved for Mexico, and accompanied with
many Taxallans, went to Cholola, at which place the Spaniards reported
Montezuma had prepared an Army to surprise them, whereupon they used very great
severity against them; (though it was said they had Sacrificed 10 Children, of
both Sexes, of three years old to their God for success,) for all the chief Men
and Priests coming to meet and entertain them, they made them all Prisoners,
and afterward cut them off, some being tied to Stakes and burnt to death, and
others suffered great Tortures; the Chief Commander escaped with about 30 or 40
Men, and got into a Temple which was like a Castle, there defending himself a
good part of the day, but the Spaniards firing the Temple, burnt them all
within it, who as they were dying, broke forth into these Lamentations; O
Wicked Men! How have we injured you, that you should thus torment us? away,
away to Mexico, where our Chief Lord Montezuma will revenge our Quarrel. It is
reported, that while the Spaniards were acting this Bloody Tragedy, upon above
six Thousand Innocent Creatures, their Chief Captain in sport sung these Verses.

One flame the Roman City now destroys,
And Shreeks of People make a dismal noise,
While Nero sung, and (moved with delight)
From Tarpey Hill beheld the woeful sight.
Eight Leagues from Cholola is Popocatapec, a burning Mountain, the mouth
whereof is about half a League in compass, from whence issued out great
quantities of Fire, Smoke and Ashes, with terrible noise, the Indians believed
it to be Hell, wherein wicked Men were punished; two Spaniards adventured near
it, but narrowly escaped being destroyed, being sheltred by a Rock from the
violent Eruption which then happened, which is sometimes so furious, that the
fiery ashes are carried 15 Leagues off, burning their Corn, Fruits, Herbs, and
Clothes on the Hedges; The Indians kissed the Garments of these adventurous
Spaniards, an honor only given to their Gods. Cortes drawing near Mexico,
Montezuma was much afraid, saying, These are the men whom our Gods told us
should inherit our Land; He then shut up himself eight days in his Oratory,
praying and fasting, and sacrificing many men to appease his offended Deities;
The Oracle or Devil bids him not fear, but to continue these inhumane
massacres, assuring him he should have two Gods to preserve him, saying, that
Quezal permitted that great destruction at Cholola, for want of that bloody
Sacrifice.

Cortes went forward passing over a Mountain six miles in height, covered with
Snow continually, and the passage very difficult, so that the Mexicans might
easily have prevented his proceeding further; from hence he had sight of the
Lake whereon Mexico, and many other great Towns were built, filled with
Inhabitants, and adorned with diverse Temples and Towers, which beautify the
Lake; being arrived at Mexico, Montezuma received him with all kind of
solemnity, excusing his former unkindnesses, and providing all necessaries for
him and his Spaniards, making Beds of Flowers for their Horses instead of
Litter, but Cortes being full of Ambitious designs, seized upon the King, and
put him in chains with a Spanish Guard of 80 men, whereupon Montezuma's Nephew
fled to arms, but by the Treachery of his own People, was presented to
Montezuma, whom Cortes permitted to exercise Regal Authority, and by whose
order he summoned a Parliament, or Assembly of the chief of his People, where
he made an Oration to his Subjects, declaring, That he and his Predecessors
were not naturally born in the Country, but that his Forefathers came from a
strange Land, and that their Kings of old, had promised to send such as should
rule them, and had accordingly sent these Spaniards. He therefore advised them
to yield themselves Vassals to the Emperor of Spain. This request they yielded
to, though with many tears on either side in thus forever departing from their
Liberty. Montezuma then presented Cortes a vast quantity of Gold and Jewels, in
the nature of a Tribute, valued at sixteen hundred thousand Castellins.

Hitherto Cortes had obtained a continual victory without fighting, when he had
Intelligence that Pamphilo de Narva, and some hundreds of Spaniards, were sent
from Velasques another Spanish Captain, to interrupt his proceedings, who
leaving two hundred of his Men in Mexico, he with two hundred and fifty others,
suddenly surprised Narva and his company, and brought him Prisoner to Mexico;
While this was doing, one of Cortes his Captains at Mexico resolved to perform
something in his absence, which might render the Spaniards dreadful and
terrible to the Indians, a policy they often used; it happened that the
Nobility and Commons of the City, used all kind of sports and recreations, to
divert their Captive King, and none more than dancing and revelling all night
long in the streets, in which divertisements they brought forth all their
Wealth, Richest Garments, and whatever they esteemed precious; The Nobility and
Princes of the Royal-Bloud, exercised themselves herein, near the Houses where
their King was confined, there being above Two Thousand youths, even the flower
of the Nobility engaged therein. The Spanish Captain came with a small party of
Soldiers, as if to be Spectators, sending more Troops into other parts of the
City, giving them Command to be ready at a certain signal, and then leading the
way, he himself cried out aloud, St. Jago, let us fall upon them; The watchword
thus given, the Soldiers began to cut and mangle those noble and delicate
youths, with such fury, that they left not one alive, and their rich Garments
and Jewels, were made a prize by the Spaniards.

The Indians beholding this unheard of cruelty and injustice, having long
endured with patience, the imprisonment of their King, who had charged them to
be quiet, now fly all to arms, and falling upon the Spaniards wounded many, and
pursued others, at length putting a dagger to the breast of their King
Montezuma, they threatened to kill him, unless he would look out atth Window,
and Command his Subjects to lay down they Arms; But they contemning his Orders,
chose themselves a Captain; when Cortes returned again, in good time to relieve
his men, and Montezuma being again commanded by his Spanish Guardians to speak
to the People, he was wounded on the Temples by a stone, whereof he died 3
days after. Cortes had some Thousands of Taxallans to assist him, and yet was
forced to fly out of Mexico privately by night, with all his Spaniards and
Indians, which yet was not unknown by the Mexicans, so that an alarm being
raised, they cut off their Bridges, and made a great slaughter among them, the
Spaniards losing most of their ill got Treasure; And their number increasing to
two hundred thousand, they pursued them with all speed, but Cortes having the
good fortune to kill their Standard Bearer, the Indians forsook the Field.

The Taxallans raising an Army of fifty thousand men, joined with Cortes, and
took in diverse places, and then building several Frigots or Brigantines, he
soon took all the Indian Canoes upon the Lake. Quabutimoc, who succeeded
Montezuma, being encouraged from the Devils Oracle, made all possible defense
for saving Mexico, sometimes conquering, and being other while beaten by the
Spaniards, who fired a great part of the City. One day the Mexicans having
gotten an advantage against the Spaniards, they thereupon celebrated a Feast of
Victory; The Priests going into the Temple, made a Perfume of sweet Gums, and
then sacrified forty Spanish Prisoners, opening their breasts, plucking out
their hearts, and sprinkling their blood in the Air, their companions looking
on, unable to revenge it, the Mexicans mean while, dancing, beating their
drums, drinking themselves drunk, and using all manner of expressions of Joy.
At length Rage, Revenge and Disdain had so filled the Spaniards breasts, that
having hitherto been more careful of ruining the City, which they hoped to
preserve for their own use, they now resolved utterly to destroy it, to which
the dreadful Famine and Pestilence within, did as much contribute, as their
Fury without; so that after three months Siege, Mexico is taken, and rased to
the ground, with the loss of Fifty Spaniards, and Six Horses; but of the
Mexicans, an hundred thousand, besides those who died of the Plague and Hunger;
the King himself being taken Prisoner, and that mighty City and State utterly
subverted; this happened Aug. 13. 1521. which day is kept as a yearly Festival
by the Spaniards to this day. Mexico was afterward rebuilt, with an hundred
thousand Houses, fairer and stronger than before.

Thus fell the Great Montezuma and his mighty Empire with him; Thus fell he who
was honored as a God, whom it was death for any of the Common People to look
in the face, who never set his foot on the ground abroad, but was carried upon
the shoulders of Noblemen in a Chariot of pure Gold, and if he happened to
alight, trod upon rich Tapestry; He who never put on one Garment twice, never
used any Vessel or Dish, though of Gold, but once, and yet all these
Magnificences were so far from procuring him happiness, that they were the
chief incentives to covetous and ambitious Spirits to contrive his Ruin. Yet
was not this general Devastation without some prodigous forerunners of the
same. The King of Tescuco, a great Magician, and diverse other Sorcerers,
confirmed the declaration of the Idol Cholola; That a strange People should
come and possess his Kingdom; These Sorcerers being imprisoned by the King,
immediately vanished away; But a stranger thing happened by report to a poor
man, who was taken up by an Eagle, and carried into a certain Cave, where being
set down, the Eagle pronounced these words, Most mighty Lord, I have brought
him whom thou have commanded; There he saw one like Montezuma lying asleep, who
uttering several dreadful threatenings against the King, the man was again
carried away by the Eagle, and set down in the place where he had been first
seized. Strange voices were likewise heard, with Earth quakes and overflowings
of Rivers; A prodigious Bird of the bigness of a Crane, was taken, having on
his head as it were a Glass representing armed men, which being brought into
the Kings presence, instantly disappeared, and was never seen after; The King
endeavored to have appeased his Gods by Sacrifice, and would therefore have
removed a great Stone, which yet he could not possibly do, by any strength or
other means he used, which was thought to be an Ominous presage, that his
Deities were not to be reconciled. These things were certainly told by the
Indians, which if true, may be accounted the Illusions of the Devil, whereby he
sometimes, forwarns his Votaries.

III. Neither ought Americus Vespusius, a Florentine, to be forgotten, who was
Second to Columbus in the glory of this grand and successful enterprise of
discovering the New World, who at the charge of Emanuel King of Portugal,
undertook the business; He had been one of Columbus his Companions in the first
expedition, and consequently did now but trace the way that Columbus had before
showed him, yet had he this happiness and Honor above his Predecessor, to give
his name unto the discovered Country; the whole continent of the New World
being ever since from him generally called America; this man at the charge of
King Emanuel in 1502. with a competent number of Ships and men crossed the
Equinoctial Line, and discovered the Coasts of Guiana and Brasil, beyond the
Tropique of Capricorn, to 32 degrees of Southern Latitude, where having stayed
some time, and taken possession of the Country after their usual Formalities,
they held on their course beyond the River of Plate, to 52 degrees, to the
height of the Streights of Magellane, but being here taken with foul weather,
and their Ships much impaired by Storms, they were forced to return homeward by
the Coast of Africa. The year following he attempted another Voyage, directing
his course for Insula Real* in the Country of Brasil; but having passed Cape
Verde and Sierra Liona, upon the Coast of Guinney, by great misfortune the Ship
which carried their Provisions was sunk, and 300 Hogsheads of Victuals and
other necessaries, for the Company were utterly lost, by which disaster they
were forced again to turn homeward; how long he lived, and what expeditions he
made after this, are not remembered in History.

IV. Francis Pizarro, a Person of very mean birth and Education, was likewise
very fortunate in discoveries, for going from Sivil in Spain where he was born,
to the Indies, he went in company of Almagro and others, to discover the
South Sea in 1526. Pizarro offering to land his men, was wounded, and forced to
retire to his Ships. Almagro in another place had better success, the Indians
using him kindly, and presenting him three thousand Ducats of Gold, but
endeavoring to land in that place of Pizarro's misfortune, he was set upon by
the Indians, and lost one of his eyes in the encounter. At length they met at
Panama, and having cured their wounds, and recruited their Forces with two
hundred men, and many Slaves, they set sail, and landed at another place, but
are beaten back to their Ships, and forced to an Island called Gorgon, six
miles from the Continent, where Pizarro stayed while Almagro went back for
greater supplies, but both he and his company were almost starved before
Almagro's return; being refreshed and strengthened, they once more attempt the
Indian Shore, but were again repelled both from thence and the Island, so that
they resolved to go further, coursing this Land and their ill fortune and
having sailed five hundred miles, they came to Chira a Province in Perue, and
having Intelligence by some of the Natives of the great wealth of this
Country, Pizarro sent one Peter a Candian on shore, who was kindly treated by
the Governor, by whom he was showed a Temple dedicated to the Sun, wherein were
inestimable riches, whereupon it was agreed among the Partners in this
Enterprise, that Pizarro should return to Spain and get a License for this
Conquest, which he did accordingly, but yet only for himself, absolutely
leaving his Companions out of the Grant, and returning with Letters Pattents to
Panama with his four brethren Hernando, Gonzalo, John, and Martin de Alcantara
his brother by ^he Mothers side, his Partners were much disturbed ^hereat;
however, after much quarelling, Pizarro and Almagro agreed to make an equal
division of their booty; Pizarro goes before with an hundred and fifty
Soldiers, (ordering Almagro to follow with all the strength ^e could make) and
Lands in Peru, a River so called, which gave name to those great and wealthy
Provinces; ^hey went by Land, enduring much misery by the way, ^ill they came
to Puna, where they were well received of the Governor, till by abusing their
Wives, they provoked the Indians to take Arms, but were soon defeated, and
thereby their Riches became a prey to the prevail^ng Spaniards.

The Governor of this Island, to satisfy his Jealousy, ^ut off the Noses, Privy
Members, and Arms of his Eunuchs. Here Pizarro heard first of Atabaliba, for
the Governor taking part with Guascar Atabaliba's Brother, who were at that
time at War, about the Sovereignty of the Kingdom, he had taken six hundred of
his Enemies Prisoners, who now coming into Pizarro's hands, ^e freely sent them
to Tumbez, a great Indian Town be^onging to Atabaliba, and three Messengers
with them to ^emand peace and safe entrance; but notwithstanding their Captives
were so generously restored, they ingratefully delivered the three Spaniards to
their bloody Priests to be sacrificed to the Idol of the Sun Upon this Pizarro
took Tumbez, and plundered the Temple and City; From thence he marches toward
Guatimala, where Guascar sent some with great promises to desire his aid
against his Brother; Soon after others came from Atabaliba, with a peremptory
command that he should return back to his Ships. Pizarro answered, That he came
thither not to hurt any, but for their good, as his Lord and Emperor had given
him in charge, nor could he now return without much dishonor, being an
Ambassador from the Pope and Emperor, who were Lords of the World, before he
had seen King Atabaliba 's Royal Person, and bad communicated to him such
wholesome Counsels and Instructions as might be good both for his body and Soul.

Pizarro passed forward, and as he went through the Province of Chira, the
Lords thereof provoked him against Atabaliba, who had lately conquered their
Countries; these Civil distractions did much facilitate the Spaniards
Victories; on the River Chira he settled the Colony of St. Michael for securing
his Spoils, and then marched on to Guatimala, sending Messengers on Horseback to
give notice of his coming; the Indians having never before seen an Horse, were
extremely surprised, but Atabaliba was little moved thereat, though very much
concerned that those Bearded Men afforded him such small Reverence, and
Respect; he sent Pizarro a Pair of Shoes cut and Gilded, under pretense of
distinguishing, and knowing him from others, though it was judged a design to
seize and kill him. The next day the King was carried in Solemn Triumph upon
the Shoulders of his Nobility in great Pomp and Magnificence, Guarded with
Twenty five Thousand Indians; when Vincent a Dominican Friar, coming before him
with great Reverence, holding a Cross in one hand, and his Breviary, or as some
say, a Bible, in the other, he blessed him with the Cross, and said, Most
Excellent Prince, it much concerns you to believe, that God in Trinity and
Unity Created the World out of nothing, and Formed a Man of the Earth whom he
called Adam, of whom we had all our beginning, that Adam sinned against his
Creator by disobedience, and in him all his Posterity, except Jesus Christ, who
being God, came down from Heaven, and took the flesh of the Virgin Mary, and to
save and redeem Mankind, dyed upon a Cross like to this in my hand, for which
cause we worship it. After his death he rose again the third day, and after
forty days ascended into Heaven, leaving for his Vicar on Earth St. Peter and
his Successors, which we call Popes, one of whom has now given the most
Puissant King of Spain Emperor of the Romans, the Monarchy of the World. Obey
the Pope therefore, worthy Prince, and receive the faith of Christ, which if
you will believe to be most Holy, and your own most false, you shall do well,
but know, that if you do the contrary, we will make War upon you, and destroy
and break your Idols to pieces; Let me then advise you to leave off your false
worship, and thereby prevent all these mischiefs.

Atabaliba seemed to wonder at the Preaching of this Friar, and replied, That
he was a free Prince, and would become Tributary to none, neither did he
acknowledge any greater Lord than himself; As for the Emperor he could be well
content to be in friendship with so great a Monarch, and to be acquainted with
him, but for the Pope, he would not obey him, who gave away what was none of
his own, and took a Kingdom from him whom he had never seen; As for Religion he
liked well his own, neither would nor ought he to question the Truth thereof,
it being so ancient and approved, especially since Christ died, which never
happened to the Sun and Moon whom he worshipped. And how do you know, said he,
that the God of the Christians created the World? Fire Vincent answered, That
his book told it him, giving him his Breviary or Bible, Atabaliba looked in it,
and said, It told him no such thing, throwing it on the ground; The Friar took
it up, and went to Pizarro, crying out, He has cast the Gospels on the Ground,
Revenge it O Christians upon these Infidel Dogs, and since they will not accept
our friendship nor our Law, let as utterly destroy them.

Pizarro hereupon set up his Standard, and planted his Ordinance, and his
Horsemen in 3 Squadons assulted Atabaliba's people, making great slaughter,
Pizarro himself with his Foot came in, and did much execution with their
swords, all charged against Atabaliba, killing them who carried him on their
Shouldiers in his Pavillion, whose Rooms were presently supplied by others,
till at last Pizarro plucked him down by his Clothes; All the while not one
Indian made resistance, either because they had no Command, or with the
amazement to see their Sovereign so abused, so that never a Spainar^ was slain,
though several Indians were thurst through; thus were the Indians routed, their
King and other rich spoils remaining to the Spaniards, reckoned at fourscore
thousand Castilians in Gold, and Seven Thousand Marks in Silver, of the
household Plate of Atabaliba, every Mark being eight Ounces; And in Guatimala
they found several Houses filled up to the roof with rich Garments, besides
Armor and Weapons, of which some were Axes and Pole-axes of Gold and Silver.
The next day the Spaniards searched all about for spoil, and found five thousand
women belonging to the King, with much Treasure.

Atabaliba was much disturbed at his imprisonment, but especially because they
put a chain upon him, and when many proposals had been made about his ransom, a
Soldier said, If you will give us this House full of Gold and Silver thus
high, (lifting up his Sword, and making a mark upon the wall) you shall have
your Freedom; Atabaliba, promised if they would give him Liberty to send
throughout his Kingdom, he would fulfill their demand, whereat the Spaniards
amazed, gave him three months time, but he had filled the House in two months
and an half, a thing hardly to be credited; but says Lopez Vaz, I know above
twenty men who were there at that time, and all affirmed that there was above
ten Millions of Gold and Silver. Another Spanish Captain relates that Atabaliba
promised to give them so much Gold, as should reach up to a Mark which was a
span higher than a ^all man could reach, the room being 25 Foot long and 15
wide, and the Governor demanding how much Silver he would give, he said, he
would fill up a large enclosed Garden, with Vessels of Pla^e for his ransom;
this Captain was made Guardian of this Golden House and saw this vast mass of
(...) melted down; the Govern^^^ sent a fifth pa^^ (...) ^he King of Spain, and
part^^ (...), giving to eve^ Footman which ^ere (...) two, four tho^^^ eight
hundred (...) which amounted to abov^ seven (...) Horsman 63 (...) adva^ta^e
(...) he Victor^ (...) thousand Pezo's and ^o thousand to the Inhabitants of
St. Michael; Many other gifts he gave to Merchants and others, and yet after
the Governor was gone, there was more Gold brought in, than that which had been
shared; Ten or twelve days, after the Spaniards who were sent to Cusco, brought
in as much Gold, as amounted to two Millions and an half, and half a million of
Silver; When Atabaliba had procured this immense sum, he was discharged from
his promise by sound of Trumpet, and yet was still kept under a Guard for the
Spaniards security, under pretense that his Subjects were again gathered
together by his Command, he argued with them, that if they were assembled
together, it was no more by his Authority, than the moving of the Leaves of the
Trees, but however, being their Captive, he said, it was in their power to take
away his Life.

Notwithstanding these so reasonable Remonstrances, they consulted whether they
should burn him alive, and at last Condemned him to that cruel death, but by
the entreaty of some, that Sentence was mitigated, and he was ordered to be
strangled by four Negro's, whom Pizarro kept for that purpose, which one night
was accordingly performed; the King understanding he was to dye, spoke thus to
his Murderers, Why do you kill me? Did not you promise to set me at liberty, if
I would give you Gold? I procured it for you, yea, more than you required, yet
if it be your pleasure that I must be killed, send me to your King of Spain,
that I may clear myself of what you falsely object against me; but the
Executioners stopped his Breath before he could proceed further, yet did not
vengeance suffer these Ungrateful Villains to escape. Almagro was Executed by
order of Pizarro, and young Almagro slew Pizarro, who was likewise put to death
by de Castro John Pizarro was slaughtered by the Indians, Martin and Francis,
two other of his Brethren were likewise killed; Ferdinand was imprisoned in
Spain, and his end unknown; Gonzales was put to death by Gasca, and the Civil
Wars among themselves utterly destroyed the rest of these Treacherous Spaniards.

The difference between the two Brethren accelerated their Ruin, Guascar
succeeded his Father in the Kingdom, and the Province of Quito was assigned to
Atabaliba, who being of an aspiring Spirit, seized on Tumebamba a rich
Province, upon which his Brother raising Forces, took him Prisoner; Atabaliba
making his escape, got back to Quito, where he made his People believe that
their God the Sun, had turned him into a Serpent, and thereby he got through a
hole in the Prison; the conceit of this Miracle, made them instantly rise in
Arms against Guascar, with whose assistance Atabaliba made such Slaughter of
his Enemies, that there are great heaps of Bones to be seen at this day,
Threescore Thousand being killed, and many Provinces Conquered; during
Atabaliba's Imprisonment, some of his Captains had taken his Brother Guascar,
who sent word to one of the Spanish Commanders, that if he would restore him to
his Liberty and Kingdom, he would fill up a large Room at Guatimala with Gold
and Silver, which was thrice as much as Atabaliba had promised, adding, that
his Father Guayna, who was a great Sorcerer, had commanded him on his Deathbed
to be kind to the white and Bearded Men, who should come and rule in those
parts; Atabaliba hearing of these offers, sent to have his Brother put to
death, which the Spaniards took no notice of, and which seemed justly to befall
him, since he had before Murdered another of his Brethren, and drunk in his
Skull, as he had sworn to deal with Atabaliba.

Though the Spaniards got vast Treasures in this Country, yet the Indians hid
great quantities of Gold, Silver and Jewels, which never came to their hands,
formerly belonging to Guayna: one of Atabaliba's Chief Captains visited him in
Prison with great reverence, he and the chief of his Company, laying Burdens on
their Shoulders, and so entered into his presence* lifting up their hands to the
Sun, with great thankfulness for giving them sight of their Lord, and then
kneeling down, kissed his hands and feet; this Captain told the The Caribee
Islands
Spaniards, that an Indian had conveyed away vast Treasures, and upon Torture
discovered a great House full of Vessels of Gold, with a Shepherd and his Sheep
all of Gold, as great as if living; he likewise reported he heard Atabaliba
say, that in an Island called Collas, was a very great House covered all over
with Gold, the Ceilings, Walls and Pavements within, being likewise all Beaten
Gold; the Spaniards so abounded in Gold, that they would give a Thousand or
fifteen hundred Pezo's for an Horse; Debtors sought out their Creditors with
Indians laden with Gold, from House to House to pay them; they took from the
Walls of some Houses, and the Roof of the Temple at Cusco, Plates of Gold of
ten or twelve Pound weight, they carried into Spain one Vessel of Gold, and
another of Silver, each of so vast extent, as they were big enough to boil a
Cow whole therein, likewise a huge Eagle, an Image of Gold, as long as a Child
of four years old, Drums, and Statues of Women in Gold to the full proportion;
with several others of Silver, Sheep of fine Gold curiously wrought, and other
admirable Rarities.

In this Kingdom of Peru is an High Mountain called Periacaca, upon which
Joseph Acosta ascended as well provided as possible, being sensible of the
Danger, but in the ascent he and his Companions were suddenly, surprised with
looseness and Vomiting, casting up Phlegm, Choler and Blood, so that they
expected present death. There are other Deserts in Peru called Punas, where the
Air cuts off men without feeling, a small breath depriving them sometimes of
their feet and hands, which fall off like leaves in Autumn, without pain, and
other times of their Lives, and yet after death the same piercing cold Air
preserves the body from Putrefaction.

Cuba an Island of 230 Leagues in length was about this time possessed by the
Spaniards, where they executed great severity as well as in other places. A
certain Lord of great power who had fled over the Continent to this Isle to
avoid either death or perpetual Captivity, hearing that the Spaniards were come
hither, having assembled the Principal Indians, spoke to them to this effect;
Countrymen and Friends, you are not ignorant of the rumor that the Spaniards
are arrived amongst us, neither need I tell you how barbarously they have used
the Inhabitants of Hispaniola, you know it by too certain Intelligence, nor can
we hope to find them more merciful than they did; But my dear Countrymen, do
you know their Errand? if not, I will tell you the cause of their coming, they
worship some covetous and insatiate God, and to content their greedy Deity,
they require all our Gold and Silver from us, for this they endeavor
continually to murder and enslave us. See here this little Chest of Gold, and
therein behold the God of the Spaniards, therefore if you think fit let us
dance and sing before this their God, perhaps we may hereby appease his rage,
and he will then command his worshippers to let us alone. To this motion they
all assented, and danced round about the Box till they were thoroughly wearied,
when the Lord thus proceeded, If we should keep this God till he be taken from
us, we shall be certainly slain, I therefore think it expedient for us to cast
him into the River; whose Counsel being followed, the Chest was thrown into the
River.

When the Spaniards first landed in this Island, this Nobleman having
sufficient experience of their cruelty, avoided them as much as possible, still
flying and defending himself by force of Arms upon all occasions; at length
being taken, for no other reason, but endeavoring to preserve his Life from
his Enemies, he was by the Spaniards burnt alive; being tied to a Stake, a
Franciscan Monk began to discourse him of God, and the Articles of his
Religion, telling him that the small time allowed him by the Executioner, was
sufficient to make his Salvation sure, if he did heartily believe in the true
Faith; having a while considered his words, he asked the Monk whether the Door
of Heaven was open to the Spaniards, who answering yea, then, said he, Let me
go to Hell, that I may not come where they are. In this Island the Spaniards
got above a Million of Gold, and vast sums more in the other spacious.
Provinces of this New World, the greatest part whereof came into their
Possession in a few years, and which they enjoy to this very day.

CHAP. II. The Voyages and Discoveries of several Englishmen into America.
IN the former Chapter I have, according to my usual scantling, given a
sufficient account of the Fortunate Acquisitions of the Spaniards, and now
think my self in justice obliged to let my Countrymen know what Adventurous
Voyages, and extreme dangers some of our brave English Spirits have surmounted
in their Discoveries of this New World; wherein I shall follow the Sun,
beginning first Northward, and so proceed toward, and beyond the Equinoctial.

I. In which number, Sir Sebastian Cabot ought to be first mentioned, born and
living in England, though a Venetian Gentleman by Extraction, who in 1496 at
the charge of Henry the 7th King of England, set out with two Carravels, for
discovering a Northwest ^assage to Cathay and the East Indies, according to the
design which Columbus had first suggested to him; in pursuit whereof, he is
reported to have sailed to 67 Degrees of Northern Latitude, upon the Coast of
America, and finding Land, called it Prima Vista; the Inhabitants wore the
Skins of Beasts, there were white Bears, and Stags far greater than ours, with
great pi^^ty of Seal and Sole fish above a yard long, and such vast quantities
of other Fish, that they sometimes staid the course of the Ship; the Bears
caught these Fish with their Claws, and drawing them to Land, eat them; he then
discovered all along the Coast to Florida, and afterward returned, at which
time strong preparations being making for Wars with Scotland, this design was
wholly laid aside to the great prejudice of the English Nation, who in all
probability might have made themselves Quarter Masters, at least with the
Spaniards, in the wealthiest Parts and Provinces of America, if the business
had been well followed. Sir Sebastian himself went immediately to Spain, and
was employed by that King in discovering the Coasts of Brasil, and though he
afterward returned again to England in 1549. and was honored by King Edward
the Sixth, with the Title of Grand Pilot of England, and the yearly Pension of
an hundred and sixty Pound, yet his design was never effectually revived.

II. Sir Martin Frobisher, justly deserves the second place, who in the reign
of Queen Elizabeth made three several voyages to discover the North-west
Passage. June 15. 1576 he sailed from Blackwall, and July 7 had sight of
Frizeland, but could not get ashore, because of the abundance of Ice, and an
extreme Fog, July 20. he had sight of an High Land, which he named Queen
Elizabeth's Foreland, very full of Ice, but sailing further Northward, he
descried another Foreland with a Great Bay, whereinto he entered, calling it
Frobishers Streights, supposing it to divide Asia from America; Having sailed
sixty Leagues, he went ashore, and was encountered with mighty Deer, who ran at
him, and endangered his Life. He had there a sight of the Savage Inhabitants,
who rowed to his Ship in Boats of Seals Skins, they eat or rather devour raw
Flesh and Fish, their hair was long and black, broad faces, flat noses, color
tawny or Olive, which neither Sun nor Wind, but nature it self imprinted on
them, as appeared by their Infants, and seems to be the complexion of all the
Americans; their clothing was Seals Skins, the women were painted on the
Cheeks, and about the Eyes with blew streaks. These Savages intercepted 5
Englishmen and their Boat, they took also one of them, whom they brought into
England, where they arrived Oct. 2. 1576. having taken possession of the
Country, in right of the Queen of England, every man of the company being
commanded to bring home somewhat in witness thereof; one brought a piece of
black stone like Seacoal, which was found to hold Gold in a good quantity.

Whereupon the next year a second voyage was made to bring home more of this
Ore, and coming into these Streights in July 1577. they found them in a manner
shut up with a long wall of Ice, which very much endangered their Ships. They
found a Fish as big as a Porpice dead upon the Shore twelve foot long, having a
Horn of two yards growing out of the Snout, wreathed and straight like a wax
tapor, and was thought to be a Sea Unicorn; It was broken on the top, wherein
the Sailers affirmed they put Spiders which presently died. It was presented to
the Queen at their return, and sent to Winsor to be reserved in the Wardrope
for a curiosity. They went on Shore, and had some skirmishes with the
Inhabitants, who were so fierce and resolute, that finding themselves wounded,
they leapt off the Rocks into the Sea rather than fall into the hands of the
English, the rest fled, only one Woman and her Child they brought away, and
another man, who seeing the Picture of his Countreyman in the Ship that was
taken the year before, thought him to be alive, and was very angry that he
would not speak to him, wondering how our People could make men live or die at
their pleasure. It was very pleasant to observe the behavior of the man and
woman when they were brought together; who though put into the same Cabin,
showed such signs of Chastity, and Modesty, as might justly shame Christians
who come so far short of them; when these Savages would trade, their manner was
to lay down somewhat of theirs and go their ways, expecting the English should
lay down something in exchange; if they like the value when they come again,
they take it, otherwise they take away only their own; they made signs that
their Catchoe or King was higher of stature than any of ours, and carried upon
men's Shoulders. They could not hear what became of their five men taken the
year before, only they found some of their Apparel, which made them judge the
Savages had eaten them; Having laden their Ship with Oar, they returned.

The next year 1578. with fifteen sail another Voyage was made by Captain
Frobisher for further discovery. He went on shore June 20 on Frizeland, which
is in length about 25 Leagues, in 57 degrees of Latitude, which he named West
England, where they espied certain Tents and People like the former, who upon
their approach fled; in the Tents they found a Box of small Nails, red
Herrings, and boards of Fir Tree, with other things wrought very Artificially,
so that they were either ingenious workmen themselves, or traded with others;
some think this to be Friesland, and joined to Greenland. In going from hence
one Ship called the Salamander sailing with a strong gale, struck with such
violence upon the back of a Whale with her full stem that she stood still
without motion, whereat the Whale made a hideous roaring, and lifting up his
body and tail above water, sunk instantly to the bottom; Two days after they
found a dead Whale, which was supposed the same. July 2. they entered the
Strieghts, the mouth whereof was barred with Mountains of Ice, wherewith a Bark
was sunk, with part of a house they designed to erect there, the men were all
saved, and the other Ships in much danger by the severity of the Ice, Fogs, and
Snow. These Islands of Ice seem to be congealed in the winter further North in
some Bays or Rivers, the waters thereof being fresh, and the Sun melting the
tops of the Ice rills of fresh water run down, which meeting together make an
indifferent Stream; these Rocks being by the summers Sun loosed and broken from
their natural Situation, are carried whither the swift Current and the
outragions Winds drive them.

Some of these Icy Rocks or Islands are half a mile about, and fourscore
fathoms above water, besides the unknown depth beneath, the usual rule being,
that only one part of seven is seen above water; strange is their multitude,
more strange their deformed Shapes, but most strange, that instead of
destroying, they sometimes save both men and Ships, suffering the mooring of
Anchors, entertaining them with sports, as walking, leaping, shooting forty
miles from Land without any Vessel or Ship under them, presenting them with
running Streams of fresh water sufficient to drive a Mill. The People represent
the Tartars in apparel and living. It is colder here in 62, than in ten degrees
farther North, which happens from the cold North East Winds, which brings this
sharp Air off the Ice; The Natives are excellent Archers, they wear the Skins
of Deer, Bears, Foxes, Hares, and of Fowls sowed together; in the Summer the
hary side outward, in the Winter inward, yet many go naked; they shoot Fish
with their Darts, and kindle Fire by rubbing two sticks together; The Beasts,
Fowls and Fishes they kill, are their Houses, Bedding, Meat, Drink, Hose, Shoes
Apparel, Sails Boats, and indeed all their riches; they eat all things raw, yea
Grass and Shrubs, and suck Ice to satisfy their thirst; there is no flesh or
fish which they find dead, though never so filthy, but they will take it up and
eat it, yet sometimes they parboil their meats in little kettles made of Beasts
Skins, the blood and water they drink, and lick the bloody Knife with their
Tongues, and use the same remedy for curing their wounds, that is, licking them
only with their Tongues.

They have great plenty of Fowl, our men killing 15 hundred in one day; they
have thicker Skins, and more Feathers than ours, which requires them to be
flayed before eaten; They have no hurtful creeping things but Spiders, and a
Gnat, which is very troublesome, nor any Timber but what the undermining water
brings from other places; They are great Magicians, and when their heads ache,
they tie a great Stone with a string into a stick, and using certain Charms,
the Stone cannot be moved with all the force of a man, yet at other times seems
as light as a Feather; they lie grovelling with their Faces on the Ground,
making a noise as if they Worshipped the Devil under the Earth; they use great
black Dogs like Wolves to draw their Sleds, and some of a lesser kind they feed
upon. In the midst of Summer, they have Hail and Snow, sometimes a Foot thick,
which Freezeth as it Falls, and the Ground is Frozen 3 Fathom deep, at which
time the Sun is not absent above 3 hours and an half, during which it was so
very light, that we could see to read. There are no Rivers or Running Springs,
but what the Sun causes to come from the Snow. They Row in their Leather Boats
faster with one Oar, than we can ours with all our Oars. They seem to have
commerce with other Nations, from whom they have a small quantity of Iron.

III. In 1585. Mr. John Davis made his first Voyage for the Northwest
Discovery, and in 54 Degrees, they went on Shore on an Island where they saw
diverse Savages, who seemed to Worship the Sun, pointing up to it with their
Hands, and therewith striking their Breasts, the English answering them with
the same Actions, they took it for a confirmed League and Agreement between
them, they then leaped and danced with a kind of Timbrel, which they struck
with a stick, their Garments were the Skins of Birds and Beasts, they killed
white Bears, one of whose Forefeet was fourteen Inches broad, and the Flesh so
fat, they were forced to throw it away; by their dung they seemed to feed on
Grass, which was like Horse-dung, they heard tame Dogs howl on the Shore, for
killing one he had a Collar about his Neck, he had a Bone in his Pizel, and
seemed inured to the Sled, two of which they found.

Next year Captain Davis made a second Voyage, and found the Savage People very
tractable; they are great Idolaters and Witches, having many Images which they
carried about them, and in their Boats; they found a Grave wherein many were
buried, and covered with Seals Skins, with a Cross laid over them; they are
very Thievish, eat raw Fish, Grass and Ice, and drink Salt Water; here they saw
a Whirlwind ^ake up a great quantity of Water, which mounted vio^ently into the
Air three hours together with little in^ermission; In 63 Degrees they met with
a vast Mass of ^ce in one piece, so very large, that it appeared like an
Island, with Bays and Capes like a high Cliff Land, whereupon they sent their
Pinnace to discover it, who found it to be only Ice, this was July 17. 1586.
and they Coasted it till the 30th following. In 66 Degrees they found it very
hot, and were much troubled with Musket to Flies; all the Coasts hereabout
seemed broken Islands; then returning Southward, they Coasted Greenland, but
were hindered from Harbor by the Ice, their Houses near the Seaside were made
with pieces of Wood crossed over with Poles, and covered with Earth; our Men
played at Football with the Islanders upon the Ice. Captain Davis his third
Voyage was performed the next year 1587. wherein he discovered to 73 Degrees,
finding the Sea all open, and forty Leagues between the Shore on each side,
having Greenland on the East, and America on the West, near which was another
Island, which for its dreadful aspect, being covered with Snow, without Wood,
Earth, or Grass to be seen; and the terrible noise of the Ice, he named the
Isle of Desolation, but the untimely death of Sir Francis Walsingham, hindered
the further Prosecution of these Discoveries.

IV. In 1602. Captain George Weymouth set forth with two Flyboats at the charge
of the Muscovy Company, to find out the Northwest Passage, he saw the South
part of Greenland, the Water in an 120 Fathom was black as puddle, and suddenly
clear again; the breach of the Ice made a noise like Thunder, and endangered
the overturning both their Vessels; they had thick Fogs and Mists, which Froze
as they fell; in 68 Degrees, they met with an inlet, Forty Leagues broad, and
sailed therein an hundred Leagues West and by South.

V. In 1605. Captain James Hall Sailed to Greenland, and had the like
Encounters of Ice, which made as much noise as five Cannons discharged at once;
the People were like those mentioned by Frobisher, they make Sails of Guts
sowed together, and deceive the Seals by raking them with their Seals Skin
Garments ^ the Country is high, Mountainous, and full of broken Islands along
the Coasts, the Rivers are Navigable, and full of Fish, between the Mountains
are such pleasant Plains and Valleys, as is hardly to be imagined in that cold
Country. He saw store of Fowl, no Beasts but black Foxes and Deer. The Natives
wander in Companies in Summer for Hunting and Fishing, removing from one place
to another, with their Families, Tents, and Baggage, they are of a reasonable
Stature, Brown, Active and Warlike, eat their Meat either raw or parboiled with
Blood, Oil, or a little Water which they drink; their Arrows have two Feathers,
and a Bone Head, they have no Wood, but what the Sea drives ashore. In 1606. He
made a second Voyage thither, and found their Winter Houses Built with
Whalebones, and covered with Earth, with Vaults two yards deep, and square
underground. The next year he sailed thither a third time, and in a fourth
Voyage, 1612. was Slain by a Savage, in revenge as was thought of some of
theirs formerly carried away from thence. They have Hares as white as Snow,
Dogs that live on Fish, their Pizles, as of their Foxes, being Bone; their work
in Summer is to dry their Fish on the Rocks. Every Man and Woman has a Boat
made of long pieces of Fir, covered with Seals Skins, and sowed with Sinews and
Guts, about 20 Foot long, and two and an half broad, like a Weavers Shuttle, so
light and swift, that no Ship with any Wind is able to hold way with them, and
yet use but one Oar, which they hold by the middle in the midst of their Boar,
wherewith they Row forward and backward at pleasur^; they generally Worship the
Sun, to which they pointed at the approach of the English, striking their
Breasts and crying Ilyout, not coming near till they had done the same; they
bury their dead in their cloths on the tops of Hills in the midst of heaps of
Stones, to preserve them from the Foxes, making another grave hard by wherein
they place his Bow, Arrows, Darts, and other Utensils. The next year Mr. John
Knight made a North-west Voyage, Iosing his Ship, which was sunk in the Ice,
and was with three more of his company surprised by the Savages.

VI. About this time three of our Countrymen named Stephen Borough, Mr. Pet.
and Mr. Jackman, went toward the North-West touching upon the Northerly parts
of Greenland, and sailed from 80 degrees to Nova Zembla; in one place they saw
red Geese, and in another blue Ice, but at length loosing their Ship by the
Ice, they were forced to set up an House to winter in the Isle of Desolation;
they began their bulding about the 10 of September, the cold even then kissing
his Newcome Tenants so eagerly, that when the Carpenter did but put a nail into
his mouth, the Ice would hang thereon, and the blood followed in plucking it
out. In December their Fire could not heat them, their Sack was frozen, and
they were forced to melt it, their Beer when thawed drunk like water; They
endeavored to remedy it with Sea-coal fire, as being hotter than wood, and
stopped the Chimney and Doors to keep in the heat, when they instantly swounded
away for want of Air; Their Shoes froze as hard as horns to their feet, and
when they sat at the fire while they were almost burnt on the forepart, they
were frozen white on their backs; The Snow rose higher than the House, which in
clear weather they endeavored to remove, cutting out steps, and ascending up
as out of a Vault or Cellar; when neither Cloths nor great fires would keep out
the cold, they were forced to heat Stones and apply them burning hot to their
feet and bodies; in one night a barrel of water was turned into Ice; They saw no
Sun from November 3. to Jan. 24. a long night of fifty two days; When the Sun
had left them, they saw the Moon continually day and night never going down,
the twilight likewise remaining several days, and they saw some daylight
sixteen days before the return of the Sun; The Bears who had held them
beseiged, and often endangered them, forsook them with the returning Sun; these
Bears are very large and cruel, some of their Skins being thirteen foot long,
and yiedling and hundred pound of fat, which served them for Oil in their
Lamps; the flesh they durst not eat, some of them losing all their own skin by
eating a Bears Liver; they devour any thing, even their own kind; for having
killed one with a Gun, another Bear carried it a great way over the Ice in his
mouth, and then fell to eating it, whereupon making to him with their weapons,
he fled, leaving his purchase half eaten, and four men could hardly carry the
other half, when the whole body seemed to be very lightly carried by his
fellow; The white Foxes continually visited them, of which they took many,
whose flesh was good Venison to them, and their Skins in the linings of their
Caps a comfortable remedy against the extreme cold; they used Pattens of wood
with Sheepskins above, and many Socks and Soles under their feet, with shoes of
Rug or Felt; Their Diet was very mean, but at length despairing of relief, they
made them two open Scutes, wherein they sailed above a Thousand miles after ten
months continuance in this disolate Habitation, and though encompassed with a
thousand dangers from the Ice which surrounded them like Tents, Towns, and
Fortifications, yet at length happily returned to their own Country; However,
no further progress was made till the English several years after made more
profitable Discoveries, and found in Greenland (not far off) a very beneficial
Trade of Whale-fishing, which continues to this time.

Now, though this Country is reckoned to be in Europe, and therefore out of
our present survey, yet being so near adjacent, it may not be unpleasant to
give a brief relation of an hunting spectacle, of the greatest chase which
nature has created; I mean, the killing of Whales; when they spy him on the
top of the water, ^o which he is often forced to get breath, they row toward
him in a Shallop, wherein the Harponier stands ready to dart his harping Iron
with both his hands, to which ^s fastened a line of such length, that the Whale
finding himself wounded, and sinking to the bottom, may carry it down with him,
it being contrived the Shallop shall incur no danger thereby; when he rises,
they strike him again with Lances about twelve foot long, the Iron being eight
thereof, and the blade eighteen inches, the harping Iron being chiefly intended
only to fasten him to the Shallop, and thus they hold him in hot persuit, till
after having cast up first Rivers of Water, and then of blood, as being angry
with both Elements, for suffering such weak hands to destroy him, he at length
yields his slain Carcass a prey to the Conquerors; The Tragedy is thus expressed
by the Poet.

When the Whale felt his side so rudely goar'd,
Loud as the Sea that nourisht him he roared.
As a broad Bream to please some curious taste,
While yet alive in boiling water cast.
Vexed with unwonted heat, boyls, flings about
The Scorching brass, and hurls the liquor out;
So with the barbed Javeling stung, he raves,
And ^courges with his tail the suffering waves.
His fury does the Seas with Billows fill,
And makes a Tempest, though the winds be still,
He Swims in blood, and blood does spouting throw
To Heaven, that Heaven men's Cruelties might know,
Roaring, he tears the Air with such a noise,
As well resembles the conspiring voice,
Of routed Armies when the Field is won, etc.
Being dead, they tow him to the Ship with two or three Shallops joined
together, and then floating at the stern of the Ship, they cut the blubber or
fat from the flesh in pieces three or four foot long, which are cut smaller
ashore, and boiled in Coppers, which done, they take them out, and put them
into wicker Baskets, which are set in Shallops half full of water, into which
the Oil runs, and is thence put into Buts. The ordinary length of a Whale is
sixty Foot, his brains are said to be the Sperma Caeti, his head is the third
part of him, his mouth sixteen foot wide, the Whalebones or Finns are no other
than the rough and inward part of the mouth, of which he has five hundred,
which close in the shutting thereof, like the fingers of both hands within each
other; he has a Trunk or breathing hole in his head; he has no teeth but
sucks his meat; his Tongue is monstrous great and deformed like a Woolsack,
about eight Tun in Weight, part of which yeildeth eleven Hogsheads of Oil; His
food, (that nature might teach the greatest to be content with little, and that
greatness may be maintained without rapine, as in the Elephant and Whale, the
greatest of Land and Sea Monsters) is grass and weeds of the Sea, and a kind of
water-worm like a Beetle, whereof the Finns in his mouth hang full, and
sometimes little birds, all which striking the Water with his Tail, and making
a small Tide, he gapes and receives into his Mouth, neither is any thing else
found in his Belly, as is affirmed by Eyewitnesses; this great Head has
little Eyes, not much unlike an Ox, and a little Throat not greater than for a
Man's Fist to enter; with such huge Bones on each side, as suffer it not to
stretch wider; his body is round, fourteen or fixteen Foot thick, his Genitals
hang from him as in Beasts, in Generation they go into shallow Waters near the
Shore, and in the Act join Bellies, (as is said of the Elephant) at which time
much of their Sperm Floats on the Water, their Tail is like a Swallows, at
least twenty Foot broad at the end, they have but one young one at a time,
which is brought forth as in Beasts, about the bigness, but longer than an
Hogshead; the Female Whale has two Breasts, and Teats no bigger than a Man's
Head, wherewith she Suckleth her young, of which she is very tender; one being
killed, they could not get the young one from the Dam; there has been made
twenty seven Tun of Oil out of one Whale.

VII. But to return from this diversion; Captain Henry Hudson in 1607.
discovered farther North toward the Pole than perhaps any before him; he found
himself in 80 Degrees, where they felt it hot, and drank Water to cool their
Thirst, they judged they saw Land to 82 Degrees and farther; on the Shore they
found Snow, Morses Teeth, Deers Horns, Bones, and Whalebones, and the footing
of other Beasts; with a stream of fresh Water; the next year 1608. he set forth
on a Discovery to the North-east, at which time, as several of the Company
solemnly affirmed, they saw a Mermaid in the Sea; he made another Voyage in
1609. and Coasted Newfound land, and thence along to Cape Cod; his last and
fatal Voyage was in 1610. being employed by several Merchants, to try if
through any of those Inlets which Captain Davis saw but durst not enter, there
might be a passage found to the South Sea; Their Ship was called the Discovery,
they passed by Iseland, and saw Mount Hecla cast out Fire, a certain Presage of
foul Weather; they gave the name of Lousy Bay to one Harbor in Iseland, and
found a Bath there hot enough to scald a Fowl. June 4. They saw Greenland, and
after that Desolation Isle, and then plied North-west among the Islands of Ice;
they ran, played, and filled sweet Water out of the Ponds that were upon them,
some of them were a-ground in six or seven score Fathom Water, and on diverse
they saw Bears and Patridges; they gave names to certain Islands, as Gods
Mercy, Prince Henrys Foreland, King James Cape, Queen Anns Cape. One Morning in
a Fog they were carried by a strong Tide into one of those Inlets, the depth
whereof, and the plying forward of the Ice, gave Hudson great hope it would
prove a thorough-fair.

After they had Sailed herein near 300 Leagues West, he came to a small
Straight of two Leagues over, and very deep Water, through which he passed
between the two Capes, one of which he called Digges Island in 62 Degrees, into
a spacious Sea, wherein he sailed above an hundred Leagues South, being now
over-confident that he had found the Passage, but perceiving by the Shoal
Water, that it was only a Bay, he was much surprised, committing many errors,
especially in resolving to Winter in that desolate place, in such want of
necessary Provisions. November 3. He moored his Ship in a small Cove, where
they had all undoubtedly perished, but that it pleased God to send them several
kinds of Fowl; they killed of white Patridges above an hundred and twenty
Dozen, these left them in the Spring, and others succeeded as Swans, Geese,
Teal, Ducks, all easy to take, besides the blessing of a Tree, which in
December blossomed with green and yellow Leaves, of a smell like Spice, which
being boiled yielded an Oily substance, that proved an excellent Salve, and the
Decoction being drunk, an wholesome Potion for curing the Scurvy, Sciatica,
Cramps, Convulsions, and other Diseases bred by the coldness of the Climate.

At the opening of the year there came to the side of his Ship such a multitude
of fish of all sorts, that they might easily have fraught themselves for their
return, if Hudson had not too desperately pursued his Voyage, neglecting this
opportunity of storing themselves, which he committed to the care of certain
careless dissolute Villains, who in his absence conspired against him; in few
days all the fish forsook them; one time a Savage visited them who for a Knife,
Glass, and Beads, gave them Bever and Deers Skin, with a Sled: At Hudsons
return they set Sail for England, but in few days their Victuals being almost
spent and he in despair, letting fall some words of setting some on shore, the
Conspirators entered his Cabin in the night, and forced Hudson, his Son and six
more, to go out of the ship into the Shallop and seek their Fortune, after
which they were never heard of, but certainly perished in the Sea. In a few
days the Victuals in the Ship being spent, they took 2 or 300 tame Fowls, and
traded with the Savages for Deer skins, Morse teeth and Furrs. One of their men
went a shore, and found they lived in Tents, Men, Women, and Children,
together; they were big-boned, broad faced, flat noosed and small feet like the
Tartars, their Garments, Gloves, and Shoes were of Skins handsomely wrought;
next morning Green, one of the principal Conspirators would needs go on shore,
with diverse others unarmed, the Savages lay in ambush, and at the first onset
shot this mutinous Ringleader to the heart, and another as bad who dyed
swearing and cursing, the rest of these Traitors dyed a few days after of their
wounds, Divine Justice finding executioners by these barbarous people. The Ship
escaped narrowly, for one Abraham Prichard (a servant to Sir Dudley Diggs, whom
the Mutineers had saved in hope he would procure their pardon from his Master)
was left to keep the Vessel where he sat at the Stern in his Gown sick and
lame, when the Leader of the Savages suddenly leapt from a Rock, and with a
strange kind of weapon of Steel wounded him desperately before he could draw
out a small Stotch Dagger from under his Gown, wherewith at one thrust into the
side of the Savage he killed him, and brought off the Ship, and some of the
wounded company Swimming to him, they hastened homeward without ever striking
Sail, being so distressed for food, that they were forced to fry the weeds of the
Sea with Candles ends to sustain their lives, Sept. 6. 1611. they met with a
Fisherman of Foy in Cornwall, by whose means they came safe to England.

VIII. But above all, Sir Francis Drake, whose memory is most deservedly
honored of all men, ought to be recorded for his extraordinary Abilities,
Experience and happy Conduct at S^a. This brave Seaman in the beginning of his
Actions was Captain of the Judith with Sir John Hawkins, in the Voyage to
Guiana 1567. where they received some considerable damage from the Spaniards in
the Port of St. John de Vllua, contrary to their promise and agreement; and
therefore to repair himself, having first been assured by Divines, that his
Cause was just, in 1572. be set out for America with two Ships and a Pinnace,
one called the Dragon, wherein he himself was, and at his first attempt
surprised Nombre de Dios, at that time one of the richest Towns in America; but
in the Action, happening to receive a wound in one of his Feet, which disabled
him, he was not able to command, nor gather that rich Spoil that lay even in
sight before him; for his Company being too much discouraged with thi^
disaster, carried him back to the Ships, even almost whether he would or no,
leaving the Town, and an infinite Mass of Treasure behind them untouched, (to
the great joy of the Spaniards,) a great part whereof they saw in the
Governors House with their own Eyes, namely, huge Bars of Silver lying round
about the Hall, piled up a great height from the ground, ready to be
transported to Spain; yet his Men forced him to put to Sea, so that this Voyage
served only to whet his stomach to give them a second Visit with all speed.

Being somewhat recovered of his wounds, he falls with his Ships into the Sound
of Darien, where he found a certain People called Symerons, which are for the
most part Negro's, and such as having been Slaves to the Spaniards, by reason
of their cruelty and hard usage run away from them, and live in woods and wild
places of the Country in great companies together like other Savages, hating
the Spaniards deadly, and doing them what mischief they can upon all occasions;
By these he got Intelligence that a Requa, as they call it, or a certain number
of Mules, commonly 40 or 50 in a company laden with Treasure and other things
was to pass in few days from Panama in the South Sea to Nombre de Dios to be
shipped from thence for Spain, which he therefore resolved, if it were
possible, to surprise. These Requa's do constantly Travel in the night, (by
reason of the openness of the way, and the excessive heats in the day) from
Panama to Ventacruz about six Leagues in the road to Nombre de Dios, neither
had they then any other Guard but only of those that drive them, and perhaps
some Gentleman or Officer of the Kings to oversee the Treasure, by reason of
their great security, having till then lived without any fear of an enemy upon
that Coast, which made the design seem easy.

Having therefore engaged a sufficient number of these Symerons with no more
than eighteen resolved men of his own, leaving the rest with the ships, they
marched by night over the strait of Darien, so called, as being that Neck of
Land that joins the Northern and Southern part of America together, and is not
above 20 mile over from Sea to Sea, though many Leagues long; They traveled
undiscovered within a Leagues of Panama, and lodged themselves in a wood on
each side the Road where the Mules were to pass, who at length came, so tied
one to another, as the manner is, that by stopping one, all the rest stand
still. The Requa which was coming, belonged chiefly to the Treasurer of Lima,
who with his daughter and Family were going for Spain, with 8 Mules laden with
Gold, and one with Jewels, which doubtless had been all taken, had not one
Robert Pike an Englishman prevented it, who being got drunk with Strong Water,
out of a vain ambition to be first in the action, stood up, and wearing his
shirt uppermost, as they did all to distinguish each other in the night, was
instantly descried by a Spanish Cavaleer, who rid somewhat before the rest, and
turning his Horse, gave such speedy notice, that the chief part of the
Treasure, with the Treasurer himself, his Daughter and others, were saved by a
timely retreat, and only some few of the foremost Mules taken, which though
they had some Treasure, yet the English knowing how soon the Country would be
alarmed, durst, scarce stay to ransack them, but taking a little of what came
next to hand resolutely made their way through Venta Cruz, and so by woods and
wild Forests of the Country to the Ships which expected them in the Sound,
yet had the good fortune to meet with a smaller Requa of Mules laden with
Silver and some Gold, which havin^ better leisure to examine, they carried away
as much as they were able to the Ships, burying the rest in the ground.

In 1577. Sr. Francis Drake made his Voyage about the World, in which to his
immortal Fame and Honor he was the first Commander of note that incompasse^
this Globe of the Earth, and returned safe home again* For though Ferdinand
Magellan had discovered the Streights which yet bear his name, and had gone far
yet he lived not to return home, being slain at the Moluccae Islands, while he
was reducing them to the obedience of his new Master the King of Spain. This
Voyage made Drake some amends from the Spaniards, taking and rifling many
Towns, and diverse rich prizes a^ Sea, as at Valparaiso in the South Sea, where
he took a Ship laden with Wines, and as much of the finest Gold of Baldivia
accounted the best as amounted to thirty seven Ducats of Spanish Money,
besides Silver and other goods of value. At Tarapaca on the same Coasts, he met
with thirteen bars of pure Silver valued at four Thousand Ducats, and after
that with eight hundred Pound weight of Silver laden to Panama upon certain
Sheep of America, as big as Asses, which they use for Burden. At Arica they
rifled certain Barks and other small Vessels which they found in the Port, and
took out of them, besides other Merchandise, fifty seven wedges of pure Silver,
every one twenty pound weight, and amounting in all to one hundred and forty
pound weight of Silver.

At Lima they enter the Haven, where they found twelve Ships moored fast at
Anchor, their Sails taken off, and all the Mariners secure on shore, whereupon
searching the Ships, they found, besides abundance of Silks, Linen, and other
rich Goods, one chest full of Ryols of Plate, which they did not think
convenient to leave behind, and, which pleased them more, had there
Intelligence of another Great Spanish Ship called the Cacafuego which was at
Payta, laden with nothing but treasure; this Ship had perceived them at Sea,
and was making all the Sail she could for Pariama, but before she could recovor
the Port, they persuing her very hard got sight of her about Cape Francisco,
and after some short dispute board her, and make her yield. In this Ship they
found thirteen great Chests full of Ryals of Plate, twenty six Tun of other
Silver, fourscore pound weight of pure Gold, besides abundance of Jewels,
precious Stones, and other rich Merchandise, all which became prize, meeting
likewise in the persuit of her a single Bark laden above only with ropes and
^ackle for ships, but examining her within, they found no less than seventy
eight pound weight of fine Gold, besides many curious Emeralds, and other
choice Jewels, which having taken they sailed for Acapulco, a noted and much
frequented Port in those Seas, in their way they met a Ship from China laden
with Silks and China-dishes, of which they took as much as they thought good,
and after that rifled the Town of Acapulco, where besides some quantity of
Gold, Jewels, and other Plate, they found one pot of the bigness of an English
bushel full of Spanish Ryals, which having emptied, they departed without being
farther troublesome, only one Moon an Englishman borrowed a Chain of Gold, which
he happened to find about a Spaniard just as they were going out of Town.

Finding themselves reasonably laden, and that their Ships had endured the Sea
a long time, they resolve to return for England by the Moluccae and Philippine
Islands, Sailing in this South Sea to forty degrees of Northerly Latitude,
where he landed, and named it Nova Albion. The Inhabitants presented him
Feathers and Kalls of Network, which he requited with other things, the men
went naked, the Women had loose Garments of Bulrushes tied about their middles;
They came a second time and brought Feathers, and bags of Tobacco, and after a
long oration by one that was Speaker for the rest, they left their bows on an
Hill, and came down to our men, the women in the mean time remaining on the
Hill, tormented themselves tearing their flesh from their cheeks, whereby it
appeared they were about some sacrifice, the news being further spread, brought
the King thither, who was a very proper man, and had the like to attend him,
two Ambassadors, with a Speech of half an hour long, gave an account of his
intended coming; when he appeared, one went before him with a Scepter or Mace,
whereon there hung two Crowns with 3 Chains, the Crowns were of knitwork
wrought artificially with feathers of diverse colors, the chains made of bone.
The King was clothed in Conyskins, his Followers had their faces painted with
white, black, and other colors, every one even the Children bringing their
Presents. He that carried the Scepter made a loud Speech of half an hour,
repeating it from another, who whispered to him, which being ended with a
Solemn applause, they all came orderly down the Hill without their weapons, the
Scepter-bearer beginning a Song and dance and all the rest following him. The
King and several others made many Orations or Supplications to Drake that he
would be their King, and the King with a Song set the Crown on his head, and
put the Chains about his neck, honoring him by the name of Hioh. The Common
sort leaving the King and his Guard, mingled themselves among the English,
viewing them severely, and offering their Sacrifices to those they best liked,
which were commonly the youngest, weeping,, and rending their flesh with much
effusion of blood. Our men misliked their Devotions, and directed them to
worship the Living God: Every third day they brought their Sacrifice^ till they
found them displeasing, yet at the departure of the English they very much
grieved, and secretly provided a Sacrifice; They found Herds of Deer feeding by
thousands and strange Conies, with heads like ours, feet like a Mole and the
tail of a Cat, having under their chains a bag lnto which they put their meat
when their Bellies are full. Sailing from hence they went back by the Cape of
Good Hope; And Nov. 3. 1580. which was the third year of their Voyage they
safely arrived at Plymouth.

In 1585. This Gallant Seaman, having been Knighted, and much Honored by Queen
Elizabeth, made another Voyage to America, with a greater number of Ships, in
which, besides other places of note, he took and burnt a good part of St.
Domingo in Hispaniola, forcing the Inhabitants to redeem the other part with
twenty five Thousand Ducats in Money, he took also Car^hagena a Town upon the
Continent, and in it Alonso Bravo the Governor, and after burning some Houses,
had eleven Thousand Ducats paid him by the Inhabitants to spare the rest; he
took likewise the Towns of St. Anth^ny and St. Helena; but at last the English
in the Ships falling Sick of the Calenture, and many dying, he was forced to
return for England, with what he had already got, which was valued at
threescore Thousand Pound Sterling of clear Prize, besides two hundred Pieces
of Brass Ordnance and Forty of Iron.

In 1595. Sir Francis Drake made his last Voyage, which proved not altogether
so successful to him as the former, by reason, as was thought, of some
misunderstanding between him and Sir John Hawkins, who was the other General
joined in Commission with him for the Expedition; they both died in this
Voyage, Sir John Hawkins first, as soon as ever the Ship came in sight of Porto
Rico; after which Drake being Sole General, made an attempt upon that place,
but could only Fire some Ships in the Haven, receiving some loss himself; yet
he proceeded and took Rio de la Hacha, Raucheria, at that time a Wealthy Town,
by the Trade of Pearl Fishing, and lastly Nombre de dios, but found nothing so
much Treasure now, as he saw the first time, from hence marching by Land he
designed to surprise Panama, but Sir Thomas Baskervile, who commanded a party
of seven hundred and fifty Soldiers for that purpose, found the Passages over
the Mountains so difficult, and the passes so well guarded, that he was forced
to retreat, not without loss of Men, whom the Spaniards being acquainted with
the Country, and lying in the woods through which they were to pass, killed in
their return: Hereupon they were forced to put to Sea again, and not long after
Sir Francis Drake himself fell sick, and partly of a Flux and grief for his ill
success, having hitherto been acquainted with nothing but good Fortune and
Victory, he died within few days before Porto bello, and the Fleet under Sir
Tho. Baskervile returned to England.

IX. Another renowned worthy among the English Adventurers of America, and
especially for a prosperous and complete circumnavigation of the Ocean, was Sir
Thomas Cavendish of Trimley in Suffolk, who in July 1586 with three Ships and
120 Men set out from Plymouth for the West Indies, and Aug. 25 following fell
with the Point of Sierra Liona on the Coast of Guiny, and from thence Sept: 7
with the Isle of Madrabamba about Cape Verde, a place very convenient for
taking in fresh water and other necessaries for men at Sea, but otherwise much
subject to sudden claps of Thunder, Lightning and storms, especially in winter.
Their design was for the Streights of Magellan, and the South sea, therefore
steering directly South, by the latter end of October they dicover Cape Frio on
the Coasts of Brasil, and put in at an Harbor between the Isle of St Sebastian
and the Continent, where they stayed some time building a New Pinnace, and
supplying their Ships with necessaries; Then sailing toward the Streights Jan.
6. they came to an Anchor at the Streights mouth not far from the place where
the Spaniards intended a Town and Fort for commanding the Streights, and
securing the Passage into the South Sea against all Nations but themselves. But
as it appeared that project took no effect, for of 400 Men left there three
Years before by Don Pedro Sarmiento to that purpose by order of the King of
Spain, there were scarce 20 remaining alive when Sir Tho: Cav^ndish sailed that
way, the rest were either starved for want of necessary Provisions, or
destroyed by the Natives. They had begun their Town which they named St. Philip
upon the narrowest Passage of the Streights about half a mile broad, in a place
very convenient for their purpose, and the Town it self well contrived with
four several Forts, every one having some Guns which the Spaniards when they
saw themselves left destitute and not able to subsist any longer there, had
buried in the ground, but the Carriages of them standing open and in view, upon
search the Pieces themselves were found and now taken by the English. Many
Spaniards who had been left there were found dead in their houses, and lying in
their Clothes unburied. Those few who were alive, which were only twenty three,
whereof two Women, though they were scarce able to go or help themselves, yet
were resolved, as they said, to travel by Land toward Rio De La Plata, distant
some hundreds of Leagues from the place where they were, which they had free
leave to do.

Cavendish made no long stay here, but calling the place Port Famine instead of
St. Philip, they held their course along the Streights till Feb. 24. they
entered the South Sea, finding the whole length of the Streights to be about
ninety Leagues in length in 52 degrees of South Latitude, having good and
convenient Harbors on both sides almost at every Leagues end, but otherwise of
most difficult passage by reason of the many windings and turnings of the Sea,
and of so many contrary winds, with which from several Coasts this Passage is
almost continually infested, but especially in the depth of winter at which
time by the intolerable sharpnes of the cold, frequent storms, and huge flights
of Snow, there is neither Sailing nor abiding upon those Seas, neither is the
return so safe as the going thither.

Being now got into Mare Del Zur, and as it were upon the backside of America,
they ply up and down those Coasts, visiting and not seldom pillaging the Towns,
taking such Ships as they met withal, and steering their course so far
Northwest, till at last June 12. 1587. they cross the Equinoctial Line, sailing
Northward up toward Panama and New Spain, but whether Intelligence had been
given to those parts of their being upon the Coasts, it was some time before
they could Spy any Ships. The first was July 9 when they took a New Ship of 120
Tuns burden coming from Puna laden with ropes and other tackle, and in her one
Michael Sancius a Provincial born at Marseilles, who to do the Spaniards a
pleasure gave them information of a great Ship called the St. Anna expected
from the Philippine Islands, and which upon his Information they took within a
few days after, being one of the richest Prizes that ever was taken and carried
off those Seas by Englishmen, but first they Sail to Acapulco and having rifled
the Town, they took a Bark in the Haven of fifty Tuns Burden, laden with 600
bags of Anile, which is a rich sort of Dye, every bag being estimated at forty
Crowns, and 400 bags of Cacao an American fruit like Almonds, and so much
valued that they pass there for Meat and Money, every bag being worth Ten
Crowns the whole prize in the Bark (beside what they got in the Town) amounted
to twenty eight thousand Crowns.

From hence they Sail Northward to the Bay of St. Jago, and being come as far
as the Tropique of Capricorn, they were in some distress for want of Water,
thinking they had none nearer than thirty or forty Leagues, but by the advice
of the aforenamed Michael the Frenchman, who was a man of long and great
experience upon those Coasts, they dug about 5 foot deep on the adjoining
shore, and found very good fresh Water in a soil outwardly dry and Sandy, which
he told them was an usual experiment in many other places upon those Coasts.
About October they came to St. Lucar on the West side of the point of
Califormia, where they resolved to wait the coming of the St. Anna
abovementioned, which about Nov. 4. appeared to their no small content. She was
a Ship of Seven Hundred Tuns and Admiral of the Seas, and therefore not only
richly laden but well manned, by noon the English Ships got up with her, and
gave her a broadside which she answered, but soon after put her self to a close
fight, and expected boarding, which the Engli h attempting were twice beaten
off, and forced to betake themselves again to their Guns, with which they so
be^aked her from side to side, and plied it so continually, that after a
dispute of 5 or 6 hours, she was made to yield, the Captain hanging out a flag
of Truce, and begging mercy for their Lives, which the General readily granted,
and thereupon commanding him to strike Sail and come on board, the Captain,
Pilot, and some of the principal Merchants did so, they were in all 190 Persons
in the Ship, Men and Women, and declared that their Lading was one hundred
twenty two Thousand Pezo's of fine Gold, abundance of Silks, Sa^tins, Damask,
Musk, Conserve of Fruits, Drugs, and other the richest Merchandise of India, of
which they could give no certain estimate, now every Pezo in Silver is valued
at eight shillings, and consequently in proportion a Pezo in Gold must be worth
four pound sixteen Shillings, so that the whole value of the Prize would not be
less than Ten Hundred Thousand Pound, or a Million of Sterling Money, enough to
make them all Gentlemen that shared in it. The Spaniards and other People of
the Ship were according to their desire set a shore at the next Port, with
necessary Provisions given them, both for subsistence and their defense in
Travel.

From hence they sailed to the Philippine Islands, and in 45 days reached the
Islands Ladrones, so called, which lie in the way thither about 17 or 18
hundred Leagues from Califormia whence they came, very convenient for fresh
Water but the people wholly barbarous and Savage, and so extremely given to
pilfering and Stealing, that from thence Magell^ne gave them the name of
Ladrones, or the Island of Thieves. In January they came to Mavilla the chief
of the Philippine Islands, which is counted the richest Country for Col^ in
the World, but scarce of silver, the Sanguelos as they call them, who are great
and rich Merchants of the Country trade continually with the Americans of New
Spain for their Silver, giving weight for weight in pure Gold, from hence about
the middle of March they reach the Islands of Java, where by way of barter with
the Inhabitants for such things as they had got upon the Coasts of America,
they plentifully stored their Ships with all kind of Flesh Meats, Fowls and
Fruits, necessary for their subsistence homeward, receiving at their going away
a Present of the same nature from the King of the Country, namely, two fat
Oxen alive, ten great and fat Hoggs, abundance of Hens, Ducks, Geese and Eggs,
a great quantity of Sugar Canes, Sugar in plate, Coco's, Plantans, sweet
Oranges, sour Lemons, great store of good Wines, Aquavitae, Salt, with almost
all manner of Victuals besides; and it was no more than they had need of in the
place where they were, for putting again to Sea, and making for the Cape of
Good Hope, which is the utmost Point of Africa Southward; they sailed upon that
vast Atlantic Ocean, before they could reach the Cape, almost nine weeks,
running a Course of at least eighteen hundred and fifty Leagues without
touching Land, it being reckoned to be full 2000 Leagues from the Islands of
Java to the Cape of Good Hope; There lies about forty or fifty Leagues short of
the Cape, a certain Foreland called Cabo Falso, because it is usually at its
first discovery at Sea mistaken by Mariners for the true Cape.

From hence by June 18. 1588. they fall in sight of the Island of St. Helena,
which lies in the main Ocean, and as it were in the middle way between the
Coast of Africa and Brasil, in fifteen degrees, and forty eight minutes of
Southern Latitude, distant from the Cape about six hundred Leagues. It is a
pleasant Island, well stored with Oranges, Lemons, Pomegranats, Pomecitrons,
Dates, and so proper for Figgs, that the Trees bear all the year long; so that
there are blossoms, green and ripe Figgs at all times on the same Tree. It
affords also store of wild Fowl, Partridges, and Pheasants; a kind of Turkies
black and white, and as big as ours in England; great plenty of Goats, and such
abundance of Swine, fat and large, that they live in Herds upon the Mountains,
and are not to be taken but by hunting, and that with great pain and industry.
From hence by August 24. they discover Flores, and Corvo, two of the Azores or
Tercerae Islands; and Sept. 9. having first suffered a terrible Stormupon the
English Coast, which carried away all their Sails, and ind^ngered the loss of
all they had got; yet at last by the mercy of God, and favor of a good Wind,
they arrived safely at Plymouth.

X. The Right Honorable George Lord Clifford Earl of Cumberland had made
several Voyages and Adventures against the Spaniards, in and toward the parts
of America, in 1586. 89, 92 and 94, with various success, but in 1597. He more
publicly and avowedly in his own Person undertook an expedition with eighteen
or twenty good Ships, and about a Thousand Men, being himself Admiral and
Commander in Chief. He set out from Portsmouth, March 6. 1597. with design at
first to attend the coming out of the Carracks, which go yearly from Spain to
the West Indies; but being disappointed of them through some Intelligence that
the Spaniards had gotten of his Lordshitps being at Sea, he Sailed on for the
Coast of America, resolving by the way, with the consent of the Principal
Commanders with him, to make an attempt upon St. John de Porto Rico, the
Principal Town and Port of the Island of that name, in nineteen Degrees of
North Latitude, a place where a few years before Sir Francis Drake had received
some loss, Sir Nicholas Clifford the Earls Brother being slain, by a shot from
one of the Platforms, as he sat at Supper with the General in the Ship called
the Defiance.

The Town stands in a Peninsula by it self, yet closely joined to the main
Island toward the North, being, a place very well seated, and fortified with
two strong Castles, one for defense of the Haven, the other of the Town; about
three or four Leagues off lies a fair sandy Bay or Beach, which the Sea washes
on one side, over which the English at their landing marched directly to the
Town through a thick Wood, and upon a Cawsey of some length, but of breadth
only to admit three Persons to march abreast; at the end thereof, was built a
strong Bridge of Wood, which reached from one Island to the other, and joined
them both together, having also some Barricado's to defend it, and a
Block-house with Ordnance on the further side of the Water. They were informed
that at low Water they might pass the Bridge on either side the Cawsey;
whereupon waiting till two a Clock next Morning, when the Ebb would be, they
attempt the Passage, but could not gain it, because the Great Guns played so
directly against the Cawsey, retreating with the loss of about Fifty Men killed
and wounded. Next day the General ordered another Fort standing upon the
Principal Island should be attackt by Sea, the place was of dangerous access,
yet by the help of some Musketeers that were gotten upon certain Rocks within
the Island, so near, that they could play upon them in the Fort, within an hour
the Spaniards, that kept it quitted the place, and those from Sea entered it in
Boats, though the Ship that brought them near was her self cast away upon the
Rocks at the first ebbing of the Water, as it was at first feared she would.

The Spaniards, who quitted the Fort, with the chief of the Town who were not
already fled, retired to another Fort called Mora giving the English leave to
enter the Town, and block up the Fort wherein they were, so that in few days
they surrendered upon discretion, and the English were Masters of all. The
General designed to have kept it but the English by the intemperature of the
Air, and their own intemperance, especially in eating many strange and luscious
Fruits, contracted such sickness, so many dying of the Calenture, bloody Flux,
and other hot diseases, that after ten weeks possession, and 600 of his men
dead, his Lordship was forced to return for England, doing no further hurt to
the Town, save only bringing away 80 pe^^^s of Ordnance, the Bells of their
Church, and some quantity of Sugar and Ginger, sustaining no other loss in the
Voyage, than of sixty men slain upon taking the Town, the six hundred dying of
the Flux and other diseases, the Ship Pegasus wrackt upon Goodwin Sands, an old
Frigot lost upon V^hant on the Coast of Normandy with 40 men in them, add a
Bark lost by Tempest about Bermudas.

The Admiral at his return left Sir John Barclay behind, with some Men and
Ships to compound with the Spaniards for the Town, but they seeing the General
gone, and the English by reason of sickness not like to continue long after
him, made no great have to compound, but delayed so long that at last the
English were forced to leave it to them, without burning or doing them any
other mischief, as the Admiral had left Order, who sought Honor more than
Spoil by this expedition as the Spaniards happily experienced.

XI. Captain John Oxenham who had formerly been Servant, Soldier and Mariner
with Sir Francis Drake, and together with him had sustained some loss by the
Spaniards in the Port of Sir John De Vllua, was resolved to recover that by
force which he complained was by force taken from him, and having by his former
Adventures gained competent skill in Maritime Affairs, being particularly
acquainted with the Coast and Commodities of the West Indies, in 1575 he got to
be Captain of a Ship of an hundred and forty Tuns burden carrying seventy men,
with whom he sailed for America, and arriv^d at the Sound of Darien where Sir
Francis Drake formerly fell acquainted with the Symerons who put him upon
surprising the Treasure at Panama, a Place and People which Captain Oxenham
very well knew, and intended now to make use of; Nor was it long ere he met
with some of them, who inform him that the Mules now travel with a strong Guard
of Soldiers, which was somewhat contrary to his expectation, and quite altered
his design; However being resolved to act some great thing, it did not much
disanimate him, and therefore finding little hopes of success here, they
resolve to try their Fortunes on the South Sea. To this purpose the Captain
brings his own Ship on ground, and covers her with boughs and rubbish as well
as he could, and burying his great Guns in the Earth he with his Company and 6
Negro's to conduct them march by land toward the Coast of Panama and Peru.

Having gone about 14 Leagues, they came to a River which the Symerons told
them ran directly into the South Sea; Here they cut down wood, and built
themselves a Pinnace about 45 foot long, wherein they put to Sea, making toward
the Island of Pearls 25 Leagues South of Panama hoping some Ships from Peru or
other places from the South would be sailing that way for Panama. So that
though Sir Francis Drake has deservedly the honor of first discovering the
South Sea to the English by the open and known way of the Streights, yet
Captain Oxenham was the first Englishman that ever sailed upon it with command.
He had not waited long but there came a Bark from Quito a Province of Peru
laden with Goods, and sixty Thousand Pezo's of fine Gold, which he took, and
within six days after, another from Lima, wherein were no less than two hundred
Thousand Pezo's of Silver in Bars, the value of a Pezo, both in Gold and
Silver, you have in Sir Tho. Cavendishes Voyage; according to which account,
this Prize amounted to nine hundred and sixty Thousand Pound S^erling in Gold,
and fourscore Thousand Pound in Silver, which being enough to satisfy
reasonable Men, they retire with their Pinn^ce up the River, intending to make
all speed to their Ship, but unhappily by the Covetousness and Dissension of
some of the Company, so much time was spent about sharing their Booty, that the
Spaniards at Panama had notice of it, whereupon Ships were presently dispatched
to pursue them at Sea, and Soldiers to intercept them at Land.

The Captain himself through the obstinacy and wilfulness of some of the
Company, was forced to leave the Treasure with them, and Travel some Leagues up
into the Country, to find Negro's that might help him to carry it, his own Men
refusing to do it, but quarrelling with him for larger pay. In the mean time
the Spanish Ships came to the mouth of the River, and by the Feathers of
certain Hens which the English had taken and plucked there, they judged them to
be gone up the River, and putting in after them soon overtook them, and their
Prize together. The Captain was absent, but either the Negro's or some of the
English having discovered that their Ship lay in the Sound, neither he nor any
of the rest escaped, but were all in a short time met with by the Spaniards,
and having no Commission to show, he going only upon his own Account, every Man
of them were Executed save two Boys. Thus ended the stout and resolute Captain
Oxenham, the Justice of whose Cause (says my Author) I will not dispute with
his Adversaries, but could wish it had been as perfectly just in all respects,
as it was gallant and bravely managed on the Captains part, insomuch that his
very Enemies who put him to death, do yet admire and extol it, miscarrying only
through Passion, Covetousness, and Self-will of some of his Company, whose
Lives paid for their folly.

XII. That Valiant and Learned Knight, Sir Walter Rawleigh, having Intelligence
of the Rich and Mighty Empire of Guiana in America, which is bounded on the
North with Orenoque River and the Sea, on the East and South, with the River of
Amazones, and on the West with the Mountains of Peru; In March 1595. he set
forth for discovery thereof, and landed at Curiapan in Trinidado, taking the
City of St. Joseph, and therein Antony Berreo the Spanish Governor; leaving
his Ships, he went with an hundred Men in Boats, and a little Galley with
Indian Pilots, into the famous River of Orenoque, which runs from Quito in Peru
on the West, and has nine Branches on the North side, and seven on the South,
the Inhabitants on the Northern Branches are the Tivitivas a Valiant Nation,
and of the most manly and deliberate Speech that I have heard, says Sir
Walter. In Summer they Build Houses on the Ground, in Winter upon Trees, where
they Build very Artificial Towns and Villages, for between May and September,
the River rises thirty Foot upright, and then are these Islands, which the
River makes, overflown twenty five Foot high, except in some raised Grounds;
the Natives never eat any thing that is set or sown, using the tops of
Palmettos for Bread, and killing Deer, Fish, and Pork for Meat; those that
dwell on some other Branches are chiefly employed in making Canoos, which they
sell into Guiana for Gold, and to Trinidado for Tobacco, in taking of which
they exceed all Nations; when their King dies, they use great lamentation, and
when they think the flesh is putrified and fallen from the Bones, they take up
the Carcass again, and hang it up in his House, decking his Skull with Feathers
of all Colors, and hanging Plates of Gold about his Arms, Thighs and Legs;
those who dwell on the South beat the Bones of their King to Powder, which
their Wives and Friends Drink.

As they passed along these Streams, they were entertained with several curious
Divertisements, the Deer feeding by the Waterside, the Birds of variety of
colors and notes singing, the Fields embroidered with Plants and Flowers, the
Fishes and Fowls of all kinds playing in the River, only the Crocodile, who
preys both on the Land and Water, had almost spoiled the Comedy, by turning it
into a Tragedy, feasting himself with a Negro of their company before their
Eyes. Passing hence to Cumana 120 Leagues North, they came to a People as black
as Negro's, but with smooth Hair, whose Arrows are so mortally poisoned, that
they kill with unspeakable Torments, especially if men drink after they are
wounded. At the Port of Morequito they anchored, and the King, who was an
hundred and ten years old, came fourteen miles on foot to see them, returning
the same day; they brought them Fruits great store, a sort of Pariquetro's no
bigger than Wrens; An Armadilla which seemed covered all over with small
Plates, somewhat like a Rhinoceros, with a white Horn growing in his hinder
parts, which they use to wind instead of a Trumpet, and the Snout of a Pig;
this Beast they afterward eat.

They passed forward till they came in sight of those strange Cataracts or
Over-falls of Caroli, of which there appeared ten or twelve in sight, every one
as high above the other as a Church Steeple. They likewise saw a Mountain of
Crystal, which appeared afar off like a white Tower, exceeding high, over
which there falls a mighty River, which touches no part of the side of the
Mountain, but rusheth over, leaving all hollow underneath, with such a dreadful
noise, as if a thousand great Bells were rung together. Further South they were
told is the Nation of the Amazons, where none but Women inhabit, conversing
with the Men only once a year, but none of these were seen by our Men; nor any
of those People whose Mouths are said to be in their Breasts, and their Eyes in
their Shoulders; and others who have Heads like Dogs, and live all the day in
the Sea, which Relations we may justly esteem fabulous, till we are certified
of their reality by some honest Eyewitness; yet one Francis Parrey left there
by Sir Walter Rawleigh, tells of a place called Camala, where at certain times
Women are sold as at a Fair, and says he bought eight young Girls, the Eldest
of which was not eighteen* for a Red hasted Knife, which in England cost an
halfpenny, he bestowed these Lasses upon the Savages, and was himself
afterward sent Prisoner to Spain. After fourteen years Imprisonment in the
Tower of London, Sir Walter Rawleigh made another Voyage to Guiana, which
proved very Unfortunate, and soon after his return, he was beheaded in the
Palace Yard Westminster, October 29. 1618.

CHAP. III. A Prospect of New found-land, with the Discovery, Plantation, and
Product thereof.
HItherto I have treated only of some Voyages and Discoveries made by diverse
worthy Englishmen into several parts of America, I shall now proceed to give an
Account of the Discovery, Plantation, and Settlement of those Countries and
Islands in the West Indies, of which the English are in Possession at this day,
and shall therefore begin with this Country, as being farthest North, and so
proceed South, toward the Equinoctial Line, according to my proposed Method.

New found-land was first discovered by Sebastian Cabot, though not then known
to be an Island. Fabian in his Chronicle says, that in the time of Henry the
7th. three Men were brought to the King taken in New Foundland; and Robert
Thorn writes that his Father, and one Mr. Eliot were the Discoverers of the
New-found-lands. In 1530. Mr. Hoar set out for a further Discovery, but was
brought to such extremity by Famine, that many of the Company were killed and
eaten by their Fellows, and those which returned were so altered that Sir
William Butts a Norfolk Knight, could not know their Son Thomas, one of this
starved number, but only by a Wart which grew upon one of his Knees. It is a
great Island, judged as big as England, situated between 46 and 53 Degrees
North Latitude. The North part is better Inhabited than the South, though
fitter for Habitation; it is furnished upon the Sea coasts with abundance of
Cod-fish, Herrings, Salmons, Thorn-back, Oysters and Muscles with Pearls; ^t
abounds with Bears and Foxes, who will rob you of your Flesh and Fish before
your Face. Within Fifty Leagues of the Shore lies a Bank or Ridge of Ground,
extending in length many hundred Leagues, in breadth twenty four where
broadest, in other places but sixteen. And all about it are certain Islands,
which Cabot by one common name called Bacalaos, for the great number of
Cod-fish which swarmed so much thereabout, that it hindered the passage of his
Ship.

After the first discovery, the business of Trading thither, was laid aside for
many years; in the mean time, the Normans, Portugals, and Britains of France
resorted to it, and changed the names which had been given by the English to
the Bays and Promontories; but the English would not so soon relinquish their
pretensions, and therefore in 1583. Sir Humfry Gilbert took Possession thereof
in the name, and by the Commission of Queen Elizabeth, forbidding all other
Natitions to use Fishing, and intended to have settled an English Colony there,
but being Wrackt in his return, the settling of the Colony was discontinued till
1608. and then undertook by John Guy a Merchant of Bristol, who in twenty three
days sailed from thence to Conception Bay in Newfoundland. In 16^1. they had
scarce six days of Frost in October and November, which presently thawed, the
rest of the Months being warmer and dryer than in Eng^and, neither were the
Brooks Frozen over three Nights together with Ice able to bear a Dog; they had
Filberds, Fish, Mackerel and Foxes in the Winter; white Partridges in the
Summer larger than ours, who are much afraid of Ravens, they killed a Wolf with
a Mastiff and a Greyhound.

In 1612. They found some Houses of Savages, which were nothing but Poles set
round, and meeting on the Top, ten Foot broad, the Fire in the midst, covered
with Deerskins. The People are of a reasonable stature, beardless, broadfaced,
their Faces colored with Oker; some of them went Naked only their Privities
covered with a Skin; they believe in one God who Created all things, but have
many whimsical notions and ridiculous opinions, for they say, that after God
had made all things, he took a number of Arrows, and stuck them in the Ground,
from whence Men and Women first sprung up, and have multiplied ever since; a
Sagamor or Governor being asked concerning the Trinity, answered, there was
only one God, one Son, one Mother, and the Sun, which were four. Yet God was
above all; being questioned if they or their Ancestors had heard, that God was
come into the World, he said, that he had not seen him; some among them speak
visibly to the Devil, and he tells them what they must do as well in War, as
other matters.

One Samuel Chaplain in 1603. tells of a Feast made by one of their Great Lords
in his Cabin; eight or ten Kettles of meat were set on several Fires four yards
asunder; The men sat on both sides the room, each having a dish of the Bark of
a Tree, one of which was appointed to give every man his portion. Before the
meat was boiled one took his Dog and danced about the Kettles, and when he came
before the Sagamor threw the Dog down, and then another succeeded in the like
exercise, after the Feast they danced with the heads of their Enemies in their
hands, singing all the while; Their Canoos are of the bark of birch,
strengthened with little wooden Hoops, they have many Fires in their Cabins, ten
housho^ds sometimes live together, lying upon skins one by another, and their
Dogs with them, which are like Foxes; At another Feast, the men caused all the
women and maids to sit in ranks, themselves standing behind singing, suddenly
all the women threw off their Mantles of skins, and stripped themselves stark
naked, not at all ashamed of their shame; Their Songs ended they ^yed with one
voice Ho, Ho, Ho, and then covered themselves with their mantles, and after a
while renewed their former Songs and nakedness. When a maid is ^ourteen or
fifteen years old, she has many Lovers, and uses her pleasure with as many of
them as she ^leases, for five or six years, and then takes whom ^he likes for a
Husband, provided he be a good Hun^er, living chastely with him all her life
after, except for barrenness he forsake her.

When any dies they make a Pit, and therein put ^ll his goods with the Corpse,
covering it with Earth, and setting many pieces of wood over it, and a stake
painted red. They believe the Immortality of the Soul, and that the dead go
into a far Country to make merry with their Friends. If any fell sick they
^ent to one Sagamor Memberton, a great Conjurer who made Prayers to the Devil,
and blowed upon the party, and cutting him sucks the blood, if it be a wound
^he heals it after the same manner, applying a round slice of Bever Stones, for
which they make him a Present of Venison or skins; If they desire news of
things absent, the Spirit answers doubtfully and sometimes false; when the
Savages are hungry they consult with this Oracle, and he tells them the place
where they shall go, if they find no game, the excuse is, the Beast has
wandered and changed his place, but most times they speed, which makes them
believe the Devil to be God, though they do not Worship him; when these
Conjurers consult with the Devil, they fix a staff in a Pit, to which they tie
a Cord, and putting their Head into the Pit, make Invocations in an unknown
Language, with so much stirring and pains, that they sweat again, when the
Devil is come, the Wizard persuades them, he holds him fast with his Cord,
forcing him to answer before he lets him go. Then he begins to sing something
in praise of the Spirit, who has discovered where there are some Deer, and the
other Savages answer in the same Tune, they then dance and sing in a strange
Tongue, after which they make a Fire and leap over it, putting an half Pole out
of the top of the Cabin, wherein they are with something tied thereto, which
the Devil carries away. Memberton wore about his Neck the mark of his
Profession, which was a triangle Purse, with somewhat within it like a Nut,
which he said was his Spirit. This Office is Hereditary, they teaching this
Mystery of Iniquity to their Sons by Tradition.

In 1613 fifty four Englishmen, six women, and two Children wintred there; they
killed Bears, Otters and Sables, sowed wheat, Rye, Turnips and Coleworts; their
winter was dry and clear with some Frost and Snow, diverse had the Scurvy
whereto the Turnips there Sown were a Sovereign Remedy. There are Musk Cats and
Musk Rats, and near the Coasts is great killing of Morses or Sea Oxen, a small
Ship in a short time slew fifteen hundred of them, they are bigger than an Ox,
the Hide dressed is as thick again as a Bulls, they have teeth like Elephants
about a foot long, growing downward out of the upper Jaw, and therefore less
dangerous, it is sold dearer than Ivory, and by some thought as great an
Antidote as the Unicorns Horn; The young ones eat like Veal, which the old will
defend to the utmost, holding them in their Arms or Forefeet. Out of the
Bellies of five of these Fishes, (which live both on the Land and water) they
make an Hogshead of Train-Oyle; Thomas James says, these Morses sleep in great
Companys and have one Sentinel or watchman to wake the rest upon occasion.
Their skins are short-haired like Seals, their face resembles a Lion, and may
therefore more justly be called Sea Lions than Sea Oxen or Horses.

About the great Bank aforementioned (which is covered with Water when the Sea
is high and uncovered and dry on the Ebb, on all sides whereof the Sea is 200
Fathom deep) is the great Fishing for Cod, and here the Ships do for the most
part stop and make their Freight. It is almost incredible how many Nations, and
of each how many Sail of ships, go yearly to fish for these Cods, with the
prodigious quantity they take, one man catching an hundred in an hour; They
fish with Hooks which are no sooner thrown into the Sea but the greedy Fish
snapping the Bait is taken, and drawn on shipboard, where they lay him on a
Plank, one cuts off his head, another guts him, and takes out its biggest
bones, another salts and barrels it, which being thus ordered is hence
transported by the European Nations to all parts of Christendom, yea throughout
most other parts of the world; They fish only in the day, the Cod not biting in
the night, nor does this fishing last all seasons, but begins toward Spring,
and ends in September, for in Winter they retire to the bottom of the Sea,
where storms and Tempests have no Power.

Near these Coasts is another kind of fishing for Cod which they call Dried, as
the other Green Fish. The Ships retire into some Harbor, and every morning
send forth their Shallops two or three Leagues into the Sea, who fail not of
their Load by noon or soon after, which they bring to Land and order as the
other, after this Fish has layn some days in Salt they take it out and dry it
in the wind laying it again in heaps, and exposing it daily to the open Air
till it be dry, which ought to be good and Temperate to make the Fish saleable,
for Mists moisten and make it rot, and the Sun causes yellowness. At this their
fishing, the Mariners have likewise the pleasure of taking Fowl without going
out of their Vessels, for baiting their Hook with the Cods Liver these Fowls
are so greedy that they come by Flocks, and fight who shall get the bait first,
which soon proves its death, and one being taken the Hook is no sooner thrown
out but another is instantly catched. In 1623. Sir George Calvert after Lord
Baltimore had a Patent for part of New Foundland which was erected into the
Province of Avalon, where he settled a Plantation, and erected a stately house
and Fort at Ferriland, where he dwelt for some time, which after his death
descended to his Son the present Lord Baltimore, wh^ is also Proprietor of
Maryland.

CHAP IV. A Prospect of New England with the Discovery, Plantation and Produ^
thereof.
THis Country was first discovered as well as the other Northern Coasts of
America by Sebastian C^bot aforementioned in 1497. And in 1584. Mr. Pli^
Amadas, and Mr. Arthur Barlow were the first of a Christians who took
possession thereof for Q. Elizabeth* The next year Sir Richard Greenvile
conveyed an En^lish Colony thither under the Government of Mr. Ra^ Lane, who
continued there till the next year, and the upon some urgent occasions returned
with Sir Fra^ Drake into England, who is by some accounted the f^ discoverer
thereof It has New France on the Nort^ and Virginia on the South, lying
between 40. and 4^ degrees of North Latitude; His Travels were si^ much
perfected by the Industry and Voyages of C^tain Gosnold, Captain Hudson,
Captain Smith, and other the last of whom gives a very large account of the
wo^ship and Ceremonies of the Indians: This Captain w^ taken Prisoner by the
Natives, and whiile he stayed among them observed their Magical Rites. Three ^
four days after his being seized, seven of their Prie^ in the House where he
lay, each with a Rattle, (ma^ing him sit down by them) began about 10 in the
morning to sing about a Fire, which they incompass^ with a circle of Meal, at
the end of every Song (whi^^ the chief Priest begun, the rest following in
order they laid down 2 or 3 grains of wheat. Then ^ Priest disguised with a
great Skin, his head hung round with little Skins of Weasels and other Vermin,
and a Coronet of Feathers, painted as ugly as the Devil, at the end of every
song he used strange and vehement gestures throwing great Cakes of Deer suet
and Tobacco into the Fire, thus these howling Devotions continued till 6 a
clock at night, and held so 3 days. This they pretended was to know of their
God whether any more English should arrive, and what they intended to do in
that Country. They fed Captain Smith so high, that he much doubted they would
have sacrificed him to their chief Deity, the Image of whom is so deformed that
nothing can be more monstrous, the Women likewise after he was freed and
President of the Company made him a very odd entertainment; Thirty of them came
out of the Woods only covered before and behind with a few green leaves, their
bodies painted of different colors, the Commander of these Nymphs had on her
head a large pair of Staggs Horns, and a Quiver of Arrows at her back with Bow
and Arrows in her hand; The rest followed with Horns, and Weapons all alike,
they rushed through the Trees with hellish shouts and cries, dancing about a
Fire, which was there made to that purpose, for an hour together. Then they
solemnly invited him to their Lodging, where he was no sooner come but they all
surrounded him, declaring great kindness to him, and crying, Love you not me?
after which they feasted him with great variety cooked after their mad fashion,
some singing and dancing all the while, and at last lighted him home with a
Firebrand instead of a Torch to his Lodgings.

When they design to make War, they first consult with their Priests and
Conjurers, no People being so barbarous almost, but they have their Gods,
Priests and Religion, they adore as it were all things, that they think may
unavoidably hurt them, as Fire, Water, Lightning, Thunder, our great Guns,
Muskets and Horses; yea some of them once seeing an English Boar were struck
with much terror, because he bristled up his Hair, and gnashed his Teeth,
believing him to be the God of the Swine, who was offended with them. The chief
God they worship is the Devil, which they call Okee, they have conference with
him, and fashion themselves into his shape; in their Temples they have his
Image il favouredly carved, painted, and adorned with Chains, Copper and Beads,
and covered with a Skin; the^ Sepulcher of their Kings, is commonly near him,
whose bodies are first Imbowelled, dried on a hurdle, adorned with Chains and
Beads, and then wrapped in white Skins, over which are Matts, they are
afterward intombed orderly in Arches made of Matts, their wealth being placed
at their Feet; for their ordinary burials, they dig a deep hole in the Earth
with sharp Stakes, and the Corpse being wrapped in Skins and Matts, they lay
them upon Sticks in the ground, and cover them with Earth. The Burial ended,
the Women having their Faces painted black with Cole and Oil, sit mourning in
the Houses twenty four hours together, yelling and howling by turns.

The People are clothed with loose Mantles made of Deer skins, and Aprons of
the same round their middles, all else naked, of stature like to us in England,
they paint themselves and their Children, and he is most gallant who is most
deformed; the Women imbroider their Legs, Hands and other parts with diverse
works, as of Serpents and the like, making black Spots in their Flesh. Their
Houses are made of small Poles, round, and fastened at the top in a circle, like
our Arbours covered with Matts, twice as long as broad; they are exact Archers,
and with their Arrows will kill Birds flying, or Beasts running full speed, one
of our Men was with an Arrow shot through the Body and both the Arms at once,
another Indian shot an Arrow of an Ell long through a Target, that a Pistol
Bullet could not pierce, their Bows are of tough Hazel, and their strings of
Leather, their Arrows of Cane or Hazel, headed with Stones or Horn, and
Feathered artificially, they soon grow heartless, if they find their Arrows do
no Execution; they speak of Men among them, of above two hundred years of Age.

Though the Planting of this Country by the English was designed by diverse, yet
it lay much neglected till a small Company of Planters under the Command of
Captain George Popham, and Captain Gilbert were sent over at the charge of Sir
John Popham, in 1606 to begin a Colony upon a tract of Land about Saga de hoch
the most Northerly part of New England, but that design within two years
expiring with its first Founder, soon after some Honorable Persons of the West
of England, commonly called the Council of Plymouth, being more certainly
informed of several Navigable Rivers, and commodious Havens, with other places
fit either for Traffic or Planting, newly discovered by many skilful
Navigators, obtained of King James the First, a Patent under the Great Seal of
all that part of North America called New England, from Forty to Forty eight
Degrees of North Latitude. This vast Tract of Land, was in 1612. cantoned and
divided by Grants into many lesser parcels, according as Adventurers presented;
which Grants being founded upon uncertain and false Descriptions, and Reports
of some that Traveled thither, did much interfere one upon another to the
great disturbance of the first Planters, so that little Profit was reaped from
thence, nor was any greater Improvement made of those Grand Portions of Land,
save the erecting some few Cottages for Fishermen, and a few inconsiderable
Buildings for the Planters; yea for want of good conduct they were by degrees
in a manner quite destitute of Laws and Government, and left to shift for
themselves.

This was the beginning of New England, when in the year 1610. One Mr. Robinson
a Presbyterian, or rather Independent Preacher, and several other English then
at Leyden in Holland, though they had been courteously entertained by the Dutch
as Strangers, yet foreseeing many inconveniences might happen, and that they
could not so well provide for the good of their Posterity under the Government
of a Foreign Nation, they resolved to entreat so much favor from their own
Sovereign Prince, King James, as to grant them liberty under the shelter of his
Royal Authority, to place themselves in some part of New England; having
therefore obtained some kind of Patent or Grant for some place about Hudsons
River, they set Sail from Plymouth in September for the Southern parts of
New England, but as they intended their course thitherward, they were through
many dangers, at last, about November 11, cast upon a bosom of the South Cape
of the Massachusetts Bay, called Cape Cod. When Winter approached so fast that
they had no opportunity to remove, and finding some Encouragement from the
hopefulness of the Soil, and courtesy of the Heathen, they resolved there to
make their abode, laying the Foundation of a new Colony, which from the last
Town they Sailed from in England they named New Plymouth, containing no
considerable Tract of Land, scarce extending an hundred Miles in length through
the whole Cape, and not half so much in breadth where broadest.

From this time to the year 1636. things were very prosperously and
successfully carried on in New England, which was much increased in Buildings
and Inhabitants, at which time the Naraganset Indians, who are the most warlike
and Feirce, and much dreaded by all the rest, committed many barbarous outrages
upon some of them, and likewise upon the English and Dutch as they came
occasionally to trade with them, barbarously murdering Captain Stone, Captain
Oldham and others, whereupon the Inhabitants of all the Colonies unanimously
falling upon them in 1637. they were easily suppressed, about 700 of them being
destroyed, and the rest cut off by their Neighbor Indians; Upon which
Miantonimoh the Chief of the Mogehins expecting to be Sole Lord and Ruler over
all the Indians, committed many Insolences upon some others who were in
confederacy with the English as well as himself, and he being sent for to the
Massacusets Court at Boston, endeavored to clear himself, but was clearly
convicted by one of his Fellows named Vncas, in revenge of which after his
return home he made War upon Vncas, by whom being taken Prisoner, by the advice
and Counsel of the English, he cut off his head, it being justly feared no firm
Peace could be concluded while he was alive; This happened in 1643. from whence
to 1675. there was always an appearance of Amity and good correspondence on all
sides, only in 1671. one Matoonas being vexed that an intended design against
the English did not take effect, out of mere malice against them slew an
Englishman on the Road; This murderer was a Nipnet Indian and under the
command of the Sachem of Mount Hope, the Author of all the mischiefs against
the English in 1675.

Upon a due inquiry therefore of all the Transactions between the Indians and
English from their first settling on these Coasts there will appear no Ground of
quarrel, or provocation given by the English. For when Plymouth Colony was
first planted in 1620. within three months after Massasoit the chief Sachem or
Commander of all that side of the Country repaired thither to the English, and
entered Solemnly into a League upon the following Articles. 1, That neither he
nor any of his should injureor do hurt to any of their People. 2. If any of his
hurt the English he should send them the Offender to punish. 3. If any thing
should be taken away by his, he should see it restored and the English to do
the like to them. 4. If any made War unjustly against him they were to aid him,
and he likewise them. 5. that he should certify his Neighbor Confederates
hereof, that they might be likewise comprised in the Peace. 6. That when his
men should come to the English they should leave their Arms behind. Which were
then Bows and Arrows, and were then their only weapons though now they have
learned the use of Guns and Swords as well as the hristians. This League the
same Sachem confirmed a little before his death in 1630. coming with his 2 Sons
Alexander and Philip to Plymouth, and renewing the same for himself, his Heirs
and successors; Yet it is apparent this Massasoit never loved the English, and
would have engaged them never to have attempted to draw away any of his People
from their old Pagan superstition and devilish Idolatry to the Christian
Religion, but finding they would make no Treaty with him upon such conditions
he urged it no further. But this was a bad Omen, that whatever kindness he
pretended to the English, yet he hated them for being Christians; which strain
was more apparent in his Son that succeeded him and all his People, insomuch
that some discerning Persons of that Jurisdiction were afraid that that part of
the Indians would be all rooted out as it is since come to pass.

Neither was Passaconaway the great Sagamore or Sachim of Merimack River
insensible of the fatal consequence of opposing the English; for a Person of
Quality relates, that being invited by some Sachims to a great Dance in 1660.
Passaconaway intending at that time to make his last and farewell Speech to his
Children and People that were then all gathered together, he addressed himself
to them in this manner; I am now going the way of all flesh, or ready to die,
and not likely to see you ever met together any more, I will now leave this
word of Counsel with you, that you take heed how you quarrel with the English,
for though you may do them much mischief yet assuredly you will all be
destroyed and rooted off the Earth it you do: For I was as much an Enemy to
them as their first coming into these parts as any one whatsoever, and tried
all ways and Means possible to have destroyed them, at least to have prevented
them sitting down here, but could no way effect it, therefore I advise you
never to contend with the English nor make War with them. And accordingly his
eldest Son as soon as he perceived the Indians were up in Arms, with drew
himself into some remote place that he might not be hurt either by the English
or Indians. It is observable that this Passaconoway was the most noted Pawaw
and Sorcerer of all the Country, and might therefore like Balaam at that time
utter this from some divine Illumination.

But to proceed after this digression, after the death of Massasoit his eldest
Son Alexander succeeded about twenty years since, who notwithstanding the
League he had entered into with the English with his Father in 1639. had no
affection to them nor their Religion, but was plotting to rise against them,
whereupon a stout Gentleman was sent to bring him before the Council of
Plymouth, who found him and eighty more in an Hunting-house, where they were
just come in from Hunting, leaving all their Guns without Doors, which being
seized by the English, they then entered the Wigwam, and demanded Alexander to
go along with them before the Governor; at which Message he was much appalled,
but being told that if he stirred or refused to go, he was a dead Man, he was
persuaded by one of his chief Confidents to go, but such was the Pride of his
Spirit, that his very indignation for this surprizal, cast him into a Fever,
whereof he soon after died. After his death Philip his Brother, Nicknamed King
Philip, for his haughty Spirit came in his own Person in 1662, with Sausaman
his Chief Secretary and Counselor, to renew the former League, that had been
made with his Predecessors, and there was as much correspondence betwixt them
for the next seven years, as had ever been in former times, and yet without any
kind of provocation, this treacherous Caitiff in 1676. harbored mischeivous
thoughts again them, plotting a General Insurrection in all the English
Colonies, all the Indians being to rise as one man against the Plantations
which were next them; which being discovered by John Sausaman, Philip thereupon
caused him to be murdered, the Murderers being apprehended were Executed, and
Philip fearing his own Head, got openly into Arms, killing, burning and
destroying the English, and their Habitations, with all manner of Barbarity and
Cruelty, which troubles continued almost two years, till at length after
several defeats given to Philip and his Forces, the loss of his Friends,
bereavement of his dear Wife and beloved Son, whom in his have he was forced to
leave Prisoners to save his own Life, his Treasures taken, and his own
Followers plotting against his Life, Divine Vengeance overtook him, for
causlesly breaking his League. For having been hunted like a Savage Beast
through the Woods, above an hundred Miles backward and forward, at last he was
driven to his own Den upon Mount Hope, retiring himself with a few of his best
Friends in a Swamp, which proved now a Prison to secure him, till the
Messengers of death came.

For such was his inveteracy against the English that he could not bear any
thing should be suggested to him about Peace; insomuch that he caused one of
his Confederates to be killed for propounding it, which so provoked some of his
Company not altogether so desperate as himself, that one of them who was near
akin to him that was killed fled to Road Island, and informed Captain Church
were Philip was, offering to lead him thither; Upon this welcome news a small
Party of English and Indians, came very early in the morning and surrounded his
Swamp, from whence as he was endeavoring to make his escape, he was shot
through the heart by an Indian of his own Nation, for Captain Church having
appointed an Englishman and an Indian to stand at such a place of the Swamp
where it happened that Philip was breaking through, the morning being very wet
and rainy the Englishmans Gun would not fire, the Indian having an old Musket
with a larg touchhole, it took Fire the more readily, with which Philip was
dispatched, the bullet passing directly through his Heart. soon after several of
his Confederates and Counselors were taken, and suffered deserved punishment,
and in a while most of these murderers received their condign rewards. It
cannot be altogether impertinent, but may discover much of the temper and
management of the Indians in this War, to insert an account of one Stockwell of
Deerfield, concerning his Captivity and Redemption, with other notable
Occurrences during his continuance among them, written with his own hand; and
thus follows in his own words.

Sept. 19. 1677. About Sunset I and another man being together, the Indians
with great shouting and shooting came upon us, and some other of the English
hard by, at which we ran to a Swamp for refuge, which they perceiving, made
after us, and shot at us, three Guns being discharged upon me; the Swamp being
miry, I slipped in and fell down, whereupon an Indian stepped to me with his
Hatchet lift up, to knock me on the head, supposing I was wounded, and unfit
for Travel; it happened I had a Pistol in my Pocket, which though uncharged, I
presented to him, who presently stepped back, and told me, if I would yield, I
should have no hurt, boasting falsely that they had destroyed all Hatfield, and
that the Woods were full of Indians, whereupon I yielded my self, and so fell
into the Enemies hands, and by three of them was led away to the place whence I
first fled, where two other Indians came running to us, and one lifting up the
But-end of his Gun to knock me on the head, the other with his hand put by the
blow, and said, I was his friend. I was now near my own House, which the
Indians burnt last year, and I was about to build up again, and there I had
some hopes to escape from them; there was a Horse just by which they bid me
take, I did so, but attempted no escape, because the Beast was dull and slow,
and I thought they would send me to take my own Horses, which they did, but
they were so frighted that I could not come near them, and so fell again into
the Enemies hands, who now took me, bound me, and led me away. Soon after I was
brought to other Captives, who were that day taken at Hatfield, which moved two
contrary Passions, Joy to have company, and Sorrow that we were in this
miserable condition: We were all pinioned, and led away in the night over the
Mountains in dark and hideous ways about four Miles further, before we took up
our place of rest, which was in a dismal place of a Wood on the East Side of
that Mountain; we were kept bound all that night, the Indians watching us, who
as they traveled made strange noises as of Wolves, Owls, and other Birds and
Beasts, that they might not lose one another, and if followed, might not be
discovered by the English.

About break of day we marched again, and got over the great River of
Pecomptuck, there the Indians marked out upon Trays the number of their
Captives and and Slain, as their manner is: Here I was again in great danger, a
quarrel arising whose Captive I was, and I was afraid I must be killed to end
the Controversy; they then asked me whose I was, I said, three Indians took
me, so they agreed to have all a share in me; I had now three Masters, but the
chief was he who first laid hands on me, which happened to be the worst of the
company, as Ashpelon the Indian Captain told me, who was always very kind to
me, and a great comfort to the English. In this place they gave us Victuals
which they had brought away from the English, and ten Men were again sent out
for more plunder, some of whom brought Provision, others corn out of the
Meadows upon Horses; from hence we went up about the Falls, where we crossed that
River again, when I fell downright Lame of my old Wounds received in the War,
but the apprehension of being killed by the Indians and what cruel death they
would put me to, soon frighted away my pain, and I was very brisk again. We had
eleven Horses in that Company, which carried Burdens, and the Women; we
Traveled up the River till Night, and then took up our Lodging in a dismal
place, being laid on our Backs and staked down, in which posture we lay many
Nights together, the manner was, our Arms and Legs being stretched out, were
staked fast down, and a Cord put about our Necks, so that we could not possibly
stir; the first Night being much tired, I slept as comfortable as ever, the
next we lay in the Squahag Meadows, our Provision was soon spent, and whilst we
were there, the Indians went a Hunting, and the English Army came out after us.
Then the Indians moved again, dividing themselves and the Captives into many
Companies, that the English might not follow their Track. At Night having
crossed the River, we met again at the place appointed, the next day we
repassed it, where we continued a long time, which being about thirty Mile
above Sq^ ag, the Indians were quite out of fear of the English, but much
afraid of the Mohawks, another sort of Indians, Enemies to them.

In this place they built a long Wigwam, and had a great Dance, as they called
it, where it was concluded to burn three of us, having provided Bark for that
purpose* of whom, as I heard afterward, I was to be one, Sergeant Plympton
another, and the wife of Benjamin Wait the third; I knew not then who they
were, yet I understood so much of their Language that I perceived some were
designed thereto; That night I could not sleep for fear of the next days work,
the Indians weary with dancing lay down and slept soundly; The English were all
loose, whereupon I went out for Wood and mended the Fire, making a noise on
purpose but none awaked, I thought if any of the English should wake we might
kill them all sleeping, to which end I removed out of the way all the Guns and
Hatchets, but my heart failing I put all things where they were again. The next
day when they intended to burn us our Master and some others spoke for us, and
the Evil was prevented at this time; we lay here about three weeks, where I had
a shirt brought me to make, one Indian said it should be made this way, another
a different way, and a third his way, whereupon I told them I would make it
according to my chief Masters Order; Upon this an Indian struck me on the face
with his Fist, I suddenly rose in anger to return it again which raised a great
Habbub, the Indians and English coming about me, I was fain to humble my self
to my Master which ended the matter. Before I came to this place my three
Masters were gone a hunting, and I was left with only one Indian (all the
company being upon a March) who fell sick so that I was fain to carry his Gun
and Hatchet whereby I had opportunity to have dispatched him, but did not
because the English Captives had engaged the contrary to each other, since if
one should run away it would much endanger the remainder; whilst we were here
Benjamin Stebbins, going with some Indians to Wachuset Hills made his escape,
the tidings whereof caused us all be called in and bound. One of the Indian
Captains and always our great friend met me coming in and told me Stebbins was
run away, and the Indians spoke of burning us, some were only for burning our
fingers, and then biting them off; He said there would be a Court and all would
speak their minds, but he would speak last and declare, That the Indian who
suffered Stebbins to make his escape was only in fault, and bid us not fear any
hurt should happen to us, and so it proved accordingly.

Whilst we lingered hereabout, Provision grew scarce, one Bears foot must serve
five of us a whole day, we began to eat Horsflesh, and devoured several Horses
three only being left alive. At this time the Indians had fallen upon Hadly
where some of them being taken were released upon promise of meeting the
English on such a Plain to make further Terms. Captain Ashpalon was much for it
but the Sachims of Wachuset when they came were against it, yet were willing to
meet the English only to fall upon and destroy them. Ashpalon charged us
English not to speak a word of this, since mischief would come of it. With
these Indians from Wachuset there came above fourscore Squaws or Women, and
Children, who reported the English had taken Vncas and all his men, and sent
them beyon the Seas, whereat they were much enraged, asking us if it were true,
we denied it, which made Ashpalon angry saying he would no more believe
Englishmen; They then examined every one a part and dealt worse with us for a
time than before: Still Provision was scarce, at length we came to a place
called Squaro Maug River where we hoped to find Salmon, but came too late, this
place I reckon 200 miles above Deerfield, then we pa^ted into two Companys some
went one way, and some another; we passed over a mighty Mountain being eight
days in traveling it though we marched very hard, and had every day either
Snow or Rain; we observed that on this Mountain all the water ran Northward.
Here we likewise wanted provision, at length we got over and came near a Lake
where we stayed a great while to make Canoos wherein to pass over. Here I was
frozen, and here again we were like to starve, all the Indians went a Hunting
but could get nothing, several days they Pawawed or Conjured but to no purpose,
then they desired the English to Pray, confessing they could do nothing and
would have us try what the Englishmans God could do. I prayed, so did Sergeant
Plympton in another place, the Indians reverently attended morning and night;
next day they killed some Bears, then they would needs make us desire a
Blessing, and return Thanks at Meals, but after a while they grew weary of it,
and the Sachim forbid us, when I was frozen they were very cruel to me because
I could not do as at other times.

When we came to the Lake, we were again sadly straightened for Provision, and
forced to eat Touchwood fried in Bears Grease, at last we found a Company of
Racoons, and then we made a Feast, the Custom being that we must eat all, I
perceived I had too much for one time, which an Indian that sat by me
observing, bid me slip away some to him under his Coat, and he would hide it
for me till another time, this Indian as soon as he had got my Meat, stood up
and made a Speech to the rest, discovering what I had done, whereat they were
very angry, and cut me another piece, forcing me to drink Racoon Grease, which
made me Sick and vomit, I told them I had enough, after which they would give
me no more, but still tell me I had Racoon enough, whereby I suffered much, and
being Frozen was in great pain, sleeping but little, and yet must do my task
that was set me; as they came to the Lake, they killed a great Moose, staying
there till it was all eaten, and then entering upon the Lake, a Storm arose,
which endangered us all, but at last we got to an Island, and there the Indians
went to Powawing or Conjuring; the Powaw declared that Benjamin Wait and
another were coming, and that Storm was raised to cast them away; This
afterward appeared to be true, though then I believed it not, upon this Island
we lay still several days, and then set out again, but a Storm took us, so that
we continued to and fro upon certain Islands about three Weeks; we had no
Provision but Racoons, that the Indians themselves were afraid of being
Starved; they would give me nothing, whereby I was several days without any
victuals. At length we went upon the Lake on the Ice, having a little Sled,
upon which we drew our Loads before Noon I tired, and just then the Indians met
with some Frenchmen; one of the Indians who took me, came and called me all
manner of ill names, throwing me on my Back, I told him I could do no more,
then he said he must kill me, which I thought he was about to do, for pulling
out his Knife, he cut off my Pockets and wrapped them about my Face, and then
helped me up, and took my Sled and went away, giving me a bit of Biscuit like a
Walnut, which he had of the Frenchman, and told me he would give me a Pipe of
Tobacco; when my Sled was gone, I ran after him, but being tired, soon fell to
a foot pace, whereby the Indians were out of sight, I followed as well as I
could, having many falls upon the Ice, at length I was so spent, I had not
strength enough to rise again, but crept to a Tree that lay along, upon which I
continued all the cold Night, it being very sharp Weather.

I now counted no other but that I must here die, which whilst I was ruminating
of, an Indian hollowed, and I answered, he came to me and called me bad names,
telling me if I would not go, he must knock me on the head, I told him he must
then do so, he saw how I had wallowed in the Snow, but could not me, hereupon
he wrapped me in his Coat, and going back, sent two Indians with a Sled, one said
he must knock me on the head, the other said no, they would carry me away and
burn me; then they bid me stir my Instep, to see if that were Frozen, I did so,
when they saw that, they said there was a Surgeon with the French, that could
cure me, then they took me upon a Sled, and carried me to the Fire, making much
of me, pulling off my wet, and wrapping me in dry Cloths, laying me in a good
Bed; they had killed an Otter, and gave me some of the Broth, and a bit of the
Flesh, here I slept till toward day, and was then able to get up, and put on my
Cloths; one of the Indians awaked, and seeing me go, shouted as rejoicing at
it. As soon as it was light, I and Samuel Russel went before on the Ice upon a
River, they said I must go on Foot as much as I could for fear of Freezing,
Russel slipped into the River with one Foot, the Indians called him back, and
dried his Stockings, and then sent us away with an Indian Guide, we went four
or five Miles before the rest of the Indians overtook us, I was then pretty
well spent, Russel said he was faint, and wondered how I could live, for he said
he had ten Meals to my one; I was then laid on the Sled, and they ran away with
me on the Ice, the rest and Russel came softly after, whose Face I never saw
more, nor know what became of him. About Midnight we got near Shamblee a French
Town where the River was open; when I came to Travel, I was not able, whereupon
an Indian who staid with me would carry me a few Rods, and then I would go as
many, telling me I would dye if he did not carry me, and that I must tell the
English how kind he was.

When we came to the first House there was no Inhabitant, the Indian and I were
both spent and discouraged, he said we must now both die; at last he left me
alone, and got to another House, from whence came some French and Indians, who
brought me in, the French were very kind, putting my hands and feet in cold
Water, and gave me a dram of Brandy, with a little Hasty-pudding and Milk; when
I tasted Victuals, I was very hungry, but they would not suffer me to eat too
much; I lay by the Fire with the Indians that night, yet could not sleep for
pain; next morning the Indians and French fell out about me, the Indians
saying, that the French loved the English better than the Indians. The French
presently turned the Indians out of doors, being very careful of me, and all
the men in the Town came to see me; here I continued three or four days, and
was invited from one House to another, receiving much civility from a young
man, who let me lie in his Bed, and would have bought me, but that the Indians
demanded an hundred pound; we traveled to a place called Surril, whither this
young man accompanied me, to prevent my being abused by the Indians, he carried
me on the Ice one days Journey, for now I could not go at all, when we came to
the place the People were kind. Next day being in much pain, I asked the
Indians to carry me to the Chyrurgions, as they had promised, whereat they were
angry, one taking up his Gun to knock me down, but the French would not suffer
it, falling upon them, and kicking them out of doors; we went away from thence
to a place two or three Miles off, where the Indians had Wigwams, some of whom
knew me, and seemed to pity me; while I was here, which was three or four days,
the French came to see me, and it being Christmas time* they brought me Cakes
and other Provisions; the Indians tried to cure me, but could not; then I asked
for the Chyrurgion, at which one of them in anger struck me on the face with
his Fist, a Frenchman being by, who spoke to him some words, and went his way;
soon after came the Captain of the place to the Wigwam, with about twelve Armed
men, and asked where the Indian was that struck the Englishman, and seizing
him, told him, he should go to the Bilboes, and then be hanged: The Indians
were much terrified at this, as appeared by their countenance and trembling, I
would have gone away too, but the Frenchmen bid me not fear, the Indians durst
not hurt me.

When that Indian was gone, I had two Masters still, I asked them to carry me
to that Captain, that I might speak in behalf of the Indian, they answered, I
was a Fool, did I think the Frenchmen were like the English, to say one thing,
and do another? they were men of their words. But at length I prevailed with
them to help me thither: and speaking to the Captain by an Interpreter, told
him, I desired him to set the Indian free, declaring how kind he had been to
me; he replied, He was a Rogue, and should be hanged; then I privately
alleged, that if he were hanged it might fare the worse with the English
Captives; the Captain said, That ought to be considered, whereupon he set him
at liberty upon condition he should never strike me more, and bring me every
day to his House to eat Victuals; I perceived the common people did not approve
of what the Indians acted against the English. When he was free, he came and
took me about the middle, saying, I was his Brother, I had saved his ^ife once,
and he had saved mine, he said, thrice; He then called for Brandy, and made me
drink, and had me away to the Wigwam again; when I came there, the Indians one
after another shook hands with me, and were very kind, thinking no other but I
had saved the Indian's life. Next day he carried me to the Captains House, and
set me down, they gave me my Victuals and Wine, and being left there a while by
the Indians, I showed the Captain and his Wife my Fingers, who were affrighted
thereat, and bid me lap it up again, and sent for the Chyrurgion, who when he
came, said, he would cure me, and dress^d it. The Indians came for me toward
night, I told them I could not go with them, whereat being angry, they called
me Rogue, and went away. That night I was full of pain, the French were afraid
I would die, five men did watch me, and strove to keep me cheerful, for I was
sometimes ready to faint; oft-times they gave me a little Brandy: The next day
the Chyrurgion came again and dressed me, and so he did all the while I was
among the French, which was from Christmas till May. I continued in this
Captains House till Benjamin Wai^ came, and my Indian Master being in want of
Money, pawned me to the Captain for fourteen Beavers, or the worth of them by
such a day, which if he did not pay, he must lose his Pawn, or else sell me for
21 Beavers; but he could get no Beaver, and so I was sold, and in God's good
time set at Liberty, and returned to my Friends in New England again.

Though I have already given some Account of the Indians in this Country, yet
having met with a Relation of them from one J. J. an Englishman, in the year
1673. I think it not improper to collect some brief Remarks concerning them,
and of the present State of the English in New England.

The People that inhabited this Country are judged to be of the Tartars called
Samoids, who border upon Muscovia, and are divided into Tribes, those to the
East and North-East are called Churchers, Tarentines, and Monhegans; To the
South are the Pequets and Narragansets, Westward Connecticuts and Mowhacks; To
the North Aberginians, which consist of Mattachusets Wippanaps and Tarrentines.
The Pocanets live to the Westward of Plymouth. Not long before the English came
into the Country happened a great Mortality among them, especially where the
English afterward planted. The East and Northern Parts were sore smitten, first
by the Plague, after when the English came, by the Small Pox, the three
Kingdoms or Sagamorships of the Mattachusets being before very populous, having
under them seven Dukedoms or Petty- Sagamorships, but were now by the Plague
reduced from thirty thousand to three hundred. There are not now many to the
Eastward, the Pequods were destroyed by the English; the Mowhacks are about
five hundred; their Speech is a Dialect of the Tartars; they are of Person tall
and well limbed, of a pale and lean Visage, black-eyed, which is counted
strongest for sight, and black-hair'd, both smooth and curled, generally
wearing it long; they have seldom any Beards, their Teeth very white, ^hort and
even, which they account the most necessa^y and best part of man; and as the
Austrians are known ^y their great Lips, the Bavarians by their Pokes under
their Chins, the Jews by their goggle Eyes; so ^he Indians are remarkable for
their flat Noses. The ^ndesses or young Women are some very comely, with ^ound
plump faces, and generally plump of their Bodies (as well as the Men,) soft and
smooth like a Moleskin, of reasonable good complexions, but that they dye
themselves Tawny; yet many pretty Brownetto's and small-finger'd Lasses are
found amongst them. The Vetuala's or old Women are lean and ugly, yet all of a
modest demeanor, considering their Savage Breeding; and indeed they shame our
English Rusticks, whose rudeness in many things exceeds theirs.

The Indians are of disposition very inconstant, crafty, timorous, quick of
apprehension, and very ingenious, soon angry, and so malicious, that they
seldom forget an injury, and barbarously cruel, witness their direful revenges
upon each other; prone to injurious violence and slaughter, by reason of their
blood dried up by overmuch Fire; very Letcherous, proceeding from adust choler
and melancholy, and a salt and sharp humor; both Men and Women are very
thievish, and great haters of Strangers, all of them Canibals, or eaters of
Human flesh, and so were formerly the Heathen Irish, who use to feed upon the
Buttocks of Boys, and the Paps of Women. I have read in the Spanish Relations,
that the Indians would not eat a Spaniard till they had kept him two or three
days dead to grow tender, because their flesh was hard. At Martins Vineyard, an
Island that lies South of Plymouth in the way to Virginia, certain Indians
(whilst I was in the Country) seiz^d upon a Boat that put into a By Cove,
killed the Men, and in a short time eat them up before they were discovered.
Their Houses which they call Wigwams, are built with Poles pitched into the
ground, commonly round, sometimes square, leaving a hole for the Smoke,
covering the rest with Barks of Trees, and line the inside of their Wigwams
with Matts made of Rushes painted with several colors, one good Post they set
up in the middle, which reaches to the hole in the top, with a staff across,
whereon they hang their Kettle, beneath they set a broad Stone for a back,
which keeps the Post from burning, round by the Walls they spread their Matts
and Skins, where the Men sleep while their Women dress their Victuals; they
have commonly two Doors, one opening to the South, the other to the North, and
according as the Wind sits, they close up one Door with Bark, and hang a
Deer-skin or the like before the other. Towns they have none, removing always
from one place to another for convenience of food, sometimes where one sort of
Fish is plentiful, and then where another. I have seen an hundred of their
Wigwams together in a piece of ground, which shows prettily, and within a week
they have all vanished. They live chiefly by the Seaside, especially in the
Spring and Summer: In Winter they go up in the Country to hunt Deer and
Beaver: Tame Cattle they have none except Lice, and certain Dogs of a wild
breed, which they bring up to hunt with.

Wives they have two or three according to their ability and strength of body,
the women have the easiest labor of any in the world, for when their time is
come they go out alone carrying a board with them two foot long, and a foot and
half broad, boared full of holes on each side, having a foot beneath, and on
the top a broad strap of Leather which they put over their forehead, the board
hanging at their back; when they come to a convenient Bush or Tree they lay
them down, and are delivered in an instant without so much as one groan, they
wrap the child up in a young Beaver-skin with his heels close to his Buttocks,
and lace him down to the board upon his back, his knees resting upon the foot
beneath, then putting the strap of Leather upon their forehead with the Infant
hanging at their back home they trudg, and die the Child with a liquor of
boiled Hemlock bark, and then throw him into the ^ater if they suspect it
gotten by any other Nation, if it will swim, they acknowledge it for their own;
They give them names when they are men grown, and love ^^e English, as Robin,
Harry, Philip, and the like, they are ^ery indulgent to their Children, as well
as Parents, but if ^hey live so long as to be burdensome they either starve ^or
bury them alive, as it was supposed an Indian did by his mother at Casco in
1669. Their Apparel before the English came among them was the skins of wild
Beasts with the hair on, Buskings of Deerskin or Moose dressed and drawn with
lines into several works, the ^ines being colored with Yellow, Blue or Red,
Pumps too they have made of tough skins without Soles. In winter when the snow
will bear them, they fasten to their feet snow-shooes made like a larg Racket
for Tennis play, laced on before and behind they wear a square piece of Leather
tied about their middle with a string to hide their Secrets, and go bareheaded.
But since they have had to do with the English they buy of them a cloth called
trading cloth of which they make Mantles, Coats with short sleeves and caps for
their heads, but the men keep their old Fashion. They are very proud as appears
by decking themselves with white and blue beads of their own making, and
painting their faces with colors, and sometimes weave curious Coats with
Turkies Feathers for their Children; Their Diet is fish, Fowl, Bear, Wild Cat
Raccoon and Deer, dried Oysters, Lobsters roasted or dried in the smoke,
Lampreys, and dried Moose tongues, which they esteem a dish for a Sagamor or
Prince, likewise Earthnuts, Chestnuts and diverse Berries, they beat their Corn
to Powder, and put it into bags which they make use of when Stormy weather
hinders them of food. If they have none of this (being careless providers
against necessity) they use Sir Francis Drakes remedy for hunger, to go to
sleep.

They live to an hundred years old, if they be not cut off by their own
Children, War, Plague or small Pox, when they have any of the two last
diseases, they cover their wigwams with Barks so close that no Air can enter,
and making a great Fire remain there in a stewing heat till they are in an
extreme sweat, and then run out naked into the Sea or River, and presently
after their return they either recover, or give up the Ghost. They die
patiently both men and women, not knowing of a Hell to scare them or a
Conscience to terrify them, they howl at their funerals like the wild Irish,
blaming the Devil for his hard heartednes, and concluding with rude Prayers to
him to afflict them no further. They acknowledge a God who they called Squantam
but worship him not, because they say he will do them no hurt, but Abbomo^ho or
Cheepie many times smites them with incurable diseases, scares them with
apparitions, and panick Terrors, so that they live in a wretched Consternation,
worshipping the Devil for fear. One black Robin an Indian sitting in a
Cornfield near the House I was in, ran about extremely frighted with the
appearance of two Infernal Spirits like Mohawks; Another time two Indians and
an Indess came crying out they should all die, for Cheepei was gone over the
Field gliding in the Air with a long Rope hanging from one of his legs, we
asked them what he was like, they said, He had Hat, Coat, Shoos and stockings
like an Englishman; They have a remarkable observation of a flame that appears
before the death of an Indian or English upon their Wigwams in the dead of the
night, I was called out once about twelve a clock in a very dark night, and
plainly perceived it mounting into the Air over a Church about half a Quarter
of a Mile off, toward the North, on what side of a House it appears, from that
Coast you may certainly expect a dead Corpse in two or three days.

As they Worship the Devil, their Priests who are called Powaws, are little
better than Witches, who have familiar conference with him; he makes them
invulnerable and S^otfree. They are Crafty Rogues, abusing the rest at their
pleasure, by pretending to cure Diseases with Barbarous Charms, for which if
^hey recover, they send great Gifts, as Bows, Arrows, and rich Furrs to the
Eastward, where there: is a vast Rock not far from the Shore, having a hole in
it of an unsearchable depth, into which they throw them. Their Divinity is not
much, yet say, that after death ^hey go to Heaven beyond the white Mountains,
and ^int at Noah's Flood by Tradition from their Fathers, ^ffirming, that a
great while ago their Country was drowned, and all the People, and other
Creatures in ^t, only one Powaw and his Webb or Wife foreseeing ^he Flood, fled
to the white Mountains, carrying a Hare with them and so escaped, after a while
the Powaw sent the Hare away, who not returning, imboldened thereby they
descended, and lived many years, after having diverse Children, from whom the
Country was again filled with Indians; some of them tell another Story, saying
the Bever was their Father. Their Learning is very little or none, Poets they
may be guessed by their formal Speeches, sometimes an hour long; Musical too
they be, having many pretty od Barbarous Tunes, which they sing at Marriages
and Feastings.

Their Exercises are Fishing and Hunting, they sometimes Hunt forty or fifty
Mile up in the Country, especially when they happen upon a Moose or Elk, which
is a Creature, or rather if you will a Monster of Superfluity, being in his
full growth many times bigger than an English Ox, the Horns are very big,
brancht out into many Palms, and the tips thereof, are sometimes twelve Foot
asunder, and in height, from the Toe of the Fore-foot to the pitch of the
Shoulder twelve Foot, they are accounted a kind of Deer, and have three young
ones at a time, which they hide a Mile asunder, when the Indians hunt him,
which is commonly in Winter, they run him down sometimes in half a day,
otherwhile a whole day, but never give over till he is tired; the Snow being
usually four Foot deep, and the Beast very heavy, he sinks every st^p, and as
he runs, breaks down the Trees in his way with his Horns, as big as a Man's
Thigh at last they get up and pierce him with their Lances, upon which the poor
Creature groans, and walks on heavily, till at length he sinks and falls like a
ruined Building, making the Earth shake, becoming a Sacrifice to the Victors,
who cut him up, and making a Fire near the place, they there Boil and eat their
Venison, fetching their drink from the next Spring, being unacquainted with any
other, till the French and English taught them the use of that cursed Liquor,
called Rum, Rumbullion or Kill-devil, stronger than Spirit of Wine, drawn from
the dross of Sugar and Sugar Canes, which they love dearer than their lives,
wherewith if they had it, they would be perpetually drunk, though it has
killed many of them, especially old Women.

Their Wars are with their Neighboring Tribes, but the Mowhawks especially,
who are Enemies to all other Indians, their Weapons were Bows and Arrows, but
of late he is a poor Indian, that is not Master of two Guns, which they
purchase of the French, with Powder and Shot; the Victors Flea the Skin off the
Skull of the Principal slain Enemies, which they carry away in Triumph; their
Prisoners they bring home, the old Men and Women they knock on the Head, the
young Women they keep, and the Men of War they Torture to death, as the Eastern
Indians did two Mowhawks whilst I was there, they bind him to a Tree and make a
great Fire before him, then with sharp Knives, they cut off his Fingers and
Toes, then clap upon them hot Embers to sear the Veins; thus they cut him to
pieces joint after joint, still applying Fire for stanching the Blood, making
the poor Wretch Sing all the while; when Arms and Legs are gone, they Flea the
Skin off their Heads, and presently apply thereto a Cap of burning Coals, then
they open his Breast and take out his Heart, which while it is yet living in a
manner, they give to their old Squa's or Women, who are every one to have a bit
of it. These Barbarous Customs they used more frequently before the English
came, but since there are endeavors to Convert them to Christianity, by Mr.
Eliot and his Son who Preach to them in their own Language, into which they
have likewise Translated the Bible; these go Clothed like the English, live in
framed Houses, have Stocks of Corn and Cattle about them, which when Fat they
bring to Market; some of their Sons have been brought up Scholars in Harward
College.

New England is seated in the midst of the Temperate Zone, yet is the Clime
more uncertain as to heat and cold than those European Kingdoms which are in
the same Latitude; The Air is clear, healthful, and Agreeable to the English,
well watered with Rivers, having variety of Beasts both tame and wild, with
several sorts of Trees and excellent Fruits; the Commodities it yeildeth are
rich Furs, Flax, Linen, Amber, Iron, Pitch, Tarr, Cables, Masts, and Timber to
build Ships, with several sorts of Grain, wherewith they drive a considerable
Trade to Barbado's, and other English Plantations in America, supplying them
with Flower, Biscuit, Salt, Flesh and Fish, and in return bring Sugars and other
Goods; To England they trade for Stuffs, Silks, Cloth, Iron, Brass and other
Utensils for their Houses; The weights and measures are the same with England.
The English posesss many potent Colonies, being very numerous and powerful, and
are governed by Laws of their own making, having several Courts of Judicature,
where they meet once a mouth, so they be not repugnant to the Laws of England;
every Town sends two Burgesses to their great and solemn General Court. The
Government both Civil and Ecclesiastical is in the hands of the Independents,
or Presbyterians; The Military part of their Government is by one Major General
and three Sergeant Majors to whom belong the four Countys of Suffolk,
Middlesex, Essex and Norfolk. They have several fine Towns, whereof Boston is
the Metropolis, likewise Dorchester, Cambridg, beautified with two Colleges
and many well built Houses; Reading, Salem, Berwick, Braintree, Bristoll,
Concord, Dartmouth, Dedham, Dover, Exeter, Falmouth, Gloucester, Greensharbour,
Hampton, Harford, Haverhill, Weymouth, Yarmouth, New Haven, Oxford, Salisbury,
Taunton, Southampton, Newbury, Springfield, Sudbury, Ipswich, Li^ Hull,
Sandwich, Malden, Norwich, Roxbury, Sandwich, Wenham; Rowley, Hingham and
others, most of them having the names of some Towns in England. The present
Governor for his Majesty of England is Henry Cranfield Esquire.

CHAP. V. A prospect of New York, with the Situation Plantation and Product
thereof.
New York so called from our present gracious Sovereign when Duke of York,
formerly namel^ New-Netherlands, being part of that New England which the Dutch
one possessed, it was first discovered by Mr Hudson, and sold presently by him
to the Dutch without Authority from his Sovereign the King of England in 1608.
The Hollanders in 1614. began to plant there and called it New-Netherlands, but
Sir Samuel Argall Governor of Virginia routed them, after which they go^ leave
of King James to put in there for fresh water in their passage to Brasile, and
did not offer to plant till a good while after the English were settled in the
Country. In 1664. his late Majesty King Charles the Second sent over four
Commissioners, to reduce the Colonies into bounds that had before incroached
upon each other, who marching with 300 Redcoats to Manhadees or Manhataes took
from the Dutch, their chief Town then called New-Amsterdam, now New York, and
Aug. 29. turned out their Governor with a Silver Leg, and all the rest but
those who acknowledged subjection to the King of England, suffering them to
enjoy their Houses and Estates as before; thirteen days after Sir Robert Car
took the Fort and Town of Aurania now called Albany, and twelve days after
that the Fort and Town of Arosapha, then Dela-ware Castle manned with Dutch and
Sweeds. So that now the English are Masters of three handsome Towns, three
strong Forts and a Castle, without the loss of one man, the first Governor of
these parts for the King of England was Colonel Nichols one of the
Commissioners; This Country is blessed with the richest soil in all
New England; I have heard it reported from men of Judgment (says my Author)
that one Bushel of European wheat has yielded an hundred in one year.

The Town of New York is well seated both for Trade, security and pleasure, in
a small Isle called Manahatan, at the mouth of the great River Mohegan, which
is very commodious for Shipping, and about two Leagues broad, the Town is
large, built with Dutch Brick, alla Moderna, consisting of above 500 fair
Houses, the meanest not valued under one hundred Pounds, to the Landward it is
encompassed with a Wall of good thickness, and fortified at the entrance of the
River, so as to command any Ship which passes that way by a Fort called
James-Fort: It has a Mayor, Aldermen, a Sheriff, and Justices of Peace for
their Magistrates; the Inhabitants are most English and Dutch, and have a
considerable Trade with the Indians, for Bever, Otter, Racoon Skins, with other
rich Furs; likewise for Bear, Deer and Elk Skins, and are supplied with Venison
and Fowl in the Winter, and Fish in the Summer by the Indians, at an easy Price.

The Province of New York formerly contained all that Land, which lies in the
North-parts of America, betwixt New England and Maryland, the length toward
the North is not fully known, the breadth is about 200 Miles, the principal
Rivers are Hudsons River, Raritan River, and Delaaware Bay, the chief Islands
are the Manahatan Island, Long Island, and Staten Island; Manahatan Island so
called by the Indians, lies within Land, betwixt forty one and forty two
Degrees of North Latitude, and is about fourteen Miles long, and two broad.
New York is seated on the West end of this Island, having a small Arm of the
Sea, which divides it from Long Island on the South. Long Island runs Eastward
above an hundred Miles, and is in some places eight, twelve and fourteen Miles
broad, Inhabited from one end to the other, having an excellent Soil for all
English Grain; the Fruits, Trees, and Herbs very good, in May you may see the
Woods and Fields so curiously bedeckt with Roses, and a multitude of other
delightful Flowers, as equal if not excel many Gardens in England; there are
several Navigable Rivers which run very swift, and are well furnished with
variety of Fish, as the Land is with all sorts of English Cattle, besides Deer,
Bear, Wolves, Racoons, Otters, and Wild Fowl in abundance.

There are now but few Indians upon the Island, and these not unserviceable to
the English, being strangely decreased since the English first settled there,
for not long ago there were six Towns full of them, which are now reduced to
two Villages, the rest being cut off by Wars among themselves, or some raging
mortal diseases. They live principally by Hunting, Fowling and Fishing, their
Wives tilling the Land, and planting the Corn; They feed on Fish, Fowl and
Venison, likewise Polcats, Turtles, Racoon and the like; They build small
moveable Tents, which they remove three times a year, chiefly quartering where
they plant their Corn, besides their Hunting and Fishing Quarters. Their
Recreations are chiefly Football and Cards, at which they will play away all
they have, except a Flap to cover their nakedness; They are great Lovers of
strong drink, so that except they have enough to be drunk, they care not to
drink at all; If there be so many in a company that there is no^ sufficient to
make them all drunk, they usually choose so many as are proportionable, to that
quantity, and the rest must be Spectators, if any chance to be drunk before he
has taken his share, which is ordinarily a Quart of Brandy, Rum or Strong
Waters, to show their Justice, they will forcibly pour the rest down his
throat. In these debau^hes they often kill each other, which the Friends of the
dead revenge ^ on the Murderer, unless he purchase his life with money, which
is made of a Periwinkle shell, both black and white, strung like beads.

Their Worship is Diabolical, and usually performed but once or twice a year,
unless upon some extraordinary occasion, as making war or the like; The time
about Michaelmas when their Corn is ripe; The day being appointed by their
chief Priest or Pawaw most of them go a hunting for venison; when they are all
assembled, if the Priest wants money he then tells them, their God will accept
no offering but money, which the People believing, every one gives according to
their ability. The Priest takes the money and putting it into some dishes, sets
them upon the top of their low flat-roofed Houses, and falls to invocating
their God to come and receive it, which with many loud hollows and outcries,
striking the ground with sticks, and beating themselves is performed by the
Priest, and seconded by the People. After being thus wearied, a Devil by this
Conjuration appears amongst them, sometimes in the shape of a Foul, a Beast,
or a Man, at which the People being amazed not daring to stir, the Priest
improves the opportunity and stepping out makes sure of the money, and then
returns to lay the Spirit, who is sometimes gone before he comes back, having
taken some of the Company along with him, but if at such times any English come
among them it puts a period to their proceeding, and they will desire his
absence, saying their God will not come till they are departed. In their Wars
they fight no pitched Battle, but upon their enemies approach, (having first
secured their Wives and Children in some Island or thick Swamp) armed with Guns
and Hatchets, they way-lay their Enemies and it is counted a great fight where
seven or eight are slain.

When an Indian dies they bury him upright sitting upon a seat, with his Gun,
money, and goods, to furnish him in the other World, which they conceive is
Westward, where they shall have great store of Game for Hunting and live at
ease; At his burial his nearest Relations paint their faces black, and make
sad lamentations at his Grave once or twice every day, till by time the
blackness is worn off their faces, and after that once a year they mourn a
fresh for him visiting and trimming up the Grave, not suffering any Grass to
grow near it, fencing it with a hedge, and covering it with Mats for a shelter
from the rain. Notwithstanding all this bustle, when an Indian is dead his name
dies with him, none daring ever after to mention his name, it being not only a
breach of their Law, but an affront to his Friends and Relations, as if done on
purpose to renew their grief. And every Person who has the same Name
instantly changes it for another, which every one invents for himself, some
calling themselves Ratlesnake, others Buckshorn or the like; Yea if a Person
die whose Name is some word used in common speech, they change that word, and
invent a new one, which makes a troublesome alteration in their Language. When
any one is sick, after some means used by his Friends every one pretending
skill in Physic, that proving ineffectual, they send for a Pawaw or Priest,
who sitting down by the sick Person without the least inquiry after the
distemper expects a Fee or gift, according to which he proportions his work,
beginning with a low voice to call sometimes upon one God, and then another,
still raising his voice, beating his naked breasts and sides till the sweat
runs down, and his breath is almost gone, the little that remains he breathes
upon the face of the sick Person three or four times together, and so takes his
leave.

Their Weddings are performed without any Ceremony, the Match being first made
by money which being agreed on and given to the woman make a Consummation of the
Marrage if we may so call it; After which he keeps her during pleasure, and
upon the least dislike turns her away and takes another. It is no offense for
their married women to lie with another man provided she acquaint her husband,
or some of her nearest Relations therewith, but if not, they account it such a
fault as is sometimes punishable by death; some write that when an Indian woman
finds her self with Child, she continues Chaft or untouched by man until her
delivery, the like she observes in her giving suck, a strange Custom, which our
European Ladys would not well relish. An Indian may have two, three or more
wives if he please, but it is not now so much used as before the English came,
they being inclined to imitate them in things both good and bad. Any Maid
before she is married lies with whom she please for Money, without the least
Scandal or aspersion, it being not only customary but lawful. They are extreme
charitable to each other, for if any one has to spare, he freely imparts it to
his Friends, and whatever they get by gaming or otherwise they share one with
another, leaving commonly the least part to themselves.

At their Cantica's or Dancing Matches, all persons that come are freely
entertained, it being then Festival time, their Custom is that all but the
Dancers have a short stick wherewith they strike the ground, and sing
altogether, while those that Dance sometimes Act warlike Postures, and then
come in with faces painted black and Red like Warriors, or some all black,
others all red, with streaks of white under their Eyes, and so jump and hop
about without any Order, uttering many expressions of their designed valor; In
other Dances they only show what Antic Tricks their Ignorance will lead them
to, wringing their Bodies and Faces in a strange manner, sometimes leaping into
the Fire, then catching up a Firebrand, and biting off a live coal with many
such tricks, which more affright than please an Englishman, resembling rather a
Crew of Infernal Furies than reasonable Creatures; when their King or Sachem
sits in Council, he has a Company of armed men to Guard his Person, great
respect being showed him by the People, which chiefly appears by their silence;
After he has declared the cause of their Convention he demands their Opinions,
ordering who shall begin first, who having delivered his mind, tells them he
has done, for no man interrupts him, though he make never so many long stops
and halts, till he says he has no more to say; The Council having all delivered
their Opinions, the King after some pause gives the definitive sentence, which
is commonly seconded with a shout from the People, thereby signifying their
assent or applause. If any Person be condemned to dye, which is seldom but for
murder or incest, the King himself goes out in Person, (for they have no
Prisons, and the guilty Person flies into the woods) to seek him out, and
having found him, the King shoots first, though at never such a distance, and
then happy is the man that can shoot him down, who for his pains is made some
Captain or military Officer.

Their clothing is a yard and half of broad cloth, which they hang on their
Shoulders, and half a yard of the same being put betwixt their Legs, is tied up
before and behind, and fastened with a Girdle about their middle hangs with a
flap on each side, they wear no hats, but commonly tie either a Snakes skin
about their Heads, a belt of their money, or a kind of Ruff made with Deers
hair, and died of a Scarlet Color, which they esteem very rich; They grease
their bodies and hair very often, and paint their faces with diverse Colors, as
Black, White, Red, Yellow, Blew, which they take great pride in every one being
painted in a several manner; Thus much of the Customs of the Indians, and the
Colony of New York.

Hudsons River runs by New York Northward into the Country, toward the head of
which is seated New-Albany, a place of great trade with the Indians, betwixt
which and New York being above an hundred Miles distance is as good Corn-Land,
as the World affords, it was reduced to his Majesty's Obedience by Colonel
Nichols, and a League of Friendship concluded between the Inhabitants and the
Indians, by whom they have never been since disturbed, but every man hathsate
under his ownvine, and has peaceably reaped and enjoyed the fruits of his own
Labors, which God continue

CHAP VI. A Prospect of New Jersey, with the; Situation, Plantation and
Product thereof.
New Jersey is part of the Province of New-Albion aforementioned, and is
subdivided into East and West Jersey. East-Jersey lies between 39 and 41
Degrees of North Latitude being about 12 Degrees more to the South than the
City of London; It is bounded on the South-East by the main Sea, East by that
vast Navigable stream called Hudsons River, West by a line of Division which
separates it from West-Jersey, and North upon the Main Land, and extends it
self in length on the Seacoasts, and along Hudsons River, one Hundred English
Miles and upward.

The Proprietors of this Province, who in 1682. were William Penn, Robert West,
Thomas Rudyard, Samuel Groom, Thomas Heart, Richard Mew, Thomas Wilcox, Ambrose
Rigg, John Heywood, Hugh Hartshorn, Clement Plumstead and Thomas Cooper, have
published the following Account for the Information, and Encouragement of all
Persons, who are inclined to settle themselves, Families and Servants in that
Country, which may give sufficient Satisfaction of the Situation,
Conveniences, and Product thereof.

The convenience of Situation, temperature of Air and fertility of Soil is
such, That there are no less than seven considerable Towns, viz. Shrewsbury,
Middletown, Burgin, Newark, Elizabeth Town, Woodbridge, and Piscataway: which
are well inhabited by a Sober and Industrious People, who have necessary
Provisions for themselves and Families; and for the comfortable entertainment
of Strangers and Travelers. And this Colony is experimentally found Generally
to agree well with English Constitutions. For Navigation it has these
Advantages, not only to be Situate along the Navigable part of Hudsons River,
but lies also Fifty Miles on the Main Sea. And near the midst of this Province
is that Noted Bay for Ships, within Sandy Hook, very well known not to be
inferior to any in America, where Ships not only Harbor in greatest Storms
but Ride safe with all Winds, and Sail in and out thence, as well in Winter as
Summer. For Fishery the Sea Banks there are very well stored with variety of
Fish, not only such as are profitable for Transportation but fit for Food
there: As Whales, Cod-fish, Cole and Hake-fish, large Mackerill, and many other
sorts of Flat and small Fish. The Bay also and Hudsons River are plentifully
stored with Sturgeon, Great Basse, and other Scale Fish; Eels and Shellfish,
as Oysters, etc. in great plenty, and easy to take.

This Country is plentifully supplied with lovely Springs, Rivuolets, Inland
Rivers, and Creeks which fall into the Sea, and Hudsons-River, in which is much
plenty and variety of Fresh-Fish and Waterfowl. There is great plenty of
Oak-Timber fit for Shipping, and Masts for Ships, and other variety of Wood,
like the adjacent Colonies, as Chestnut, Walnut, Poplar, Cedar, Ash, F^rr, etc.
fit for building within the Country. The Land or Soil (as in other places)
varies in goodness and richness, but generally fertile, and with much smaller
labor than in England, produces plentiful Corpse of all sorts of English
Grain. Besides Indian Corn, which the English Planters find not only to be of
vast increase but very wholesome and good in use. It also produces good Flax
and Hemp, which they now Spin and Manufacture into Linen Cloth. There Is
sufficient Meadow and Marsh to their Vp-lands. And the very Barrens there (as
they are called) are not like some in England, but produce Grass fit for
Grazing Cattle in Summer Season. The Country is well stored with wild Deer,
Conies, and wild Fowl of several sorts, as Turkeys, Pigeons, Partridges,
Plover, Quails, Wild Swans, Geese, Ducks, etc. in great plenty. It produces
variety of good and delicious Fruits, as Grapes, Plumbs, Mulberryes, Apricocks,
Peaches, Pears, Apples, Quinces, Water-Melons, etc. which are here in England
planted in O'rchards and Gardens: These, as also many other Fruits which come
not to perfection in England, are the more natural product of this Country.
There are already great store of Horses, Cowes, Hogs and some Sheep, which may
be bought at reasonable Prises, with English Monys, or English Commodities, or
man's Labor, where Monys and Goods are wanting. What sort of Mine or Minerals
are in the Bowels of the Earth, After-time must produce, the Inhabitants not
having yet employed themselves in search thereof. But there is already a
Smelting-furnace and Forge set up in this Colony, where is made good Iron,
which is of great benefit to the Country. It is exceedingly well furnished with
safe and covenient Harbors for Shipping, which is of great advantage to that
Country and affords already for Exportation great plenty of Horses; And also
Beef, Pork, Pipestaves, Boards, Bread, Flower, Wheat, Barley, Rye, Indian Corn,
Butter and Cheese, which they Export for Barbados, Jamaica, Mevis, and other
adjacent Islands, as also to Portugal, Spain, the Canaries, etc. their Whale
Oil and Whale-Fins, Bever, Monky, Racoon and Martin Skins, (which this Country
produces) they Transport for England.

The Situation and Soil of this Country may invite any who are inclined to
Transport themselves into those parts of America. For, 1. It being considerably
Peopled and Situate on the Sea Coast, with convenient Harbors, and so near
adjacent to the Province of New York, and Long Island, being also well Peopled
Colonies may be proper for Merchants, Tradsemen, and Navigators. 2. It Is
likewise proper for such who are inclined to Fishery, the whole Coast and very
Harbors Mouth's being fit for it, which has been no small Rise to the
New England people, and may be here carried on also with great advantage. 3.
For its Soil it is proper for all Industrious Husbandmen, and such who by hard
Labor here on Rack Rents are scarce able to maintain themselves, much less to
raise any Estate for their Children, may, with God's blessing on their Labors,
there live comfortably, and provide well for their Families. 4. For Carpenters,
Bricklayers, Masons Smiths, Mill-wrights and Wheel wrights, Bakers, Tanners,
Tailors, Weavers, Shoomakers, Hatters, and all or most Handicrafts, where their
Labor is much more valued than in these Parts, and Provisions much Cheaper. 5.
And chiefly for such of the above mentioned, or any other who upon solid
Grounds and weighty Considerations are inclined in their minds to go into those
Parts; without which, their going their, cannot be comfortable, or answer their
expectation.

The Indian Natives in this Country are but few, comparative to the
Neighboring Colonies; and those that are there are so far from being
formidable or injurious to the Plan^ers and Inhabitants, that they are really
servicable and advantageous to the English, not only in Hunting and taking the
Deer, and other wild Creatures; and catching of Fish and Fowl fit for food in
their Seasons, but in the killing and destroying of Bears, Wolves, Foxes, and
other Vermin and Poltry, whose Skins and Furrs they bring the English, and
sell at a less price than the value of time an Englishman must spend to take
them. As for the Constitutions of the Country, they were made in the Time of
John Lord Barclay, and Sir George Carteret, the late Proprietors thereof; in
which, such provision was made for Liberty in matters of Religion and Property
in their Estates, that under the Ferms thereof that Colony has been
considerably Peopled, and that, much from the adjacent Countries, where they
have not only for many years enjoyed their Estates according the Concessions,
but also an uninterrupted Exercise of their Particular persuasions in matters
of Religion. And we the present Proprietors so soon as any persons here in
England, or elsewhere are willing to be Engaged with us, shall be ready and
desirous to make such farther Additions and Supplements to the said
Constitutions, as shall be thought fit for the encouragement of all Planters
and Adventurers; And for the farther settling the said Colony with a Sober and
Industrious People.

Having with all possible brevity given an Account of the Country, we shall say
something as to the disposition of Lands there. 1. Our Purpose is, with all
convenient expedition, to erect and build one Principal Town; which by reason
of Situation, must in all probability be the most considerable for
Merchandise, Trade and Fishery in those Parts. It Is designed to be placed upon
a Neck or Point of Rich-land called Ambo-point, lying on Raritor-River, and
pointing to Sandy-Hook-Bay, and near adjacent to the place where Ships in that
Great Harbor commonly Ride at Anchor: A Scheme of which is already drawn, and
those who shall desire to be satisfied therewith many treat for a share
thereof. 2. As for Encouragement of Servants, etc. We allow the same
Privileges as were provided in the Concessions at first. 3. Such who are
desirous to Purchase any Lands in this Province, Free from all Charge, and to
pay down their Purchase Monys here, for any quantities of Acres; Or that desire
to take up Lands there, upon any small Quit-Rents to be Reserved, shall have
Grants to them and their Heirs, on moderate and reasonable Terms. 4. Those who
are desirous to Transport themselves into those Parts, before they Purchase, if
any thing there present to their satisfaction, we doubt not but the Terms of
Purchase will be so Moderate, Equal and Encouraging, that may Engage them to
settle in that Colony.

Our Purpose being with all possible Expedi^ion to dispatch Persons thither,
with whom they may Treat; and who shall have our full Power in the Premises. As
for Passage to this Province, Ships are going hence the whole Year about, as
well in Winter as Summer, Sandy-hook-Bay being never frozen. The usual price is
5 l. per Head, as well Master as Servant, who are above 10 years of Age; all
under 10 years, and not Children at the Breast pay 50 s. Sucking Children pay
nothing. Carriage of Goods is usually 40 s. per Ton, and sometimes less, as we
can Agree. The cheapest and chiefest time of the year for Passage is from
Midsummer till the later end of September, when many Virginia and Maryland
Ships are going out of England into those Parts; and such who take then their
Voyage, arrive usually in good time to Plant Corn sufficient for next Summer.
The Goods to be carried there, are first for peoples own use, all sorts of
Apparel and Household Stuff, and also Vtensils for Husbandry and Building; and
2dly. Linen and Woollen Cloths, and S uffs fitting for Apparel, etc. which are
fit for Merchandise and Truck there in the Country, and that to good Advantage
for the Importer; Lastly, Although this Country, by reason of its being already
considerably inhabited, may afford many conveniences to Strangers, of which
unpeopled Countries are destitute, as Lodging, Victualling, etc. Yet all
persons inclining unto those Parts must know that in their Settlement there,
they will find they must have their Winter as well as Summer. They must Labor
before they Reap. And till their Plantations be cleared (in Summer time) they
must expect, (as in all those Countries) the Muscato Flies, Gnats, and such
like, may in Hot and Fair Weather give them some disturbance, where People
provide not against them. Which as Land is cleared are less troublesome.

The South and South West part of New Jersey lying on the Sea and Dela ware
River is called West Jersey of which Mr. Edward Billing is now Proprietor; It
has all the Conveniences and Excellencies of the other part aforementioned,
and may be made one of the best Colonies in America for the Situation, Air and
Soil; The Ports, Creeks, good Harbors, and Havens being not inferior to any in
that part of the World, having no less than 30 Navigable Creeks ranging
themselves at a Convenient distance upon the Sea, and that stately River of
Dela Ware, the Shoars whereof are generally very deep and bold. The English
that are settled here buy the Lands of the Natives, and give them real
satisfaction for the same, whereby they are assured of their love and
Friendship for ever, and the poor creatures are never the worse but much
better, as themselves confess, being now supplied by way of Trade with all they
want or stand in need of, hunting and fishing as they did before except in
enclosed or planted ground, bringing home to the English Seven or Eight fat
Bucks in a day. There is a Town called Burlington, which will quickly be a
place of great Trade, their Orchards are so laden with Fruit that the very
Branches have been torn away with the weight thereof, it is delightful to the
Eye, and most delicious to the Taste; Peaches in such plenty that they bring
them home in Carts, they are very delicate Fruit and hang almost like our
Onions tied upon Ropes; They receive 40 Bushels of good English Wheat for one
Bushel sown; Cherries they have in abundance and Fowl and Fish great plenty,
with several that are unknown in England; There are likewise Bears, Wolves,
Foxes, Rattle Snakes, and several other Creatures, as I imagine (says my
Author) because the Indians bring such Skins to sell, but I have traveled
several hundreds of Miles to and fro, yet never to my knowledge saw one of them
except 2 Rattle-Snakes, and I killed them both, so that the fear of them i^
more than the hurt, neither are we troubled with the Muskato Fly in this place,
our Land lying generally high and Healthy, and they being commonly in boggy
ground; with common and reasonable care there may in a few years be Horses,
Beef, Pork, Flouer, Biscuit and Pease to spare, Yea this Country wjll produce
Honey, Wax, Silk, Hemp, Flax, Hops, Woad, Rapeseed, Madder, Potashes, Anniseed
and Salt, Hides raw or tanned, and there is a very large vast Creature called a
Moose, of whose Skins are made excellent Buff; besides the natural product of
Pitch, Tar, Rosin, Turpentime, etc. As for furs, there are Beaver, black Fox
and Otter with diverse other sorts; The Tobacco is excellent upon the River Dela
Ware; There may be very good fishing for Cod and Cusk as several have found by
experience, who have caught great plenty of well-grown Fish; upon the whole
matter this Province affords all that is either for the necessity, convenience,
Profit, or Pleasure of humane life; and it may therefore be reasonably
expected, that this Country with the rest of America may in a few Ages be
thoroughly peopled with Christians: I shall conclude with the Prophecy of the
pious, learned and Honorable Mr. George Herbert Orator to the University of
Cambridge, written many years since.

Religion stands on Tiptoe in our Land,
Ready to pass to the American Strand,
When height of Malice, and Prodigious Lusts,
Impudent Sinning, Witchcraft, and Distrusts,
(The Mark of future Bane) shall fill our Cup
Unto the Brim, and make our me^sure up.
When Sein shall swallow Tyber, and the Thames,
By letting in them both, pollutes her Streams.
When Italy of us shall have her will.
And all her Calendar of sins fulfill.
Whereby one may foretell what sins next year,
Shall both in France and England domineer.
Then shall Religion to America flee.
They have their time of Gospel even as we.
CHAP. VII. A Prospect of Pensylvania with the Situation, Product and
Conveniences thereof.
IT is the Jus Gentium or Law of Nations that whatever wast or unculted Country
is the Discovery of any Prince, it is the Right of that Prince who was at the
charge of that Discovery; Now this Province is a Member of that part of America
which the King of Englands Ancestors have been at the charge of discoveing, and
which they and he have taken care to preserve and improve; And his late Majesty
of happy memory upon the Petition of William Penn Esquire (wherein he set forth his
Fathers Services, his own Sufferings and his Losses in relation to his Fathers
Estate, and lastly his long and costly attendance without success) was pleased
in right and consideration thereof to make a Grant to the sai'd William Penn,
of all that Tract of Land in America which is expressed in the following
Declaration to the Inhabitants and Planters of the Province of Pensylvania.

CHARLES R.

Whereas His Majesty in consideration of the great merit and faithful services
of Sir William Penn deceased, and for diverse other good Causes Him thereunto
moving, has been graciously pleased by Letters Patents bearing Date the Fourth
day of March last past, to Give and Grant unto William Penn Esquire, Son and
Heir of the Sir William Penn, all that Tract of Land in America, called by the
Name of Pensylvania, as the same is Bounded on the East by Delaware River, from
Twelve miles distance Northwards of New Castle Town, unto the three and
fortieth Degree of Northern Latitude, if the said River does extend so far
Northwards, and if the said River shall not extend so far Northward, then by
the said River so far as it does extend: And from the Head of the said River,
the Eastern Bounds to be determined by a Meridian Live to be drawn from the
Head of the said River, unto the said three and fortieth Degree, the said
Province to extend Westward Five Degrees in Longitude, to be Computed from the
said Eastern Bounds, and to be bounded on the North, by the Beginning of the
three and fortieth Degree of Northern Latitude, and on the South, by a Circle
drawn at Twelve Miles distance from New Castle Northwards, and Westwards unto
the beginning of the fortieth Degree of Northern Latitude, and then by a
straight Line Westwards to the limit of Longitude abovementioned, together with
all Powers, Preheminences, and Jurisdictions necessary for the Government of
the said Province, as by the said Letters Patents, reference being thereunto
had, does more at large appear.

His Majesty does therefore hereby Publish and Declare his Royal Will and
Pleasure, That all Persons Settled or Inhabiting within the Limits of the said
Province, do yield all Due Obedience to the said William Penn, His Heirs and
Assigns, as absolute Proprietaries and Governors thereof, as also to the
Deputy or Deputies, Agents or Lieutenants, Lawfully Commissioned by him or
them, according to the Powers and Authorities Granted by the said Letters
Patents: Wherewith his Majesty Expects and Requires a ready Compliance from all
persons whom it may concern, as they tender his Majesty's Displeasure.

Given at the Court at White Hall the Second day of April, 1681, In the Three
and thirtieth year of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command, Conway.


The Description of this Province cannot better be given by any than William
Penn himself, who sent the following account from off the place in a Letter
dated from Philadelphia, Aug. 16. 1683.

For this PROVINCE, the general Condition of it take as follows. The Country
it self in its Soil, Air, Water, Seasons and Produce both Natural and
Artificial is not to be despised. The Land contains diverse sorts of Earth, as
Sand Yellow and Black, Poor and Rich: also Gravel both Loomy and Dusty; and in
some places a fast fat Earth, like to our best Vales in England, especially by
Inland-Brooks and Rivers, God in his Wisdom having ordered it so, that the
Advantages of the Country are divided, the Back-Lands being generally three to
one Richer than those that ly by Navigable Waters. We have much of another
Soil, and that is a black Hasel-Mould, upon a Stony or Rocky bottom. The Air is
sweet and clear, the Heavens serene, like the South-parts of France, rarely
Overcast; and as the Woods come by numbers of People to be more cleared, that
it self will Refine. The Waters are generally good, for the Rivers and Brooks
have mostly Gravel and Stony Bottoms, and in Number hardly credible. We have
also Mineral Waters, that operate in the same manner with Barnet and
North-Hall, not two Miles from Philadelphia. For the Seasons of the Year,
having by God's goodness now lived over the Coldest and Hottest, that the
Oldest Liver in the Province can remember, I can say something to an English
Understanding. 1st, Of the Fall, for then I came in: I found it from the 24th
of October to the beginning of December, as we have it usually in England in
September, or rather like an English mild Spring. From December to the
beginning of the Month called March, we had sharp Frosty Weather; not foul,
thick black Weather, as our North-East Winds bring with them in England; but a
Sky as clear as in Summer, and the Air dry, cold, piercing and hungry; yet I
remember not, that I wore more Clothes than in England. The reason of this Cold
is given from the great Lakes that are fed by the Fountains of Canada. The
Winter before was as mild, scarce any Ice at all; while this for a few days
Froze up our great River Delaware. From that Month to the Month called June, we
enjoyed a sweet Spring, no Gusts, but gentle Showers and a fine Sky. Yet this
I observe, that the Winds here as there, are most Inconstant Spring and Fall,
upon that turn of Nature, than in Summer or Winter. From thence to this present
Month, which ended the Summer (commonly speaking) we have had extraordinary
Heats yet mitigated sometimes by Cool Breezes. The Wind that rules the Summer
season, is the South-West; but Spring, Fall and Winter, it is rare to want the
wholesome North Western seven days together: And whatever Mists, Fogs or
Vapors soul the Heavens by Easterly or Southerly Winds, in two Hours time are
blown away; the one is always followed by the other. A Remedy that seems to
have a peculiar Providence in it to the Inhabitants; the multitude of Trees yet
standing, being liable to retain Mists and Vapors, and yet not one quarter so
think as I expected.

The Natural Produce of the Country, of Vegetables, is Trees, Fruits, Plants,
Flowers. The Trees of most note are, the black Walnut, Cedar, Cyprus, Chestnut,
Poplar, Gumwood, Hickery, Saffafrax, Ash, Beech and Oak of diverse sorts, as
Red, While and Black; Spanish Chestnut and Swamp, the most durable of all: of
All which there is plenty for use of man.

The Fruits that I find in the Woods, are the White and Black Mulberry,
Chestnut, Walnut, Plumbs, Strawberries, Cranberies, Hurtleberries and Grapes of
diverse sorts. The great Red Grape (now ripe) called by Ignorance, the Fox-G ape
(because of the Relish it has with unskilful Palates) is in it self an
extraordinary Grape, and by Art doubtless may be Cultivated to an excellent
Wine, if not so sweet, yet little inferior to the Frontiniack, as it is not
much unlike in taste, Ruddiness set aside, which in such things, as well as
Mankind, differs the case much. There is a white kind of Muskadel, and a little
black Grape like the cluster-Grape of England, not yet so ripe as the other;
but they tell me, when ripe, sweeter, and that th^^ only want skilful Vinerons
to make good use of them: I intend to venture on it with my French man this
season, who shows some knowledge in those things. Here are also Peaches, and
very good, and in great quantities, not an Indian Plantation without them; but
whether naturally here at first, I know not, however one may have them by
Bushels for little; they make a pleasant Drink, and I think not inferior to any
Peach you have in England, except the true Newington. It Is disputable with me,
whether it be best to fall to Fining the Fruits of the Country, especially the
Grape, by the care and skill of Art, or send for foreign Stems and Sets already
good and approved, it seems most reasonable to believe, that not only a thing
grows best, where it naturally grows; but will hardly be equalled by another
Species of the same kind, that does not naturally grow there. But to resolve
the doubt, I intend, if God give me Life, to try both, and hope the consequence
will be as good Wine as any European Countries of the same Latitude do yield.

The Artificial Produce of the Country, is Wheat, Barley, Oats, Rye, Pease,
Beans, Squashes, Pumkins, Water-Melons, Musk-Melons, and all Herbs and Roots
that our Gardens in England usually bring forth.

Of living Creatures; Fish, Fowl and the Beasts of the Woods, here are diverse
sorts, some for Food and Profit, and some for Profit only: For Food as well as
Profit, the Elk. as big as a small Ox Deer bigger than ours, Beaver, Racoon,
Rabbits, Squirrels, and some eat young Bear, and commend it. Of Fowl of the
Land, there is the Turkey (Forty and Fifty Pound weight) which is very great;
Pheasants, Heath-Birds, Pigeons and Partridges in abundance. Of the Water, the
Swan, Goose, white and gray, Brand^, Ducks, Teal, also the Snipe and Curloe,
and that in great Numbers; but the Duck and Teal excel, nor so good have I ever
eat in other Countries. Of Fish, there is the Sturgeon, Herring, Rock, Shad,
Catshead, Sheepshead, Ele, Smelt, Perch, Roch; and in Inland Rivers, Trout,
some say Salmon, above the falls. Of Shel fish, we have Oysters, Crabs,
Cockles, Concks and Musctas; some Oysters six Inches long, and one sort of
Cockles as big as the Stewing Oysters, they make a rich Broth. The Creatures
for Profit only by Skin or Fur, and that are natural to these parts, are the
Wild Cat, Panther, Otter, Wolf, Fox, Fisher, Minx, Musk-Rat; and of the Water,
the Whale for Oil, of which we have good store, and two Companies of Whalers,
whose Boats are built, will soon begin their Work, which has the appearance of
a considerable Improvement; to say nothing of our reasonable Hopes of good Cod
in the Bay. We have no want of Horses, and some are very good and shapely
enough; two Ships have been freighted to Barbados with Horses and Pipe-Staves,
since my coming in. Here is also Plenty of Cow-Cattel, and some Sheep; the
People Plow mostly with Oxen. There are diverse Plants that not only the Indians
tell us, but we have had occasion to prove by Swellings, Burnings, Cuts, etc.
that they are of great Virtue, suddenly curing the Patient: and for smell, I
have observed several, especially one, the wild Myrtle; the other I know not
what to call, but are most fragrant. The Woods are adorned with lovely Flowers,
for color, greatness, figure and variety; I have seen the Gardens of London
best stored with that sort of Beauty, but think they may be improved by our
Woods: I have sent a few to a Person of Quality this Year for a trial. Thus
much of the Country, next of the Natives or Aborigines.

The NATIVES I shall consider in their Persons, Language, Manners, Religion and
Government, with my sense of their Original. For their Persons, they are
generally tall, straight, well built, and of singular Proportion; they tread
strong and clever, and mostly walk with a lofty Chin: Of Complexion, Black but
by design, as the Gypsies in England: They grease themselves with Bears fat
clarified, and using no defense against Son or Weather, their skins must needs
be swarthy: Their Eye is little and black, not unlike a straight-look't Jew:
The thick Lip and flat Nose, so frequent with the East-Indians and Blacks, are
not common to them; for I have seen as comely European-like faces among them of
both, as on your side the Sea; and truly an Italian Complexion has not much
more of the White, and the Noses of several of them have as much of the Roman.
Their Language is lofty, yet narrow, but like the Hebrew; in Signification
full, like Shorthand in writing; one word serves in the place of three, and
the rest are supplied by the understanding of the Hearer: Imperfect in their
Tenses, wanting in their Moods, Participles, Adverbs, Conjunctions,
Interjections: I have made it my business to understand it, that I might not
want an Interpreter on any occasion: And I must say, that I know not a Language
spoken in Europe, that has words of more sweetness or greatness, in Accent and
Emphasis, than theirs, for Instance, Octorockon, Rancocas, Oricton, Shakamazon,
Poquesin, all which are names of Places, and have Grandeur in them: Of words of
Sweetness, Anna, is Mother; Issimus, a Brother; Netap, Friend; usque oret, very
good; ponc, Bread; metse, eat, matta, no, hatta to have, payo, to come;
Sepassen, Passejon, the Names of Places; Tamane, Secane, Menanse, Secatereus,
are the Names of Persons. If one ask them for any thing they have not, they
will answer, matta ne hotta, which to translate is, not I have, instead of I
have not.

Of their Customs and Manners there is much to be said; I will begin with
Children. So soon as they are born, they wash them in Water, and while very
young, and in cold Weather to choose* they Plunge them in the Rivers to harden
and embolden them. Having wrapped them in a Clout, they lay them on a straight
thin Board, a little more than the length and breadth of the Child, and swaddle
it fast upon the Board to make it straight; wherefore all Indians have flat
Heads; and thus they carry them at their Backs. The Children will go very
young, at nine Months commonly; they wear only a small Clout round their
Waste, till they are big; if Boys, they go a Fishing till ripe for the Woods,
which is about Fifteen; then they Hunt, and after having given some Proofs of
their Manhood, by a good return of Skins, they may Marry, else it is a shame to
think of a Wife. The Girls stay with their Mothers, and help to hoe the Ground,
plant Corn and carry Burdens; and they do well to use them to that Young, they
must do when they are Old; for the Wives are the true Servants of their
Husbands: otherwise the Men are very affectionate to them. When the Young Women
are fit for Marraige, they wear something upon their Heads for an
Advertisement, but so as their Faces are hardly to be seen, but when they
please: The Age they Marry at, if Women, is about thirteen and fourteen; if
Men, seventeen and eighteen; they are rarely elder. Their Houses are Mats, or
Barks of Trees set on Poles, in the fashion of an English Barn, but out of the
Power of the Winds, for they are hardly higher than a Man; they lie on Reeds or
Grass. In Travel they lodge in the Woods about a great Fire, with the Mantle of
Duffils they wear by day, wrapped about them, and a few Boughs stuck round them.
Their Diet is Maze or Indian Corn, diverse ways prepared; sometimes Roasted in
the Ashes, sometimes beaten and Boiled with Water, which they call Homine; they
also make Cakes, not unpleasant to eat: They have likewise several sorts of
Beans and Pease that are good Nourishment; and the Woods and Rivers are their
Larder.

If an European comes to see them, or calls for Lodging at their House or
Wigwam, they give him the best place and first cut. If they come to visit us,
they salute us with an It ah, which is as much as to say, Good be to you, and
set them down, which is mostly on the Ground, close to their Heels, their Legs
upright; may be they speak not a word more, but observe all Passages: If you
give them any thing to eat or drink, well, for they will not ask; and be it
little or much if it be with Kindness, they are well pleased, else they go away
sullen, but say nothing. They are great Concealers of their own Resentments,
brought to it, I believe, by the Revenge that has been practiced among them;
in either of these they are not exceeded by the Italians. A Tragical Instance
fell out since I came into the Country; A King's Daughter thinking her self
slighted by her Husband, in suffering another Woman to lie down between them,
rose up, went out, plucked a Root out of ^he Ground, and ate it, upon which she
immediately dyed; and for which, last Week he made an Offering to her Kindred
for Atonement and liberty of Marriage; as two others did to the Kindred of
their Wives, that dyed a natural Death: For till Widowers have done so, they
must not marry again. Some of the young Women are said to take undue liberty
before Marriage for a Portion; but when married, chaste: when with Child, they
know their Husbands no more, till delivered; and during their Month, they touch
no Meat they eat, but with a Stick, lest they should defile it; nor do their
Husbands frequent them, till that time be expired.

But in Liberality they excel, nothing is too good for their friend; give them
a fine Gun, Coat, or other thing it may pass twenty hands, before it sticks;
light of Heart, strong Affections, but soon spent; the most merry Creatures
that live, Feast and Dance perpetually; they never have much, nor want much:
Wealth circulateth like the Blood, all parts partake; and though none shall
want what another has, yet exact Observers of Property. Some Kings have sold,
others presented me with several parcels of Land; the Pay or Presents I made
them, were not hoarded by the particular Owners, but the neighboring Kings and
their Clans being present when the Goods were brought out, the Parties chiefly
concerned consulted, what and to whom they should give them? To every King
then, by the hands of a Person for that work appointed, is a proportion sent,
so sorted and folded, and with that Gravity, that is admirable. Then that King
sub-divideth it in like manner among his Dependants, they hardly leaving
themselves an Equal share with one of their Subjects: and be it on such
occasions, at Festivals, or at their common Meals, the Kings distribute, and to
themselves last. They care for little, because they want but little; and the
Reason is, a little contents them: In this they are sufficiently revenged on
us; if they are ignorant of our Pleasures, they are also free from our Pains.
They are not disquieted with Bills of Lading and Exchange, nor perplexed with
Chancery-Suits and Exchequer-Reckonings. We sweat and toil to live; their
pleasure feeds them, I mean, their Hunting, Fishing and Fowling, and this Table
is spread every where, they eat twice a day, Morning and Evening, their Seats
and Table are the Ground. Since the Europeans came into these parts, they are
grown great lovers of Strong Liquors, Rum especially, and for it exchange the
richest of their Skins and Furs: If they are heated with Liquors, they are
restless till they have enough to sleep; that is their cry, some more, and I
will go to sleep; but when Drunk, one of the most wretchedst Spectacles in the
World. In Sickness impatient to be cured, and for it give any thing, especially
for their Children, to whom they are extremely natural; they drink at those
times a Teran or Decoction of some Roots in spring Water; and if they eat any
Flesh, it must be of the Female of any Creature: If they dye, they bury them
with their Apparel, be they Men or Women, and the nearest of Kin fling in
something precious with them, as a token of their Love: Their Mourning is
blacking of their Faces, which they continue for a year: They are choice of the
Graves of their Dead; for lest they should be lost by time, and fall to common
use, they pick off the Grass that grows upon them, and heap up the fallen Earth
with great care and exactness.

These poor People are under a dark Night in things relating to Religion, to be
sure, the Tradition of it; yet they believe a God and Immortality, without the
help of Metaphysics; for they say, There is a great King that made them, who
dwells in a glorious Country to the Southward of them, and that the Souls of
the good shall go thither, where they shall live again. Their Worship consists
of two parts, Sacrifice and Cantico. Their Sacrifice is their first Fruits; the
first and fattest Buck they kill goes to the fire, where he is all burnt with
a Mournful Ditty of him that performs the Ceremony, but with such mavelous
Fervency and Labor of Body, that he will even sweat to a foam. The other part
is their Cantico, performed by round- Dances, sometimes words, sometimes Songs,
then Shouts, two being in the middle that begin, and by Singing and Drumming on
a Board, direct the Chorus: Their Postures in the Dance are very Antic and
differing, but all keep measure. This is done with equal Earnestness and
Labor, but great appearance of Joy. In the Fall, when the Corn comes in, they
begin to feast one another; there have been two great Festivals already, to
which all come that will: I was at one my self, their Entertainment was a green
Seat by a Spring, under some shady Trees, and twenty Bucks, with hot Cakes of
new Corn, both Wheat and Beans, which they make up in a square form, in the
leaves of the Stem, and bake them in the Ashes; and after that they fell to
Dance. But they that go, must carry a small Present of their Money, it may be
six Pence, which is made in the Bone of a Fish; the black is with them as Gold;
the white, Silver; they call it all Wampum.

Their Government is by Kings, which they call Sachema, and those by
Succession, but always of the Mothers-side; for Instance, the Children of him
that is now King will not succeed, but his Brother by the Mother, or the
Children of his Sister, whose Sons (and after them the Children of her
Daughters) will Reign; for no Woman inherits; the Reason they render for this
way of Descent, is, that their Issue may not be spurious. Every King has his
Council, and that consists of all the Old and Wisemen of his Nation, which
perhaps is two hundred People: nothing of Moment is undertaken, be it War,
Peace, Selling of Land or Traffic, without advising with them; and which is
more, with the Young Men too. It Is admirable to consider, how Powerful the
Kings are, and yet how they move by the Breath of their People. I have had
occasion to be in Council with them upon Treaties for Land, and to adjust the
terms of Trade; their Order is thus: The King sits in the middle of an half
Moon, and has his Council, the Old and Wise on each hand; behind them, or at a
little distance, sit the younger Fry, in the same figure. Having consulted and
resolved their business, the King ordered one of them to speak to me; he stood
up, came to me, and in the Name of his King saluted me, then took me by the
hand, and told me, That he was ordered by his King to speak to me, and that now
it was not he, but the King that spoke, because what he should say, was the
King's mind. He first prayed me, to excuse them that they had not complied with
me the last time; he feared, there might be some fault in the Interpreter,
being neither Indian nor English; besides, it was the Indian Custom to
deliberate, and take up much time in Council, before they resolve; and that if
the Young People and Owners of the Land had been as ready as he, I bad not met
with so much delay. Having thus introduced his matter, he fell to the Bounds of
the Land they had agreed to dispose of, and the Price, (which now is little and
dear, that which would have bought twenty Miles, not buying now two.) During
the time that this Person spoke, not a man of them was observed to whisper or
smile; the Old Grave, the Young Reverend in their Deportment; they do speak
little, but fervently, and with Elegancy: I have never seen more natural
Sagacity, considering them without the help, (I was a going to say, the spoil)
of Tradition* and he will deserve the Name of Wise, that Out-wits them in any
Treaty about a thing they understand. When the Purchase was agreed, great
Promises past between us of Kindness and good Neighborhood, and that the
Indians and English must live in Love, as long as the Sun gave light. Which
done, another made a Speech to the Indians, in the Name of all the Sachamakers
or Kings, first to tell them what was done; next, to charge and command them,
To love the Christians, and particularly live in Peace with me, and the People
under my Government: That many Governors had been in the River, but that no
Governor had come himself to live and stay here before; and having now such a
one that had treated them well, they should never do him or his any wrong. At
every sentence of which they shouted and said, Amen, in their way.

The Justice they have is Pecuniary: In case of any Wrong or evil Fact, be it
Murder it self, they Atone by Feasts and Presents of their Wampum, which is
proportioned to the quality of the Offense or Person injured, or of the Sex
they are of: For in case they kill a Woman, they pay double, and the Reason
they render, is, That she breeds Children, which Men cannot do. It Is rare
that they fall out, if Sober; and if Drunk, they forgive it, saying, it was the
Drink, and not the Man, that abused them. We have agreed, that in all
differences between us, six of each side shall end the matter: Don't abuse
them, but let them have Justice, and you win them: The worst is, that they are
the worse for the Christians, who have propagated their Vices, and yielded them
Tradition for ill, and not for good things. But as low an Ebb as they are at,
and as in glorious as their Condition looks, the Christians have not outlived
their sight with all their Pretensions to an higher Manifestation: What good
then might not a good People graft, where there is so distinct a Knowledge left
between good and evil? I beseech God to incline the Hearts of all that come
into these parts, to outlive the Knowledge of the Natives, by a fixed Obedience
to their greater Knowledge of the Will of God; for it were miserable indeed for
us to fall under the just censure of the Poor Indian Conscience, while we make
profession of things so far transcending.

For their Original, I am ready to believe them of the Jewish Race, I mean, of
the stock of the Ten Tribes, and that for the following Reasons; first. They
were to go to a Land not Planted or known, which to be sure Asia and Africa
were, if not Europe; and he that intended that extraordinary Judgment upon
them, might make the Passage not uneasy to them, as it is not impossible in it
self, from the Easter-most parts of Asia, to the Wester-most of America. In the
next place, I find them of like countenance, and their Children of so lively
Resemblance, that a Man would think himself in Dukes-place or Berry-street in
London, when he sees them. But this is not all, they agree in Rites, they
reckon by Moons; they offer their first Fruits, they have a kind of Feast of
Tabernacles; they are said to lay their Altar upon twelve Stones; their
Mourning a year, Customs of Women, with many things that do not now ocur.

So much for the Natives, next the Old Planters will be considered in this
Relation, before I come to our Colony, and the Concerns of it. The first
Planters in these parts were the Dutch, and soon after them the Swedes and
Finns. The Dutch applied themselves to Traffic the Swedes and Finns to
Husbandry. There were some Disputes between them some years, the Dutch looking
upon them as Intruders upon their Purchase and Possession, which was finally
ended in the Surrender made by John Rizeing, the Sweeds Governor, to Peter
Styresant, Governor for the States of Holland, Anno. 1655. The Dutch inhabit
mostly those parts of the Province, that lie upon or near to the Bay, and the
Swedes the Freshes of the River Delaware. There is no need of giving any
Description of them, who are better known there than here; but they are a
plain, strong, industrious People, yet have made no great progress in Culture
or propagation of Fruit Trees, as if they desired rather to have enough, than
Plenty or Traffic. But I presume, the Indians made them the more careless, by
furnishing with the means of Profit, to wit, Skins and Furs for Rum, and such
strong Liquor. They kindly received me, as well as the English, who were few,
before the People concerned with me came among them: I must needs commend their
Respect to Authority, and kind Behavior to the English; they do not degenerate
from the Old friendship between both Kingdoms. As they are People proper and
strong of Body, so they have fine Children, and almost every house full; rare
to find one of them without three or four Boys, and as many Girls, some six,
seven and eight Sons: And I must do them that right, I see few Young men more
sober and laborious. The Dutch have a Meeting Place for Religious Worship at
New Castle, and the Swedes, three, one at Christina, one at Tenecum, and one at
Wicoco, within half a Mile of this Town.

There rests, that I speak of the Condition we are in, and what Settlement we
have made, in which I will be as short as I can; for I fear, and not without
reason, that I have tried your Patience with this long Story. The Country lies
bounded on the East, by the River and Bay of Delaware, and Eastern Sea; it has
the Advantage of many Creeks or Rivers rather, that run into the main River or
Bay; some Navigable for great Ships; some for small Craft: Those of most
Eminency are Christina, Brandy-wine, Skilpot and Skulkill; any one of which
have room to lay up the Royal Navy of England, there being from four to eigh^
Fathom Water. The lesser Creeks or Rivers, yet convenient for Sloops and
Ketches of good Burden, are Lewis, Mespilion, Cedar, Dover, Cranbrook,
Feversham, and Georges below and Chichester, Chester, Toacawny Pemmapecka,
Fortquessin, Neshimenek and Pennberry in the Freshes; many lesser that admit
Boats and Shallops. Our People are mostly settled upon the upper Rivers, which
are pleasant and sweet, and generally bounded with good Land. The Planted part
of the Province and Territories is cast into six Counties, Philadelphia,
Buckingham, Chester, Newcastle, Kent and Sussex, containing about Four Thousand
Souls. Two General Assemblies have been held, and with such Concord and
Dispatch, that they sat but three Weeks, and at least seventy Laws were past
without one Dissent in any material thing. But of this more hereafter, being
yet Raw and New in our Geer: However, I cannot forget their singular Respect to
me in this Infancy of things, who by their own private Expenses so early
considered Mine for the Public, as to present me with an Impost upon certain
Goods Imported and Exported: Which after my Acknowledgments of their Affection,
I did as freely remit to the Province and the Traders to it. And for the well
Government of the said Counties, Courts of Justice are established in every
County, with proper Officers, as Justices, Sheriffs, Clerks, Constables, etc.
which Courts are held every two Months. But to prevent Lawsuits, there are
three Peacemakers chosen by each County Court, in the nature of common
Arbitrators, to hear and end Differences betwixt man and man; and Spring and
Fall there is an Orphan's Court in each County, to inspect and regulate the
Affairs of Orphans and Widows.

Philadelphia, the Expectation of those that are concerned in this Province, is
at last laid out to the great Content of those here, that are any ways
Interested therein: The Situation is a Neck of Land, and lies between two
Navigable Rivers, Delaware and Skulkil, whereby it has two Fronts upon the
Water, each a Mile, and two from River to River. Delaware is a glorious River
but the Skulkil being an hundrod Miles Boatable above the Falls, and its Course
North-East toward the Fountain of Susquahannah (that tends to the Heart of the
Province, and both sides our own) it is like to be a great part of the
Settlement of this Age, in which those who are Purchasers of me, will find
their Names and Interest. But this I will say for the good Providence of God,
that of all the many Places I have seen in the World, I remember not one better
seated; so that it seems to me to have been appointed for a Town, whether we
regard the Rivers, or the convenience of the Coves, Docks, Springs, the
loftiness and soundness of the Land and the Air, held by the People of those
parts to be very good. It is advanced within less than a Year to about four
score Houses and Cottages, such as they are, where Merchants and Handicrafts
are following their Vocations as fast as they can, while the Countrymen are
close at their Farms: Some of them got a little Winter-Corn in the Ground last
Season, and the generality have had a handsome Summer-Crop, and are preparing
for their Winter-Corn. They reaped their Barley this Year in the Month called
May; the Wheat in the Month following; so that there is time in these parts for
another Crop of diverse things before the Winter Season. We are daily in hopes
of Shipping to add to our Number; for blessed be God here is both Room and
Accommodation for them; the Stories of our Necessity, being either the Fear of
our Friends, or the Scare-Crows of our Enemies; for the greatest hardship, we
have suffered, has been Salt-Meat, which by Fowl in Winter, and Fish in
Summer, together with some Poultry, Lamb, Mutton, Veal, and plenty of Venison
the best part of the year, has been made very passable. I bless God, I am
fully satisfied with the Country and Entertainment I can get in it; for I find
that particular Content which has always attended me, where God in his
Providence has made it my place and service to reside. You cannot Imagine, my
Station can be at present free of more than ordinary business, and as such, I
may say, it is a troublesome Work; but the Method things are putting in, will
facilitate the charge, and give an easier Motion to the Administration of
Affairs. However, as it is some Men's Duty to Plow, some to Sow, some to Water,
and some to Reap; so it is the Wisdom as well as Duty of a Man, to yield to the
mind of Providence, and cheerfully, as well as carefully embrace and follow the
Guidance of it.

The City of Philadelphia, as it is now laid out, extends in Length, from River
to River, two Miles, and in Breadth near a Mile; and the Governor, as a
further manifestation of his Kindness to the Purchasers, has freely given them
their respective Lots in the City, without defalcation of any of the^r
Quantities of Purchased Lands; and as its now placed and modelled between two
Navigable Rivers upon a Neck of Land, and that Ships may ride in good
Anchorage, in six or eight Fathom Water in both Rivers, ^^se to the City, and
the Land of the City level, dry and wholesome; such a Situation is scarce to be
paralleled. The City is so ordered now, by the Governor's Care and Prudence,
that it has a front to each River, one half at Delaware, the other at Skulkil;
and though all this cannot make way for small Purchasers to be in the Fronts,
yet they are placed in the next Streets, contiguous to each Front, viz all
Purchasers of one Thousand Acres, and upwards, have the Fronts (and the
High Street) and to every five Thousand Acres Purchase, in the Front about an
Acre, and the smaller Purchasers about half an Acre in the backward-Street; By
which means the least has room enough for House, Garden and small Orchard, to
the great Content and Satisfaction of all here concerned.

The City consists of a large Front-street to each River, and a High Street
(near the middle) from Front (or River) to Front, of one hundred Foot broad,
and a broad Street in the middle of the City, from side to side, of the like
breadth. In the Center of the City, is a Square of Ten Acres; at each Angle are
to be Houses for Public Affairs, as a Meeting House, Assembly or State-House,
Market-House, School-House, and several other Buildings for Public Concerns.
There are also in each Quarter of the City, a Square of eight Acres, to be for
the like Uses, as the More-Fields in London; and eight Streets (besides the
said High Street) that run from Front to Front, and twenty Streets (besides the
Broad Street) that run cross the City from side to side, all these Streets are
of fifty Foot breadth.

CHAP. VIII. A Prospect of Maryland, with the Plantation, Situation and
Product thereof.
THE Province is bounded on the North with Pensylvania, on the East by Delaware
Bay and the Atlantic Ocean, on the South by Virginia, from whence it is parted
by the River Patowmec^; Chesopeak Bay, is the passage for Ships both into this
Country and Virginia, and runs through the middle of Maryland, being found
Navigable near 200. miles into the Land, into which fall diverse very
considerable Rivers. The Climate is very agreeable to the English Constitution,
especially since the clearing of the ground from Trees and Woods, which
formerly caused much unhealthfulness, neither is the heat extreme in Summer,
being much qualified by the cool winds from the Sea, and refreshing Showers,
and the Winter so moderate as does no way incommode the Inhabitants. It is
seated between 37 and 40 Degrees of North Latitude, and was discovered at the
same time with Virginia; Our first Discoverers relate many strange Rites and
Ceremonies used by the Native Indians; Mr. T. H. an Englishman writes, they
believe there are many Gods, which they call Mantoac, but of different sorts
and degrees, yet that there is one only Chief and Great God which has been
from all Eternity, who, (they say) when he purposed to make the World, created
first other Gods of a Principal Order to be as Means and Instruments used in
the Creation, and then the Sun, Moon, and Stars as petty Gods; Out of the
Waters, they affirm, all the diversity of Creatures were made, and for Mankind
that Woman was made first, who by the assistance of one of the Gods conceived
and brought forth Children, but know not how long it was since this was done,
having no Arithmetic nor Records, but only Tradition from Father to Son; They
make the Images of their Gods in the Shapes of men, placing one at least in
their Houses or Temples, where they worship, pray, sing, and make offerings.

They believe, that after this Life, the Soul shall be disposed of according to
its works here, either to the habitacle of the Gods to enjoy perpetual
happiness, or to a great pit or hole in the furthest part of their Country
toward Sunset, (which they think the furthest part of the World) there to be
burnt continually. This place they call Popogusso, and relate that the Grave of
one who was buried was the next day seen to move, whereupon his Body was taken
up again, who then revived, and declared that his Soul was very near entering
into Popogusso, had not one of the Gods saved him, and suffered him to return
and warn his Friends, to avoid that terrible place; another, being taken up,
related, that his Soul was alive, while his Body was in the Grave, and had been
Traveling in a long broad way, on both sides whereof, grew delicate Trees
bearing excellent Fruits, and at length arrived to most curious Houses, where
he met his Father, that was dead before, who charged him to go back, and show
his Friends, what good they were to do, to enjoy the pleasures of this place,
and then to return to him again; whatever tricks or subtilty the Priests use,
the Vulgar are hereby very respectful to their Governors, and careful of their
Actions, though in Criminal Causes they inflict punishments, according to the
quality of the offense; they are great Necromancers, and account our
Fireworks, Guns, and Writing to be the Works of Gods rather than Men; when one
of their Kings was sick, he sent to the English to pray for him; some of them
imagine that we are not mortal Men, nor born of women, but an old Generation
revived, and believe that there are more of us yet to come to kill their nation
and take their places, who are at present invisibly in the Air without bodies,
and that at their Intercession they cause those of their Nation to ^^e, who
wrong the English.

Their Idol they place in the innermost room of their House, of whom they
relate incredible storys; they carry it with them to the Wars and ask Counsel
thereof, as the Romans did of their Oracles; They sing Songs as they march
toward battle instead of Drums and Trumpets, their Wars are exceeding bloody
and have wasted the people very much. A certain King, called Piemacum, having
invited many men and Women of the Secotans to a Feast, whilst they were merry
and praying before their Idol came upon them and slew them; When one of their
Kings had conspired against the English, a Chiefman about him said, That we
were the servants of God, and not subject to be destroyed by them, and that
when we were dead we could do them more hurt than when alive. One Owen Griffin
an Eyewitness thus tells of their Ceremonies; The eldest among them rises
upright, the rest sitting still, and looking about cries out aloud Baw Waw,
then the women fall down and lie upon the ground, and repeating Baw Waw
altogether, fall to stamping furiously with both feet round the Fire making the
ground shake with dreadful shoutings and outcryes, thrusting firebrands into
the Earth and then ceasing a while of a sudden they begin as before, stamping
till the younger sort fetched many stones from the shore, of which every man
took one, and first beat upon them with their firesticks, and then the earth
with all their strength, in which exercise they continued above two hours,
after which, they that had wives withdrew themselves with them severally into
the Woods, this seemed to be their Evening, Devotion; when they have obtained
some great Victory or deliverance, they use solemn rejoicing by making a great
Fire, and incompassing the same promiscuously men and women together, making a
great noise with rattles in their hands; Once a year they hold a great
Festival, meeting together out of diverse Villages, each having a certain Mark
or Character on his back, whereby it may be discerned, whose Subject he is; The
place where they meet is spacious, and round about are Posts carved on the top
like a Nuns head, in the midst are three of the fairest Virgins lovingly
embracing and clasping each other, about this living Image and Artificial
Circle they dance in their Savage manner. Their chief Idol called Kiwasa is
made of wood four foot High, the face resembling the Inhabitants of Florida,
painted with flesh-colors, the breast white, the other parts black, the legs
only spotted with white, with chains and strings of Beads about his Neck; This
Idol is the keeper of the dead bodies of their Kings, which are advanced on
Scaffolds nine or ten foot high, this Kiwasa or Guardian being placed near
them, and underneath lives a Priest who there mumbleth his Devotions Night and
Day.

The Country is generally plain and even, the soil rich and Fertile naturally,
producing all such Commodities as are found in New England, as to Fish, Fruits,
Plants Roots. etc. The chief Trade of the English there is Tobacco, which is
not inconsiderable, since an hundred sail of Ships have in one year traded
thither from England and the neighboring English Plantations. It is divided
into ten Counties, in each of which a Court is held every two months for little
Matters, with Appeal to the Provincial Court at St. Mary's, which is the
principal Town seated on St. Georges River, and beautified with several well
built Houses. This Province is granted by Parent to the Right Honorable the
Lord Baltimore and to his Heirs and Assigns, with many Civil and
Military-Prerogatives and Jurisdictions, as conferring Honors, Coining money,
etc. paying yearly as an acknowledgment to his Majesty and his Successors, two
Indian Arrows at Windsor Castle upon ^aster Tuesday. The Lord Baltimore has
his residence at Mattapany about eight miles distant from St. Mary's where he
has a pleasant seat, though the General Assemblies and provincial Courts are
kept at St. Mary's; And for encouraging People to settle here, his Lordship, by
advice of the General Assembly, has long since established a Model of
excellent Laws for the ease and security of the Inhabitants, with Toleration of
Religion to all that profess Faith in Christ, which has been a principal
Motive to many to settle there.

CHAP. IX. A Prospect of Virginia with the Discovery, Plantation and Product
thereof.
THis Country with the other adjoining Coasts, was first discovered by
Sebastian Cabot with his English Mariners in 1497. And may therefore be justly
claimed by England, it was afterward visited by Sir Francis Drake, and called
Virginia by Sir Walter Rawleigh in honor of his Virgin Mistress, Queen
Elizabeth; In 1603. some Persons at Bristow by leave from Sir Walter Rawleigh,
who had the Propriety thereof, made a Voyage thither, who discovered
Whitson-Bay in forty one Degrees, the People used Snakeskins of six Foot long
for Girdles, and were exceedingly ravished with the Music of a Gittern Boy,
dancing in a ring about him, they were more afraid of two English Mastives than
of twenty Men; In 1607. Sir John Popham, and others settled a Plantation at the
mouth of the River Sagahadoc, the Captain James Davis chose a small place,
almost an Island to set down in, where having heard a Sermon, read their Patent
and Laws, and Built a Fort, they Sailed to discover further up the River and
Country, and encountered with an Island, where was a great Fall of Water, over
which they haled their Boat with a Rope, and came to another Fall, shallow,
swift and unpassable, they found the Country stored with white and red Grapes,
good Hops, Onions, Garlic, Oaks, Walnuts, and the Soil good, the Head of the
River being in about forty five Degrees; they called their Fort St. George,
Captain George Popham being President, the People seemed much affected with our
Men's Devotions, and would say, King James is a good King, and his God a good
God, but our God Tanto a naughty God; which is the name of the evil Spirit that
haunts them every new Moon, and makes them Worship him for fear; he commanded
the Indians not to converse nor come near the English, threatening some to kill
them, and to inflict Sickness upon others if they disobeyed him, beginning with
two of their Saga^nors or Kings Children, affirming he had power to do the like
against the English, and would execute it on them the next new Moon. The
Natives told our Men of Cannibals near Sagadohoc, with Teeth three Inches long,
but they saw them not. In January they had in the space of seven hours Thunder,
Lightning, Rain, Frost and Snow all in abundance; they found a Bath two Miles
about, so hot they could not drink of it. One of the Savages for a Straw-hat
and Knife stripped himself of his Clothing of Bevers Skins worth in England 50 s.
or 3 l. to Present them to the President, leaving only a Flap to cover his
Nudities.

About this time Captain Gosnold set Sail for Virginia, and arrived there after
long contending with furious Storms and Tempests; and soon after by the
Industry of Captain Smith, James-Town was Built, the Savages supplying their
necessities which were sometimes very extreme; the Winter approaching, the
Rivers afforded them plenty of Cranes, Swans, Geese, Ducks, wherewith they had
Pease, and Wild Beasts, as Bevers, Otters, Martins, and black Foxes, upon which
they daily Feasted; but in the discovery of Chickahamine River, George Casson
was surprised, and Smith with two others beset with two hundred Savages, his
Men Slain, and himself in a Quagmire taken Prisoner, but after a Month, he
procured not only his Liberty, but was in great esteem among them, being
extremely pleased with his Discourses of God, Nature and Art, and had Royal
Entertainment from Powhatan one of their Emperors, who sat in State upon his
Bed of Matts, his Pillow of Leather imbroidered with Pearl and white Beads,
attired with a Robe of Skins as large as an Irish Mantle, at his Head sat a
handsome young Woman, and another at his Feet, and on each side the Room, twenty
others, their Heads and Shoulders painted red with a great Chain of white Beads
about their Necks, and a Robe of Skins large like an Irish Mantle, before these
sat his chiefest Men in their Orders: in this Palace or Arbor, one Newport,
who accompanied Captain Smith, gave the Emperor a Boy, in requital whereof,
Powhatan bestowed upon him Namontack his Servant, who was after brought into
England; yet after this Powhatan treacherously contrived the Murder of sixteen
of our Men, which was happily prevented by Captain Smith, who seized another of
their Kings, and thereby procured Peace from them on his own Terms.

This Powhatan had about thirty Kings under him, his Treasure consisted of
Skins, Copper, Pearls, Beads, and the like, kept in a house on purpose against
the time of his Burial; this House was fifty or sixty Yards long, frequented
only by Priests, at the four Corners stood four Images as Sentinels, one of a
Bear, another a Dragon, a third a Leopard, and the fourth a Giant; he has as
many Women as he please, whom when he is weary of, he bestows upon his
Favorites; his Will and the Customs of the Country are his Laws, Malefactors
are punished, by broiling to death, encompassed with Fire, and diverse other
Tortures; Mr. White relates, that about ten Mile from James-Town, one of their
Kings made a Feast in the Woods, the People were monstrously painted, some like
black Devils, with Horns, and their Hair loose of diverse Colors, they
continued two days dancing in a circle of a Quarter of a Mile about, for in a
rank, in two Companies, using several Antic Tricks, the King leading the
dance; all in the midst had black Horns on their Heads, and Green Boughs in
their Hands, next whom were four or five Principal Men differently painted, who
with Clubs beat those forward that tired in the Dance, which held so long that
they were neither able to go nor stand; they made a hellish noise, and every
one throwing away his Bough, ran clapping their Hands up into a Tree, and
tearing down a Branch fell into their Order again. After this fifteen of their
properest Boys between ten and fifteen years old, painted white, were brought
forth to the People, who spent the Forenoon in dancing and finging about them
with rattles; Then the Children were fetched away, the Women weeping and
passionately crying out, providing Moss Skins, Matts and dry Wood, making
Wreaths for their Heads, and decking their Hair with Leaves, after which they
were all cast on an heap in a Valley as dead, where a great Feast was made for
all the Company for two Hours, they then fell again into a Circle and danced
about the Youths, causing a Fire to be made upon an Altar, which our Men
thought was designed to Sacrifice them to the Devil, but it was a mistake, and
the Indians deluded our Men by false Stories, one denying and another affirming
the same thing, being either ignorant or unwilling to discover the devilish
Mysteries of their Religion; but Captain Smith says, that a King being demanded
the meaning of this Sacrifice, answered, that the Children were not all dead,
but that Okee or the Devil, did suck the Blood from their left Breast, till
some of them died, but the rest were kept in the Wilderness till nine Moons
were expired, during which they must not converse with any, and of these were
made Priests and Conjurers.

They think these Sacrifices so necessary, that if omitted, they believe their
Okee or Devil, and their other Gods would hinder them from having any Deer,
Turkies, Corn or Fish, and would likewise make a great Slaughter among them.
They imagine their Priests after death go beyond the Mountains toward the
Sunsetting, and remain there continually in the shape of their Okee, having
their Heads painted with Oil, and finely trimmed with Feathers, being furnished
with Beads, Hatchets, Copper and Tobacco, never ceasing to dance and sing with
their Predecessors, yet they suppose the Common People shall dye like Beasts,
and never live after death; some of their Priests were so far convinced, that
they declared they believed, our God exceeded theirs, as much as our Guns did
their Bows and Arrows, and sent many Presents to the President, entreating him
to pray to his God for Rain, for their God would not send them any. By break of
day before they eat or drink, the Men, Women and Children above ten years old
run into the Water, and there wash a good space till the Sun arise, then they
offer Sacrifice to it, strewing Tobacco on the Land and Water, repeating the
same Ceremonies at Sun set; George Casson aforementioned was Sacrificed, as
they thought, to the Devil, being stripped naked and bound to two Stakes with his
back against a great Fire, after which they ripped up his Belly and burnt his
Bowels, drying his Flesh to the Bones, which they kept above ground in a by
Room; many other Englishmen were cruelly and treacherously Executed by them,
though perhaps not Sacrificed, and none had escaped if their Ambushes had
succeeded. Powhatan invited one Captain Ratcliff and thirty others to Trade for
Corn, and having brought them within his Ambush, Murdered them all.

One Tomocomo an Indian and Counselor to one of their Kings, came into England
in the Reign of King James the first, who landing in the West was much
surprised at our plenty of Corn and Trees, imagining we ventured into their
Country to supply those defects, he began then to number the Men he met with,
but his Arithmetic soon failed him; he related that Okee their God did often
appear to him in his Temple, to which purpose four of their Priests go into the
House, and using certain strange words and gestures, eight more are called in,
to whom he discovers what his will is; upon him they depend in all their
Proceedings, as in taking Journeys or the like; sometimes when they resolve to
go on hunting, he by some known token will direct where they shall find Game,
which they with great cheerfulness acknowledging, follow his directions, and
many times succeed therein; he appears like a handsome Indian with long black
Locks of Hair, after he has staid with his twelve Confederates for some time,
he ascends into the Air from whence he came. The Natives think it a disgrace
to fear death, and therefore when they must dye, they do it resolutely, as it
happened to one who robbed an Englishman, and was by Powhatan (upon complaint
made against him,) fetched sixty Miles from the place where he lay concealed,
and by this Tomocomo Executed in the presence of the English, his Brains being
knocked out, without the least show of fear or terror.

The Virginians are not born so swarthy as they appear, their hair is generally
black, few men have beards, because they pluck out the hair that would grow,
their Ointments and smoaky houses do in a great measure cause their blackness,
whereby they look like Bacon, they have one wife, many Concubines, and are
likewise Sodomites; The Ancient Women are used for Cooks, Barbers, and other
services, the younger for dalliance, they are modest in their carriage, and
seldom quarrel, in entertaining a stranger they spread a Matt for him to sit
down, and then dance before him, they wear their nails long to flea their Deer,
and put Bows and Arrows into the Hands of their Children, before they are six
years old. In each Ear they have generally three great holes wherein they
commonly hang chains, bracelets, or Copper, some wear a Snake therein colored
green and yellow near half a yard long, which crawling about their necks offers
to kiss their lips, others have a dead Rat tied by the Tail. The Women raze
their bodies, legs and thighs with an Iron in curious knots, and Shapes of
Fowls, Fishes, and Beasts, and Rub a painting therein which will never come
out; The Queen of Apametica was attired with a Coronet beset with many white
Bones; with Copper in her ears, and a Chain of the same six times incompassing
her neck; The Sasquehanocks are Giant-like people, very monstrous in
proportion, behavior and attire, their voice sounds as if out of a Cave, their
Garments are Bears-Skins, hanged with Bears Paws, a Wolfes head, and such odd
Jewels; their Tobacco Pipes, three quarters of a yard long with the head of
some beast at the end so weighty as to beat out the brains of a Horse. The calf
of one of their legs was measured three quarters of a yard about, their other
limbs being proportionable. They have diverse ridiculous conceits concerning
their Original, as that a Hare came into their Country, and made the first men
and after preserved them from a great Serpent, and two other Hares coming
thither, the first killed a Deer for their entertainment, which was then the
only Deer in the World, and strewing the hairs of that Deers hide, every Hair
proved a Deer.

Virginia after the first discovery cost no small pains and experience before
it was brought to perfection, with the loss of many Englishmens lives. In the
Reign of King James the first, a Patent was granted to certain Persons as a
Corporation, who were called, The Company of Adventurers of Virginia. But upon
several misdemeanors and miscarriages in 1623 the Patent was made void, and it
has been since free for all his Majesty's Subjects to trade to; It is Situate
South of Maryland, and has the Atlantic Ocean on the East; The Air is good,
and the Climate so agreeable to the English, especially since the clearing it
from Woods, that few die of the Country disease called Seasoning. The Soil is
so fruitful that an Acre of ground commonly yields 200 Bushels of Corn, and
produces readily the Grain, Fruits, Plants, Seeds, and Roots, which are brought
from England, besides those that are natural to this Country and the rest of
America. They have plenty of Beasts, Fish, and Fowl, some of their Turkeys
being affirmed to weigh six stone or 48 pound; The Mockbird is very delightful,
imitating the notes of all other Birds. The Produce of this Country are Flax,
Hemp, Woad, Madder, Potashes, Hops, Honey, Wax, Rape-seed, Annise-seed, Silk
if they would make it, since Mulberry Trees grow here in so great plenty,
several sweet Gums and excellent Balsoms, Alum, Iron, Copper; diverse sorts of
Woods, and Plants used by Dyers, together with Pitch, Tar, Rozin, Turpentine,
and sundry sorts of rich Furs, Elk-skins, and other Hides; but above all,
Tobacco, which is their principal Commodity, and the Standard whereby all the
rest are prized.

This Country is well watered with many great, and swift Rivers that lose
themselves in the Gulf or Bay of Chesapeak, which gives entrance into this
Country as well as Maryland, being a very large and Capacious Bay, and
running up into the Country Northward above two hundred Miles; The Rivers of
most Account are James River, navigable a hundred and fifty miles, York River
large and navigable above 60 miles, and Rapahanok Navigable above a hundred and
twenty miles; Adjoining to these Rivers are the English settled for the
convenience of shipping, having several Towns, the chief whereof is James-Town
commodiously seated on James-River, very neat and well beautified with Brick
Houses, where are kept the Courts of Judic^^ure, and all Public Offices which
concern the Country. Next to James is Elizabeth Town, well built and seated on
the mouth of a River so called; Likewise the Towns of Bermuda Wicocomoco, and
Dales-Gift; The Governor is sent over by his Majesty, who at present is the
Right Honorable the L. Howard of Essingham, and the Country governed by Laws
agreeable to those of England, for the better observing thereof, those Parts
possessed by the English are divided into the Counties of Caroluck, Charles,
Gloucester, Hartford, Henrico, James, New Kent, Lancaster, Middlesex, Nausemund,
Lower, Norfolk, Northampton, Northumberland, Rappahanock, Surrey, Warwick,
Westmoreland, the Isle of Wight and York. In each of which Counties are held
petty Courts every Month, from which there may be Appeals to the Quarter Court
at James Town. They have great store of Wild Beasts as Lions, Bears, Leopards,
Tigers, Wolves and Dogs like Wolves but bark not, Buffelo's, Elke whose flesh
is as good as Beef. Likewise Deer, Hares, Bevers, Otters, Foxes, Martins,
Poulcats, Weasels, Musk-Rats Flying Squirrels, etc. And for tame Cattle, Cows,
Sheep, Go^ts, Hogs and Horses in great plenty.

CHAP. X. A Prospect of Carolina with the Situation and Product thereof.
CArolina, so called from his late Majesty King Charles the Second of Glorious
memory, is a Colony not long since established by the English, and is that part
of Florida adjoining to Virginia, between twenty nine and thirty six degrees of
Northern Latitude; On the East it is washed with the Atlantic Ocean, and is
bounded on the West by Mare Pacificum or the South Sea, and within these bounds
is contained the most fertile and pleasant part of Florida which is so much
commended by the Spanish Authors; Of which I cannot give a more ample Account
than has been done already by an Englishman, who has lived, and was concerned
in the settlement thereof, and shall therefore repeat what he has deliveted in
his own words.

This Province of Carolina was in the Year 1663. Granted by Letters Patents of
his late Gracious Majesty, in Propriety unto the Right Honorable Edward Earl
of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarl, William Earl of Craven, John Lord
Berkely, Anthony Lord Ashly, now Earl of Shaftsbury, Sir George Carteret, and
Sir John Colleton, Knights and Baronets, Sir William Berkely Knight, by which
Letters Patents the Laws of Eagland are to be of force in Carolina: but the
Lords Proprietors have power with the consent of the Inhabitants to make
Bylaws for the better Government of the said Province: So that no Money can be
raised or Law made, without the consent of the Inhabitants or their
Representatives. They have also power to appoint and empower Governors, and
other Magistrates to Grant Liberty of Conscience, make Constitutions, etc. With
many other great Ptiviledges, as by the said Letters Patents will more largely
appear. And the said Lords Proprietors have there settled a Constitution of
Government, whereby is granted Liberty of Conscience, and wherein all possible
care is taken for the equal Administration of Justice, and for the lasting
Security of the Inhabitants both in their Persons and Estates.

By the care and endeavors of the said Lords Proprietors, and at their very
great charge, two Colonies have been settled in this Province, the one at
Albemarle in the most Northerly part, the other at Ashly River, which is in the
Latitude of thirty two Degrees od Minutes.

Albemarle bordering upon Virginia, and only exceeding it in Health, Fertility,
and Mildness of the Winter, is in the Growths, Productions, and other things
much of the same nature with it: Wherefore I shall not trouble the Reader with
a particular Description of that part; but apply my self principally to
discourse of the Colony at Ashly-River, which being many Degrees more Southward
than Virginia, differs much from it in the Nature of its Climate and
Productions.

Ashly-River was first settled in April 1670. the Lords Proprietors having at
their sole charge, set out three Vessels, with a considerable number of able
Men, eighteen Months Victuals, with Clothes, Tools, Ammunition, and what else
was thought necessary for a new Settlement, and continued at this charge to
supply the Colony for diverse years after, until the Inhabitants were able by
their own Industry to live of themselves; in which condition they have been for
diverse years past, and are arrived to a very great Degree of Plenty of all
sorts of Provisions. Insomuch, that most sorts are already cheaper there, than
in any other of the English Colonys, and they are plentifully enough supplied
with all things from England or other Parts. Ashly-River, about seven Miles in
from the Sea, divides it self into two Branches; the Southermost retaining the
name of Ashly-River, the North Branch is called Cooper-River. In May, 1680. the
Lords Proprietors sent their Orders to the Government their, appointing the
Port-Town for these two Rivers to be Built on the Point of Land that divides
them, and to be called Charles Town, since which time about an hundred Houses
are there Built, and more are Building daily by the Persons of all sorts that
come there to Inhabit, from the more Northern English Colonys, and the Sugar
Islands, England and Ireland; and many Persons who went to Carolina Servants,
being Industrious, since they came out of their times with their Masters, at
whose charge they were Transported, have gotten good Stocks of Cattle, and
Servants of their own; have here also Built Houses, and exercise their Trades:
And many that went thither in that condition, are now worth several Hundreds of
Pounds, and live in a very plentiful condition, and their Estates still
increasing. And Land is become of that value near the Town, that it is sold for
twenty Shillings per Acre, though pillaged of all its valuable Timber, and not
cleared of the rest, and Land that is cleared and fitted for Planting, and
Fenced, is let for ten Shillings per annum the Acre, though twenty miles
distant from the Town, and six men will in six weeks time, Fall, Clear, Fence
in, and fit for Planting, six Acres of Land. At this Town in November, 1680.
There Rode at one time sixteen Sail of Vessels (some of which were upwards of
200 Tuns) that came from diverse parts of the Kings Dominions to trade there,
which great concourse of shipping, will undoubtebly in a short time make it a
considerable Town.

The Eastern Shore of America, whether it be by reason of its having the great
Body of the Continent to the Westward of it, and by consequence the
Northwest-Wind (which blows contrary to the Sun) the Freezing-Wind, as the
North-East is in Europe, or that the Frozen Lakes which lie-in, beyond Canada,
and lie North and West from the Shore, Impregnate the Freezing Wind with more
chill and congealing qualities, or that the uncultivated Earth, covered for the
most part with large shading Trees, breathes forth more nitrous Vapors, than
that which is cultivated; or all these Reasons together, it is certainly much
more cold than any part of Europe, in the same Degree of Latitude, insomuch
that New England and those parts of America about the Latitude of thirty nine
and forty, and more North, though above six hundred miles nearer the Sun than
England; is notwithstanding many degrees colder in the Winter.

The Author having been informed by those that say they have seen it, that in
those Parts it Freezeth about six Inches thick in a Night, and great Navigable
Rivers are Frozen over in the same space of time; and the Country about
Ashly-River, though within nine Degrees of the Tropic, has seldom any Winter
that does not produce some Ice, though I cannot yet learn that any has been
seen on Rivers or Ponds, above a quarter of an Inch thick, which vanishes as
soon as the Sun is an hour or two high, and when the Wind is not at North-west,
the Weather is very mild; So that the December and January of Ashly-River, I
suppose to be of the same Temperature with the latter end of March, and
beginning of April in England; this small Winter causes a fall of the Leaf,
and adapts the Country to the production of all the Grains and Fruits of
England, as well as those that require more Sun; insomuch, that at Ashly-River,
the Apple, the Pear, the Plum, the Quince, Apricock, Peach, Medlar, Walnut,
Mulberry, and Chestnut, thrive very well in the same Garden, together with the
Orange, the Lemon, the Olive, the Pomgranate, the Fig and Almond; nor is the
Winter here cloudy, Overcast, or Foggy, but it has been observed that from the
twentieth of August to the tenth of March, including all the Winter Months,
there have been but eight overcast days, and though Rains fall pretty often in
the Winter, it is most commonly in quick Showers, which when past, the Sun
shines out clear again.

The Summer is not near so hot as in Virginia, or ^^e other Northern American
English Colonies, which may hardly gain belief with those that have not
considered the reason; which is its neerness to the Tropicks, which makes it in
a greater measure than those ports more Northward partake of those Breezes,
which almost constantly rise about eight or nine of the Clock, within the
Tropicks, and blow fresh from the East till about four in the Afternoon, and a
little after the Sea-breeze dies away, there rises a North Wind, which blowing
all night, keeps it fresh and cool. In short, I take Carolina to be much of the
same nature with those delicious Countries about Aleppo, Antioch, and Smyrna:
But has the advantage of being under an equal English Government.

Such, who in this Country have seated themselves near great Marshes, are
subject to Agues, as those are who are so seated in England; But such who are
(...) Swan, wild Geese, Duck, Widgeon, Teal, Curlew, Snipe, Shell Drake, and a
certain sort of black Duck that is excellent meat, and stays there all the
year. Neat Cattle thrive and increase here exceedingly, there being particular
Planters that have already seven or eight hundred head, and will in a few years
in all probability, have as many thousands, unless they sell some part; he
Cattle are not subject to any Disease as yet perceived, and are fat all the
Year long without any Fother; the little Winter they have not pinching them so
as to be perceived which is a great advantage, the Planters here have of the
more Northern Plantations, who are all forced to give their Cattle Fother, and
must spend a great part of their Summers Labor in providing three or four
Months Fother for their Cattle in the Winter, or else would have few of them
alive in the Spring, which will keep them from ever having very great Herds, or
be able to do much in Planting any Commodity for Foreign Markets: the providing
Winter Food for their Cattle, taking up so much of their Summers Labor; So
that many Judicious Persons think that Carolina will be able by Sea, to supply
those Northern Colonies, with salted Beef for their Shipping, cheaper than they
themselves with what is bred among them; for, considering that all the Woods in
Carolina afford good Pasturage, and the small Rent that is paid to the Lords
Proprietors for Land, an Ox is raised at almost as little expense in Carolina,
as a Hen is in England. And it has by experience been found that Beef will
take salt at Ashly-River any Month in the Year, and save very well.

Ewes have most commonly two or three Lambs at a time; their Wool is a good
Staple, and they thrive very well, but require a Shepherd to drive them to
Feed, and to bring them home at night to preserve them from the Wolves. Hogs
increase in Carolina abundantly, and in a manner without any charge or trouble
to the Planter, only to make them Sheds, wherein they may be protected from the
Sun and Rain, and Morning and Evening to give them a l^ttle Indian Corn, or the
pickings and parings of Potatoes, Turnips, or other Roots, and at the same time
blowing a Horn, or making any other constant noise to which being used, they
will afterward upon hearing it, repair home, the rest of their Food they get
in the Woods, of Masts, and Nuts of several sorts; and when those fail, they
have Grass and Roots enough, the ground being never frozen so hard as to keep
them from Rooting, these conveniences breeds them large, and in the Mast time
they are very fat, all which makes the rearing them so easy, that there are
many Planters that are single and have never a Servant, that have two or three
hundred Hogs, of which they make great profit; Barbados, Jamaica, and
New England, affording a constant good price for their Pork; by which means
they get wherewithal to build them more convenient Houses, and to purchase
Servants, and Negro-Slaves.

There have been imported into Carolina, about an hundred and fifty Mares, and
some Horses from New York, and Road-Island, which breed well, and the Colts
they have are finer Limbed and Headed than their Dams or Sires, which gives
great hopes of an excellent breed of Horses, as soon as they gotten have good
Stalions amongst them. Negros by reason of the mildness of the Winter thrive
and stand much better, than in any of the Northern Colonys, and require less
clothes, which is a great charged saved.

With the Indiaas the English have a perfect friendship, they being both useful
to one another. And care is taken by the Lords Proprietors, that no Injustice
shall be done them; In order to which they have established a particular Court
of Judicature, (composed of the soberest and most disinteressed Inhabitants) to
determine all differences that shall happen between the English and any of the
Indians, this they do upon a Christian and Moral Consideration, and not out of
any apprehension of danger from them, for the Indians have been always so
engaged in Wars one Town (...) Village against another, (their Government being
usually of no greater extent) that they have not suffered any increase of
People, there having been several Nations in a manner quite extirpated by Wars
amongst themselves since the English settled at Ashly River: This keeps them so
thin of people, and so divided, that the English have not the least
apprehensions of danger from them; the English being already too strong for all
the Indians within five hundred Miles of them, if they were united, and this
the Indians so well know, that they will never dare to break with the English,
or do an Injury to any particular person, for fear of having it revenged upon
their whole Nation.

The Lords Proprietors do at present grant to all persons that come there to
Inhabit as follows, viz. To each Master or Mistress of a Family fifty acres,
and for every able son or manservant they shall carry or cause to be
transported into Carolina fifty acres more, and the like for each Daughter or
Woman servant that is marriageable, and for each child, man or woman servant
under sixteen yeart of age, forty acres, and fifty acres of Land to each
servant when out of their time, this Land to be enjoyed by them and their Heirs
for ever, they paying a penny an Acre Quit-rent to the Lords Proprietors, the
Rent to commence in two years after their taking up their Land. But forasmuch
as diverse persons who are already Inhabitants of Carolina, and others that have
Intentions to transport themselves into that Province, desire not to be
cumber'd with paying of a Rent, and also to secure to themselves good large
convenient tracts of Land without being forced to bring thither a great number
of servants at one time; The Lords Proprietors have been Prevailed upon, and
have agreed to sell to those who have a mind to buy Land, after the rate of
fifty pound for a Thousand Acres, reserving a Pepper-Corn per annum Rent when
demanded. The way of any ones taking up his Land, due to him either by carrying
himself or servants into the Country, or by purchasing it of the Lords
Proprietors, is after this manner: He first seeks out a place to his mind that
is not already possessed by any other, then applies himself to the Governor
and Proprietors Deputies, and show what rights he has to Land, either by
Purchase or otherwise, who thereupon issue out their Warrant to the
Surveyor-General to measure him out a Plantation containing the number of
actres due to him; who making certificate that he has measured out so much
Land and the Bounds, a Deed is prepared of course, which is Signed by the
Governor and the Lords Proprietors Deputies, and the Proprietors Seal affixed
to it and Registr'd, which is a good Conveyance in Law of the Land therein
mentioned to the Party and his Heirs for ever.

I have here, as I take it, described a pleasant and fertile Country, abounding
in health and pleasure, and with all things necessary for the sustenance of
mankind, and wherein I think I have written nothing but truth, sure I am I have
inserted no wilful falsehood: I have also told you, how men are to have Land
that go there to Inhabit. But a rational man will certainly inquire, When I
have Land, what shall I do with it? what Commoditys shall I be able to produce
that will yield me money in other Countries, that I may be enabled to buy Negro
slaves (without which a Planter can never do any great matter) and purchase
other things for my pleasure and convenience, that Carolina does not produce?
To this I answer, That besides the great profit that will be made by the vast
Herds of Cattle and Swine, the Country appears to be proper for the Commoditys
following. viz. Wine. There are growing naturally in the Country five sorts of
Grapes, three of which the French Vignaroons, who are there, judge will make
very good Wine, and some of the Lords Proprietors have taken care to send
plants of the Rhenish, Canary, Claret, Muscat, Madera, and ^ish Grapes, of all
which diverse Vinyards are planted; some wine was made this year that proved
very good both in color and taste, and an indifferent good quantity may be
expected the next year: The Country has gentle rising hills of fertile sand
proper for Vines, and farther from the Sea, rock and gravel on which very good
grapes grow naturally, ripen well, and together, and very lushious in taste,
insomuch as the French Protestants who are there, and skilled in wine, do no
way doubt of producing great quantitys and very good. Oil. There are several
Olive trees growing, which were carried thither, some from Portugal, and same
from Bermudas and flourish exceedingly, and the Inhabitants take great care to
propagate more, so that in all probability it will be an excellent Oil Country.

Silk. There is in Carolina great plenty of Mulberry Trees, such as are by
experience found to feed the Silkworm very well, yea as well as the white
Mulberry, but there is of that sort also, which are propagated with a great
deal of ease, a stick new-cut and thrust into the ground, seldom failing to
grow, and so likewise if the Seed of them be sown. Tobacco does here grow very
well, and is nearer to the nature of the Spanish Tobacco than that of Virginia.
Indigo thrives well here, and very good has been made. Cotton of the Cyprus
and Smyrna sort will grow well, and good plenty of the Seed is sent thither.
Flax and Hemp thrive exceedly. Good plenty of Pitch and Tar is there made,
there being particular persons that have made above a thousand barrels. Here is
great plenty of Oak for Pipe-staves, which are a good Commodity in the
Maderas, Canaryes, Barbados, and the Leeward Islands. Sumack. Sumack grows in
great abundance naturally, so undoubtedly would Woad, Madder and Sa-Flower, if
planted. Drugs. Jallop, Sassaparilla, Turmerick, Sassafras, Snake-root, and
diverse others.

In short. This Country being of the same Climate and Temperature of Aleppo,
Smyrna, Antioch, Judea, and the Province of Nanking, the richest in China, will
(I conceive) produce any thing which those Countries do, were the Seeds brought
into it. T^^ Tools that men who go thither ought to take with them are these,
viz. An Ax, a Bill, and a broad Hoe, and grabbing Hoe, for every man, and a
cross cut Saw to every four men, a Whip saw, a set of Wedges and Fraus and
Betle-Rings to every family, and some Reaping Hooks and Sythes, as likewise
Nails of all sorts, Hooks, Hinges, Bolts and Locks for their Houses. The
Merchandises which sell best in Carolina, are Linen and Woollen, and all other
Stuffs to make clothes of, with Thread, Sowing Silk, Buttons, Ribbons, Hats,
Stockings, Shoes, etc. which they sell at very good rates, and for these goods
any man may purchase the Provision he has need of. The Passage of a man or
women to Carolina is five Pound. Ships are going thither all times of the year.

Mr I. L. an Englishman, having about fourteen year since traveled into the
western parts of Carolina, has given a very ingenious relation of his
Discoverys; Has says the Indians now seated in these parts are none of those
which the English removed from Virginia, but e people driven by an Enemy from
the North-west, and invited to sit down here by an Oracle above four hundred
years ago as they pretend; For the ancient Inhabitants of Virginia and Carolina
were far more rude and barbarous, feeding only upon raw flesh and Fish till
these taught them to plant Corn, and showed them the use of it. They have no
Letters, yet supply that defect either by Counters, Emblems or Hieroglyphics,
or else by Tradition delivered in long Tales from Father to Son, which when
children they are taught to say by rote; where a battle has been fought they
raise a small Pyramid of stones consisting of the number of the slain and
Prisoners taken; By the picture of a Stag they express Swiftness; By a Serpent,
wrath; By a Lion, Courage; By a Dog, Faithfulness; By a Swan they signify the
English, alluding to their white Complexion, and flight over the Sea; They
worship one God the Creator of all things whom they call Okee, and to whom the
High Priest offers Sacrifice, yet they believe he has no care of worldly
affairs, but commits the Government of Mankind to good and Evil Spirits, to
whom the Inferior Priests pay their Devotion and Sacrifice, at which in a
lamentable Tune they recite the great things done by their Ancestors. They
religiously observe Marriage, and distinguish themselves into four Tribes,
believing that all mankind were derived from four women, whereupon they divide
their places of Burial into four Quarters, assigning one to every Tribe, for
they hold it wicked and ominous to mingle their bodies even when dead; they
commonly wrap up the Corpse in the skins of Beasts and bury provision and
householdstuff for its use in the other world; when their Great men die they
kill some Prisoners of War to attend them, they believe the Transmigration of
Souls, for the Angry they say are possessed with the Spirit of a Serpent; the
Bloody, that of a Wolf; the Fearful, of a Deer; and the Faithful of a Dog, The
Residue of their lesser Gods they place beyond the Mountains and the Indian
Ocean, and though they want those helps of Education which we have, yet in
solemn debates they will deliver themselves with excellent Judgment and
Eloquence.

This Author relates that in his Travels with some Indians, they met with a
Rattlesnake, in length two yards and an half and as big as a man's arm, which by
the greatness of her Belly they judged to be full with young, but having killed
and opened her, found there a small Squirrel whole; The Indians assured him
that these Serpents lying under a Tree fix their Eyes steadfastly upon the
Squirrel, which so affrights the little Beast that he tumbles into the Jaws of
his Enemy; Traveling through the Woods a Deer seized by a wild-Cat crossed
their way, being almost spent with the burden and cruelty of her Rider, who
having fastened on her Shoulder left not sucking her Blood till she fell down
under him; which an Indian perceiving, shot a lucky Arrow which peircing the
wild Cat under the Belly made him leave his prey already slain, and turn toward
them with a dreadful fierce look, but his strength and Spirits failing, they
escaped his revenge which they had certainly felt had not his wound been
mortal. This Creature is somewhat bigger than our English Fox, of a reddish
gray Color, and in figure every way like an ordinary Cat, fierce, ravenous and
cunning, for knowing the Deer, (upon which they chiefly prey) too swift for
them, they watch upon Branches of Trees, and as they walk or feed under, jump
down upon them; The Fur is counted excellent, and the Flesh eaten by the
Indians, though as rank as a Dogs. They saw great Herds of Red and Fallow Deer
daily feeding, and on the sides of the Hills Bears crashing Masts like Swine;
Small Leopards they saw, but never any Lions, though their Skins are much worn
by the Indians; The Wolves were so ravenous, that they often feared their
Horses would have been devoured, in the night they gathered up and howled so
close about them, if the Fires they made had not scared them away; The Woods
were full of Bever, O^ter and gray Foxes; They then arrived to the Apalatean
Mountains, which were so high and steep that they were from break of Day till
Evening, ere they could gain the top from whence next Morning they had a
beautiful Prospect of the Atlantic Ocean washing the Virginian Shores, but to
the North and West other higher Mountains hindered their sight: Here they
wandered in Snow three or four days hoping to find some passage through the
Mountains, but the coldness of the Earth and Air seizing their hands and feet,
caused their return and put a stop to their further Travels.

In a second Expedition, he came to another sort of Indians, enemies to the
Christians, yet ventured among them because they hurt none whom they do not
fear, and after he had given them some sin all Trifles of Glass and Metal they
were very kind to him, and consulted with their Gods, whether to admit him into
their Nation and Councils, and oblige him to stay among them by a Marriage with
their Kings or some of their great Men's daughters, but he with much ado waved
their courtesies and got leave to depart upon promise to return in six Months.
At length he came to a Town more populous than any he had seen before in his
Journey; The King whereof though his Dominions are large and populous is in
continual fear of his Neighbor Indians, who are a People so addicted to Arms
that even their Women come into the Field, and shoot Arrows over their Husbands
Shoulders. The men it seems fight with Silver hatchets, for an Indian told him,
they were of the same metal with the hilt of his Sword. They are a cruel Nation
and steal their Neighbors Children to sacrifice them to their Idols: The Women
delight much in Ornaments of Feathers of which they have great Variety, but
Peacocks are most in esteem because not common in that Country; They are
reasonably handsome and more civil in their Carriage than their Neighbors, but
miserably infatuated with the Illusions of the Devil, it caused no small horror
in him to see one of them, with his neck all one side, foam at the mouth, stand
barefoot upon burnings Coals for near an hour, and then, recovering his senses,
leap out of the fire without hurt or s gn of any; this he was an Eye witness
of. Southwest from hence he arrived at a Nation who differ in Government from
all the other Indians of these parts, being slaves rather than Subjects to
their King; their Monarch was a grave man, and courteous to Strangers, yet our
Author could not without horror observe his Barbarous Superstition, in hiring
3 Youths to kill as many young Women of their Enemies, as they could meet
withal to serve his Son, then newly dead in the other World as he vainly
imagined. These youths during his stay returned with Skins torn off the Heads
and Faces of three young Girls which they presented to their King and were by
him gratefully received. Our Author in his sleep was stung by a Mountain
Spider, and had not an Indian sucked out the Poison he had died for receiving
the hurt at the rip of one of his Fingers, ^he venom shot up immediately into
his Shoulder, and ^o inflamed his side that it is not possible to express ^he
Torment; the means used by the Indian was, first ^ small Dose of Snake-root
Powder which he gave him ^n a little Water, and then making a kind of Plaster
of ^he same, applied it near to the place affected; which when he had done he
swallowed some himself by way ^f Antidote, and then sucked the wounded Finger so
^iolently that the patient felt the venom retire back from his side into his
Shoulder and from thence down his ^rms. The Indian having thus sucked half a
score times and ^pit as often, our Author was eased of all his pain and
^refectly recovered. He thought he had been bit with a Rattle-Snake for he did
not see who hurt him, but the ^ndian found by the wound and the effects of it,
that it was given by a Spider, one of which he saw the next ^ay much like our
great blue Spider, only somewhat longer; It is probable the nature of this
Poison is much ^^ke that of the Tarantula; being thus beyond hope and
expectation, restored to himself, he with his fellow travelers resolved to
return back to Carolina without mak^ng any further discovery.

CHAP. XI. A Prospect of Bermudas, or the Summer Islands, with the Discovery,
Plantation, and Product thereof.
Having traveled thus long upon the Main Land of America, let us now venture
again to Sea, and look into the Islands belonging to his Majesty in the West
Indies. The first which offers it self is Bermudas or the Summer Islands, which
are a multitude of broken Isles, some write no less than four hundred, situate
directly East from Virginia from which they are distant five hundred English
Miles, and three Thousand three hundred Miles from the City of London, so named
from John Bermudaz a Spaniard who first discovered them. Oviedo writes, that he
was near it, and had though^ to have sent some Hogs on Shore for increase, but
by force of Tempest was driven from thence, it being extremely subject to
furious Rains, Lightning and Thunder, for which and the many Shipwracks tha^
have happened upon the Coast, it is called the Island of Devils. Job Hartop
relates that in the height of Bermudas, they had sight of a Sea Monster, which
showed it self three times from the middle upward, in shap^ like a man of an
Indian or Mulatto Complexion; I^ was after named the Summer Islands from the
shipwreck of Sr George Summers who was so much delighted with the misadventure,
that he endeavored what he could to settle a Plantation there, together with
Sr T^o^ Gates. They found there plenty and Variety of Fish^ abundance of Hogs
which probably escaped out of some shipwreck; Mulberries, Silkworms, Palmettos
Cedars, Pearls and Ambergreice, but the most surprising thing was the Variety
of Fowl, taking a Thousand of one kind in two or three hours as big as a Pigeon
laying speckled Eggs as large as hens on the Sand, which they do daily without
affright though men sit down by them; Other Birds were so tame that by
whistling to them they would come and gaze at you, while with your stick you
might kill them; when they had taken a Thousand soon after they might have as
many more; They had other Eggs of Tortoises, a bushel being found in the belly
of one of them which were very sweet and good, they took forty of these
Turtles or Tortoises in a day, one of which would serve fifty men at a meal.

This shipwrackt Company built here a ship and a Pinnace, two of their Company
being Married, and two born among them, whereby they took the most natural
possession thereof for our Nation. These Islands seem rent asunder with
Tempests which threaten in appearance to swallow them all in time, the storms
in the Full and Change keep their unchangable ^ourse Winter and Summer, rather
thundering than ^lowing from every Quarter sometimes for 48 hours together. The
North and North-West Winds cause Winter in December, January, and February. Yet
not so ^evere, but young Birds are then seen. That Island of most fame and
greatness than all the rest, and to which ^he name of Bermuda's is most
properly ascribed is sci^uated in the Latitude of thirty two degrees and thirty
Minutes North; the Air is sound and healthy very agree^ble to English Bodies,
the Soil as Fertile as any, well Watered, plentiful in Maize, of which they
have two ^arvests yearly, that which is sowed in March being ^ut in July, and
what is sowed in August is mowed in December. No venomous Creature is to be
found in this Country, nor will live if brought thither, and besides these
advantages, it is so fenced about with Rocks, and Islets that without knowledge
of the Passages a Boat of Ten Tun can not be brought into the Haven, yet with
such knowledge there is entrance for the greatest Ships. The English have since
added to these natural strenghts such Artificial helps, by Block-houses, Forts
and Bulwarks in convenient places, as may give it the Title of Impregnable.

It was first discovered rather accidentally than upon design by John Bermudaz
a Spaniard about 1522, and thereupon a Proposition made in the Council of Spain
for settling a Plantation therein, as a place very convenient for the Spanish
Fleet in their return from the Bay of Mexico by the streights of Bahama; yet
was it neglected, and without any Inhabitant till the like accidental coming of
Sr. George Summers sent to Virginia with some Companies of the English by the
Lord De la Ware in 1609. Who being Shipwrackt on this Coast had the opportunity
to survey the Island which he so well liked, that he endeavored to settle a
Plantation in it at his return in 1612. The First Colony was sent over under
Richard More, who in three years erected eight or ninth Forts in convenient
places, which he planted with Ordnance. In 1616. a new Supply was sent over
under Captain Tucker, who applied themselves to sowing of Corn, setting of
Trees brought thither from other parts of America, and planting that gainful
Weed Tobacco. In 1619. the business was taken more to heart, and made a public
matter, many great Lords and Persons of honor being interested in it; Captain
Butler was sent thither with 500 Men. The Isle was divided into Tribes or
Counties, a Borrough belonging to each Tribe, and the whole reduced to a settle
Government both in Church and State according to the Laws of England. After
this, all succeeded so well, that in 1623. there were said to be 3000 English,
and ten Forts, whereon were planted fifty pieces of Ordnance, their Numbers
since increasing daily both by Children born within the Island, and supplies
from England.

All the Isles together represent an Half Moon, and enclose very good Ports, as
the Great Sound, Harrington Inlet, Southampton and Pagets Bay, with Dover and
Warwick Forts, having their Names from the Noble Men who were undertakers
therein; The greatest Isle is called St. George, five or six Leagues long, and
almost throughout not above a quarter or half a League long. The Air is almost
constantly clear, (except when it Thunders and Lightens) is extreme temperate
and healthful, few dying of any Disease but Age; so that many have removed on
purpose from England hither, only to enjoy a long and healthful Life, and after
having continued there are fearful of removing out of so pure an Air; the very
Spiders here are not venomous, but of diverse curious Color, and make their
Webs so strong, that oftimes small Birds are entangled and caught therein;
Their Cedar Trees are different from all others, and the Wood very sweet; But
the excellencies of this curious place are sufficiently expressed by our English
Vi^gil in the following Poem, wherewith I shall conclude this Prospect of
Bermuda's, the present Governor whereof for his Majesty, is Sir Henry Heydon.

Bermuda Walled with Rocks, who does not know
That happy Island where huge Lemons grow
And Orange Trees which Golden Fruit do bear,
The Hesperian Garden boasts of none so fair.
Where shining Pearl, Coral, and many a Pound
On the rich Shore of Ambergris is found:
The lofty Cedar which to Heaven aspires,
The Prince of Trees is Fuel for their Fires;
The Smoke by which their loaded Spits do turn,
For Incense might on Sacred Altars burn:
Their private Roofs on od^rous Timber born,
Such as might Palaces for Kings adorn;
The sweet Palmettas a new Bacchus yield,
With Leaves as ample as the broadest Shield,
Under the shadow of whose friendly Boughs,
They sit carowsing where their Liquor grows;
Figs there unplanted through the Fields do grow,
Such as fierce Cato did the Romans show,
With the rare Fruit inviting them to spoil
Carthage the Mistress of so rich a Soil;
The naked Rocks are not unfruitful there,
But at some constant Seasons every Tear,
Their barren tops with luscious food abound
And with the Eggs of various Fowls are crowned.
Tobacco is the worst of things which they
To English Landlords as their Tribute pay.
Such is the Mould that the blessed Tenant feeds
On precious Fruits, and pays his Rent in Weeds.
With candid Plantines, and the juicy Pine,
On choicest Melons and sweet Grapes they dine,
And with Potato 's fat their wanton Swine,
Nature these Cates with such a lavish hand
Pours out among them, that our courser Land
Tastes of that bounty, and does Cloth return,
Which not for warmth, but O nament is worn,
For the kind Spring which but Salutes us here
Inhabits there, and courts them all the Year.
Ripe Fruits and Blossoms on the same Trees live,
At once they promise what at once they give,
So sweet the Air, so moderate the Clime
None sickly lives, or dies before his time,
Heaven sure has kept this spot of Earth uncurst,
To show how all things were created first,
The tardy Plants in our cold Orchards placed,
Reserve their Fruits for the next Ages taste,
There a small Grain in some few Months will be
A firm, a lofty, and a spacious Tree:
The Palma Christi, and the fair Papah
Now but a Seed (preventing Natures Law)
In half the Circle of the hasty year
Project a Shade, and lovely Fruits do wear.
The Rocks so high about this Island rise.
That well they may the numerous Turk despise.
CHAP. XII. A Prospect of the Island of Barbuda.
The next that present themselves are the Caribbee Islands so called in
General, because inhabited by Cannibals or Man-eating People at the first
discovery, as the word Caribes imports. They lie extended l ke a Bow from the
Coast of Paria to the Isle of Porto Rica, many in number, twenty seven of them
known by proper names, in nine whereof the English are concerned namely
Barbuda, Anguilla, Montserrat, Dominica, St Vincent, Antego, Mevis or Nevis, St
Christophers and Barbados; Of which I shall give a brief Account as to the
Natives, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Monsters and other Remarkables in each as I
pass along, which may be very divertive to the Reader.

To begin with Barbada or Berbuda. It it is situate in seaventeen degrees of
North Latitude, of no great ^^tent not above fifteen miles long, lying
Northeast from Monserrat; The English are reckoned between four and five
hundred men, who find whereupon conveniently to subsist: The Soil is fertile
and well stored with Cattle and sheep, and may produce other Commodities if
well managed, but subject to one great An^yance as well as some other of these
Islands, that the ^rivians of Dominico and other places many times ^mmit great
spoils in it, the Enmity and Aversion which these Barbarians have conceived
against the ^nglish Nation in general being such, that there hardly ^sses a
year, but, they make irruptions into one of these ^ands and if not timely
discovered and valiantly opposed, ^ll all the men they meet, ransack the Houses
and ^rn them, and if they get any of the women and ^hildren, carry them
Prisoners to their own Terito^es with all the Booty they have a mind to.

The Caribeans who inhabit several of these Islands ^e thought to have been
formerly forced by their E^emies from the main Land of America, and to have
shel^ed themselves here, having various Opinions, Customs and Ceremonies; Those
who converse with the ^hristians have left off many of their ancient barbarous
^sages, and have complied to our evil as well as good ^anners, and therefore
two Ancient Caribeans consi^ering the degeneration of their Contrymen, took
^ccasion to entertain some Europeans with a discourse (...) this purpose, Our
People in a manner are become like yours, ^nce they came to be acquainted with
you, and we find it ^me difficulty to know our selves, so different are we
grown ^om what we were heretofore; It is to this alteration, that ^r People
attribute the more frequent happening of Hurricanes, ^han they were observed to
be in the days of old, and conclude ^hence that Maboya (that is the Devil) has
reduced us under the power of the French, English, Spaniards and others, who
have driven us out of the best-part of our Country.

The Caribeans are a handsome shaped People, well ^roportioned, of a smiling
Countenance, their Com^lexions Olive Color, that spreads to the Whites of
their Eyes, which are black, as likewise their Hair ^omewhat like the Chinesses
or Tartars; Their Foreheads and Noses are flat, their Mothers crushing them
down ^t their Birth, and all the time of their Sucking, imagining it a kind of
Beauty and Perfection; Their Feet arge and thick because they go barefoot, but
are withal so hard that they defy Woods and Rocks; neithe^ shall you meet any
of them who are Blind, One eyed Lame, Crook-backt, Bald, or having any other
natural Infirmity; Those Scars or Deformities they get in the Wars, they glory
in as demonstrations of their Valor; Their Hair is straight and long, and the
Women attribute the highest excellency to the blackness thereof, which they are
very careful in Combing, anointing it with O l, and using Receipts to make it
grow; Both Men and Women tie up their Hair behind, winding i^ up so that it
stands like a Horn on the Crown, parting it to fall down on both sides their
Heads; The Men seem to have no Beards at all, but as soon as they grow pluck
them up by the Roots, thinking it a great deformity in our Contrymen to wear
any. They go stark naked both Men and Women, as many other Nations do, and if
any among them should endeavor to hide their Privy Parts, all the rest would
laugh at it: Yea though the Christians have conversed very much among them, yet
have all their persuasions to cover themselves been to no purpose, and though
when they come to visit the Europeans, or treat with them, they have so far
complied as to cover themselves by putting on a Shirt, Drawers, Hat, or such
Cloths as have been given them, yet as soon as they are returned to their own
Habitations they strip themselves, and put up all in their Closets, till some
such occasion shall happen again; To requite which compliance, some of the
French having occasion to go among them, make no difficulty to strip themselves
after their example, and this defiance of Clothes is well known to Reign in all
places under the Torrid Zone, and being reproached for it, they reply, That we
came naked into the World, and it were a mad thing to hide the Bodies given us
by Nature.

Yet these Caribeans change the natural Color of their Bodies, by painting and
dying them with a Composition which makes them red all over; for as soon as they
have washed themselves, which they do every morning at some River or Spring
near hand, they return to their Houses, and dry themselves by a little Fire,
after which one takes a red Composition, which being mixed with Oil, they rub
therewith the whole Body and Face, and to appear more gallant, they many times
make black circles about their Eyes with the Juice of Junipa Apples, this
painting they reckon useful both for Ornament, and to increase their Strength
and Activity, securing them likewise against the coldness of the nigths and
rain, the stinging of Mesquito's, and the heat of the Sun, and serves instead
of Shirts, Cloaks, and Coats; Sometimes to add to their gallantry they wear a
Crown of Feathers of different colors, and hang the Bones of certain Fishes,
and of late buckles of Gold, Silver and Tin in their Ears, but are most taken
with those of Crystal, Amber, or Coral: some of them make holes through their
lips, yea in the space between their Nostrils wherein they hang a Ring,
Fishbone or some such toy; They wear also Necklaces and Bracelets of Amber,
Coral, or such glittering stuff.

There are excellent Fruits growing in these Islands, as Oranges, Pomegranates,
Citrons, Rasins, Indian Figs. and Coco's, that famous Fruit whereof Historians
tell such Miracles; It grows on the very trunck or top of the Tree in form of a
Nut, but much bigger, one of them sometimes weighing above ten Pound; from the
first bearing this Tree is never found without Fruit, for it bears new every
Month; When the Coco Nut is opened, the Meat is white as Snow, extremely
nourishing, and tastes like an Almond, enough to fill an ordinary Dish, in the
midst of it there is a Glass full of Liquor clear and pleasant as perfumed
Wine; There are also excellent Trees and Wood, as Brasi, Ebony, Iron and yellow
Wood: Likewise Cassia, Cinalmon and Co^ton Trees, with Pepper, Tobacco, Iu^igo,
Ginger Potatoes, Pine-apples and Sugar Canes, and a Living or Sensible Plant
esteemed one of the most admirable Rarities in the World, which as soon as one
fastens on it with his hand, draws backs its leaves and wriggles them under its
little branches as if the were withered, and when the hand is removed an^ the
party gone some distance from it, spreads the^ abroad again; some call it the
Chaste Herb, because cannot endure to be touched without expressing i^
resentments of the injury. Tav^llers relate that the^ are whole woods near
Panama of the Trees called a Sen^^tive Tree, which being touched, the branches
and leave^ start up, making a great noise and close together into the Figure of
a Globe.

There are very few venomous Creatures in the Caribees, though there be many
Snakes and Serpents o^ several colors and Figures; some nine or ten foo^ long,
and as big as a man's Arm or Thigh, nay one wa^ killed which had in her belly a
whole Hen feathers an^ all, and above a dozen Eggs, being seized as she was
sitting; Another snake had devoured a Car, whence ^ guess may be given of their
bigness: Notwithstandin^ which, they are not poisonous, but do the Inhabitants ^
Curtesy in freeing their Houses from Rats which they devour; Other Serpents are
very delightful to the Eye, being green all over about an ell and half long not
above an inch about, feeding on Frogs in Brooks and birds upon Trees. These
dangerous snakes are o^ two kinds, some gray on the back and feel like velvet
others Yellow or red, dreadful to look on, their heads are flat and broad, and
their jaws extremely wide, and armed with eight or ten teeth, extraordinary
sharp, and hollow within, from whence they disperse their Poison which lies in
little Purses just at the roots of their Teeth, they never chew any thing but
swallow it down whole after they have crushed and made it flat; some say, if
they chewed there food they would poison themselves, to prevent which they
cover their Teeth with their Gums when they take their nourishment; these
Creatures are so venomous, that when they sting any, if present help be not had
the wound in two hours is incurable, their only commendation is, that they
never hurt any who do not either touch them, or something whereon they repose.

CHAP. XIII. A Prospect of the Island of Anguilla
ANguilla, sometimes called Snake Island from its Shape, is a long Tract of
Land of about Thirty mile, and nine mile broad, winding almost about near, St.
Martins Island, whence it is very plainly perceived; There is not any Mountain
in it, the ground lying low and even; Where it is broadest there is a Pond,
about which some English have settled themselves in number two or three hundred,
and where they plant Tobacco, which is highly esteemed by those who are good
Judges in that Commodity. The Island lies in Eighteen Degrees and Twenty
Minutes on this side the Equinoctial. Before the discovery of America, there
were not to be found in these parts any Horses, Kine, Oxen, Sheep, Goats,
Swine, or Dogs, but for the better convenience of their Navigations and supply
of their Ships in case of necessity they left some of these Creatures in
several parts of this Newfound World, where they have since multiplied so
exceedingly, that now they are more common, as well on the Continent as the
Caribees, than in any part of Europe

But beside these Foreign kinds of Cattle, there were before in these Islands
certain sorts of strange fourfooted Beasts, as the Opassum about the bigness of
a Cat with a Sharp Snout, the neither Jaw being shorter than the upper like a
Pigs, it has very sharp Claws, and climbs Trees easily, feeding upon Birds,
and in want thereof upon fruit, it is Remarkable for a purse or bag of its own
Skin folded together under its belly, wherein it carries its young, which it
lays upon the ground at pleasure by opening that natural purse, when he would
leave that place he opens it again, and the young ones get in, and so he
carries them with him wherever he goes. The female suckles them without setting
them on the ground, for her Teats lie within that Purse, which is much softer
within that without; The Female commonly brings six young ones, but the Male
who has such another natural Purse under his Belly, carries them in his turn
to ease the Female.

There are also in some of these Islands a kind of Wild Swine, with Short Ears,
almost no Tails, and their Navels on their backs, some of them are all black,
others have certain white Spots, their strange grunting is more hideous than
that of Swine, they are called Javaris; The flesh is of taste good enough, but
very hardly taken, in regard the Bore having a kind of vent or hole on the
back, by which he refreshes his Lungs, is in a manner unwearied, and if he be
forced to stop, and be persued by the Dogs, he is armed with such Sharp and
cutting Tushes, that he tears to pieces all who set upon him. The Tatous is
another strange creature, armed with a hard scaly coat wherewith they cover and
secure themselves as with Armor: They have a head and snout like a Pig,
wherewith they turn up the ground, they have also in every Paw five very sharp
Claws, which they use more readily to thrust away the Earth and discover the
Roots, wherewith they are fattened in the night time. Some affirm their flesh
is very delicate meat, and that there is a small bone in their Tails which
helps deafness: It is known to be good for noise and pains in the ears, some of
these are as big as Foxes; when they are persued, or sleep, which is commonly
in the day time, they close together like a Bowl, and so dexterously get in
their feet head, and ears under their hard scales, that all the parts of their
Body are by that natural Armor secured against all the attempts of Huntsmen or
Dogs, and if Strange Creatures in America
they are near some precipice or steep Hill they roll down without peril. The
Agouty is another, of a dark color and a little Tail without hair, it has two
teeth in the upper Jaw, and as many in the nether: It holds its meat in the
Two fore Paws like a Squirrel, and cries as if it distinctly pronounced the word
Covey; When it is hunted it gets into hollow Trees, out of which it is forced
by smoke after it has made a strange cry; If taken young it is easily tamed;
When angry the hair of his back stands upright and he strikes on the ground
with his hind feet like a Rabbit, being much of the same bigness, but his ears
are short and round, and his Teeth as Sharp as a Razor. There are also
Musk-Rats who live in holes and Berries like Rabbits, there comes from them a
scent like Musk, which causes Melancholy and makes such a strong perfume about
their holes that it is easy to find them out.

But of all, the Caymaa, Crocodile or Allegator is very remarkable it keeps
near the Sea and in Rivers and Islands uninhabited, and sometimes among the
Reeds on Land, very hideous to look on. It is thought to live very long, and
grows bigger to the very last day, even to eighteen foot long and as big about
as an Hogshead, it has four feet well armed with crooked Claws; The skin,
which is covered all over with scales, is so hard on the back that a Bullet
from a Musket shot at him shall hardly make any Impression on it, but if be
hurt under the belly, or in the eyes he is soon gone; his lower Jaw is
immovable, but has so wide a mouth, and so well set with sharp Teeth that he
makes nothing to cut a man in two; He runs fast enough on the Land, but the
weight of his body makes as deep a Track in the sand as a Coach-horse, and
having no joints in the backbone, he goes straight forward, not being able to
turn his vast body without much difficulty, so that to avoid him one need only
turn aside several times. Those that are bred in the fresh water smell of Musk,
while they are alive, and the Air is perfumed an hundred paces about them, nay
the water retains somewhat of the smell, which is enclosed in certain Glandules
under his Thighs, and being taken thence retain their scent long; It may be
Providence has bestowed it upon them, that men and other Creatures may avoid
being made a Prey to these cruel Monsters.

Those that live in the Sea have no such smell, but both kinds are very
dangerous to those that swim; They have a cunning slight for seizing Oxen and
Cows, for one of them will lie lurking at the places where they come to Water,
and finding one at his advantage he half shuts his eyes, and floats on the top
of the Water like a piece of rotten wood, and getting still nearer to the poor
Beast which is drinking and unaware of him, he immediately fastens on him by
the lips, forcing him under Water, drowning and then eating him. He likewise
takes men by the same slight, for Vincent Le Blanc relates, that the Servant
of a Consul of Alexandria going to take up one of these cruel Creatures,
thinking it had been a piece of wood, was drawn by it to the bottom of the
River, and never seen more. There are abundance of these Monstrous Crocodiles
in these Islands who come in great numbers in the night to the places where the
Tortoises are killed (of which hereafter) to feed on the entrails and carcass
of them that are left by Fishermen; who are obliged to carry great wooden
Leavers with them to keep off these Crocodiles, and oftimes kill them by first
breaking their back therewith. Several parts of this Ravenous Monster are
accounted good for many Diseases, the wise Author of Nature having provided
some advant ges from those Creatures which are otherwise most pernicious.

CHAP. XIV. A Prospect of the Island of Montserrat.
THe Island of Montserrat received that Title of the Spaniards from the
resemblance of a Mountain therein to that of Montserrat near Barcelona in
Spain, and has retained the name ever since; It is of a small extent, not
above three Leagues or nine Miles in length, and near as much in breadth, so
that it seems almost round. It lies in the Latitude of seventeen degrees on
this side the Line, full of mountains whereon grow plenty of Cedar and other
Trees: The Valleys and plains being very fertile. It is chiefly inhabited by
the Irish, with some English, in all about six or seven hundred persons; There
is in it a very fair Church of a delightful structure, built by the
contributions of the Governor and Inhabitants: The Pulpit, Seats, and all the
Joyners and Carpenters work within it are of the most precious and
sweet-scented wood growing in the Country.

On the Coasts of these Islands there is sometimes taken by the Fishers a
Monster so dreadful that they call it the Sea-Devil about four foot long and
proportionably big, it has on the back a great bunch full of Prickles like an
Hedghog; The Skin thereof is hard, uneven and rugged like that of a Sea-dog and
of a black color, the head is flat and on the upper part has many little
risings, and among them two small very black eyes. The mouth is extreme wide,
with several very sharp Teeth, two of them crooked like a Wild Boars, it has
four Fins and a broad forked Tail; but has the name of Sea-Devil, because above
the eyes there are two little sharp black Horns, which turn toward his back
like a Rams; As this Monster is extreme ugly, the Meat of it, which is soft and
full of strings, is absolute Poison, causing strange Vomitings and Swoonings,
which prove mortal if not prevented by a good Dose of Mithridate or some other
Antidote, this dangerous Creature is only desired by the curious to adorn their
Closets, whereby it happens that this Devil who was never profitable while
alive, gives a little satisfaction to their Eyes after death.

The Sea Unicorn is a Fish no less Miraculous, a Prodigious one, being cast
ashore about these Islands, is thus described by an Ingenious occular Witness;
This Unicorn, says he, was pursuing a smaller Fish with such earnestness and
impetuosity, that it stuck with half the body dry on a Sand-bank, and before it
could recover the deep, was destroyed by the Inhabitants; It was about eighteen
Foot long, and in compass as big as a Barrel, having six great Fins like the
ends of Galley Oars, whereof two were placed near the Gills, and the other four
at the sides of the Belly at equal distances, they were of a Vermillion red
Color; All the upper part of the Body was covered with great Scales about the
bigness of a Crown piece, of a blew Color, intermixed with Spangles of Silver,
near the Neck the Scales were closer, and of a dark Color like a Collar; The
Scales under the Belly were yellow, the Tail Forked, the Head somewhat bigger
than that of a Horse, and near the same shape; The lower part of the Body was
covered with an hard dark Skin, and as, it is said, the Land Unicorn has one
Horn in his Forehead, so this Sea Unicorn had a very fair one issuing out of
his Head about nine Foot and an half in length, it was very straight, and grew
smaller to the very point, which was sharp enough to pierce Wood, Stone, or any
thing more hard: Toward the Head it was sixteen Inches about, and from thence
almost to the end waved like a wreathed Pillar, growing smaller till they
gently ended in a point, it was naturally polished of a shining black, marked
with certain small white and yellow strokes, and of such solidity, that a sharp
File could hardly get a little small Powder from it. It had no Ears standing
up, but two spacious Gills as the other Fishes. The Eyes are about the bigness
of an Hens Egg, the Ball which was of a Sky Color, Enameld with yellow, was
of Vermillion Color, and beyond it another as clear as Crystal; The Mouth was
wide ^^ough, with several extreme sharp Teeth; The Tongue proportionable,
covered with a rough red Skin; Upon the Head was a Crown rising two Inches
above the Skin, made Oval, and ending in a point. Above three hundred Persons
eat of the Meat of it, and thought it exceeding delicate, being Inter-larded
with white fat, and when Boiled, came up in Fleaks like fresh Cod, but of a
more excellent taste; Those who saw it alive, and broke its back with Leavers,
affirmed that he made prodigious attempts to thrust them with his Horn, using
it with much nimbleness and dexterity, and if he had not wanted Water, would
have been too hard for them all, within him they found the scales of several
Fishes, a token that he lived by prey.

Of all the Sea Monsters that are good to eat, and kept for Provision as Salmon
and Cod are in Europe the most esteemed in these Islands is a certain Fish by
the French called Lamantine and Manaty; It is a Monster that in time grows to
that bulk that some of them are eighteen foot in length and seven in bigness,
the head is like a Cow, and from thence termed by some the Sea-Cow, with small
Eyes and a thick Skin of a dark color wrinkled and hairy, which being dried
serves for a Buckler against the Arrows of the Indians. They have no Fins, but
instead thereof two short feet under their Bellies, each of which has four
fingers, very weak to support the weight of so heavy a Body, nor has he any
other defensive weapons; It lives on the grass and Herbage about the Rocks, in
those Shallow places that have not much above a fathom of Seawater. The
Females are disburthened of their young like Cows; and have two Teats wherewith
they suckle them, they bring forth two at a time, who forsake not the old one
till they no longer need Milk, and can feed on Grass as she does. Of all Fish
none are so good meat as this, two or three will load a great Canow, and eat
short like a Land creature, of a Vermilion color, not cloying or fulsom, and
mixed with fat, which being melted never grows musty: It is much more wholesome
salted a day or two than fresh; Certain small stones found in his head are
highly valued for the Stone and Gravel when dissolved to Powder.

There are often seen rising out of the Sea about these Islands great numbers
of Fishes which fly fifteen or twenty foot above Water, and near an hundred
paces in Length, but no more in regard their Wings are dried by the Sun, they
are somewhat like Herrings but of a rounder head and broader back, their wings
like a Bats, which begin a little below the head, and reach almost to the Tail.
In their flight they many times strike against the Sails of Ships, and fall
even in the day time upon the Decks, some say they are very good meat; the
cause of their flying is to avoid danger from greater Fishes but they meet with
Enemies in the Air as well as Water, for certain Sea-Fowl which live only by
Prey have open hostility with them and seize them as they fly. The Sword-Fish
is worth observing as well as the Flying-Fish, it has at the end of the upper
Jaw a defensive weapon about the breadth of a great broad Sword, which has
Sharp hard teeth on both sides, some of these Swords are five foot long, and
six inches broad at the lower end with twenty seven white solid teeth in each
rank, and the bulk of their Bodies bears a proportion thereto. The head of this
Monster is flat and hideous to behold, being in the Shape of an Heart, near
their Eyes they have two Vents at which they cast out the Water which they have
swallowed; They have no Scales but a greyish Skin on their back, and white
under the belly which is rough like a file; They have seven Fins, two of each
side, two on the back, and and one which serves them for a Tail, some call them
Saw-fishes, and some Emperors, because there is always open War between them
and the Whale, which is many times wounded to death by this their dreadful
weapon.

CHAP. XV. A Prospect of the Island of Dominica.
THe Island of Dominica lies in the Latitude of fifteen degrees and thirty
Minutes, judged to be in length about thirteen Leagues or forty Mile and not
much less in breadth where it is greatest. On the Westside of the Isle is a
very convenient Harbor for Ships. It is very Mountainous in the midst which
incompasses an inaccessible bottom, where from the tops of certain Rocks may be
seen an infinite number of Vipers, Dragons and other dreadful venomous
Creatures, whom none dares approach unto. Yet there are many fruitful valleys
producing several commodities, but especiably Tobacco which is planted by the
English, but the Natives who are Cannibals and very barbarous do much hinder
the coming of the English to settle there: For the Caribeans are very numerous
in it, and have a long time entertained those who came to visit them with a
story of a vast and monstrous Serpent which had its abode in that bottom,
affirming that there was on the head of it a very sparkling stone like a
Carbuncle of inestimable price, and that it commonly covered this Rich Jewel
with a thin moving Skin like that of a man's Eyelid, but that when it went to
drink or sported it self within the midst of that deep bottom he fully
discovered it, and that the Rocks and all about received a a wonderful luster
from the Fire issuing out of that precious Crown.

The Supreme Person of this Island was heretofore one of the most considerable
among those of the same Nation, for when all their forces marched out against
the Arovagues their Common Enemies of the Continent, he had still the conduct
of the Vanguard, and was known by a particular Mark which he had about him;
When any French ships come near this Island there are immediately seen several
Canows in each of which there are are three or four Indians at the most who
come to direct them to the Havens where they may safely Anchor. They commonly
bring along with them some of the Country fruits, whereof having presented the
Captains and other Officers with the choicest, they offer the rest in exchange
for Fishing hooks, grains of Crystal and such trifles as they Account
precious. They have had some differences with the English upon the account of
damage received from some particular Persons which though our nation has
protested against, yet their reveng is so implacable that they hardly ever
forgive nor pass by any injuries; And upon this Account next the Arovages on
the Continent of America the greatest enemies the Caeibbeans have are the
English, which enmity took his rise from hence, that some ill principled
Englishmen under the Flags of other Nations having by pretended kindness, and
little gifts and Aqua Vitae which they dearly love, got diverse of the
Carribbeans aboard their Ships, when they saw their Vessel full of these poor
people who never dreamt of such Treachery, carried away men, Women and Children
into their Plantations, were they are still kept slaves.

Hence it happens they bear such a grudg to the English, as hardly to endure to
hear their Language, and if a Frenchman or some other Nation in Friendship with
them chance to use any English expression he runs the hazard of their Enmity.
In revenge hereof they often make Incursions into Montserrat, Antego and other
English Settlements, firing their Houses, and carrying a way Goods, Men, Women,
and Children with them, but do not eat them as they do the Arovagues. They do
not love to be called Cannibals though they eat the Flesh of their Enemies,
which they say they do to satisfy their Indignation and revenge, and not out of
any delicacy they find in it more than in any thing else which they eat; In
other things they are of a good tractable disposition, and so great enemies to
severity that if the European or other Nations who have any of them slaves,
treat them with rigor, they dye out of pure grief. They commonly reproach the
Europeans with their Avarice and immoderate industry in getting wealth for
themselves and Children, since the Earth is able to find sufficient sustenance
for all men, if they will take pains to cultivate it; As for themselves, they
say they are not perplexed with care for those things wherewith their lives are
preserved, and it is apparent they are much fatter and healthier than those
that fare deliciously; They live without Ambition, without vexation, without
disquiet having no desire of acquiring Honors or Wealth, slighting Gold and
Silver, and seeming astonished to see us so much esteem them considering we are
so well furnished with Glass or Crystal, which they think more beautiful and
valuable. When they go a hunting, Fishing, or root up Trees for ground to make
a little Garden, or to build Houses, which are innocent Employments, and
suitable to the nature of man, they do all without eagerness and as it were in a
way of divertisement and Recreation.

When they see the Christians sad or perplexed at any thing; They give them this
Gentle Reprehension; Compeer (a Familiar word they learn of the French
signifying Friend or Gossip) how miserable art thou thus to expose thy Person
to such tedious and dangerous Voyages and to suffer thy self to be orepressed
with cares, The inornate desire of getting wealth puts thee to all this
trouble, and all these inconveniences, and yet thou art no less disquieted for
the goods thou have already gotten than for those thou art desirous to get;
Thou art in continual fear lest some body should rob thee either in thy own
Country or upon the Seas, or that thy Goods should be lost by shipwreck or the
Waters, thus thou growest O d in a short time, thy hair turns gray, the
forehead is wrinckled, a thousand inconveniences attend thy Body, a thousand
afflictions surround thy heart, and thou make all the have thou can to the
Grave; Why art thou not content with what thy own Country produces? Why do
tho^ not contemn Riches as we do? That wealth which you Christians pursue with
so much earnestness, does it any way promot^ your advancement in the grace of
God? Does it prevent your dying? Do you carry them along with you to the Grave?
They further reproach the Europeans with usurpation of their Country, which
they reckon manifest injustice. Thou have driven me (say this poor people) out
of St. Christophers, Mevis, Montserrat, St. Martins, Antego, Guadel upe^
Barbu^da, St. Eustace, etc. Neither of which places belonged to thee, and
whereto thou could not make any lawful pretense; And thou threatnest me every
day to take away that little which is left me: What shall become of the poor
miserable Caribean? Must we go and live in the Sea with the Fishes. Thy Country
must needs be a wretched o^^ since thou ^^avest it to come and take away mine,
or thou must needs be very barbarous and full of malice thus to persecute me
only for divertisement and Recreation. This kind of discourse may well exempt
them from the opprobrious denomination of Savages.

They are great enemies to thieving and live without distrust of each other,
their Houses and Plantations being left without keepers, but if the least thing
be taken from them, such as a little knife wherewith they do strange things in
Joyners work, they so highly prize its usefulness, that such a loss is enough
to make them weep and grieve a week after, nay ingages them to join with their
friends and demand reparations, and to be revenged on the Person, especially
where the Christians live near them, for then upon missing a y thing they
presently cry, Some Christian has been here; And among the Grievances and
Complaints which they make to the Governors of the French Nation, this comes
always in the Front, Compere Governor, thy Mariners (for so they call all
Foreigners) have taken away a knife out of my Cottage, or some such small
household stuff; They are a people associated in one common Interest and extreme
loving to each other, from whence there are few Quarrels or Animosities among
them, but if they are once injured either by a stranger or their own
Countrymen they never forgive, but contrive all ways to be revenged; Thus when
their Sorcerers or Conjurers tell them, any one has done them the mischief
which happens to them, they endeavor all they can to kill him, saying, He has
bewitched me, I will be revenged on him; And this furious passion and desire of
Revenge is that which makes them so brutish as to eat the very flesh of their
enemies. This implacable Animosity is a Vice generally Reigning among them, and
exercises the same Tyranny without exception over all the Savages of America.
The revenge of the Canadians is very pleasant, who eat their own Lice because
they bite them: If the Brasileans hurt themselves against a stone, to be
revenged they bite it as hard as that can, yea they bite the Arrows which light
upon them in fighting;

They bear great respect to ancient People, hearing them speak with much
attention, the younger complying in all things to their Sentiments and Wills.
The young men among the Caribeans have no conversation either with the Maids or
Married Women, and it is observed that the men in this Country are less
amorous than the Women, as they are in several places under the Torrid Zone;
Yet both sexes are very chaste, a rare quality among Savages. When those of
other Nations look earnestly upon the Women, and laugh at their nakedness they
are wont to say to them. Friends you are to look on us only between both our
Eyes; A virtue worthy admiration in a people that go naked and are as barbarous
as these. It is related that Captain Baron a Caribean, in one of the Incursions
they made upon the English in Montserrat, from whence he carried a great Booty,
took among other Prisoners a young Gentlewoman wife to one of the Officers of
the Island, whom he caused to be brought to one of his Houses in Dominica, and
being big with Child she was carefully attended by the Savage Women of the
Island during her lying in, and though she lived a great while among them, yet
neither he nor any other ever touched her, a great example of reservedness in
such People. Yet it must be acknowledged some of them have since degenerated
from that and many other Virtues of their Ancestots, the Europeans by their
Unchristianlike Treatment and pernicious examples, their perfidious breach of
promises, rifling and burning their Houses, and Villages, and Ravishing and
Debauching their Wives and Daughters, having taught them (to the perpetual
Infamy of the Christian name) dissimulation, lying, Treachery, perfidiousness,
Luxury,, and several other vices which were unknown before in these parts.
These Caribbeans are great lovers of cleanliness, a thing extraordinary among
Savages, so that if one should ease himself in their Gardens where their
Potato's and Cassavy Roots are planted, they would presently forsake them and
not make use of any thing therein.

CHAP. XVI. A Prospect of the Island of St. Vincent.
THe Island of St. Vincent lies in sixteen Degrees North from the Line, and is
about twenty four Miles long, and eighteen broad, wherein are several high
Mountains, between which are very fruitful Plains, yielding abundance of Sugar
Canes, which grow naturally without Planting; It is well watered with Rivers,
and has several good Harbors and Bays for Shipping; The English have here
some Plantations, but they are neither very considerable nor powerful herein,
it being the most populous of Caribeans, of any possessed by them, who have
here many Fair Villages, where they dwell pleasantly and without any
disturbance, and though they are jealous of the Strangers that live about them,
and stand on their Guard, when they come to their Roads, yet they do not deny
Cassavy Bread, Water, Fruits, and other Provisions growing in their Country to
them that want them, taking in Exchange, Wedges, Hooks, and other Implements of
Iron, which they much esteem. Their simplicity is very remarkable in several
things, as in admiring our Firearms, but especially Firelocks, to which they
see no Fire put as to Muskets, and therefore believe Maboya or the Devil sets
them on Fire; When the Moon is Eclipsed, they believe the Devil eats her, and
dance all night making a noise with Gourds, wherein are many pebble Stones;
When they smell any evil scent, they cry, Maboya or the Devil is here, let us
be gone from him.

Some years since most of the Caribeans were persuaded that Gunpowder was the
Seed of some Herb, and sowed some in their Gardens; They never make use of
Salt, accounting it extremely prejudicial to health, and when they see
Christians use it, cry, Compere, thou hastnest thy own death; but instead
thereof they season all things with American Pepper, neither do they eat
Swines-Flesh for this simple reason, lest they should have small Eyes like that
Beast, which they judge the greatest deformity, nor Tortoise or Turtle, least
they should participate of its lazyness and stupidity. They have no notion of a
Deity, so that neither Prayers, Ceremonies, Sacrifices, or any exercise or
Assembly whatsoever is to be found amongst them, but say the Earth is their
indulgent Mother, who furnishes them with all things necessary to Life; if any
discourse to them about God, and the Mysteries of our Religion, they hearken
attentively, but in the end, answer as it were in jest; Friend, thou art very
Eloquent and Subtle, I wish I could talk as well as thee: Nay they sometimes
say, That if they should be persuaded by such discourses, their Neighbors
would laugh at them; A certain Caribean being at Work on a Sunday, Mounsieur
Montel said to him, Friend, he that made Heaven and Earth will he angry with
thee for working on this Day, for he has appointed this Day for his Service,
and I, replied the Savage very bluntly, am already very angry with him, for
thou say, he is Master of the World and the Seasons; He it is therefore that
has forborne to send Rain in due time, and by reason of the great drowth, has
caused my Manioc, and my Potatoes to rot in the Ground; now since he has
treated me so ill, I will Work on every Sunday on purpose to vex him; A
pregnant Example of the brutality of this wretched People.

Yet have they a natural Sentiment of some Divinity or Superior power, that
has its residence in Heaven, which they say is contented to enjoy quietly the
delights of its own felicity, without being offended at the ill actions of Men,
and is endued with so great goodness, as not to take any revenge even of
Enemies, from whence they render Heaven, neither Honor nor Adoration
interpreting its liberality and long sufferance, an effect either of its
weakness or indifference toward Mankind; yet they believe there are a number of
good and evil Spirits, the good are their Gods, and every one imagins that
their is one of them particularly designed for his conduct, yet will not
acknowledge them Creators of the World, and when the Christians tell them, we
adore that God who made Heaven and Earth, and causes the Earth to bring forth
Fruits and Herbs for our nourishment, they answer; It is true thy God has made
the Heaven and the Earth of France, (or some other Country that they name) and
causes the Wheat to grow there, but our Gods have made our Country, and cause
our Manioc to grow; This Manioc is a Root of a small Tree or Shrub, whereof the
Caribeans make Bread. When they recover of some Disease, they set a little
Table at the end of their Hutts, and upon it their offerings, but without any
Adoration or Prayers, yet they invocate their false Gods, when they desire his
presence, but this is done by the Priest, and that upon four occasions; To
demand Revenge, To be healed of Diseases, To know the event of their Wars, To
invocate them to drive away the great Devil or Maboya, for they never pray to
him; His invocation is by singing some words and burning Tobacco, the scent
whereof is so pleasant, that it makes this little Devil appear, and when
several Priests call upon their several Gods together, as they speak, these
Gods or rather Devils rail, quarrel, and seem to fight with each other; These
Demons shelter themselves, sometimes in the Bones of dead Men taken out of the
Graves and wrapped in Cotton, and thereby give Oracles, saying it is the Soul of
the Deceased Person, they make use of them to bewitch their Enemies, the
Sorcerers wrapping up these Bones with something that belongs to the Enemy.

These Devils do also sometimes enter into the Bodies of Women, and speak by
them, clearly answering all questions demanded, after the Boy or Priest is
retired, the Devil stirs the Vessels, and makes a noise with his Jaws, as if he
were eating and drinking the Presents prepared for him, but the next day they
find he has not meddled with any thing. These poor wretches complain that
sometimes Maboya beats them severely, which though some impute to Melancholy
Dreams, yet other Persons of Quality and exquisite knowledge, who have long
lived in St. Vinc ents Island, do affirm that the Devils do effectually beat
them, and that they often show on their Bodies the visible marks of the blows
they have received, and they sometimes make horrid complaints of his cruelty,
saying, That he is of late mightily incensed against the Caribeans, accounting
the Europeans happy that their Maboya does not beat them. Mounsieur Montel, who
has been often present at their Assemblies, and converst much with the
Inhabitants of St. Vincent, gives this Testimony upon this sad occasion.
Notwithstanding the ignorance and Irreligion, wherein our Caribeans live, they
know by experience, and fear more than death the Evil Spirit whom they call
Maboya, for that dreadful Enemy does many times appear to them under most
hideous shapes: And what is more particularly observable, that unmerciful and
bloody Executioner, who is an insatiable Murderer from the beginning of the
World, cruelly wounds and torments those miserable People, when they are not so
forward as he would have them to engage in War, so that when they are
reproached with Blood-Thirstness, their Answer is, they are forced thereto by
Maboya against their wills.

This cursed Spirit it is that inflames them to act such cruelty upon their
Enemies taken in War, in relating whereof we had need dip our pen in blood,
being to draw a Picture which must raise horror in the beholder; In this the^^
appears nothing but Inhumanity, Barbarism, and Rage; to see rational Creatures
cruelly devouring those of the same kind with them, and filling themselves with
their flesh and blood, a thing which Pagans heretofore thought so full of
Execration that they imagined the Sun withdrew himself because he would not
give light to such bloody banquets. When these Cannibals or Eaters of men
(which is here their proper names) have brought home a Prisoner of War of the
Arovages, he belongs of right to him who either seized him in fight, or took
him running away, being then brought to this Island, he keeps him safe in his
house, and after he has made him fast four or five days, produces him upon
some solemn day of debauch to serve for a public Sacrifice to the immortal
hatred of his Countrymen toward that Nation. If any of their enemies dye on
the place of battle, they eat them there before they leave it, they design for
slavery only the young maids and Women taken in the War. They have tasted of
all the Nations that frequented them, and upon experience affirm that the
French are the most tender, and the Spaniards the hardest flesh of digestion,
but now, they feed on no Christians at all.

They abstain from several Cruelties formerly used before they killed their
Enemies, for whereas at present they think it enough to dispatch them at a blow
or two with a Club, and afterward cut them into pieces and having boiled to
devour them; They heretofore put them to several Torments before they gave them
the mortal blow, of which they themselves have given this deplorable relation
to those who have been so curious to inform themselves from their own mouths;
The Prisoner of War who had been so unfortunate to fall into their hands, and
was not ignorant that he was designed to receive the most cruel Treatment which
rage could suggest, armed himself with constancy, and to express how generous a
People the Arovages were, marched very cheerfully to the place of execution,
not being either bound or dragged thereto, and presented himself with a mild and
steady countenance in the midst of the Assembly, which he knew desired nothing
so much as his death, and not expecting their abuses and bitter discourses, he
prevented them in these Terms.

I know well enough upon what account you have brought me to this place, I
doubt not but you are desirous to fill yourselves with my blood, and that you
are impatient to exercise your Teeth upon my Body; But you have not so much
reason to Triumph to see me in this Condition, nor I much to be troubled
thereat; My Countrymen have put your Predecessors to greater miseries than you
are now able to invent against me; And I have done my part with them in
mangling, Massacring and devouring your People, your Friends, and your Fathers,
besides that I have Relations who will not fail to revenge my quarrel with
advantage upon you and upon your Children, for the most inhumane tortures you
intend against me, what Torments soever the most ingenious cruelty can dictate
to you for the taking away of my life is nothing in comparison of those which
my generous Nation prepares for you in exchange, therefore delay not the utmost
of your cruelty any longer, and assure your selves I both slight and laugh at
it; Somewhat of this Nature is that brave and bloody Bravado which we read of a
Brasilean Prisoner* ready to be devoured of his Enemies; Come on boldly, said
he to them, and feast your selves upon me, for at the same time you will seed
on your Fathers and Grandfathers, who served for nourishment to my Body; These
Muscles, thi^ flesh, and these veins are yours, blind Fools as you are; ^ou do
not observe that the substance of the Members of your Ancestors are yet to be
seen in them, taste them well and you will find the taste of your own flesh.

The Great Soul of our Arovagues was not only his lips, but showed it self also
in the effects which followed this Bravado; For after the company had a while
endured his menaces and arrogant defiance without touching him, one among them
came and burnt his sides with a flaming brand, another cut great Gobbets of
flesh out of him, and would cut bigger if the bones would have admitted it,
then they cast pepper into his wounds, others diverted themselves in shooting
Arrows at the poor Patient, and every one took a pleasure in tormenting him,
but he suffered with the same unconcerned countenance, and expressed not the
least sense of pain; After they had thus sported a long time with the poor
wretch, at last growing weary of insulting and out-braved by his constancy
which seemed still the same, one of them came and at one blow dispatched him
with his Club. This is the usage wherewith the Caribeans heretofore treated
their Prisoners of War, but now they think it enough to put them to a speedy
death. As soon as this unfortunate Person is thus laid dead upon the place, the
young men take the Body, and having washed it cut it in pieces, and then boil
some part, and broil some upon wooden Frames made like a Gridiron for that
purpose. When this detestable dish is ready and seasoned according to their
Palates they divide it into so many parts as there are persons present, and
joyfully devour it, thinking that the World cannot afford any other repast
equally delicious; The Women lick the very sticks whereon the fat dropped, not
so much from the deliciousness they find in that kind of sustenance as from the
excessive pleasure they conceive in being revenged in that manner of their
chiefest enemies, and to heighten this rage and hatred against the Arovages
they save the fat that comes from it; and keep it carefully in little Gourds to
pour some few drops thereof into their sauces at their solemn entertainments,
so to perpetuate as much as lies in their power, the motive of revenge.

CHAP. XIX. A Prospect of the Island of Antego.
THe Island of Antego lies in the Latitude of sixteen degrees and eleven
minutes between Barbados and Desiderado. In length about Twenty Miles, and
much of the same breadth; The access to it is dangerous for shipping by reason
of the Rocks which incompass it; It was conceived heretofore that it was not to
be inhabited upon presumption that there was no fresh Water in it, but the
English who have planted themselves in it have met with some, and make Ponds
and Cisterns to supply that defect, it being inhabited by eight or nine hundred
Persons. The Commodities this Island affords are Sugar, Jndico, Ginger and
Tobacco. It abounds in tame Cattle, and all sorts of Fish, among which the
Shark-Fish deserves remark; It is a kind of Sea-dog, or Sea-Wolf, the most
devouring of all Fishes, and the most greedy of man's flesh and therefore
dangerous to those that swim, he lives altogether by prey, and commonly follows
ships to feed on the filth cast out of them into the Sea; These Monsters seem
yellow in the Water, some of them of a vast length and bigness, insomuch that
they are able to cut a man in two at one bite; Their Skin so rough that files
are made of it to polish Wood; Their heads are flat, and the opening of their
mouth not just before the snout but under it, so that they are forced to turn
their Bellies almost upward when they seize their Prey; Their Teeth are very
sharp and broad jagged about like a Saw, of which some have three or four ranks
in each Jaw Bone, they lie within his gums, but sufficiently appear when there
is occasion. These cruel Sea-Dogs are attended by two or three small Fishes and
sometimes more, which go before them with such swiftness, and exactness that
they either go forward or stay as he does; The Meat of him is not good, but the
brains are counted useful against the stone and Gravel.

Another Ravenous Sea Monster found on these Coasts is called the Becune, a
dreadful enemy to Mankind, in shape like a Pike but seven or eight foot long,
he lives by prey, and furiously fastens like a bloud-hound on the men he
perceives in the Water. He carries away whatever he once fastens on, and his
teeth are so venomous, that the least touch of them becomes mortal, if some
Sovereign Antidote be not instantly applied to divert and abate the Poison.
There are another kind of Becunes by some call Sea Wood-Cocks, their beaks
being somewhat like a Wood-cocks bill only the upper part is much longer than
the lower, and it moves both Jaws with like facility; Some of them are four
foot long and twelve Inches broad near the head, which is somewhat like a
Swines, with two large eyes extremely Shining, he has two Fins on the sides
and under the Belly a great plume rising higher like a Cocks comb, reaching
from head to Tail: Besides the long solid beak, it has two sorts of Horns,
hard, black, and about a foot and an half in length which hang down under his
throat and are particular to this kind of fish, and these he can easily hide in
a hollow place under his Belly which serves them for a Sheath, it has no
Scales but a rough black Skin on the back, and the meat is eatable. Another
Fish found near these Islands is called the Sea Vrchin or Hedghog, and well
deserves that name, it is round as a Ball and full of Sharp prickles for which
it is feared, some call it the armed Fish, they are sent as Presents to the
curious to hang in their closets.

The Sea Parrots are likewise admirable which have beautiful sparkling eyes the
Balls clear as Crystal, enclosed within a circle as green as an Emerald of
which color are the Scales of their backs; They have no Teeth but Jaws above
and below of a solid bone very strong, of the same color with their Scales and
divided into little Compartiments very beautiful to the Eye, they live on shel
fish, and with those hard Jaw-bones they crush, as between two Milstones,
Oysters, Muscles and other shell fish to get out the meat. They are an
excellent kind of Fish to eat, and so big that some of them have weighed above
Twenty pound. The Dorado by some called the Sea Bream, by others the Amber-Fish
is also common in these patts, so called, because in the Water the head seems
to be of a green gilt, and the rest of the Body as yellow as gold. It has
pleasure in following Ships, but is so swift that it is very hard to take,
being extremely well furnished for swimming, having the forepart of the head
sharp, the back bristled with prickles reaching to the Tail which is forked,
two Fins on each side the head and as many under the Belly, and the whole body
rather broad than big, all which give him a strange command of the Water, he is
as good meat as Trout or Salmon, they are caught only with a piece of White
Linen tied to the Hook.

This Island likewise abounds in several sorts of Fowls and Birds, those of an
extraordinary kind are first the Canades, which are the most beautiful Birds in
the World (says my Author,) under the belly and Wings it is of a waving Aurora
color, the back and one half of the Wings of a very bright Sky color, the
tail and greater feathers of the Wings are mixed with a Sparkling Carnation,
diversifyed with a Sky, upon the back it was grass green and shining black,
which very much added to the Gold and Azure of the other Plumage, but the most
beautiful part was the head covered with a murrey down, chequered with green,
yellow, and a pale blew which reached down wavingly to his back, the eyelids
were white, and the apple of the eye yellow and red like a Ruby set in Gold, it
had upon the head a tuft or C^p of Feathers of a Vermillion Red sparkling like
a lighted Coal, which was encompassed by o^ (...) lesser Feathers of a Pearl
color. It was abo^^ (...) ^ess of a Pheasant, and very kind and familiar
with^^ ^^ends, but severe to its Enemies. This that our A^^^ saw spoke the
Dutch, Spanish, and Indian Language, and in the last he sung Airs as a natural
Indian; He also imitated the cries of all sorts of Poultry and other creatures
about the House, he called his Friends by their Names and Sirnames, and flew to
them when he saw them especially when he was hungry, and if they had been long
absent, expressed his Joy at their return. In a word, he was a present for a
Prince, if he could have been brought over the Sea.

The Flamant is a great and beautiful bird about the bigness of a Wild goose,
his beak is like a Spoon, his Neck and Legs very long, so that his Body is
three foot from the ground, when they are young their feathers are white, then
murrey, and when old of a bright Carnation, they are seldom seen but in great
Companies, and their hearing and smelling is so perfect that they smell the
Huntsmen and firearms at a great distance, and therefore for fear of surprise
they live in open places in the midst of the Fens, one of them being always on
the Guard, while the rest are searching the Waters for a livelihood; as soon as
he hears the least noise or perceives a man, he takes his flight and gives a
great cry for a signal to the rest to follow him; when the Huntsmen take them
they get the wind of them that they may not smell the Powder, and covering
themselves with an Oxhide creep on their hands and feet till they come to a
place whence they may be sure to kill them.

CHAP* VIII A Prospect of the Island of Mevis.
THe Island of Mevis or Nevis lies in seventeen degrees, and nineteen Minutes
North of the Line; It is not above eighteen Miles round, and in the midst there
is but one only Mountain, which is very high, and covered with great Trees up
to the very top, about which all the Plantations are settled, beginning from the
Seaside to the very highest part of it; It has within it diverse Springs of
Fresh Water, whereof some are strong enough to make their way into the Sea, one
Spring has the waters so hot and Mineral, that from the force of it there are
Baths made, found very beneficial in several Diseases. The English who planted
themselves there in 1628. and are still Possessors thereof, being now about
three or four Thousand Inhabitants, drive a very handsome Trade with Sugar,
Ginger, Tobacco and Cotton, which they exchange for other conveniences, it is
the best governed of any of the Caribee Islands, impartial justice being
administered, and all debauchery and immorality severely punished by a Council
of the most Eminent and Ancient Inhabitants. There are three Churches erected
for the Service of God; And for the security of Vessels in the Road, there is a
Fort, wherein are planted several great Guns, that command at a great distance,
which likewise secure their Storehouses, into which all the Commodities
imported for the use of the Inhabitants are disposed, and from thence
distributed to those that have occasion for them; It is indifferent Fruitful,
and has store of Deer, and other Game for Hunting.

In this Island there are Lizards five Foot in length, and a Foot about, their
skins are of diverse Colors, Strange Creatures in America
according to the different Soil they are bred in, some of them have their
Scales and Skin so glittering, that at a distance they look like rich Cloth of
Gold and Silver, they have four Feet, each with five Claws, and very sharp
Nails, they run fast and climb Trees dexterously, and whether they love Men or
are stupid, they stand still, looking on the Huntsmen, suffering them to put a
Gin with a running knot about their Necks, which is fastened to the end of a
Pole, whereby they get them off the Trees where they rest themselves; Their
Jaws are wide, with very sharp Teeth, their Tongues thick, and they hold fast
what they catch with their Teeth, which are not at all venomous, the Females
lay Eggs about the bigness of Woodcocks, the Shell is soft, which they lay deep
in the Sand on the Sea-shores to be hatched by the Sun, they are sometimes
eaten though disliked by many. The Annolis is another creature very common in
all the Plantations, about the bigness of a Lizard, but the head longer, the
Skin yellowish, and on their backs they have green, blew and gray streaks drawn
from the top of the head to the end of the Tail, they live in holes under
ground, whence in the night they make a very loud and importunate noise, in the
day they are continually wandering about Cottages for subsistence. A Land-pike
is another strange Reptile so called from its likeness to that Fish, but
instead of Fins it has four feet which are so weak that they only crawl on the
ground, and wind their bodies as Pikes newly taken out of the Water, the
longest are about fifteen inches and proportionably big; Their Skin is covered
with little Scales which shine extremely, and are of a Silver gray color, in
the night they make a hideous noise from under the Rocks, and the bottoms of
hollow places where they are lodged; It is more sharp and grating to the ear
than Frogs or Toads, and they change their notes according to the variety of
the place where they lurk, they are seldom seen but a little before night, and
when met in the day their strange motion is apt on a sudden to affright the
Spectator.

There is an Insect in these Islands called a Soldier, somewhat like a Snail,
but have no Shells proper to themselves, and therefore to secure the weakness
of their little bodies against the injuries of the Air, and the attempts of
other Beasts, they take possession of such a shell as they find most
convenient, which is commonly that of Perriwinkles; As they grow bigger they
Shift their Shells and get into larger, they have instead of a foot an
instrument like a Crabs Claw, wherewith they close the entrance of their
Shells, and secure their whole body, if he be set near the Fire he forsakes his
Quarters, if it be presented to him to get in again he goes in backward, when
they all intend to change lodgings, to which they are much inclined, there
happens a serious engagement managed with that clasping Instrument, till at
length the strongest by Conquest gets possession which he peaceably enjoys
during his pleasure. Another Insect called the flying Tygar is observable, the
Body is chequered with spots of diverse colors as the Tygar is, about the
bigness of an horned Beetle, the head sharp with two great Eyes as green and
Sparkling as an Emerald, his mouth is armed with two hard hooks extremely
sharp, wherewith he holds fast his prey while he gets the substance, the whole
body is covered with a hard and swarthy crustiness which serves him for armor;
Under his Wings, which are also of solid matter, there are four less Wings as
soft as Silk, it has six Legs, each whereof has three Joints, and they are
bristled with certain little prickles; In the day he is continually catching
Flies, and other little Animals, and in the Night sits Singing on the Trees.
The Hornfly is another which has two snouts like an Elephant, one turning
upward, and the other down about three Inches long, the head is blew like a
Grasshopper, the two Eyes green, the upper side of the Wings of a bright Violet,
Damaskt with Carnation, heightened by a small natural thread of Silver, the
Colors drawn with such Curiosity, that the most curious Painting cannot reach
it. I imagined (says my Author (it had been Artificial because of the lively
Carnation color and the string of Silver, but having taken it in my hand, I
thought nature must certainly be in an excellent humor, and had a mind to
divert her self when she bestowed such sumptuous Robes on this little Q. of
Insects.

A Monstrous Spider is likewise found in these parts so large that when her
legs are spread she takes up above the breadth of a man's hand, the Body consists
of 2 parts, one flat and the other round, smaller at one end like a Pigeons
egg, with a hole in the back, which is as it were their Navil, it is armed with
two Sharp tushes solid and black, smoot and shining, so that some set them in
Gold for Tooth-pickers, esteemed to have a virtue of preserving from pain and
corruption the places rubbed therewith, when they grow old they are covered
with a swarthy down soft as Velvet, they have ten feet having each four Joints
armed at the ends with a black hard-horn. They every year shift their old Skins
and their two Tushes, they feed on flies and such vermin, and it has been
observed that in some places their Webs are so strong that little Birds can
hardly extricate themselves from them. The Palmer-worm is notable from the
almost infinite number of Feet, which are as bristles under his Body, and help
him to creep along the ground with incredible swiftness if persued; It is half
a Foot long, the upper part covered with swarthy Scales, which are hard and
jointed one within another like the Tiles of a House, but what is dangerous in
this Creature is, that he has a kind of Claw both in his head and Tail,
wherewith he twitches so home and so poisonous the wounded place, that for four
and twenty hours the patient feels great pain. There was some years since
brought from thence a Bird about the bigness and shape of a Swallow, only the
two great Feathers of the Tail a little shorter and the beak turned down like a
Parrot, and the feet like a Ducks, it was black only under the Belly, a little
white like our Swallows, in fine, it was so like them that it may be called the
Swallow of America.

The Fly Catcher is a very pretty Animal, it is a four legged Creature, of a
very small size, some of them seem to be covered with fine Gold or Silver
Brocado, others with a mixture of green, Gold, and other delightful colors,
they are so familiar that they come boldly into rooms, where they do no
mischief, nay on the contrary clear them of Flies and such Vermin, which they
perform with such nimbleness and slight that the cunning of Huntsmen is not
comparable to it, for he lies down on a plank where he hopes the Fly will come
and keeps his eye always fixed upon it, putting his head into as many different
postures as the Fly shifts places, and standing upon his fore-feet and gaping
after it, he half opens his little Wide Mouth as if he had already swallowed it
in hope, nay though a noise be made and one come near him, nothing disturbs
him, and having at last found his advantage he starts so directly on his prey
that he very seldom misses it; They are so tame as to come upon the Table at
dinner, and attempt to catch a Fly there or upon their hands or cloths being
very neat clean things; They lay small eggs as big as Pease, which having
covered with a little Earth they leave to be hatched by the Sun, as soon as
they are killed all their beauty vanishes, and they become pale. It may be
reckoned a kind of Camelion, assuming the color of those things on which it
makes its ordinary residence, for being about Palm Trees it is green, about
Orange Trees yellow and the like.

CHAP. XIX. A Prospect of the Island of St. Christophers.
THis Island was so named by Christopher Columbus, who finding it very pleasant
gave it his own name, which the shape of the Mountains likewise inclined him
to, for it has on its upper part as it were upon one of its shoulders another
lesser Mountain, as St. Christopher is painted like a Giant, carrying our
Savior upon his as it were a little Child; It is situated seventeen degrees
and twenty five Minutes on this side the Line, and is about twenty five Leagues
in compass, the soil being light and sandy is apt to produce all sorts of the
Country Fruits, with many of the choicest growing in Europe; It lies high in
the midst by reason of some very high Mountains, out of which arise several
Rivers, which do sometimes so suddenly overflow through the Rains falling from
the Mountains, that the Inhabitants are thereby surprised; The whole Island is
divided into four Cantons or Quarters, two whereof are possessed by the
Engli^h, and two by the French, but so separated that People cannot go from one
quarter to the other, without passing over the Lands of one of the two Nations.
The English have more little Rivers in their Division, the French more of the
plain Country fit for Tillage; The English exceed the French in number, but the
French have four Forts and the English only two, and to prevent differences
between the two Nations, each of them have a Guard upon the Frontiers of their
Division, which is renewed every day.

There is a fine Salt Pit in the Island, and some conceive there is a Silver
Mine, but because the Salt Pits, Woods, Havens and Mines are common to both
People, it is not regarded, besides the great stock, and multitude of slaves
which such an enterprise would require; The true Silver Mine is Sugar; This
Island may be easily encompassed by Land, but one cannot pass through the midst
of it, by reason of several great and steep Mountains, between which are
dreadful Rocks, Precipices, and springs of hot Water, yea some springs of
Sulphur which causes one of them to be called the Sulphur Mountain; The Island
seems to descend gently toward the Sea, and is divided into several Stages,
from the uppermost whereof a man may take a very pleasant Prospect of all the
Plantations from thence downward; There are many gallant Houses built both by
the English and French, and the English have also erected five fair Churches
well furnished within with Pulpits and Seats of excellent Joyners work of
precious wood; The Ministers being sent thither by the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury. The French and English Colonies, had their beginning at the same
time, for in 1625. Monsieur Desnambuck a French, and St. Thomas Warner an
English Gentleman jointly took possession of St. Christophers on the same day,
in the names of the Kings of Great Britain and France their Masters, that they
might have a place of safe retreat, and a good Haven for the Ships of both
Nations bound for America, as being well furnished with Provisions, and
therefore often visited by the Spaniards, who sometimes left the sick there to
be looked to by the Caribeans with whom they had made a peace upon those Terms.

These two Gentlemen having thus taken possession of the Island, left some men
therein to secure it, and returned for the further establishment of these
Colonies, to their respective Countries; But before they parted hence,
suspecting some private Intelligence between the Indians and Spaniards for
destroying all the English and French in their absence, they in one night rid
their hands of the most factious of that Nation, and soon after forced all the
rest, who were got together in several Bodies and stood upon their Guard, to
retire to some other Islands, and leave that to their disposal. After this they
both returned home, where their Conquests and Proceedings being approved of by
the Kings their Masters, they returned with recruits of men in the quality of
Governors, and Lieutenants under the Kings of Great Britain and France, and
having divided the Island according to their first Agreement, and the English
having plentiful Provisions from London, prospered much more than the French,
who wanted necessary assistance.

In 1629. a powerful Fleet from Spain under Don Frederick de Toledo had
received order from that King, that before he fell down to the Havana, he
should touch at St. Christophers, and force thence all the English and French,
who had planted themselves there for some years before. This Navy consisted of
twenty four great Ships of Burden, and fifteen Frigots, who first seized some
English Ships lying at Anchor near the Isle of Mevis; And then came and cast
Anchor in the Road of St. Christophers, in the French Division, and the Forts
of both Colonies being not in a condition to stand out a Siege, unfurnished
with Ammunition and Provisions, nay all the Forces of the Nations in
Conjunction, not being able to have opposed so great an Army, it was a great
discouragement to them, yet resolving the Enemy should not boast they had
compassed their designs without blows they made a very Vigorous opposition, but
being over powered by number, the French forsook the Island, ^^snam^u^
Imbarquing all his Men in certain Ships, which chanced to be in the Haven. The
Quarters of the English upon this Intelligence were in great disorder, and in
continual expectation that the Spaniards would fall upon them. Some
endeavoring to escape by Sea, or shelter themselves in the Mountains, while
others somewhat more courageous, sent Deputies to Don Frederick to propose an
accommodation; But all the answer they received was, an express command
immediately to depart the Island, or to be treated with that Rigor, which the
Law of Arms permits to be used toward those who wrongfully possess what belongs
not to them, and to speed their departure, he ordered those English Ships taken
at Mevis should be restored to them, wherein they should Imbarque Instantly for
England, and because it was impossible those Vessels should contain so great a
number, he permitted the rest to continue in the Isle till they had opportunity
of Transportation.

These things dispatched, Don Frederick weighed Anchor, but as soon as the Fleet
was out of sight, the English who were left behind, began to rally, and took a
resolution courageously to carry on the Settlement of their Colony; During
these Transactions at St. Christophers, the French who went to Sea, having
suffered many inconveniences, were forced to put in at the Islands of St.
Martin and Montserrat, but looked on them as Deserts in comparison of the place
they had left, and being desirous to be informed of the condition of the
Spaniards there, sent one of their Ships to St. Christophers, who returning
gave them an account the Enemy was gone, and the English courageously employed
in Re building, Planting, and repairing Desolations; This unexpected good News
revived their decayed hopes, and persuaded them to a speedy return; The English
Colony with constant supplies from London, from that time grew very powerful,
peopling not only this place, but sending new Plantations from hence to
Barbuda, Montserrat, ^ntego and Barbados, which are grown very numerous and
famous for the Trade of the rich commodities they are furnished with, as well
as this curious Island, whose chiefest Trade is Sugar Tobacc^, Cotton, Ginger,
with several other sorts of Fruits and Provisions.

The Rocquet is a pretty Animal in this Isle, their skin is of the color of a
withered leaf, marked with little Yellow or bluish Points, they go on four
feet those before being highest, their Eyes lively and sparkling, their heads
always lifted up, and so active that they leap up and down perpetually like
Birds when they make no use of their Wings, their Tails are so turned up toward
their back that they make a Circle and an half; They love to look upon men, and
are constantly staring on them; When they are pursued they open their Mouths,
and put out their Tongues like little Hounds. There is a large Bird in the
Carribees called the Eagle of Orinca much like an Eagle in shape; All his
Feathers are of light Gray marked with black Spots, save that the ends of his
Wings and Tail are yellow, he has a piercing sight, and feeds on other Birds,
yet to show his generosity he never sets upon the waeker sort, but those that
are armed with crooked beaks and sharp Tallons like himself, nay it is
observable he never seizes his prey on the ground or a Tree, but stays till it
has taken his flight that he may engage it in the open air with equal
advantage, upon whom he furiously fastens his Tallons, and having mastered them
tears them in pieces and devours them. There is also a large Bird in these
Islands called a Craw fowl about the bigness of a great Duck, the feathers Ash
color, and hi^eous to the eye, it has a long Flat beak, a great head, small
eyes deep set in his heed, and a short neck, under which hangs a bag or Craw so
big that it will contain two Gallons of Water, they are commonly found on Trees
by the Seaside, where as soon as they perceive a Fish at advantage they seize
it, and swallow it whole, they are so attentive on their Fishing having their
Eye constantly on the Sea, that they are easily shot and become a Prey to
others; their sight is so admirable that they will discover a Fish at a great
distance in the Sea and above a fathom under Water, yet stay till they come
almost even with it before they seize; Their Flesh is not to be eaten; Here are
likewise found a kind of Pheasants which are called Pintado's, because they are
as it were painted with colors, and have about them small points like so many
Eyes on a Dark ground.

To conclude with these Fowls we shall give an Account of the Colibry, or
Humming Bird, which is admirable for its beauty, bulk, sweet scent, and manner
of life, for being the least of all Birds he gloriously confirm the saying of
Pliny, That nature is ever greatest in its least Productions; Some of these
Birds are no bigger bodied than the greater sorts of Flies, yet of such
beautiful feathers, that the neck, wings and back represent the Rainbow, there
are others that have such a bright red under their neck that at a distance one
would imagine it to be a Carbuncle, the Belly and under the Wings are yellow as
Gold, the thighs Green like an Emerald, the feet and beak as black as polished
Ebony, the two little eyes two diamonds set in an oval of the color of
burnished steel, the Head is grass green, which gives it such a luster that it
looks as if gilt; The Male has a little Tuft on the head in which may be seen
all the colors that enamel this little Body, the miralcle of the feathered
Common wealth and one of the rarest productions of nature; He moves that little
Crown of Feathers at pleasure, and is more beautiful than the Female; As his
bulk and plumage is miraculous, so is the activity of his flight, making a
noise with his Wings as if a little Whirlwind were suddenly raised in the Air,
which surprises those who hear him before they see him; He lives only on the
dew which he sucks from the Flowers of Trees with his Tongue which is longer
than his beak, hollow as a reed, and about the bigness of a small needle; it is
pleasant to look on him in that posture for spreading abroad his little crest,
one would think (...) had on his head a Crown of Rubies and all sorts of
^^ecions stones, and the Sun adding to his Luster makes him look like a
composition of precious Stones animated and flying in the Air; The female
commonly lays but two Eggs which are oval about the bigness of a Pea or small
Pearl: And though he lose much of his beauty when dead, yet there is so much
left, that some Ladies have worn them for Pendants, and imagined they became
them better than any other, its smell being also excellent, even like the
finest Musk and Amber.

CHAP. XXI. A Prospect of the Island of Barbados.
Barbados is the most considerable Island the English have among the
Carribees, and lies in thirteen degrees and twenty Minutes on this side the
Equator, and though not above Twenty four Miles long and fifteen broad, yet was
many years ago accounted to have above Twenty thousand Inhabitants besides
Negro Slaves who are thought a far greater number. In the reign of K. James the
first a Ship of Sr. William Curteens returning from Fernambuck in Brasil, being
driven by soul weather upon this Coast, chanced to fall upon this Island, and
anchoring before it staid some time to inform themselves of the nature thereof,
which was so exceedingly overgrown with Woods that they could find no Champion
or Savana's for men to dwell in, nor any Beasts but a multitude of Swine, which
the Portugals put ashore long before for breed, if they should at any time be
cast on that shore in foul weather, and the fruits and roots that grew there
afforded so great plenty of food as they multiplied abundantly, so that the
Natives of the other Islands use to come thither a hunting; This discovery
being made, and advice given to their Friends in England, other Ships were
sent, and having cut down the Woods, and cleared the ground, they planted
Potatoes, Plantines and Maiz, which with the Hogsflesh they found served only
to keep Life and Soul together, and their supplies from England, coming so slow
and uncertain, they were often driven to great extremities, but in the year 1627.
when they had more hands, and having Tobacco, Indico, Cotton Wool, and Fustick
Wood to trade with, some Ships were invited with hope of gain to visit them,
bringing for exchange such things as they wanted, as working Tools of Iron, and
Steel, Clothes, Shirts, Drawers, Hose, Shoes, Hats, and more Planters; So that
in a short time they grew very considerable, especially when their Sugar Canes
were grown, and they had learned the Art of making Sugar; The Inhabitants which
consist of English, Scotch, Irish, with some few Dutch, French and Jews, were
lately calculated to be above fifty Thousand, and the Negro's about an hundred
Thousand; So that they can in a short time arm Ten Thousand fighting men, which
with the natural advantage of the place, is able to defy the most potent Enemy,
as the Spaniards have sound to their cost, having in vain assaulted it several
times.

It has only one River or rather a Lake which runs not far into the Land, yet
the Country lying low, and level they have diverse Ponds, and are supplied with
Rain Water by making Cisterns in their Houses; The Air is very hot for eight
months, and would be more insupportable were it not for the cool breezes which
rise with the Sun, and blow still fresher as that grows higher, but always from
the Northeast except in the Turnado, and then it chop* about to the South an
hour or two, and after returns as before, the other four months are not so hot,
but like the air of England about the middle of May, and though they sweat yet
find not such faintness as in England in August, neither are they thirsty
unless overheated with labor or strong drink. Their Bread is made of the root
of a small Tree or Shrub which they call Cassavy, and account it wholesome and
nourishing.

They have a drink called Mobbie made of Potatoes; Another named Perino, which
is reckoned much better though not altogether so pleasant, made by the Indians
for their own drinking of the Cassavy Root, which of it self is a strong
Poison, and this they cause their old Women whose Breath and Teeth have been
tainted with many several Poxes, to chew and spit out into the Water, for the
better breaking and macerating the Root, and in three or four hours this juice
will work and purge it self of the poisonous quality, for the old Women's
poysnous Breath and the Poison of the Cassavy being opposites, work with such
vehemence against each other as they spend their poisonous quality in the
conflict; They drink likewise Puncb, Plum drink, Plantane drink, A strong drink
made of the skimming of Sugar, Beveridge, and Wine of Pines, which is the best
of all; Their Meat is generally Hogs Flesh exceeding good, they feeding on
nothing but Pompious as sweet as Mellons, Plantanes, Sugar Canes and Maiz; They
have also Turkies, Pullets, Muscovy Ducks, Turtle Doves, Pigeons and Rabbits;
With excellent Fish, many kinds not known to us, as the green Turtle, who
coming in with the Tide, lie upon the Sands till the next return, and are
easily taken in the Lucaick Islands, though not in this, but sent hither; For
it is but turning them on their Backs with staves, and there they lie till they
are fetched away; A large Turtle (as we have mentioned) will have in her body
half a Bushel of Eggs which she lays in the Sand, where they are hatched by the
Sun. When you are to kill one of these Fishes, you lay him on his Back on a
Table, and when he sees you come with a Knife in your hand to kill him, he
sends forth the most grievous sighs that ever were heard, and sheds Tears in
abundance, after he is opened, and his Heart taken out, if you lay it in a
Dish, it will stir and pant ten hours after the Fish is dead, there is no more
delicate in taste, nor more nourishing than he.

This Island may be divided into Masters, Servants and Slaves; The Masters live
in all affluence of pleasure and delight, the Servants after five years become
Freemen of the Island, and then employ their time as may be most to their
advantage; but the Negro-Slaves and their Children being in Bondage for ever,
are preserved with greater care; but used with such severity, as occasioned a
great Conspiracy against their Masters some years since, which was so closely
carried as no discovery was made till the day before it was to be acted, and
then one of them either failing of his courage, or out of love to his Master,
discovered and prevented it, for which many of them were put to death, as a
terror to the rest, who being so numerous might prove dangerous, but that they
are kept in such strict aw, and not suffered to touch or handle a Weapon, so
that nothing is more terrible to them than Gunshot; and besides being of
different Countries, they speak diverse Languages, and do not understand one
another; For in some of those places in Africa, where petty Kingdoms are, they
sell their Subjects, and such as they take in Battle, whom they make Slaves,
yea some poor Men sell their Servants, their Children, and sometimes their
Wives, for such Traffic as our Merchants bring them; When they are brought
hither, the Planters buy them out of the Ship, where they find them stark
naked, and therefore cannot be deceived in any outward Infirmity, choosing them
as they do Horses in a Market, the strongest, youthfulest and most beautiful
yield the greatest price; Thirty Pound Sterling for a Man, and Twenty five for
a Woman, is usual; if they buy any that have no Wives, they will come to their
Masters and complain they cannot live without, and he provides them one by the
next Ships; Religion they have none, yet seem to acknowledge a God, by looking
up to Heaven for revenge when they are wronged; One Negro Woman being brought
to Bed of two Children, her Husband provided a Cord to hang her as false to
him, but the Overseer prevented it, by telling him it was common with the
English Women, and they liked them the better, yet if he were resolved to Hang
her, he should be Hanged himself by her, the fear of which hindered him.

The chief Towns in this Isle are St. Michaels formerly called Bridge-Town,
Little Bristol, St. James, and Charlestown, with other Parishes of less note,
and several Bays on the Seacoasts. The Government is by Laws agreeable to those
in England; For which they have Courts of Judicature, Justices of Peace,
Constables, Churchwardens and the like. The Island is very strong as well by
nature as Art; It is divided into eleven Precincts, wherein are fourteen
Churches and Chapels, the whole so filled with Houses that it may almost seem
one Great Town. There is a Fish called a Rock-fish taken near this Island,
which is red, Intermixed with several other colors very delightful to the Eye;
And a great Fly called by the Indians Cucuyos which gives such a great light,
in the night that it is called the Flying Torch of America, not only guiding
the Traveller by showing his way in the night, but with the assistance of this
light a man may easily write and read the smallest print; The Indians having
these Flies fastened to their hands and feet go a hunting all night by the
light of them, which the famous Dubartas thus describes.

New Spains Cucuyo in his forehead brings
Two burning Lamps, two underneath his Wings,
Whose shining Rays serve often in darkest night
The Embroyderers hand in Royal works to light;
The Ingenious Turner with awakeful eye
To polish fair his purest Ivory,
The Vserer to count his glistring Treasures,
The learned scribe to limn his Golden measures.
If five or six of these Flys were put into a Vessel of fine Crystal, no doubt
it would be a living incomparable Torch answerable to the Poets description.
The present Governor of Barbados is Sir Richard Dutton.

CHAP. XXII. A Prospect of the Island of Jamaica.
Jamaica is situate in seventeen or eighteen Degrees of North Latitude, its
shape somewhat oval being about 170 miles long, and about seventy broad, in the
midst whereof runs a continued ridg of high Mountains, so that some have
compared the Island to a saddle; from hence flow diverse fresh springs, which
cause many Rivers to the great refreshment of the Inhabitants; It came into the
possession of the English upon this occasion.

In 1655. Oliver Cromwell who then usurpt the Government, having made Peace with
the Dutch, resolved upon an Adventure against the Spaniards, providing a Fleet,
and giving out that the Voyage would be very profitable, being designed to a
place where there was much Gold and store of riches, but concealed the design
to the very last; Hope of gain encouraged many of low fortunes to engage in
this enterprise, so that the Fleet, was soon filled, which setting Sail, Dec.
28. Venables commanding the Land Forces, and Pen being General at Sea, they put
in at Barbados Jan. 28. Following; The King of Spain was not ignorant these
preparations were designed against the West Indies, and having dispatched
Expresses into those parts, he sent the Marquess of Leda in a ^plendid Amb ssy
t^ Cromwell, but had such cold reception that he quickly returned; In the mean
time the Fleet steered its course from Barbados to Hispaniola one of the
richest Islands in America, which was much wondered at, since at that time no
open Hostility was declared against Spain, and though it was alleged, That the
conditions of Peace extended not beyond the line, yet the Spaniard looked on it
as an absolute breach; The beginning of this Enterprise met with a Remarkable
check, for when General Venables might have landed very near St. Domingo, the
chief Town in the Isle and deserted by the Garrison, yet ruled by strange
Counsels of his own, or as some say overuled by his Wife, he set his men ashore
ten Leagues Westward of it, whereupon the Spaniards took Courage and betook
themselves again to the defense of St. Domingo.

The English landing, and seeing no opposition thought themselves safe, and
Lords of the Indies, and were already sharing the Golden Mines among
themselves; When contrary to their expectation, the General caused it to be
proclaimed at the head of the Army, that none upon pain of Death should Plunder
any Gold, Plate or Jewels, or kill any Cattle; Which damping their Spirits and
the excessive heat of the Climate weakening their Bodies, by that time they had
marched a most tedious and disconsolate March, through thick Woods, in deep
scalding Sands, ready to perish with miserable drought and Thirst for want of
Water, of which they met not with a drop in many miles, they were brought into
such a Condition that they needed not an Enemy to kill them, being already
almost dead with faintness and weakness, so that the Spaniards Negro's and
Molatto's falling upon them, destroyed them without resistance, till they were
weary of killing, and those thought themselves happy, who could make their
escape to their Ships. Major General Hains and above six hundred others fell in
this skirmish besides near as many more in straggling Parties, and all this
Execution was done with the loss of not above sixty of the Enemy. The remnant
of this Naval Army, that they might not be thought to have undertaken so long a
Voyage, and of such expectation in vain, possessed themselves with little or no
opposition of the Island of Jamaica, which though not so plentiful and rich as
the place they aimed at, yet with much Industry, and the Supplies sent them
from England, they made it a tolerable Habitation to abide in, planting
themselves at Oristano the chief, and then only Town therein. In 1658. five
hundred Spaniards under Don Christopher Arnaldo Saffer landed in this Island,
and began to fortify themselves at a place called St. Ann, but were fiercely
set upon by the English, and forced to fly into the Woods and Mountains; and
another body of three hundred Spaniards, having fortified themselves at
Chareras in the North of this Island, were by the then Governor Colonel Doyly
driven quite out of their hold, Don Francisco de Preucia, the Maestro del Campo
with others taken, many killed, and the rest utterly dispersed.

This grand disaster with many petty ill successes caused the Spaniards to
despair of regaining the Island, and to Ship off most of their Plate and Women,
and the Negro's finding the greatest part of their Masters to be dead, killed
the Governor, and decline all obedience to the Spaniards, choosing themselves a
Black for their Governor, and such was the weakness of the Spaniards, that
instead of correcting them they were forced to beg their assistance, which yet
would not prevail, for soon after they submitted to the English Government, and
made Discoveries of the Spaniards and Negro's that would not join with them;
whereupon the next year the Spaniards quite deserted the Island, except thirty
or forty of their Slaves who betook themselves to the Mountains, but being
afraid of a discovery, and to be pursued to death for some Murders by them
committed, they built themselves Canoo's, and in them fled to Cuba, and never
since had any considerable attempt made upon them. The English being thus
become Masters of the Island, formed themselves into a Colony, and begun to
settle Plantations, while others betook themselves to Sea as Privateers, the
better to secure themselves against the Spaniards, and force them to a Peace by
seizing their Ships, wherein they were very successful. This caused the Isle to
be much talked of and esteemed by the English, who sent them supplies of Men,
Provisions and necessaries, and thus by degrees it became so potent as now it
is; And though the success of the English at the beginning of the Spanish War
was but in-different, yet it afterward proved Fortunate enough by gaining
several Victories, and great prizes from them as our English Virgil then Sung.

For diverse Ages had the Pride of Spain
Made the Sun Shine on half the World in vain,
While she bid War to all that durst supply
The place of those her cruelty made dye.
Of Natures Bounty men forbore to taste,
And the best Portion of the Earth lay wast.
From the New World her Silver and her Gold,
Came like a Tempest to confound the Old.
Feeding with these the bribed Electors hopes,
Alone she gave us Emperors and Popes,
With those accomplishing her vast designs
Europe was shaken with her Indian Mines.
When Britain looking with a just disdain
Upon this gilded Majesty of Spain,
And knowing well that Empire must decline
Whose chief support and sinews are of Coin.
Our Nations solid virtue did oppose
To the rich Troublers of the Worlds repose,
They that the whole Worlds Monarchy designed
Are to their Ports by our bold Fleet confined,
From whence our Redcross they Triumphant see
Riding without a Rival on the Sea;
Others may use the Ocean as their Road.
Only the English make it there abode,
Whose ready Sails with every wind can fly,
And make a Covenant with the inconsistant Sky.
Our Oaks secure as if there took root,
We tread on Billows which a steady foot.
Bold were the men which on the Ocean first
Spread their new Sails when shipwreck was the worst.
More danger from the English Spain does find,
Than from the Rocks the Billows or the Wind,
Some Ships are Prize, while others burnt and rent
With their rich lading to the bottom went
Down sinks at once (so Fortune with us Sports)
The pay of Armies and the pride of Courts.
Vain man! Whose Rage buries as low that store
As Avarice had dug for it before,
What Earth in her dark bowels could not keep,
From greedy hands lies safer in the deep.
Where the Ocean kindly does from Mortals hide
Those seeds of Luxury, Debate, and Pride.
And thus into our hands the richest Prize,
Falls with the noblest of our Enemies, etc.
The Soil of Jamaica is very fruitful, the Trees and Plants being always
springing, and never disrobed of their Summer Livery, every month being like
our April or May; there are many Plains which they call Savana's intermixed with
Hills and Woods, which they say were formerly Fields of Indian Maiz or Wheat,
but converted by the Spaniards, to pasture for feeding their Horses, Cows,
Hoggs, and Asinego's that they brought from Spain for breed, afrer they had
destroyed all the Indians, which were reckoned above six hundred Thousand,
which Cattle increased exceedingly, great herds of Horses, Hogs, and other
kinds still running Wild in the Woods; The Air is more temperate than any of
the Caribees, being constantly cooled with Eastern breezes, and frequent rains,
and never troubled with these storms of wind called Hurricanes wherewith the
adjacent Islands are disturbed, sometimes so violent that Ships are forced out
of the Roads, and on Shore, their Houses blown down, and provisions rooted out
of the Earth; The days and nights are almost equal all the year. It produces
many excellent Commodities, as Sugar very good, Cocao, Indico, Cotton, Tobacco,
Hydes, Tortoise Shells, curious Wood, Salt, Saltpeter Ginger, Pepper, Drugs of
several sorts, and Cocheneel, with many others which if well improved, this
Isle will be the best and richest Plantation that ever the English were Masters
of.

They have Horses so plentiful that a special one may be bought for six or
seven pound; Likewise Cows, Asinego's, Mules, Sheep, Goats, and Hog^ in
abundance; With very rare Fish of several sorts, and plenty of tame Fowl as
Hens, Turkies, and some Ducks, but almost infinite store of Wild-Fowl, as
Geese, Turkies Pigeons, Ducks, Teal, W^gens, Ginny Hens, Plovers, Flem ngo's
Snipes, Parr^ts, and Parac^etto's, and many others whose names are not known;
With choice Fruits, as Oranges, Limes, Pomegranats, Coco-nuts, Guavers,
Prickle-Apples, Prickle-Pears, Grapes, Plantains Pines, and s^veral more; All
manner of Garden Herbs and Roots as Beans, Pease, Cabbages, Colliflowers,
Radish, Lettice Pursly, Melons, and diverse more, They are sometimes troubled
with Calentures, which is generally occasioned by drunkenness, ill Diet, or
Sloth, also with Fevers and Agues, but they seldom prove mortal. This Isle
abounds with good Roads, Bays and Harbors, the chief whereof is Port Royal
formerly called Cageway, very commodious for Shipping, and secured by a strong
Castle, it is about twelve Miles from the chief Town of the Island called St.
Jago. Next is Port-Morant, O^d Harbor, Port-Negril and Port-Antonio, with
diverse others. The Town of St. Jago de la vega is s^ated six miles within the
Land North-west; When the Spaniards possessed the Isle, it was a large famous
City of about two Thousand Houses, with two Churches, two Chapels and an
Abbey, which when the English took under Venables were destroyed all but five
hundred, its Churches and Chapels made fewer, and the remainder spoiled and
defaced; But since the settlement of the English, they begin to repair the
ruinous Houses, and it is like to be gr^ater than formerly.

Passage is another Town six mile from St. Jago, and as many from Portugal,
where are about twenty Houses and a Fort to secure the English going thither.
In the Spaniards time here were several other Towns which are now disregarded,
as Sevilla on the North of the Isle, once beautified with a Collegiat Church,
which had an Abbot. Melilla in the Northeast, where Columbus repaired his Ships
at his return from Veragua, when he was almost Shipwrackt; Oristan toward the
South Sea, where Peter Seranna lost his Ship upon the adjacent Rocks and Sands,
and continued here in a Solitary Condition for three years, and then had the
company of a Mariner for four years more, who was likewise Shipwrackt, and only
saved himself. Though there are at present no more Towns, yet the Island is
divided into fourteen Precincts or Parishes, namely Port Royal, St. Catherine,
St. John's, St. Andrews, St. David's, St. Thomas, and Clarendon, many whereof are
well inhabited by the English that have there very good Plantations, whose
number is not certainly known, but according to a survey taken and returned
into England some years since, there were above seventeen hundred Families, and
more than Fifteen Thousand Inhabitants, in the forenamed fourteen Precincts;
And in the four Parishes on the North side of the Isle that is St. Georges, St.
Mary's, St. Anus, and St. James, above Two Thousand more, all which are now
extremely increased even to double if not treble that number, the Great
Encouragement of gaining wealth, and a pleasant life inviting abundance of
People to transplant themselves from Barbados, and other English Plantations
every year, so that in a small time it is like to be the most potent and rich
Plantation in all America; And besides the aforementioned number of
Inhabitants, there are reckoned to belong to Jamaica of Privatiers, or
Bucaniers Sloop, and Boatmen, which ply about the Isle at least Thirty Thousand
stout fighting men, whose Courage is sufficiently discovered in their daily
attempts upon the Spaniards in Panama and other places, which for the hazard,
conduct and daringness of their exploits have by some been compared to the
Actions of Caesar and Alexander the Great. The Laws of this Island are as like
those of England, as the d^fference of Countries will admit, they having their
several Courts, Magistrates, and Officers, for executing Justice on Offenders,
and hearing and determining all Civil Causes between man and man; The present
Governor under his Majesty of Great Britain is Sir Thomas Linch,

FINIS.
There are lately published the four following Books, all which together may be
reckoned a very satisfactory History of England, and the affairs thereof for
above a thousand years past; they are to be had single, or all bound together,
of Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.
1. THE Second Edition of Englands Monarchs, very much enlarged; Or, A
Compendious Relation of the most Remarkable Transactions, and Observable
Passages Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military, which have happened during the
Reigns of the Kings and Queens of England, from the Invasion of the Romans,
under Julius Caesar, to this present: Adorned with Poems and the Pictures of
every Monarch from King William the Conqueror, to our most gracious Sovereign
King James the Second, with his present Majesty's Life, Heroic Actions, late
gracious Declaration, and other Occurrences to this time: The Names of his now
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council; The Great Officers of the Crown: A
List of the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscount, Bishops, Barons and Deans; The
Knights of the most Noble Order of the Garter at Windsor, and the Principal
Officers, Civil and Military in England. The number of the Lord and Commons who
have Votes in both Houses of Parliament; and many other very useful
particulars. By R. B. Price One Shilling.

2. ADmirable Curiosities, Rarities and Wonders in Englan^ Scotland and
Ireland; or an Account of many remarkable persons and places, and likewise of
the Battles, Siege ^rodigious Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Thunders
Lightnings, Fires, Murders, and other considerable occurrences and accidents
for many hundred years past: Together with the natural and artificial Rarities
in every County in England; with severa^ curious Sculptures. Price One Shilling.

3. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and present State of
London and Westminster, showing the Foundations Walls, Gates, Towers, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Schools, Inns of Court, Charters Franchises and Privileges thereof; with an
account of the mos^ remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and other
Occurrences, for above Nine hundred years past, in and about these Cities, to
the Year 1681. and a description of the manner of the Trial of the late Lord
Stafford in Westminster Hall; Illustrated with Pictures, with the Arms of the
65 Companies of London, and the time of their Incorporating. Price One Shilling.

4. THE Fifth Edition of the Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland; being near
a third, enlarged with very considerable Additions, containing an Impartial
Account of all the Battles, Sieges and other Remarkable Transactions,
Revolutions and Accident^ which have happened from the beginning of the Reign
of King Charles the First, 1625 to His Majesty's happy Restoration, 1660* The
illegal Trial of King Charles the First at large, with his las^ Speech at his
Suffering. And the most considerable matters which happened till 1660. with
Pictures of several Remarkable Accidents Price One Shilling.

Ten other very useful, pleasant and necessary Books, are lately published,
all sold by Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.
V. THE History of the Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, containing. 1. An
Account of the most Remarkable Transactions and Revolutions in Scotland, for
above Twelve hundred years past, during the Reigns of sixty eight Kings, from
the year of our Lord 424. to the Happy Union of both Kingdoms under King James
the Sixth of Scotland, and First of England, of Blessed Memory, in 1602. and
among other particulars, The lamentable Murder of King Duffe, with the strange
Discovery and Punishment thereof: The Wonderful History of Mackbeth and the
Witches, with the many Notable Occurences ^ his Reign. 2. The History of
Ireland from the Conquest thereof under King Henry the Second to this time;
With a Relation of the Miraculous Places and Persons in that Country: A full
Account of St. Patrick's Purgatory, and diverse other memorable Matters.
Intermixed with Variety of Excellent Speeches, Strange Accidents, Prod^gious
Appearances, and other very considerable things both pleasant and profitable:
With a List of the Lord High Commissioners L. Lieutenants, L. Deputies, L.
Justices, Great Officers of State; the Names and Sirnames of the Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Lords, the Archbishopricks and Universities in
both Kingdoms. Illustrated with near Thirty Pictures of several Kings, and
other extrao dinary Observables. Price One Shilling.

2. DElights for the Ingenious; In above Fifty select and choice Embl^ms,
Divine and Moral, Ancient and Modern; curiously Engraven upon Copper Plates;
with Fifty Delightful Poems and Lots, for the more Lively Illustration of each
Emblem; Whereby Instruction and Good Counsel may be promoted and furthered by
an honest and pleasant Recreation. To which is Prefixed, An Incomparable Poem
Entitled, Majesty in Misery, or an Imploration to the King of Kings, written by
his late Majesty, King Charles the First, with his own Hand, during his
Captivity in Carisbrook-Castle in the Isle of Wight, 1648. With a curious
Emblem. Price Half a Crown.

3. TWo Journies to Jerusalem, containing first, A strange and True Account of
the Travels of two English Pilgrims some years since; 2dly The Travels of
Fourteen Englishmen in 1669. from Scandaroon to Trip^ly, Joppa, Ramah,
Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Jericho, the River Jordan, the Lake of Sodom and
Gomorrah, and back again to Aleppo. By S. B. With the rare Antiquities,
Monuments, and memorable places and things, mentioned in the Holy Scriprure.
Beautified with Pictures. Price One Shilling.

4. Unparalleled Varieties; Or the Matchless Actions and Passions of Mankind;
Displayed in near four hundred notable instances and examples; Discovering the
transcendent effects; 1. Of Love, Friendship and Gratitude, 2. Of Magnanimity,
Courage and Fidelity, 3. Of Chastity, Temperance and Humility; and on the
contrary, the Tremendous Consequences, 4. Of Hatred, Revenge and Ingratitude,
5. Of Cowardice, Barbarity and Treachery, 6. Of Unchastity, Intemperance and
Ambition. Imbellished with Proper Figures. Price One Shilling.

5. Surprising Miracles of Nature and Art, in two parts containing, 1. The
Miracles of Nature; or the Wonderful Signs, and Prodigious Aspects and
Appearances in the Heavens, Earth and Sea; With an Account of the most famous
Comets, and other Prodigies to 1682. 2. The Miracles of Art, describing the
most Magnificent Builidngs, and other Curious Inventions, in all Ages, as the
Seven Wonders of the World, and many other excellent tru^tures and Rarities
throughout the Earth. Beautified with Sculptures. Price 1 s.

6. EXtraordinary Adventures of several famous Men; with the strange Events,
and signal Mutations and Changes in the Fortunes of diverse Illustrious Places
and Persons in all Ages; Being an Account of a multitude of Stupendous
Revolutions, Accidents, and observable matters in States and Provinces
throughout the whole World. Price One Shilling.

7. WOnderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy, discovered in above 300
memorable Histories, containing, 1. Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists,
Blasphemers, Perjured Villains. etc. 2. The miserable ends of many Magicians,
Witches, Conjurers, etc. with diverse strange App^^^^ons and Illusions of the
Devil. 3. Remarkable Predictions and Presages of approaching Death, and how the
Event has been answerable. 4. The Lives, and Deaths of several Popes. 5.
Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants, Murderers, etc. 6. Admirable
Deliverances from imminent Dangers, and Deplorable Distresses at Sea and Land.
Lastly, Divine Goodness to Penitents, with the Dying Thoughts of several famous
Men, concerning a future State after this Life. Imbellished with diverse
Pictures. Price One Shilling.

8. THE Young man's Calling, or The Whole Duty of Youth, in a serious and
compassionate Address to all young Persons to remember their Creator in the
days of their Youth. Together with Remarks upon the Lives of several excellent
Young Persons of both Sexes, as well ancient as modern, who have been famo s
for Virture, and Piety in their Generations; namely, on the Lives of Isaac and
Joseph in their youth On the Martyrdom of the seven sons and their Mother; of
Romanus a young Nobleman, and of diverse holy Virgins and Martyrs. On the Lives
of K. Edward 6. Q. Jane, Q. Elizabth in her Youth, P. Henry, eldest Son to K.
James, and the young L. Harrington, etc. with 12 curious Pictures Illustrating
the several Histories. Price Eighteen Pence.

9. A Guide to Eternal Glory: Or, Brief directions to all Christians, how to
attain to Everlasting Salvation: To which are added several other small Tracts:
As 1. A short Directory for Self-examination. 2. A Brief Dialogue between a
Learned Divine and a Beggar. 3. Cordial Meditations, Or Beams of the Spirit,
Enlivening, Enlightening, and Gladding the Soul. Lastly, Divine Hymns upon the
Lords Supper; with some others. Price Six Pence.

10 EXcellent Contemplations, Divine and Moral; Written by the Magnanimous and
truly Loyal A. L. Capel, Baron of Hadham; Together with some Account of his
Life, and his Affectionate Letters to his Lady the day before his Death, with
his Heroic Behavior and last Speech at his Suffering: Also the Speeches and
Carriages of D. Hamilton, and the E. of Holland, who suffered with him: With
his Pious Advice to his Son the late E. of Essex. Price One Shilling.

All Sold by Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultry near Cheapside.


