THE VANITY AND IMPIETY OF Judicial Astrology WHEREBY Men Undertake to foretell
future Contingencies, especially the particula^ Fates of Mankind, by the
Knowledge (...) the Stars, i. e. the Conjunctions, Motion Positions, and
Influences of the Coelesti^ Bodies on the Earthly.

By FRANCIS CROW, M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultrey. MDCXC.

Price Sticht

TO THE Gentlemen, Merchants, And other Inhabitants of PORT ROYAL IN Iamaica,
That Attended on my Ministry in the Meeting there.
AS the Apostle found the Men of Athens too superstitious, so did I the Island
of Jamaica too much addicted to Judicial Astrology: And several so fond of that
foolish Art, as seldom to set out to Sea without consulting their Oracle of a
Star-gazing Astrologer for lucky Days, and happy Stars. And being well assured
that there was nothing of what was pretended in that Art, so called, I was
willing to undertake something while I was with you for undeceiving the
deluded, and repressing of that vain, prevailing Humor, of predicting by the
Stars: For which end I searched the best Authors I could meet with in your
illiterate World, and summed up in these few Papers the most convincing
Arguments I could either find or think of, to make appear its Vanity and
Iniquity.

I had thought first to Preach a Sermon or two upon the Subject; but judging it
not so fit for the Pulpit, I left at my coming away a Written Copy of it, for
any desirous to see it, and now I send it you in Print: Not that your Society
is any way chargeable with a good Opinion of this Imposture, but to enable the
more Judicious to refute its Propugnators, as they meet with them.

Neither may I be so injurious to you, as to let this public Occasion pass
without the Testimony of my Thankfulness for all the Kindness and Respect you
showed me, together with your generous Bounty in bestowing upon me. And if you
had not been more wanting to your selves (I mean your Souls) than to me, we
might have yet been happy together. But I will not make the Causes of our
Parting more public than I made them in my Valedictory Discourse in the
Congregation. I must needs acknowledge, the costly Kindness of many of you left
me nothing to ask, but what was of higher concern than any thing you had of
your selves to give. And if I should conceal this Goodness, I might be found to
Offend on the same score with him that took the Man's one Ewe-lamb from him. And
for the Blessing of Health I must needs commend your benign Climate, in which I
enjoyed a greater measure thereof than ever I am like to do in the European
Regions. Sed multa majora desiderantur. Now being persuaded that even in your
Sardis Christ has a few Names, and that tho they dwell where Satan's seat is,
(perhaps as eminently as in any Place where Christ is Named) yet have not
defiled their Garments with the Pollutions of the Place; to such I say, Watch
and Pray, hold fast and Repent, abide in Christ, and Christ in you; and when
you have secured well your own Souls, spare not to Sigh and Cry for
Abominations done in the midst of you, and Weep over a perishing World about
you, lamenting daily what you cannot amend, and so shall you be kept from other
Men's sins.

And before I take leave, I beg one thing for you all, that the Lord of the
Vineyard that sent me to labor among you, may grant that the many Sermons I
have Preached with you may never rise up in Judgment against you at the great
Day, but that the savor of the Knowledge of Christ you have had spread among
you, may still in its gracious effects abide upon you, increasing and blessing
the Word yet with you, for bringing forth Fruit unto Eternal Life: So Prays

The hearty Well-wisher of all your Souls, Fra. Crow.

THE VANITY AND IMPIETY OF Judicial Astrology.
PRetenders to this Astromantick Art, fortify themselves from Genesis 1.14. And
let them be for signs and for seasons: As if the Stars were given for Signs,
whereby Astrological Diviners might by their Observation be able to know and
foretell future Events of things.

Luther in loc. Makes them to be signs of Eclipses and great Conjunctions of
portentous things, whereby God intimates either his Wrath or Mercy to the
World, as by Comets, or some unusual Phoenomena.

Though they be for signs and seasons, yet for no Prophets; neither are they
infallible, but ordinary signs of the change of Weather, ( Mat. 16.2, 3.) and
of a fit time to manure the ground, ( Genesis 8.22.) The several seasons shall
continually return, accordng to the time of the Year, measured by the Sun,
Moon, and Stars.

Pareus in loc. gives as good satisfaction as any I meet with, of the meaning
of that place, and how the Stars are set for signs and seasons, thus, The Lord
has set them to be Measures for numbering and distinguishing fleeting time
into certain parts; that one time may be called present, another past, and
another to come: That one time may be called a Year, another a Quarter, a
Month, a Day, an Hour. Without this kind of numbering and distinction by
Celestial Bodies, we could not understand what Time is: There would be no
remembrance in Man of things done, nor deliberation of things to be done, no
hope of things to come, and scarcely a thought of things present: But we should
be like them who sleep, who neither know that they sleep, nor how long, because
they count not the time: Or we should be like Infants who know not their
Motion, Life, nor Age. Vid. plura in loc.

No Divine so much as Origin, (who followed Plotinus) has helped them in this
their pretended Art, refuted by Basil in an accurate Discourse on Genesis 1.14.
And by many other Authors, as Aulus Gellius, Pererius, Picus Mirandula, who
wrote twelve Books against them very learned and accurate.

Augustine likewise meets often with them in his Writings, especially l. 14. de
Civitate Dei, dicit Daemonem invenire Astronomiam. He makes the Devil Master
and Author of this Black Art. Vide Ludov. Viv. in loc. And in his 63 Sermon de
Tempore, says, The Power of Stars is nothing, that the advancement of humane
Affairs should depend upon them: But all things are disposed of by the Will of
the great King. And in Psalm. 72. says, It Is an evil, impious Doctrine, that the
Wills of Men are subject to the Stars. And in his 42 Confess. says, Who fall
into the desire of curious Magical Visions, are accounted worthy of being
mocked.

THE VANITY OF THIS ART.
1. THey know not the Stars; nay, not one of a thousand; far less their
Influences; what is the Nature of the Heavens, Order of the Orbs, number of the
Stars, variety of their Power and Influence. The greatest Philosophers have
professed their Ignorance of these things, even their Prince Aristotle, l. 2.
de Coelo. Alas, how far short are the most learned of understanding the present
things of Creatures here below, as Stones, Plants, and Animals that are just
before us, and lie exposed to our Senses daily: How much less can be known of
those excellent Bodies above us, at such a distance; as the Book of Wisdom (in
Apocrypha) teaches us, Chapter 9. v. 16. And hardly do we guess at things that are
upon Earth, and with labor do we find things that are before us; but the
things that are in Heaven who has searched out? Nay, out of Canonical
Scripture Humane Knowledge of this is denied, Job 38.33. Know thou the
Ordinances of Heaven? can thou set the Dominion thereof in the Earth? Even
where the Influences of these Heavenly Constellations, is plainly asserted in
the two foregoing Verses; yet is our Knowledge hereof clearly denied as to
their particular Influences.

2. If some Stars may have so favorable and benign an Influence, so may
others, for any thing they know, have as inauspicious an Effect at the same
time.

3. There can be no Certainty in their Art, because of the swift Motion of the
Heavens, that so suddenly alters the Face thereof, that it is not the same one
Moment. And then the wandering Stars, that they make most Judgment by, of Humane
Fate, are so uncertain, that the same posture, it may be returns not once in a
hundred or a thousand Years.

4. You shall see Twins conceived and born together, to be of as different
Tempers, Spirits, Parts, and Lot in Life and Death as any: Instance Jacob and
Esau.

5. If there be a necessity and fatality upon Men, born under such Stars and
Position of the Heavens, proper and peculiar to themselves; then how comes the
Death of so many to be the same in time and manner, that are born and bred so
different, as in Earthquakes, Fights, and Shipwracks.

6. Let any Man show why these Heavenly Bodies being Universal Causes, should
not have the same effects upon Brute Animals, as well as on Men: and if they
fail in the lesser, we may well suspect them in the greater.

7. What is to be said of Jews all the World over? Whatever Clymat or Regiment
of Heavenly Bodies they are born in, yet have they the same solemn Observation
of Sabbath and Circumcision. And so Christians scattered through the whole
World, before they heard the Gospel, in all Nations, were obedient to their
Country Laws, and Customs; but when Christ was revealed in them, and turned
quite to another Mind and Life, was it by some peculiar Star, that prevailed in
the sudden Universal change of Faith and Life all the World over?

8. It must needs be vain and uncertain, because it so frequently fails. These
things, that they either say rashly or cunningly, which prove true, bear not
proportion of one to a hundred, of what they say false; witness Almanacks. Now
all Science or Art, is of these things, that either always, or for most part
fall out true, according to the Rules thereof: Wherefore Luther on Genesis 1.14.
says, Astrology can be no Science, because it has no Demonstration, but
uncertain Conjectures. Wherefore Cicero l. 2. de Divinatione, wonders how any
should believe the Soothsayers, who foretold generally such Untruths to
Pompey, Crassus and Caesar, that they should all die in their Beds in a good
Old Age, and in Honor. And Cato said, he wondered how they that deceived the
People so, could look on one another without laughing.

9. If they can by their Astrology tell of things that are lost, why could not
the Chaldean Astrologers tell the King his Dream that was lost, Daniel 2.

10. If the same Stars (whereby they contend all Humane and Divine things are
carried) produce various Effects of Heat and Cold, Mild and Tempestuous
Weather, in different Countries at the same time, why not also different Events
of things, and business in these Countries.

11. If nothing be done by the Will of Man, and Conduct of Reason, but all
things come to pass by the influence of the Stars, then little things as well
as great are governed by them. And if they can by their Art do the greatest,
why cannot they do the lesser, viz. tell who shall get the Game at Cards or
Dice, as well as who shall have the Victory, Caesar or Pompey, Alexander or
Darius.

12. If the same Conjunction of the Stars returning, produce the same Effects,
why see we not many Socrates's, and Plato's brought forth, with the same
Spirit, Form, manner of Life, and Death, and all things in the World falling
out just as they did, under the same Position of the Heavens sometimes?

13. If there had been any Certainty in Astrological Predictions of Futurities,
certainly the greatest Philosophers, and Wisest Men would have embraced and
practiced it: But the greatest Scholars have still derided it, as Socrates,
Cicero, Cato, Aristotle, Plato, Pythagoras, Democritus, and Seneca. We read of
their long Journeys to Persia, Chaldea, and Egypt, to learn Wisdom and increase
Knowledge. Where they increased their Skill in Mathematics, Policy, and of
worshipping their Gods: But for the Divination of Astrology, either they
learned none of it, or concealed it from the World, their Writings manifesting
nothing thereof.

14. If it had been indeed a true Art, and indeed useful, it had been less
ungrateful to Wise States, and the best Governors: For these Chaldean
Astrologers were banished Rome, not only in Tiberius and Dioclesians Time, but
in Constantines, Theodosians, and chiefly Justinians, not only as Vain, and
void of all Truth, but as hurtful and pestilent to Cities and Societies. And to
this may be added the utter Aversion and Detestation all serious Christians,
and Lovers of Divine Truth have to it. It Is to be observed, that Haters of
necessary Truths, are most curious about knowing unnecessary forbidden things.
Augustine calls Astrologers Veritatis Inimici, Enemies of the Truth, Tom. 4. c.
742.

15. The Vanity and Vileness of this Art, appears by the little Advantage the
greatest Practitioners of it reap to themselves; most of them being but poor,
despicable, and utterly ignorant of their own Fate, and greatest Concerns, many
of them dying dismally, without foreseeing it: As Balaam, that Notorious
Soothsayer, could not presage the Evil that befell him in that wicked
Expedition to Balak, to curse Israel. Qui sibi nequam cui bonus.

16. If Astrology be an Art or Science, why is it not studied as the Liberal
Sciences are? as freely and openly; but it goes into by-places, and hides it
self in secret Corners. And Pretenders to it are for the most shy of
discoursing the Principles of it with Learned Persons.

THE IMPIETY OF Judicial ASTROLOGY.
THe Impiety as well as the Vanity of Judicial Astrology, may be made appear
many ways:

1. In that it is by many made a Cloak for Witchcraft and Consulting with the
Devil: And no doubt some begin with no other Purpose, but useing the supposed
Art; but finding it so foolish and unsatisfying, stay not there, but labor to
eke out the scantness of their Understanding of the Stars with the Black Art of
Hells help and Divination. And it is often God's righteous Judgment on curious
Wits, that set themselves to the Study of things concealed and forbidden, to
leave them unto sinful, and yet unsatisfying ways of ending the Tragedy.
Augustine in Tom. 5. c. 291. says, Astrologorum responsa ex malis esse
Spiritibus. The Answers Astrologers have, are of the Evil Spirits.

2. It Is the Hereditary (and so the more dangerous) Disease of our first
Parents, derived to us, to know more than we need, and to slight the needful
revealed Points of Knowledge. Deuteronomy. 29.29. The secret things belong unto the
Lord our God; but those things that are revealed belong unto us, and to our
Children for ever, that we may do all the things of this Law. Man ^y affecting
Wisdom out of God's way, (says a Learned Person) got (...) crack in his Head,
which has con^inued above 5000 Years; and ever ^ince our own Wisdom and
Know^edge has perverted us. Bernard ^aith, it is better, Apca quam alta sapere.

3. It Is an ungrateful derogating from Scripture sufficiency, of imparting all
things needful for Man to know; especially having so great (...) Prophet as
Jesus Christ, sent from the Bosom of his Father with all the Counsels of
Heaven; which greatly aggravates the Guilt of running into that Extravagancy of
curious searching into concealed Trifles; nay, to take the Devil for our
Teacher, when the Tabernacle of God is with Men as appears clearly from Deuteronomy.
18* 14, 15. For these Nations hearkened to Observers of Times, and unto
Diviners* but as for thee, the Lord thy God has not suffered thee so to do:
The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet in the midst of thee, of thy
Brethren like unto me; unto him ye sha^ hearken; which passage being
interpreted of Christ, Acts 3.22. From al^ which it is most clear, that
hearkening unto these Diviners, is opposed to our hearkening unto Christ: And
having so excellent a Prophet raised up, excludes all Applications unto ^uch
pretended Prophets, that the Heathens were seduced by, and de^oted unto. You
shall likewise see, ^sa. 44.25, 26. that the Word of the Lords Servants is put
in opposition to the Lying Diviners: That frustrateth the Tokens of the Liars,
and makes Diviners mad, -- That confirms the word of his Servants. And
Sooth-saying in Israel is not only opposed to a walking by the Light of God's
Word, but recorded as the Cause of his forsaking of them, Isa. 2.5, 6. O House
of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord. Therefore thou
have forsaken thy People, the House of Jacob, because they are soothsayers like
the Philistines.

4. It takes Men off from Divine Providence, attributing nothing to God, and
all to Fate and Destiny: as if they would ease God of governing the World, and
ascribe all to the Government of the Stars. Gual^her in Zeph. 1.5. says,
Observent ^sta qui hodie Astrologiam judiciariam profitentur; subjecting Events
to Stars that belong to the Eternal Providence alone.

5. It takes off from the Exercise of almost all Religious Duties and
Performances: For if the Stars and Constellations put us under a necessity of
believing such Events of Good or Evil, Life or Death, will such a Person call
on God, and commend his Life to him? or will he praise under prosperous Gales?
or impute any thing that falls cross to his sins, that God is hereby calling
him to Account in Judgment, Jer. 10.2. Learn not the way of the Heathen, and be
not disma^ed at the Signs of Heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at them: Upon
which, Calvin says, this Divination o^ Judicial Astrology, extinguisheth all
Godliness, in that it brings all Daties of Piety to nothing, as Prayer, Praise
and Repentance, etc.

6. It takes away one of the Flowers of God's Crown, viz. to know things to
come, even the most contingent, secret uncertainties, which are denied to Man
to know, as in Eccl 8.7. For he knows not that which shall be, for who can
tell him when it shall be? And Chapter 10.14. again, says the Wise Man. A Man
cannot tell what shall be; and what shall be after him who can tell? yea, the
knowledge of these secret things to come, is so inherent a Privilege in the
Crown of Heaven, that if any of the Heathenish gods can claim it, he is content
they be owned for true Deities, Isa. 41.23. Show the things that are to come
hereafter, that we may keow that ye are Gods. Now Astrologers pretend to know a
Man's Thoughts long before he can know them himself, which is proper to God
alone, 1 Cor. 2.11. Psalm. 139.2.

7. God sets himself against such, and glories in defeating and infatuating
their Devices, making the Diviners mad, by making their presumptuous
Predictions false, Isa. 44.25.47.13.

8. When the Gospel Converted Astrologers, they penitently and openly
disclaimed their Art by burning their Books, Act. 19.19. An excellent Pattern
for such unlucky Students, who would burn their Books of Magic, that they
might not hurt others; and of their own accord did they bring them and burn
them publicly, to testify their sincere Repentance to the World, that they
had so dangerously deluded: And tho the Books were of great Price, (esteemed to
be worth 5000 Crowns) yet the Power of Grace and Truth prevailed over the Love
of Money.

9. This Celestial Fate and Power of the Stars either can be hindered, and so
is uncertain, or not, and then takes away all Free Will in humane Actions, and
involves into many absurdities. First, Arguing the Soul of Man to be material
and mortal, that is so subject to created Bodies. Secondly, The Will of Man is
hereby excused from doing evil by a fatal Necessity the Conjunction of the
Planets lays on Men not to be avoided. Thirdly, It makes God the Author of
Sin, that sets the Stars in such Positions, and gives them such Influence on
Men's Actions that has no Remedy or possible prevention on Man's part: Wherefore
Augustine brings in an Astrologer lying against God thus: That Adultery was not
committed by the Man's own Will, but Venus; and Murder not by Man's Will, but by
Mars, that angry Planet; and that God did not do Righteousness and Justice, but
Jupiter the Planet.

10. And a last may be added from Cicero, that pretended Astrological
Predictions for most part are evil, and so their Ignorance is much better than
their Knowledge: And Seneca de Astris, says, Whether the Stars cause or
signify Events, what profits it to see what cannot be evited? Luther of the
same, says, It is much better to be always in the Fear of God and Prayer, than
to be tortured with the fear of future Events by lying Astrologers.

EPILOGUE.
AND yet I would not make light of the superior Celestial Bodies of these
heavenly Phoenomena, so celebrated in Scripture, and so beneficial to the
World; there being so much of God's Power and Wisdom attributed to his great
and wonderful work of making the Stars of Heaven.

The most profitable Study of the Stars I take to be,

1. A serious consideration of their Magnitude; that so many Stars should be
more than an hundred times bigger than all the Earth: What a vast Body must the
Heaven be wherein they all are, if one of them so far exceed the whole Earth?
yea, What are the Heavens we see, to the Heaven that is unseen, to which these
are but a Pavement!

2. Let us consider their multitude, which cannot be numbered more than the Sand
of the Sea-shoar; yet God tells their Number, Psalm. 147.4.

3. Their swiftness, that these mighty vast Bodies should be carried every Day
so long a Journey, and never tire or are weary.

4. The exact Order of their Motion; so great, so many, so different Motions,
and yet never one to move out of their course: The Stars in their courses or
proper Paths or ranks are spoken of in Judge. 5.20.

Now these things considered, what can we do less than adore the Divine Wisdom
and Power that made them, and with Galen compose Hymns of Praise to the Honor
of the Creator! and especially with David wonder at that Divine Goodness and
Bounty that made such great and glorious Orbs and Stars for the use of poor
little mean Man -- for having mentioned the Heavens and Stars, ( Psalm. 8.) he
breaks out with What is Man? O then what greater and more glorious Provisions
has our God made for us above Moon and Stars!

Let not the pretended Masters of such an Art any more delude the World or
themselves, to think that we disown or deny the Divine Philosophy in Scripture,
that asserts the Influence and efficacious Virtue of the Stars, in Job 38.31.
The sweet Influences of Pleiades, or the Constellation of the seven Stars; but
only we deny Man's knowledge of their particular Influences to be such as that
thereby he can predict the future Events of Men's Lives and Actions. And we
further assert, that to subject unto the Influences of the Stars the things
that depend upon Contingencies and the Will of Man, so as to make Predictions
from them, is a mere Folly founded upon fond suppositions that have no Being in
Nature, but are the Chymerical Fancies of addle-brain'd Astrologers: For if
they cannot tell what Weather it will be every day, by all their Skill, who
will believe them in other things.

And because the Lord foresaw Men would dote much upon second Causes, and
venture to Prognosticate by the Heavens the Fates of Men and the fruitfulness
of the Earth, therefore in his wise Providence made he the Earth fruitful in
all its glory, before he put the Stars in the Heavens, that we might see that
the Earths fruitfulness depends not so much on second Causes (as many vainly
suppose) as on Divine Benediction Genesis 1.12. compared with v. 16.

And let me beseech such as these lines belong most unto, to read and consider
well that Passage in Isa. 44.24, 25. I am the Lord that stretches out the
Heavens alone, and that frustrateth the tokens of the Liars, and makes the
Diviners mad: From which observe, First, The Title Jehovah takes to himself.
Secondly, That the Lord seems to take special Delight to befool the Wisdom of
such who would resolve future Events by the Conjunction of Planets, as if they
could spell the secret Providence of God out of the Book of the Creatures, an
end whereunto he never appointed them. Thirdly, That the God of Truth brands
these Diviners for Liars. And Lastly, That such as pretend to such a kind of
Wisdom, may fear the Almighty may smite them with Madness; which God in his
Mercy prevent, by turning them in time to the Wisdom of the Just.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THE Present State of Europe: Or, the Historical and Political Mercury, giving
an Account of all the public and private Occurrences in every Court, to the
Month of August, 1690. With Reflections upon every State; to be continued
Monthly from the Original published at the HAGUE by the Authority of the
States General. Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1690.


