The History of the Nine Worthies OF THE WORLD;

Three whereof were Gentiles.
I. Hector Son of Priamus King of Troy. II. Alexander the Great King of
Macedon. III. Julius Caesar, First Emperor of Rome.
Three Jews.
IV. Joshua Captain General of Israel. V. David King of Israel. VI. Judas
Maccabeus a Valiant Commander.
Three Christians.
VII. Arthur King of Britain. VIII. Charles the Great, Emp. of Germany. IX.
Godfrey of Bulloign King of Jerusalem.
Being an Account of their Glorious Lives, Worthy Actions, Renowned Victories
and Deaths.

Illustrated with Poems, and the Picture of each Worthy.

By R. B.

Licensed, and Entered according to O^d^^.

London, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultry near Cheapside.
1687.

king on orb

BY Arms and Virtue these to Honor rose
By both they Conquered and ore'came their Foes,
Whereby of Worthies they obtained the name
Whose Acts are registered in the Book of Fame,
Though they are Dead, their Deeds will never
But still be Famous to Posterity.
modern bookplate

TO THE READER,
HAving often heard and read of the Nine Worthies, and not meeting with any
particular Relation of them, I thought it might be worth my while to search out
who they were, and found that the Ancients celebrated the memory of nine
Renowned Persons, for the most Worthy Hero's in the Ages wherein they lived.
Three whereof were Gentiles, Hector Son of Priamus King of Troy, Alexander the
Great King of Macedon and Conqueror of the World, and Julius Caesar the first
Emperor of Rome. Three were Jews, Joshua Captain General and Leader of the
Hebrews into the Land of Canaan, David King of Israel, and Judas Maccabeus a
Valiant Jewish Champion against the Tyranny of Antiochus. And the last three
were Christians, Arthur the famous King (...) B^^^^ain who valiantly defended
his Country against the Saxons, Charlemaign or Charles the Great King of
France and Emperor of Germany, and Godfrey of Bulloign, called King of
Jerusalem, so memorable for his Gallant Achievements in recovering the Holy
Land from Sarazens and Infidels.

Having discovered their names, I next endeavored to collect from the most
credible and Authentic Authors, what I could meet with of the Worthy Actions,
and exploits whereby they obtained the Great Title of Worthies, which I have
done in as brief a method as such notable Deeds could be contained in, which I
now present to my Countrymen, both for their Information and Delight, not
doubting but it will be acceptable, especially since a Courageous Prince of our
own Nation has been dignified with this mighty Honor; If it please, as I hope
it may, I shall be very well satisfied with the pains I have taken in gathering
these Remarks out of other Voluminous Histories.

R. B.

The History of Hector of Troy, the First Worthy of the World.
portrait of Hector

REnowned Hector, Priams Valiant Son
Deservedly the Name of Worthy won,
His Countries miseries he did foresee
And therefore first engaged unwillingly.
But when his Fathers Glory called him forth,
He then displaid his Gallantry and worth,
His Thundering Arm no Grecian could withstand,
All fled and trembled where he did command.
At length, at unawares he lost his Life,
Achilles thus betwixt them ends the strife:
Troy and his Fathers House soon after fell,
As Hellon and Cassandra did foretell.
THough the Poets have mingled and corrupted the History of the Destruction of
Troy, with their Fictions and Fables, as they have most other true Storys of
former Ages, yet it is most certainly related by Ancient Historians of
undoubted veracity, that the Ruin of this famous City was occasioned by means
of a Wooden Horse, as is commonly believed; And that Hector the Son of King
Priamus of whom we now write the Life, was a renowned and Valiant Captain, and
lost his Life in defense of his Father and his Country; But for the better
understanding the Story, we will look farther back, and consider the original
of this once Magnificent City.

Troy was hertofore one of the most Noble C^our of Asia Minor, as well for its
Largeness and ^iches, as for that renowned War, which it managed against the
Armies of Greece; It was situate in Phrygia, a Province stretching it self
upon the Coast of the Aegean Sea, near the Hellespont, called now the River of
Constantinople, over against the Chersonesus of Thracia, and the Island
Tenedos, which was not far distant from it; The River Scamander, which
proceeded from Mount Ida, ran by the Walls thereof, and joining with the R^ver
Simois, they both together empty themselves into the Sea, near the Promontory
called Sigeum.

The first who built this City, and commanded there in Chief, was Dardanus the
Son of the King of Corinth; When his Elder Brother was dead, a dispute arose
between him and his other Brother about the Succession, part of the People
favoring one, and the rest the other, but Dardanus having at length defeated
and killed his Brother Jasius, He with his Favorites were forced for their
security, to take Shipping and fly into Phrygia, where he married the Daughter
of King Teucer, with whom he jointly reigned in that Country, which was then
named Teuoria, and afterward Dardania, by which name also the City of Troy was
then called; This happened about the time that Moses left the leading of the
People of Israel to Joshua, about seven hundred years before the building of
the City of Rome, and six hundred and fifty years after the first foundation of
the Assyrian Monarchy.

Dardanus left his Kingdom to his Son Erichthonius who begat Tros; When he was
possessed of the Kingdom he called the City after his own name Troja, and the
Country round about Troas; This Tros had several Sons, the eldest was named
Ganimedes, and having War with Tantalus King of Phrygia, he took his Son
Ganimedes Prisoner, and sent him as a present to Jupiter King of Crete (now
called Candia) and this gave occasion to the Fable that Ganimedes was ravished
by Jupiter; His second Son was Assaracus, who was Father of Capys, of whom came
Auchises the Favorite of Venus, who had by him Aeneas, born upon the banks of
the River Simois. But the Heir of his Crown was Ilus, who altered the name of
Troy to Ilium, which he mightily enriched.

Laomedon succeeded his Father Ilus, he fortified Troy with Walls, by the
assistance of Apollo and Neptune, who being both fallen into displeasure with
their Prince, and seeing themselves reduced to extreme poverty in a strange
Country, far from their possessions which were in Crete, they resolved to
enter themselves into the service of King Laomedon to help to build the Walls
of his City. They wrought long for this ungrateful King, but when they saw no
hopes of the reward promised them with an Oath for their labors, but that he
was so unworthy to refuse it, he was afflicted with many diseases, so that to
be delivered he was forced to expose his own Daughter Hesione to be devoured by
a Sea Monster, it being required of them to deliver up a Virgin every year to
be destroyed by them; The King was extremely concerned that the Lot should fall
upon his Daughter, but Hercules traveling that way came to Laomedon, and
offered to deliver her, by destroying the Monster if the King would give him
for a reward some Noble Horses called for their excellency, The Horses of the
Sun then in his Stables in Troy. The promise was made, but perfidious L^omedon
stood not to it after Hesione was set at liberty, which so much incensed
Hercules, that he besieged the City of Troy, took and plundered it, killed
Laomedon, and carried his Son into Captivity, who was afterward redeemed by the
Trojans, and for that cause was named Priamus, which in Greek signifies
Redeemed. To effect this, Hercules had the assistance of his Friends and
Allies, especially of Telamon the King of Salames, and Father of Ajax; He
carried away all Laomedons wealth, with Hesione his Daughter, who was married
to King Telamon.

Priamus being redeemed by his Subjects, and established in the Kingdom, began
to enlarge his Dominions, and to render the City of Trey far more famous than
ever it was before, for he rebuilt all the Walls, adorning them with Forts and
Bastions, which were then called Pergama. His Wives name was Hecuba Daughter of
the King of Thracia; She had by him many Sons, as Hector, Polites, Deiphobus,
Helenus the Southsayer, Troilus, Paris, and Polydorus, and three Daughters
named Polyxena, Cassandra, and Creusa; His Court and Palace were full of pomp
and glory, and he lived in this prosperous Estate many years, but when he
espoused the quarrels of the Asian People against Greece, thereby engaging
himself in the public enmity of his Country, and suffered Paris to affront the
Grecians, he brought up, on himself and his subjects utter Ruin and
Destruction, and was at last so unhappy to behold with his own Eyes, the total
desolation of the City of Troy, which had lasted only three hundred years, as
Herodotus a faithful Historian has related.

When Hecuba was with Child of Paris, she dreamed she was bringing into the
World a Firebrand, that should kindle the flames of War in that Country, and
cause a general Destruction therein. It was the custom of the Heathens, when
any strange accident happened to consult the Oracles, and enquire from them
what they ought to do; When Priamus therefore understood his Wives Dream, he
sent to take advice with the Oracle, who informed him that this Child would be
the cause of the Ruin of his Country: To prevent this, as soon as he was born,
the King delivered him into the hands of a Soldier named Archelaus, that he
might cast him into the woods to be devoured of the Wild Beasts, and thereby
avoid the mischief which threatened his Kingdom; But the Mother seeing the Child
so beautiful, and well shaped, was moved with compassion and sent him to Mount
Ida to the Kings Shepherd, where he was brought up as his Son, this mean
education did not take from him the generous qualities and inclinations which
he had received from his illustrious birth, for on every occasion, he made
appear to all the World a great Courage, Prudence, and Justice, and all other
virtues worthy of a Prince, so that he proved as Valiant as he was handsome;
Insomuch that the Poets feigned, Juno, Pallas, and Venus agreed to choose him
sole Arbitrator and Judge of their Concerns in a difference between them, which
was this.

At the Marriage of Peleus and Thetis, whilst these Goddesses were merry at the
Feast, the Goddess of Discord, cast into the middle of the Company a Golden
Apple with this Inscription; For the Fairest and most Beautiful. Each of these
Ladies claimed it as their own, and because they could not agree, they resolved
to leave it to the judgment of Paris, who was corrupted with the Charms and
Promises of Venus; For she had engaged to procure him the handsomest Lady in
the World, whereupon he despised the Riches of Juno, and the Wisdom of Pallas,
and pronounced his sentence in favor of Venus, whereby he provoked the Wrath
of these Goddesses against himself and all his Nation. This is the Fable.

After in a Public Assembly he declared who he was; for the Nobles and Gentry
of the Country being met near the City to see the sport of Wrestling, when
every one strove to express his Strength and Courage, he likewise went forth,
and threw to the ground many who undertook to engage with him; Hector the Son
of Priamus among the rest did try his strength, and was also overcome; But this
disgrace so enraged him against Paris, that he resolved to kill him, esteeming
him no better than a Country Clown. In his Anger he had taken away his Life
had not Paris to prevent it, shown him certain small Jewels which Queen Hecuba
his Mother had delivered to the Shepherd his Tutor, and thereby declared
himself to be his Brother. King Priamus who had already admired his Address and
Courage in the Combats, was ravished with joy to understand the strange
preservation of such an Excellent Son; He therefore embraced him, brought him
to his Palace, and gave him a Train of Attendants suitable to his Quality,
having forgot the Oracle foretold he was to be ruin of his Kingdom and Country.
He was at first renowned for his Justice and Civil behavior, but vice overcame
his Generous Disposition, and the Pleasures of the Court and sudden change of
his condition altered his Temper and Carriage, so that he had two natural Sons
by Oenone, Daphnis and Ideus who were as obscure as their Father was Famous.

King Priamus thinking himself now strong enough to encounter his old Enemies
the Graecians, assembled his Nobility to Court, to whom he spoke to this
purpose, My Lords, You cannot forget the cruel injuries we have undeservedly
received from the Greeks, who lately invaded our Country, and barbarously
murdered your Parents and Friends as well as mine; Having likewise carried away
Captive Hesione my most Fair and Beloved Sister, whom they still retain among
them as a common Strumpet; You must needs remember how they battered down this
Famous City, overthrowing and ruining the Walls, Houses, and Palaces thereof
even to the very ground, and robbed us of all our Riches and Wealth wherewith
Troy did then abound. I therefore think it very just and reasonable that, by
the assistance of the Gods who resist the Proud and Insolent, we ought to join
together, and endeavonr to take vengeance of them for those many wrongs we have
received, since our City is now so well peopled with valiant Soldiers, and that
we have Arms and Riches enough to furnish a complete Army. You know likewise we
have made Alliances with diverse great Princes our Neighbors, who no doubt will
assist us if we should have occasion for their help. So that my opinion is, we
ought now to seek Redress for all our wrongs; But since the fortune of War is
uncertain, and none call tell the Event thereof; and though the dishonor of my
Noble Sister be a very great Affront to me, yet before I begin the War, I will
send some Prudent Person fairly to demand the Restitution of Hesione, which if
granted, I will be content to remit all their other Affronts.

The whole Council approved of this his Resolution, and Anthenor one of his
Princes was instantly dispatched to Salamine to King Telamon, and being admitted
into his presence he thus Addressed him; Sir, Priamus King of Troy has sent me
to your Highness to desire you would please to restore him his Sister Hesione,
whom contrary to the Laws of Honor you detain as your Concubine, it being no
way proper to your glory thus to abuse the Daughter and Sister of a King, who
issues from a more Noble Family than your self. Yet if you please to send her
back, my Master is willing to pass by all other Indignities and Damages, which
he has received from you or yours.

King Telamon upon hearing this Message fell into an extreme Passion, and
fiercely replied, Friend, whatever you are, I cannot but much admire at the
weakness of Priamus, with whom I have no Correspondence, nor Amity, and whom I
have not the least cause to fear, nor grant his request. Thy King ought to
remember that I and others my Confederates came into his Country to revenge an
injury which his Father Laomedon offered to some of our Allies, and because I
was the first who entered the City of Troy with great danger of my Life and
Effusion of my Blood, Hesione of whom thou speak, was bestowed upon me as
the recompense of my Victory to use her at my pleasure, and since she is so
Noble and Beautiful a Lady, I am very unwilling to be deprived of what is so
delightful to me, and whom I obtained with so much pains and danger, go
therefore and tell Priamus that he is never like to recover her but with the
point of his Sword; Neither can I think that thou art a very discreet Person to
undertake such a Voyage with so great peril of thy Life, and to bring such an
Errand into a Country where thou and thy Countrymen are mortally hated, I
command thee therefore to go hence with all speed as thou hopest to escape a
severe and cruel death.

Anthenor instantly took Shipping, and carried the same Message to King Peleus,
then to King Castor and Pollux, and lastly to Duke Nestor, all of them Grecian
Princes, who all defied Priamus with the utmost contempt and scorn, especially
Nestor, who all enraged, said, Thou vile wretch were it not for my Nobility I
would cause thy Tongue to be plucked out of thy mouth for presuming to utter
such things before me, and in despite of thy King would see thee torn
piecemeal by Wild-Horses; Anthenor doubting he might be as good as his word,
returned immediately to Sea, and sailed toward Troy, where at length after many
dangers he arrived in safety. And then in the Company of several Noblemen he
presented himself before King Priamus, all the Barons of the Realm, and all the
Kings Sons being present to hear what Tidings he brought; To whom Anthenor gave
a full Account of his Embassy, and of all that happened to him during his
Voyage. At the recital whereof, Priamus was very much disturbed, and by their
opprobious Speeches he perceived that it was impossible to recover his Sister
without bringing on himself the utmost force and fury of the Graecians.

Soon after he again assembled his Nobility to his Palace of Ilium, to whom he
thus spoke, My Lords, you may remember that by your advice I sent Anthenor into
Greece, to demand the return of my Sister by all fair means possible, you
likewise are sensible what injurious answers they gave to my proposals, and how
little they value the wrongs we have received, insomuch that they threaten us
with new mischiefs, which Heaven forbid should ever fall upon us; But since we
have a strong and well fortified City, and several considerable Princes firmly
confederate with us, in my opinion we are in a Capacity to revenge these
reiterated damages; Therefore if you think fit, we will send our Forces
privately into their Countries, where finding them utterly unprovided of
defense, we shall be able in some measure to right our selves upon them;
Neither ought you to be discouraged because they have been lately so victorious
against us, since it often happens that the Conquerors at length are vanquished
by the Conquered.

All present were satisfied with this determination, and being all dismissed, he
called all his Sons who were not present at the debate, to whom he again
declared his intention, with tears in his eyes to this purpose; Dear Sons, you
ought never to forget the death of your Grandfather Laomedon, nor the
servitude of your Aunt Hesione whom the Greeks our inveterate Enemies abuse at
their own pleasure, which methinks should stir up thoughts of revenge in your
minds, but if this do not move you, yet you ought to endeavor it for my
Satisfaction who have brought you up with the utmost care and diligence, and
who am ready to dye with sorrow and vexation in reflecting on the multiplied
injuries I have received from them; And thou my Wise and Valiant Son Hector,
thou who art the Eldest of thy Brethren, I require thee chiefly to undertake
this matter, thou shall be the Principal Commander in executing this my will,
and all the rest will gladly obey thee, yea the whole Kingdom will willingly
submit to thy Conduct, whom they know to be so valiant and courageous, and
therefore upon thee I must lay all the burden of this War, and discharge my
self thereof, not doubting but by thy prudence and valor all will be brought
to an happy effect, and thy Father be revived in his old Age with the reports
of thy growing glory.

To this speech Hector returned this mild and discreet answer; Dear Father, and
my Sovereign Lord; I am satisfied that there are none of your Sons but are
sufficiently inclined to require satisfaction for any wrongs offered us, or any
of our Family, and according to the quality of the Person abused so does the
injury appear greater; It is natural to men to seek redress of injuries yea the
very Beasts by nature strive to do the same; Neither, Most Dear Father, is
there any of your Sons who ought more sensibly to resent the Murder of our Lord
and Grandfather than I who am the eldest; But I beseech you before you
undertake this enterprise, to consider seriously what may be the Issue and
Event thereof, otherwise you may have cause to repent that ever it was begun; I
speak not this out of Contradiction or Cowardice, but only to induce your
Highness to take mature advice and deliberation in the matter. You know that
all Africa and Europe are Subject to the Greeks, and that they abound with
stout and valiant Soldiers, so that our strength in men at Arms is not
comparable to theirs; Why therefore should we who live in peace and quietness
disturb our own Welfare and Prosperity. Hesione is not of so much value that we
should endanger all our Lives and Estates only for her sake; She has been
already a long time in Greece, and I think it were better she should spend the
rest of her days, which cannot be many, in that Country, than that we should
run such great hazards to fetch her home again. I again declare, Dread Sir, I
speak not this for fear, or want of Courage, but because the chance of War is
uncertain, and lest fortune by this adventure should confound and destroy our
Realm, or at least cause us to wish a thousand times that we had never
undertaken so dangerous an Enterprise.

When Paris heard Hector thus declare his mind, he was much concerned, and
standing up said; Dread Lord, I beseech you hear me one word; To what ill end
can this undertaking against the Greeks possibly come? Are we not furnished
with as gallant and courageous Knights as any in the World? Yes certainly, and
are able to defy the greatest force can be brought against us; Go on therefore
I entreat you with your design in sending some Men and Ships to Land and
Forage in Greece, and if you please to accept of my Service I shall most
readily undertake this employ, not doubting but to do them very great damage,
and to bring away some Noble Lady, by exchanging of whom you (...) your Sister
Hesione without further troub^^^ Deiphobus the third Son confirmed what Paris
had said, but Helenus the fourth, who was a Priest or Southsayer, smartly
replied; Mighty Father and Sovereign, beware that the thirst of revenge do not
bring upon you greater mischiefs; You know very well I understand and can
foretell things to come, as you have often experienced, The Gods forbid that it
should ever happen Paris should be sent into Greece, for if you make an assault
upon them, I now declare and presage, you shall see this Honorable City
destroyed by them, and your Trojans and all your Children killed, be therefore
persuaded not to adventure upon what will certainly end in utter desolation,
with the death of your self and Queen, and we that are your Children shall not
escape; For if Paris go into Greece, all these evils shall surely come upon you.

The King was much disturbed at these words, and for some time all stood
silent, when Troylus his youngest Son briskly answered. My noble Lords, why are
you discouraged for the words of this cowardly Priest, who you know does as
naturally hate War and Fighting as he loves good eating and drinking? Who can
believe that any man knows future events unless they are revealed to him by the
Gods? it were then great folly in us to concern our selves about his dreams. If
Helenus be afraid, let him go into the Temple and sing Service, and let us,
Dear Lord and Father revenge by force of Arms the injuries we have received
from the Greeks, send your Ships therefore instantly, and doubt not but your
valiant Subjects will procure you sufficient satisfaction from your enemies.
The whole Assembly approving this advice, they broke up, and Priamus presently
dispatched his two Sons Paris and Deiphobus to raise Forces in Panonia; though
Cassandra his Daughter Surnamed the Prophetess upon hearing this their
resolution, like one frantic thus cried out; O Noble City of Troy, what Fury
has moved thy Citizens to bring thee to ruin and desolation? How soon will thou be overthrown and destroyed even unto the ground? O Queen Hecuba for what
crime have thou deserved to see the lamentable death of all thy Children? Why
do thou not prevent Paris from going into Greece, which will be the cause of
so many deplorable mischiefs? She then ran to her Father, and drowned in tears
humbly besought him by no means to proceed in this enterprise, because by her
Science she certainly foresaw horrible effects would undoubtedly follow; But
neither the disswasions of Hector nor Helenus, nor the admonitions of Cassandra
could prevail in the least upon the mind of Priamus, nor stagger his
resolution, as if inevitable destiny had absolutely designed the ruin both of
himself and his Kingdom.

In the Spring Paris and Deiphobus returned with three Thousand stout Soldiers,
and were soon after imbarqued in twenty Ships, accompanied with Aeneas,
Anthenor and Polidamas, and Landing at Sparta, were received by Menelaus King
thereof with all expressions of kindness and civility, and when his Affairs did
require his presence in Crete (now Candia) he left Paris at his Palace in his
absence, but the Affection of this King was requited with a notable Treason and
Ingratitude; For Paris having secretly Contracted a Friendship with Helena his
Queen the Sister of Castor and Pollux, and accounted then one of the greatest
Beauties in the World, he Debauched her, and when he saw a favorable
opportunity he rifled his Palace, plundered the City of Argos, and carried all
away Captive, with Helena and her two Ladies of Honor, and at length brought
them all to Troy; The next Morning he married her in the Chief Temple of that
City; King Priamus received his Sons and their Booty with great joy, remembering
his hard usage from the Greeks during his Captivity, and because they had
utterly ruined his City in the Reign of his Father Laomedon, in hope likewise
hereby to recover his Sister Hesione out of their hands. When Cassandra heard
and saw the rejoicing at the Marriage of Paris, which lasted eight days
throughout the whole City, she like a Frantic Woman cried out, O unhappy
Trojans, what madness is it to rejoice at this Wedding, which will bring so
many evils! Your selves and your Children shall be slain, this Famous City
shall be utterly destroyed; O unhappy Mothers! you shall see your sucking Babes
torn in pieces before your Eyes. O most unfortunate Mother and Queen Hecuba!
where will thou find Tears enough to weep for the Murder of thy Children. O
blind and foolish people! why do you not send Helena home again, before the
Swords of your Enemies be sheathed in your Bowels? do you believe that her King
and Husband will not seek Revenge? Yes certainly, and woeful will his vengeance
be unto you. O unhappy Helena! thou will be the cause of sad calamities to this
our Country. King Priamus hearing her thus crying, commanded her silence,
which she refusing, was cast into Prison, where she continued many days; Happy
had it been for him and his people too, had they believed this warning of hers,
which might have prevented those desolations that will be read with pity to the
end of the World.

Men^laus who was at that time with King Nestor at Epirus, hearing the news of
the carrying away his Wife and ruin of his City was ex^reamly disturbed, and
sent to Agamemnon King of Mycene his brother to come to him, who arriving and
understanding the affair, he was mightily concerned for this disgrace of
Menelaus, which obliged him to acquaint the Princes of Greece with this notable
affront, which all the Nations had received by this Action. They all agreed to
consult about this business in two general Assemblies, where it was resolved to
join all their Forces together under the leading of Agamemnon, and revenge this
injury, and that they should oblige themselves solemnly by Oath not to forsake
the War till the Trojans had made full satisfaction for the wrongs received.

Besides Agamemnon many other valiant Commanders and stout Soldiers were met
together in the Grecian Army,) as Palamedes, Achilles, Ajax, Ulisses,
Menelaus, Stenelus, Diomedes, Prothesilaus, Idomeneus and Nestor, who was said
to be three hundred years old, and whose wise Counsel and Eloquence was very
serviceable to the Greeks, for he insinuated himself into the minds of the
Auditors so pleasantly as if honey had dropped from his mouth with his words;
They wanted no kind of Instruments nor Engines of War for their assistance in a
Seige; In short time all things being provided, the Graecians landed at the
Isle of Tenedos three miles from Troy, where they soon got possession of the
Castle, though valiantly defended by the Trojans; After which they sent to
Priamus t^ demand Helena, and Satisfaction for the damage they had received by
Paris, and if not to assure him that sudden ruin would fall upon him.

Priamus treated the Messengers very roughly and returned them back with an
absolute denial and defiance to their General Agamemnon; Who thereupon ordered
his Ships to sail immediately to Troy, where being arrived they endeavored to
Land, but were so warmly received by the Trojans who were prepared for them
upon the Shore, that there ensued a very bloody Battle, so that the Greeks were
sometimes forced back almost to their Ships, but being reinforced they pressed
very hard upon the Trojans, so that a great cry arose among them, which Hector
the most Noble Worthy hearing, he instantly issued out of the City with fresh
Forces, and meeting with Protiselaus who had that day slain a great many
Trojans, he struck him dead to the ground, and then pressing forward he bore
down all who stood in his way, his name being so terrible to his Enemies that
none durst withstand him; About Evening Hector returned into the City, when
Achilles, landing with his Mirmidons, made a great-slaughter of the Trojans,
and at length all the rest of the Fleet landed, though not without stout
opposition from Troilus, Paris, and Deiphobus; That night the Greeks encamped
in the Field, and the Trojans retired within the City, and were Besieged
there^n by the Greeks; Next Morning Hector issued ^ut of the Gates with a
gallant Company, when Patroclus advanced against him with all his Force, so
that his Spear pierced through his Shield, but Hector with one blow cut him
down, and observing his gallant Armor, was desirous of it, and alighting to
seize it, was immediately incountred by King Menon with three thousand men, who
endeavored to seize both him and his Horse, but Hector remounting, made his
way through the thickest of his Foes, and overthrew all that opposed, and
attempted the second time to take off the Armor of Patroclus when Idumeneus
King of Crete came upon him with two Thousand more, who being enraged at this
disappointment, made a terrible slaughter among the Greeks, striking off Heads,
Legs and Arms in abundance, and killing fitteen of the most valiant Grecian
Commanders with his own hand; During this skirmish King Menon carried off the
Body of Patroclus to his Tent, and thereby defeated Hector of his prize to his
great vexation.

The Trojans hearing that Hector was unhorsed, and in great danger of his Life,
issued out with all the strength they had to his rescue, so that the Battle was
renewed with more sury than ever, and Hector being earnest in fight was
encompassed on all sides by the Enemy, but as his danger so his valor
increased, so that like a raging Lion he brought ruin and destruction
wherever he came, and having another Horse brought him, his own being slain
under him, he revived the courage of the Trojans, who by the multitude of their
Enemies were even tired out, and just ready to leave the Field; Hector
endeavoring to put the Enemy to flight was hurt in the Face with an Arrow shot
by King Humerus, but not without a quick revenge, for Hector instantly returned
upon him, and slew him, and presently after meeting with King Menon, Ha
Traitor, said he, that hinderedst me from taking the Arms of Patroclus, I will
now be avenged of thee; and therewith struck him dead off his Horse. This day
the Trojans had great advantage of the Greeks, and might nave put an end to the
War, had not Hector unhappily met with Ajax in an Encounter, and understanding
he was his Kinsman, instead of killing him as he might have done, embraced him
in his Arms, and invited him to come to Troy, and see his Kindred; Ajax
subtly answered, that it was not now a convenient time, but if he had so much
kindness for him as he said, he desired that for his sake the Battle might
cease that day only, to which Hector readily agreed, and blowing a Horn,
thereby recalled all the Trojans into the City, who had already begun to set
Fire to the Grecian Ships, and had burnt them all, if they had not been
prevented by this unfortunate accident.

This short Truce being expired both sides soon prepare again for Battle, and
both Armies being ^eady, Hector assaulted Achilles, who commanded the Greeks,
with so great force that both fell ^o the Earth, Hector remounted first,
leaving Achilles on the ground, and fell in among the body of his Enemies whom
he slew on all hands, having his armor covered with the blood of his Opponents,
Achilles recovering himself fell likewise with great fury upon the Trojans, and
at length again encountered Hector, by whom he was again dismounted, but being
soon horst again there insued a bloody duel between these two gallant
Commanders, and they had certainly killed each other had they not been timely
parted; The rest of the Trojan Generals behaved themselves with much courage,
and Hector was commonly at the head of them; King Prothenor observing his
advantage, came suddenly upon him and struck him to the Earth, but Hector
remounting in an instant, soon dispatched him, whereat the Trojans taking
courage followed the Graecians so close that they fled to their Tents, whom
they pursued till night prevented them, and then returned into the City.

After this battle Agamemnon called a Council of War in his Tent, wherein they
concluded that it was in vain to hope for success against their Enemies till
the valiant Hector was killed, and therefore they desired Achilles as well for
his Strength as wisdom, to undertake it; Achilles readily accepted this charge,
as knowing Hector to be his mortal adversary, and being willing he should dye
rather by his hand than any other; Soon after the Trojans again issued out of
the City, and engaged with the Greeks, in which Battle the Valiant Hector slew
three of the Greek Princes, and again encountered Achilles, both of them being
again dismounted by the force of their Spears, but night coming on both sides
retired. In the next fight many gallant Commanders were killed, but the Trojans
lost more than the Greeks; But in the seventh Battle though Hector was very
much dissuaded from fighting that day both by his Father Priamus, and his Wife
Andromache, who seeing him Armed fell at his Feet, together with her two little
Sons, humbly entreating him to disarm himself, since she had drearned the night
before that if he went out that day he should certainly be slain, and said she,
If you will not do it for my sake, yet have compassion on your Dear little
Children, and do not expose both them and me to a Cruel Death, or cause us by
your death, to be carried into slavery in a strange Country: But her reasons
not in the least prevailing, his Mother Queen Hecuba, and Queen Hellena, with
all his Sisters came to him with tears in their Eyes, and begged him not to go
out, yet all to no purpose, for taking his Horse he was just going into the
fight which was already begun, when his Father Priam seizing his Horse by the
Bridle prevented him, and made him return, but he would by no means be
persuaded to disarm;

The Battle was very bloody to the Trajans, and by the obstinate Valor of the
Greeks they were beaten back to the City Gates, and Margetton one of Priamus
natural Sons was slain by Achilles, which when Hector heard, he was so enraged,
that putting on his helmet, he privately got away into the Fight, where he soon
dispatched several of the most forward Greek Captains, and again restored the
Battle by his presence, so that the Greeks lay dead on all sides; When Achilles
observed Hector to make such havoc of his Commanders, he concluded that all
his endeavors or hopes of success would be in vain whilst Hector lived, and
therefore taking a Noble Grecian with him called Policceus, they came upon him
with the utmost fury imaginable, but Hector soon dispatched the Nobleman;
Achilles resolving to revenge his Death, assaulted him courageously, but Hector
threw a dart at him with such violence that it wounded him in the thigh;
Achilles retired to bind up his wound, and then returning to the Battle with a
very great Spear, wherewith he vowed to be the death of Hector, he found him
carrying a Grecian Prince very richly armed out of the Field, having thrown
his shield behind him for his ease and thereby left his breast uncovered;
Achilles observing his advantage, without being perceived by Hector, came
suddenly up to him and thrust his Spear into his Body wherewith this Gallant
Worthy fell instantly dead to the ground; King Memnon who was present, seeing
Hector slain, fell upon Achilles with his utmost force, striking him to the
ground, and wounding him very dangerously, but his Soldiers laid him upon his
Shield, and so carried him into his Tent; The Trojans were wonderfully
discouraged at his death, and retired into the City with much sorrow and
lamontation; But who can express the grief of his Father, Mother, Wife and
Kindred, they tore their garments and faces, and were for a long time as it
were distracted for grief?

Hector being buried with much funeral Pomp and State, the Trojans fell upon
the Greeks and cut off abundance of them in revenge of his death; To conclude,
there were many slain, and much blood Spilt in the frequent Sallies of the
besieged, and Memnon whom the Trojans put their trust in next to Hector being
likewise slain, they were much terrified yet was Achilles soon after killed by
Paris, at which they began to take courage again, and express their Joy, but it
lasted not long, for Pyrrhus the Son of Achilles being arrived from Greece,
succeeded his Father in all his Offices, and had no less success in the
Encounters although he was very young; He revenged his death upon the Trojans
in many Battles, in one of which he killed Paris. At last the besieged were so
unhappy as to see their Palladium, upon which they superstitiously believed the
safety of their City did depend, stolen and carried away privately by Ulisses
and Diomedes; You must know that Troy was first built by Dardania, and
afterward enlarged by his great Grandson Ilus, who named it Ilium; This Prince
made his Prayer to the Gods, that they would please to give him some sign,
whether they did approve of the Building this City; Immediately at his words
(says the Story) there fell down from above, the Palladium, which was an Image
of three Cubits long, holding in one hand a Lance, and in the other a Spindle
with a Distaff; The Statue no sooner touched the Earth, but it began to march in
the presence of the King. The Oracle afterward informed him, that Troy should
never be taken nor destroyed whilst that remained safe; Ulisses and Diomedes
stole secretly into the Citadel of Troy through a Gutter, and carried away the
Palladium; This caused King Priamus to come to an Agreement with the Greeks,
but had no mind to restore Helena, who was Married to Deiphobus his Younger Son
after the death of Paris. Aeneas and Anthenor were Commissioned to Treat with
the Enemy, who concluded a Peace for a certain sum of Money, and a quantity of
Provisions which the Trojans were to furnish the Greeks for their return home.

This Peace was but a cheat that the Greeks might surprise them with less
difficulty; When they raised the Siege, they pretended to leave behind them a
Present for Minerva to appease her Wrath, as if they had displeased her by
Stealing away and profaning the Palladium; for that purpose they caused a
Wooden Horse of a Prodigious bigness to be made; In the Belly of it they shut
up a great many of the stoutest and ablest Soldiers of the Army, and left it
before the Walls of the City, and retired with their whole Forces as if for
good and all, but they went no farther than the Isle of Tenedos, expecting to
see the success of their Enterprise. The Besieged immediately go out of their
City where they had been shut up so long, they visit all the quarters of the
Grecian Camp, they admire this great Wooden Horse; At length they consult
whether they should carry it into their City; Some were for it, others
suspected some deceit, among whom one Lacoon cast his Lance against it, but
seemed to be instantly punished, for two dreadful Serpents immediately killed
him and his two Children. This Accident caused them all to resolve to drag this
Wooden Engine into Troy. But they were far more eager when they heard the
Relation and discourse of one Sinon, a Fellow taught by Ulysses for this
purpose, and taken as a spy by the Trojans, who told them, That when the Fleet
was ready to set sail toward Greece, the Gods had demanded a Grecian to be
sacrificed to them that the Voyage might be prosperous, and that Ulysses his
mortal Enemy having caused the Lot to fall upon him, he was forced to run away
and hide himself; Thus persisting in his dissimulation, he told them that the
design of the Greeks was to reconcile themselves to the Goddess Pallas, and
therefore they had dedicated unto her this Horse, which they had caused to be
made so large that it might not enter within the Walls of the City, and that
the Trojans might not make use of it to their advantage; and to the prejudice
of the Greeks.

This Discourse removed out of their minds all Jealousy and Suspicion, and
caused them to resolve to break down a part of the City Wall to carry in this
great Horse; Every one employed himself in this Work with all their ^ower and
diligence, and having drawn it into the midst of the City, they all departed to
Drink, Dance, and make merry, wherein they continued till night, and were then
overcome with Wine and Sleep; When Sinon saw things in this posture, he opened
the Belly of the Horse to let out the Soldiers who had been there shut in, and
then he made a Fire to give notice to the Greek Army, who hastening back
without noise, entered by the breach lately made in the Wall, and soon dispersed
themselves into every part of the City to burn and plunder it, Pyrhut went
directly to the Palace, where he Massacred King Priamus, and all his Sons, and
his Daughter Polixena; The rest of the poor Inhabitants had no Quarter granted
them, but were all cruclly murdered without respect to Quality, Sex or Age; And
thus after ten years Siege this Famous City was destroyed and burnt to the
ground, about three hundred years after it had been built by Dardanus, and
about two thousand eight hundred years from the Creation of the World. Helena
the occasion of all this desolation returned with her Husband to Sparta, where
she lived till his death. She being afterward banished by the Sons of
Menelaus, fled to Rhodes to Queen Polixena her old Acquaintance, who suffered
her to be hanged on a Tree for her Infamous and Wicked Life.

The History of Alexander the Great, the Second Worthy of the World
portrait of Alexander

THE Second Worthy, was Great Alexander,
That Valiant Captain, and renowned Commander.
He in his youth did the known World subdue
And wept beeause he found no more to do.
He was a Prince that had a Mighty Mind
And to all Glorious Actions was inclined.
With Thirty Thousand men he put to slight
Six hundred thousand Persians, and quite
Destroyed that Potent Monarchy, which long
Had Triumphed over Nations Great and Strong,
Yet he who others could subdue by wine
Was Conquered, and did his Life resign.
ALexander the Great was the Son of Philip, King of Macedon and Olympias; His
Father after he subdued Greece, and was acknowledged their Captain General,
listed the Auxiliaries of ever City, by whom he was to be assisted against any
Invasion, or to lead them forth against any Nation, for it was not doubted but
that the Empire of the Persians was the design of those great preparations, the
number of foot were two Hundred Thousand, and fifteen Thousand Horse, besides
which he had an Army of Macedonians, and another of the barbarous Nations who
were conquered, and borderers upon his Kingdom. In the Spring he sent Parmenio,
Amyntas and Attalus, (whose Sister he had lately Married, having divorc
Olympias upon suspicion of incontinency) into that part of Asia which was under
the power of the Persians; But while the Auxiliaries of Greece were drawing
into a Body, he celebrated the Nuptials of Cleopatra his Daughter and Alexander
whom he had made King of Epirus; The day was remarkable for the magnificence of
the Two Kings, the one Marrying, the other giving his Daughter in Marriage;
Neither was there wanting the delight of Enterludes and Masks, to the beholding
whereof when King Philip passed without a Guard, between the two Alexanders his
own Son and his Son in Law, Pausanias one of the Nobility, being suspected by
none, Killed Philp as he was going through the crowd, and made the day destined
to mirth and Marriage, black with the lamentation of a funeral.

This Pausanias about the fourteenth year of his age was enforced to be a
Prostitute or Sodomite to Attalus, to which indignity this ignominy was added
that Attalus having afterward brought him into the Banquet, and made him
drunk, did not only expose him to his own lust, but to all his guests, and
rendered him a common laughing stock among them, which Pausanias resenting with
great indignation, often complained of it to Philip, but finding that he was
both deluded and delayed in his just complaints, and likewise that his
adversary was honored with a new addition of power and greatness, he converted
his anger against Philip himself, and that revenge which he could not have on
his adversary he took on his unrightous Judge; Pausanias was seized and
crucified for the Fact.

As there were diverse Nations in the army of Philip, so he being slain, there
were diverse agitations of minds in them; In these distractions the coming of
Alexander was a Sovereign remedy, who in a very obliging Speech, quieted their
minds, and procured to himself a very great esteem from them; He was then but
twenty years old, and gave exceeding hopes of a growing Virtue; He freed the
Macedonians from all Tributes whatsoever, unless a discharge from the War,
wherewith they were extremely satisfied, declaring that they had only lost the
Person but not the Virtue or valor of their King; He caused all who were
guilty of his Fathers death to be slain at his Funeral; He awed many Nations
who were ready to rebel, and marching privately into Greece, called the
Magistrates of all the Citys to Corinth, by whom he was made General in the
place of his Father, after which he proceeded in his preparations for the
Persian War begun by his Father, during which he had notice that the Athenians,
Lacedaemonians and Thebans had revolted to the Persians by the treachery of
Demosthens the Orator, who corrupted him with a great sum of gold; But upon
Alexanders approach they soon returned again to their obedience, the Thebans
only persisting, who were thereupon quickly subdued, their City levelled to the
ground, and their Citizens sold for Captives.

Alexander being now wholly intent upon the War in Asia, put to death all his
Kindred, or friends, that he imagined might nourish any aspiring thoughts;
After which having drawn his Army all into one Body, he speedily imbarqued
them, and being come within sight of Asia, inflamed with an incredible ardor of
Spirit, he erected 12 Altars where he made his Vows to the Gods of War; He then
divided all his Patrimony and Kingdom which he had in Macedonia and Europe
amongst his Friends, alleging That Asia was sufficient for himself. And before
any of his Ships Sailed he offered Sacrifices, desiring Victory in this War, in
which he was to be the Revenger of Greece so often invaded by the Persians,
whose Empire was grown Old and Ripe for change, it being now high time that the
Turn should again come about when others who would use their power better
should enjoy it; Neither were the resolutions of his Army less prosaging good
fortune than his own, who forgetting their Wives and Children and the War which
was so far from their own Country, assured to themselves the Persian Gold and
all the riches of the East, as if already in their possession.

When they drew near the Asian Shore, Alexander first threw a dart, as into an
Enemies Country, and leaping ashore in his Armor, vaulted twice or thrice
into the Air; He there again sacrificed, praying That those Countries might
willingly receive him as King; He did the same at Ilium, upon the Tombs of
those who fell in the Trojan War; Advancing afterward toward the Enemy, he
made Proclamation, That none of his Soldiers should plunder, since they ought
to spare their own goods, and not destroy what they came to possess; In his
Army were thirty Two thousand Foot, and Four Thousand five Hundred Horse, and a
Fleet of one hundred eighty two Ships; With which inconsiderable Force it may
seem wonderful he durst undertake to overcome all the Western World, especially
since his Army did not consist of stout young men in the Flower of their Youth,
but chiefly of Old Soldiers, some of whom by the Laws of War, ought for their
age to have been discharged from further Service, being such as served both his
Father and Grandfather, whereby they now seemed Select Masters of War, rather
than private Soldiers, there being no File-leader who was not sixty years old,
the Order of the Camp being so excellent as it appeared like the Senate of some
ancient Commonwealth, therefore in the Battle no man thought of flight but of
Victory, having no hope in the nimbleness of their Feet, but in the strength of
their Arms.

On the other side Darius King of Persia, confident of his strength, affirmed
he would have nothing done by Policy or Circumvention, since it was not
suitable to his Grandeur to steal a Victory, and therefore thought it more
honorable to admit the Enemy to enter his Country, than to fall upon him on
the Borders: The first Battle was in the Plain of Adrastum, where an Army of
six hundred thousand Persians were overcome as much by the Policy of Alexander
as the courage of the Macedons, great was the slaughter of the Enemy, whereas
he lost only nine Footmen, and one Hundred and Twenty Horse, whom to encourage
the rest, he caused to be honorably buried, and Statues were erected for them
as for some memorable Commanders, bestowing great Privileges on their
Relations and kindred; After this Victory, the greatest part of Asia submitted
to him; He also made many Wars with the Lieutenants of Darius, whom he overcame
not so much by Arms as the Terror of his name.

While he was thus Victorious he understood by a Captive that a Treason was
contrived against him by Alexander Son in law to Antipater (then the Kings
Lieutenant in Macedonia) but fearing if he should put him to death it might
occasion some Tumult in Macedon, he only confined him to Prison in Bonds; After
this he advanced to Gordium, situate between both the Phrygias, which City he
desired to be Master of, not so much for the plunder as because he heard that
in the Temple of Jupiter which was within it, there was consecrated the Plough
of Gordius, the knots of whose cords if any could unlose, the Oracle of Old had
presaged he should reign over all Asia; The Original of the Story was this;
When Gordius was ploughing in this Country with his Oxen, great flights of
Birds of all sorts flew round about him, who going to the Southsayers and
Astrologers of the next City to know the meaning, he met at the Gate a Virgin
of admirable Beauty, and asking her whether he should go to be resolved of his
doubt, she having some knowledge her self in the Art by the instructions of her
Parents told him, That the Kingdom and Government of that Country was presaged
to him thereby, and offered him to be a companion of his good fortune by giving
her self in Marriage to him; He was unwilling to refuse so fair a condition,
which seemed the first felicity of his Kingdom; After this Marriage a Sedition
arose among the Phrygians, and counsel being asked, what would put an end to
these mischiefs, the Oracle replied, That there was a necessity of a King; And
being again demanded, who he should be, answer was made; That they should make
him King whom they should find with a Plough entering into Jupiters Temple;
Gordeus was the man, whom they presently saluted as their King, who consecrated
to Regal Majesty in that Temple the Plough, by which the Kingdom was conferred
upon him. After him reigned his Son Midas, who being instructed by Orpheus in
the Solemnities of Worshipping their Gods, he filled all Phrygia with Religion
and Ceremonies, by which, during his life, he was thought safer than by Arms.

Alexander soon took the City, and entering the Temple, inquired for the Plough,
which being shown him, when he could not discover the ends of the Cords lying
hid amongst the multiplicity of the foldings, he gave a violent interpretation
to the sense of the Oracle, and cutting the cords asunder with his sword, the
knots were undone, and he found the ends lying undiscovered in the Mystery of
the Twists; Mean while he heard of Darius approach with a formidable Army, and
fearing the danger of the Streights of Taurus, he marched speedily over that
Mountain, his Foot going five hundred Furlongs without Respite; Coming to
Tarsus and being taken with the pleasant River Cydnus running through that
City, he disarmed and covered with dust and sweat, threw himself into it, which
was so very cold, that it caused a Chilness and benuming in every joint, which
rendered him Speechless, and made his condition very dangerous, and the more
because he had received letters that day from Cappadocia, that Philip his chief
Physician in whom he put most confidence, was corrupted by Darius to destroy
him: However the case being desperate, he ordered him to prepare a potion, and
having received the Cup, he delivered these Letters to him, and steadfastly
beheld him as he drank the Physic, and observing no alteration in his
countenance in reading them, he became more cheerful, and in four days was
perfectly recovered.

And now Darius advanced toward him with Three hundred thousand Foot, and One
hundred thousand Horse, and though the multitude of his enemies did somewhat
disturb him, yet when he reflected what mighty Actions and what notable
Conquests over many Nations he had performed with as few men, he resumed his
former courage, but thought it necessary by no means to delay fighting least
some discouragement might happen to his Soldiers, and therefore riding through
the midst of his Troops, he by several Speeches and Orations endeavored to
confirm their valor, teling them, The World had no Soldiers comparable to
them, and that this one Battle would put an end to their labors, but their
glory and renown would remain for ever; Darius on the other side was no less
industrious, admonishing his men not to forgot the ancient Glory of the Persian
Empire, and of their everlasting possession of it, which was granted them by
the Immortal Gods.

After this the Battle was fought with great resolution, in which both Kings
were wounded, and the Victory was doubtful till Darius fled, thereupon there
followed a great slaughter of the Persians, threescore and ten thousand Foot,
and ten thousand Horse being slain, and forty thousand taken Prisoners; Of the
Macedons were slain one Hundred and Thirty Foot, and one hundred and fifty
Horse; Much Gold, and other rich movables were found in the Persian Camp, and
among the Captives there were the Mother and Wife of Darius, and his two
Daughters, to comfort whom when Alexander came in person with some Soldiers,
they embracing one onother expecting present death, made a Screaking
lamentation, then humbling themselves to the knees of Alexander, they desired
not life, but only a reprieve till they had buried Darius; Alexander moved at
their Piety, assured them he was alive, and to remove from them the fear of
death, commanded they should be honored as Queens, and that the daughters
should choose them Husbands according to their Quality; After which observing
the riches and precious furniture of Darius, he was possessed with admiration,
and then first began to delight in luxurious Banquets, and Feasts, and to be
tempted by the Beauties of Barsinoe his Captive, on whom he begot a Son, named
Hercules. But considering Darius was yet alive, he commanded Parmenio to seize
upon the Persian Fleet, and sent other Commanders to take possession of some
Citys in Asia, who soon delivered themselves up with vast Sums of Gold, upon
the same of this great Victory. He then advanced into Syria, where many Kings
of the East with Fillets and Miters met him, some of whom he received as
Friends, others he deprived of their Kingdoms, preferring new Kings, and among
others, Abdolominus was by him chosen King of Sidonia, who before lived
miserably, his only employment being to scour Ditches and water Gardens,
Alexander rejecting the Nobility least they should impute their Royalty to
their birth, and not his generosity.

The Citizens of Tire sending him a weighty Crown of Gold on pretense of
gratifying him, the gift was gratefully accepted, and the Ambassadors were
told, He would come thither himself, and pay his vows to Hercules; Who alleging
he might perform that better in the Old Town of Tire in the ancient Church, he
was so incensed that he threatened utterly to destroy their City, and
immediately drawing his Army to the Island, was resolutely received by the
Tyrians who depended on assistance from Carthage, but that failing, they were
not long after surprised by Treachery and destroyed; He then took Rhodes, Egypt
and Cilicia upon composition, and resolved to visit the Temple of Jupiter Hamon
to inquire of future events, and of his own Original, since his Mother Olympias
had confessed to his Father Philip that Alexander was not begot by him, but by
a vast great Serpent, and Philip a little before his death openly declared,
That Alexander was not his Son, and divorced Olympias as guilty of
incontinence. Alexander therefore being ambitious of being a God, and to free
his Mother from disgrace, sent some before hand with presents to the Priests,
ordering them what answers they should return, so that entering the Temple, they
instantly saluted him as the Son of Hamon, who being joyful of this adoption by
this Deity, commanded that Jupiter Hamon should be esteemed his Father; He then
demanded, Whether full Revenge had been taken of his Fathers Murderers. It was
answered, That his Father could neither be killed, nor dye, but the Revenge for
King Philip was fully performed; In Answer to a third demand it was said, That
both Victory in all Wars and the possession of all Lands was granted to him;
His Commanders and Intimates were likewise enjoined by the Priest to worship
him as a God, and not as a King. From hence he was possessed with wonderful
insolence and pride, altogether estranging himself from his former familiarity
learnt of the Graecians and Macedonians; He then built Alexandria, and settled a
Colony of Macedons there, commanding it should be the Chief City of Egypt.

Darius flying to Babylon, sent Letters to Alexander offering him a vast sum of
money for redeeming the Captive Ladies, who returned answer, That to redeem
them, he must not only give his money but his Empire. Darius soon after writ
again, proposing his Daughter in Marriage, and a great part of the Empire, but
Alexander writ back, That he gave him only what was his own before, and
commanded him to come as a Suppliant to him, and to permit the Conqueror to
dispose of the Kingdom at his own pleasure; Darius hereby dispairing of Peace,
prepared again for War, and advanced against Alexander with four hundred
thousand Foot, and one hundred thousand Horse; In his march he was informed his
Wife was dead, and that Alexander had been extremely kind to her and the rest,
lamenting her death, and assisting at her Funeral, and that he often went to
comfort his Mother and Daughters, whereat he confessed; He was truly Conquered,
since after so many Battles his Enemy had likewise overcome him in kindness,
and that it was some comfort to him in his Misery, to be subdued by so gallant
an Adversary. He thereupon writ the third time to him, giving him many thanks
for his Civil Respects to his Family, offering his other Daughter, and the
greater part of his Kingdom, even to the River Euphrates, and thirty thousand
Talents for the other Captives; Alexander answered, That giving thanks to an
Enemy was superfluous, neither had he done any thing either for Flattery, fear
of future events, or in hope of peace, but out of the greatness of his mind,
whereby he had learnt to contend against the Forces, but not the calamities of
his Enemies; He promised to allow the same grants to Darius, if he would be his
second, not his equal, but as the World could not be governed by two Suns, no
more could it endure the Government of two such great Empires in a safe
condition, therefore said he, Come if you will, and this very day surrender
your self to me, or else prepare for Battle the next, wherein you have no
reason to promise your self any beter success than you have already found.

Next day both Armies stood ready to fight, at which instant Alexander possessed
with too much care, fell into a deep sleep, and was hardly waked by Parmenio,
and all admiring that he who slept little, should now be overcome therewith, in
so great danger, he replied, That his being delivered from a great fear was the
occasion of it, since now he was to fight with all the Forces of Darius at
once, being before afraid the War would be delayed should the Persians have
divided their Army; Before the Battle, both Armies viewed each other, the
Macedons admired the multitude, greatness of Body and Beautiful Armor of their
Enemies. The Persians were amazed to think how often so many thousands of them
had been overcome with so few Soldiers; Alexander bid his Soldiers, Not be
troubled at the multitude or strength of their Enemies, but to consider this
was the third time they had fought with them, and that they were never the more
valiant for flying away so often, that they ought to despise an Army shining
with Gold and Silver, since their Iron would soon purchase it to themselves.
Then both Armies engaging the Macedonians in contempt of the Enemy so often
conquered, threw themselves upon the Swords of their Adversaries, and the
Persians desired rather manfully to dye than be again defeated, seldom more
blood was shed in any Fight; Darius seeing his Forces routed would willingly
have died himself, but those next him compelled him to fly, some persuaded him
to break down the Bridge of Cydnus, and stop the Enemies progress; who
answered, That he would not provide for his safety so dishonourably by expesing
so many thousands of his own Soldiers to the fury of the Enemy, who ought to be
allowed the same way to escape which lay open to himself.

Alexander was still personally present in the greatest difficulties, and where
the Enemy stood firmest, he clapped in amongst them, and made the most pressing
dangers more his own than his Soldiers. In this Battle he gained to himself the
whole Empire of Asia in the fifth year of his reign, so happily, that none
after durst Rebel, the Persians whose Empire had continued so many years, now
patiently enduring the Yoke of Servitude; His Soldiers refresht, and rewarded,
the Booty being so great that they were thirty days in dividing it, he found
hid eleven thousand Talents, and then took Persepolis the Chief Seat of the
Kingdom renowned for many years, and full of the spoils of the World, which
were now discovered in the destruction thereof. At this place eight hundred
Greeks who had been formerly taken Captive by the Persians, came to Alexander
with their dismembered Bodies, desiring him as he had delivered Greece, so he
would likewise them from the Cruelty of their Enemies; The King granted them to
return home, but they rather chose to be seated in some Plantation there, least
instead of joy they should present to their Parents the lamentable and loathed
spectacle of themselves.

Mean time Darius was seized on by his own Kinsmen, and Fettered in Golden
Chains in a Parthian Town called Taneas, thinking thereby to purchase savor of
the Conqueror; Alexander pursuing him full speed, came to the same Town next
day, and was informed that Darius was by night carried away in a close Wagon;
Therefore ordering his Army to follow, he pursued him with only seven thousand
Horse, encountering several dangers by the way, and having run many miles
without gaining any Intelligence of him, he staid to refresh his Troops, when
one of his Soldiers going to the next Spring, found Darius there, bleeding
through many wounds, but yet alive, who observing the Soldier to be a Persian
Captive he said; It was some comfort to him in his deplorable Misfortunes, that
he should speak to one who understood him, and should not breath forth his last
words in vain; He desired him to represent to Alexander, his real sense of the
many obligations received from him, which he was sorry he had not the happiness
to return, since he had demeaned himself toward his Mother and Children not as
an Enemy but a King, and that he was more happy in an Adversary than in his own
kindred, since Alexander had spared the Lives of his near Relations, whereas
his own Life was taken away by his Kinsmen to whom he had given both Life and
Kingdoms, for which he should receive that recompense which was due to a
Conqueror. All the return he could make him for his repeated savours, was as a
dying man to beseech the Powers above, and the Powers below, and the Gods that
dispose of Scepters, to bestow upon him the Empire of the whole World. For
himself he desired to have rather a solemn than a sumptuous Funeral; As to his
death the revenge ought to be exemplary, it being not only. Alexanders but the
common cause of all Kings, and would be as dishonorable as dangerous to be
passed over, since hereby he might both declare his Justice, and procure his
future safety, and in hope of his performing it, He gave the Soldier his right
hand, the only pledge of the Faith of a King, and soon after gave up the Ghost.
Alexander coming thither, and hearing this Relation, having beheld the
miserable condition wherein he was, with tears lamented his death so unworthy
his former grandeur, and commanded his Body to be Buried like a King among the
Tombs of his Predecessors.

Alexander after this honored the Soldiers he lost in pursuit of Darius with
great suneral expenses, dividing fifteen thousand Talents among their surviving
Companions; He now received Intelligence that after his departure almost all
Greece combined to recover their liberty in his absence, the Lacedaemonians
leading the Van, who despising the Peace with Philip and Alexander, Agis their
King became General of this War, which insurrection Antipater suppressed in the
beginning, though with great blood shed on both sides, Agis making terrible
slaughter of his Enemeis, and sometimes driving whole Troops before him. After
the death of Darius, Alexanders Soldiers did not doubt but the War was quite
finished, expecting nothing but a speedy return to their own Country, and in
their imagination already embraced their Wives and Children, when Alexander
calling a General Council, declared unto them, That they had gained nothing by
so many famous victories if their more Eastern Enemies were yet untouched,
neither did he make War to conquer the Person, but the Empire of Darius, and
that those were to be pursued who fled away, and revolted from him; Having by
this speech revived the courage of his men, he subdued the Mardians and
Hircanians; In this place Thalestris or Minothea Queen of the Amazons addressed
her self to him, attended with three hundred Thousand Women, having traveled
twenty five days through many terrible Nations, only as she said, To have a son
by so great a Conqueror; Her countenance and the cause of her coming were the
subject of much wonder, both for the strangeness of her habit, and request. To
satisfy which the King took thirty day; leisure, and when she thought she was
with Child, she took her leave and departed.

Alexander now assumed the habit, and Diadem of the King of Persia, as if
tranformed into the fashions and Customs of the Conquered, and to prevent envy,
commanded his friends likewise to wear long Robes of gold and purple, and to
imitate their Riot also, he divided the night by turns among troops of
Concubines, admired both for birth and beauty, adding thereto Feasts and Plays
to complete his Luxury; which caused great indignation among his Commanders to
see him so far degenerate from his Father Philip, that he did not care to have
his own Country so much as mentioned, being overcome with the same vices which
were the overthrow of his Enemies; yet he politickly permitted his Soldiers to
marry those Women who were their Captives, to make the War less tedious, and
their desires to abate of returning home, and likewise that Macedonia might be
the less exhausted with recruit^ if young Soldiers born in the Camp should
succeed, their Old Fathers. The Parthians being next subdued, Andragoras a
noble Persian was made their Governor, from whom the Kings of Parthia derived
their original. In the mean time Alexander excercised his rage on his own men
more like an Enemy than a King, especially on those who upbraided him for
subverting the Customs of his Country, for which offense old Permenio next in
dignity to the King and his Son Philotas, though upon other pretenses, were put
to death; upon which, murmurs rose throughout the Camp in compassion to these
innocents, and secrets whispers that they could hope for little better to
themselves; which being told Alexander, he declared he would send some into
Macedonia to give an account of his Conquests, desiring his Soldiers to write
freely to their Friends, who were glad of such an opportunity; This done he
commanded the Letters to be secretly brought him, whereby having discovered
every man's opinion of him, he reduced those who had writ severely into one
Company, with an intent either to destroy or distribute them into Colonies in
the furthest parts of the World.

He then subdued the Dracans, and diverse other Nations inhabiting at the foot
of Mount Caucasus, when Bessus one of the Favorites of Darius was brought bound
in chains, who not only betrayed but killed his King, whom Alexander delivered
to the brother of Darius to be tormented in revenge of his Treason, And to
leave his name in those remote Countries, he built a City which he named
Alexandria on the River Tanais within seventeen days, making a Wall about it of
six miles compass, and transplanting thither the people of three Citys
adjacent, built by Cyrus; He likewise built twelve Citys amongst the Bactrians
and Sogdians, wherein he placed all whom he found seditious in his Army; After
this, one Holyday he called his chief Captains together to a Banquet, where
mention being made of the exploits performed by Phillip, Alexander preferred
himself above his Father, and extolled his own Achievements to the skies, the
greatest part of his guests assenting thereto, but Clytus an Old Commander upon
confidence of the Kings Friendship, still persisted to magnify the actions of
Philip; which so inflamed Alexander, that snatching a spear from one of the
Guard, he killed him at the Feast, and insulted over his Dead body; but his
Passion being abated he heartily repented of that rash action, lamenting his
innocent Old Friend whom Wine and Gluttony had thus destroyed, and would have
done execution upon himself for the same, had not his Friends prevented him;
Yet melting into tears he embraced the dead Body, handled his wounds, and
confessed to him his madness as if alive, and taking the spear again into his
hands he had certainly slain himself if the attendants had not interposed. This
resolution to dye continued with him several days after; The remembrance of his
Nurse who was Sister to Clytus still renewed his grief, for making her so
cruel a recompense for the nourishment she had given him, and that being a
young man and a Conqueror he should requite her who brought him up in her arms
with Blood and Murder. He then reflected on the disgrace this act would procure
him both in his own Army and the Conquered Nations, appearing now more terrible
among his Friends at a Banquet than being armed in the face of his Enemies,
then Permenio and Philotas, and all the Princes he had destroyed in Macedon
represented themselves to his memory, for which he abstained four days from
eating a bit of meat, till he was at last prevaild on by the Prayers of the
whole Army, desiring him not so much to resent the death of one as thereby to
destroy them all, nor to forsake those whom he had brought into the utmost
parts of the East among barbarous and cruel Nations, sufficiently provoked by
his invasions;

The persuasions of Calisthenes the Philosopher and his familiar acquaintance
prevailed much upon him, being bred up with him in the School of Aristotle, and
whom he sent for on purpose to record his Conquests and Victorys. Having
therefore resolved to pursue the War, he took several Nations who submitted to
him into his protection; Yet not long after to render himself still more
hateful, he commanded, That he would not only be Worshipped but adored, which
was the only thing he had forborne in his proud imitation, of the Persian Kings.
Calisthenes was the most resolute opposor of this innovation, which ruined both
him and diverse other Princes of Macedon, who were all put to death under
pretense of Treason; Yet would not the Macedons submit to adoration, but
retained their ancient custom of saluting their King. He next marched into India
to bound his Empire with the Ocean and the farthest East, and to make himself
and his Army more renowned, he covered the trappings of their Horses, and the
arms of his Soldiers with Silver; When he came to the City of Nysa, the in
habitants made no resistance because of their religious confidence in the
assistance of their God Bacchus, by whom that City was built, which he
commanded should be spared that he might follow the footsteps of their Deity;
He then led his Army to see the Holy Hill of Bacchus which was clothed with
Vines and Ivy so naturally and elegantly as if adorned by the hand and industry
of the Planter; From hence he marched to the Hills of Dedalus and the kingdom of
Queen Cleophis, who yiedling to him without resistance received back her
Kingdom, redeeming it by exposing her self to his pleasure, and obtaining that
by wantonness which she could never have recovered by force of Arms; She called
her Son, then begotten by him, Alexander, who after enjoyed the Kingdom of the
Indians, she was afterward called by her subjects The Royal Harlot.

Having marched almost through all India, he came at length to a Rock as
wonderful for its bigness as ascent, into which many Nations fled for security,
and understood that Hercules was by an Earthquake hindered from taking it; Being
thereupon transported with ambition to transcend the Actions and labors of
Hercules, he with almost infinite difficulty and danger became came Master of
it, and took into his protection all the Nations thereabout. One of the Indian
Kings named Porus, was as admirable for his strength of Body as greatness of
Mind, who having notice of Alexanders advance, prepared an Army to entertain
him; The Battles being joined, he damanded of the Macedons their King, being
resolved as a private Enemy to fight with him hand to hand. Alexander made no
delay to answer him, and in the first encounter falling headlong to the ground,
his Horse being killed under him, he was preserved by the concourse of his
Guard. Porus almost covered with Blood from the many wounds received, was taken
Prisoner, and had such Indignation to be overcome, that though he had Quarter
given he would receive no sustenance, nor suffer his wounds to be dressed,
being with much difficulty persuaded to be contented to live. Alexander in
honor of his valor sent him back safe to his own Kingdom; He erected there two
Citys, one called Nicea, and the other Bucephale after the name of his Horse;
He then overthrew the Armies of the Adrestians and diverse other people, and
marching to the Euphitans he found they attended his coming with an Army of two
hundred thousand Horse, whereupon all his Soldiers being tired as well by the
number of their victories as their labors, humbly besought him with tears To
put a period to his Wars, and now at last to think of returning to their
Country, entreating him to consider the years of his Soldiers, whose age
could scarce suffice to carry them home again; Some showed their gray hairs,
others their Wounds, some their Bodies consumed with sickness, others their
loss of Blood, which they had freely shed in continual warfare both with
himself and Father, and therefore desired That the remains of their worn bodies
might be buried in the graves of their Ancestors, and however if he would not
spare them, Yet that he would spare himself, and not tempt his good Fortune by
venturing it too far. Moved with these just petitions, he to give an end to his
Victorys, commanded his Camp to be made exceeding mangnificent, that by the
large Extent thereof the Enemy should be terrified, and his fame admired in
future ages; His Soldiers never undertook any thing more readily, and then
falling upon their formidable enemy with all their might, they soon put that
undisciplined multitude to flight, and with great Joy returned to their
Quarters.

From thence he marched to the River Acesines, on which he saild to the Ocean,
where two Nations of whom Hercules was the founder submitted to him, from
whence he saild to the Sycambrians who with fourscore and three thousand armed
Foot, and threescore thousand Horse were ready to receive him. Having
overthrown them in the Field, he came to their chief City, and being himself
the first man that scaled the Walls, when he found them unguarded, he leaped
down into the City alone without any guard. The Enemy seeing him single with a
great shout ran toward him from every place, hoping by the death of one man to
end the Wars of all the World, and revenge the quarrel of so many Nations.
Alexander resolutely resisted them, and fought alone against so many.
Thousands. It is incredible to be spoken that neither the multitude of his
Foes, the fury of their weapons, nor the cries they made to encourage one
another, could any way affright him, he alone killed and put to flight so many,
but at length finding he was overpowered, he got to the body of a Tree close
under the Wall, where he a long time sustained their fury, till his Soldiers
understanding his danger, leapt down to his assistance, many of whom were
slain, and the Battle continued doubtful until the Walls being beat down, his
whole Army came to his rescue. In this Fight being shot with an Arrow under the
breast, he fainted with loss of Blood, yet fought so long with one knee on the
ground till he had killed two who wounded him.

The cure was more grievous than the wound, but being at last recovered, though
with extreme difficulty, he sent Polypercan with his Army to Babylon, he
himself going with a Select party aboard his Fleet to make further discovery of
the Ocean, and landing at the City of King Ambigerus, the Inhabitants believing
he could not be overcome by the Sword, poisoned their Darts, wherewith they
forced him from the Walls, and killed many of his Soldiers, among others
Ptolomy was deadly wounded, and being ready to expire, an herb was shown to
Alexander in a dream, which being found and steeped in his drink, recovered
Ptolomy and the greater part of the Army; At length the City being taken, he
returned to his Ships and Sacrificed to the Ocean, imploring a happy return
into his Country, and at length arrived at the Mouth of the River Indus, where
as a Monument of his Atcheivements he built the City of Barse and Erected
Altars, and having left a Governor over the Indians, he marched toward Babylon,
digging Wells by the way to procure fresh Water to his tired Soldiers; Hither
many of the Conquered Nations had sent their Ambassadors to accuse his
Lieutenants of Oppression and Cruelty, whom Alexander without any respect to
friendship caused to be put to death in their presence.

After this he Married Statyra, Darius Daughter, and gave the most noble
Virgins of all Nations for Wives to his Princes, thereby to mitigate his own
fault. He then called his Army together, and promised to pay all their Debts,
that they might carry home all their Booty and pay entire, which munificence
was remarkable for the vastness of the Sum, Twenty three Thousand Talents being
laid out in this affair; His old Soldiers being thus sent home, the younger
were much displeased, and began to mutiny that they had not the same favor,
some of whom Alexander chastized, and persuaded others, but at length finding
words would not prevail, he leapt unarmed from his Throne, among the Armed
multitude, and seizing twelve of the chief Authors of the Sedition, hurried
them to Execution, none daring to offer the least resistance. Calling then
together the Persian Soldiers, he extolled their constant fidelity both to
himself and their former Kings, and declarcd he would now commit himself to
their Custody and no longer to the Macedons; And accordingly chose a thousand
of them for his Lifeguard, mingling also several Regiments of Persians among
his Macedons to learn their discipline, which his Army took so much to heart,
that all weeping they repaired to him, beseeching him rather to punish them
than to put such a severe affront upon them, by which submission they prevailed
so far that he dismissed and sent back to Macedonia Eleven thousand of his Old
Soldiers, and their pay was continued to them in their return as if they had
still served.

At this time Ephestion one of his Favorites, both for his Beauty, Youth, and
Wisdom died, whom Alexander below the dignity of a King, lamented a long time,
erecting him a Tomb which cost twelve thousand Talents, and commanding him to
be worshipped as a God.

Returning to Babylon from the furthest Coasts of the Ocean, he had notice that
Ambassadors from Carthage and other Cities in Africa, as also from Spain,
Sicily, France, Sardinia, and diverse Cities in Italy, attended his Arrival, the
Terror of his name having so possessed the World, that all Nations submitted to
him as a King destined to be their Ruler. For this cause, approaching Babylon
to keep as it were a Parliament of the whole World, some Magicians advised him
not to enter that City, affirming it would be fatal to him, therefore declining
it, he turned aside to Bersia, a City heretofore unpeopled on the other side
Euphrates where he was importuned by Anaxarchus the Philosopher to despise the
Presages of the Magicians as false and uncertain, and if proceeding from
Destiny or Nature not to be prevented. Going therefore to Babylon, after a
while he again prepared a Solemn Feast, which he had for some time intermitted,
where he devoted himself absolutely to mirth, both day and night; After which
Thessalus his Physician invited him and his Companions to another debauch,
where taking the Cup into his hand, in the middle of his draught, he groaned as
if he had been struck through with a Sword, and his Body became so extreme
tender that he complained if but touched, as though he had been wounded; His
Friends said, his disease was occasioned by excess of Wine, though it were
really Treason, the infamy whereof the power of his Successors did suppress.
The Author of this Treason was Antipater, who when he beheld his dearest
friends commanded to death, his Son in law slain, and himself who had performed
such considerable Service in Greece disrespected, and accused by his Mother
Olympias of many insolences, and likewise considered his late severity to his
Lieutenants, and expected the same treatment, to make sure work with the King,
he suborned his son Cassender, with his Brother Philip and Jolla, who used to
minister to him, to poison him; So great was the strength of the Poison, that
it could not be contained in Iron, Brass, nor any thing but a Horses hoof,
Cassander was bid to entrust none but Thestalus, so that when the Feast was in
his house, after Philip have tasted the Kings Cup, having the poison ready in
cold Water, they put it into the Wine; Four days after Alexander finding Death
certainly approaching, said, He believed it was the fate of his Family to dye
about thirty years Old. After which he pacified his Soldiers who were ready to
mutiny, suspecting he perished by Treason, being therefore brought into the
highest place of the City, he admitted all into his presence, and gave them his
right hand to kiss, and when all wept, he appeared without the least trouble,
comforting those who impatiently lamented, his courage being now as invincible
against death as formerly against his Enemies. The Soldiers departing, he asked
his Friends about him, If they thought they should have another King like him.
When all holding their Peace, he confidently presaged as if he had seen it with
his Eyes, That Macedon should lose much blood in his quarrel, and many Thousand
Lives would be sacrificed at his Funeral; He then commanded his Body to be
buried in the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, and then fainting away, his Attendants
demanded whom he would constitute heir of his Empire, he only, answered, To the
most Worthy; So great was the vigor of his mind, that though he left behind him
his Son Hercules, his Brother Arideus, and his Wife Roxane big with Child, yet
forgetting those Obligations, he only nominated, The most Worthy to be his
Heir, as if it were unreasonable that any but a valiant man should succeed a
Conqueror. With these words, as if the Spirit of Discord had been sent among
them, his chief Captains instantly grew jealous of each other, and privately
sought to gain the favor of the Soldiers to themselves; On the sixth day being
Speechless, he gave his Ring off his Finger to Perd^ccas, which for the present
pacified the growing dissentions, for though by voice he was not nominated
Heir, yet by choice he seemed to be so, Alexander deceased being Thirty three
years and one mouth Old, a man endewed with a mighty Spirit above other men,
whose Mother Olympias dreamed when he was conceived that she had commerce with
a God, and by his Actions he after seemed to be above the condition of Mortal
men; There appeared also many Presages of his future greatness on his
Birthday, for two Eagles flying all that day round about the Palace, settled at
last upon the battlements of his Fathers Court, seeming to prognosticate to him
the two Empires of Europe and Asia, and on the same day his Father received the
glad tidings of two Victories, one in Illyria, and another in the Olympic
race, whither he sent some Charlots drawn with four Horses, which portended to
the Infant the Victory over all the World. He was of admirable apprehension and
learning, and was educated under Aristotle the most famous Philosopher. Being
invested in his Fathers kingdom, he commanded himself to be called, King of all
Countries, and Lord of the World; So great a confidence had his Soldiers in
his good fortune, that he being present they scared not, though unarmed, the
force of any Enemy; He never encountered any Adversary whom he did not overcome,
nor besieged any City which he did not take, nor invaded any Nation over whom
he did not Triumph, and therefore deservedly gained the name of Alexander the
Great, and one of the Worthies of the World. Yet was this Great Conqueror at
length destroyed not by the valor of his Enemies, but the Villainy and Treason
of his own Friends and Subjects. He lived in the Year of the World 3611, before
Christ 337 years.

The History of Julius Caesar first Emperor of Rome, The Third Worthy of the
World.
portrait of Julius Caesar

GReat Julius Caesar next attained the Name
Of the Third Worthy; Whose immortal Fame
Remains still fresh in the Records of time,
He to the Empire of the World did clime,
And what he Conquered by his Sword in Fight
He with his Pen did elegantly write,
At length through many wounds his Soul hence fled
And he who never before was Conquered
In War; He who with slaughter strewn
So many Lands; With his own blood imbrued
The Seat of wronged Justice; And fell down
A Sacrifice to appease the incensed Gown.
Julius Caesar of the Noble Family of the Juli^ so called as some think from
Julus Ascanius the Son of Aeneas, from whom they were ambitious to have
descended, and Caesar, because it is said, he was cut out of his Mothers Womb,
though others derive it a Caeso Elephanto, from his Grandfathers, killing an
Elephant; He was but Sixteen years old when his Father died, and yet was
designed the next year to be High Priest of Jupiter, and having divorced
himself from his first wife, whose birth was not so eminent as his Fortune, he
married Cornelia, daughter of Cinna who had been four times Consul, by whom he
had his daughter Julia; Sylla used all possible arguments to have separated him
from her, but not prevailing, he pursued him as an Enemy, and designed to
arrest him; At length by the intercession of the Vestal Virgins and some of his
kinsmen, he obtained pardon, though Sylla then cried out by way of prediction,
Take him then since you will needs have him, but know the person for whom you
have been so zealous will be the destruction of the Nobility and Common
Interest we have so earnestly defended, for I assure you there are in Caesar
many Marii or disturbers of their Country; He first bore arms in Asia as a
Voluntier, and afterward in Cilicia, but hearing of Sylla's death, and hoping
for new troubles from the discontents of M. Lepidus, he returned to Rome, where
he accused C. Dolabella of extortion, but unable to make good his charge, and
Dolabella acquit, he withdrew to Rhodes both to avoid envy, and to study more
privately under A. Molon the most celebrated Orator of those times. In his
passage he was taken by Pirates in whose hands he continued forty days with
great perturbation of mind with only his Physician, and two servants, having
sent away the rest to procure his ransom, who bringing fifty Talents, he was
set ashore; to recompense their kindness, he puts immediately again to Sea,
pursues, overtakes and executes these Robbers, as he had often threatened them
in jest when he was their Prisoner.

In the mean time Mithridates making great devastation in the neighboring
Countries, Caesar thinking it dishonorable to lie still while his Allies were
in distress, he past from Rhodes to Asia, and raising what Forces he could,
beat Mithridates Governor out of those Provinces, and confirmed several in
their allegiance who before were inclining to revolt. The first dignity
bestowed on him by the People was to be Tribune, which Office he strenuously
maintained. Being Quester he made Funeral Orations, according to custom, in
praise of Julia his Aunt, and Cornelia his Wife, wherein he speaks thus of his
Extraction. My Aunt Julia by the Mothers side was descended from Kings, and by
the Fathers she was allied to the Gods, for from Ancius Marcius the Marcij, who
were called Reges or Kings are derived, and the Ju^^ were derived from Venus.
In our House there fore we have the Majesty of Kings, who are the most potent
among men, and the Veneration (...) the Gods, who are more powerful than they.
A^ Questor the Government of the furthest part o^ Spain fell to his Lot, and
going his Circuit t^ keep Courts of Justice, he came to Cadez, when observing
the Image of Alexander in the Tem^ ple of Hercules, he fetched a deep sigh for
having done nothing remarkable at that Age wherei^ he had Conquered the World;
Upon which contemplation he begged to be immediately dismissed designing for Rome
to attend some greate^ Enterprise. He likewise dreamed the Night^ before, that
he had ravished his Mother, and was extremely exalted when the Interprete^ told
him it was a presage of his Dominion over the whole Earth, since the Mother
which seemed to be violated could be nothing but the Earth the common Mother of
all.

Departing therefore out of Spain before his Commission was expired, he went
amongst the Latin Colonies who were at that time pressing for their Freedom,
and if not prevented, had certainly excited them to Sedition. Yet this did not
discourage him, for being made Aedil, he was suspected of Conspiracy with M.
Crassus, Sylla and Antonius, their design was to have set upon the Senate, and
having cut the Throats of such as they thought convenient, Crassus was ^o have
been Dictator, and Caesar, Master of ^he Horse, and the Republic to be settled
ac^ording to their contrivance, but at the day ^ppointed either for fear or
remorse, Crassus ^bsenting himself, their Plot was not Executed. ^n his
Aedilship he beautified the Marketplaces and Halls of Justice, and adorned the
Capitol with Galleries, that From thence the common People might be spectators
of the Baiting of wild Beasts, Stage Plays, and such other diver^ions as might
insinuate his generosity toward them; To which were added Sword-Players ^n so
great numbers, that his Enemies alarmed ^t their multitude, published an Edict
to re^train them to a certain number; having here^y obliged the People, he
intended to get the Government of Egypt to himself by their Act, and when the
Nobility prevented him therein, ^he was much disturbed; Yet by his liberality
^he soon after obtained the Office of High Priest, which he managed with
extravagant profuse^ess.

The Conspiracy of Cataline being discovered, and the Senate generally
condemning him and his Accomplices to death, Caesar only was the man who
endeavored to moderate the Sentence into Imprisonment and Confiscation, which
he pressed with so much heat, that had not Cato's Oration recollected them, the
whole Senate had complied. Yet he afterward opposed the Execution of the
Decree, with that obstinacy, that he was threatened to be killed by the Guards,
who set their Swords to his Throat, and frightened him into compliance. He next
asserted some Privileges in behalf of the People contrary to the mind of the
Senate, who thereupon forbid him to proceed in executing them, of which he took
no notice but went on, till some Soldiers were ordered to interrupt him; Then
he dismissed his Officers, and laid by his Purple Robe, retiring privately to his
own House, as if submitting to the iniquity of that time. Two days after the
People came to him in great throngs, and in a tumultuous way offered him their
assistance, but he appeased them beyond all expectation, and the Senate (who
suddenly met about that Commotion) sent him thanks by some Principal Persons;
He was also re-invited into the Senate, commended, restored, and the Decree for
his suspension revoked.

He fell again into some trouble upon an accusation of being concerned in
Catalines Conspiracy, but appealing to the Testimony of Cicero, he was cleared
of it, and his Accuser fined, his goods seized, and himself almost torn in
pieces by the People. In a short time he was made Consul with Bibulus, and some
affronts being put upon him by the Senate, he contracted a strict Friendship
with Pompey, at that time at defiance with the Senate, to whom he reconciled
Crassus, and joining all together, nothing for the future could be transacted
in the State but by the consent of all three. After his promotion to the
Consulship, a Law called Lex Agraria being propounded, and his Companion
Bibulus protesting against it, Caesar violently drove him out of the place, and
finding upon his complaint of that violence, that none of the Senate durst move
in his behalf, in utter despair he retired immediately to his House where he
continued all the rest of his Consulship, so that now Caesar had the sole
administration of Affairs, which he managed with that uncontrollable
arbitrariness, that some merry Citizens upon subscribing any Will or Record
writ thus, Not when Caesar and Bibulus, but when Julius and Caesar were
Consuls, and these Verses were dispersed.

Non Bibulo quidquam, etc.
All things of late Great Caesar acts alone,
Poor Bibulus is out of Fashion grown.
Upon all occasions he extended his power to the utmost; The Farmers of the
Revenues petitioning for abatement because of the hardness of their Bargain, he
abated them a third part, admonishing them to bid more warily for the future.
He caused Cato to be halled violently out of the Senate and committed, for only
interrupting him, and others were made sensible of his least displeasure. He
then married Calphurnia the Daughter of Piso, by which alliance he still grew
greater, and had a Triumph a lowed him for conquering Gallia now Fran^^ with
which advancement he was so elated tha^ a while after in a full Assembly he
boasted (...) had laid his Enemies on their backs. His achievements during the
nine years wherein (...) had the principal command of the Army we^^ generally
these. He reduced into a Province tha^ part of France which lies between the
Pyrenea^ Mountains, the Alps, the Mountains Gerbenn^ the Rhyne and the Rhosne,
containing thr^^ thousand two hundred Miles in circumference imposing a vast
Tribute upon all the great Towns and Cities; He was the first of all the Romans
who built a Bridge over the Rhin^ assailed the Germans on the other side the
Rive^ and gave them several considerable defeats He invaded the Britains
likewise, who were till then unknown, and having overrun them in a short time;
forced them to give him Hostages and Contribution; Amongst all the Variety and
Greatness of his Enterprises, he never had ill fortune but thrice. First upon
the Coasts of Britain, where his whole Fleet had like to have miscarried by
storm; The Second in France where one of his Legions was entirely cut off, and
the third on the Frontiers of Germany, where two of his Lieutenants were
circumvented by an Ambuscade and defeated.

At this time the Commonwealth was in great consternation, and the Senate
resolving ^o create but one Consul which should be Pom^ey, Caesar prevailed
with the Tribunes who were endeavoring to make him his Colleague, that they
should propose to the People, That in respect of his absence upon Public
affairs they would make him capable of being chosen again when his Consulship
was out, l^st otherwise he should be constrained to leave the Wars he had so
prosperously begun, unfinished; Having succeeded in his desires, his hopes were
enlarged with his Designs, there was no kind of Bounty or Munificence which he
omitted to all people; He began to build the Town Hall with the Spoils of his
Enemies, paying a vast Sum for the Ground; and having published a solemn
Sword-play, and made a Feast to the People in memory of his Daughter, he not
only employed all the Cooks and Victuallers of the City to provide what they
could get, but made vast preparations likewise at home; He doubled the pay of
his Soldiers forever; He endeavored to continue his friendship with Pompey by
promising him Octavia his sisters Grandaughter in Marriage; He obliged all
Persons about Pompey, and most of the Senators either by giving or lending them
money, upon very reasonable Terms; He ingratiated himself with the rest by
frequent invitations or noble Presents, not forgetting to let their Servants
partake of his bounty according to their interest with their Masters. All
Criminals, Debtors and Prodigal^ had their Sanctuary in him, provided their
Crimes, Debts and Necessities were not beyond his relief, in which case he used
plainly to tell them, They had nothing to pray for but a Civil War.

Nor was he less studious in insinuating into Foreign Princes and Provinces;
To some he would make Presents of a thousand Prisoners at once; To others he
would send as many and great supplies as he pleased without consent or
Authority of Senate or People. He likewise beautified and adorned the most
eminent Cities in Italy, France, Spain, Asia, and Greece with their most
considerable Buildings; Till at length all being amazed to see whither these
things should tend, Mrcellus the Consul proposed to the Senate to name a
Successor to Caesar before his time was expired, because the War being finished
and Peace restored, it would be convenient to disband the Army, which was
accordly done, though opposed by the Tribunes, and Caesar was likewise deprived
of the Provinces over which he was Governor; Caesar being netled at the fierce
opposition against him, humbly addressed to the Senate, That either that Favor
and Privilege of the people might be made good to him, or that all other
Generals might lay down their Commands; intending thereby that Pompey the
Senates General should dismiss his Forces, and hoping that he could afterward
sooner raise a new Army than Pompey. But the Senate not thinking it fit to
capitulate with a Subject, Caesar went into the lower part of France, resolving
to oppose with his Sword whatever Decree the Senate should make against the
intercession of the Tribunes of the People who were of his Party, and this was
his pretense for the Bloody Civil Wars that followed, though Pompey use to say;
That not being able to finish these public Buildings which he had begun with
so much magnificence, nor to satisfy the expectations of the People with his
private Estate, he resolved to put all things into confusion. Others say, he
was jealous of being questioned for what he had done illegally in his first
Consulship, contrary to the Laws and Remonstrances of the Tribuns; and the
rather because Cato had solemnly sworn to impeach him as soon as ever he parted
from his Army, and it was generally said, That if he returned as a private
Person, they would handle him as they did Milo, and make him answer before the
Judges with strong Guards about him, which seems the more probable by what he
said at the Battle of Pharsalia when he saw his Adversaries run, This is their
own doings, I my self must have been condemned after so many Noble exploits had
I not begged the assistance of my Army; Some said that having been so long used
to command, and cunningly computing his own and Enemies power, he laid hold of
that occasion to usurp that power which he had long before designed since he
had often in his Mouth two Verses of Euripedes.

Nam si violandum est jus, etc.
Never stand on Justice when the Stake's a Crown,
In lesser things pretend Religion.
When he had Intelligence that the intercession of the Tribunes was
ineffectual, and that they were gone out of Rome, he made bold with a Bakers
Mules, and instantly clapped them into his Chariot, and after Sunset traveled
with great privacy through by-lanes to his Troops on the Banks of Rubicon,
whither being come, he stood still a while ruinating upon the Enterprise he was
undertaking, at last turning to those next him, he said, Thus far we are safe,
and may return if we please, if we pass but this Bridge me shall have nothing
to trust to but our Arms. While he stood doubting, there appeared to him a
Person of a Remarkable Stature and Beauty sitting hard by him, and playing upon
a Reed, not only the Shepherds, but several of the Soldiers ran to hear him,
and some Trumpeters among the rest, which being observed by this Piper, he
suddenly snatch a Trumpet out of one of their hands, and leaping instantly into
the Water, he sounded a charge which he continued to the other side of the
River with such loudness as made the Earth tremble again; Upon which Caesar
cried out; Come then, it is decreed, let us go whither the Prodigies of the
Gods, and the Iniquity of our Enemies leads us.

Having passed his Army over the River, and joined with the Tribunes of the
People, who being expelled out of the City, retired to him; He made an Oration
to his Soldiers, and with Tears in his Eyes implored their Fidelity and
Assistance, affirming he would strip himself of all rather than any should go
unsatisfied who asserted his Honor; After this he possessed himself of several
Towns, and marching toward Brandusium whither Pompey and the Consuls were fled
for more speedy transportation, he endeavored to prevent them but in vain, and
so returned to Rome with his Army, where calling the Senate together, and
advising about the most weighty matters of State, he then marched into Spain
against the most considerable of Pompeys Forces, commanded then by three
Lieutenants, saying at his going thither, That he was now going against an Army
without a General, but at his return his next Expedition would be against a
General (meaning Pompey) without an Army. He was opposed at Marseilles, but at
length he reduced it, and settled Spain in a short time. Coming back to Rome,
and ordering all things there according to his own mind, he marched against
Pompey himself, and besiege him in his own Camp four Months with incredible
labor, and at last utterly defeated him at the Battle of Pharsalia; He persues
him to Alexandria in Egypt where he finds him slain by King Ptolomy who was
conspiring the same entertainment for him, whereupon he was there engaged in a
most desperate War, having neither time nor place to defend himself, yet though
it was Winter, and his Supplies on that account uncertain, though he was shut
up within the same Walls with a numerous and subtle Enemy, and unprovided of
all kind of necessaties, he overcame them at last, made himself Master of all
Egypt, and gave the command of it to Cleopatra, and her youngest Brother not
daring to make it a Province, lest falling into the hands of a Pragmatical
Governor, it might cause new disturbances. When Pompeys head was presented him
he wept bitterly, and caused him to be honorably buried, saying, I lament
Pompeys Fall, and fear my own Fortune; And finding many Letters in his Coffers
whereby diverse showed their good will to Pompey, and hatred toward him, he
never read them, but instantly burnt them all, lest being exasperated by them
he should have been tempted to commit some great mischief; When Pompeys Images
were thrown down, he set them up again, which made Cicero say, That Caesar in
setting up Pompeys Images again made his own stand surer. He accounted his
Conquest of the two Sons of Pompey the Great in Andaluzia in Spain the most
glorious of all his Victorys, for he would after often say, That at other times
he fought for Fame and Glory, but that day for his life which he had never
fought for before.

From Alexandria he went into Syria, and from thence to Pontus, where in four
hours he beat Mithridates quite out of the Field; after which he reduced
Scipio, Juba and Pompeys Sons in Spain. In all his Civil Wars he never received
any defeat in person, but only in his Lieutenants, Curio miscarrying in Africa,
and Antonius taken Prisoner, Dolabella lost his Fleet in Illiricum, and
Domitius his Army in Pontus; Once at Dyracchium when Pompey repulsed him, but
not prosecuting his advantage, Caesar declared, He knew not h^w to make the
best use of a Victory; His next Exigence was in Spain abovementioned, where in
his last Battle his affairs were so desparate, that he thought once to kill
himself. His wars being ended, he triumphed five times, after he had defeated
Scipio four times in a month, and once more after the victory over the Sons of
Pompey; His first and most magnificent Triumph was that of the Gauls, his next
of Alexandria, the third of Pontus, the fourth of Africa, and the last of
Spain, the Pomp and preparation of each of them being different and various. On
the day of his Gallick Triumph the Axletree of his Chariot breaking, he had
like to have been cast upon the ground, He ascended to the Capitol with lights,
having forty Elephants attending him on both hands, with carriers of Torches.
In his Ponitck Triumph upon the several Pageants this Motto was inscribed,
Veni, Vidi, Vici, I came, I saw, I overcame, alluding to the expedition of his
Conquests. He bestowed very great gifts and possessions upon his Old Soldiers,
and exhibited several Prizes, Stage Plays, and other magnificent shows to
please the People; And applying himself to the Settlement of the State, he
reformed the Calender which was then become confused, and reduced it to that
Account which from him is to this day called the Julian Account. He filled up
the Senate according to his own mind, none daring refuse to choose whom he
recommended. In the administration of Justice he was diligent and severe, and
reduced the Extravagancy of Coaches, Diet and Cloths.

His stature was tall, his complextion white, his limbs strong and compact, his
visage full, his eyes black and lively, his temper sound and healthy, only in
his latter days he was subject to Swounding fits, and to be affrighted in his
Dreams; Twice he was surprised with the falling sickness as he sat in judgment
His baldness was a great trouble to him, and had often exposed him to the
scoffs of his Enemies, and therefore among all the Honors conferred upon him
by the Senate and People, he received none with more delight than the
priveledge of wearing a Laurel Garden perpetually; In his Cloths he was
singularly remarkable, wearing his long Senators Robe studded with Gold,
fringed at the hands and girt about, but always loosly, which gave occasion to
that expression of Sylla, who often admonisht the Nobility, To beware of that Boy
who went girded so slightly; He was exceedingly addicted to Neatness, and
sumptuous Hospitality at his Table; It is reported he undertook the Voyage into
Great Britain in expectation of Pearls, whose value he could judge by poising
them in his hands; He was a great Lover, and a most curious Collector of
Jewels, Seals, Pictures, Statues, and all kind of Antiquities; He Spared no
cost for Slaves if young and handsome. He kept his House in such exact
Discipline, even in little things as well as great, that he clapped one of his
Servants into Irons, for giving some Guests worse bred than himself, and
punished another of his Gentlemen whom he much favored, with death, for
committing Adultery with the wife of a Roman Knight, though no complaint was
brought against him.

Yet the general report was that himself was much given to Women, (if not
worse) and with his liberality debauched many Ladys of Quality, and among
others Mutia the wife of Pompey, who was often upbraided, That out of an
extravagant ambition of greatness he had Married Caesar's Daughter for whose
sake he had put away his own wife though he had three Children by her, and they
were wont in Passion to call him Adulterer; But his greatest affection was for
Servitia the Mother of Brutus, presenting her with a Pearl of a very vast
value, and suffering her to purchase Lands at a very low rate; Nor did he
abstain from the Ladys in the Provinces where he commanded, if we may believe
what the Soldiers sung at his Gallick Triumph, Look to your Wives, our
bald-pate Fornicator
Will cuckold you; See therefore to the matter;
His Money's spent in France, He Is now come home
At the Old Rate to borrow more at Rome.


He was likewise inamoured of several Queens, as Eunoe wife of the King of
Mauritania and others, but his chiefest Passion was for Cleopatra, with whom he
would often entertain himself till next morning, passing with her in the same
Barge or Pleasure-boat into Egypt almost as far as Ethiopia, and had doubtless
gone through had not his Army mutined and refused to follow him. He after
invited her to Rome, and sent her back with many Honors and Rewards; He
permitted her to call a Son of hers by his name, who its said did exactly
resemble him. That he was temperate in drinking, his very Enemies confess.
Cato's saying was; That he was the only sober man ever went about to subvert
the Government of the State. In his Diet he was so indifferent, that being at a
public Entertainment where ill Oil was brought up instead of good, the rest
refusing to touch it, he eat very heartily, lest otherwise he should upbraid
his Host of poverty or neglect. He abstained from no way of getting Money in
his Civil and Military Commands, and maintained his Civil Wars, Triumphs, and
shows by all manner of Rapine and Sacrilege. In Eloquence and Martial Conduct
he excelled the best of his Predecessors, none being more pungent nor frequent
in his Sentences, or more Neat and Elegant in his words. He writ the
Commentaries of his own Actions in the Wars of France and against Pompey, in so
Judicious, Eloquent and Modest a Style, as justly makes it a question whether
he writ or fought with the greater Spirit.

At his Weapon, and riding the Great Horse he was excellently expert, and in
labor most indefatigable, marching constantly at the head of his Army, both on
Horseback and a foot, always with his head bare in all weathers. His diligence
was so incredible, that upon an expedition he would go fifty Leagues a day in a
Hackney Chariot, swimming over Rivers if any were in his way, or else passing
over with blown Bladders, so as he out-ran all Intelligence of him. In his
Martial undertakings, it is doubtful whether he used more Caution or Courage,
he never marched his Army in any dangerous ways, till he had first thoroughly
discovered them; Before his landing in England, he himself surveyed the Ports
and Acesses to go into that Island. Having notice that his Camp was Besieged in
Germany, he passed the Enemies Guards disguised like a Frenchman, and came safe
to their relief. No Religious scruple ever hindered his designs; when he went
against Juba, the Beast ran away just as it was to be Sacrificed, which was
thought an ill Omen, yet he valued it not; As he was getting out of the Ship he
fell to the ground, but perverting the bad presage he cried out, I take
possession of thee O Africa. When he saw any Battle doubtful he dismounted his
Troopers, and sent away all their Horses and his own first, that it being
impossible to escape, they might either Fight or Dye. He rid upon a most
remarkable Horse, whose Feet were almost like a Man's, the Hoofs being cloven to
the Toes, he bred him up from a Colt with great care, because the Astrologers
declared, That Horses Master should have the Empire of the World; Neither would
the Horse suffer any Body upon him, but Caesar who backed him himself.

He several times restored the Battle when it was almost lost, by opposing
himself against them that fled, taking them by the Throats, and forcing their
Faces toward the Enemy. After the Battle of Pharsalia, going to Sea in a Bark
by himself, he met with ten of the Enemies Ships, and stoutly commanded them to
yield, which they instantly performed. At the Siege of Alexandria, as he was
attempting the Bridge, the Enemy made a desperate Sally, and forced him into a
Boat, into which others throwing themselves, he leapt into the Sea, and swam
two hundred paces to the next Ship, though he held his left hand above water to
preserve some Papers, and haled his Generals Robe after him with his Teeth lest
it should fall into his Adversaries hands; He considered his Soldiers neither
by their Qualities nor Wealth, but their Courage and Strength, using them all
alike, with the same severity and indulgence, and would often give them false
Alarms; If they were at any time discouraged with the report of the number of
their Enemies, he would not lessen but increase their number above what was
true. As upon the approach of Juba whose power was terrible to them, he called
them together, and said; Know that in few days Juba will be here with ten
Legions, thirty Thousand men at Arms, an hundred Thousand Horse, and three
hundred Elephants. Therefore let every one forbear to inquire or concern
himself further, for I am sufficiently informed; and if any presume to
discourage you, I will put him into the oldest Ship I can get, and expose him
to the mercy of the Winds and Floods.

He neither took notice of all faults, nor punished them alike; Those that were
seditious or deserted their Colors he punished severely; After a Victory he
would abate his strict Discipline, suffering all their Riot and Luxury,
boasting often, That his Soldiers could fight in their very perfumes. He used
to call them his Companions and Fellow Soldiers, and kept them always brave in
Arms shining with Gold and Silver that they might fight more stoutly if but to
save their Armor, he loved them so well that hearing of the defeat of his party
under Titurius, he let his Beard and Hair grow for indignation till he was
thoroughly revenged; By which obliging carriage his Soldiers had such an entire
affection for him, that when he first undertook the Civil wars, there was not a
Captain in his Legions but offered to find him a Horse out of their own pay,
neither did any forsake him, and though taken by the Enemies, and offered their
lives to take up Arms against him, chose rather to dye; They endured hunger and
other extremities of War with extraordinary constancy, and when repulsed at
Dyracchium, they came and offered themselves to be punished, So that Caesar had
more trouble to comfort than correct them. During his ten years War in Gaul
they never mutined, in his Civil Wars but seldom, and then returned presently
to their duty; After he had made himself Emperor he advanced Persons of the
meanest condition to the highest honors, for which being blamed, he said, If
they were Thieves and Murderers and had stuck to me in defense of my honor, I
would have done the same.

He was not naturally revengeful, and for Clemency and Moderation was
admirable; At the Battle of Pharsalia he proclaimed, That all Citizens should
be spared; And none were killed but in the heat of fight. And having
information of several conspiracies and meetings in the night, he troubled them
no further than by Edict to let them know they were discovered. To such as
spoke ill of him, he thought it sufficient to admonish them before the People
to desist for the future, and being severely asperst by Libels whose Authors
were in his Power, he took all patiently without revenge. Yet many of his
Speeches and his Irregular Actions sufficiently discover that he much abused
his Authority, and committed many Capital Crimes; For besides the extravagant
Honors he assumed, as the perpetual Dictatorship, the continual Consulship,
the Censorship, the Title of Emperor and Father of his Country, a Statue among
the Kings, a Chair of Gold in the Senate, and another in the Courts of Justice;
He usurped greater Dignities than became a Man, as to have his Image carried
like a God in the Cercensian Games; He had his Temples, Altars, and Images
placed by the Gods, his consecrated Beds and his Priests; In short there were
no Honors whatever, but he took or gave as he pleased. Nor did his public
Expressions speak him less presumptuous, saying usually, The Commonwealth was
now but a word without either Body or Soul. That Sylla was no good Grammarian
to part with his Dictatorship so easily; That hereafter he was to be spoke to
with more reverence, and every word he uttered was to be looked on as a Law. Nay
so confident was he grown that when a Beast in Sacrifice was found without a
Heart, which the Spectators said was an ill Omen; Trouble not your selves says
he, theyshall be better when I please, nor is it to be thought a Prodigy if a
Beast wants a Heart, But the most cruel, and desperate hatred against him rose
from hence, that when the Senate came to him in a Body with most Honorable
Decrees, he received them sitting before the Temple of Venus; And in one of his
Triumpts passing by the Seats of the Tribunes, and observing all the Company
rose up and saluted him but P. Aquilla the Tribune, he in great indignation
cried out; Well done Tribune Aquilla, you had best try if you can wrest the
Government of the Commonwealth out of my hands with your Tribune-ship; When at
a Festival one had put a Crown of Laurel on his Statue, and the Tribunes
ordered it to be taken off, he was so offended, taking it for an ill Omen of
his Coronation, that he sharply rebuked them and turned them out of their
Commands. He suffered some Persons to salute him with the Title of King; And it
was affirmed that he resolved suddenly to declare his Opinion that Caesar
should be called King, because he found in the Books of the Sybyls, that the
Parthians were not to be Conquered but by a King.

This was the great occasion of hastening the Conspiracy against him, and their
Councels were now united, the People growing sensible of their condition, and
wishing for some Body to assert their Liberties; some writ under the Statue of
the former Brutus, Would to God thou were alive again; Others under Caesar's
Image, Brut us was created the first Conful for expelling Kings, and this man
the last of Kings for suppressing Consuls; The Conspiracy was managed by above
threescore Persons, the chief were C. Cassius, Marcus and Decimus Brutus, they
long deliberated whether to throw him over the Bridge, or to kill him at his
entrance into the Theater, but when the Senate had Order to meet in Pompeys
Court upon the Ides of March, they preferred that time and place before all the
rest.

Caesar had warning of his death by many Presages; In digging up some
Sepulcher, at Capua, they found in the Monument of Capys Founder of that City,
a Brass Table with this Inscription in Greek, When the Bones of Capys shall be
discovered, it shall come to pass that a Person descended from Julus shall be
murdered by his Kindred, and his death revenged a while after with the ruin of
all Italy; Not many days before this disaster, his Horses which he had
consecrated at his passage over the Rubicon, being turned into the Fields,
refused to eat, and seemed to weep abundantly. As he was at Sacrifice, Spurinna
the Southsayer bid him beware of the danger hanging over his head which would
scarce be deferred beyond the Ides of March; The day before, a little Bird
called Regaliolus flying into Pompeys Court with a branch of Laurel in her
mouth, was pursued by several Birds out of the next Grove and torn in pieces
there. That night he himself dreamt he was flying above the Clouds, and
sometimes shaking Jupiter by the hand. Calphurnia his Wife dreamt likewise that
the top of the House was fallen down, and that her Husband was stabbed in her
Arms, and immediately the doors flew open of themselves; Upon which she
earnestly persuaded him not to go to the Senate that day, but all the Charms of
her loving Eloquence and Tenderness could not prevail; Hear his answer in the
words of the Elegant Cucan, as excellently rendered into English.

Ah Dear Calphurnia!
Dearer to me than that life breath I draw
Would thou forbear thy grief, it could not lie
Within the power of any Prodigy.
To make this day a sad one; should I here
Begin to learn that superstitious fear
Of Fatal days and hours, what day to me
Could e're hereafter from such fears be free,
I only should my wretched mind torment
And not my destined time of Death prevent,
But live forever with vain fear diseased
When e're Astrologers and Augurs pleased,
If Caesar's danger grow from discontent
Of Rome, not one days absence can prevent
Nor scarce reprieve my Fate, and once to dye
Better than ever fear Conspiracy.
What good can strongest Guards on me confer,
But make me live perpetual Prisoner?
Why should I fear the Peoples discontent?
Who now enjoy under my Government
More wealth, more safety, and prosperity.
Than by my death they could? The death of me
That have already reached the height of all
Glory and State that can to man befall.
And wrought my furthest ends, can never be
So much my own as their calamity.
Oh do not fear thy Dream, Calphurnia,
Nor sad Presages from such trifles draw,
But if they are Presages, tell me then,
(For our two Dreams to night have different been)
Which should prevail? Methought I flew above
The lofty Clouds and touched the hand of Jove.
And to my self did seem more great and high
Than e're before; what but felicity
Should this portend? I dare not now suspect
In Peace, Heavens care who helped me to effect
My roughest Wars; Oh let no sad surmise
With causeless grief bedew Calphurnias Eyes.
Yet though he seemed to slight these Prodigies, they had such influence upon
him, that he had once some thoughts of staying at home that day. But D. Brutus
coming, and persuading him not to disappoint the Senate now it was full, and
had long attended him, he went about Eleven a Clock; By the way he was
presented by a Person he met, with a Paper discovering the whole Conspiracy,
but he put it among his Papers in his left hand as if he would read it anon.
Having then Sacrificed to the Gods, and succeeding in none, in defiance of all
these ill Omens, he entered the Senate, laughing at Spurinna for a false
Prophet, seeing the Ides Ides of March were come without any disaster, to which
he replied, They are come indeed but not past. As soon as he was set, the
Conspirators placed themselves about him pretending to do him honor, and
immediately Cimber Tullius who had engaged to begin, addressed himself to him as
if to demand something, but Casar seeming to put him off to another time,
Cimber caught hold of his Gown by both Shoulders, and Caesar crying ont that,
This was violence, one of the Cassii came and stabbed him under the Throat,
Caesar laying hold of his Arm struck it through with his Dagger, and
endeavoring to rise was stopped by another wound, when Brutus assaulted him he
cried out, And art thou amongst them too my Son Brutus? but seeing several
Swords presented to his Breast, he covered his head with his Gown, and in this
manner received twenty three wounds, and died without speaking a word, or
fetching so much as a sigh. Which the Poet thus expresses.

Hopeless he hides his Face and fixed stands
T'indure the fury of revenging hands.
Suppressing groans, or words, as loath to shame
His former life, or dying, stain the Fame
Of those great deeds throughout the World expressed
These silent thoughts revolving in his Breast.
"Yet has not Fortune changed, nor given the power
"Of Coesars head to any Conqueror.
"By no Superiors proud command I dye,
"But by subjected Romes Conspiracy.
"Who to the World confesses by her fears,
"My Power and Strength to be too great for hers,
"And from Earths highest Throne sends me to be
"By after Ages made a Deity.
Being dead all the Conspirators fled, and he was carried home in a Litter;
They once resolved to have drawn his Body into Tyber, to have confiscated his
Estate, and make void all his Acts, but were afraid of M. Antonius the Consul.
He was afterward buried with very great Magnificence and Pomp, and instead of a
Funeral Oration M. Antonius the Consul published an Act of the Senate, by which
they decreed him all Honor both Humane and Divine, and likewise caused an Oath
to be read, whereby they obliged themselves in the defense of a single Person.
The Funerals being over, the people ran in multitudes with Firebrands in their
hands to set the Houses of Brutus and Cassius on Fire. Some thought that his
sickness made him desire to live no longer, all agree he died according to his
own desire, for reading how Cyrus being under the extremity of a Disease, gave
directions for his Funeral, abhorring so tedious a death, he wished when he died
it might be of a sudden, and the day before his death being at Supper with
Lepidus, a question arising which was the best death, he declared, In his
Judgment a sudden and unexpected. He died in the 56 year of his Age, and was
Cannoniz'd among the Gods, not only by those who made the Decree, but by the
persuasion of the People. Of his Murderers scarce any outlived him three
years, or died a natural death. All stood Condemned, and fell by diverse
Accidents, some drowned at Sea, others killed in Fight, and some flew
themselves with the same Dagger wherewith they had Murdered Caesar. He lived in
the year of the World 3901. and before the Birth of Christ 47 years.

The Hist. of Joshua Capt. General and Leader of Israel into Canaan. The Fourth
Worthy of the World.
portrait of Joshua

Joshua's much Wo^th^^, than the Three before
They False Gods, he the True God did adore,
By whose Great Power and overruling hand
The Sun and Moon he caused still to stand,
And made a longer day than e're was known
Whereby Gods Enemies might be overthrown.
He thirty Kings subdued in Canaan,
And settled Israel in their Conquered Land,
At length be^^^^ full of Years and Victories
He leaves to Israel this last advice,
That they should serve the Lord and him obey,
And then God from the Earth takes him away.
WHO can see the Sun and not remember Joshua, and the great Commerce that this
valorous Captain had with the King of Stars; All the world lift up their Eyes
to it, but none but he has lifted up his voice so far as it, to make himself
be heard, and obeyed. The Stars knew Joshua (or Jesus) because he bore the name
of him that formed them; It is he that gave us the foretasts of the name of
Jesus, at which the Heaven, the Earth, and Hell do bend the knee.

Moses knowing that by Gods appointment he was to die, and not enter into the
Land of Canaan; When they came upon the Borders, he called the Israelites
together, and spoke to them to this purpose; Seeing, says he, I go to my
Ancestors, and God has prefixed this day for my departure, it is very just
that while I am alive and stand in your presence, I should give him thanks for
the care and providence he has hitherto had of your Affairs, not only in
delivering you from so many evils, but also in largely imparting his blessings
to you, and because he has also assisted me with his savor whilst with my
utmost I endenvoured to make you as happy as possible) for it is he only who
has begun and accomplished all those great things that have been done for you,
and who has made me his Minister and Servant in all the good which you have
received; For all which blessings, I have thought it requisite in departing
from you to praise the goodness of that God, who in time to come shall have the
care and charge over you, and to acquit my self of that debt, I leave you this
remembrance, That you ought to serve and honor the Lord, and reverence the
Ordinances which he has given you, whereby he may continue his favor toward
you, and may give you grace to preserve and keep his Excellent Commands; Surely
a Lawgiver that were no more than a man, would be much displeased with those
who should violate his Ordinances, and set them at naught; Do not you therefore
tempt God, who is provoked to anger when those Laws which he himself has
established and given you shall be contemned and neglected.

Whilst Moses pronounced these his last words, and foretold to the Tribes their
several Destinies, and wished them all manner of blessings, the whole multitude
brake out into Tears, and the Women beating their breasts, showed their sorrow
for his Death; The Children likewise lamented because in their tender years
they had understood the virtue and samous Acts of Moses; Who beholding their
affection could not restrain himself from Tears; Afterward he walked toward the
place where he was to die, and they all followed him weeping, when beckoning to
them to stand still, and not afflict him any longer with their griefs, having
appointed Joshua to be his Successor to head the Armies against the Canaanites,
according to the Command of God, and laid his hands on him he went accompanied
only with him and Eleazer the High Priest, up to the Mount Abarim, which is
very high, and from whence he could discover the greatest part of the Land of
Canaan, where taking his last leave of Joshua and Eleazer, with many endearing
embraces, on a sudden a Cloud encompassed him, and he was carried into a
certain Valley where he died and was buried. The whole time of his Life was a
hundred and twenty years, the third part whereof he spent in governing this
great People; In Counsel and Judgment he had no equal; In Eloquence he was
incomparable; His skill in War made him renowned amongst the greatest Captains,
and no man had the gift of Prophecy in so great a degree, for his words seemed
as so many Oracles, and as if inspired by God himself. The People mourned for
him thirty days with real grief and trouble; In short, he left behind him a
great estimation among all who were acquainted with his Virtues and Graces.

After Moses was taken from among men, and the time of mourning past, Joshua a
man in whom was the Spirit of wisdom, commanded the People to prepare and march
forward to battle; Sending spies to Jericho to sound their minds, and discover
their Forces, and then raising his Camp, he proceeded toward the River Jordan;
And the Princes of the Tribes of Reuben and Gad and of the half Tribe of
Manasses (to whom the Country of the Amorites, which was the Seventh part of
Canaan, was given for an habitation) having furnished him with Fifty ^housand
men, he proceeded toward the Enemy; At which time the Spies returning, and
having surveyed Jericho gave an Account thereof, and likewise how narrowly they
escaped, having been hid by Rahab the Harlot under some packs of Linen, who
being thus delivered from danger by her means, she desired them to swear, That
when they should take Jericho and kill all the Inhabitants with the Sword, as
she knew that God had commanded, they would save her life and the lives of her
family as she had saved theirs; Which they accordingly agreed to, advising her
that when she should perceive the City ready to be taken, she should bring all
that she would have spared into her own house and then hang a red Cloth over
her door, that the General observing the sign might forbid the Soldiers from
plundring or destroying her or hers; After this she let them down with a rope
from the Wall, whereby they escaped back again.

Joshua having this account, seemed somewhat concerned how they should pass
over the River Jordan, because it was deep and without Bridges. But God
promised him they should have a safe passage over; Joshua therefore waited with
his Army two days, and then passed over the River, the Priests going first with
the Ark, who as soon as they had set their feet in the Water, which was then
very high, it being in harvest, the Waters from above rose up in an heap, and
the Priests stood on dry ground in the midst of Jordan till all the People
passed quite over, and then according to Gods command, they took out of the
middle of the River Twelve Stones wherewith to build an Altar for a Memorial to
after-ages of this wonderful deliverance; And all things being finished, the
Priests came out of the River, which instantly after flowed with as much
violence as before; Whilst the Israelites did all this, the Canaanites never
sallied out upon them, but dismayed with fear, kept themselves within the Walls
of Jericho, which Joshua resolved to besiege with all his Forces; But God
commanded him that on the first day of the feast, the Priests leaving the Ark
and guarded on every side with Troops of armed men should draw near Jericho,
sound-Seven Rams horns, and at night to return to their Camp; This they
performed six days together, but on the Seventh, Joshua assembled the People
early, and caused them to incompass the City seven times that day, and the
Trumpets sounding with great force, the Walls by the power of God without any
violence used by the Hebrews, fell down flat to the ground, so that entering the
City over the ruins they put all within it to the Sword, the Enemy through the
sudden astonishment that fell upon them being unable to resist, and so great
was the slaughter that they neither spared Women nor Children, but filled the
City with dead Carcases, which at length being set on fire served for a funeral
flame to consume them; Only Rahab and her household were saved by the Spies, and
Joshua bestowed an Inheritance upon her; and ever after held her in great
honor.

Then Joshua denounced Curses on those who should endeavor to rebuild this
City, foretelling. That he should lay the foundation thereof in the days of his
Eldest Son, and should lose his youngest ere it was finished. There was much
Spoil taken both of Gold, Silver, and Brass in this City, and Joshua having
before commanded that all the Gold and Silver should be brought to one place to
offer to God as the first fruits for his assistance, none of them, but only one
man, kept any thing to himself, all being delivered to the Priests to be laid
up in the Treasury, but Achan the Son of Zebedias of the Tribe of Judah having
got the Kings Coat imbroidered with Gold, and a Wedge of Gold of two hundred
Shekels in weight, and thinking it unjust that what he had got with the hazard
of his Life should be taken from him, he dug a Pit in his Tent and buried
his Spoils therein, designing to defraud God as well as his Companions.

At this time the Israelites Ten^s were pitched in Gilgal, which signifies
Liberty, because being delivered from Egyptian bondage, and the wants of the
wilderness they now thought they had nothing more to fear; A few days after the
destruction of Jericho Joshua sent out three thousand armed men against Ai, a
City hard by, who encountering with their adversarys, the Israelites were put to
flight and lost thirty six men; The news of this disaster being brought to the
Camp, they were much astonished, not only for the men they had lost, but
dispairing of future success, since they persuaded themselves they were already
Masters of the Field, and that their Army should be always Victorious according
to the promise of God, and that this advantage would much encourage their
Enemies; So that clothing themselves in Sackcloth, they spent three days in
tears and lamentations without taking any meat; When Joshua saw them thus
dejected, falling on his face to the Earth he thus addressed himself to God. O
Lord thou know we have not been induced by our own rashness and temerity to
attempt the Conquest of this Land by force, but have been thereunto encouraged
by thy Servant Moses to whom thou did promise by diverse signs to give us this
Country to inhabit, and that our Armies should always have the Victory in
Battle, and of these thy promise we have oftimes experienced the certain
accomplishment; But now O Lord what shall I say when Israel turns their backs
before their Enemies, for having beyond all expectation received an overthrow,
and lost some of our Soldiers, we are extremely terrified by this accident,
lest the Canaanites and all the inhabitants of the Land should hear it, and
should incompass us and cut off our name from the Earth, for we have little
hope of any prosperous proceedings, in time to come; But be thou assistant to
us O Lord who art Almighty, and in thy mercy change our present sorrow into
joy, our discouragement into confidence, and give us Victory.

Joshua having made this Prayer, God presently commanded him to arise and purge
the People from that Sacrilege and Theft which had been committed among them,
by concealing those things which were consecraed to himsef, assuring him that
his was the cause of their present Calamity, which as soon as it was
discovered, Israel should be again victorious over their Adversaries. Joshua
hereupon calling for the High Priest and the Magistrates, he cast Lots upon the
Tribes, and the Lot fell upon the Tribe of Judah, he then cast them again upon
Families, and it fell upon the Family of Zacharias; Lastly, the Lots were cast
Man by Man, and it fell upon Achan, who unable to deny what was discovered by
God himself, confessed the fact, and produced what he had concealed, whereupon
he was presently stoned to death, and the Anger of the Lord was appeased.

Then Joshua having purified the People, led them forth against the City of Ai,
and laying an ambush of men secretly over night above the City, early in the
morning he drew the Enemy out to fight, who being encouraged by their former
success, boldly assaulted them, but Joshua seeming to retreat and fly, drew
them farther off the City, imagining that the Israelites fled, and that they
should gain a second Victory over them, and thereupon all the Men of Ai, and of
the next City Bethel, were called out to pursue them, so that there was not a
man left in either City. When Joshua suddenly making a stand, and giving a
signal to those in ambush, they instantly marched into the City and set it on
fire, which when the Men of Ai looking back perceived, they presently fled and
scattered themselves through the Fields, but were pursued so furiously that few
escaped, the King of Ai was taken alive and hanged on a Tree by Joshua, and
twelve thousand, even all the Inhabitants of Ai were slain that day; The spoil
they got was very considerable both in Silver and Cattle, all which Joshua when
he came to Gilgal distributed among the Soldiers.

The Gibionites who dwelt near Jerusalem, having notice what had happened to
Jericho, and Ai, and fearing the same misfortune, since they understood that
Joshua intended utterly to root out the Canaanites from off the Earth, they
resolved to send Ambassadors to conclude a Peace with him, and knowing that if
they owned themselves to be Canaanites, Joshua would make no League with them;
They came to him with protestations, that they had no converse nor alliance
with that Nation, but being incited by the fame of his glorious Victories, they
were come from a very far Country, which he might perceive by their old Shoes
and Garments, and by the moldy Bread, which were all new when they set forth
on their Journey, but by the length of the way were now in the condition they
saw them; And that they were assured that God had given the Israelites the Land
of Canaan to inherit, with whom they therefore desired to be confederate; By
this subtle practice they persuaded the Hebrews to enter into Amity with them,
and Eleazer the High Priest and the Council of Elders swear to them that they
should for the future be their Friends and Allies, and no hostility should be
offered them. In three days after Joshua incamping on the Borders of their
Country, understood that the Gibeonites dwelt not far from Jerusalem, and were
Canaanites, and sending for the Chief of them, charged them with this deceitful
dealing, who alleged that having no other way to procure their safety they
were obliged to make use of this, whereupon he called to him the High Priest
and Elders; and they concluded not to infringe the Outh of God, but however for
this treachery they were condemned to be Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water
to the Camp.

When the King of Jerusalem heard that the Gibeonites had submitted to Joshua,
he assembled live Kings his Neighbors, and resolved to fall upon them, who
perceiving their danger, desired Joshua to assist them, who marching with all
speed to their relief, he with his whole Army fell upon them early in the
morning, and quickly put them to flight, and pursuing them to a steep Tract
called B^thhoron the Lord destroyed a great number of them by Thunder,
Lightning, and Hailstones from Heaven, and the night approaching Joshua with
mighty Faith cried out, Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou Moon in the
Valley of Ajalon, and the Sun stood still, and the Moon was stayed till the
Peope had avenged themselves on their Enemies, and the Sun did not go down
about a whole day, and there was no day like that before or after it, that the
Lord hearkened to the voice of a man, for the Lord fought f^r Israel; and the
five Kings hid themselves in a Cave near Makkedah, but were discovered and
brought to Joshua, who commanded his Captains to tread upon their Necks as an
evident token to them of success against all the rest; After which he slew thom
and hanged them on five Trees, and their Forces were utterly cut off and
destryed; After this wonderful success; Joshua led his Army to the Mountains of
Canaan, where having made a great slaughter, and taken rich booty he brought
back the People to Gilgal.

The Renown of the Israelites Victories, and that they gave no quarter coming
among the Neighbor Nations, they were possessed with extreme f^ar, and resolved
to try their utmost strength; Whereupon their Kings raised an Army of three
hundred thousand Foot, ^en thousand Horse, and twenty thousand Chariots, so
great an Host as was sufficient utterly to swallow up the Israelites; But the
Lord bid Joshua not to fear, since they should all surely be delivered into his
hand; Encouraged by these promises, Joshua marched out courageously against his
Enemies, and the fifth day he came upon them; The Encounter was strong, and the
Slaughter very great, multitudes being also killed in the pursuit, and all the
Kings slain, very few of this numerous Army making their escape; Joshua having
command-their Horses to be slain, and their Chariots to be burnt; he afterward
marched victoriously through the whole Country, besieging and taking many
strong places, and killing all that fell into his hands, so that in five years
none of the Canaanites were left alive, but only in two or three strong
Fortresses.

Then Joshua removed his Camp to Shiloh, and set up the Tabernacle there, and
from thence he marched to Sichem, and there built an Altar according to the
command of Moses, and being now well stricken in years, he assembled all the
People in Shiloh, where he represented to them the happy success wherewith till
that time God had favored them because they had observed his Laws, that no
less than one and thirty Kings who had presumed to oppose them, were by them
overcome, and all their Armies discomfited in Battle, and most of their Cities
destroyed, so that there was no memory of them remaining, he therefore thought
fit they should send to survey the extent of Canaan, and to measure it out
among the Tribes; which being approved of by the Congregation, ten men were
appointed to view the Land, who returning with a full account of it in fix
months time, Joshua with the Highpriests and Princes of the Tribes divided the
Country amongst them; and then he distributed the prey they had taken from the
Enemy, which was very great, so that they were all enriched by it.

After which he assembled the whole Army, and to those that were planted on the
other side Jordan, who had born Arms with the rest, and were in number no less
than Fifty Thousand, he spoke after this manner; Since God the Father and
Master of our Nation has given this Country into your possession, and has
promised to preserve the same to your for ever, and since ye have cheerfully
assisted us in all our necessities and dangers, according to Gods command and
direction, it is requisite, now we have no further service for you, that we
dismiss you home to enjoy what you purchased, and may thereby be in a capacity
to engage with us hereafter upon all occasions. We therefore give you hearty
thanks that you have vouchsafed to be our companions in all our perils, and
desire you would always continue this mutual affection between us, remembering
that by Gods favor, and our assisting each other we have attained to this our
present Felicity. Neither have you adventured without some reward for your
labors, for you are hereby enriched, and shall carry home much Cattle, with
Silver, Gold, Brass, Iron, and very much Raiment, and likewise our sineere love
to you, whenever you have occasion to use us; For we have no^ forgot nor
slighted Moses command before his death, neither have you spared any pains to
oblige us to you. We therefore dismiss you to your own possessions in fullness
of Contentment, beseeching you never to put any bounds to our inviolable Amity,
and Friendship, and let not the River Jordan which is betwixt us hinder you
from considering us as Hebrews, for we are all the posterity of Abraham, and
the same God gave Life to both our progenitors, whose Laws and Religion
instituted by Moses are diligently to be observed, for thereby will the Lord
become our helper, but if we degenerate from his Statutes he will surely be our
Enemy.

Having spoke thus, Joshua embraced the Chief of the Tribes, who returned and
their whole peoplewith them; After the Tribe of Reuben and Gad and the rest of
the Menassites had passed over Jordan, they built an Altar upon the Bank of the
River as a Memorial to Posterity of their Alliance with those on the other
side; which when the Israelites beyond Jordan heard, they rashly imagined their
Brethren designed to violate their Religion, and introduce the Worship of false
Gods, and therefore instantly Armed themselves to be revenged on them as having
forsaken the Laws and Ordinances of their Forefathers. But Joshua and Eleazer
the High Priest, and the Elders restrained them, advising first to inquire what
their intention was, and accordingly to proceed against them; Whereupon they
sent Phinehas the Son of Eleazer, and ten of the Princes as Ambassadors to
them, who when they were arrived, an Assembly was summoned, and Phinehas
standing up in the midst of them, spoke to this purpose.

You have committed too heinous an offense to be punished with words, and yet
we would not suddenly take up Arms against you, though the crime you have
committed is very heinous, but rather choose first to admonish you; To which
purpose we are sent to you as Ambassaders, hoping that in confideration of the
Friendship between us you will be persuaded to acknowledge and detest your
fault; We therefore require you to inform us of the cause why you have built an
Altar, that if it be with an ill design you may not think you are hardly dealt
with, if we take revenge upon you for the same, but if it be otherwise, we may
be satisfied upon what account it is erected; For we can scarce believe that
you who are so well grounded in the knowledge of God, and the Laws which he
himself has given you, should since your departure from us, and arrival in
your own Patrimony, which you have obtained by his favor, and peaceably enjoy
by his Providence. So forget him, as to forsake his Tabernacle, Ark, and Altar,
and introducestrange Gods, and thereby be Partakers of the impieties of the
Canaanites; Yet if you repent your folly and return to your Ancient Religion a
pardon is granted you, but if you obstinately persist in your wickedness, we
will venture all in defense of our Faith, and Gods true Religion, and will
treat you like the Inhabitants of Canaan; For though you have past the River
you are not exempt from Gods power who is in all places, and can at all times
avenge himself upon you for your Iniquities. Resolve therefore with your selves
to renounce your Error, and consider whether it be not better for you to enjoy
Peace and Safety, than to expose your selves, your Wives and Children to the
danger of a bloody War.

Phinchas ending hi^ Oration, the Chief of the Assembly made this reply; We
never the ^ight of breaking the Union which joins us so near together, or of
innevating any thing in the Religion of our Fathers; we will always persevere
therein; We know that there is one God the common Father of all the Hebrews;
and none but the Brazen Altar which is before the Tabernacle shall receive our
Sacrifices; As for that which we have (...) erected, and causes suchjealousie
in you, we did not build it with the least intent to Offer Sacrifice thereon,
but only as a perpetual (...) of our Alliance, and ^f our Obligation to
con^inue firm in the same belief, but without the least intent of making
alteration in our Religion; To the truth whereof we call Almighty God to
witness, therefore instead of continuing in all ill opinion of us, we desire
that for the future you would never suspect us conscious of such a crime
whereof none of Abraham's Posterity can he guilty without deserving to lose his
life. Having heard this modest reply, and praised their Constancy, Phinehas
returned, and gave Joshua an Account thereof in the presence of the People, who
rejoicing that there, was no cause of Bloodshed, Offered Sacrifices of
Thansgiving to God and dissolving the Assembly each man returned nome.

A ^r twenty years, Joshiea being extreme old, called to him the Princes,
Magistrates and Elders, to whom he uttered his dying words to this Effect; That
they should call to remembrance the many benefits God had bestowed upon them,
whereby from a very mean and afflicted condition they had attained to great
Riches and Glory; He then earnestly exhorted them Religiously to observe Gods
Commandments, that so he might continue his merciful hand over them, since he
assured them that they could obtain his favor by no other way but Obedience;
Which he thought himself obliged to admonish them of before his departure out
of this Life. That he was certain was now just at hand; As he ended these words
he gave up the Ghost, and died in the hundred and tenth year of his Age,
whereof he spent forty as Minister under Moses their Chief Magistrate, and
after his death he Governed the Commonwealth twenty five years; A man of
incomparable Prudence and Eloquence, Wise and Diligent in matters of
Government, and equally capable of the most important Affairs in Peace and War,
in a word, the Most Excellent Captain General of his time, whose only presence
was worth hundreds or others, whose Soldiers thought nothing impossible under
him, and by whom his Enemies esteemed themselves vanquished as soon as seen;
But let us remember while we speak of Joshua that God has covered him with the
Rays of Glory, so that we are constrained to cover his brave Acts in silence.
He died in the year from the Creation of the World 2560, and about 1500 years
before the Birth of Jesus Christ.

The History of David King of Israel; The Fifth Worthy of the World.
portrait of King David

DAvid a Man was, after Gods own heart,
Who wondrous blessings did to him impart;
By whose assistance in his youth he killed
The Great Goliath, and so won the Field;
But though he made this mighty Monster fall,
A greater rose; The jealousy of Saul,
Yet Saul at length in battle overthrown
David obtains the Kingdom and the Crown,
A Worthies name he justly does deserve
Whom many Worthies did obey and serve.
He reigned forty, lived seventy years,
And then Death put an end to all his Cars.
THE Life of David is a mixture of Good and Evil, of Joy and Grief, of
Contempts and Glories, of Vices and Virtues, of Actions and Passions, of
unthought of Successes, and of strange Accidents and Marvels; We will consider
him in a twofold state, of a Servant, and of a Master, and will observe with
what Wisdom he preserved himself in the one, and with what Majesty he behaved
himself in the other. He comes first to Court under the quality of a Musician,
there he makes himself known for a good Soldier, admired as a Commander of an
Army, and crowned as a Conqueror. Saul was tormented with an Evil Spirit which
was maintained by his melancholy humor, and nourished by his passion, They seek
out for him a fair Young man, who withal was skilful in playing on the Harp, to
make him merry, one of his Servants said, That David the Son of Jesse was fit
for that Employment; He is sent for in the Kings name, he comes, he pleases
while he played on his Instruments, but Saul is displeased when he handles his
Weapons, whose envy caused his Valor to be reputed a fault.

This young Shepherd who in his Apprenticeship had learned to fight with Lions
and Bears, would go to the War as well as his Brethren, who blame his
Curiosity, and despise his Person; There must be usually some famous Exploit to
put a man at first in great credit at Court, and the Combat of Goliath was that
which Heaven had prepared to raise David; One man alone who affrighted the
whole Army, nine foot high, and armed with five hundred pound weight of Iron,
continues for forty days his proud Bravado's, challenging the stoutest of the
Israelites to combat. All their hearts were frozen at the sound of his
terrible voice, and none dares come forth against him. The King propounds great
Riches and his Daughter in marriage to him who would take away this blemish
from the People of God, printed on the whole face of the Army by this
Philistine. David hereupon presents himself, and gets forth to fight with him,
not with the gilded Arms of Saul, but only with a Sling; The Giant scoffs at
him, and finding him sufficiently armed to defend himself from Dogs, but not
fit to set upon Men, he designs David's little body as a fit prey for some Bird
of rapine. But this Champion of the Lord of Hosts reads first a Lesson to him
of Religion before he shows his skill in fighting; Thou come to me (says he)
with a Spear, a Sword, and a Buckler, but I come to thee in the Name of the God
of Armies, of the God of the Hosts of Israel, at which thou this day have
scoffed with so great insolence; It is written in Heaven that this great God
will deliver thee into mine hands, and that I shall take away thine head from
off thy shoulders, and that I shall make a great Feast for all the Beasts of
prey with the flesh of this thy monstrous Body, whereby thou shall know there
is a God in Israel.

He says it, he does it, he strikes his Adversary with a blow of the Sling in
the midst of his Forehead, and makes this mighty Tower of flesh to fall in a
moment, cutting off the head of this terrible Giant with his own Sword, which
put the whole Army of the Philistims to confusion, and raised up the glory of
the chosen People to an incomparable height. Yet this is the fountain of all
the great Evils that David after suffered, the Great ones admire him, the
People applaud him, he is the Subject of the Songs of the Daughters of
Jerusalem, which set him above Saul. It is this Music that enraged Saul's evil
Spirit, and would not give him any rest; David must be destroyed because he
saved the Nation; He must be put to death because he restored the people to
life; He must be dishonored for having recovered the honor of the King; He is
sufficiently faulty because he is too virtuous. Saul resolved to be rid of
David, yet thought it dangerous to attempt his life openly who was so high in
the peoples esteem, and therefore under pretense of honor bestows on him a
chief place in the Army, believing his Courage would carry him into danger, and
so his death would be imputed to chance or destiny; But when he saw he returned
from manifest perils with Victory and the applause of Israel, and that he
behaved himself with great wisdom, Saul suspected him more than before, and
injuriously married his Eldest Daughter to another; But since his honor was
engaged, and to prevent the scandal of faithlesness, he offers him his younger
Daughter Michael, but with very harsh and dangerous conditions, no less than by
the death of two hundred Philistims, whom he hoped it was hardly possible for
him to vanquish, but herein God who overthrows the designs of the malicious to
establish his own Councils upon their ruins, caused the Victories and Marriage
of David to succeed to his own content, accompanied with the good will and
admiration of all the Court.

Jonathan the Eldest Son of Saul was so astonished with his valiant Exploits,
his rare Virtues, and incomparable Carriage, that he loved him as his own
Heart, and bereft himself of the most precious things he had to adorn him
withal; David likewise swears unto him reciprocally an Immortal Friendship, and
their two Souls seemed united together with an indissoluble affection. Poor
Jonathan who was of incomparable mildness declared to his Father as much as he
durst the innocence of David, and the great services he had done to the Crown,
assuring him there was not a man in the Kingdom of a more harmless and pleasing
Conversation, and that it was the joy of his Heart, and his only safety to have
him always at his side; Saul seemed to be overcome with these discourses, and
suffered David, whom he had driven far off, to return again near his Person,
but Saul upon a day when David played on the Harp in his presence, endeavored
to strike him through with his Lance had not David's nimbleness avoided that
evil blow, and lest any should charge him with perfidiousness, he excused it by
the distemper of his Spirit; Jonathan yet another time endeavored his
reconciliation, but being repelled by Saul with harsh words and threats to kill
him, he saw clearly there was no more safety for his Friend, and persuaded him
to retire; David goes from Court, and makes a sad departure from his beloved
Jonathan, thousands of tears and sighs being vented betwixt them.

Saul seeing he was escaped out of his bloody hands, sends Soldiers to bring
him back, which Michal his Wife having notice of, she tells her Husband, and
makes him depart suddenly in the deep silence of the night, putting in his
place an Image in the Bed; Next morning Saul's Guards break into the House, and
passing on to the Bed, there found the counterfeit; Michal was accused thereof
and chidden by Saul, but she excused her self saying, Her Husband had compelled
her to it, threatening to kill her, if she would not obey; This still increased
his rage, and caused him to invent every day new means to destroy him, whom
above all men he ought to have preserved. In the mean time David knew not
whither to retire himself; He would have taken the boldness to have gone to
Samuel who was yet alive, but this would have been prejudicial to both in the
mind of Saul, who turned all suspicions into fury; He therefore goes to the
Town of Nob to Abimelech the High Priest, who seeing him in a very mean
Equipage was somewhat amazed at his Arrival. But David to confirm him, said
that he came about some urgent business of the Kings, and had not time to
provide for his Journey, desiring the Priest to give him some Bread and a
Sword, who having no other, gave him some Loaves of the Consecrated Shewbread,
and the Sword of Goliath which was kept in the Tabernacle for a Monument.

Saul hearing that David was seen in the Woods with a Lance in his hand, and
accompanied with several Captains and Officers, sharply complained of the
unfaithfulness of his Servants. Whereupon Doeg an Edomite of a barbarous
behavior, to get savor with his Master, accused Abimelech the Priest with all
his Company for furnishing David with Weapons and Provisions, he being present
at that time; Saul instantly sent for him, and reproached him with the fact, he
wisely excused it as not knowing but David was as much in the Kings favor as
ever, and that what he did was for Saul's service as he judged This excuse was
very just and lawful, but the jealousy of Saul was never satisfied, so that
without any other form of proceeding, he commanded that villainous Butcher Doeg,
(all others refusing to lift up their hands against these sacred Persons) to
fall upon the High Priest, and the Priests that accompanied him, eighty five in
number, who were all murdered in one day, and that cursed Servant exceeding his
Commission drove on his Murderers to the Town of Nob which they filled with
Fire and Blood.

David having understood by Abiathar the Son of the High Priest all that was
past, was pierced with most bitter grief, accusing himself as the cause of the
death of these unhappy ones, and perceiving well the Spirit of Saul was wholly
invenomed, he saved himself in the Cave of Adullam, where though he thought
himself hid from the Eyes of all the World, yet his Father and Brethren flying
the Persecution, found him out, and wounded his tender heart with their
Lamentations for the change of his condition, who was now no longer a David
Triumphant, the object of all thoughts, and the discourse of all Tongues; He
comforted them the best he could, and recommended them to the protection of the
King of Moab till he knew what it would please God to do with him; At this time
all the banished that fled for safety, and all the miserable betook themselves
to David to the number of four hundred men, who entrenched themselves in a
Fortress, going forth every day to seek wherewithal to maintain themselves. In
the midst of all these misfortunes the good Prince kept always in his Heart a
true love of his Country, and knowing that the Philistines had laid Siege
before Keil^h he failed not to relieve it, though this ungrateful City designed
to have delivered him up to Saul if he had enclosed himself therein, which
having consulted the Oracle of God he would not do, but retired to the Desert
of Ziph, where Jonathan his beloved Friend secretly met him, comforted him, and
assured him that he should be King after his Father, and that himself would be
content to be his second.

Mean while David ran from Desert to Desert with his Troops, when he received a
severe Check from Nabal to whom he sent for relief, and for which he threatened
to destroy his Family, had not Abigal, who appeared before him with great
wisdom and humility, stayed the Sword already drawn for the desolation of her
Family. The Philistines about this time had taken the Field, whom Saul having
encountered and driven back, he returns to the pursuit of David, with three
thousand men, and entering into a Cave for necessity, where David was hid with a
small number of his most faithful Servants, they persuaded him, That by the
hand of God his mortal Enemy was now delivered into his power, by whose death
he might put an end t^ all his Calamities; But David by a strong inspiration
from God, resolved in his heart never to lay his hands upon Gods Anointed, and
contenting himself with only cutting off the Skirts of his Garment, he went out
of the Cave after Saul, and cried after him with a loud voice, saying, Behold
my Lord, my Father, and my King the innocence of my hands, and be no more
filled with vain and false suspicions of poor David, you cannot be ignorant
that God at this time had put me into your power, and that I could have taken
away your life to have saved my own, but God by his grace has preserved me
from such ill thoughts and has secured you from all danger; I had never yet
any intent to hurt you, though you cease not to persecute and torment my life
with a thousand afflictions; Alas my Lord what is it you desire? Against whom
are you come forth with so great a strength of Arms and Horses? against a poor
dead Dog, a miserable little Beast? I beseech the living God to be Judge
between us, and to make you sensible of the goodness of my cause.

Saul was so amazed with this action that he ran to him, and embracing him
weeping, said, This O David is a sure sign whereby I know for certain thou
shall reign after me, so great a goodness not being able to be rewarded but by
an Empire I only beseech and entreat you to have pity on my poor Children after
my death, and not to revenge upon them the injuries I have offered you;
Hereupon he swore to deal peaceably with him for the future; But the Spirit of
Saul was unequal and often departed from reason for a long season; Whereupon
David resolved to go out of the Kingdom to Achish King of the Philistines a
Sworn Enemy to Israel, since he could not besecure any where else, yet did he
never bear arms against the people of God: At last the fatal day of Saul drew
near, and he saw the Philistines came upon him with their utmost strength, and
being troubled in mind, in the confusions of a disturbed Spirit, he sought to
the Divine Oracles to learn his destiny in this pressing necessity, but this
unhappy Prince sought after the dead in vain, having trod under feet the
admonitions of the Living; and therefore he applies himself to the Witch of
Endor, who by Samuels appearance foretold the routing of his Army, his own
death, and likewise his Childrens sad Fate, at which he was so affrighted that
he fell into a Swound. Being recovered, he went to his Army, and the next
morning perceived the Philistines wonderfully increased, and resolved to fight;
And his own people exceedingly weakened, and seeming to carry misfortune in
their faces; The Enemies gave the onset with very great violence, and overthrew
the foremost of the Israelites, wherein Jonathan with his two Brethren sealed
the last proofs of their valor with their blood and death in the sight of
their miserable Father, who seeing he could not dye so soon as he desired
suffered himself to fail upon his own Sword, vomiting, forth his Soul and blood
with ragings and griefs unspeakable.

While this unhappy Battle was fought, David was pursuing the Amalakites, who
in his absence had sacked the Town of Ziglag the place of his retiring, whom he
overtook laden with their prey, and regained his two Wives Ahinoam and Abigail
whom they had taken away; As he came from this Battle, a young Amalekite
presents himself, and brings him the news of the death of Saul and Jonathan,
and his other Sons, affirming that he himself had stood by at the death of the
King, and had helped him to die by his own command; Whereat David moved with
extreme grief, tore his garments, wept, fasted, and made a funeral Lamentation
over Saul and Jonathan; Causing likewise the Amalekite to die, who by his own
confession was accessory to the death of the King; And though David at this
time might have taken possessesion of the Kingdom, yet upon prudent
deliberation he thought it not convenient to be too hasty; Whereupon Abner a
chief Captain, without losing time, seeing there yet remained a Son of Saul
alive named Ishbosheth, aged forty years, though of little courage, and less
understanding, he made him presently come into the Camp, and caused him to be
proclaimed the true and lawful Successor of Saul, not so much for the love he
bore him, or the esteem of his sufficiency, as intending to reign by him and
over him.

All the People swore Allegiance to Ishbosheth, except the Tribe of Judah from
whom David sprung, which joining together in favor of him, crowned him King in
Hebron, where he reigned seven years before he possessed the whole Kingdom of
Israel. Afterward Abner laying aside his warlike humor, fell in love with a
Concubine of Saul's named Rispah, whereat Ishbosheth being offended, Abner for
one poor word spoken in a very mild manner, entered into a rage against the
King, and said, It was to use him as a Dog to quarrel with him for a woman
after so great Services as he had done for the Crown, and from whom he held
both his Life and Kingdom; The poor Prince held his peace, and durst not answer
a word to this bold Fellow, and was pitifully devoured by his own Servant.
Abner grew so hot with anger that he dispatched Messengers to David to desire
his friendship, and promises to bring the whole Kingdom of Ishbosheth into his
hands. David answered, That he was willing to make peace with him, if he would
cause his Wife Michol to be restored to him, whom they had married to another
after his departure, which was readily agreed to, and performed.

Mean time Abner powerfully sollicites the people of Israel to betake
themselves to David, since God had committed their safety and rest into his
hands, who would unite all the Tribes under one Monarchy, which would make him
a happiness to his people, helpful to his friends, and terrible to his Enemies.
This Discourse prevailed very much on the Principal ones of the Nation, who saw
small hopes of Ishbosheth, he being disparaged both by Nature and Fortune. Soon
after Abner meets David at Hebron, who made him a Feast, hearkened to his
Propositions and conducted him back with honor. Joab who was at that time
absent, soon understood the coming of Abner and being jealous that the
Friendship of a man who seemed to draw a whole Kingdom after him might much
prejudice his interest he enters roughly into the Kings Chamber, telling him
that Abner was but a deceiver who came to spy out his secrets, and that he
ought to have secured him when under his power; And since David seeing him in
such a rage answered nothing Joab without Authority sends a message to Abner to
return to Hebron under color of treating more fully with David; He lightly
believed it, and came back the same way, when Joab trecherously surprising him
killed him at the Gate of the City.

David was much perplexed hereat, and uttered grievous Curses against Joab and
his whole race, and to deface the blemish of this Murder, be assisted at the
Funerals of Abner, protesting against the cruelty of those who had taken away
his Life, and highly setting forth the praises of the dead; yet he caused not
process to be made against Joab, conceiving that he was not able to destroy him
in such a time when it was dangerous to provoke him. After this Ishbosheth King
of Israel was slain by two Murderers Rechab and Baanah as he slept on his Bed
at Noonday, who cut off his Head and brought it to David, at which this great
King was so highly incensed, abhorring this barbarous Fact, that he instantly
condemned them to death, and their Heads and Feet being cut off, they were
hanged up at the Fish^ood of Hebron.

The death of Ishbosheth the Son of Saul ended the difference between the two
(...) Houses, and all the Tribes, yielded universally to David; So that now he
began to Reign absolutely, and to disscover the Admirable Qualities and Royal
Virtues wherewith he was adorned. And it is certain that of all the Kings of
Judah, none equaled him in all kind of perfections. He was one who feared God
without Superstition; was Religious without Hypocrisy; Valiant without
Sternness, Liberal without reproaching any, a good Husband without
Covetousness; Valiant without Insolence, Vigilant without Unquietness, Wise
without Subtilty, Courteous without Looseness, Humble without Cowardliness,
Cheerful without too much Familiarity, Grave without Fierceness, and Kind
without any Complement; Above all he was all his Life very Zealous for
Religion, and wonderfully affected toward Divine things, settling the Worship of
God, and composing Hymns for the people, which have continued to all Ages, and
serve for perpetual Springs of Devotion even to this very day; Yet did these
Exercises no way diminish his Actions of Valor; He overthrew the Philistines
in two great Battles, and made War on every side, in the East against the
Moabites and Amonites, in the West against the Phoenicians, on the South
against the Amalekites, Arabians, and Idumeans, and in the North against the
Syrians, Sabeans and Mesopotamians, and was happy in all his Enterprises;
Besides which he made Leagues with the Kings his Neighbors, which he gained
either by Friendship or Force. He rendered Justice exactly to his Subjects,
favored Arts, Inricht and Fortified Towns, Erected Stately Palaces, and
brought the Kingdom of Judah out of Servility, who had not yet known what
Magnificence was; He was honored by the great Ones, beloved by the Priests,
admired by the Wisest, and almost adored by the People. But as all light in
mortal things has a shadow; God suffered him to fall into a great offense
which served to humble him, and caused very much trouble in his House; His mind
being freed from the cares of War and Business, he descried from the top of his
Palace a Woman that bathed her self in her Garden, he inquired her name, her
Kindred, and her Quality, and becoming in Love thereby, sends for her to his
house, and had Company with her; How dear did this unhappy cast of his Eye cost
him; When a man once exceeds in this blind Passion, he goes further than ever
he designed. She soon after sends word to David that she had Conceived, and
that her Husband having not seen her of a long time, might have very ill
apprehensions of her; The honor of this lost Creature must now be covered, the
King sends for her Husband under some other pretense, he comes from the Army,
is kindly entertained, and David is earnest with him to go home and take his
ease with his Wife, but the good man refuses it, saying, That it was not fit
for him to lie in a Bed when the Ark of God and his Captain Joab were under
Tents; He lies on the ground before the door of the Kings Chamber, and so
passes the night, having no desire but to return speedily to the Army; Alas
poor Vriah! thou art made a harmless Sacrifice, and wast but too faithful, and
therefore must water with thy blood the guilt of thy Master! David dictates a
bloody Letter to Joab to place Vriah in the Forlorn hope, that he might be
fairly rid of him, and Vriah carries this deadly Letter; Joab without inquiring
obeys, the Innocent Vriah is massacred, and these false Lovers now think
themselves secure; David remains nine Months covered with this Filth and Blood,
without coming to the knowledge of himself, until Nathan the Prophet removes
the Vail that blinded him, who though he knew how dangerous it was to reprove a
King, and especially in such a case, yet resolved to show David his sin, by
uttering a Parable of a Rich Man that had great Store of Sheep, who yet had
violently taken away one only Ewe from a Poor Man, which David finding very
strange, judged him worthy of death, whereat the Prophet hits him home, telling
him, He was the Man who had caused poor Uriah to be slain after he had taken
Bathsheba from him. David awaking as it were out of a dead sleep, acknowledged
his sin with a true humility, and submitted himself to all the Chastisements it
should please the great Judge to inflict upon him; He was presently changed
into another man, and was exceeding Penitent, his Heart bleeding and his Eyes
weeping continually for his grievous offense, and God beginning the punishments
of his sin (which yet he had pardoned as to his own person) caused the Child
Conceived in Adultery to dye.

A year after those pitiful Tragadies of his House which the Lord had threatened
him with, came upon him, and filled his heart with terrors; Amnon the eldest
Son of David fell in love with his sister Thamar a very fair Princess, and
being in despair of obtaining his desire, falls sick; The King his Father goes
to see him to take order for his health, who tells him; There is but one
medicine that will cure him which is that his sister Thamar should come and
make him broth with her own hand, wherein she had much skill. This is easily
granted, and the innocent Maid goes to him, who soon discovers his passion to
her, which she as violently opposed by reasons and tears; Whereupon this
barbarous Man proceeds to force and ravishes her, which being past, he entered
into as furious a repentance, and not enduring to behold her, drives her out of
his House with reproach and sco^^, she puts on morning attire, and covers her
head with ashes and at last discovers all to Absalom her brother by the same
Mother, who comforts her, and promises revenge; David hears of it, but
remembering his own offense, durst not censure that of his Son, especially since
he loved him tenderly and feared to offend him

Absalom seeing David did nothing in it, resolved to do himself Justice with
his own hands; and having kep^ his design secret two years to prevent
suspicion, he makes a Royal Feast to which he invites his Father and all his
brethren; David excuses himself, and the other earnestly entreats that his
eldest brother Amnon might supply his place, to which his Father consents. The
brethren enter joyfully into the Hall where the Banquet was, where Absalom had
prepared a Bloody Spectacle and horrible Sacifice; he gives the word to his
Servants that when his brother Amnon had drank plentifully, they should take
their opportunity to kill him without inquiring the cause, since his Command
was sufficient authority and security; The Wine and good cheer having made them
merry, on a sudden drawn Swords glittered before their eyes; Fear came upon
all, but the danger was only to Amnon who was suddenly Murdered, his blood
leaping on his Brothers Table for a just revenge of his shameful lust. The
Brethren affrighted instantly fly and report brings the sad news to David that
Absolon had slain all his Brethren; The poor King casts himself on his face
upon the ground weeping, and all the Court tear their clothes and put on
Mourning, when Jonadas certifies that none but Amnon was killed in revenge of
the offense committed against Thamar. David returns a little to himself, and
his other Children present themselves before him affrighted and weeping for
that which had passed.

Absolon saves himself in the House of his Grandfather by the Mother, the King
of Geshur, where he remains three years without daring to see the King his
Father who would no ways pardon this great Crime. Joab labors to reconcile the
Son to the Father by the mediation of a discreet Woman of Tekoah, and at length
prevails, Absolon returns, the King embraces him, gives him the kiss of peace
and re-establishes him in the Court; The Spirit of this Prince was high and
tempestuous, and being well made, courteous, liberal, courageous and capable of
great undertakings, he entertained ambitious thoughts; He saw his Father
declining, Adonijah his elder Brother too much a fondling, and Solomon yet a
Child unable to oppose him, and therefore conceived the Kingdom could not slip
out of his hands; And the better to secure it he provided himself a guard of
Soldiers and ceased not secretly to gain the hearts and good will of all his
Fathers Subjects; Never was any Prince more prodigal of his Courtesies, whoever
had any business with the King, he called them to him, embraced them, kissed
them, and enquired of their condition and suit, and said, There was no other
mishop but that the King was old and tired with business, and had not appointed
any one to hear the Complaints of his Subjects and do them Justice, but if one
day he should have that charge due to him by his cirth, he would give full
satisfaction to every one.

By this means he made himself Conqueror of hearts, and by the advice of
Achitophel a great Politicion, gets leave of David to perform a Vow in Hebron
whither he goes accompanied with many of his Followers, giving order to the
rest of his Confederates, that at the first sound of a Trumpet they should
march to him, which being done, he caused himself to be crowned King in Hebron;
The news came quickly to David, that his Son had revolted and got possession of
Hebron, and that all the Forces of the Kingdom ran to him; This poor Prince at
the tidings of this Rebellion thinks of nothing but flying, and leaves his
chief City to save himself in the by paths of the Wilderness: He is the first
that goes forth, without a Horse to ride on, upon his ^are feet, with his head
uncovered and tears in his Eyes, marching thus like a true Penitent, and
adoring the Judgments of God, which made him bear the enraged Tongue of Shimei
with a deep patience, and would not suffer him to be chastized for his horrid
insolence. Mean while Absolon entered Jerusalem without resistance, where
Achitophel to make the difference irreconcilable, gave him the detestable
Counsel to abuse his Fathers Concubines that were left in the Palace; After he
had performed this Villainy, he contrives to surprise his Father at unawares,
which by Achitophels subtilty might have probably succeeded, had not Hushai a
secret Friend of David's who joined himself to Absolon on purpose to discover
his designs, prevented the Plot by this cunning speech, That they should do
nothing hastily, since his Father was an old Captain, and politic in War, who
had still in his Army men of Valor and Counsel, and that it stood not with his
honor to give Battle unless he were assured of the Victory, for if at the
first Encounter he should be repulsed, it would be of dangerous consequence,
and might so discourage his men, that his whole Army might be routed, but if he
would stay a while, the People would gather to him as the Sand on the Sea
shore, and being in the midst of such a mighty Army, nothing would be able to
stand before him. This Counsel being preferred before Achitophels, he was so
enraged that he goes instantly home and hangs himself, by the most manifest
Justice of God. After which Absolon thinking himself sufficiently strong,
passes over Jordan, makes Amasa his chief Captain, and designs to give Battle
to his Earler; David having had a little leisure to recollect and fortify
himself, takes Courage again, and dividing his Army into three parts, appoints
Joab, Abishai, and Ittai to command it; He would have been present himself had
not his Council dissuaded him, therefore encouraging his people, and charging
them strictly if they should gain the Victory to secure his Son Absolon without
any hurt, he retired out of the Camp.

The Trumpets sound, and the Armies approach David's men having a good Cause,
engage like Lions; But the Rebels affrighted with their own guilt, were soon
disordered, and put to flight, so that one Party seemed to come only to kill,
and the other to be slain, Twenty thousand falling dead on the place; Absolon
astonished at this sudden change of Fortune, gets on his Mule and flies through
a Forest where his head being caught within the branches of a Tree, his Mule
left him hanging between Heaven and Earth; as a spectacle of the Vengeance of
God for his ingratitude to so good a Father; Of which Joab having notice,
struck him through with three Darts, though forbidden by David, and ten young
Soldiers made an end of him, the body, was interred in a Pit under a great
heap of Stones, though he had built a stately Monument for himself which he
called Absolons Place. Behold the horrible end of an Evil Son and a Rebellious
Subject, sufficient to deter Posterity from such wicked practices to the end of
the World. While this was doing, David enclosed himself in a little Town,
expecting the Event, and continually inquiring of the health of Absolon, but
when certain news came of his death, he was pierced with so violent a grief,
that he could not be comforted, losing all Courage, and crying every moment, O
Absolon my Son Absolon, Oh that this favor had been done for me that I might
have died for thee! Every one cast down his Eyes for pity, and the whole
Victory was turned into sorrow.

Joab always bold and insolent toward his Master, reproaches David, thinking
thereby to justify his own fault, telling him, That he would put to confusion
all his faithful Servants who had that day saved his Life, his House, and
Kingdom, that he seemed of a very strange nature, to hate those that loved him,
and love them that hated him, since it was plain that if all his good Captains
and Soldiers had perished to save the life of one Rebellious Son he would have
been very well satisfied; Further he swore to him by the Living God, That if he
did not rise, and entertain those who returned from the Battle, there would not
one man remain with him before morning, which would prove a greater displeasure
than had ever yet happened to him. He presses him so vehemently that the King
without daring to answer a word rose up, and did all he required; By degrees
his great grief diminished, and the rejoicings of the people who came to carry
him back to Jerusalem in triumph made him forget his loss, and endeavoring to
bring back all to him, he pardoned them with unspeakable meekness, being ready
to give Joabs place to Amasa Absolons chief Captain; But Joab quickly prevented
this, by killing with his own hand him who was designed his Successor. After
this he pursued Sheba a Captain of the Rebels who retired into Adela, which
being besieged by Joab, a Woman of great discretion and credit with the people
persuaded them to slay him and throw his head over the Wall which put an end to
this whole bloody War.

After David's re-establishment in his Kingdom, he reigned about Eleven years in
full peace, and in continual exercises of Piety and Justice, and assembling the
States of his Realm, he made his Son Solomon whom he had chosen, to be
confirmed King in his stead; He lived near seventy two years, reigned forty,
and died a thousand thirty two years before the Birth of our Savior, and about
three thousand from the Creation of the World, leaving vast Treasures for
building the Temple, as an Eternal, Monument of his Devotion and Understanding;
It was a special favor to him that Jesus Christ should be born of his Line,
and that his Birth was revealed to him so long before it was known to the
world; He often sets it down on the ^ide of his Psalms, and was in an Ecstasy in
Contemplation by the foretast of this happiness; Men usually take their
Nobility and Names from their Predecessors, but David drew his from a Son who
is the Father of Glory and Author of Eternity; All things were great in David's
Person but the height of all this greatness is that from his Family there was
given to us a Jesus.

The Hist. of Judas Maccabeus a Valiant Commander of the Jews; The Sixth Worthy
of the World.
portrait of Judas Maccabeus

This Valiant Worthy for his Countries Cause
And in defending of Gods Truth and Laws
Was still engaged, and often with a few
He Thousands of his Enemies did subdue.
Their Number nor their strength he did not fear
Hoping that God would still for him appear
Who fought his Battles; And would never comply
To wicked Heathenish Idolatry.
At length forsook by almost all his men
His Courage would not suffer him, even then
To fly away, but being with killing tired
He dearly sold his life, and so expired.
AFter the death of Alexander the Great, his Army and Dominions were divided
between his Captains, among whom Seleucus made himself King of Syria, And
afterward Antiochus Epiphanius reigned in Asia, who being invited by some
Apostate Jews to come to Jerusalem, he encamped before it, and by his Faction
within had the gates opened and the City betrayed to him, about the year of the
World 3796. and before the Nativity of Christ 168. He robbed the Temple, and
carried away the Golden Table, Candlestick and Censers, with all the other
vessels dedicated to God, leaving nothing of any value behind him, and raising
such an horrible persecution against the Jews, that the Heavens seemed to weep,
and the Earth to blush with Blood; It was a sport to that barbarous man to
profane Holy things, and a continual exercise to flea and roast men alive, or
to throw them into boiling Caldrons, for no other crime but persisting in the
True Religion, as he did by the Seven Sons of the Maccabees, whose courage and
constancy out-brav'd all his most exquisite Tortures. He overturned the Altars
upon the bleeding Priests, strangled the Children in the bosom of their sighing
Mothers, the Flames devoured the sacred and profane Buildings without
distinction, and the Houses that now seemed but Dens of Beasts, represented so
hideous a spectacle as gave more desire to die than courage to live.

Amidst these desolations was found a gallant Old man named Matthias a Priest,
the Father of many Sons, all men of valor, who went out of Jerusalem to retire
himself to the City of Modin, where he assembled his Family, resolving to
oppose themselves against the fury of the Tyrant, but was quickly summoned to
render up himself and all his men, and to offer Incense to their Pagan Idols;
But this virtuous man, calling his people together, spoke thus to them; We
should be too much in love with Life, to keep it with the loss of the True
Religion; I am sorry that ever I was born in such an Age as to have seen the
disasters of my Nation, and the desolation of the Holy Jerusalem, abandoned to
the hands of Rapine and to impious profanation; Her Temple has been the
Object of all reproaches, and those Vessels of Glory that served for the
Ministry of the Living God have been taken away by violence; We have seen our
Streets covered with dead Bodies, and the little Children with their Throats
cut lying upon the Carcasses of their Fathers; And what Nation has not
possessed our Inheritance, and enriched themselves with our Spoils; The
holiness of the Temple has not stayed Sacriligious hands, neither has this
famous City been able to preserve it self from Flames; After this what pleasure
can we have in Life, unless it be to revenge the quarrel of God? I am promised
all the honors and privileges I can reasonably hope for, if I will obey King
Antiochus, and join with those Apostates who have so basely betrayed their
Faith, but God forbid that I should ever fall into so odious a compliance; When
almost all my Nation have conspired to forsake the Law of their God, and
accommodate themselves to the times, and their Princes will, I can answer for
my self, my Children, and my Brethren, and can assure my self they will never
commit so vild a crime. Let all those who have a Zeal for True Religion join
themselves with us, and know that among so many miseries there is nothing
better than to proceed in the ways of Religion and Glory, though with the loss
of our dearest blood and life.

In the mean time the Kings Commissioners pressing every one to declare
himself, one of the Jews, whether induced by terror, or reward, steps forth
from among the people to sacrifice according to the command of the King,
wherewith Matthias inflamed with Zeal, was so displeased, that he and his Sons
fell upon him, and hewed him in pieces, they also slew Apollos the Kings
Captain and other Soldiers who withstood them; Then he overthrew the Altar,
and with a loud voice said, All that are affected to the Laws of their Fathers,
and the Service of God, let them follow me; Whereupon many of them retired with
their Wives and Children into the Deserts and Caves, but were soon pursued and
overtaken by the Kings Captains, who again renewed their persuasions to them to
offer Sacrifice to the Idols, which the Jews absolutely refusing, and resolving
rather to die than commit such Impiety, these bloody Persecutors assaulted them
on the Sabbath day, and burnt them in their Caves, who neither resisted nor
defended themselves lest they should profane the Sabbath; Some thousands of
Men, Women and Children were there destroyed, yet diverse escaped who joined
themselves with Matthias, and chose him for their Captain, who then informed
them that they might lawfully fight on the Sabbath if they were assaulted, else
they were guilty of their own deaths; And having assembled a sufficient number,
he destroyed the Heathen Altars, and slew those who had forsaken their
Religion, commanding them to circumcise their Children, and driving from every
place those whom Antiochus had appointed to see the Laws executed.

Having thus governed one year, he fell sick and perceiving his death to
approach he sent for his five Sons, John, Simeon, Judas Maccabeus, Eleazer and
Jonathan, whom he earnestly exhorted to follow his steps its maintaining the
Law of God, and fighting for their Country, assuring them of the divine
assistance which never fails those who love and fear God, but taking pleasure
in their virtues will grant them favor to recover their former liberty and
peace; And says he, God will establish you in the possession of your ancient
Laws, and though our bodies are mortal and subject to death, yet the memory of
our virtuous actions will remain to eternity, never doubt therefore to venture
your lives in so good a Cause, but above all I exhort you to love and concord,
and whatever you find any one most apt and fitted for, let him prosecute the
same, without contradiction from the rest. I charge you to obey your brother
Simeon a politic and valiant man, in what ever he shall Counsel you, but make
Judas Maccabeus your Captain who is courageous and strong, for he shall revenge
the injuries and outrages that have been done to our Nation, and shall put your
Enemies to flight; Assist him therefore like men of valor, and such as fear
God, and thereby you shall be sure to prevail.

Soon after Matthias gave up the Ghost, and Judas Maccab^us was made General,
who by the assistance of his Brethren and other Jews, drove the Enemy out of
the Country, and cleansed the Land of Idolatry; Which when Apollonius the
General of Antiochus in Samaria heard, he invaded Judea; Against whom Maccabeus
went forth, and in a terrible Battle, overthrew and killed Apollonius, taking
his Camp and therein a very rich Booty, together with his Sword. After this,
Seron Governor of Coelosyria with the assistance of many Apostate Jews, marched
against Judas to B^thoron, who observing his Soldiers discouraged by their
great numbers, and because they had fasted so long, and were thereby disabled,
he encouraged them, saying, That Victory did not consist in numbers of men, but
in their Devotion toward God, who had so assisted their Forefathers, that with
small Forces they had often defeated many thousands of their Enemies; They were
hereby so prevailed upon, that without sear of their multitude they ran all
upon Sevon, routed his Army and slew him, together with eight hundred of the
Syrians, the rest escaping by flight.

Antiochus enraged at this defeat, commanded Lysias the Governor of Egypt to
go with a very strong Army and conquer Judea, and then to sell the Inhabitants
for Slaves to those that would give most, and utterly to destroy and ruin
Jerusalem; Lysias having this command, sent Prolomy, Nicanor and Gorgias, men
of great Authority, about the King, with Forty thousand Foot, and Seven
thousand Horse to invade Judea, who marching to the City of Emaus, greatly
increased their Forces. Judas having viewed the Camp and number of his Enemies,
exhorted his Soldiers to repose their confidence and hope of Victory in God
alone, appointing likewise a Fast to humble themselves before God by
supplications and prayers in such a time of extreme danger, and assuring them
that God would have compassion on them and strengthen them to put their
Adversaries to sham^; Next day he mustered his Army, discharging all who were
newly married, or had lately bought Possessions, according to the Law, and then
spoke thus to the rest; Countrymen and Companions, we had never more occasion
to express our Courage, and contemn Dangers than at this present; For if you
now fight valiantly, you may in this one Battle recover your Liberties, whereby
you will have opportunity again to serve the True God, and live a happy life;
But if you prove Cowards in this Encounter, you will be branded with perpetual
Infamy, and endanger the utter extirpation of your Nation; Consider therefore
that if you fight not you must die, and on the contrary assure your selves that
in fighting for your Religion, Laws and Liberties, you shall obtain Immortal
Glory, Be ready Theerfore in the morning to give your mortal Enemies Battle.

Immediately news was brought him that a strong party of Horse and Foot were
designed to fal^ on him that night, whereupon Maccabeus suddenly resolved to
break into the Enemies Army the same night while they were so divided; Having
therefore refreshed himself and his Army, and leaving many Fires in his Camp to
deceive the Enemy, he marched all night to seek them out; Gorgias finding the
Jews had forsaken their Camp, imagined that they were fled to the Mountains for
fear, and deligently pursued them; But in the morning Judas with only three
thousand men, ill armed, showed himself to the Enemy at Emaus, and having
observed their posture, he persuaded his men, To fight Valiantly since he was
certain God would deliver their Enemies into their hands, and thereupon causing
his Trumpets to sound he fell upon them with, such fury and resolution that
being absolutely affrighted and surprised they instantly gave ground, and
having slain such as resisted, he pursued the rest to the Plains of Idumea; In
this fight three thousand of the Enemy were Killed, yet would he not suffer his
Soldiers to take the spoil, telling them, that they were still to fight with
Gorgias and his Army, whom when by Gods help they had beaten, they should then
securely enrich themselves with the booty; Gorgias and his Army observing from
a Hill the flight of their Frie^^s, and the readiness of the Jews to give them
battle, were so discouraged that they fled likewise, whereupon Judas and his
men returned to gather the Pillage, where finding great store of Gold, Silver,
Scarlet and Purple, they returned home with Joy, praising God for their good
success.

Lysias was extremely concerned at this overthrow, and presently invaded Judea
with Sixty thousand Chosen Foot, and five thousand Horse, and encamped in
Bethsura. Which Judas hearing, came out against him with only ten thousand men,
and seeing their number so vastly exceed his, he cried earnestly to God that he
would please to fight with him and for him, and then charged the front of the
Enemy with such force, that he discomfited and slew above five thousand of
them. Lysias perceiving the resolution of the Jews who would rather dye than
lose their liberty. He returned with the rest of his Army to Antioch to
reinforce them. Mean while Judas assembled the People, and told them, That
having obtained so many Victorys through the mercy of God, they ought now to go
up to Jerusalem, and purify the Temple that was desolate, and to offer
Sacrifices according to the Law of the Lord; Then going up with a great
multitude of People, he found the Temple desolate, the gates burnt, and grass
growing within the same; At this sad spectacle he and all present could not
forbear weeping, and presently applied themselves to purge the Temple; Then
Judas caused a Table, a Candlestick, and an Altar for Incense to be made all of
Gold, putting up a Rail, and Gates to the Temple, and throwing down the Altar
which was profaned by Antiochus, he built a new one of stones neither Newed
nor Hammered; And on the twenty first of Chasleu, or September, lights were put
in the Candlesticks, perfumes laid upon the Altar, Loaves set upon the Table,
and Sacrifices offered upon the New Altar, which had been neglected for three
years past; Then did Judas and his Countrymen celebrate a Feast unto the Lord
for eight days, praising God with Hymns and Psalms, He also enclosed Jerusalem
with a Wall, and built (...) Towers thereon in which he planted Garrisons
against the incursions of the Enemy, and fortified Bethsura for a defense to it.

The Nations ^ound about envying this prosperity of the Jews, surprised many of
them by Treachery, whereupon Judas made an incursion, slew many Idumeans, and
brought a great prey out of their Country, besieging the Sons of Baan their
Prince who lay in wait for the Jews, and at length setting fire to their
Towers, killed all that were therein. After this he overcame a mighty Army of
the Ammorites under the command of Timotheus, taking and burning their City of
Jazor, and leading their Wives and Children Captive into Judea. The
Neighboring People hearing of his departure assaulted the Jews and Galaad, who
retiring into the Fort of Dathema, sent to Judas for relief; And at the same
time Letters came out of Galilee, that they were endangered by the Inhabitants
of Ptolemais, Tire, Sydon, and others thereabout. Judas hereupon sent his
Brother Simeon with three thousand chosen men to relieve Galilee, and himself
with his Brother Jonathan, and eight thousand others, marched to Galaad; Simeon
fought against his Enemies in Galilee, and slew about three thousand, pursuing
them to the Gates of Ptolemais, and taking much spoil, and releasing many
Jewish Prisoners he returned victoriously home. But Judas passing Jordan, was
there informed that his Brethren were Besieged in their Cities and Castles, and
some already in great extremity; Hereupon he first fell upon the Inhabitants of
Bozra, took their City, set it on fire, and killed all able to bear Arms; Then
marching all night he arrived early next morning to the Castle where the Jews
were Besieged by the Army of Timotheus, who were just ready to scale the Walls,
when Judas dividing his Forces into three Battalions, courageously assailed
them, who hearing it was Maccabeus, were surprised with such dread that they
instantly fled; Judas his men slaying about eight thousand in the pursuit; Then
marching to Molla he seized it, slew all the men therein and burnt it with
Fire, after which he destroyed several other places.

Soon after Timotheus raised another Army, wherewith he marched to Jordan,
exhorting them valiantly to oppose the Jews, and to hinder their passage over
the River, since if they once past Jordan, they were sure to be defeated. Judas
hearing this, marched hastily against the Enemy, and passing the River,
unexpectedly fell upon them with such violence, that casting away their Arms
they fled for their lives, some endeavored to save themselves in Carnain, but
Judas taking that City and Temple, slew them, and burnt the same, and then he
led away all the Jews who dwelt in Galaad with their Wives, Children and
substance, and brought them into Judea. When he drew near the Town of Ephion,
they had barricado'd up his way that he could not pass, and refusing upon his
desire to open the passage, he Besieged the City, took it by assault, burnt it,
and slew all the Inhabitants. After this passing over Jordan they came into
Judea with great joy and gladness praising God, and Offering Sacrifices of
Thanksgiving for the safe return of the Army, because in all these Batrles and
Encounters they had not lost one Jew. But whilst Judas and Simeon were gone
upon these expeditions, the two Captains with whom he had left the rest of his
Forces (with a strict command to have a watchful Eye over Judea. but not to
join Battle with any Enemy till his return) being desirous to gain the repute
of valiant men, went out with their Soldiers toward Jamnia, against whom
Gorgias Governor of that place issued out, and slew two thousand of them, the
rest flying back into Judea. Then Judas and his Brethren took diverse Cities
from the Idumeans, and with much Booty and great Joy returned home.

The Bloody Antiochus being at this time in Persia, heard of a wealthy City
called Elymais, wherein stood a rich Temple of Diana; Thither he went and
beseiged it, but the Inhabitants sallied out, and with great loss drove him
from thence, whereupon he returned to Babylon, where having notice of the
overthrow of his Captains in Judea, and the power of the Jews, this with his
former defeat so wrought upon him that he fell sick, and finding no hope of
recovery, he called his most familiar Friends about him, telling them, That he
was plagued with this violent and desperate affliction for tormenting the Jews.
destroying the Temple, committing horrid Sacrilege, and contemning the True
God; But now he vowed if it pleased the Lord to restore him, he would become a
Jew, and do many great things for them, and would go through all the known
World to declare the power of God; Who knowing his hyprocrisy, continued to
plague him in a terrible manner* He had an intolerable pain and torment in his
bowels and inward paits from whence issued abundance of Worms continually
crawling out, so that he rotted above ground with such an intolerable stink,
that none could come near him, neither could himself endure it; And thus this
vile Person who had insolently boasted he would make Jerusalem a common Burying
place, and the streets thereof run with the Blood of Gods People, by his just
Judgment ended his life in extreme misery; Before his death he made Philip his
Chief Captain Governor of his Kingdom, requiring him to be very careful of his
Son Antiochus.

Then was Antiochus proclaimed King, and Surnamed Eupator; About which time the
Apostate Jews in garrison at Jerusalem did much mischief, slaying those
unawares who came to Worship and offer Sacrifices in the Temple; Judas hereupon
resolved to cut them off, and accordingly besieged the Fort with his Army, when
some of the beseiged escaping by night, went and desired Antiochus not to
suffer those to perish who for his Fathers sake had forsaken their God and
their Religion; who thereupon sent a mighty Army of an hundred thousand foot;
twenty thousand Horse, and thirty two Elephants under Lysias their Captain, to
relieve them, who sat down before Bethsura a strong City, but were valiantly
resisted by the inhabitants who fallied out and burnt the Engines prepared for
battery; Whereupon Judas raising his seige before the Castle of Jerusalem,
marched toward the Enemy, who preparing to meet him, Antiochus then present
caused his Elephants to march first through the narrow passage where Judas was
encamped, each Elephant having a thousand Foot and an hundred Horse for his
guard with a Tower on his back furni^^^ with Archers; The rest of his Forces
were ordere^^^ march by the Mountains, and with great shouts to a^^^l their
Enemies, and by uncovering their brazen and golden Bucklers to dazel the eyes
of the Jews; Yet was Judas no way disturbed, but encouraging his Army slew six
hundred of the Forlorn Hope; Eleazer the Brother of Judas seeing a huge
Elephant with Royal trappings, and judging the King was on him, having with a
noble courage slain those about him, thrust his Sword into the belly of the
Beast, who suddenly falling, slew him with his weight.

Judas observing the great strength of the Enemy, matched back to Jerus^lem,
Antiochus following him, and taking Bethsura by Treaty for want of provisions
and dispairing of relief, they having the Kings Oath that no violence should be
offered them, yet he thrust them out of the City and put a Garrison therein. He
lay long before the Temple of Jerusalem, the besieged defending it gallantly,
only they wanted Victuals the Land not having been tilled for seven years
before, whereupon diverse secretly fled, and few remained to defend the Temple,
when by Gods providence, Antiochus had news that Philip his Fathers Governor
was coming out of Persia to make himself Lord of his Country; Whereupon
Antiochus sent an Herald to Judas, promising the Jews peace and the liberty of
their Religion; Which Judas accepting, and taking the Kings Oath for the true
performance thereof, he surrendered up the Temple to Antiochus, who entering the
same, and finding it so impregnable a place, he contrary to his Oath commanded
the Wall that encompassed it to be levelled, and so returned to Antioch with
Onias the High Priest, whom by the counsel of Lysias be put to death, because
he had advised his Father to enforce the Jews to forsake their Religion; A just
reward for so wicked a Fact.

Philip having Conquered much of his Country, Antiochus marched against him,
fought with him and slew him. Soon after Demetrius Son of Seleucus took
Tripolis in Syria, and declaring himself King, invaded the Kingdom of
Antiochus, to whom the people generally submitting, seized on Antiochus and
Lysias, and bringing them to Demetrius he caused them to be slain; To this new
King, diverse Jews, banished for their impiety, together with Alcimus the High
Priest resorted, accusing Judas Maccabeus, his brethren, and the rest of the
Nation for killing their Friends, and banishing such as were for Demetrius; Who
much moved with these reports, sent a great Army under Bacchides a Valiant and
Experienced General to destroy Judas and his Confederates; He marching into
Judea sent to Judas pretending to make peace with him, who observing him to
have such strong Forces, would not trust to his false promises, though some of
the people did, having his Oath for their protection, but paid dear for their
credulity, for he slew threescore of them at one time. Then going from
Jerusalem he seized and put to death many Jews, commanding the rest to obey
Aleimus the High Priest, who by his feigned and familiar deportment drew many
wicked Jews to join with him, and then marched through the Country slaying all
who were for Judas, who seeing many upright men thus causlesly killed, he with
his Army went through the Land, and flew all the Apostates that were of Alcimus
his Faction; He thereupon going to Demetrius, made grievous complaints against
Judas, and showing how dangerous it would be to the State if he went thus on;
Demetrius thereupon sent an Army against Judas under Nicanor, commanding him
not to spare any one of the Nation of the Jews.

Nicanor coming to Jerusalem, offered no act of hostility, but endeavoring to
entrap Judas by subtilty, sent him a peaceable Message, protesting he de^gned
no injury, but came only to express the good affections of Demetrius to the
Jewish Nation. Judas and his Brethren deceived with these fair pretenses,
entertained him and his Army, and Nicanor saluting Judas, whilst they were in
discourse, he gave a sign to his Soldiers to seize him, but Judas discovering
the Treason, escaped from him, and got to his Army; Upon which Nicanor
proclaimed open War against him, and fought him near Caper-Salama, where ^e
obtained the Victory, and constrained Judas to re^etreat into the Fortress of
Jerusalem, where Nicanor ^esieged him a while, and then retired; At which time
certain of the Priests and Elders met him, and having given him reverence, they
showed him the Sacrifices they intended to offer to God for the Kings
prosperity; But Demetrius blaspheming, threatened them if they did not deliver
Judas into his hands, at his return he would destroy the Temple; Hereupon the
Priests wept abundantly, beseeching God to defend the Temple and his True
Worshipers from the outrage of their Enemies.

Nicanor coming near Bethhoron, received a great supply of Soldiers out of
Syria; Judas likewise was not far off with about a thousand men, yet exhorting
his Soldiers to trust in God, and not fear the multitude of their Enemies, he
courageously encountered Nicanor, where the Conflict was doubtful, yet at last
Judas had the advantage, killing a great number of his Enemies; Nicanor himself
fighting valiantly was slain, whereupon his Army fled, and Judas speedily
pursuing, made a great slaughter, and by sounding a Trumpet giving notice to
the Neighboring places, the Inhabitants armed themselves and killed those that
fled, so that not one escaped from this Battle, though they were at least Nine
thousand men; After this the Jews had some rest; But Alcimus the High Priest
intending to beat down the old Wall of the Sanctuary, was suddenly stricken by
God, became speechless, and fell to the ground, and having suffered grievous
torments many days he died miserably; Whereupon the People by general consent
chose Judas Maccabeus High Priest, who hearing of the great power and Victorys
of the Romans sent two Persons to Rome to make them his Allies and
Confederates, and to write to Demetrius to give over his Wars against the Jews.
These Ambassadors coming to Rome were entertained by the Senate, and an
Alliance was concluded upon these conditions, That none under the Romans should
War against the Jews nor furnish their Enemies with Victuals, Ships, nor
Silver; That if any made War on the Romans, the Jews should assist them; That
the Jews should neither add nor dimini^^ from this Association, without the
general consent of (...) Romans, and that what was thus concluded should
contit^ forever.

The death of Nicanor, and the loss of his Army being reported to Demetrius, he
sent another under Bacchides, who coming into Judea, and hearing tha^ Judas was
encamped at Bethzeth, he marched against him with twenty thousand Foot, and two
thousan^ Horse; Judas had not in all above two thousand me^^ who seeing the
vast number of their Foes were much afraid, so that many forsaking the Camp
fled away, an^ there remained with Judas only eight hundred me^ and his Enemies
pressed so hard on him that he l^^ no time to re-assemble his Forces, yet he
resolved (...) fight with that small handful, exhorting them to behav^
themselves valiantly; Who answering, That they we not able to make head against
so great an Army, advise^ him to retire, and stand on his guard till he had
re^^ enforced himself; Judas replied, God forbid that the (...) should see me
turn my back upon mine Enemies, though die and spend my last Blood in this
Battle, yet will I never blemish my former Worthy actions by an ignominious
flight And having again encouraged his Soldiers, he commanded them to use
their utmost courage again^ the Enemy without any apprehension of danger.

Bacchides marshalled his Army in Battalia, and ca^^sing the Trumpets to sound,
and his Soldiers to make (...) great Shout, he charged his enemies; Judas did
the like, and encountered Bacchides upon which there ensued a most bloody Fight
which continued till Sunset. Juda^^ perceiving that Bacchides and the flower
of his Army fought in the right wing, drew his most resolute Souldier^ thither,
who brake in upon them, and forcing them to fly, pursued them to Mount Aza; But
the left wing followed Judas and enclosed him on the back part, so that finding
himself in much danger, he with his Followers resolved to sell their lives
dearly and fight it out to the last; He slew a great number of his Enemies,
^ill at length he was so wearied with killing that he ^ell to the ground and
was there slain, upon which his ^ew remaining companions betook themselves to
flight, Simeon, and Jonathan his Brothers recovered his Body and buried it at
Modin, all the people weeping and making great lamentation for the death of so
valiant (...) Commander, for whatsoever Virtue has of great, whatsoever valor
has of generous met in the person of Judas Maccabeus to make a Marvel of his
life, and give ^mmortal memory to his Name. In the space of six years be
sustained the great and prodigious Forces of three Kings of Asia as you have
heard, opposing himself with a little flying Camp, against Armies of forty,
sixty, an hundred thousand men which he put into disorder and confusion; He
defeated nine Generals of the Infidels in ranged battles and combats, killing
some with his own hands, and carrying away their Spoils, so that of all his
great Qualities, Valor always held, the upper rank, and worthily entitled him
to the name of a Worthy.

The History of Arthur King of Britain. The Seventh Worthy of the World.
portrait of King Arthur

Arthur the Great and Worthy British King
Glory and Victory to his Realm did bring.
He the Heathen Saxons often overcame,
Inducing them to own the Christian Name.
He while he lived upheld the Sinking State,
And Conquest seemed upon him still to wait,
His Subjects Love he thereby does attain,
And he must choose one after him to Reign.
The Pictish King this Choice does much resent
As if to wrong him of his Rights they meant
Both Kings engage in Fight, where both Kings died
With Thousands of their Subjects on each side.
THe British Writers have related such Strange and Miraculous Actions and
Adventures of this Wor^hy Prince, that many Intelligent Men have been apt to
think that all which has been written of his Heroicks deeds is mere Fiction
and Invention, yea some are of opinion that there never was any such Person,
but though Historians disagree about times and places, some writing carelessly
and others superstitiously, yet they all agree upon the Predecessors and
Successors of this Noble King, but as it is most execrable Infidelity to doubt
that there was a Joshua; Wicked Atheism to question if there were a David, and
unreasonable to deny the being of Judas Maccabcus; As it may be judged folly to
affirm there was never any Alexander, Julius Caesar, Godfrey of Bullen or
Charlemagne, so we may be thought guilty of incredulity and ingratitude to deny
or doubt the honorable Acts of our Victorious Arthur. This is premised in
vindication of our Hero, and his immortal name and fame, whereby he justly
gained the Title of the Seventh Worthy of the World. Now to his History.

After this Kingdom had for above four hundred and eighty years been subject to
the Romans which began by the Conquest that Julius Caesar made here in the
Reign of Cassibelan King of the Britains seventeen years before the birth of
our Blessed Savior, and ended in the time of the Emperor Gratianus, three
hundred seventy six years after Christ; Vortigern of the blood Royal of the
British Kings, by usurpation, and the Murder of Constance the Son of
Constantius, seized upon the Crown, who growing odious and hateful to his
Subjects both for his wicked life and ill got Sovereignty, he was forced to
send to Germany for the Saxons to aid and support him; The Saxons at this time
possessed the third part of Germany, holding all the Countries between the River
Rhine and Elbe, bounded on the North by the Baltic Sea and the Ocean, and
governed by twelve Princes who elected a Sovereign Leader and General in time
of War; This being so sparious, populous and near a Country, well furnished
with Shipping, which the Britains wanted, yielded always plentiful supplies to
the undertakers of this action who were first Two brothers Hengist and Horsa;
After they had continued here a while as hired Soldiers, and observed the
weakness both of Prince and People, their number daily increased; At first they
had only the Isle of Thanet allowed them to inhabit, but soon after the whole
County of Kent was made over to them upon condition they should defend the Land
against the Picts and Scots; And in short time greater privileges were granted
them upon Vortigerns marrying the daughter of Hengist an exceeding beautiful
Lady, who was brought over on purpose to steal away the heart of a dissolute
Prince, so that by tha^ alliance, and the fruitfulness of the Country so many
(...) this populous and Military Nation came in, that Kent i^ a little while
grew too narrow for them, and Hengist (...) extend their power into all parts
of the Kingdom, persuaded Vortigern to plant a Colony of them in the Nort^
beyond Humber, to be a continual guard against all invasions on that side;
Which being granted he sends for Occa his Brother and his Son Ebusa to manage
that design and hereby the Saxons came to possess Kent and Northum beland,
which contained all the Country from the Rive^ Humber to Scotland.

And now of Servants they became Masters, contem^ing their Entertainers, and
committing many insolences, whereupon the British Nobility combine together
and resolve to depose Vortigern, the Author of this inconsiderate admission of
Strangers, and to choose Vortimer (...) Son in his stead, a Prince of great
worth, who while he lived gave them many fierce encounters; but all prevailed
not, for the Saxons being possessed of the chief Ga^^ of the Land which lay open
to their own Country (...) receive continual supplies from thence without
resistan^^ had the advantage to weary them all out at last; And beside force
they are said to have used treachery in murdering three hundred of the
British Nobility at Ansbury (where they innocently met to treat of a peace
with them) took their King Prisoner, and would not release ^im, but upon
granting them three Provinces more; Also the long life of Hengist, a Politic
General, who ^ved almost forty years, made much for the settling their Dominion
here, which was not effected without a great deal of labor and much effusion
of ^loud.

For the Britains being by continual Wars made ex^ert in Military discipline,
grew at length so enraged to ^e their Country ravished from them by
Foreigners, that they sold their Liberties and Inheritance at a very ^ear rate.

Wherein much must be attributed to the courage and gallantry of their Leaders
from whom the Spirit and alour of a people does usually proceed, of whom none
^re more worthy to be remembered than Aurelius Ambrosius ^e last of the Romans,
and our worthy Prince Arthur ^e Noblest of the Britains; A man in conduct and
va^ur almost above a man, and worthy of eternal memo^y, who while he stood,
bore up the sinking state of his ^ountrey. He was the Son of Vter Pendragon by
the ^ir Igrene, and during his life had continual War ^ith the Saxons and the
Picts and Scots who were some^^mes confederate with them; In the beginning of
his ^eign the two Kings of these two Nations seemed to envy ^s advancement to
the Crown of Britain, Loath King (...) the Picts having married the elder
sister of Aurelius ^mbrosius, and Vortigern, and Conran King of Scots ^^e
younger, and because Arthur was begot out of wed^ck, though his Mother was
after married to Vter ^^ey thought it more reasonable the Kingdom should de^end
to their Sisters Son than to him; Whereupon Loath ^^nt Ambassadors to the
British Lords and Nobility re^iring that according to the ancient Laws, and
Cus^^ms of this Realm they should receive him as King who and Married the
Sister and Heir of the two brethren Am^osius and Vter their last Kings. The
Erittains received ^is Message with great scorn, disdaining to think of
sub^iting to a stranger, and dispatching the Ambassadors ^ith many reproaches
against Loath and the Picts they proclaimed Arthur King of the Realm who raising
a potent Army marched instantly against the Saxons, hoping to engage them
before the Picts should join, which doubtless they would do suddenly; Having
therefore procured more aid from Armorica, or little Britain in France, they
met with the Saxons within ten Miles of London, whom they vanquished in two set
battles, and obliged them to pay Tribute, and receive such Governors over them
as Arthur should appoint, with several other very hard conditions, to the great
rejoicing of the Britains for such prosperous and happy success under their
new elected King.

After this the Britains easily took London, where Arthur continued for some
time in consultation with his Nobility and Commanders how they should proceed
it their Wars against the rest of the Saxons; Having a^ length prepared a
mighty Army, Arthur resolved to ge^ against those beyond Humber in the North,
with whom the Picts had concluded a League, whereby they were obliged to assist
each other against their Common Enemies the Britains. Arthur marching into
Yorkshire, encamped near the Enemy, who were already joined together, and
resolving to fight the next day, he appointed Howel Commander of the French
Britains to engage the Picts, while himself dealt with the Saxons; The battle
was very furious, and for some time the Victory was doubtful, but at length the
Picts were put to flight which the Saxons perceiving, and thinking themselves
unable to bear the whole Force of the Britains, they likewise left the Field,
and fled with all speed toward York Arthur pursuing them, beseiged that City
almost three months, the Saxons valiantly defending it, and making brisk
sallies upon the Besiegers, but at length provisions growing very scarce, they
were just ready to have surrendered, when notice was given them, that a strong
Army of Picts and Saxons were coming to their relief together with Occa who
escaping into Germany from the last battle, was newly arrived with fresh Forces
in the River of Humber, whereupon the Saxons refused to treat any further, not
doubting but the Britains would be quickly forced to raise the seige, and be
glad to get off with their own lives.

Arthur having Intelligence of these Succors, and judging it no wisdom to stay
for their coming, considering how many of his Soldiers were diseased and sick
by lying so long in the Field, raised his seige, and went into Wales, where
leaving the French Britains to quarter that Winter, he with his choice Troops
marched to London to prevent any disturbance from the Kentish Saxons, or
others. In the Spring having mustered his Forces he proceeded against Colgern
and Occa the two Saxon Generals, who coming out of Northumberland was^ed and
destroyed the British borders with their usual Cruelty; Whereupon Arthur
encountering them twice in ^attel, overcame in both, and then again beseiging
York (...) at length got possession thereof by means of a Britain, who living
among the Saxons within the City, privately ^et in some Britains in the dead
of the night, who breaking open the gates, gave entrance to the whole Army;
Arthur would not suffer many of the Saxons to be slain, but ^ardoned all who
begged quarter, thereby to gain a repuation of Clemency amongst his adversaries.
The Britains having thus gotten York, many skirmishes happened between them and
the Saxons thereabout, but Winter ^oming on, they gave up themselves to
drinking, banuetring, and other voluptuous pleasures, so that when they harcht
into the Field next Summer, they were unable to ^ndure the labors and Fatigues
of War, and for several ears performed very little Service.

At length Arthur concluded a League with Loath King of ^icts whereby it was
agreed, That Arthur during his life ^ould be King of Britain, and after his
discease, the King^on should descend to Mordred the eldest son of Loath, and his
^eirs; That the Picts should at all times assist the Britains against the
Saxons, and should freely possess all such Lands as ^bey recovered from them
beyond the River Humber. that they should duly observe the League which was
ma^^ between them and the Scots; That Mordred should marry the Daughter of
Gawolan a Noble Britain; and next to Arthur himself; That the Children of this
marriage should be brought up by their Grandfather in Britain till they came
to years of discretion. That Gawan the Brother of Mordred should serve King
Arthur in his Wars, for which he should receive large possessions and rewards.
Arthur having concluded this League, and being desirous to purge this Island of
the Heathenish Saxons, he sent to the Kings of Scotland and Pictland, requiring
them; That for the advancement of Christ's Religion which they professed and
owned they should forthwith assembl^ their Forces, and meet him at Tynmouth at
a day appointed, that so they might join together and march against their
common Enemies the Saxons. These two Kings presently consented to this so
reasonable request, and in a few days meeting with the Britains, they
presently marched altogether against the Saxons, whom they understood were
already in the Field under Occa their General, ready to receive them Both
Armies approaching each other, Colgern Duke (...) Northumberland rid up to the
very Front of the Picts Army where he severely reproached Loath and his Nobility
(...) their breach of Friendship with the Saxons, and told the^ he did not
doubt but suddenly to see some just judgmen^ fall upon them for their Treachery
and Falsehood, (...) thus joining with their former Enemies against the^ most
trusty Friends and constant Allies

The Pictish King being mayed hereat, commande^ his Standards to advance,
neither were the Saxons id^^ so that the Skirmish began, which Arthur
perceiving commanded the Brittans to engage, so that there immediately followed
a terrible slaughter; The Scots in the right wing killing Childrick an eminent
Saxon Captain quickly discomfited them on that side, Colgern earnesly desiring
to be revenged of King Loath, rushed in up him with such violence that at the
first encounter threw him to the ground, but instantly two Pictish Heremen
coming on one side of Colgern ran him quite throu^^ the body, Loath soon
recovered himself, but Colgern be^ dead, his men were so disheartened that they
present ran away; Arthur perceiving the main battle of (...) Saxons was now
left naked, pressed ^n so violently up Ocea, that having received a desperate
wound, (...) escaped out of the battle, but being at length brought to the Sea
side, he got into a Ship and escaped into Germany; This Victory being thus
obtained, the Saxons were forced to submit themselves to King Arthur, who
offered them pardon as to life and goods if they would turn Christians, and
never hereafter engage against their Neighbors the Britains, Scots, and
Picts, which if they would not consent to, he commanded them that leaving their
Arms and goods behind they should upon pain of death depart the Kingdom within
fourteen days; Hereupon many Saxons went over to Germany, others pretending to
be Christians still remained, hoping for better fortune; Several who continued
after the time appointed, and refused to be baptized were put to death
according to the proclamation, so that very few were thought to profess he
Christian Faith sincerely.

All things thus quieted in Northumberland, Arthur repaired several Churches in
York and other places, which had been ruined and defaced by the barbarous
Infidels; Next year he had notice, that the Saxons who inhabited the Isle of
Wight joining with those in Kent had fallen upon the Britains on that side the
Thames, killing and destroying a great number of them, whereat being much
moved, he hasted toward Lonaon with his Forces, resolving utterly to root out
the East and South Saxons since his Subjects could never be secure so long as
that wicked generation remained amongst them. In pursuance of the League he had
Twenty Thousand Picts and Scots in this expedition; Eugenius Nephew to King
Congal, and Mordred Son of King Loath being their General. Then marching forward
he encamped in the Field near the Thames, and himself with some of his Nobility
going to London caused prayers to be made to Almighty God three days together
for their good success against the Saxons, on the fourth day Divine Service
being celebrated by the Bishop of London, and a Sermon preached in the Market
place, he committed himself and his whole Army to the tuition and protection of
Jesus Christ, and then issuing out of the City, he exhorted his Soldiers to be
of good courage since they were to fight in a just quarrel against Pagans and
the implacable enemies of the Christian Faith.

Morderd, and Gawolan his Father in Law marched in the front with five thousand
Horse, and being come within five miles of the Saxons Camp, there came
Ambassadors to King Arthur desiring him not to proceed any further, since if he
pleased they were willing to depart the Land with their goods and substance
without further molesting the Britains ever hereafter. But Arthur would not
consent hereto, neither would so much as allow them a Truce for three days,
which they earnestly desired, only he told them that he would not march above
two miles that day, so that if they came again next morning he would in the
mean time consult with his Nobility and Captains what answer to give to their
request. Whilst the Britains were busied about the news these Ambassadors
brought, the Saxons suddenly marching out of their Camp fell with much violence
upon the Forces of Mordred and Gawolan, of whom they killed a great number in
that surprise, though by their exhortations their men made the utmost
resistance so small a company could against the multitude of their Enemies, by
whom being at length oppressed they were forced to fly, not resting till they
came to the rest of the Army; Mordred and Gawolan by the help of fresh Horses
made their escape without hurt though many of their followers were killed in
the Fight and Chase.

The Saxon Ambassadors being not yet gone out of the Camp, were hereupon
secured till next morning, and then sent back with this answer; That the
Britains were resolved for the future never to treat with any Messengers free
the Saxons about Peace, since it is apparent they designed nothing but
treachery and falsehood, having contrary to the Laws of Ar^^ unworthily fallen
upon the British Ferces, whilst their Ambassadors pretended to make an
Accommodation, that therefore they should expect nothing from Arthur but the
utmost reveng and the most cruel Severities of War in recompense of their
wicked infidelity. They had no sooner received this answer, but forty other of
the Principal Saxons arrived, who endeavored to excuse what had happened over
night, laying all the blame on some few rash heady fellows, who knew nothing of
the proceedings of the Commanders of the Army, nor of their sending Ambassadors
to them.

But Arthur suspecting this to be another subtle trick of the Saxons, commanded
these Messengers as well as the former to be secured in the Marshals Tent;
whilst he himself in the second Watch of the night marched privately against
the Enemy, dividing his Army into three parts; and having goue about three
miles they fell upon the Saxons Out-guards e're they were aware, which caused
such a tumult and confusion amongst them, one calling and crying out upon
another, that the most valiant among them were dismayed. Mordred desirous to
revenge his last overthrow, fell in fiercely among them; But some having by
this time armed themselves made resistance, defending themselves amidst the
Carts and Carriages, and thereby for a while stopped the violence of the
Britains, others unable to resist, broke out of the Camp and fled, but being
pursued by the British Horse a great number perished in the next River, choosing
drowning rather than to fall into the hands of their merciless Adversaries, who
that day gave no Quarter. It was thought this Bloody Battle, and so great a
slaughter of such a multitude of Saxons would have utterly disabled them that
they should never after have been troublesome to the Britains. Arthur having
thus vanquished his Enemies, dismissed all the Ambassadors in his Camp, upon
condition they would return back to Germany, but suffered the rest of the
meaner Saxons to remain still in the Land, provided they would turn Christians,
and pay a yearly Tribute. The Scots and Picts who had assisted him in this War
he treated with much State and Magnificence at London, giving them all possible
respect and honor, and dismissing them with rich Presents and Princely rewards.

It is written of King Arthur, that in one Battle against the Saxons with his
Sword named Callibourn he slew above eight hundred of them, if it be possible
to be true. In twelve set Battles besides Skirmishes, he is said to have
returned Victor from the slaughter of the Saxons; The names of which places are
said to be. The first at the mouth of the River Gleyn; The second, third,
fourth, and fifth near the River Douglas in Lenox. The sixth at the River
Bassus; The seventh in the Wood Calidon; The eight near the Castle of Guinien.
The ninth at Carlion in Wales; The tenth by the Seaside in a place called
Rithwood. The eleventh upon a Hill named Agued Cathergain; The twelfth at Bath
or Bathen Hill.

Whilst these things were acted in Britain, Conranus King of Scotland was
Murdered in his Bedchamber, by the Treason of Donald Governor of Athol, in
the twentieth year of his Reign and the sixteenth of Arthurs Dominion over
Britain; After whom succeeded Eugenius his Nephew; About this time some
Authors ascribe to Arthur the obtaining of many glorious Victories against the
Irish, Danes, Norwegians and other Northern Nations, yea some affirm that he
subdued most part of Germany, the Low Countries, Normandy, France, the Romans,
and the people of the East, the credit whereof seems very doubtful. Only it is
certain (as Hector Boethius affirms) that Arthur lived in the days of Justinian
the Emperor, about which time the Goths, Vandals, Burgonians and French invaded
and ruined diverse parts of the Roman Empire, yet we find no mention of K.
Arthur acting any thing among them.

But notwithstanding his wonderful Achievements, it is related Lucius Hiberus
the Roman Legate demanded of him a Tribute for Britain, which he not only
denied but also threatend to have a Tribute from Rome, as appears by his
Letters sent to the Senate to this purpose. Understand you of Rome that I am
King Arthur of Britain, and freely it hold and shall hold, and at Rome hastily
will I be not to give you Truage, (or Tribute) but to require Truage of you,
for Constantine who was Hellens Son, and other of my Ancestors Conquered Rome,
and thereof were Emperors, and what they had I hope to recover by Gods grace;
And accordingly (says the story) he set forward against Lucius Hiberius, who
with great power and vain confidence came marching against him, where after a
long and bloody fight the Romans were discomfited, their General killed, and
his slain Body sent to the Senate for a Tribute from Britain.

King Arthur to increase the Courage of his Soldiers is said to have instituted
the Order of the Knights of the Round Table, to which none were admitted, but
such of the Nobility as were most renowned for Virtue and Courage, they were in
all the number of one hundred and fifty, the Chiefest of them being Sir
Lancelot, S^r Tristram, Sir Lamrock, Sir Gawin and others. They were all
recorded for Knights of great Renown, and had not King Arthurs Valor been most
transcendent each of them might have passed for no less than a Worthy. These
things are related of him of which the Reader may credit as much as he please.
To pass therefore these questionable matters, let us proceed to what is more
certain.

After the Britains were delivered from the terror of the Saxons, and had for
some time enjoyed peace and quietness, they grew Rich and Wealthy, and then
began to repent of the League they had made with Loath King of the Picts,
whereby it was agreed that Mordred his Son should succeed, they now resolving
that no Forreigner should Reign over them, and therefore addressing themselves
unanimously to King Arthur, they humbly beseech him since he had no Sons to
nominate a Successor of their own Nation to govern them after his decease;
Arthur finding it in vain to contradict this their resolution, since they
absolutely refused to be ruled by a Stranger, advised them to find out one of
the Bloud-Royal themselves, whom for his Wisdom, Valor, and Nobility they were
willing should Reign over them, and he for his part promised to ratify and
confirm their Election. The Nobility and Commons thereupon met together with
great joy, and at length agreed upon Constantine the Son of Cador Duke of
Cornwall, a virtuous and comely young Gentleman, and induced with all Princely
qualities; who being brought by the Peers of the Realm into the Council Chamber
and presented to Arthur, he gladly accepted their Choice, and forthwith caused
Constantine to be Proclaimed Heir Apparent to the Crown by the name of Prince
of Britain; who being thus preferred, behaved himself with that discretion and
gallantry, that the Britains entertained a very high opinion of his worth and
future Government.

Mean time Loath King of the Picts deo^asing, Mordred his Son succeeded him, who
hearing that Constantine was proclaimed Prince, was much disturbed and sent
Ambassadors to Arthur to complain that contrary to the honor of a King he by
proclaiming Constantine his Heir had broken the League between himself and his
Father, and endeavored to defeat him of his rightful Inheritance; desiring him
not so easily to consent to the persuasions of the Britains, as thereby to
violate the Laws both of God and man, and admonishing him yet to observe the
League which he had solemnly sworn to, and to persuade his Subjects to do the
like, lest they should provoke the wrath of Almighty God against them who is a
just revenger of the breach of all Oaths, Leagues, and Covenants. To this the
Nobles of Britain answered, That the League concluded between Arthur and Loath
endered but for their Lives, and was determined upon the death of either of
them, and therefore Arthur had done nothing but according to the duty of a
Prince who tendered the peace and happiness of his Subjects in providing one of
their own Nation to succeed him, thereby to prevent the Realm from falling into
the hands of strangers, which they could by no means suffer. Therefore if the
Picts loved their Weal and Security, it would be good for them to be contented
with their own Bounds and Dominions, since if they should attempt to gain other
men's Estates and Territories they would be forced in a short time to see the
mischievous Consequences of such ill advised undertakings,

The Ambassadors of Pictland returning with this Answer, the whole Nation were
so stirred with indignation, that they resolved immediately to revenge their
wrongs by open War; But first they endeavored to procure the Scots to assist
them, and sending Ambassadors to Eugenius then King of Scotland, he readily
agreed to their requests upon pretense that some Scotch Rebels who fled to
Arthur were received by him, and likewise suffered to make In roads into
Scotland. Arthur having notice of these Transactions, and War being Proclaimed
against him, he first secured the Sea coasts with cons^derable forces to
prevent the Landing of the Saxons if they should attempt it. And then marched
with the rest of his Army as far as the River Humber, near the Banks whereof he
pitched his Tents, (a place formerly fatal for the overthrow of the Britains)
expecting the Scots and Picts, who in a short time came up to them, and both
Armies were in sight ready to engage each other, when certain Bishops of all
the three Nations riding to and fro, took great pains to persuade the Kings to
Peace and Concord, especially since what they were going to try with the Sword,
and the loss of much Blood and many Lives, might as well be composed by an
Amicable and Friendly Agreement; Neither could they better gratify the Saxons,
the common Enemies to the Christian Religion than by weakening and destroying
each other to make way for them to Conquer all together.

Mordred and Eugenius were induced by these carnest exhortations to refer the
differences to some indifferent Persons, and presently to lay down their arms
upon assurance that the League with King Loath should be faithfully observed.
Arthur was also content for his part to have agreed thereto, but the other
Britains, especially the Kindred and Allies of Constantine, utterly refused
it, and gave diverse reproachful words to the Bishops for their unseasonable
interposing, since they were already ranged in battle, so that it might be
doubted they designed to betray their Army to their Enemies under pretense of
an unprofitable agreement. After this both Parties engaged with great fury, but
the Britains had such disadvantage by the place where they stood, which was
full of Mire, Bogs, and Mosses, that they could neither advantagiously defend
themselves nor offend their Enemies, yet the Battle continued a long time with
the slaughter of so many men that the river Humb^r near which it was fought
grew red with blood, and carried a multitude of dead bodies into the Sea. In
the heat of the sight a subtle Scot cried out with a loud voice in the British
tongue, that Arthur and most of his Nobility were slain, and it was therefore
in vain to resist any longer or hope for Victory, but better for every man to
shift for himself and endeavor to make his escape.

This news wonderfully encouraged the Scots and Picts, but the Britains were
so much astonished at it that the greatest partinstant^, fled away; Others
judging it only a crafty device to discourage them continued to make the utmost
resistance, till they were overpowred and almost every man slain. This Victory
was veryhardly got, and cost more lives than any other for many years before,
for of the Scots and Picts who won the Field there were killed above Twenty
Thousand, together with King Mordred, and abundance of the Nobility of both
Nations; Of the Britains and their confederates in the fight and pursuit above
thirty thousand fell, and among them King Arthur himself, and Gawan brother to
Mordred who had such an entire affection for his Lord and Master Arthur, that
he fought courageously on his side that day against his own brother Mordred.
Gawan and most part of the British Nobility were likewise slain. Next day the
Camp was plundered, and among other rich spoils Guyniver King Arthurs Wife, with
a great number of other Ladys and Gentlewomen were taken Prisoners, though she
and some others were afterward redeemed upon ransom. This Bloody Battle was
fought in the year of our Lord 542. the 26 year of the reign of King Arthur,
and so much weakened both the Picts, Scots and Britains, that they could not
recover their losses in man, years. The same year many strange Prodigies were
seen. The Grass and Herbs in Yorkshire were stained with Blood; Near Camelon a
Cow brought forth a Calf with two heads; and an Ewe brought forth a Lamb of
both Sexes; The Sun for several days appeared like Blood; The Sky was full of
bright Stars at noon diverse days together. In Wales there was a Battle between
the Crows and Magpies on one side, and the Ravens on the other, and great
slaughter was made on each side.

The Body of this famous Worthy was buried at Glassenbury in Somersetshire in
the Church yard, and discovered in the reign of King Henry the second, who
being informed by a Welsh Ministrel that could sing many Historys in Welsh of
the Acts of the ancient Britains, declared that Arthurs Body was there buried
Sixteen foot deep between two Pillars lest his Enemies the Saxons should have
found him, Henry caused the place to be dug up; After they had dug about
seven Foot, they found a mighty broad Stone with a leaden Cross fastened to
that part which lay downward, with this Inscription. Hic jacet Sepultus,
inclytus Rex Arthurus in Insulae Avaloniae; Here lies the renowned King Arthur
in the Isle of Avalonia; His Body was enclosed in a great Tree made hollow,
whith being opened, his Bones appeared of a very great bigness, his Shinbone
reached above the knee of a very tall man, his skull was so large that the
place between his eyes was a span broad, in which there appeared some signs of
wounds and bruises; The Body of his wife Gynever was likewise buried with him,
the Hair of her head was curiously plaited and shined like burnisht Gold, but
being touched instantly fell to dust. The Abbot who by the Kings command
searched for the Grave, removed both their Bones to the great Church and there
buried them in a sair double Tomb of Marble, laying the Body of the King at the
head thereof, and the Queen's at the feet, above six hundred years after they
were first buried, and in the year of our Lord. 1191. I shall conclude the life
of this, Worthy Prince with an Ephitaph written in me ^^ry of him by John
Leland a Monk in Latin, and translated into English many years since by
Nicholas Roscock which you shall have in the Poetry of those times.

Saxonicas toties qui fudit Mart cruento
Turmas, and peperit spoliis sibi nomen opimis, etc.
Who vanquished the Saxon Troops
With Battles bloody broils
And purchas't to himself a name,
With Warlike Wealthy Spoils
Who with his shivering shining Sword
The Picts so often dismayed,
And an unweildy servile Yoke
On Necks of Scots has laid.
Who Frenchmen puffed with pride, and who
The Germans fierce in fight
Discomfited; and beat the Danes
With strong and martial might.
Who of that murdering Mordred did
The Vital breath expel
That horrid, cruel, Monster great,
That bloody Tyrant fell.
Here liveless Arthur lies entombed
Within this stately Hearse,
Famous for Strength and Chivalry
And against his Enemies fierce.
Whose glorious Acts and Victories
Through all the World do fly,
And whose most worthy Fame and Name
Does reach the very Sky.
Therefore you Noble Progeny
Of British Line and Race
Never forget your Emperor Great
Of thrice renowned Grace.
But place upon his sacred Tomb
Your Rosy Garlands gay
Whose fragrant smell may witness well
Your duties you display.
Grass and He^ (...)
Near Camelon (...)
The Hist. of Charles the Great K. of France and Emp. of Germany; The Eight
Worthy of the World.
portrait of Charlemagne

HE well deserved the name of Charlemagne
That to such mighty Glory did attain,
Who all his Enemies having overcome,
Was owned and Crowned Great Emperor of Rome*
Virtue and Valor he still mixed so well,
'Twas hard to say in which he did excel.
The Christian Faith he always did defend,
And against Saracens did often contend.
The Huns and Pagans too he conquered,
His name alone filled them with fear and dread,
Yet all his fury he laid by, if they
Would Idols leave and the True God obey;
THE Ancient French Historians relate, that the original Habitation of this now
Potent Nation was in that part of Germany which lay nearest Gaul, now called
France, and having together with the Romans obtained a great victory against
the Alans, Enemies to the Empire in the Reign o^ Valentinian they got
possession of a great part of Gaul as a fruit of their Conquest, which they
held by their Sword not doing any homage for it but to their own valor.
Pharamond laid the first Stone in the Building of this great Monarchy, Clodion
prosecuted this design; Merovee made it appear above ground, Clovis adding the
profession of Christ to his own and Predecessors valor, so won the Hearts of
the Gauls, the Natives of this Country who were generally Christians, that he
procured voluntary obedience from them, and an assured possession of his new
Conquests, uniting both Nations into one, and giving Law to the Conquered with
such wisdom and discretion, that the name of France was generally received in
Gaul. The race of Pharamond continued successively in France during the Reign
of one and Twenty Kings for about one hundred and twenty years; At which time
nine or ten Idle Kings (as the French History calls them) succeeding each
other, the Kingdom was thereby reduced to a multitude of dangers and
inconveniences which gave occasion to Charles Martel to lay the Foundation of a
new race of Kings from his own Posterity, who being first Mayor or Governor of
the Palace, was chosen Prince of the French, and upon this account is reckoned
the 22 King of France; He was a man of great wisdom and courage, and managed
all A^^^rs of War and State during the Reigns of the three last Kings.

In the time of Thierry the Second, the Saracens or Turks issuing out of Asia
into Africa and Spain, possessed themselves of many mighty Kingdoms and Provinces
under the command of Abderamen their King, and afterward invaded France with an
Army of four hundred thousand men, but by the admirable conduct and valor of
Martel, this vast multitude was utterly vanquished, three hundred seventy five
thousand Barbarians being slain in the Field, and their King found dead in a
heap of Carcasses not wounded but smothered by the multitude that fled, the
French lost fifteen hundred, and among them many of their Nobility and Gentry;
The Care and Toil of great Affairs, together with his Age having much broken
Martel, and the weakness of Childerick, the last King of the first Race giving
him encouragement, he resolves so to dispose of things as to leave the Kingdom
to his Children, and therefore observing that Childerick loved no man neither
any man him, and that Pepin Ins own Son was beloved of all both for his own and
Martels sake, as the Protector of their Liberty, whereas Childerick did not
regard the common good but spent his time in folly and voluptuousness; Martel
therefore at his death left France to the Government of Pepin whom he knew to
be stout, and of a great Spirit. After his death the Friends of Pepin
proclaimed his merits in all places; but Religion, and the Reverence and
Devotion the French Nation naturally bear to Kings seemed to be insuperable
difficulties to his advancement to the Crown; Childerick had already Reigned
nine years, only in appearance, under Martel, and four more under Pepin, who to
remove the last scruple, represented to the People, that their Allegiance was
vowed to true Kings and not to Kings in imagination and disguise, that they
were sworn to maintain a Religious, Just, Merciful, Diligent and Active King,
able to withstand their Enemies, to punish the wicked, to defend the good, and
to protect the Christian Law; according to the express words the French Kings
are Sworn to in their Coronation Oath; Why then should they think themselves
bound to a vicious King who was negligent and careless of himself and his
Subjects, since the Con^^ct between them was limited, and the French were only
obliged to obey him, who being endued with many Royal Virtues, persorms the
Office of a true King. These reasons were plain, and easily received by all men
as absolutely necessary for the common good, though most of thera who seemed
thus convinced had an Eye to their particular advantage by the favor of Pepin.
As to the scruple of Religion how they could be dispensed from their Oath of
Allegiance, Pepin assuring himself of good Friends at Rome, sends thither two
Bishops to Pope Zachary to represent to him the present State of France; who
being truly informed of the weakness of Childerick, who was hated and contemned
of all men, and of the general resolution of the French to receive Pepin, but
chiefly moved with hopes of great Assistance from him against the Lombards his
Capital Enemies; He discharged the French from their Oath of Obedience to
Childerick and all his Race.

Being thus freed from their Allegiance, they Assemble the General Estates,
where it was concluded, That to avoid that Confusion in the Realm which was
apparently grown by the negligence of former Kings, Childerick should be
rejected, and Pepin chosen; The one unworthy to reign by reason of his Vices,
and the other most worthy to be K. for his Royal Virtues; But lest the
Fundamental Law of Succession should be directly infringed and broken, they
derive the race of Pepin from Clovis the great King of France, to whom he was
acknowledged next Heir both by Succession and Virtue. The Assembly hereupon
commanded Boniface Archbishop of Mentz to declare to Pepin, That in regard of
his Virtues and their future hope of his worthy Government the French had by a
free and gener al consent elected him King. And in prosecution of this Decree,
Pepin was instantly Crowned by the said Archbishop, and then being raised upon
a Target or Shield, he was carried about the Assembly according to an ancient
Ceremony of the French; And by Virtue of the same Decree, Childerick was
deposed as unworthy of the Crown, and afterward degraded, shaven, and confined
to a Monastery, there to pass the remainders of his days. This Pepin called the
Short, the Twenty third King of France, having reigned eighteen years with much
glory and the great love and affection of his Subjects (the strongest
Foundation upon which a Prince can build his Authority) died in the year 768.

After his death the Estates of France being assembled, concluded to divide the
Realm between his two Sons, Charles or Charlemagn the Elder, and Caroloman the
Younger; Charles being Crowned at Worms, and Caroloman at Soissons; Writers
have not set down the bounds of their Dominions, since three years after their
Fathers death the whole Kingdom came to Charles; Brothers they were of
different humors, who by equality of power endangered the ruin of the Monarchy,
had not divine Providence united it in the Person of this great Prince Charles;
He was endued with excellent gifts both of body and mind, of a Virtuous
conversation, and above all carefully educated in the Christian Religion, for
which he had much reverence all his life; Charity, Temperance, Equity, and
Justice in relieving his People, Fidelity to all, and Modesty in using
Victorles, were the admirable effects of his knowledge, and as remarkable in
him as in any Prince whatever; He naturally loved Learning and Learned men,
having been instructed in the Greek and Latin Tongues, and likewise in
Philosophy and the Mathematics, which Sciences he termed his Pastimes, and the
Companions of his Sword, wherewith he often diverted himself. He took delight in
Poetry, as some of his writings witness, but especially in Histories, wherein
he was exceeding well read; In Arms his Father Pepin was his Schoolmaster,
under whom he had great Commands which he discharged with such reputation that
he well deserved the name of Great both for his Valor and Virtue; There
appeared in his Countenance a grave sweet Majesty, in Personage he was Tall,
Strong, and Patient of labor, of a clear Spirit, a sound Apprehension, Memory
and Judgment, which never failed him in difficulties, terrible to some, and
pleasing to others, according to the occasion; These Virtues gained him so much
Repute that he was Beloved, Respected, and Obeyed of all men, and having
received a great Kingdom from his Father, he enlarged it with wonderful
success; Charles ^^rtel, Pepin, and this Great Charles seeming to have been
raised up after each other to preserve the Christian name amidst the deluge of
barbarous Nations, and the ruin of the Roman Empire.

Caroloman was exceeding jealous of his Brothers greatness, whom with grief he
saw honored, obeyed and beloved by all the French, which caused him to
endeavor as much as possible to countermine his designs, who had his eye upon
Italy as the most proper Theater for his valor; For after the death of Pepin
the Church of Rome, fell into great confusions by the practices of Didier King
of Lombardy, who having corrupted some of the Clergy caused Constantine brother
to the Duke of Nepezo, (his creature and trusty friend) to be chosen Pope, and
Phillipicus already elected to be violently deposed; The other party resolving
not to be imposed on by Didier, by common consent choose Stephen the Third a
Sicilian to the Popedom, who resolves to call in the King of France to his
assistance, upon which Charles first sends twelve Prelates to Rome to
strengthen his party who unanimously confirm the Election of Stephen, and
depose Constantine raised by force and disorder; Though Didier resolved not to
be controlled, yet cunningly dissembling his thoughts, he sends to congratulate
the Election of Stephen, and renounces Constantine, and pretending to desire
the continuance of friendship, proposes to come to Rome and confer with him in
private; The Pope, who only made use of the French for necessity; was easily
persuaded by Didier to consent thereto, who coming makes many Protestations of
Obedience; Paul Ephialte a Grecian was then Governor at Rome for the Emperor,
whom Didier so corrupted that having the Execution of Justice in his hands, he
causes him to seize upon Christopher and Sergius the Popes two Secretaries in
the presence of Stephen, whom accusing of supposed crimes, he infamously
hanged, their greatest offense being for favoring the French; yea he proceeded
to banish all the Citizens of Rome who were noted to be of the French Faction,
resolving to be Master of Rome in s^^ght of the Pope; Stephen observing the
falsehood of the Lombards, flies again to Charlemagne for help, who resolving to
assist him, Didier had so wrought with Caroloman his Brother that he found
means to hinder him by raising a dangerous War in Guienne.

Though the County of Guienne depended on the Crown of France, yet many
Rebellions happened by the practices of the Noblemen, who abusing the bounty of
the French Kings that allowed them their ancient Privileges, were ambitious to
be absolute Sovereigns themselves. and to cast off their dependence upon
France; Hunalt at this time was the principal Person in this Country, whom
Caroloman finding to be very desirous of being a Duke, or Prince, resolves to
employ him against his brother Charles, Hunalt not doubting but to have credit
enough with the People to make himself absolute if he were favored by one of
the Kings of France against the other; Guienne was part of Charlemagnes
Territories, against whom Hunalt designs to make open War, but though the
countenance of Caroloman might do much, yet the Wisdom and Courage of Charles
prevailed more for understanding his brothers secret practices, he armed so
suddenly that he seized several Great Towns and thereby all the Country
adjoining submitted to him; Hunalt finding himself prevented, fled to a
Nobleman in that Country, called Loup his faithful and affectionate Friend, to
whom Charles instantly sends to deliver Hunalt into his hands, as guilty of
High Treason; Who unable to resist, sends him back, with all his Family to whom
Charles graciously grants both life and liberty, and pardons Loup, and all that
obeyed him, thereby ending a dangerous War without blows.

Caroloman finding his designs against his brother unsuccessful, takes a Voyage
to Rome under show of Devotion, though intending other matters; His Mother
Berthe accompanying him, was honorably received by Didier King of the
Lombards, who then concluded a Marriage between her Son Charles and Theodora
daughter to Didier one of the greatest enemies of his Sons good fortuno, yet
Charlemagne to please his Mother Married this Wife, though he soon after put
her away as disagreeable to his humor and affairs, and likewise on suspicion
of incontinency, so that what should have been a cause of love, bred greater
hate between these two Princes; Carolom^^ having effected nothing at Rome, only
discovering his malicious Jealousy, returns into France, and soon after dies in
the year of our Lord 770. Charles being now alone by his brothers decease,
quietly takes possession of his Dominions, and then marries Hildegard daughter
of the Duke of Sueve his own Subject, by whom he had three Sons and three
daughters;

Carolomans Jealousy died not with him, for his Wife Birthe impatient of her
condition retires with her two Sons to Didier, who contrived with the Widow to
procure from Adrian then Pope a confirmation of her Sons in the Crown of
France; which the Pope absolutely refused; At which time Hunalt forgetful of
the mercy of Charles comes to Didier by whom he is received and made General of
the Army against the Pope for denying the King of Lombardy's request, who
having no other weapons but Excommunication, implores the aid of Charles, who
first sends Ambassadors to Didier requiring him to restore what he had taken
from the Pope, and to suffer him to live in peace; Who insisting upon having
the Children of Caroloman declared Kings of France; His demands were thought so
unreasonable that the Treaty is broke off, and Charles instantly prepares for
War, and in a short time gives the Lombards two notable defeats; And at length
besieges him and all his Forces, in Pavia, which was soon surrendered, and
Didier falls into his hands who was sent Prisoner to Lions, and the Kingdom of
the Lombards thereby utterly ruined; During the Siege of Pavia a Council was
held at Rome by Pope Adrian in favor of Charlemagne, and for his merits toward
the Church the right to bestow all Benefices in Christendom was said to belong
to him.

Charlemagne being returned into France, Aldegise the Son of Didier endeavored
to disquiet Italy by the aid of the Emperor Constantine, and the practices of
Rogand to ^om Charlemagne had given Friuli, but all these Rebellions were soon
suppressed by the diligence of the French Gover^ors, and Rogand being taken, was
beheaded by ^he Kings Command. But the end of this War was the ^eginning of
another in Germany, whereof the Saxons were the Chief Authors with the
assistance of some of their Neighbors, this War continued thirty three years
at diverse times; The Saxons in Germany were at this time Subject to the Crown
of France under Martel and Pepin his Son, and the desire of recovering their
ancient liberty, but especially of retaining their Pagan Superstition received
from their Ancestors, was the chief occasion of these tedious Troubles; For
Charles zealous for the Christian Faith, endeavored to oblige them to make
profession thereof; Upon this Controversy of Religion the Saxons made War eight
times against him, especially when they found him busied elsewhere, and took
Strasburg, and several other Towns then in possession of the French; whereupon
Charles calling a Parliament at Worms, leavied a great Army, wherewith having
vanquished the Saxons twice in one Month in the open Field; he reduced them to
their ancient Obedience, yet used his Victoty with much Modesty and Wildom,
designing rather to show his Power than his Justice. The Chief Commander among
them was one Widichind, who being by Charles persuaded without any violence to
embrace the Christian Religion, by his means the greatest part of the Saxons
were brought to the knowledge of the true God, and into Obedience to the French
Monarchy.

After this, the Zeal for Religion gave some color of necessity to the
Heroical desire of Charlemagne to enlarge his Dominions by making War upon the
Saracens, or Moors in Spain, who had then conquered a great part thereof, which
they divided into distinct Kingdoms; yet all these petty Kings resolved to
unite against Charles their common Enemy, and to prevent all his designs, they
caused one of their Kings called Idbunala to insinuate into his Friendship, and
Charlemagne pushed on both by him and Alphonso (surnamed the Chaste) King of
Navar, and well affected thereto himself, he brings his Forces into Spain, and
took the Cities of Pampelona and Saragosa, plundering them and putting all the
Saracens to the Sword. Encouraged by this success, he marches on relying on his
usual Fortune, many small Towns in the way terrified by their example, yielding
upon composition; and then giving part of his Army to be commanded by Milon his
Brother in Law, it happened that near Bayonne, Aigoland a Saracen King took him
at such advantage that he defeated him with the loss of forty thousand men,
Milon himself being slain. Aigoland elevated with this Victory, and Charles
being far off, he marches into Gascoign and besieges Again, to draw him home for
the defense of his own Country; who doubting the Fidelity of the Gascoins,
makes a speedy return, but so tired that his Troops were altogether
unserviceable; which Aigeland being sensible of, sends him a Proposal, That to
prevent bloud^hed, and the unnecessary destruction of Mankind, and since he
understood that Charles would make Peace with them if they would embrace the
Christian Religion, he desired the Trial of the true Faith might be made only
by some few Troops protesting to yield to that Religi^n which should overcome
in the Combat; The condition was accepted by Charles, and the Christian Troop
vanquished the Saracens; Aigoland hereupon declares himself openly a Christian,
but intended nothing less, and takes this occasion to break the Treaty; He
finds Charles at his Table eating with the Chief of his Followers, (for Kings
used not then to eat alone) and sees twelve poor men in very ragged Cloths near
the Noblemens Table, and demanding who those miserable Creatures were that fed
by themselves, was told, They were the Messengers of God, who replied, Sure
your God is very poor himself, since his Messengers are so very mean and
contemptible; and thereupon takes occasion to retire.

Charlemagne resolving to be revenged for this bold affront of the Saraeen,
raises an Army of an hundred and thirty thousand men, wherewith he defeated
Aigolands Forces at Pampelona, and carried away the head of this profane King
as a Tropby of his Victory; and afterward utterly defeated the remainder of his
Forces; The Saracens again Mustering a new Army, Rowland Nephew to Charles
marches against them with only twenty thousand men, and being suddenly set upon
in his passage over the Pyrenean Mountains, he is over power^d with numbers,
and retiring himself apart for some refreshment, he there perishes for thirst,
by reason of the long and painful Combat he had endured; yet not without
revenge, for he killed Marseilles one of their Kings with his own hand.
Charlemagne advertised of this unexpected loss, returns suddenly and takes
revenge on the Saracens, killing a vast number of them, and building Tombs for
Rowland and those other valiant Commanders who died in the Bed of Honor; and
his other urgent Affairs in France requiring his presence he returned thither;
That the War in Spain ended with little success, having disturbed Charles at
diverse times for fourteen years past.

At his return from Spain, Charlemagne finds occasion to exercise his Valor
first in Italy where Alde ise the Son of Didier again attempted to settle
himself, but was soon suppressed with much loss to the Lombard Rebels. The like
occasion bred a War in Germany; For King Tasilon Son in Law to Didier, by his
Wives persuasions endeavors to shake off the Yoke and flies to Arms, engaging
the Huns, and other Nations against Charlemagne who suppressed them with such
happy success that Tasilon being Vanquished, and found guilty of Treason and
Rebellion, was according to the Salique Law, condemned to lose his Estate
whereby the Kingdom of Bavaria ended, and was incorporated into the Crown of
France. The Huns (from whom the Hungarians are derived) together with the
Danes, Westphalians and diverse other Nations who were united in this War
against Charles, were all brought under his Obedience, their Countries
containing Hungary, Valachia, Bohemia, Transylvania. Denmark and Poland; Thus
the French M^narchy grew great by the happy Valor of ^^^rlemagne; France,
Italy, Germany, Spain and Hungary made the Romon Empire in the West, and
Charles being Master of these go^dly Provinces, was in effect Emperor thereof,
and wanted only the Title, which he obtained by this means.

Leo being then Pope of Rome, a strange sedition was raised against him by
Silvester and Gampul men of great credit in the Court of Rome, who in a Solemn
procession seize upon the Pope before St. Laurence Church, they stripped him of
his Pontificial robes, throw him to the ground, tread him under their feet,
bruise his face with their fists, and having drawn him ignominiously through
the dirt, they throw him into Prison; But he continued not long there being
freed by a Groom of his Chamber, and recovering St. Peter's Church, he entreats
Vingise Duke of Spoleto to free him from this miferable Captivity, who
presently marching to Rome, carried him thence to Spoleto; From whence he goes
with all speed to France to Charles whom he found engaged in many troubles, who
yet neglected all other affairs to assist Leo in this his great necessity; And
marching to Rome with a potent Army, he speedily pacifies all disturbances, and
punishes the Popes Enemies according to Law; Leo being thus put into possession
of his Sovereignty, declares Charles to be Emperor of the West, which with the
price of his blood lost in opposing the furious incursions of barbarous Nations
he had valiantly gotten possession of, and accordingly Crowns him Emperor with
the full consent of the Roman People who asisted at his Coronation, crying with
one general voice, All happiness, long life and Victory to Charles Augustus
Crowned the Great and Peaceable Emperor of the Romans, always happy and
victorions; This was performed in the year of our Lord 800. Italy having for
thirty years past suffered horrible Confusions without Emperor, without Laws
and without order.

The Seat of the Roman Empire since Constantine the Great remained at
Constantinople a City of Thrace, convenient for the guard of the Eastern
Provinces; All the West being full of strangers, who having expelled the Roman
Name and Authority, the force of the Empire remained in the East, where the
State was in a strange confusion by fatal differences; Constantine Son to Leo
the Fourth was then Emperor, who (together with the Empire) was governed from
his infancy by Irene his Mother; At this time there was great division in the
East about Images, which had already continued eighty years, the (...) ops
would needs bring them into the Christian Church, but were always opposed by
Constantines Predecessors; but the Empress having assembled a Council at Nice
it was there decreed by her consent and earnest desire, That ^mages should be
planted in Christian Churches for Devotion; Charlemagne did not approve of this
decree, but writ, or caused to be written a small Treatise against this
Council, to be seen at this day, and called, A Treatise of Charlemagn's,
touching Images against the Greek Synod.

The present Emperor Constantine retained the hereditary hatred of his Father
and Grandfather against them, so that being now of age, and in possession of
the Empire he disanulled all those new decrees, and caused images in all places
to be beaten down, yet he still shew^ed respect to his Mother, allowing her
great part of her former Authority, which occasioned an horrible Tragedy to
follow, for being enraged both for his crossing her new opinion about Images,
and for the loss of part of her power, She resolves to disposless him of the
Em^ress, and having corrupted the Chief Officers with her Sons Money, she
seized on him, put out his eyes, sent ^im into banishment. where he soon after
died for grief, and took possession of the Empire for her self.

These unnatural Tragedies were acted in the East while Charlemagne by his
great Valor erected an Em^ire in the West; After Constantines death, Irene
sent to Charles to excuse her self, disowning the Murder, and charging it on
some who had done it without her command; and likewise treated with him about
Marrying ^er, his Empress being lately dead, premising to consent he should be
declared Emperor of the East, and that ^he would resign up all her power to
him, but Charlemagne would not accept thereof; the Nobility and People after
this, had such a public derestation of her, the Murtheress of her own Child,
that having suf^ered ^er three years, Nicephorus a Noblemant of Greece, aff^^ed
^y the Chief of the Cou^^, and with the consent of the people makes himself
Emperor, and only Banishes Irent He afterward Treats and Compounds with
Charles, tha^ the Empire of the East continuing under his Command that of the
West should remain to Charlemagne, which being confirmed by the general assent
of the Greeks, the Empire was divided into the East and West; That of the West
began with Charlemagne, and remained in his Fami^ly while they continued
Virtuous, and was afterward removed to the Princes of Germany, who acknowledg^
the German Original of Charlemagne, he being born a Worms, Crowned at Spire,
and buried at Aix, all City of Germany.

Charles lived fifteen years after he had united the R^^ man Empire to the
French Monarchy; Grimald Duke (...) Benevent after endeavored to disturb Italy
for the Lombards, but was timely prevented; and about the same time the War in
Saxony was renewed, being always pro^ to Rebellion, and likewise that against
the Huns, Bohe^ ans, Sclavonians and Saracens; As likewise a dangerou^ War
against the Venetians, by whom the Emperor and hi^ Frenchmen received a severe
check, and had reason to glo^ry that among all the People of Italy subdued by
Charle magne, they remained unvanquished, and were able (...) oppose themselves
against him. At length all things being quieted, and Char'es finding himself
old and broken wit^ cares, and that his three Sons were Wise, Valiant, an^
Obedient, he resolved to divide his Empire among them; To Pepin he gave Italy;
to Charles, Germany at the Neighbor Counereys, keeping Lewis his Eldest So^ at
home to Inherit the Kingdom of France; But in a sho^ time after, his two Sons
Charles and Pepin the best supports of the Empire and true Inheritors of their
Father Valor, both died, leaving Lewis their Brother with large Territories,
and mean Virtues, to succeed in so great a^ Estate Charlemag^e secming hereby
deprived of (...) Arms, his Enemies the Saranens in Spain, and the (...) ^on
a^s and (...) in the N^rth rose in Rebellion ag^^^^ him, ^ut as old and broken
as he was, he vanquished the^ all and reduced them again to Ob^^ience. And his
A^ fairs being thereby again settled, his mind now wo^n out with the toils and
difficulties of his whole Life, re^^^^d nothing but rest, and being well
instructed in Religion, and knowing how necessary it was that those who taught
others should be well qualified themselves both in Doctrine and Manners, he
called five Councils for Reforming and Governing the Church, and likewise a
great Coun^il at Frankford of the Bishops of France, Germany, and I^aly, which
he himself honored with his presence, where by general consent, The false
Synod of the Greeks, untruly ^alled the Seventh, was condemed and rejected by
all the Bishops who subscribed to the condemnation. After this a new accident
called Charles again to arms, Alphonso King of Navar, (Surnamed the Chaste for
his singular temperance) sends to him, that now there was opportunity utterly
to root the Saracens out of Spain, Charles extream^y desirous to finish this
work, raises an Army and marches thither, but though Alphonso meant sincerely,
the Chief of his Court (who feared the Forces of Charles no ^ess than the
Saracens, doubting to be deprived of their Governments by a new Master) created
so many difficulties and dangers, that he was obliged to return into France
without acting any thing considerable, and so concluded all his Enterprises,
embracing the care of Religion as a Subject only fit for the remai^der of his
^^^ys; He was Sixty eight years old when he left the Was and spent three whole
years in his Closet, reading the Bible, and the Books of St. Augustine whom he
admired above all the Doctors of the Church; He resided at Paris to have
frequent conference with the Learned, where he erected a famous University,
supplied with learned men, and enriched with great Privileges.

Thus Charlemagne spent three years happily, only in the care of his Soul,
leaving an excellent example to Princes to moderate their greatness with plety,
and in the full enjoyment of Temporal things not to forget eternal, nor their
departure out of this life; Then sore^clling the time of his Death, he made his
Will, leaving Lewis his Son sole Heir of his mighty Deminions, and causing him
to be Crowned by the General consent of the Estates, where himself being
present, after having mad^ a long and fervent prayer prostrate before God, with
hi^ dear Lewis, he put the Crown upon his head, and said thus to him.

My Dear Son, it is to day that I die to the Empires of the World, and that
Heaven seems to make me be born again in you Person; If you will Reign happily,
fear God, who is the foundation of Empires, and the Sovereign Father of all
Dominions; Keep his commandments, and cause them to be observed with in
violable fidelity; Take the care and protection of Religion an^ Gods Church
into your hands; Love your Sisters, render you^ self good and officious to your
kindred; Honor Gods Ministers cherish tenderly your Subjects as your Children,
and be contin^^ ally the Comforter and Protector of the Poor. Chastise the
vicious, and recompense men of merit; Establish Governors Judge and Officers
that are capable and without reproach, and when you have chosen them, do not
deprive them of their charges with out very just cause. Serve first of all for
an Example to a^ the World, and lead before God and man an irreproveable life.

After this Action, he survived about a year longer employed in all kind of
Religious Exercises and then fallin^ sick, continued so only eight days and
died in the 71 yea^ of his age, and the 47 of his Reign including the 15 year
of his Empire, and in the year of our Lord 814; H^ Corpse was exposed in
public, clothed like a King wit^ a Sword, and the Gospel lying by him, which
he had ^^glor ously defended; He was buried with a Stately mag^ nitiance in the
Church of Aix in a Chapel himself he butle. He was one of the greatest Princes
of the Age His Virtue may be a pattern for Princes, and his Fortur^ the Subject
of their withes. The greatness of his Mon ^^^chy is admirable, for he quictly
enjoyed all Fran^, ^^many most part of Hungary, all Italy and part of Spai^ Yet
his Virtues were greater th^n his Empire, his (...) mency, wisdom, courage,
Learning (even in the Hol^ Ser^^^res) his (...), Magnanimity and singular (...)
(...) P^aise. He was universally lamened (...) all the Would, as the Farner of
the Univere, and the Singular O^^ m^^^ of (...), and truly merited th^n a^me of
one of (...) Worthies of the World.

The History of Godfrey of Bullen called King of Jerusalem. The Ninth Worthy of
the World.
portrait of Godfrey, King of Jerusalem

GOdfrey a Worthies Name does well deserve
Whom for his Valor, All might wish to serve,
He for recevery of the Holy Land
The Turks and Infidels did often withstand,
Whereby at length he won Jerusalem,
That had a long time been enslaved by them,
In which he so much Courage made appear,
The Christian Princes with one voice declare
That he alone shall be Jerusalems King,
And the richest Spoils they freely to him bring,
Which Honor, all Men since him justly give.
And'mong the Great his Fame shall ever live.
(...)

the Princes of that fair Duchy of Lorrain. Godfrey of Bossu having no
Children, made him his Heir, and gave him the Earldom of Bullen which
occasioned him to have that Strname who by his Heroic Actions has rendered
himself one of the Worthies of the World; He was naturally inclined to all
sorts of Virtue, much whereof was owing to his happy education under the exact
care of a wise Father and a Mother of extraordinary merit, who with a diligence
unusual to her Sex had her self studied, and therefore infused into him all
sort of curious Learning; and is said to have predicted the future greatness of
her three Sons, for one day as the Earl her husband demanded of her what she
had hid in her lap, being playing with the Children, she very seriously
answered, that she had there three Great Princes, one Duke, one King, and one
Earl, which was afterward verified in the admirable Fortunes of these three
Princes, for Godfrey was Duke of Lorrain and King of Jerusalem; Baldwin was
King of the same Realm, after Godfrey, and Prince of Edessa, and Eustace whom
some say was the elder Brother, was Earl of Bullen after the death of his
Father; It is likewise related that she had a strange dream before the Birth of
Prince Godfrey, for the Sun seemed to descend from the sky and fall into her
lap, and she saw her little Son sitting on a Throne in the midst thereof; But
this is certain that she used to relate with much pleasure after the Glorious
success her Sons had in the Holy-War, that long before there was any discourse
thereof, Prince Godfrey used to say, That he would one day take a Voyage to
Jerusalem not for Devotion only as a Pilgrim, but as a Captain and Conqueror at
the head of an Army to chase the wicked Infidels from that Holy place.

After his Uncles death the Emperor Henry the Fourth pretending that the Duchy
of the lower Lorrain for want of Heirs Male devolved to him conferred it on his
Son Conrade, leaving Godsrey nothing there but the Marquisate of Antwerp, and
on the other side Albert Earl of Namur his kinsman and the Bishop of Verdun
endeavored to deprive him of Bullen and Verdun; So that before he was
seventeen years of age he was compelled to an early Valor for recovering his
Right; which he did by vanquishing their joint Porces, and conquering Earl
Albert in a single combat; And then he assisted the Emperor Henry in his Wars
in Italy and Germany, though he had injuriously dealt with him who was at
length so much overcome by his extraordinary merit and the considerable
services he had performed, that he again put him into possession of Lorrain,
his Mothers inheritance, which he had detained from him thirteen years; and
likewise gave him his fister Adelaida in marraige;

Godfreys aflairs being in so good a Posture, the Voyage for the Holy Land was
proclaimed, which he embraced with such earnestness and generosity that he sold
almost all his Estate to the Bishops of Liege and Verdun to raise Forces, so
that by an odd adventure the Princes improverished themselvess to serve Jesus
Christ, and the Priests enriched themselves with the spoils of these Temporal
Princes, choosing rather to make use of that money (which like them they should
have employed in this Holy Expedition) to advance their present fortunes which
they saw these Princes so generously part with for the Love of God; Godfrey
being hereby provided to raise Soldiers, his fame and repuration soon
furnished him with military men from all parts, many Princes and Gentlemen,
also his Friends serving under him as Volunteers; He was now about thirty five
years old, and so excellently qualified both in Person and mind for a Captain
and a Soldier, that he obtained an absolute Empire over those Spirits who
voluntarily submitted to his conduct. But Peter the Hermit addressing himself
to him, Godfrey perceiving he should be clogged with a multitude of
unprofitable people who followed that Priest, and were more like to cause a
Famine than give any real assistance, he ordered that they should march under
their own Leader, and Peter being a Gentleman, who before his turning Hermit,
had born arms, the desire of glory induced him to believe that he might
lawfully undertake such a military command without affronting the order of
Priesthoed, or embracing the World which he had renounced, but he soon found by
woeful experience what it was to exceed the Bounds of his Profession, for his
Soldiers in their march living upon free Quarter, were most of them knocked on
the head by the Inhabitants before they got to Constantinople.

In August 1096. Godfrey with an Army of ten thousand Horse, and seventy
thousand Foot well appointed, and attended with many Princes and Nobles of the
first Quality, marched into Germany, and passing over the vast Countries of
Bulga^ia, he at length arrived at Philipolis in Thracia, where some differences
with Alexis the Greek Emperor being composed, he at length came to
Constantinople, whither the rest of the Christian Princes and their Forces
following soon after, it was resolved first to Besiege Nice the Capital City of
Bythinia, and Duke Godfrey advancing before as far as Nicomedia, and having
levelled the ways over the Mountains from that Town to Nice, they invested that
place. May 16. Godfrey with his Brother Baldwin took the Right hand over
against the Principal Gate of the City where it was most strongly Fortified.
May 24. A general Assault was given upon several Quarters at once, and the
Combat was continued all day till night parted them, and the next morning again
renewed with extraordinary fury though without effect, the Besieged being not
only gallant men, but in hourly exp^ctation of relief from Soliman the Turkish
Emperor, to whom they had dispatched an Express to inform him of their
condition, and the Sultans Letters in Answer to them whereby he assured them of
certain relief the next morning, being intercepted by the Christians they
accordingly made Provision to receive him; The Turks early in the morning
descended from the Mountains, and dividing into two great Bodies, one of them
assaulted Godfreys Quarter which lay next to that of Reymond Earl of Flanders,
but were received by both these Princes with so much vigor, that they were
presently put into disorder, and forced to a hasty flight; yet the Besieged
continued to make an obstinate defense, among whom there was one Valiant Turk,
who for his great Bulk and extraordinary Strength seemed a Giant, that defended
one of the Towers which were assaulted by Count Raymond; he had been often
repulsed but still renewed the Attack making terrible havoc among the
Christians, and intollerably insulting over those who fell under his Arms, and
exposing himself naked to a vast number of Arrows that were shot at him, he
with both his hands fell to throwing down Stones of a prodigious bigness upon
those who attempted to undermine the Wall, though he had above twenty Arrows
sticking in his Breast, and looked as if he were bristled with them; Godfrey
coming from his own Quarter, and unable to endure this insolence of a
Barbarian, with a well placed Arrow shot him through the very Heart, and
tumbled him dead into the Ditch; Thus the bravest man of the Turks seemed to
stay to receive an honorable death from the hand of the gallantest of the
Christians; Soon after Solomon having made another fruitless attempt to relieve
them, the Besieged delivered up the City by Treaty to the Christians.

The Princes, not to lose the season of the year, marched immediately from
thence toward Syria and for convenience of Forage they separated into two
Bodies, that part under the Earl of Flanders and the Duke Normandy taking the
left, and Godfrey the right hand, but yet without distancing the Armies above
two miles asunder; The Duke of Normandy had not marched far, when they had
notice that Solomon with three hundred and sixty thousand Turks and Persians,
all Horse, with an infinite number of Arabians intended to surprise and
surround the Christians the next morning; Who instantly sent to advertise Duke
Godfrey of their danger, who again joining the Army the Princes encouraged
their Soldiers telling them, That they were the same Enemies they had often
before vanquished at Nice, and that in sighting valiantly against those wicked
Insidels, if they died they might be certain of eternal happiness; And then
drawing their Swords they cried out, It is the will of God, which words the
whole Army repeated with such a terrible Harmony, the Valleys, Rocks, and
Mountains shook with the dreadful Echo; and thereupon, presently engaging, by
the Conduct of Godfrey and Reymond who ran full speed upon the Turks with their
European Lances, which they had neither Shields nor Breast-plates to oppose,
they were overthrown horse and man, and the Arabs not enduring a charge hand to
hand, fearing to be surrounded, began to betake themselves to slight, which
caused such fear and disorder in the whole Army, that it put them in a moment
to general rout, and the Christians obtained a complete Victory, with a
Prodigious quantity of booty and plunder which they found in the Turkish Camp,
and then marching forward toward Syria they arrived about Antioch in Pisidia
which surrendered to them without ressistance as did most of the other Cities in
their passage.

Whilst the Army refresht themselves in Pisidia after such Toyls and hardships,
Prince Godfrey had like to have been lost by a strange accident, which however
redounded in conclusion much to the honor of this Prince, advancing his
Reputation, Courage and Nobleness which appeared even to admiration upon this
dangerous occasion; For one day entering alone on Horseback into a Wood, he
heard the voice of a man who cried out for help with all his power, and
advancing to the place from whence the noise came, he perceived it was a poor
Soldier, who coming to cut Wood was running almost quite cut of breath round a
great Tree to save himself from the merciless Jaws of a monstrous and furious
Bear which was just ready to seize upon him; Godfrey transported with Courage
and Charity spurred on his Horse with his sword in his hand toward the cruel
Beast, who forsaking the Soldier, with inflamed eyes, gaping Jaws, and the
terrible Claws of her two fore Paws, advanced toward him, and raising her self
upon her hinder feet to throw her self upon the Horse, she was affrighted with
the Sword, and to avoid the blow fell sideling, but so that Horse and man fell
over her, and she catch^ hold of the Dukes Coat to draw him toward her, but
Godfrey nimbly recovering his fall, and seizing on her left paw which she
thrust out to lay hold of him, he ran his Sword up to the hilt in the belly of
this monstrous enemy, when one of his Gentlemen coming in at the noise
dispatched the Beast already overthrown with the terrible blow she had received;
But Godfrey in drawing his Sword from between his legs after his fall, having
given himself a cruel wound in his Thigh, which during the heat of the combat
he did not perceive, he had lost so much blood, that after he began to cool, he
suddenly sunk down in a Swoon; This accident though it proved not dangerous,
spread a mighty Consternation through the whole Army as if all had been lost,
so much confidence and authority they placed in his Valor and Judgment,
especially since the last battle where he gained the Christians a glorious
Victory out of the hands of the Insidels, who were just ready to ruin them.

The Christians having conquered Cilicia and great part of Armenia, they next
besieged the City of Antioch, and having lain some time before it, two Fleets
from Genoa, and Pisa arrived very fortunately at the Port of St. Simeon with
all sorts of Provisions, which were very welcome after a five months Seige, the
news whereof no sooner arrived at the Camp, but the Soldiers ran thither in
Shoals to furnish themselves with what they wanted. The Turks who continually
watched for all advantages laid an Ambuscade of four thousand men that secretly
sallied out of the Town, who meeting with the Soldiers in their return without
Order or Arms, but only their Swords and laden with Provisions, they fell upon
them, and obliged them to fly to the Mountains leaving all their Provisions,
and a thousand of their Companions dead upon the place.

Godfrey soon advertized of this disaster, took a strong Party resolving
immediately to charge the Tarks whom he doubted not to find in sufficient
disorder upon Joy of their Victory; The Governor of Antich having from one of
the Towers of his Castle observed this motion of the Christians, was in much
pain for the safe return of his men, and therefore commanded the greatest part
of his Army to sally out of the City for their relief; Godfrey marched on
slowly, having notice that the Conquerors, having joined the Troops of the
Town, drew near laden with their booty, then drawing his Sword and turning to
his men, after he had looked fiercely toward the Enemy, he cried, Follow me it
is the will of God^ Ordering them only to use their Swords without either
Lances or Arrows, so that with their Swords drawn and their Bucklers they made
a kind of Penthouse against the Arrows of the Turks, who being thereby put out
of their usual way of fighting, the Service of their Bows being taken from
them, they presently recoiled upon their assistants, and being encumbered with
Spoils, the Christians fell into the midst of them, and on all hands made a
most horrible slaughter of these miserable wretches, so that they were totally
routed, some flying to the mountains, others toward the City, not dreaming that
the Gate was shut against them; Godfrey to prevent their return into the Town,
flew like lightning among his enemies, there was no blow of his terrible Sword
which drew not a dreadful death with it, so that he filled all with Horror,
Lloud and Terror, which way soever he turned himself, and the other Princes
finding the Enemies stopped by Godfreys Squadron, made a most woeful destruction
among them, and their lamentable cries at length obliged the Governor to open
the Gates, and receive the small remainder into Antioch.

One of the Principal Turks of a Stature much exceeding others, transported
with fury to observe that Godfrey killed all who came within the reach of his
terrible Sword, he ran up to him foaming with rage, and with his broad-Sword
discharged so terrible a blow on the Duke that he split his Shield in two
pieces which he had opposed to secure his head; when Godfrey raising himself
upon his Stirrups, gave him such a furious stroke, that his Sword falling on
his right Shoulder passed quite through his Breast to his left side, and made
that half of his body tumble to the ground, while the other remaining in the
Saddle was carried by the Horse quite through the Town, making such a fearful
spectacle as struck Consternation and Horror in all the beholders; Night coming
on the Defendants throwing whole showers of Arrows from the Walls, hindered the
further pursuit of the Victory; The Christians lost above a thousand men, but
it is almost impossible to count the loss of the Turks, which was so great that
they partly stopped the River with their dead Bodies.

After this great Victory the Besieged were more closely blocked up, and some
time after Antioch was surprised by Stratagem by the Christian Princes; which
was followed by another great Victory wherein the Enemy lost an hundred
thousand Horse, and an incredible number of Foot. And then the Princes
assembled to consult concerning the principal Enterprise, which was that of
Jerusalem, during which Godfrey, or Geoffry de la Tour, going out upon a party
as he frequently did, he heard the terrible roaring of a Lion, who seemed
rather to cry out for some dreadful mishap befallen him, than in sollowing the
Prey to devour it, and without a moments deliberation he broke away from those
that would have held him, toward the next Wood, and ran directly to the noise,
where he saw a horrible Serpent of prodigious magnitude, who having wound
himself about the Legs of a Lion, had prevented him from defending himself, and
darted many blows at him with his Tongue to kill him with his Poison; who
thereupon struck the Serpent such a blow with his Sword, that he killed him
without hurting the Lion, and after that cut the wreaths of the Serpent
wherewith he was entangled; when the poor Lion saw himself at liberty, he came
in the most expressive manner, and with the greatest submission to render
thanks to his deliverer, couching down and licking his Feet, and afterward
would never forsake him, but sollowed him like a faithful Dog without offending
any but his Enemies, upon whom by a sign given he would be sure to fall, and
was always with him in the Combat and Chase, and never failed to provide
Venison for his Master; a mavelous instance of natural gratitude, and a
reproach to Mankind, who often prove ungrateful to their Benefactors though
endued with all the force of reason.

The Christians now marching with all speed toward Jerusalem, took Rama in
their way and then marching to Emaus about two Leagues and an half from
Jerusalem, they from thence had a fair prospect of the lofty Towers of the Holy
City which filled the hearts of the Princes, Officers, Soldiers, and the whole
Troop of Pilgrims with great Joy, and then coming up to it, that they might
avoid a tedious seige, like that of Antioch, it was resolved to attack the
place by main force, though those within were more numerous than the Christian
Army who were not above Twenty Thousand Foot and fifteen Hundred Horse, the
rest of that vast number of three Hundred Thousand men who came into Asia,
being either dead with diseases, or slain in the several encounters, the
Christians therefore coming up close to the Walls, raised up their scaling
Ladders and mounted to the top from whence with mad courage they threw
themselves into the Town, where they desperately fought hand to hand with the
Saracens, who were amazed at this more than heroic boldness, and no doubt if
they had had more Ladders Jerusalem had been that day taken, but since one
Ladder could mount a very few men, a Retreat was sounded after having lost a
great many brave Soldiers in that rash attempt, who yet sold their Lives so
dear, that twice as many of the Saracens fell with them.

Duke Godfrey concerned at this miscarriage, resolved for the future to assault
the Town with proper Engines of War, which he managed with such extraordinary
success, that making a great breach in the Walls, he threw himself into the
Town with such admirable courage, that the other Princes following him, they in
short time all entered and took full possession, putting all the Insidels to the
Sword, and killing the very Children in the Arms of their Mothers thereby if it
were possible to extinguish the whole race of Turks. In short a most terrible
vengeance was taken upon them, and the Houses being plundered the whole Army
found themselves enriched beyond imagination; The richest Booty was found in
the Temple of Solomon, from whence was taken an inestimable Treasure of Gold,
Silver and Jewels, which the Princes generously presented Duke Godfrey as the
Person to whose only courage and conduct it was due;

Eight days after this happy conquest the Princes and Lords assembled to
re-establish the ancient Government of Jerusalem by giving it a King; Diverse
were proposed, and it was offered to Robert Duke of Normandy Son to William the
Conqueror, but he designing to return home as soon as possible, declined it,
telling the Assembly, That it was most evident they ought to choose that Person
whose Piety, Modesty, Frudence Justice, Valor and Success had appeared in many
occasions; That Person whose strength of Age, Body, Nobility, Greatness and
Majesty, worthy of an Empire, conspired to rank him among the greatest Princes
that ever were, and My Lords (said he) all these extraordinary qualities render
themselves so conspicuous in the Person who possesses them, that it may seem
unnecessary to name him, and God himself seems to have nominated him in giving
him these surpassing advantages above the rest of mankind, whom he has chosen
like a second David to be King of Jerusalem, It is the Illustrious Godfrey of
Bullen Duke of Lorrain, whom the Prince had no sooner named but the whole
Assembly interrupted him, crying out with the same mind and voice, Godfrey,
Godfrey, long live Godfrey the most puissant and pious King of Jerusalem; And
notwithstanding all the resistance of that modest Prince, he was obliged to
consent to the Election which seemed confirmed to him by Divine approbation;
And the very same day he was conducted to the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, and
there proclaimed King amidst the acclamations of the whole Army, and all the
Christians of the Country who came flocking in to inhabit the City of
Jerusalem; He was there presented with a Royal Crown richly adorned with Pearls
and precious Stones which he absolutely refused with this Zealous answer.

Why should I bear the name of a King in a place where my Savior has been
crowned with reproaches? should I take the Scepter in my hand, where he has
taken the Cross upon his Shouldiers? Should I suffer a Crown of Gold upon my
head where he has received a Crown of Thorns? Sure I should then hold my self
for vanquished if such a vanity should be victorious over my heart. It is God
that has inspired us with these designs; It is he that has conducted and
crowned us with success, I pretend therefore to no other honors, than to lay
all honors at the seet of the Cross of Christ. But though he would not take
upon himself the name of King, yet it was constantly given him, as all
Historians of that time and Posterity have ever since done to this very day,
and certainly never any King better deserved to wear that glorious Title which
he adorned with so many Royal Actions.

The Sultan of Egypt coming too late to relieve Jerusalem, advanced now with a
formidable Army to besiege it, against whom Godfrey and his Soldiers marched
with much courage and resolution, over whom they obtained an entire Victory,
with richer pillage than any time before in the whole War, the Enemy losing
thirty thousand upon the place and as many more in the pursuit. After this
Battle the Princes and great Lords who followed them believing they had fully
accomplished their vow of recovering the Holy Land, took their leaves of King
Godfrey to return to their respective Countries, leaving him only three hundred
Horse and about two thousand Foot, with which few Troops the King to enlarge
the Frontiers of his new Kingdom, conquered the places which were yet untaken
round about Jerusalem; And now after so many Toils being fallen sick he caused
himself to be removed to the City, where July 8. 1100. In the fortieth year of
his age, and the first of his Reign he rendered his glorious Soul into the hands
of his Almighty Redeemer by a most Religious death, (his brother Baldwin
succeeding K. of Jerusalem in his stead) He was a Prince in whom all Virtues,
Christian, Civil and Military met in the highest point of humane perfection
without mixture of any default, so that it will remain difficult to find
another like him to whom without Flattery the same praises may be given, and
which induced future Ages to bestow on him the honorable Title of one of the
Worthies of the World.

FINIS.
There are newly Published seventeen very useful, pleasant and necessary Books,
all sold by Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.
I. A View of the English Acquisitions in Guinea, and the East Indies. With an
Account of the Religion, Government, Wars, strange Customs, Beasts, Serpents,
Monsters, and other observables in those Countries. And among others, the Life
and Death of Mahomet the Grand Impostor, with the Principal Doctrines of the
Turkish Religion as they are displayed in the Alcoran. Two Letters, one written
by the Great Mogol, and the other by the King of Sumatra in the East Indies, to
our King James the First, of an unusual and extravagant style. The cruel
Executions in those parts: with the manner of the Women's burning themselves
with their dead Husbands. Together with a description of the Isle of St.
Helena; and the Bay of Souldania, where the English usually refresh in their
Voyages to the Indies. Intermixed with pleasant Relations, and Enlivened with
Picture. Price One Shilling.

II. THE English Empire in America, or a Prospect of his Majesty's Dominions in
the West Indies, namely New-sound-land, New England, New York, New Jersey,
Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia Carotina, Bermuda's, Barbuda, Anguilla,
Montserrat, Dominica, St. Vincent, ^ntego, Mevis or Ne^^is, St. Christophers,
Barbados, and Jamaica; With their Discovery, Situation, and Product; The
Religion and Manners of the Indians, and other excellencies of these Countries;
With the first Discovery of this New World, and of the Remarkable Voyages, and
Adventures of Sir F. Drake, Sir T. Cavendish, the E. of Cumberland; Sir W.
Rawleigh, and other English Worthies to diverse places therein. Illustrated with
Maps and Pictures. Price One Shilling.

III. THE Second Edition of Englands Monarchs, very much enlarged; Or, A
Compendious Relation of the most Remarkable Transactions, and Observable
Passages Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military, which have happened, during the
Reigns of the Kings and Queens of England, from Julius Caesar, to this present:
Adorned with Poems, and Pictures of every Monarch from William the Conqueror,
to our gracious Sovereign King James 2. with the Names of his now Privy
Council; The Great Officers of the Crown: A List of the Nobility; The Knights
of the most Noble Order of the Garter at Windsor, and the Principal Officers,
Civil and Military in England. The number of the Lords and Commons in both
Houses of Parliament, and many other very useful particulars. Price One
Shilling.

IV. THe History of the Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, Containing, 1. The
most Remarkable Transactions and Revolutions in Scotland for above Twelve
hundred years past, during the Reigns of Sixty eight Kings, from 424, to the
Happy Union of both Kingdoms under King James the First in 1602. 2. The History
of Ireland from the Conquest thereof by Henry the Second to this time; With the
Miraculous Persons and Places in that Country: Intermixed with Variety of
Excellent Speeches, Strange Accidents, and Prodigious Appearances: With a List
of the Nobility and Great Officers of State in both Kingdoms. Illustrated with
near Thirty Pictures. Price One Shilling.

V. DElights for the Ingenious, In above Fifty Select and choice Emblems Divine
and Moral, Ancient and Modern, Curiously Engraven upon Copper Plates; with
Fifty Delightful Poems and Lots, for the more Lively Illustration of each
Emblem; Whereby Instruction and Good Counsel may be promoted and furthered by
an honest and pleasant Recreation. To which is prefixed, An Incomparable Poem
Entitled, Majesty in Misery, or an Imploration to the King of Kings, written
by his late Majesty, King Charles the First, with his own Hand, during his
Captivity in Caisbrook-Castle, in the Isle of Wight, 1648. With a cuious
Emblem. Collected by R. B. Price half a Crown.

VI. Surprising Miracles of Nature and Art, in two parts, containing, I. The
Miracles of Nature, or the wonderful signs, and Prodigious Aspects and
Appearances in the Heavens, Earth and Sea; with an Account of the most famous
Comets, and other Prodigies, from the Birth of Christ to this time. II. The
Miracles of Art, describing the most Magnificent Buildings, and other curious
Inventions in all Ages; as, the Seven Wonders of the World, and many other
excellent Structures and Rarities throughout the Earth. Beautified with
Sculptures. Price One Shilling.

VII. THE Second Edition of Two Journies to Jerusalem, Enlarged, containing
first, an Account of the Travels of Two English Pilgrims, some years since, and
what admirable Accidents befell them in their Journey to Jerusalem, Grand Cairo,
Alexandra, etc. Secondly, the Travels of Fourteen Englishmen in 1669, from
Scanderoon to Tripoly, Joppa, Ramah, Jerusalem, Jericho, the River of Jordan,
the Lake of Sodom and Gomorrah, and back again to Aleppo, by T. B. With the
rare Antiquities, Monuments and memorable places and things mentioned in the
Holy Scripture; and an exact Description of the Old and New Jerusalem: To which
is added, a Relation of the great Council of the Jews assembled in the Plains
of Ajayday in Hungary, 1650. to examine the Scriptures concerning Christ; By S.
B. an Englishman there present: With the notoricus Delusion of the Jews by a
counterseit Messiah or false Christ, at Smyrna in 1666. and the Event thereof.
Lastly, The fatal and final Extirpation and Destruction of the Jews, throughout
the Bingdom of Persia, in 1666. The Epistle of King Agharus to our Savior,
with our Savior's Answer. Beautified with ^ictures. Price One Shiling.

VIII. WInter Evenings Entertainments in two Parts; Containing, 1. Ten Pleasant
and delightful Relations of many Rare and Norable Accidents and occurrances;
with brief Remarks upon every one. 2. Fifty Ingenious Riddles, with their
Explanations, and useful Observations; and Morals upon each. The whole
Enlivened with above Threescore Pictures, for the better Illustration of every
Story and Riddle. Excellently Accommodated to the Fancies of Old or Young, and
exceeding useful to advance cheerful Society and Conversation. Licensed
according to Order. Price One Shilling.

IX. THE Fifth Edition of the Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland, being near
a third part enlarged with very considerable Additions, containing an impartial
account of all the Battles, Sieges, and other remarkable Transactions,
Revolutions and Accidents which have happened from the beginning of the Reign
of King Charles the First, 1625. To his late Majesty's Happy Restoration. The
Illegal Trial of King Charles I. at large, with his last Speech at his
suffering. And the most considerable matters which happened till 1660. With
Pictures of several remarkable Accidents. Price One Shilling.

X. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and Present State of
London and Westminster, showing the Foundation, Walls, Gates, Towers, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Schools, Inns of Courts, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with an
account of the most remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and other
Occurrences, for above Nine hundred years past, in and about these Cities; to
the Year 1681. Illustrated with Pictures, with the Arms of the 65 Companies of
London, and the time of their Incorporating. Price One Shilling.

XI. ADmirable Curiosities, Rarities, and Wonders in England, Scotland and
Ireland, or an Account of many remarkable persons and places, and likewise of
the Battles, Sieges, Prodigious Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Thunders,
Lightnings, Fires, Murders, and other considerable Occurrences and Accidents
for many hundred years past. Together with the natural and artificial Rarities
in every County in England with several curious Sculptures. Price One Shilling.

XII. WOnderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy, discovered in above 300
memorable Histories, containing, 1. Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists,
Blasphemers, and perjured Villains. 2. The miserable ends of many Magicians,
Witches, Conjurers, etc. with diverse Apparitions and Illusions of the Levil. 3.
Remarkable predictions end presages of approaching Death, and how the Event has
been answerable. 4. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Murderers, etc. 5. Admirable
Deliverauces from Imminent Dangers, and Deplorable Distresses at Sea and Land.
Lastly, Divine Goodness to Penitents, with the Dying thoughts of several samous
men, concerning a future state after this Life, Imbellished with diverse
Pictures. Price One Shilling.

XIII. THE. Young man's Calling, or the whole Duty of youth, in a serious and
compassionate Address to all young Persons to remember their Creator in the
days of their Youth. Together with Remarks upon the Lives of several excellent
young Persons of both Sexes, as well Ancient as Modern, who have been Famous
for Virtue and Piety in their Generations, namely, on the Lives of Isaac and
Joseph in their Youth. On the Martydom of the seven Sons and their Mother; of
Romanus a young Nobleman, and of diverse holy Virgins and Martyrs. On the Lives
of K. Edward 6. L. Jane, Q. Elizabeth in her youth, P. Henry Eldest Son to King
James, and the young L. Harrington, etc. with Twelve curious Pictures
illustrating the several Histories. Price Eighteen Pence.

XIV. EXcellent Contemplations Divine and Moral; Written by the Maghanimous and
truly Loyal A. L. Capel, Baron of Hadham; Together with some Account of his
Life, and his Affectionate Letter to his Lady the day before his Death, with
his Heroic Behavior and last Speech at his Suffering; Also the Speeches and
Carriages of D. Hamilton and the Earl of ^ollard who suffered with him: With
his pious Advice to his Son the late E. of Essex. Price One Shilling.

XV. YOuths Divine Pastime; containing Forty Remar^^^e Scripture Histories,
turned into common English Verse. With Forty curious Pictures proper to each
Story; very delightful for the virtuous employing the vacant hours of Young
Persons, and preventing vain and vicious Divertisements. Together with several
Scripture-Hymns upon diverse oecasions, Price Eight Pence.

XVI. THE Divine Banquet; or Sacramental Devetions, Consisting of Morning and
Evening Prayers, Contemplations and Hymns for every day in the Week, in order
to a more Solemn Preparation for the Worthy receiving of the Holy Communion:
Representing the several steps and degrees of the Sorrows and Sufferings of our
Blessed Savior, till he gave up the Ghost; As, 1. His Agony in the Garden. 2.
His being Betrayed by J^das. 3. His being fasly accused, Smitten, Buffeted and
Spit upon by Calaphas the High Priest. 4. His Condemnation, Scourging, Crowning
with Thorns, and being delivered to be Crucified by Pontius Pilate. 5. His
bearing his Cross to Golgotha. 6. His Crucifixion and bitter Passion. Lastly,
Our Saviors Institution of the Blessed Sacrament. Together with brief
Resolutions to all those Scruples and Objections usually alleged for the
Omission of this important Duty. With Eight Curious Sculptures, proper to the
several parts. To which is added, The Devout Christians daily Sacrifice, or
Morning and Evening Prayers for every day upon Ordinary Occasions; with Graces.
Price One Shilling.

XVII. A Guide to Eternal Glory: Or, Brief Directiont to all Christians how to
attain Everlasting Salvation. To which are added several other excellent Divine
Tracts, As, I. Saving Faith discovered in Three Heavenly Conferences between
Our Blessed Savior and 1. A Publican. 2. A Pharisee. 3. A Doubting Christian.
II. The Threefold state of a Christian, 1. By Nature. 2. By Grace, 3. In Glory.
III. The Scriptures Concord, compiled out of the words of Scripture, by way of
Question and Answer, wherein there is the s^m of the way to Salvation and
Spiritual things compared with Spiritual. IV. The Character of a True
Christian. V. A brief Directory for the Great, Necessary and Advantageous Duty
of Self-Examination, whereby a scrions Christian may every day Examine himself.
VI. A short Dialogue between a Learned Divine and a Beggar. VII. Beams of the
Spirit, or Cordial Meditations, Enlivening, Enlightening, and Gladding the Soul
VIII. The Scraphick Souls Triumph in the Love of God. With short remembrarces
and Pious Thoughts. IX. History Improved, or Christian Applications and
Improvements of diverse remarkable passages in History. X. Holy Breathings, in
several Divine Poems upon diverse Subjects and Scriptures. Price One Shilling,

All sold by Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultry near Cheapside.

FINIS.

