THE English Hero: OR, Sir Francis Drake Revived.

Being a full Account of the Dangerous Voyages, Admirable Adventures, Notable
Discoveries, and Magnanimous Achievements of that Valiant and Renowned
Commander, As, I. His Voyage in 1572. to Nombre de Dios in the West Indies,
where they saw a Pile of Bars of Silver near seventy foot long, ten foot broad,
and 12 foot high. II. His incompassing the whole World in 1577. which he
performed in Two years and Ten months, gaining a vast quantity of Gold and
Silver. III. His Voyage into America in 1585. and taking the Towns of St. Jago,
St. Domingo, Carthagena, and St. Augustine. IV. His last Voyage into those
Countries in 1595. with the manner of his Death and Burial.


Recommended as an Excellent Example to all Heroic and Active Spirits in these
days to endeavor to benefit their Prince and Country, and Immortalize their
Names by the like worthy Undertakings.

Revised, Corrected, very much Enlarged, reduced into Chapters with Contents,
and beautified with Pictures.

By R. B.

Licensed and Entered according to Order, March 30. 1687.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.
1687.

TO THE READER.
EVer since Almighty God commanded Adam to subdue the Earth, there have not
wanted Heroic Spirits in all Ages who have adventured their Estates and
Persons to make new Discoveries of the unknown Parts of the World, and many
have industriously endeavored to find out the true circuit thereof, some
striving to effect it by Mathematical Conclusions and School demonstrations;
Others with much more certainty have added their own Experience and Travels
thereto, all whom deserved much commendation in their several times. For if he
who surveys only some few Manors or Lordships shall be thought worthy of some
reward both for his Pains, and Skill, how much more are the Travels of those
Famous Worthies to be Eternized who have bestowed their Studies and Labors in
measuring out and incompassing this almost immensurable Globe; Neither is this
Question valuable here, which is of force in private Possessions; Whose Land do
you Survey? Since the Vast Ocean is the Lords alone, and is by him left free as
sufficient for the use, and large enough for the Industry of all men.

Among these Gallant Adventurers none is more renowned than our present Hero
Sir Francis Drake, who may be a Pattern to stir up all Heroic and active
Spirits in these days to benefit their Prince and Country, and immortalize
their names by the like Noble Attempts, who by first turning up a furrow about
the whole World has exceeded all that went before him. Of whose Worthy Travels
and Exploits there having not hitherto been published any just or exact
Account; I have Collected all I could any where meet with upon this Excellent
Subject and reduced it into the present Method, to make it the more useful and
acceptable to my Countrymen, whom as I have often heretofore endeavored to
oblige by the like pleasant, and I hope not unprofitable Diversions, I shall
still continue the same according to my Ability and Power.

R. B.

THE Voyages and Adventures OF Sir FRANCIS DRAKE.
CHAP. I. His Birth and Education; His Losses by the Spaniard; His making two
Voyages into the West Indies for discovery; His Voyage in 1572. to Nombre de
Dios, and surprising it with only 52 Men, where they had a view of a Pile of
Bars of Silver 70 Foot in length, 10 Foot broad, and 12 Foot high.
THis Famous Sea-Captain and our present Hero, one of the first who put a Sea
Girdle, as it were, about the World, was Born near S^^^^ Tavestock in
Devonshire, and had his name given him by Sir Francis Russel after Earl of
Bedford, his Godfather; He was brought up in Kent, his Father being a Minister,
who for fear of the Six Articles in the Reign of King Henry the Eight, was
forced to secure himself in the Hull of a Ship, where he had diverse of his
younger Sons, having twelve in all, who being most of them Born on the Water,
for the greatest part died at Sea, the youngest only dying at home, whose
Posterity still inherit what was gallantly, though dangerously gained by our
Sir Francis their Elder Brother. After the death of King Henry, his Father got
a place to read Prayers among the Mariners of the Royal Navy, and bound his
Son Francis an Apprentice to a Ship-master who traded to France and Holland,
with whom he endured much hardship, and was thereby fitted to suffer the
Fatigues and labors of the Sea.

His Master dying, bequeathed him his Bark with which he for some time followed
his Masters Profession and thereby gained considerably; But the Narrow Seas not
being Large enough for his aspiring mind, he sold his Bark, and in the years
1565 and 1566 engaged with Captain Lovel and others in a Voyage to the
West Indies, and received much wrong from the Spaniards at Rio de Hacha; yet
the very next year Captain John Hawkins making preparations for a Voyage into
those Parts, he accompanied him to St. John de Ullua in the Bay of Mexico,
where by the treachery of Don Martin Henrique their Viceroy, he not only lost
all his goods, but likewise several of his Kinsmen and Friends, himself hardly
escaping with his life; This so exasperated the Spirit of Drake, that he vowed
the Spaniards should repay him with advantage, and to make good his word,
having served for some time in one of Queen Elizabeth's Ships to his great
advantage, and finding he could procure no redress from the King of Spain for
his losses, though the Queen had sent Letters thither upon that account, it
raised such indignation in his Breast that he resolved to use all possible
endeavors to recover the damages he had sustained; in pursuance whereof he
made two several Voyages into America to gain Intelligence, first with two
Ships the Dragon and Swan in 1570. and the next year in the Swan alone, whereby
having obtained certain notice of the Persons and places he aimed at, he fully
resolved on a third Voyage.

Pursuant thereto May 24. 1572. being Whitson Eve, Drake in the Pascha of
Plymouth of 70 Tuns, and his brother John Drake in the Swan of 25 Tuns, having
in both ships seventy three men and boys all Volunteers, well provided with
victuals for a year with all other Ammunition and provision for Men of War, and
three handsome Pinnaces taken asunder, and stowed aboard to be set together upon
occasion, they sailed out of the Sound of Plymouth bound for Nombre de Dios in
the West Indies. Their passage was so prosperous that June 3. they had sight of
the Maderas, and Canary Islands, and made no stay till they came in veiw of
Guadalupe, an high Island in the West Indies; Next morning June 29. entering
between this place and Dominica, they spied two Canoos a fishing about three
Leagues off; then landing on the South of Dominica in one of the Rivers that
fall from the Mountain, they staid there three days to refresh their men, and
saw diverse poor Cottages built with Palmetto Boughs and Branches, but no People
appeared, they seeming not to be settled habitations but only used during their
fishing. July 1. they sailed thence toward the Continent or Main Land of
America, and the first day after saw the high Land of Sancta Martha from whence
they directed their course to Port Pheasant, so named by Drake in his former
Voyage for the multitude of those Fowls they there met with, being arrived they
hardly knew the place again it was so overgrown with Wood and Grass, though the
year before they had made many ways and paths therein.

At the entrance into the Bay Admiral Drake intended to have gone ashore with
only a few in his company since he knew that no Spaniards dwelt within thirty
five mile of the place, that is at Tolou Eastward, and Nombre de Dios to the
West, when rowing toward the shore he saw a smoke in the Woods near the place
where he had frequented last year, and therefore taking more strength, with
Guns and other weapons, suspecting some Enemy near, he landed, where he found
evident marks that Captain John Garret of Plymouth had been lately there, being
brought thither by some who were formerly with Drake in that Voyage, he had
left a Plate of Lead fastened to a very great Tree, which four men together
could not fathom, on which these words were engraven, Captain Drake, if you
fortune to come to this Port make have away; For the Spaniards which you had
here with you the last year have betrayed this place, and taken away all that
you left here; I departed from hence this present 7. of July 1572. Your very
Loving Friend John Garret.

The smoke they saw was from a Fire made by Garret at his departure in a great
Tree, which had continued burning at least five days before their Arrival;
Notwithstanding this warning, Drake resolved to build his Pinnaces in this
convenient Port; Which they finished in seven days after their coming upon the
Land, by the help of some large Trees growing there which were near forty yards
about, being white and as heavy as Brasile Wood; There came now into the same
Bay an English Bark of the Isle of Wight, James Rawse Captain, with thirty men,
some of whom had been there with Drake the year before; They brought in a
Spanish Carvel or Advice-Boat bound for Nombre de Dios, and a Shallop with Oars
taken at Cape Blank, and being made acquainted with Drakes design, they joined
with him therein; July 22. they sailed out of this Harbor for Nombre de Dios,
and coming within three days to the Isle of Pinos took two Frigots laden with
Plank and Timber from Nombre de Dios; The Negro's aboard informed them of the
present State of the Town, and that some Soldiers were daily expected from the
Governor of Panama to defend it against the Symerons, a black people who about
eighty years past fled from the cruelty of their Masters the Spaniards, and
grew since into a Nation under two Kings of their own, one inhabiting Westward,
and the other East in the way from Nombre de Dios to Panama, who had almost
surprised the Town six weeks before. Captain Drake resolving not to hurt these
Negro's, set them ashore on the Main Land, that if they would they might join
themselves to the Symerons their Countrymen, and thereby gain their liberty,
or if not, yet the way being long and troublesome by land to Nombre de Dios,
they might not give notice to them of his arrival, whom he intended to surprise
with the utmost speed and secrecy.

Leaving then his three Ships and the Carvel with Captain Rawse, and putting
fifty three men with Targets, Pikes, Fire-Pikes, Muskets, Bows and Drums into
his four Pinnaces, Rawses Shallop making one, he parted from his Company and in
five days landed in the Island of Cativaas about 25 Leagues distant, and having
mustered and armed his men betimes in the morning, he exhorted them to be
valiant and courageous, representing to them the greatness of the Booty, the
weakness of the Town, and the hope of prevailing, and recompencing the wrongs
he had received, especially since he was accompanied with men of as much
resolution as himself, and at such a time as they were very likely to be
undiscovered; In the afternoon they again set Sail for Nombre de Dios, and in
the Evening reached the River Francisco, and lay close to the Shore all day to
prevent discovery from the Watch-houses; In the night they rowed hard till they
came into the harbor under the high land, resolving after they were refresht,
to attempt the Town next morning by day break; but Captain Drake observing that
his men from the report of the Negro's, seemed to apprehend the danger of this
attempt because of the greatness and strength of the Town, to prevent their
fears he took the opportunity of the rising of the Moon that night, persuading
them that it was the dawning of the day, whereby they came to the Town above an
hour sooner than was at first proposed, which was about three in the morning,
when it happened that a Ship of sixty Tuns, lately arrived from Spain with
Canary Wines and other goods came just into the Bay, having not yet furled her
Sails, who espying the Pinnaces so well Manned and Oared, sent a Gandeloe to
give notice to the Town, which Drake perceiving got between her and the Town,
forcing her to the other side the Bay, so that he landed without the least
resistance, finding only one Gunner upon the Fort, with six great brass Guns on
Carriages, and some whole and Demi Culverin, which they instantly dismounted;
The Gunner fled and gave the Town the alarm, who were usually upon their Guard,
by reason of the disturbances the Symerons often gave them, as the English now
perceived by the cries of the People, the ringing out the great Bell, and Drums
beating up and down the Town.

Captain Drake leaving twelve of his men to keep the Pinnaces and secure their
retreat, and having strengthened the Fort, went with the rest to view the Town,
and especially a Mount where he was the year before informed some Ordnance were
designed to have been planted which might scowr round about the Town, but upon
his Arrival there was never a Gun, only the place seemed prepared for that
purpose. He then commanded his brother and John Oxnam with sixteen of his
Company to go above the Kings Treasure-house and enter near the East end of the
Marketplace, himself with the rest designing to march up the broad street with
Trumpets sounding and Drums beating to the Marketplace, the Fire Pikes being
divided between both Companies, which no less affrighted the Enemy than they
gave light to the English, who thereby discovered every place as if it had been
broad day, the Inhabitants were amazed at so strange a sight, imagining them
far stronger than they were, by hearing their Drums and Trumpets at several
places at once, yet the Soldiers and some of the Townsmen got together in arms
at the Marketplace, by the Governors house near the Gate of the Town, either
to show their valor in his presence or from thence to make their escape to
Panama which was the ready way thither. And to make she of greater numbers of
shot, or else from a Custom they had whereby to terrify the Symerons, they hung
lines with matches lighted cross the end of the Marketplace, as if there had
been a Company of Musketeirs, whereas there were only two or three, that made
these Lines move and dance, who all fled when they perceived themselves
discovered; But the Soldiers and their assistants gave them a hot Volley of
Shot, which came full upon them as they marched up the Street, shooting so very
low that their Bullets often grazed on the Sands; The English having discharged
their first Volley of Shot and Arrows which were made light on purpose for
Service, they came to push a Pike, wherein the Fire-Pikes, Pikes and short
Weapons fighting at close quarters with bows and arrows, hatchets, spears with
the butt ends of their Muskets were very serviceable, and made the Spaniards
retreat, when the Captains Brother arriving at the same instant, the Enemy
threw down their Arms and fled all out of Town by the aforesaid Gate, which was
made to secure them against the Symerons, but served now for a retreat to the
flying Spaniards, who being pursued many of the English were wounded by the
Weapons of the Enemy that lay cross their way.

Being returned, they made a stand in the midst of the Marketplace, Drake
sending some from thence to stop the Alarm-Bell which continued Ringing all
this while, but the Church being strong built, and firmly Locked and Bolted they
could not get in without firing it, which the Captain absolutely forbid; Mean
time two or three Spaniards being taken in the flight, were commanded to direct
them to the Governors house, where usually all the Mules who brought the Kings
Treasure from Panama were unladen, though the Silver only was kept there, the
Gold, Pearl, and Jewels, when entered by the Kings Officer being carried from
thence to the Treasury hard by, which was very strongly built of Lime and Stone
for securing it; Coming to the Governors, they found the great door where the
Mules unload just opened, a Candle lighted on the Stairs, and a very fine
Spanish Horse ready sadled either for the Governor or some of his Family; By
means of this light they saw a vast heap of Silver in the lower Room consisting
of Bars of Silver piled up against the Wall seventy foot in length, ten in
breadth, and twelve in height, each Bar between thirty five and forty pound
weight. At sight hereof Captain Drake gave strict charge none should touch a
Bar of it, but stand upon their guard, the Town being full of people, and there
being in the Kings Treasury near the Waterside more Gold and Jewels than the
four Pinnaces could carry, which he told them, they should instantly attempt to
break open, notwithstanding the report the Spaniards gave of the strength
thereof.

Returning back to the Marketplace news came their Pinnaces were in danger to
be seized by the Soldiers and Townsmen, of which they had intelligence by one
Diego a Negro, who during the skirmish came to the Pinnaces and inquired
whether they belonged to Captain Drake, and thereupon desired to be taken
aboard, which was done though he had several Shot made at him from the shore;
By him they had notice that about eight days before their arrival the King had
sent thither an 150 Soldiers to secure the Town against the Symerons, which
was likewise full of other People, this was the rather believed as agreeing
with the report of the Negro's taken formerly at the Isle of Pinos; Drake
therefore sent his Brother and John Oxnam to discover the truth, who found the
men aboard the Pinnaces much frighted with the great Troops they saw running
about with lighted Matches, and Weapons crying, Que Gente? que gente? Of what
Nation are they? What Countrymen are they? who not having been at the conflict
at the Market-house, but coming thither from the furthest parts of the Town,
(which was as large as Plymouth in England) came many times near them, and
finding they were English, discharged their Guns at them and ran away. After
this fell a terrible strom of Rain, Thunder and Lightning with so much
violence, as usually happens in those Countries, that before they could shelter
themselves under the Treasure-house some of their Bow-Strings, Match and Powder
were wet, which caused much disturbance among them, which Drake perceiving told
them, That he had brought them to the mouth of the Treasure of the World, which
if they did not now gain, none but themselves were to be blamed; After this the
storm, having continued near an hour, ceasing, to prevent the fears of his men,
and the preparations of the Enemy, he commanded his Brother with John Oxnam and
their company to break open the Treasure-house, and the rest to follow him to
the Marketplace till they had finished the business they came about; As Drake
stepped forward his Strength, Sight and Speech failed him, and he began to faint
for want of Blood, which he then perceived had issued in great quantity from a
wound in his Leg in the first encounter, and which he hitherto had concealed
lest he should discourage his Company, or tempt them to forsake him, many
having already got considerable booty; He lost so much Blood filling his very
footsteps on the Sands therewith, that his men were much troubled, not thinking
it possible he could live after so great an evacuation, giving him therefore
somewhat to drink which recovered his Spirits, they bound up his wound with his
Scarf, and persuaded him to go aboard for his recovery, which he absolutely
refused, doubting whether ever he should have the like opportunity, so that
joining force and intreatys together, they carried him into the Pinnace, and
the whole Company being imbarqued by break of day July 19. many of their men,
besides Drake, being wounded, though only a Trumpetter slain, they resolved to
be gone, taking the Spanish Ship of Wines along with them for relieving their
Captain and themselves, yet before they got out of the Harbor, the Townsmen
remounting one of their great Guns shot at them, but without damage, so that
they carried off their prize to an Island two Leagues thence called the Isle of
Victuals, where they staid two days to cure their wounded men, and refresh
themselves in the Gardens they found there, abounding with all sorts of Roots,
Fruits, Poultrey, and other Fowls no less strange than delicate.

Soon after their Arrival a Gentleman, who belonged to the Garrison lately sent
to the Town came to them, protesting the intent of his coming was only to see
and admire the courage of those who with so small forces had made so great and
incredible an attempt, that at first they feared they had been French, but
perceiving them by their Arrows to be English, their fears were abated, since
they were satisfied that though they took their Treasures, yet they would use
no cruelty to their Persons, but though this Gallant pretended his visit was
only to honor their Virtues, yet they were after satisfied that he came
directly by the Governors command to discover whether their Captain were the
same Drake who had been the two last years on their Coasts, whom the Townsmen
affirmed they knew very well, and who had always used them kindly, and because
many of the Spaniards were wounded with Arrows, he desired to know whether the
English had poisoned them, and how they might be cured, lastly what Provisions
they wanted, the Governor promising to supply them to the utmost of his power;
the Captain though he judged this Soldier only a spy, yet treated him civilly,
and returned this answer to his demands; That he was the same Drake whom they
meant, that it was never his custom to poison Arrows, that their wounds might
be cured with ordinary remedies, that the Island they were upon was sufficient
to supply all his necessities, and that he only wanted some of that excellent
commodity of Gold and Silver which that Country yielded for the use of himself
and his Company; He therefore advised the Governor to look about him declaring
that by the help of God he was resolved before his departure to reap some of
that golden Harvest which they got out of the Earth, and sent into Spain to
trouble all the Earth.

To this unexpected answer the Gentleman replied, Pray Sir may I without
offense ask what was the cause of your leaving the Town now, where there was
above three hundred and threescore Tun of Silver, ready for the Fleet, and a
much greater quantity of Gold locked up in Chests in the Kings Treasury? The
Captain giving him a true account of his unfortunate wound and unwilling
retreat aboard, the Spaniard acknowledged they had no less reason in departing
than courage in attempting, and that it was more necessary for the Town to
provide for their own defense, than to set out any Ships to offend the English;
After this he was dismissed with gifts from the Captain to make his report to the
Governor, protesting he never received so much honor from any Person in his
life; the Negro aforementioned confirmed all that the Spaniard related of the
vast Treasures in the Town, adding, That they might have Gold and Silver enough
if they would make use of the Symerons, and that he would venture with them if
the Captain would undertake his protection, since they hated him for betraying
several of them into the hands of their Masters, and that he knew they had a
great respect for the name and Valor of Captain Drake; Hereupon they resolved
to leave that Island as neither safe not healthy, and the next night arrived at
the Isle of Pinos or Port Plenty where they had left their Ships, from whence
Drake sent his Brother and Else Hixon to the Westward to search the River
Chagro where he had been the year before, and desired a further discovery since
it ran Southward within six Leagues of Panama near a little Town called Venta
Cruz, whence all the Treasure usually brought by Mules from Panama was shipped
down this River into the North Sea, the tide not running up far into the land,
so that it requires three days to go up against the Stream.

When they came to their Ships Aug. 1. Captain Rawse despairing of the
hoped-for-success, and their security on those Coasts being now discovered, was
upon his desire freely dismissed, after the return of the Pinnaces from searching
the River Chagro, the rest continuing in the Isle about six days when it was
concluded that Drake with his two Ships and three Pinnaces should sail to
Carthagena, which they did in six days, the calms they met with much hindering
their speed, attempting nothing by the way neither at Tolou nor elsewhere; Aug.
13. their two Ships archord between the Islands of Caresha and St. Bernards,
the Captain bringing the Pinnaces about into the Harbor of Carthagena, where at
the entrance he found a Ship at anchor with only one old man aboard, who upon
demand answered, That the rest of his Company were gone ashore in a Gondelo
that Evening to fight about a Young Lady, and freely told them, That two hours
before night a Pinnace sailed swiftly by with Oars inquiring whether any French
or English, had been lately there, and being answered, none, they bid them look
to themselves, and that within an hour after this Pinnace was come to the
further side of Carthagena, many great Guns were discharged, whereupon one
going to the top Mast espied several Ships and Vessels coming into the Castle;
This report the Captain credited since themselves had heard the Ordnance, and
perceived they were now fully discovered, yet having notice by this old
Mariner, that a great Spanish Ship newly unladen lay in the next Point, bound
next morning for St. Domingo in Hispaniola, they took him aboard their Pinnace
to verify his information, and coming near the said Ship they asked whence they
came, the English replied, from Nombre de Dios, whereupon they abused and
railed at them, who disregarding their words instantly boarded her, though with
some difficulty by reason of her height, she being 240 Tun; Having entered the
Deck, the Spaniards perceiving they had taken possession, got all into Hold
with their arms, except two youths, when finding no danger from the Enemy, they
towed the Ship without the Island into the Sound, just before the Town though
out of reach of their great Guns.

Mean while the Town having Intelligence hereof by their Watch, took the alarm,
rung out their Bells, and shot off about thirty Ordnance, and diverse Horse and
Foot came down to the very Point of the Wood to prevent their going out of the
Sound; next morning the English took two Vessels wherein were two who called
themselves the Kings Scrivano's, one of Carthagena, the other of Veragua with
seven Mariners and two Negro's, who came from Nombre de Dios, bound for
Carthagena with double Letters of advice to certify them; That Captain Drake
had been at Nombre de Dios, and had probably taken and plundered it if he had
not been prevented with some blessed shot, and that he being still on the
Coast, they should carefully provide for their security; The Captain bringing
all his Fleet together, at the earnest entreaty of the Scrivano's set them and
their Company ashore, and sailed thence three Leagues off the Town, where they
found store of Fish to refresh them, and Drake considering he was now
discovered in two of the chief places on the Coast, yet not intending to leave
it till he had found the Symerons, and performed his Voyage which would require
time, and the well manning of his Pinnaces, he resolved to burn one of his
Ships, and make the other a storehouse, thereby to strengthen the Pinnaces, but
knowing his Company would hardly consent, the Ships being both good sailors and
well provided, he resolved to use policy, and sending for Thomas Moon,
Carpenter in the Swan, took him into his Cabin, and charged him to conceal for
some time, a piece of service which he must needs do him aboard his own Ship,
which was in the middle of the second watch, to go privately down into the Well
of the Ship, and boar three holes as near the Keel as possible, laying somewhat
against it to prevent the noise of the Water entering in; Moon was astonished to
hear him propose the loss of so good a Ship which was his own, new, strong, and
in which he himself had before made two rich and gainful Voyages, alleging, if
his Brother, the Master, or any of the Saylors should know of such a fact, they
would certainly kill him, but the Captain satisfying him of the necessity of
it, and assuring him of secrecy, till they should all be glad of it, he
undertook and performed it accordingly.

Next morning Aug. 15. Drake going early a fishing in his Pinnace, and falling
aboard the Swan calls for his Brother to go with him, who rising hastily,
replied, he would instantly follow, or attend him if he pleased to stay; The
Captain perceiving the business done, would not hasten him, but rowing away,
carelessly demanded of them, why their Ship was so deep in the Water; Upon which
his Brother sent to the Steward to know whether there were any Water in her, or
what might be the cause, the Steward stepping hastily down suddenly his usual
scuttle was wet up to the wast, and getting up again with much affright, cried
out, The Ship was full of Water; There was no need of hastening them, some went
to the Pump, and others to search for the Leak, which the Master observing
instantly followed his Brother, certifying him of the strange accident befallen
them that night, that whereas they had not Pumpt in six weeks before, they had
now six foot Water in hold, and therefore desired to be excused from fishing to
search and remedy the Leak, and the Captain offering his assistance his Brother
answered, they had men enough aboard, desiring him to continue his fishing that
they might have part thereof for dinner; His Brother returning found the
Company had taken much pains, but had freed the Water very little, yet having
much love to the Ship (as Drake foresaw) they used their utmost diligence till
three in the afternoon, when perceiving that though they had assistance from
the Captains Ship, yet they were not able to free above a foot and half of
Water, and were very unlikely to find the Leak they were much discouraged, and
desired Drakes advice how to remedy it, who thereupon persuaded them to take
their goods out of her and then set her a fire to prevent her falling into the
enemies hands, that himself would Sail in the Pinnace till he could provide
some handsome Frigot, and his Brother should be Captain of the Admiral together
with the Master; This advice seemed strange at first, yet was instantly put in
execution that night, Drake having his desire and men enough now to strengthen
his Pinnaces.

The next day Aug. 16. they resolved to seek out a place in the Sound of Darien
to leave their Ship at Anchor safe and undiscovered that the Enemy might judge
them quite gone from the Coast, and mean while to prosecute their design with
the Pinnaces; Drake going with two to the River Grande, and his Brother taking
the third to find out the Symerons; In pursuance hereof they in five days
privately recovered the Sound, where the Captain employed them to clear a
spacious plat of ground from Trees and Bushes to build houses large enough for
their lodgings, and one particularly for their public assembling, wherein the
Negro well acquainted with the Country and Buildings did them much service,
the rest of the Company recreating themselves with Shooting at Butts, Bowls,
Quaits, Nine-Pins or what they pleased, half of them working one day, and the
rest the next, and likewise in providing fresh Victuals of Fish, Fowl, Hogs,
Deer, Rabbits and the like, whereof there was great plenty; The Smiths here set
up their Forge with all necessaries brought from England, which did them much
service. Having continued here fifteen days to silence the noise of their
discovery, Drake leaving his Ship with his Brother went Sept. 8. with two
Pinnaces for the River Grand as was formerly concluded on, and passing by
Carthagena out of sight, and coming within two Leagues of the River they landed
on the Main Land Westward, and saw much Cattle, and finding some Indians who
kindly demanded, What they wanted, they desired fresh Victuals which the
Indians presently furnished them with, taking what Cattle they needed with so
much ease that they seemed to have an absolute command over them, whereas these
Creatures would not suffer the English to come near them, the Captain, as
usually before, giving them such things in exchange as much contented them, so
that they promised always to supply them with necessaries.

CHAP. II. Captain Drakes proceeding to Rio Grand and Carthagena; His
entertaining the Symerons, and taking several Spanish Ships, and likewise the
Town of Venta Cruz.
HAving received this seasonable refreshment from the Indians, they departed
for Rio Grand, and arrived at the mouth thereof next day, where the stream was
so violent that they took up fresh Water though within half a League from the
Sea; from three in the afternoon till dark night they rowed up against the
current which was so strong that they got but two Leagues all that time; In the
night they moared their Pinnaces to a Tree, there falling a dreadful Shower of
Rain, with such strange and terrible thunder and lightning as much astonished
them, though Drake who had before seen the like, assured them it would not
continue above three quarters of an hour; After this storm it became very calm,
and such a multitude of Gnats or Musketoes fell upon them with their troublesome
stings that they could not rest all that night, nor defend themselves from
them, the best remedy they found was to anoint themselves with juice of
Lemmons. At break of day they proceeded to hale without ceasing, and about
three afternoon they spied a Canoo with two Indians fishing in the River, to
whom they spoke not for fear of discovery, nor the other to them judging them
Spaniards; within an hour after they descried several Houses on the other side
the River, the Channel whereof was 25 fathom deep, and so broad as one could
scarce see from one shore to the other, yet a Spaniard who kept these Houses
discovering their Pinnaces and thinking them his Countrymen, made a smoke for
a Signal to them to turn that way, being desirous to speak with them, they
accordingly rowed toward him, and being half way over he waved his hat and long
hanging Sleeves to them to come ashore, but they drawing nearer he perceived
his mistake, and fled from his Houses with all speed; The English landing found
them to be five in number all full of White Rusk dried Bacon, Cheese of that
Country somewhat like that of Holland, but much better tasted, which they send
as great Presents into Spain, there were also Sweatmeats, Conserves and a great
quantity of Sugar provided for the Fleet in their return to Spain.

They loaded their Pinnaces with this store of Provisions, and by twilight
departed, having notice by an Indian Woman in those Houses that the Frigots
(usually thirty or more, which transport goods from Spain to Carthagena, and
thence to those Houses, and so in great Canoo's up to Nova Reyno with great
ease the River running many hundred Leagues within the Land and bring back in
return the Gold, Silver, Victuals and other Commodities that Kingdom abundantly
yields) were not yet come from Carthagena, since the first Alarm of the English
being in the Country; Sept. 10. they went aboard their Pinnaces from these
Storehouses, when the Spaniards having brought some Indians from a great Town
two Miles off called Villa del Rey had placed them in the bushes by the water
side to annoy them with their Arrows, but the English rowed down the stream to
the mouth of the River without damage, where having unloaded all their
Provisions and cleansed their Pinnaces according to their Captains Custom, they
took all in again and sailed Westward. In their return they discovered a Ship,
a Bark, and a Frigot, wherein they imagined to have found some Spanish Gold,
but when pursued and taken met with nothing of value being bound for Sugar and
Hides, so that dismissing her they proceeded. Sept. 10. between Carthagena and
Tolou they took six Frigots laden with live Hogs, Hens and Maiz, which we call
Guiny wheat, of whom they got what Intelligence they could of the preparations
against them, and their opinion of them, and then discharged four of them and
all the men, retaining only two Ships well stored with good provisions.

Three days after they arrived at Port Plenty (where their Captain chose at
first to leave his Ship) so called by the Company, because they usually brought
thither all the Stores which they took going that way for victualling
Carthagena and Nombre de Dios, and from the Fleets going out and coming from
Spain which procured them such abundance of all necessarys, that had they been
three thousand Persons their Pinnaces would have sufficiently provided them
with Wine, Meal, Rusk, Cassavy bread made of a root called Yucca whose juice is
poison but the substance good and wholesome, dried Beef, dried Fish, live Sheep,
Hogs and Hens in abundance, with vast store of dainty Fish easily taken every
day. So that they were forced to build four several Storehouses ten or twenty
Leagues asunder both in Islands, and on the Main Land, that so if the Enemy
should surprise one they might have another to furnish them till they had
finished their desired Voyage, in building which the Negro's were very skilful
and speedy. With this Store they not only releived themselves and the Symerons
while they joined with them, but likewise two French Ships in much distress. In
Drakes absence Captain John Drake his Brother who was left here with one
Pinnace sailed into the Ocean, and rowing not far from the shore (by direction
of Diego the Moore who freely came to them at Nombre de Dios) he spied certain
Symerons with whom he treated so effectually, that at length leaving two
English with their Leader, they brought two of theirs aboard the Pinnace,
concluding to meet again next day at a River about midway between the Cabezas
and their Ships which they named the River Diego. These two Symerons being very
intelligent men chosen out by their Commander declared with much respect to
Captain Drake upon their arrival hither; That their Nation were very joyful at
his coming knowing him an Enemy to the Spaniards not only by his late attempt
at Nombre de Dios, but in his former Voyages, and they were therefore ready to
assist him in all his designs against his and their inveterate adversarys, to
which end their Captain and Company did now attend at the mouth of Rio Diego,
expecting what answer should be returned them, that they would willingly have
marched by land even to this very place, had not the way been very long and
troublesome with many steep Mountains, deep Rivers, and thick Woods and Bushes,
they therefore desired Drake to take some speedy and convenient Order on this
behalf. Who comparing the discourse of these Persons with his former
Intelligence both from the Negro's and Spaniards together with his Brothers
information of their great kindness to him when lately among them, he with the
advice of the rest, resolved to go with his brother and the two Symerons that
Evening to the said River, ordering the rest of the fleet to follow next
morning, his Brother having found out a place thereabout of much safety and
convenience, it being a very good and plentiful Country for above sixty
Leagues, and not inhabited by one Spaniard or any on their behalf, and lying
among a great many excellent Islands full of Trees, where though there be
Channels, yet they are so full of Rocks and Shoals as makes it very dangerous
to enter by night, whereas a Ship may there lie hid among the Trees.

Next day Sept. 14. arriving at the appointed River they found some of the
Symerons according to promise, the rest of them being a mile upward in a Wood
by the Rivers side; After they had given them Entertainment, and were satisfied
of their fidelity, they took two more into their Pinnaces, leaving two
Englishmen with them to go by Land to another River called Rio Guana to meet
another Company of Symerons then in the Mountains; They went that day from Rio
Diego in their Pinnaces toward their Ship, which they wondered did not follow
them according to Order. Two days after Sept. 16. they found her in the place
where they left her, but very much damaged and endangered by a Tempest in their
absence, which having refitted they sent one Pinnace to discover the Channel at
the bottom of the Bay to bring their Ship nearer the Land; Sept. 19. they
followed and with much wariness sailed safe into the best Channel; About five
Leagues from Cativaas between the Island and the Main, they moared their Ship,
the Island being near the Continent flat and full of Trees and Bushes. Sept.
22. the two English men and the Troop of Symerons with twelve others, they met
in the Mountains, came in sight of the Ship, on which they were brought aboard
to their great joy, hoping now to be quit with their old Spanish Enemies, and
the English expecting better success by their assistance.

At their first meeting when Drake moved them to inform him how he might be
furnished with Gold and Silver, they plainly answered; That if they had known he
had desired that they could have given him enough, but at present were
incapable because the Rivers wherein they had sunk a great quantity which they
had taken from the Spaniards, rather to vex their Foes than for any love they
had for it, were now so high that they could not get it out of such depths for
them, neither could they take any more from their Enemies because the Spaniards
in these Rainy Months are not used to carry their Treasure by Land. This
unexpected answer did not discontent Drake, but rather confirmed their
faithfulness, and therefore the Captain to wear out the five months they
designed to spend in those Seas, commanded all his great Guns and Ammunition
ashore sending his Pinnaces to the Main Land to fetch over great Trees to make
a Fort upon the Island to plant his Ordnance thereon, and for securing them
against any attempt of the Enemy. The Symerons cut down Palmeto Boughs and
Branches, and with strange celerity raised up two Houses large enough for all
the Company. The Fort was made Triangular with Timber and Earth, and thirteen
foot high.

Having continued here fourteen days October. 7. the Captain resolved to go with
three Pinnaces to Carthagena, leaving his Brother John Drake to govern those
who remained with the Symerons to finish the Fort, and to fetch boards and
planks from the prize he left at Cativaas where she was drove ashore and broken
in their absence, but might now be of use to this purpose. That night Captain
Drake came to an Island he called the Spurkite Island, because they found store
of Birds like Kites, but very delicate meat; Next day October. 8. they recovered
a large Island where they got great quantity of Fish, especially of a great
Shell Fish two foot long, which they called Whelks. Next morning being clear of
these Islands and Shoals, they haled off to Sea, and four days after October. 14.
chased two Frigots ashore near the Island of St. Bernards, from whence they
proceeded to Tolou and landed October. 16. near the Town in a Garden, where
certain Indians gave them Bows and Arrows, and presented them with the dainty
Fruits and Roots therein, for which they went not unrewarded, hoping to learn
intelligence of the Country and Fleets from them. They quickly went hence to
Caresha the Island of Carthagena, and with a full gale sailed toward the City,
casting anchor between the Island and the Continent right against the goodly
Garden Island, in which the Captain would not suffer them to Land, because he
knew the Spaniards sent Soldiers thither when they heard any Men of War were
on the Coast, which happened accordingly, for three hours after passing by the
Point of the Island they had a Volley of an hundred shot from them, yet not one
of their men hurt, that Evening they went to Sea, and next morning, two Leagues
off, they took a Bark, and found that her Captain his Wife and the principal
Passengers had forsaken her, and were gone ashore in their Gundeloe, so that
they boarded her without resistance, though very well provided with Swords,
Targets, small Shot and Iron Guns; She was about fifty Tun, with ten Mariners,
five or six Negro's, great store of Soap and Sweetmeats bound from St.
Domingo, to Carthagena, the Captain having left behind him a Silk Ancient with
his Arms at his hasty departing.

Next day October. 18. they set all the Mariners ashore to seek their Masters,
retaining only a young Negro three or four years old, and the Bark, wherein
they bore into the mouth of Carthagena Harbor, and there anchored; That
afternoon diverse Horse came down to the Wood-side in company with the
forementioned Scrivano, toward their Bark with a Flag of Truce, desiring
security for his coming and going, which being granted he came aboard and gave
the Captain many thanks for his repeated favors, promising to bring him before
morning as much provisions as he desired, what danger or punishment soever he
incurred thereby. Yet all this was only a trick of the Governors to gain time
and strength enough to entrap them, so that seeing no appearance of this fair
pretender by Sunrising, they put to Sea to the West, and lay at Hull the rest
of that day and night. Oct. 20. Afternoon two Frigots bound for Sir Domingo
came out of Carthagena, one of fifty and the other of twelve Tun, laden only
with ballast, which they took a League from the Town and came to an Anchor with
them with in Shot of the East-Bulwark, she had about thirteen common Mariners,
who desiring to be set ashore, the Captain gave them the great Frigots
Gondeloe, and dismissed them.

Next morning when they came down to the West Point with a Flag of Truce the
Captain rowed ashore in his Pinnace, whereupon the Spaniards fled, and hid
themselves in the Woods pretending fear of the Great Guns, but thereby
intending to draw them ashore in the pursuit, whereupon Drake leapt out on the
Sand to defy them and show that he durst land, though he stayed not long to let
them know that though he were not able to conquer them, yet he perfectly
understood their designs; The Captain coming again aboard they returned back
upon the Sand sending a Youth as from the Governor to know what they designed
by staying so long on those Coasts. Drake replied; He meant to traffic with
them, having Tin, Pewter, Cloth and other Merchandise which he knew they had
occasion for; The Youth swum back again with this answer, and instantly
returned with another Message, That the King of Spain had forbidden traffic
with any Foreigners except for Powder and Shot of which if he had any quantity
they would buy it; He replied, That he was come from his Country to exchange
his Goods for Gold and Silver, and was unwilling to return without his errand,
and that he believed they would have little rest if they did not fairly
traffic with him; He gave the Messenger a fine Shirt for a reward and so
discharged him, who rolling his Shirt about his head, swum quickly back again.
They heard no answer all that day, but kept strict watch; Next morning about
break of day they saw two Sails making toward them, but coming nigh they
perceived by the many heads peering above board that they were manned and set
forth from Carthagena to fight with them, or at least to regain the Frigots
they had taken, but were prevented in both, for leaving John Oxnam with one
Pinnace, to entertain those Men of War, Drake hastened in the other to secure
the Ships left at Anchor, and caused the Spaniards, (who mean time had gotten
aboard in a small Canoo to have towed the Frigots within danger of the Shot) to
make all possible have away, some being forced to swim a land, leaving their
Swords, Targets, Flasks, and Calivers behind, and considering he could not man
them, he sunk one, and burnt the other to show them their secret practices were
discovered.

This done October. 22. he returned to John Oxnam who mean while lay by the Men
of War without offering to fight; When the Captain came up the wind blew so
hard that the Pinnaces were forced to give way, which caused the Spaniards to
rejoice in hope they fled, but when they came into Harbor and had smooth water,
the Pinnaces engaged the Enemy with advantage, so that after a few Shot
exchanged and a storm arising, they feared to press nearer, and the storm
continuing whereby they doubted of success they retired into the Town, and the
English were obliged by the Foul Weather to continue there four days, feeling
much cold from the rains and Westerly winds, and very little Shelter in their
Pinnaces. The fifth day after October. 27. a Frigot coming from Sea, seeing the
English make to her, ran ashore, taking off her Rudder and Sails to prevent
being carried away, but coming up to her, they perceived near an hundred Horse
and Foot well Armed coming to the Point, with whom they exchanged some Shot,
one of which passed so near a principal Commander among them that they
concluded to retreat into the Woods, where they might rescue the Frigot, and
sufficiently annoy the English, who therefore resolved to go to Sea again
intending to take down their Masts, and ride on the Rocks called Las Serenas
two Leagues off at Sea, as they usually did, and were hardly distinguished from
the Rocks, but the Waves were so high that they were forced to continue six
days in the Harbor to the great disturbance of the Spaniards who contrived
another device against them.

For Nov. 2. They sent forth a great Shallop, a Gondeloe, and a Great Canoo,
with some Spanish Musketeers, and many Indians with poisoned Arrows, as if to
begin a Skirmish and then to fly, but the English rowing toward them and
firing, they instantly landed and retired into the Woods, where an ambush of
sixty Muskets lay, beside two Pinnaces and a Frigot very well manned. They
boldly assaulted them, assisted by those out of the Wood who again got aboard
the Gondeloe and Canoo, and seeing the English coming up, assured themselves of
success from the Ambuscade, but Drake foreseeing the danger of the attempt,
kept out of reach of their Shot from land, and the Enemy freely spent their
Powder on them two or three hours, wherein the English had only one man
wounded, but saw the Spanish Pinnaces shot through in several places, and the
powder of one took fire, whereupon Drake designed to come up and board them, to
prevent which they rowed speedily to their defense in the Wood, being
disappointed of assistance from their Frigot which the wind would not suffer
either to help them or offend their Enemies; Dispairing therefore of any prize
in these Parts, and Victuals growing scarce, Drake returned again Nov. 3. to
Rio de Grand, and on the Coast in their passage found great store of Victuals;
After two days, arriving at the Villages of store where they were before
supplied with abundance of Hens, Sheep, Calves, Hogs and the like, they now
found nothing left, nor any people to be seen, flying by the Spaniards command
into the Mountains, and driving away all their Cattle that they might have no
relief from them; Troubled hereat and much of their Victuals being spoiled at
Sea, they were revived by the sight of a Frigot from whom they expected relief,
but upon boarding perceived she had neither Meat nor Money, being bound for Rio
Grand to take in provision upon Bills.

This adding to their grief they lived upon a certain allowance seven or eight
days and Sailed toward Sancta Martha in hope of Shipping in the Road, or Fishes
on the Rocks, when arriving near the Town the Spaniards seeing them Men of War,
placed forty Musketeers secretly among the Clifts, who annoyed them so
unrevengedly that they were forct to quit that Harbor, though endangered by a
storm without, and want within, and go to Sea, and the Enemy to give them a
farewell made an unlucky Shot from a Culverin between the Pinnaces, while they
were consulting how to proceed; Some advised to land in some place Eastward to
get Victuals, and rather venture on the kindness of the Country people than
continue at Sea in such a cold storm and a leaky Pinnace, but Drake resolved to
bear up toward Rio de Hacca or Coriazo, hoping there to meet with plenty
without resistance either from the Inhabitants or some Prize in the Harbor; The
Company in the other Pinnace answered, They would willingly follow him through
the World, but they did not think their Pinnace could endure a storm, nor
themselves the want of provisions so long, having only one Gammon of Bacon and
thirty pound of Biscuit for eighteen men; The Captain replied, They were better
provided than himself, who had but one Gammon of Bacon, and forty pound of
Biscuit for twenty four men, and therefore hoped they would take their Lot with
him and freely depend upon Divine Providence which never fails those that trust
therein; Upon this he hoised Sail for Corizao, which the rest perceiving,
resolved to follow their Captain, though with sorrowful hearts because of the
weakness of their Pinnace.

They had not sailed above three Leagues when a Spanish Ship about ninety Tun
appeared, which they joyfully expected to be their own, but being haled, she
despised their Summons, and gave them a Gun, the Sea went very high so that
they could not attempt her, but after a great Shower a Calm ensuing, they
pursued and quickly took her, which being laden with Victuals well powdered and
dried, they received as sent them by the mercy of Heaven. Nov. 13. Edward Hixom
by the Captains order going, in search of some Harbor along the Coast,
discovered a very convenient place twelve Leagues East of Sancta Martha,
whither bringing in their new Prize, by promising liberty and all their apparel
to the Spaniards to procure them Water and fresh Victuals, they by their means
obtained plenty of both from the Indian Inhabitants who went clothed, and were
governed by a Spaniard that dwelt in a Town a League off, they stayed all day
providing necessaries, for which they satisfied the Indians; At night the
Captain called all his men aboard, leaving the Spaniards ashore, who
acknowledged their obligations to be greater to him for giving them Liberty
than their damage was by losing their Ship.

The sickness which began among them, now appeared by the death of Charles Club
their Quartermaster, and a very Skilful Seaman, occasioned as they judged by
the cold the men had got lately in their Pinnaces, yet the rest of the Company,
though ill, recovered their health. Next morning Nov. 15. Drake sent his
smallest Pinnace the Minion to the Ships at Fort Diego to advise them of his
coming, and to prepare for their Land-Journey, and if they heard of the Fleets
arrival by the Symerons, charging the Pinnace to take in a sufficient quantity
of the Wine they had hid in the Sand at St. Bernards, in their way. In seven
days after Drake arrived at St. Bernards, but found only twelve Botajo's of
Wine of the great store they had left there, which escaped the strict search of
the Enemy who had been there since, by being buried very deep in the ground.
Nov. 27. they came to their Ship and received the ill tidings of the death of
John Drake the Captains Brother and Richard Allen a young man, both slain at
one time in attempting to board a Frigot two days after their departure from
them; for in going toward their Fort with Planks for the Platform they saw a
Frigot at Sea, which the Company persuaded him to fall upon as a good prize; He
replied, They wanted arms to assault them, and knew not how strong they were,
and his Boat was now laden with Planks, to finish his Brothers Orders; This
not satisfying them, and they seeming resolved, Well, said he, if you will
needs venture you shall never say I will be hindmost, nor report to my Brother
that you lost your Voyage by my Cowardice.

Making then the best provision possible, and heaving their Planks overboard,
they armed themselves with such poor weapons as they had, that is, a broken
pointed Sword, an old Carbine, and a rusty Musket. John Drake took the Sword,
and made a Shield of his Pillow, Richard Allen had the Carbine, standing in the
head of the Pinnace, and Roberts managed the Musket, and so they boarded the
Frigot, but found her hung round about with Hides, behind which she was full of
Pikes and small shot, which they discharged in their faces, and mortally
wounded John Drake in the belly, and Richard Allen in the head, who yet got off
the Pinnace, freed themselves from the Frigot, and hastily recovered the Ship,
wherein within an hour these hopeful young men died with much regret of the
Company; Having moared their Ships fast, Captain Drake resolved not to go to
Sea again, but to conceal himself till the coming of the Spanish Fleet,
supplying himself and the Symerons out of his Storehouse, besides the daily
relief they got of wild Hogs, Pheasants and Guanas out of the Woods, whereby
they by God's blessing continued in health till January 3. when six of their
Company fell sick and died within two or three days, yea they had thirty at a
time sick of a Calenture occasioned by the sudden change from cold to heat, or
from the salt or brackish water taken in at the mouth of the River by the sloth
of the Seamen who would not go further up. Among others Joseph Drake another of
the Captain's Brothers died in his Arms of that Disease, who being opened, his
Liver was swollen, his Heart as if boiled, and his Guts all fair, the Surgeon
that dissected him died four days after, though not of the Calenture, of which
he recovered about a month before, but by presumptuously giving himself such a
strong Purge, that he never spoke word after taking it, and his Boy who was
sick only by tasting it, not recovering his health till he came to England.

The Symerons who were entertained in September, and usually repaired to their
Ship during their absence, ranged the Country toward Nombre de Dios, and gave
Drake particular notice of what happened, now assuring him that the Spanish
Fleet was certainly arrived, he sent the Lion Frigot to discover the truth,
since if it were so, all the Ships in the Country would repair to Nombre de
Dios for provisions; They in few days after met with a Frigot laden with Maiz,
Hens and Pompions from Tolou which they took, and who assured them the Fleet
was come; in her were taken one Woman and twelve Men whereof one was the
Scrivano of Tolou; The Captain used them very civilly, securing them from the
fury of the Symerons, who much importuned Drake they might have leave to cut
their throats in revenge of their many wrongs and injuries received from the
Spanish Nation, but the Captain adjured them neither to hurt nor affront them
while in his charge, and when he resolved to take a Journey by land to Panama,
he strictly enjoined Ellis Hixom to take care of his own Ship and Company, and
especially of those Spaniards he had put in the great Prize which was haled
ashore to the Island (called by them Slaughter Island, because so many of their
men died there) and which was now used for their own Store house and a Prison
for their Enemies; All things thus ordered, and the Captain consulting with the
Chief of the Symerons,, what Weapons, Provisions and Apparel were convenient
for this great and long Journey; They advised to carry as many Shoes as
possible because of the many Rivers full of Stones and Gravel they were to pass;

Preparation of all necessaries made Febr. 3. being Shrove-Tuesday, they began
their Journey with most of their Company having already lost, twenty eight men,
and leaving only a few sound men with Hixom to secure the Ship and Prisoners,
and tend the sick; At his departure Drake gave Hixom strict charge not to
credit any Messenger who should come in his name with any token unless he
brought his handwriting, which he knew neither the Spaniards nor Symerons
could counterfeit. They were in all 48 whereof 18 were English and the rest
Symerons, who besides their arms, carried each a great quantity of Victuals, so
that the English had nothing to toil them but their Arms in this long Journey,
and because they could not carry enough for a full supply, they according to
promise, provided sufficient store with their Arrows by the way; They had each
two sorts of Arrows, one to assault the Enemy, and others to kill Victuals, the
first are very long and headed with Iron, Wood or Fish-bones, the other have
some a head of Iron of a pound and half weight, shaped like the head of a
Javelin, and sharp as a knife, making so deep a Wound into an Ox, Stag or
Wild-Boar as is hardly credible; They have others with less heads some to kill
smaller Cattle, and others still less for Birds, and are so well tempered as
not to be easily Blunted nor broken, their absolute necessity of these Weapons
makes them value Iron much above Gold, and whoever has skill to give a true
temper to these Arrows is highly valued. They marched every day from sunrising
till ten in the forenoon, and then again from twelve to four, always reposing
near some River either in Houses they found ready, or else such as were quickly
erected by the Symerons, who when they came where they designed to rest
instantly cut down branches of Palmetto Trees which served for Posts and
Rafters, and covering them close with Plaintain and Palmetto leaves they were
very well secured from the Rain and Sun; They would speedily erect six of these
Houses and made three Fires in each, one at each end and another in the middle,
which they so contrived that the smoke never offended, and the place was
temperately warm. Near these Rivers they found diverse wholesome Fruits as
Mammeas, Guyavas, Palmetto's, Pinos, Oranges, Lemons: and diverse others, which
the Symerons persuaded them to eat with moderation, except roasted Plantanes
Potato's and the like. If in the way they saw any wild Hogs on the Hills or
Valleys, the Symerons would usually six at a time, deliver their burdens to
their Fellows, and immediately pursue, kill, and bring away as much as they
could carry and the time would permit. One day they found an Otter, and went to
dressing it; Drake wondering at it, Pedro the Chief Symeron said, Are you a man
of War and in want and yet doubt whether this be meat which has blood in it?
Whereupon the Captain secretly chid him that he had not told them of it before.

The third day of their Travels they brought them to a Town of their own, on
the side of a Hill near a fine River, encompast with a Ditch eight foot broad,
and a Mud-wall ten foot high, to prevent a sudden surprise; It had one long
broad Street East and West, and two less crossing it, consisting of about sixty
Families, the Houses and Streets being very clean and sweet, and the People
lived very civilly and cleanly; When the Symerons came hither, they washed
themselves in the River, and changed their Apparel, which was very fine and
exactly made, as were likewise their Women's Garments, much like the Spaniards,
but not so costly; This Town is 35 Leagues from Nombre de Dios and 45 from
Parnama, plentifully stored with Cattle, Fowl, Maiz, and diverse Fruits. As to
their Religion, they have no Priests, only they held the Cross in much
reverence, but by Drakes persuasion they left it, and learnt the Lords Prayer,
seeming willing to be instructed in the Worship of God; They keep a constant
Guard in four parts three mile off the Town to prevent the mischiefs of the
Spaniards who are often conducted against them by the Symerons themselves,
whereby they sometimes prevailed against them when they lived carelessly, but
since this having usually notice of their coming, they many times surprise the
Spaniards and kill them in the Woods like Beasts.

They stayed with the Symerons that night Febr. 7. and the next day till noon,
during which they related many strange accidents between them and the
Spaniards, and among others; That a gallant Gentleman entertained by the
Spanish Governors of the Country undertook the last year with an 150 Soldiers
to destroy Man, Woman and Child in this Town, being conducted by one of their
own who had been taken Prisoner, and bribed with gifts; He accordingly
surprised them half an hour before day, whereby most of the men escaped in the
dark, but many Women and Children were murdered or taken; But at Sunrising,
this Gallant their Leader being slain in pursuing another man's Wife, the
Symerons resumed their Courage, and getting together, fell so furiously on the
Spaniards that flying into the Woods without a Guide most of them perished by
Famine, and not above thirty escaped to carry the news to those that sent them.
Their King dwelt in a City 16 Leagues South-East of Panama, and was able to
raise 17 hundred fighting men; They were very earnest with Captain Drake to
stay two or three days, engaging to double his number of men by that time if he
thought good; But he thanking them for their kind offer, resolved to prosecute
his Voyage, declaring, He would use no more strength if he might have twenty
times as much; Which they judging to proceed not only from kindness but
courage, they willingly marched away that afternoon, four of the Symerons who
best knew the ways going about a mile before and breaking down boughs for
direction to those that followed, all being enjoined great silence; after them,
twelve went before as a Vanguard, and twelve more in the Rear, the English and
the two Symeron Captains marching in the midst; All the way through the Woods
was cool and pleasant with the thick and high Trees, so that it was as
agreeable traveling in that hot Country as in England in the heat of Summer.
They were much encouraged by hearing there was a great Tree about the midway
where they might at once discern the North-Sea from whence they came, and the
South Sea whither they were going.

The fourth day after Feb. 17. they came to the top of this desired Hill, which
was very high, and lay East and West like a ridge between the two Seas: It was
about Ten a Clock in the morning when one of the Chief Symerons taking Drake by
the hand, desired him to walk up this famous high Tree wherein they had cut
diverse steps to ascend almost to the top, where they had made a convenient
Arbor for twelve men conveniently to sit, and from whence without difficulty
they might plainly discern both the North and South Atlantic Ocean, many of
the adjoining Trees being cut down to clear the prospect, and diverse strong
Houses built thereabout by the Symerons, who usually pass that way, and inhabit
those vast Countries; Drake having ascended the Tree, and the weather being
fair, taking a full view of that Sea of which he had heard such golden reports,
he besought God to give him life and leave once to sail an English Ship in
those Seas, John Oxnam and the rest of his Company assuring him they would
assist him therein to the utmost; All satisfied with this pleasing sight they
descended, and being refresht, marched two days further into the Woods, and then
came into a Champain Country, where the Grass grows so very high, that their
Cattle (of which they have abundance) cannot reach it, so that the Inhabitants
are forced to burn it thrice a year five or six Miles together, and yet after
it is burnt, within three days it again springs like green Corn; such is the
fruitfulness of the soil by the equality of the days and nights, and the rich
dews falling every morning.

In their three last days march over the Hills they saw Panama five or six
times a day and the Ships riding in the road, but being come within a days
Journey, the Symerons declaring that the Ladies of Panama used to employ
Hunters and Fowlers to take the curious Fowls in that Country, by whom they
might be discovered, Drake caused all his Company to travel out of the ordinary
road, with great silence to the Grove agreed on four days before within a
League of Panama, where they might lie undiscovered, near the highway to
Nombre de Dios. From hence they sent a Symeron who formerly was a Servant in
Panama in such apparel as their Negro's use in War, into the Town, to learn the
certain night and hour when the Kings Treasure was laden from the
Treasure-house to Nombre de Dios, for they always travel by night from Panama
to Venta Cruz because of the heat of the Champain Country, but from Venta Cruz
to Nombre de Dios they go always with their Treasure by day through the cool
fresh Woods, unless the Symerons happily make them sweat for fear, as often
happens, and therefore their Recoes are guarded with Soldiers; The last day
Drake took a full View of that fair City, and the large street therein, and by
three a Clock came secretly into the Grove along a River then almost dried up,
from whence he dispatched a Spy into the City in the Evening, who quickly
returned with intelligence from his Companions there, That the Treasurer of
Lima intending to go into Spain in a good Ship of 350 Tun called the Adviso,
designed that night to travel with his Daughter and Family to Nombre de Dios
accompanied with fourteen Mules, eight of them laden with Gold, and one with
Jewels, and that there were two other Reco's each of fifty Mules laden with
Victuals, and some small quantity of Silver to go this night also; There are
twenty-eight of these Recoes (or Company of Mules and People traveling
together) the greatest consisting of 70, the less of 50 Mules unless 10, 20, or
30 more are hired by particular Persons upon their own occasions.

Upon this notice they instantly marched within two Leagues of Venta Cruz when
two Symerons sent before, discovering a Spaniard by the Scent of his Match,
asleep, they stopped his mouth, put out his Match, and bound him so strictly as
had almost strangled him before they brought him to the Captain, who being
examined confirmed all that the Spy had reported, and that he was a Soldier
entertained with others by the Treasurer for guarding the Treasure from Venta
Cruz to Nombre de Dios. The Soldier understanding Drake was their Capt. took
courage to request him, That he would command the Symerons who extremely hated
the Spaniards especially the Soldiers, not to do him any mischief, whom he
knew they durst not disobey, and that since he was a Soldier, and was assured
that the Captain would gain that night more Gold, Jewels and Pearls than they
all could carry away (if not they should deal with him as they would) he would
please if it so happened to bestow as much on him as might suffice for himself
and his Mistress to live upon, as he had heard he had done to diverse before,
for which he should proclaim his bounty with as great praises as others who had
received the like favors had done. Being come to the place appointed Drake
with half his men lay about 50 paces off the highway in the long grass, and
John Oxnam with the Capt. of the Symerons and the other half, were placed on
the other side the way, but so far behind that the first Company might take the
foremost Mules by the head, and the other the hindmost, they being tied
together, and driven one after another, and especially that if they should use
their arms that night they might avoid hurting each other in the dark; Having
lain in ambush about an hour they heard the Recoes passing to and fro in the
road from Panama to Venta Cruz, they having a great trade when the Fleets are
there, the sound of their great Bells wherein they delight being heard a long
way in a dark night.

Drake had strictly commanded that none of his men should stir or appear, but
let all that came from Venta Cruz pass quietly with their Recoes, as knowing
they carried nothing but common Merchandise, yet one Robert Pike having drunk
too much Aqua-Vitae without Water forgetting himself, persuaded a Symeron to go
into the road, and seize on the foremost Mules, and a Spanish Horseman riding
by with his Page running on his side, Pike unadvisedly started up to see who he
was, though the Symeron discreetly endeavored to pull him down, and lay upon
him to prevent further discovery, yet by this the Gentleman taking notice of
one all in white, they having put their Shirts over all their Cloths to prevent
mistakes in the night, he put Spurs to his Horse both to secure himself, and
give notice to others of the danger; Drake observing by the hardness of the
ground and stilness of the night that the Gentleman changed his Trot into a
Gallop, doubted of the truth, yet had not leisure to examine by whose fault
they were discovered, but considering it might be from the danger of the place,
always suspected by Travelers, he lay still, expecting the Treasurer, who was
now within half a League, and had come forward had he not been met with by this
Horseman (as they after understood by the Recoes) who telling him what he had
seen and also what he had often heard of Captain Drake, whom he suspected to be
concerned in this business, who having been disappointed of getting any
Treasure at Nombre de Dios and other places, he believed was one way or other
come by land through the covert of the Woods to this place in hope of better
fortune, so that he persuaded him to turn his own Mules richly laden out of the
way and let the others pass on, which being only laden with Victuals, the loss
would be less, yet would discover who they were as well as the other.

Thus by the folly and carelessness of one man, and the carefulness of this
Traveller they were disappointed of a very rich Booty. The Mules coming up were
instantly stopped and seized on, the Driver a very sensible fellow telling Drake
how they were discovered, and advising them to shift for themselves unless they
were able to oppose the whole power of the City and Country which before day
would certainly come out against them. It much displeased them to be
disappointed of their Golden Hopes, and that they could not find above two
Horse-load of Silver, but it grieved the Captain much more that he was
discovered, and that by one of his own men, but since it was past remedy and
time was precious, Pedro Captain of the Symerons advised either to return back
privately about four Leagues into the Wood, or else to march forward in the
highway to Venta Cruz two Leagues off, and fight their way through their
Enemies; Drake concluded on the last course, considering the long weary marches
they had taken, choosing rather to encounter his adversarys while they had
strength than to be fallen upon by them when wearied, especially having now
some Mules to ease them in carrying their baggage. Commanding them all to
refresh themselves with the abundant provision they had got, he declared to
them all his resolution and the reason of it, particularly asking Pedro whether
he would give him his hand not to forsake him, being assured the Symerons would
follow their Captain, who glad of his design, gave Drake his hand, vowing that
in prosecuting it he would rather dye at his foot than to leave him his Enemies.

Having refresht themselves they traveled by the help of the Mules till within
a Mile of Venta Cruz, when discharging them, they charged the Mule-keepers not
to follow them upon pain of Death; The way is cut through the Woods about
twelve foot broad, for two Mules to pass, and the Soil so fruitful that with
often cutting the Woods grow as thick as the thickest Hedges in England. In the
midst of the Wood a Company of Soldiers who always lay in the Town to defend
it against the Symerons came forth to stop them, or if not to retreat to their
strength and expect their coming, a Convent of Friars with their Leader joining
likewise with them Drake understanding by the Symerons who marched with much
care and silence a small distance before them, that it was time to arm
themselves, since by the smell of their Match and their noise they perceived
the Enemy near; He gave charge that none of his men should shoot till the
Spaniards had first discharged a Volley which he thought they would not do
without speaking as accordingly happened, for being within hearing, a Spanish
Captain cried aloud, H^a, to which Drake answered, and being demanded, Que
gente, of what Country, replied, Englishmen; Whereupon the Commander charged
him in the name of the King of Spain to yield themselves, promising upon the
Word and Faith of a Gentleman Soldier that upon surrender he would use them
very kindly; Drake hereupon drawing nearer to him said, That for the honor of
the Queen of England his Mistress he must have Passage that way; And therewith
discharged his Pistol, upon which the Spaniards shot off their whole Volley,
wherewith though Drake and some of his men were slighty wounded, yet John
Harris only was killed, being so severely treated with Hail-shot which they
generally use that he could not be recovered; When Drake perceived their shot
to slacken, he gave his usual signal by a Whistle for his men to answer them
with their Shot and Arrows, and then fall in upon them, but perceiving them
retiring to a place of better strength, the English pursued them, and the
Symerons having for fear of the Shot stepped aside, when they observed them
marching forward, came all in again with their Arrows ready in their Bows
dancing and singing Yo' Peho', Yo' Peho, after the manner of their own Country
Wars till they overtook some of the Enemy who had taken their stand as before
in a Wood at the Towns-end; The Symerons now thoroughly encouraged, seeing this
broke through the thickest of them, forcing them to fly Friars and all, though
several of the English were wounded and one Symeron run through with a Pike,
who yet had so much courage as to kill him who gave that deadly wound.

They followed the chase so close that they entered the Town of Venta Cruz,
consisting in about fifty Houses, some very fair, with a Governor and other
Officers, and many large strong Storehouses for securing the goods brought
thither from Nombre de Dios by the River Chagro to be transported by Mules to
Panama. In the Houses they found three Ladies lately delivered there of
Children though they dwelt at Nombre de Dios, they having long observed, that
no Spaniard or white Woman could be safely delivered there, their Children
generally dying within two or three days, but if born and brought up in Sancta
Cruz till about six year old, and then brought to Nombre de Dios, if they
escaped sickness the first or second month, they usually lived as healthily as
in any other place; though they say no stranger can continue there long without
danger of death or extreme sickness. Though these Ladies were much frighted at
the approach of the English, yet Drake having strictly charged the Symerons not
to hurt any Woman, nor Man unarmed while in his company which they faithfully
obeyed, they had no injury offered them, nor any thing taken from them, though
they much doubted it, desiring the Captain himself would please to come and
secure them, not being satisfied with those he had sent to assure them of his
protection, to which Drake complying and repeating his promises they were much
comforted thereby.

The English having set necessary Guards as well on the Bridge they went over
as at the Towns end where they entered, and was the only passage by land into
it, they had liberty to stay there quietly an hour and half, not only
refreshing themselves but getting good plunder, which Drake gave between his
men and the Symerons as being cumbersom, and not what he came for. A while
before they departed about ten or twelve Horsemen as was thought from Panama,
thinking they had been gone because they were so still, came confidently into
the Town, but finding other entertainment than they expected, they rid faster
back out of fear than they entered in hope.

CHAP. III. Captain Drake goes back from Panama, and between Rio Francisco and
Nombre de Dios he takes a Recoe of fifty Mules each carrying three hundred
Pound Weight of Silver, and some Bars and Wedges of Gold, of which they carried
off a great quantity and buried fifteen Tun of Silver in the Sands; He comes
back to his Ships, and returns safe to England.
HAving ended their business in Venta Cruz, by daybreak they marched over the
Bridge in the same order as before, being as safe in their own opinions as if
secured by a Wall or Fort, no Spaniard daring to follow them, and the Symerons
being now much more valiant than before; But Drake considering he had been
almost a fortnight from his Ship, aboard which he left many sick, made all
possible have back, without visiting the other Symeron Towns, though earnestly
entreated by them, and encouraging his men by assuring them that he did not
doubt but they would yet be fully recompensed for all their pains before he
left that Coast; These discourses seemed to shorten the way, and their have
caused them to leave the Towns, and march many days with hungry stomachs, to
the great regret of the Symerons, who if the Captain would have stayed at any
place could quickly have killed Victuals enough. In their absence the other
Symerons had built a little Town three Leagues off the Port where their Ship
lay, wherein Drake by their earnest entreaty staid some time, because they
said, it was built for his sake and the rather that they might be supplied,
with Shoes by the Symerons, who were herein very useful to them; All the men
complaining of their feet, and their Captain, though sometime without cause
joining in their complaint to make it seem easier to them. These Symerons were
extreme serviceable to them all the time they were with him, and particularly
in this Journey, being Guides to direct them, Intelligencers, Purveyors of
Victuals, Carpenters to build Houses, and Porters to carry all necessaries with
their strong bodies, and when any fainted or were sick, two Symerons would
carry him with ease two miles together, and at other times they appeared no
less valiant than judicious.

From this Town the Captain sent a Symeron, Feb. 22. to the Master of the Ship
with a Token and Orders, who for three weeks past had kept watch upon the
Enemy, and shifted in the Woods for fresh Victual to relieve and recover his
men aboard; This Messenger coming to the Shore and calling to the Ship, was
soon fetched aboard, all hoping for good news from their Captain, but when he
showed the Tooth-pick of Gold which he said Drake had sent as a Token to Edward
Hixom with charge to meet him at such a River, though he knew it to be the
Captains Tooth-pick, yet remembering his Caveat at parting, though he seemed not
to distrust the Symeron, he stood amazed much doubting lest some misfortune had
befallen him; Which the Symeron perceiving told him, It was night when he came
away, so that he could not send a Letter, but yet with the point of a Knife he
writ something on the Tooth-pick, which he said was sufficient to give credit
to him; The Master looking on it saw writ, By me Francis Drake, wherewith being
satisfied, he prepared for the River Tortugos according to the Symerons
direction. About three in the Afternoon Drake and his men coming down toward
the River within half an hour the Pinnace arrived to receive them, and great
joy was expressed among them all for their happy meeting again; Drake and his
Company appeared to the rest (who had lived at rest and in plenty) strangely
changed both in Countenance and Body, occasioned by their fasting and long
Travel, but more for inward grief that they returned without the hoped-for Gold
and Treasure; The rest who by reason of weakness were left behind at the Indian
Town, were next day by another River at the bottom of the Bay all brought
aboard again.

All thus returned from Panama, and the Company well satisfied and revived with
hopes of success in the next attempt which Drake resolved to undertake, who
revolving in his mind the intelligence he had received of diverse other
considerable places thereabout, and particularly of Veragua a wealthy Town
Westward, between Nombre de Dios and Nicaragua, where is the richest Mine of
fine Gold on the Northside of America, he consulted what was to be done, some
were for supplying themselves with Victuals for preserving their health till
opportunity offered, which they might easily do, since the Barks and Frigots
that carried it were seldom very strong, whereas those that had Treasure were
well furnished with Soldiers and Ammunition; Others were for seizing the
Treasure, since that was not to be had but at this time when the Fleets were
there, they being already indifferently furnished with Provisions, and the
Country plentiful enough; The Symerons opinion being asked who knew the
particularities of all the Towns they declared, That Senior Pezoro their former
Master from whom they fled, dwelt near Veragua in a strong stone house where he
had resided above nineteen years, never traveling from home unless once a year
to Carthagena or Nombre de Dios when the Fleets came, that he kept an hundred
Slaves in the Mines, each being bound to bring in daily clear gain three Pezoes
of Gold for himself, and two for his Women, each Pezo being eight Shillings
three pence, amounting in the whole to above 200 pound Sterling a day, so that
he had heaped together a mighty Mass of Treasure which he kept in several great
Chests two Foot deep, three broad and four long, being notwithstanding all his
Wealth miserably covetous, and never going abroad without a Guard of five or
six men to defend him from danger which he extremely apprehended from all
Creatures, and if the Captain would undertake the getting this mighty booty,
the Symerons engaged to conduct them safe through the Woods without entering any
dangerous Havens, but might come on their backs unexpectedly, and though his
house being of Stone could not be easily burnt, yet if the Captain would
undertake it, they would undermine, overthrow, or break it open, and make the
access to this vast Treasure easy.

Drake hearing their opinions resolved to reconcile both by dividing his
Company, sending John Oxnam in the Bear Frigot Eastward toward Tolou to seize
what Victuals he could, and himself intending West in the Minion toward the
Cabezas where the Treasure-Barks from Veragua and Nicaragua pass oftnest to the
Ships, designing at the same time to gain both Money and Provisions; As to
attempting Pezoro's House by Land through the Woods, he was loath to over-weary
his men by labor whom he intended to refresh and strengthen for the next piece
of service; Courteously dismissing therefore those Symerons, who were willing
to go to their Wives with such Gifts and Presents as were most acceptable to
them, and kindly entertaining those willing to stay aboard, the Pinnace
departed, and about the Cabezas they met with a Frigot of Nicaragua wherein was
some Gold and a Genoa Pilot, of which Country there are many on those Coasts,
they came from Veragua eight days before, and being well treated, gave Drake an
account of the Town and Harbor, and that in a few days another Frigot was
coming from thence wherein was above a Million of Gold, the Pilot offering upon
consideration, To conduct them in safely by night without danger of Sands or
Shallows, as perfectly knowing the Channel, and without the least discovery,
since the Town is five Leagues within the Harbor, and the way by Land far about
and difficult through Woods, so that though they should be casually discovered
at the Point of the Harbor, yet they might dispatch their business and be gone
before the Townsmen could have notice of their coming; He told them further,
That at his being there he perceived they had heard of Drakes being on the
Coast, which much disturbed them; Pezoro the Miser resolving to remove for his
security to the South Sea, but their fears were so great in general that it
excluded Council and they had no way secured themselves.

Captain Drake considering seriously of this matter, thought once of returning
to his Ship for some of Pezoro's former Servants to be confirmed in the point,
but the Genoa Pilot pressing him to lose no time, he dismissed the Spanish Frigot
lightning it only of the Silver to hasten their speed; and then by the advice
of this Pilot whom he took aboard, he labored with Sails and Oars to attain
the Harbor of Nicaragua in the night, since they might now gain this Golden
Prize, and attempt Pezoro's House afterward; Coming to the mouth of the Harbor,
they heard two great Guns, and two more further within the Bay answering them,
which caused the Pilot to suspect they were discovered, affirming, This Order
was taken since his being there, because the Governor of Panama, had sent
notice to all places of Drakes being on the Coast, which caused such terror
among them that they hardly slept quietly in their Beds, and therefore probably
kept up this Watch at the charge and for the security of Pezoro the rich Miser;
Being thus defeated of their expectation they returned to their Ship, when
Oxnam being likewise come back, had only taken one Frigot with ten men whom
they set ashore, great store of Maiz, twenty eight fat Hogs and two hundred
Hens, of which discharging her, the Captain finding the Vessel new, strong and
of a good mould, fitted her up with great Guns and Provisions for a Man of War,
having notice by the Spaniards last taken that there were two little Galleys
built at Nombre de Dios to convey the Chagro Fleet to and fro, but were not yet
lanched, which Fleet he resolved now to attempt, and to encourage his men
feasted them nobly on Easter Day March, 20. upon that account.

Next day the new Frigot and the Bear sailed toward the Cativaas, and landed
about Noon, when observing a Sail making toward the Island they plied them, and
perceiving by their confidence they were no Spaniards but English of whom they
heard long before, being in much distress they made up to them, and declared,
Their Captain was named Tetu a French man of Newhaven and a Man of War desirous
of relief, humbly beseeching Drake to give them some Water, having nothing
aboard but Wine and Cider, which made his men sick, and that he had been
seeking the English five weeks since he heard they were on the Coast; The
Captain sent one aboard with present relief, promising them Water and Victuals
at the next Port. Coming to Anchor Tetu sent Captain Drake a Case of Pistols,
and a fine gilt Scimeter formerly belonging to the King of France whom
Montgomery hurt in the Eye, and given him by Mounsieur Scroff, Drake requited
him with a Chain of Gold and a Tablet which he wore. This Captain brought the
news of the great disturbances at Paris at the Marriage of the King of Navar
last St. Bartholomew day, with the death of the Admiral of France and many
others, so that they thought those Frenchmen most happy that were farthest from
France, which was now in a very deplorable condition. He told them what reports
there were of Drakes great Riches, and desired to know how he might likewise
make a good Voyage.

Though the English had some jealousy of him, yet upon consultation they
resolved to take him and twenty of his men to serve with their Capt. half
shares, being thereby secured against their numbers, and not damaged by that
part of the gain; Tetu had 70 men and they but 31, his Ship was 80 and there is
but 20 Tun, and the Pinnace ten. And therefore they hoped for assistance from
him in prosecuting their Voyage, and having agreed with him to meet at Rio
Francisco, they sent for two Symerons aboard to assure the French of this
agreement. Having in five or six days refresht themselves and the French, who
were very thankful for this seasonable relief, leaving, their two Ships in safe
Harbor, they manned their Frigot and two Pinnaces (having sunk the Lion after
their return from Panama for want of men) with twenty French and 15 English and
Symerons, wherewith they sailed toward Rio Francisco, where the water being
shallow they left their Frigot at the Cabezas in charge with Robert Dable
charging him to attempt nothing till their return with their Pinnaces,
wherewith they now entered Rio Francisco, and landed with the strength
aforementioned, ordering the Pinnaces to be there again four days after. And
being informed that the carriages went daily from Panama to Nombre de Dios
through the Woods toward the highway, they marched as in their former Journey
to Panama, it being reckoned five Leagues by Sea between Rio Francisco and
Nombre de Dios, but by land they found it above Seven, proceeding on with much
silence and order to the great wonder of the French Captain, who doubted of
ever recovering their Pinnaces if the Symerons should leave them, which Drake
never suspected, as knowing his will was a Law to them, though they neither
regarded nor trusted the French.

Coming within a Mile of the Highway they refresht themselves all night,
hearing many Carpenters working on the Ships, (because of the great heat of the
day) at Nombre de Dios, Next morning April 1. 1573. they extremely rejoiced to
hear the Mules coming with a great noise of Bells, hoping though they were
formerly disappointed they should now have more Gold and Silver than they could
carry away as accordingly happened, for soon after came three Recoes, one of
fifty Mules, and two more of 70 in each Company, every one carrying three
hundred pound weight of Silver amounting in all to about thirty Tun, they soon
prepared to go into the Highway to hear the Bells, and seized upon the first
and last Mules to see what metal they carried; These three Recoes had a Guard
of about five and forty Soldiers, fifteen to each, which caused the exchange
of some Shot and Arrows at first, wherein the French Captain was sore wounded
with Hail-shot in the Belly, and one Symeron slain, but the Soldiers soon
retiring for more help, left their Mules, and the English took pains to ease
some of them of their burdens, and being weary, contented themselves with as
many bars and wedges of Gold as they could well carry away, burying above
fifteen Tun of Silver in the Sand and under old Trees. Having in two hours
ended their business they prepared to return the same way, when they heard both
Horse and Foot coming, who yet never followed them into the Woods, where the
French Captain not able to travel further for his wound, reposed himself some
time in hope to recover his strength, and one of the French Soldiers being
missing, upon search it was found that being over-loaden with Wine and Gold, he
had lost himself in the Woods and was taken by the Spaniards that Evening, who
upon torture discovered where they had hid their Treasure.

They continued their march all that day and the next to Rio Francisco in hope
to meet their Pinnaces, whither being come April ^ looking out to Sea they saw
seven Spanish Pinnaces that had been searching all the Coasts thereabout; Upon
which they much doubted their own Pinnaces were burnt or taken, since Drake had
so strictly charged them to repair hither this afternoon from the Cabezas where
they lay, and from whence these Spanish Vessels seemed now to come. But much
Rain falling the night before, with a strong West Wind, enforced the Spaniards
to return home, and the Wind being contrary the English Pinnaces though with
help of Oars could not get above half way that day; Drake much fearing lest
having taken his Pinnaces they had by torture compelled his men to confess
where his Frigot and Ships were, and his Company doubting of ever returning to
their own Country, and that their Treasure would be of little use to them; The
Captain encouraged them saying, That they should venture no further than
himself, and that it was not now a time to fear, but to endeavor to prevent
their danger, since if the Enemy had seized their Pinnaces, (which God forbid)
yet they must take time to search and examine the Mariners, and time to
execute their resolutions thereupon, during which time they might if they
pleased get to their Ships, though not possibly by land because of the Hills,
Woods and Rivers, yet by Water it is very probable they might; Let us therefore
make a Raft with the Trees the River brings down as on purpose, since this last
storm, and put our selves to Sea, I my self will be one, who will be the rest?
John Smith and two Frenchmen who could Swim very well desired to accompany him,
and a Symeron, who was earnest with Drake to have marched sixteen days by land,
and if their Ships had been lost that he and his Company should always have
lived amongst them; Which the Captain refused; Pedro was left behind because he
could not row; The Raft was fitted and fast bound, and a sail made of a Biscuit
Sack, with an Oar shaped out of a Young Tree for a Rudder to direct their
course before the Wind.

At his going away he assured his Company, That if by Gods help he once more
safely put a^^ard his Foot in his Frigot, he would certainly get them all into
her in spite of all the Spaniards in the Indies; In this manner they put off to
Sea sitting always up to the wast in Water, and at every Wave up to the
Armpits, having sailed upon this Raft about six hours, their Skins being much
fretted with the heat of the Sun and the salt Water, they had sight of two
Pinnaces coming toward them, whom Drake confidently affirmed to his three
Companions were their own, and they were now out of all danger, but the
Pinnaces not perceiving the Raft, nor suspecting any such thing, were forced by
the Wind and Night to run into shelter behind the Point, which the Captain
seeing, and judging they would Anchor there, put his Raft ashore, and ran by
land about the Point, where he sound them, who joyfully took them all aboard,
for Drake to try their have, ran with all speed as if pursued by the enemy,
which they rather believed by seeing so few with him; Coming aboard, and they
asking how his Company did, he coldly answered, Well, which made them fear the
worst, to remove which, and free them from doubts, he took out of his bosom a
Quoit or Wedge of Gold, and thankt God his Voyage was now made; Telling the
French their Captain was left behind much wounded, with two of his Company,
which yet should be no damage to them; That night with much pains they got to
Rio Francisco, where they took the rest in with their Treasure, and made such
expedition that by break of day they failed back to their Frigot and from
thence directly to their Ships, where the Captain divided the Gold and Silver
by weight into two equal parts between the French and English.

Fourteen days after all things being set in order, and having taken out of the
Ship all necessaries for their Frigot, they restored her to the Spaniards whom
they had kept aboard all this time, and then sailed with the French Ship to the
Cabezas, where Drake agreed with the Symerons that twelve English and sixteen
of theirs should make another Adventure to discover the Country, and if
possible to recover Tetu the French Captain, or at least to bring away the
Treasure they had hid in the Sand; John Oxnam, and Thomas Sherwel were the
Principal Leaders of the English, who were all set ashore at Rio Francisco, and
no sooner landed when a Frenchman who freely remained behind with his wounded
Captain, having escaped the Spaniards rage came toward the Pinnace, and upon
his knees gave God thanks that ever Drake was born who now beyond hope was his
deliverer; He declared, That within half an hour after their departure, the
Spaniards overtook them seiznig on the Captain and his other Fellow, he only
escaping by flight by casting away all his Booty, with a Box of Jewels to fly
the faster from his Pursuers, but his Companion taking it up was so overloaded
therewiih that he could not escape as he might otherwise have done; That he
thought all the Silver they had hid was gone, near two thousand Negroes and
Spaniards having been there since to dig and search for it. Notwithstanding
this report the men were sent thither, and found the Earth turned up for a mile
round about the place, yet for all this narrow search their labor was not
quite lost, returning safe with thirteen Bars of Silver and some Wedges of Gold
which they imbarqued without hindrance, and speedily returned to their Frigot
with much joy.

It was now high time to think of returning home having had their desired
Success, whereupon Drake concluded again to visit Rio Grand in hope of meeting
some Vessel laden with Victuals, wherewith they might make sufficient
provision to serve them in their Voyage to England. The French who having their
Shares, were formerly dismissed, being desirous to return to their own Country,
and Drake as willing to discharge them, forseeing their Ship could not escape
the Spaniards if they lay lingering on the Coast, now meeting the English again
were loath to leave them, accompanying them as far as St. Bernards and would
have gone farther but that they had notice the Fleet was ready to set Sail from
Carthagena to Spain. At parting the English passed hard by Carthagena in sight
of all the Fleet with St. Georges Flag in the main top of their Frigot, and
silk streamers and Ancients down to the Water, sailing forward with a large
wind within two Leagues of the River being all low land and dark night, and a
Frigot from Rio Grand passing by about two in the morning they saluted them
with their Shot and Arrows, and were answered in the same manner, but soon
boarding them, they set the men ashore and took the Frigot, which was of
twentyfive Tun laden with Maiz, Hens, Hogs, and some Honey which was very
useful for their sick People; Next morning having put the Spaniards a land, in
five days they arrived at the Cabezas, where putting their Maiz ashore, they
stayed seven days fitting and providing their two Frigots, plucking their
Pinnaces to pieces that the Symerons might have the Iron-work which they much
value; Two days before their departure Drake desired Pedro, and three of the
Chief Symerons to go aboard his two Frigots and take what they liked, so it
were not absolutely necessary for their Voyage to England, and the Captain
presented them with several Silks and Linen for their Wives; Whilst they were
looking in the Trunks, the Cymeter Captain Tetu had given Drake was taken out,
which Pedro seeing he valued it above all things in the World, yet doubting to
ask it lest the Captain should likewise prize it, he promised Francis Tucker a
Wedge of Gold to move him about it, and offered the Captain four Wedges more
which he had hidden till another Voyage; Drake though unwilling to make such an
exchange, yet desirous to content him who had deserved so well, gave it him
with many kind expressions, who received it with such joy that he affirmed, If
he should give his Wife and Children whom he loved dearly in lieu of it he
could not sufficiently recompense him, since he would present his King
therewith, whom he knew would make him a Great Man for the sake of this very
Gift; Yet instead of this unvaluable Jewel he obliged the Captain to accept the
four pieces of Gold as a pledge of his thanks and faithfulness to him during
life; The Captain received it courteously, but threw it into the common Stock,
saying, That if they had not come to this place they should never have attained
such a valuable Commodity, and it was just that those who bore part of the
charge with him in setting him to Sea should likewise enjoy their full
proportion of the advantage at his return.

Thus with all manner of kindness they took leave of the Symerons, and sailing
by Cape Anthony came to the Havana, where they met with a small Bark with two
or three hundred Hides, which was of very much use to them in mending their
Pumps and otherwise, which having lightened they gave the Bark as useless to the
owners to carry them home, and returning to Cape Anthony they landed,
refreshing themselves with store of Turtles Eggs by day, and taking two hundred
and fifty Turtles by night, which being powdered and dried did them much
service. There were at this time belonging to Carthagena, Nombre de Dios, Rio
Grand, Sancta Martha, Rio de Hacha, Venta Cruz, Veragua, Nicaragua, the
Honduras and Jamaica above two hundred Frigots, some of an hundred and twenty,
others of ten or twelve, but the generality of thirty or forty Tun who all
traded between Carthagena and Nombre de Dios, most of which during their abode
on those Coasts the English took, and some twice or thrice over, yet never
burnt or sunk any unless they were fitted up for Men of War against them, or
lay to ensnare them. And of all the Spaniards taken in those Vessels, they
never hurt any when in their power, but either presently dismissed them, or if
retained some time, took as much care of them both for Victuals, and securing
them from the fury of the Symerons, as of their own, and the danger of their
discovering being over, set them at liberty. They saw many strange Birds,
Beasts, Fishes, Fruits, Trees, and Plants too long to insist on, being now
willing to end their Voyage, which they finished by sailing from Cape St.
Anthony directly home, even beyond their own expectation, the Captain designing
to touch at Newfoundland for water that they much wanted, which the Almighty
provided for them by sending great store of Rainwater; So that in twenty three
days they passed from Cape Florida to the Isles of Salley; And Arrived at
Plymouth on Sunday at Sermon time. Aug. 9. 1573. The news of Drakes return
being speedily carried into the Church so much surprised the People with desire
and joy to see him, that few or none remained with the Preacher, all running
out to observe the blessing of God upon the dangerous labors and endeavors of
Captain Drake.

CHAP. IV. Captain Drake with five Ships undertakes a Voyage round about the
Word, in 1577. and in prosecution thereof arrives at Port St. Julian, where he
discovers a Conspiracy for which a Gentleman of his Company was beheaded.
CAptain Drake having in his former Voyage had a View, and only a View of the
South Atlantic Ocean from the high Tree aforementioned, and from that very
time being very ambitious of sailing thereon in an English Ship, he retained
this Noble resolution within himself for some years, being partly prevented by
secret envy at home, and partly by applying himself to the public service of
his Prince and Country in Ireland under the Earl of Essex, and otherwhere; But
in 1577. having a gracious Commission from his Sovereign, and assisted with
diverse of his Friends who were Adventurers with him, he fitted up five Ships;
1. The Pelican Admiral of a hundred Tuns, Francis Drake Captain General; 2.
The Elizabeth Vice Admiral eighty Tuns, John Winter Captain; 3. The Marigold a
Bark of eighty Tun; John Thomas Captain; 4. The Swan a Flyboat of fifty Tuns,
John Chester Captain. 5. The Christopher a Pinnace of fifteen Tuns, Thomas Moon
Captain. Having manned this little Fleet with a hundred and sixty four able
men, and furnished them with all necessary Provisions for so long and dangerous
a Voyage, and stowing certain Pinnaces aboard in pieces, to be set up on
occasion, as in his former Voyage, yea carrying with him several Musicians for
delight, and rich furniture of Silver for his Table, and Cook-room, with all
sorts of curious Workmanship for Ornament, and to raise admiration of the
Civility and Magnificence of his Native Country in other Nations where he came.

Thus appointed, they sailed out of Plymouth Sound Novem. 15. 1577. about five
in the afternoon, and next morning came to the Lizzard, where meeting contrary
Winds, they were all compelled to put into Falmouth. Next day a great storm
arose, so that though they were in a good Harbor, yet the Admiral wherein Drake
was, and the Marigold were forced to cut their Main Masts by the board, and
obliged to return to Plymouth to repair, thirteen days after their departure
thence, where having quickly supplied all defects they December. 13. once more put
to Sea with better hopes; Being out of sight of Land, Drake gave some
intimation of his design (which he had hitherto concealed) both by the course
he saild, and appointing their Randezvouz, if separated by any accident, to be
the Isle of Mogadore; Sailing then with a favorable Wind December. 25. being
Christmas day they had sight of Cape Cantin in Barbary, and of the high inland
Country, in thirty two degrees and thirteen minutes North latitude, and
coasting thence Southward about eighteen Leagues, they arrived that day at the
Isle of Mogadore, which is under the King of Fesse, and a good Harbor, being
about a Mile from the main Land, uninhabited, and a League in circuit,
overgrown with shrubs and full of Pigeons, and therefore much frequented by
Goshawks and other Brids of Prey, with plenty of several sorts of Sea-Fowl; At
the South side are three hollow Rocks, under which are great store of very
ugly, yet very wholesome Fish; Sending a Boat to sound the Harbor, all their
Fleet came in December. 27. and staid about four days, setting up one of their
four Pinnaces brought from home in pieces. The Inhabitants of the Country soon
perceived them, and made signs on the Shore to come aboard, to whom the General
sent a Boat, wherein two Chief Moors were received, and one of theirs left in
exchange till their return; Drake treated them very civilly aboard his Ship,
presenting them with what they seemed most to value, to show they came in Peace
and Friendship to Trade for such Traffic as their Country afforded according
to their own content, wherewith they seemed much pleased, promising to return
again the next day to exchange their Goods for others; By their Law they ought
to drink no Wine, being Turks in Religion, yet they will drink it very
plentifully by stealth as it now appeared. Being carried ashore they freely
restored the Person left as a pledge, returning with Camels next day at the
hour appointed as if laden with Goods for Exchange, and calling hastily for a
Boat had one sent by the Generals Order before he went from the Island; The
Boat coming to a place of Landing among the Rocks, one John Fry, suspecting no
treachery, readily stepped out of the Boat to be a pledge as the day before, when
those on the Shore instantly seizing him, and others in ambush coming to their
assistance, they speedily carried him away, the rest being glad to shift for
themselves; The cause of this violence was to inform the King of Fesse whither
this Fleet was bound, or come from the King of Portugal, or what Intelligence
they could give him; Fry being brought into the Kings presence, and declaring
they were Englishmen bound for the Straights under General Drake, he was sent
back with a Present to his Captain, and offers of all Kindness and Friendship
in that Country.

Drake much disturbed at this injury, landed his men in his Pinnace, and marched
pretty far up into the Country without resistance, the Moors declining any
engagement with him, so that making provision of Wood, and visiting an old Fort
formerly built by the Portugals, but ruined by the King of Fesse, he departed
December. 31. toward Cape Blank, so that when Fry came back, he to his great
grief found the Fleet gone, yet by the Kings favor he was after sent home in
an English Merchants Ship, Meeting with foul weather they were detained
sometime, and the third day after fell with Cape de Guerre in 30 degrees, where
they took three Spanish Fisher-boats called Caunters, whom they carried to Rio
del Oro under the Tropic of Cancer and there took a Carvel; From hence Jan.
15. they sailed to Cape Barbas, where the Marygold took another Carvel, it lies
in 20 degrees 30 minutes, low and sandy, where they first observed the South
Stars called the Crosiers 19 degrees 30 minutes above the Horizon; In the Cape
they took another Spanish Ship riding at Anchor (all her men but two being fled
ashore in the Boat) whom with all the rest formerly taken they carried into the
Harbor three Leagues within the Cape.

Here General Drake resolved to stay some time to refresh his men with the
plenty of fresh Victuals in this place, and to supply them at Sea, there being
great store of Fish easily taken even within the Harbor, and as good as any in
the World; During their abode here, the General being ashore was visited by the
People of the Country, who brought down a Moorish Woman with her little Babe
hanging at her dry Breast, being scarce alive her self, and therefore unlike to
nourish that, whom they would have sold as a Horse or Cow, which Merchandise
Drake not dealing in, they produced Amber-greese and some curious Gums to
exchange with the English for fresh water, of which they have great want, and
were willing to quench their thirst at any price whatever, and to carry the
rest in their Leathern Bags for that purpose. Drake compassionating their
unhappiness, gave them freely what water they desired, and fed them with
Victuals which they devoured in an inhumane and loathsome manner.

Their Ships washed and trimmed, and all their Spanish Prizes discharged except
one Caunter, for which they gave the Fisherman the Christopher one of their own
Ships; And a Carvel bound for St. Jago being here freed also, after six days
stay they sailed for the Islands of Cape Verde, Jan, 22. where they were
obliged to furnish themselves plentifully with water since the General intended
to run a long course from thence, even to the Coast of Brasil without touching
land; And having the Wind generally North-East Jan. 27. they coasted Bonavista
and next day anchored at the Isle of May in fifteen degrees, high land, and
inhabited by the Portugals, where landing and expecting to traffic with the
Inhabitants for fresh water, they found in the Town near the Shore only a great
many ruinous houses and a poor Chapel, but no people, nor Water, though within
the Land there is enough. The Springs and Wells here being stopped up and no
quantity of water to be found, they marched forward to seek for a supply
finding the Soil fruitful and plenty of Fig Trees with fruit thereon, and in
the Valleys were little low Cottages with pleasant Vineyards yiedling excellent
Grapes, also Coco Trees, Plantains and other Fruits, some ripe, some rotten,
and others blossoming, and this in January, because the Sun never withdraws its
heat from them, nor have they ever any great cold or frost. They found good
Water in diverse places but so far from the Shore they could not convey it to
their Ships, the people refusing any conference with them, securing themselves
in the sweet Valleys among the Hills where their Towns were, and suffering them
freely to survey the Island, since they were like to receive more damage than
profit to offer violence to those who came peaceably among them. The Island
yields vast numbers of Goats and Wild Hens, and Salt made without labor by the
flowing of the Sea, and the heat of the Sun, which naturally produces a great
quantity thereof, lying openly upon the Sands for all that come, and wherewith
the people drive a great trade with the adjacent Islands.

Sailing hence Jan. 30. they passed next day by the Isle of St. Jago ten
Leagues West of May in the same latitude, inhabited both by Moors and
Portuguess, occasioned by the cruelty of the Portugals toward the slaves which
was so intolerable that many fled from their Masters to the hilly parts of the
Island, and their number increasing by the escapes they daily made, grew at
length so formidable that they are now a terror to their Oppressors from whom
they receive daily injuries either in their Goods or Cattle, and have lost a
great part of that large and fruitful Isle which is a relief to all Ships bound
for Brasil, Guinea or the East Indies, being also of great strength were it not
for the cause aforesaid, which has much abated the pride of the Portugals, who
under pretense of Trade and Friendship excluded the first Planters thereof both
from Government, Liberty, and almost Life. South-west of this Isle they took a
Portugal Ship laden with Wine, store of Linen and Woollen Cloth, and other
Goods bound for Brasile with many Merchants and Gentlemen aboard; As they went
hence three Towns in sight of them shot off two great Guns into the Sea, either
for joy of their departure, or to show they were provided to entertain them,
and were answered with one from the Fleet. South-west about twelve Leagues
hence yet for its height not seeming above three, lies Fogo a burning Island or
Fiery Furnace, wherein rises a steep Hill thought at least eighteen English
Miles high, belching out great and dreadful Flames of Fire from the top, almost
every quarter of an hour, that in the night it gives light like the Moon, and
seems to reach the very Heavens; It throws out great Stones, which falling into
the Sea are used as Pumice Stones; The rest of the Island is peopled with
Portugals who live happily therein.

Two Leagues hence lies another Sweet and Pleasant Island called Brava, the
Trees always green, and is almost planted all over with Trees, and Fruits, as
Figs, Coco's, Plantains, Oranges, Lemmons, Cotton, and the like, with Streams
of fresh water running into the Sea and easily taken up by Boats and Pinnaces,
but there is no Road nor Anchoring for Ships, no ground being to be found by
the longest Line, so that the Sea is thought as deep as Fogo is high; They
found only one Hermit inhabiting this Island, nor saw any House but his, who
delighted so much in solitariness that he fled from them, leaving behind the
Relics of his Worship, that is a Cross, a Crucifix, an Altar with another
above it, and certain Images of Wood of rude Workmanship. They here discharged
the Portugals taken near St. Jago, giving them a new Pinnace built at Mogadore
instead of their old Ship, with Victuals and Provision.

Furnished with fresh Water at Cape Verde, Feb. 2. they derected their course
toward the Streights of Magellane to go through into the South Sea, sailing
sixty three days without sight of Land, passing the Equinoctial Line, Feb. 17.
and fell with the Coast of Brasil April 5. During which long passage on the
vast Ocean, having nothing but Sea below and Heaven above, they saw and
experienced the goodness of Divine Providence in making ample Provision for all
their wants, and though they often met with contrary Winds, and Storms, unwelcom
calms and burning heats in this Torrid Zone, with the terrors of dreadful
Thunder and Lightning, yet they could not but take notice that not having been
thoroughly furnished with Water since they came from England till they arrived
at the River of Plate long after, yet for 17 days together their necessities
were constantly supplied by Rainwater, neither was their Fleet (now six in
number) ever dispersed, nor lost company except the Portugal Prize for one day
only, which yet much discouraged them, having the greatest part of their drink
aboard her, and was therefore found again with much joy since her miscarriage
might have defeated the whole Voyage. Among many strange Creatures they
particularly observed the Flying Fish, as big as a Pilchard, whose Fins are as
long as his Body, and serve for wings when he is chased by the Boneto or great
Mackrell (whom the Dolphin likewise pursues) for when weary of Swiming, be
lifts up himself above Water and Flies pretty high, falling sometimes into
Vessels that Sail by; The Fins are so curiously placed as might serve for a
longer and higher flight, did not their dryness after ten or twelve strokes
hinder their motion, and force them into the Water to moisten them; Their
increase is wonderful, their young ones lying upon the Water in the Sun as dust
on the Earth, where when no bigger than a wheat Straw they employ themselves
both to fly and swim, and were they not so numerous would soon be destroyed by
their many Enemies, for by flying into the Air to escape one, they often meet
death from another adversary, the Spurkite a ravenous Fowl who feeding on Fish,
seizes on them in their flight, and makes great destruction among them; There
is another sort called the Cuttle Fish whose Bones are used by Goldsmiths, a
multitude falling often at once into their Ships amongst their men.

Sailing thus with as much pleasure as if in a Garden, in beholding the
excellent works of the Eternal God in the Seas, April, 5. they fell on the
Coast of Brasil in 31 degrees of South-Latitude, and being discried by the
Inhabitants, they saw great Fires in diverse places which they understood were
made for Sacrifices to the Devil, wherein they use many Ceremonies and
Conjurations by casting up great heaps of Sand, that if any Ships stay on their
Coasts, their Evil Spirits may destroy them, whereof the Portugals had
experience by losing several Ships; Magellane in his Voyage reports, they pray
to nothing but are absolutely barbarous, but it seems they are much altered
since his time, falling from natural Creatures to make Gods of Devils, yet it
may be they being then a free people had no occasion to practice this
wickedness, but being now in miserable slavery to the Portugals as to Body,
Goods, Wives and Children, and forced by their cruelties into the barren parts
or their Country, choosing rather to starve or linger out a wretched life there
than endure such intolerable Bondage, they may now use these practices with
the Devil to be revenged of their Oppressors, and to prevent their further
entrance into their Country, and judging the English to be some of their
Enemies they used the same Enchantments against them, yet without effect, for
though they had great storms on these Coasts, they received no damage, only
April 7. a violent Tempest and South Wind directly against them, separated one
of their Ships for a while from the rest of the Fleet.

Keeping on their course South, April 14. they passed by Cape St. Mary in 35
degrees near the River of Plate, and came to an Anchor in a place which their
General named Cape Joy, because here the Christopher that was separated came to
them again; He always took special care to keep his Fleet as much as possible
together, to be well furnished with fresh water, and to refresh his men as often
as he could; And therefore at Cape Verde he gave public notice that the next
Randezvouz (if dispersed,) and place of watering should be the River of Plate,
and accordingly they here joined and were supplied with all conveniences, the
Air of this Country being Pleasant and Temperate, and the Soil fruitful,
stored with plenty of large and mighty Deer. April 16. they sailed twelve
Leagues farther to a more commodious Harbor, especially against the
South-Winds, where they killed diverse Seals or Sea-wolves (so called by the
Spaniards,) which came to the Rocks in great numbers, they were good meat, and
a seasonable supply for the future; April 20 they sailed further up the River,
and rode in fresh water, but staid not because of the danger of the Winds and
Rocks, and having spent a fortnight there to their great refreshment, April 27.
they went to Sea again, and that very night the Swan their Fly-boat lost
Company, and soon after by another Storm the Caunter was missing; To prevent
which for the future the General resolved to diminish the number of his Ships,
that they might the better keep Company, and have more supplies of Provision
and Men, especially since it was now Winter in these parts, and these Seas
subject to terrible Tempests, and therefore sought out a convenient Harbor for
this purpose. May 12. they Anchored in a place not very commodious which yet he
called Cape Hope, but seeming to promise good Harborage, Drake who never
trusted any but his own Eyes in dangers, went next day in a Boat into the Bay,
and being near the Shore one of the Inhabitants appeared seeming to sing and
dance very pleasantly to the noise of a Rattle he had in his hand, earnestly
expecting their landing; Upon which there instantly rose so thick a Mist and
Fog, with such an extraordinary Storm, that Drake being three Leagues from his
Ship thought best to return and not venture to Land, but the Fog much
increasing he could not see where his Ship lay, and was thereby in much danger,
when Captain Thomas gallantly Adventured into the Bay and finding him out,
joyfully received him into his Ship, where they rid safely; But those that lay
without were so furiously assaulted by the Tempest, that to secure themselves
they were forced to go off to Sea, the Caunter formerly lost now coming in to
them. Next day May 14. 1578. the weather being calm, and the Fleet out of
sight, General Drake now in the Marygold went ashore, and made Fires to direct
them to come together again into the Road, whereby at last they all returned,
except the Swan lost long before, and the Portugal Prize the Mary, who was not
found a great while after.

In this place the people flying up into the Country for fear of them, they
found in Houses built near the Rocks to that purpose at least fifty dried
Ostriches and much other Fowl drying, which they dry here and after carry to
their dwellings; The Ostriches Thighs were as big as a common Leg of Mutton,
they cannot fly but run so swift that they can neither be overtaken nor shot
at; They found the tools wherewith the Natives take them, and among others a
large plume of Feathers at the end of a Staff, the forepart like the Head,
Neck and Body of an Ostrich spreading very broad, behind which they go
Stalking, and drive them into some Neck of Land near the Sea where spreading
song and strong Nets, they have Dogs that seize on them. The Country seems
very pleasant and fruitful, and at their return that way, the English became
familiarly acquainted with the People, who much rejoiced at their friendship,
and that they had not harmed them. But the place not being convenient for
providing Wood, Water and the like, they departed thence May 15. and Sailing
South-West fell into a very useful Bay where they staid fifteen days; From
hence the General sent Captain Winter in the Elizabeth Southward to seek for
the two Ships that were wanting, himself going North upon the same account who
happily met with the Swan the same day, and bringing her into harbor being
unloaden she was broken up, and made firewood, the Iron-work and other
necessaries being saved, but could hear no news of the other.

After some stay here, being ashore in an Island nigh the Main Land, and from
whence at low water they might go over a foot, the Inhabitants appeared,
leaping, dancing, holding up their hands, and making outcries after their
manner, but it being then high water the General sent them by a Boat some
Knives, Bells, Bugles, and other things he thought would please them; Upon
which getting together on a Hill half a Mile from the Shore, two of their
Company came down swiftly though with a great grace such as they use in time of
Wars, but drawing nigh they made a stand, upon which the English tying the
things to a Staff, stuck it in the ground that they might see it, and retired a
reasonable distance; Being departed, they came and took the things leaving
instead thereof such Feathers as they wore on their heads, a bone carved like a
tooth-pick six inches long and neatly burnished; Whereupon the General with
diverse Gentlemen went over to them, they still remaining on the Hill placed in
a rank one of them running from one end to the other East and West, with his
hands over his head, and his body inclining toward the rising and setting Sun,
and at every third turn he erected himself, vaulting in the Air against the
middle of the rank toward the Moon, signifying (as they thought) That they
called the Sun and Moon (whom they worship as Gods) to witness they meant
nothing toward them but peace; But perceiving the English came apace forward
they seemed fearful, to prevent which the General and his Company retired,
which so confirmed them they were no enemies that diverse came down after them
without fear, and traded with them, but would receive nothing from them till it
was first cast on the ground, the word they used for exchange was Zussus, and
Toyt to throw it on the ground, if they disliked any thing they cried Coroh
Coroh, with rattling in their throat, their goods were Arrows made of Reeds,
Feathers, and the Bones aforementioned. They go naked except only a Furr about
their Shoulders when they sit or lie in the Gold, but at other times it is a
girdle about their Loins; Their Hair is very long, which to prevent trouble thy
knit up with a Roll of Ostrich Feathers, and serves them for a Quiver for their
Arrows, and a Storehouse for what they carry about them; Those of Quality wear
a large plain Feather on each side their heads seeming afar off like Horns, so
that a head thus trimmed upon a naked body resembles a Devil with horns.

Their chief bravery consists in painting their Bodies with diverse Colors, with
such works as they fancy; Some wash their faces with Sulphur or the like,
others paint their whole Bodies Black, leaving only their necks round about
White, and show like Ladys with black Gowns and naked Necks; Some paint one
Shoulder black and another white, and likewise their Legs, setting white Moons
on the black part, and black on the white, being the marks of the Gods they
adore; By this continual painting the pores of their Bodies are so closed they
never feel any cold, they are strong, comely, swift, and active, and are much
to be lamented that being of tractable natures, and in an excellent soil they
are ignorant of the worship of the true God, for though they never knew any
Christians before, yet they soon became so familiar, that they seemed rather
willing to serve and do them all good Offices than offer any injury. The
General bestowing a Cap off his head on one of their Chiefs, he going at a
distance suddenly pierced his Leg deeply with an Arrow, so that the Blood
streaming out, he thereby signified his unfeigned love to him, and was as a
Covenant of peace between them, they were about fifty persons who thus
frequented their company; In the South part of this Bay is a River of fresh
Water, and several Islands full of Seals, Birds and Fowls, sufficient to
maintain a multitude of people, of which they killed some with Shot and Staves,
and took many Birds with their hands, they lighting upon their Heads and
Shouldiers; They saw no Boat or Canoo used by the Natives to come to these
Isles, their own provision seemed to be Raw Flesh and Fish, they finding pieces
of Seals all Bloody which they had gnawn with their teeth like Dogs; They are
all armed with a Bow an Ell long, and Arrows of Reeds headed with Flints very
exactly. This Bay they named Seal Bay for the plenty of them found here,
killing two hundred in an hours time.

Sufficiently provided with all necessaries they sailed hence June 12.
Southward, and anchored two days in a little Bay, where they discharged and
laid up the Caunter or Christopher, and June 14. arrived at another Bay in
fifty degrees twenty minutes South-Latitude and within one degree of the mouth
of the Streights, through which lay their desired Passage to the South Sea.
Here the General turned his Course Northerly in hope of finding his Ship and
Friends lost in the great storm, since if they should pass the Streights
without them, both might be much discomforted. So that June 18. putting again
to Sea with hearty prayers to God for Success, they ran back toward the Line,
and the next night near Port St. Julian had sight of their Ship, and the day
after the whole Fleet entered joyfully into that Port to refit and refresh this
Ship and the wearied men; St. Julian is in 49 degrees, 30 minutes being a very
convenient Harbor, having many Islands within it; Coming now to an Anchor, and
all things made safe, the General, with his Brother and five others, (according
to his usual care and diligence on such occasions) rowed further into the Bay
in a Boat to find out some convenient place for fresh Water and Provisions
during their stay, and were no sooner landed when two of the Natives visited
them, called by Magellane Pentagoures for their huge Stature and Strength, who
seemed much to rejoice at their Arrival, familiarly receiving whatever the
General gave them, and much pleased to see Oliver the Master-Gunner shoot an
English Arrow, trying to out-shoot him, but came nothing near him; Soon after
another arrived who seemed angry at the Civility of his fellows, and strove
earnestly to make them become enemies, which General Drake not suspecting used
them as before, when Mr. Winter thinking also to shoot an Arrow, that he who
came last might see it, the string of his Bow broke, which being before their
terror, did now encourage them to contrive treachery against them, not
imagining their Guns and Swords were Weapons of War, and therefore as they were
quietly returning to their Boat these Villains suddenly discharged their
Arrows at their backs, aiming chiefly at him who had the Bow, and not suffering
him to string it again by wounding him in the Shouldier, who turning about was
shot with an Arrow through the Lungs, yet fell not, but the Gummer being ready
to shoot off his Musket which took not fire, was slain outright. In this
extremity their expert General gave order that no man should keep any certain
ground, but shifting places and defending themselves with their Targets should
approach these Monsters, and break all the Arrows shot at them, knowing when
they were spent they should subdue them at pleasure, with this wise course, and
by shooting off the piece the Gunner could not fire, the General killed the
Author of the quarrel who slew the Gunner; for the Musket being charged with a
Bullet and Hail Shot tore out his Belly and Guts with much torment, as it
seemed by his roaring which was so Horrid and Hideous as if ten Bulls had
bellowed at once; This so discouraged his Companions, that though diverse others
appeared out of the Woods to assist them, yet they were glad to fly and suffer
the English quietly to depart, which they the rather did, because of Mr. Oliver
who was wounded, and whom the General dearly loved, and would rather have saved
then slain an hundred enemies, but being past recovery he died two days after
he was brought aboard. Next day the General in his Boat well armed, went again
ashour to bring off the Gunners body which they found lying where it was left,
only stripped of its upper Garment, with an English Arrow struck in his right
Eye; Both the dead Bodies were laid in one grave, with such decency and
reverence as becomes the Tabernacles of immortal Souls, and such ceremonies as
Soldiers in time of War deserve.

Magellane was not altogether deceived in calling them Giants, since they
differ so much from other men in stature, strength and the hideousness of their
voice, yet are they not so Monstrous as the Spaniards reported, some English
men being full as tall as any they saw, but not imagining any English would
ever come there, it encouraged them boldly to write such untruths; Their name
Pentagones or five Cubits, that is seven foot and an half, giving their true
height, yet many not so large; But certainly the Cruelties used against them
have made them more Monstrous in their Manners than Bodies, which being told
from Father to Son, has created such an inveterate hatred in them against
Strangers, that upon all occasions they seek revenge upon them; Yet they seemed
to repent the wrong offered the English, suffering them to continue there
peaceably two months after, and may cause them to be kinder to others that
happen into their Country.

To this mischief from Infidels another greater and of far worse consequence
was like to have fallen out among themselves had not Divine providence timely
discovered and prevented it, whereby the innocent blood of their General, and
his most faithful Friends might have been treacherously shed, and the whole
Action thereby overthrown. The design was laid before their coming from
England, and of which General Drake had a full account in his Garden at
Plymouth, but he could never believe that a Person whom he so dearly affected,
and had so extremely obliged would contrive any evil against him, and therefore
continued his favors to this suspected Person, yea increased them so as to
make him his most intimate and bosom Friend, giving him the second place in his
Company in his presence, and leaving him the conduct of his whole affairs in
his absence, imparting to him all his secrets, and allowing him free liberty in
all reasonable things, yea bearing with his many weaknesses and infirmities,
scorning that any private injury should break that firm friendship he had
contracted with him, and was therefore offended with those who from duty
discovered his daily contrivances to destroy the whole Enterprise; But the
General being at length convinced of his falsehood, and that lenity would do no
good, since the heat of his ambition could not be allayed but by the murder
and blood of his Captain and Companions, his practices growing daily more
dangerous, he resolved to question him before it was too late; Therefore first
securing him, he called all the Commanders and Gentlemen of his Company
together, to whom he gave an account of the good parts in this Gentleman, and
of the brotherly tenderness he had always showed toward him ever since his
first acquaintance; And then delivered them the Letters he had received from
several Persons who much doubted his fidelity, and that not only at Sea but at
Plymouth, not only by bare words, but writings under the Gentleman's own hand,
yea several unworthy actions committed by him tending to the overthrow of the
Voyage in hand, and the Murdering the Generals Person. For all which so many
full and evident proofs were produced that the Gentleman himself struck with
remorse for his inconsiderate and unkind dealings freely acknowledged himself
worthy of death, yea of many deaths, since he had not only designed the ruin of
the Action, but of the principal Actor likewise, not of a Stranger or Enemy to
him, but of a true and real friend, and therefore openly besought the whole
Assembly who had power to administer Justice, to prevent him from being his own
Executioner, by condemning him to a deserved death.

This discourse raised admiration and astonishment in all present, especially
in his nearest Friends and dearest Acquaintance, but none was so much affected
as the General himself, who unable to conceal his tender affection, withdrew,
requiring them when they had thoroughly heard and considered the whole matter to
give such Judgment as they would be answerable for to their Prince, but
especially to Almighty God the righteous Judge of all the Earth; Whereupon all
of them, being 40 of the principal Persons in the whole Fleet, after they had
maturely discust the business, and freely heard what any of his friends could
allege on his behalf, gave this sentence under their Hands and Seals, That
this Gentleman had deserved Death, and that it did by no means consist with
their safety to let him live, remitting the manner and circumstances thereof to
the General himself.

This Tribunal was held in one of the Islands in the Port of St. Julian, which
was after in memory hereof called The Island of True Justice and Jugdment.
After this verdict was given to the General, to whom the Queen had committed
the Sword of Justice for the safety of himself and company with this
expression, We do account that he which strikes at thee Drake, strikes at us;
He called the guilty Person, to whom was read the aforesaid verdict which he
acknowledged most just, none giving a more severe sentence against him than
himself, the General then proposed to him this threefold Choice; Whether he
would be executed in this Island; Or be set ashore on the Main Land; Or else
return into England and answer his crimes before the Queen and her Council; He
gave hamble thanks to the General for this undeserved clemency, and desired
time till next day to consider what to choose, which granted, on the morrow he
gave this result, That though in his heart he had conceived so great a sin, and
for which he was now justly condemned, yet his chiefest care and concern was to
dye a Christian, that whatever became of his mortal Body he might remain
assured of an eternal inheritance in a far better life; That if he were set a
land among Infidels, he much doubted whether he should be able to continue
steadfast in the Faith considering his own frailty, and the great contagion of
lewd custom; And therefore he earnestly entreated the General, That he would
have a special regard to his Soul, and not endanger it among Heathenish and
Savage Infidels; That if he should return to England he must have a Ship, with
Men and Victuals, to conduct it, and if he had these, yet he thought none would
willingly accompany him with so sad and base a Message, and leave such
honorable service as they were now in; But if he could find such who would be
persuaded to go back with him, yet the very shame of his return would be
grievous, yea worse than death to him, since he should dye so often, and be so
long a dying; He therefore protested; That freely and with all his heart he
embraced the Generals first proposal of being executed there, desiring only the
favor that they might receive the Holy Communion together once before his
death, and that he might dye the death of a Gentleman.

Though diverse persuaded him to choose any of the other ways, yet he was
resolute in his determination, and his two last requests being granted he
received the Communion from Mr. Francis Fletcher Preacher to the Fleet, the
General himself communicating with this condemned penitent Gentleman, who gave
great assurance of a contrite and repenting heart, seeming more angry with his
own act than any else; After this the General and he dined together as
cheerfully and soberly as ever in their lives, comforting one another, and
drinking each to other as if going some Journey; Dinner ended and all being
prepared by him who acted as Provost Marshal, he appeared very seriously, and
kneeling down, at once prepared his Neck for the Axe and his Spirit for Heaven
without disturbance, as having already digested the whole Tragedy in his own
mind, desiring the Spectators to pray for him, and bidding him do his Office
without fear or favor; Having thus by his Worthy demeanor at his death fully
obliterated all the faults of his life, he left to the rest a lamentable
example of a Worthy Gentleman, who in striving to rise before his time lost
himself, and is a monument to Posterity of the common fate of such ambitious
minds; And one thing very remarkable may be added, That 58 years before,
another Gentleman employed in the like Service, and entertained into great
Trust was executed in the very same place, for the English found a Gibbet on
the Main Land made of a Spruce Mast fallen down, with men's Bones underneath
which they judged to be that erected by Magellane in 1520. for executing John
Carthagena, Cosen to the Bishop of Burgos, who by the King of Spains Order was
joined in Commission with Magellane and made his Vice Admiral; As they dug a
Grave in the Island to bury this Gentleman they found a great grind-stone
broken in the middle, which they set in the ground one part at the head, and
the other at the feet, whereon they graved the name of the Person there buried,
the time of their departure, and their Generals name in Latin for a Memorial to
those that should come thither after.

CHAP. V. General Drake in pursuance of his Voyage round the World, passes
through the Streigths of Magellane into the South Sea where he meets with a
terrible Tempest for 52 days together, and loses company of two of his Ships;
Being left alone he proceeds toward the Coast of Peru, and gets a Prodigious
quantity of Gold and Silver and Jewels.
THis Tragedy thus ended, the General broke up the Mary the Portugal Prize
being leaky and troublesome, leaving her Ribbs and Keel on the Island, where for
two months they pitched their Tents, and having wooded, watered, and trimmed
their Ships which were now reduced to three (besides the Pinnaces) to keep the
easier together, and to be better provided and manned upon all occasions, Aug.
17. they sailed out of this Port, and with much hope directed their course for
the Streights, South-West. Aug. 20. they fell with a Cape nigh the entrance,
called by the Spaniards Cape Virgin Maria, appearing like Cape Vincent in
Portugal with steep Cliffs and black Stars, against which the Sea beating,
seems like the Spouting of Whales; Here the General caused his Fleet to strike
their topsails in honor of the Queen, and to acknowledge her absolute right in
this New Discovery; Changing also the name of his Ship from the Pelican to the
Golden Hind, in remembrance of his honorable Friend Sir Chr. Hatton, when
after a Sermon and Prayers for the Queen and the whole Realm of England, they
entered the Streights having sight of Land on both sides, which at length grew
very narrow with many windings, after which they seemed to come out of a River
two Leagues broad into a large and open Sea, and the night following saw a
burning Island much like Fogo in height, and flaming without intermission. It
was formerly thought that the current in this Straight ran always one way, but
they found the ebb and flood and the water rising five fathoms upright as on
other Coasts.

Aug. 24. being Bartholomew day they fell with three Islands lying triangular,
one very large and fruitful, where the weather being calm the General and some
of his Company went ashore and took possession thereof in the Queens name,
calling it Elizabeth Island; And though the other two were not so large, yet
they were very useful to them for the great store of strange Birds found there,
they could not fly but ran so fast as sometimes to escape, somewhat less than a
Goose, short and thick, without Feathers, but only had matted Down, with Bills
like Crows; They lay their eggs and breed their young in the ground like
Rabbits, and live on what they catch in the Sea, being very swift Swimmers both
to get their prey, and secure themselves from others; They came thither in such
vast numbers that they killed three thousand in one day, and are wholesome food,
they named one of these Islands Bartholomew according to the day, and the other
St. George in honor of England, wherein they found the body of a man almost
rotten. From hence to the entrance of the South Sea the passage is very
crooked, so that they often met with contrary Winds, being many times forced to
alter their course, and though (as Magellane says) there be many good Harbors,
and store of fresh Water, yet they had need be well furnished with Cables and
Anchors to find ground in them; The Land on both sides is very high and
mountainous, having on the North and West the Continent of America, and on the
South and East nothing but Islands, among which lie innumerable passages into
the South Sea. The Mountains rise into the Air with vast lofty Spires environed
with Clouds and Snow, which still increases their height, the Sun having
little power to diminish them so that they may be reckoned among the Wonders of
the World; Yet there are many low fruitful Valleys full of Grass and Herds of
very strange creatures feeding therein; The Trees are almost always Green, the
Air temperate, the Water pleasant, and the Soil agreeable to any Grain of our
Country, and indeed wanting nothing to make it an happy Region but the Peoples
knowing and worshipping the true God; They made Fires as they passed in diverse
places.

Drawing nigh the entrance of the South Sea they had such shuttings up
Northward, and such open passages to the South, that lying at anchor under an
Island, the General went in a Boat to make further discovery, and having found
a convenient way toward the North, in their return they met a Canoo with diverse
Persons in her, she was made of the Barks of Trees with a Prow and Stern
standing up, and bending inward like an half Moon, of excellent Shape and
Workmanship, and built with so much judgment and Art that she seemed fit for
the pleasure of a Prince rather than the use of such a rude and barbarous
People, the seams were not closed nor caulked but only sticht with thongs of
Seal Skin so very close that they received little or no water. The People are
of a well set mean Stature, delighting much in painting their faces like the
other, and had a House within the Island built with Poles and covered with
Skins of Beasts, wherein there was fire, water and such Victuals as they can
get, as Seals, Mussels and the like, the Vessels wherein they keep their Water
and Drink are of Wood like their Canoos and very neat, which they cut with
Knives made of huge Mussel Shells (the Fish being good savoury meat) which
after they have broken off the thin edge they grind and temper so hard upon
Stones that it will easily cut the hardest Wood, and whereof they make Fisgigs
to kill Fish with admirable dexterity.

Sept. 6. They left these troublesome Islands and entered the South Sea or
Maredel Zur, the General designing to have gone ashore at the Cape, and after a
Sermon to have left a perpetual Monument of the Queen (which he had prepared)
thereon, but they could find no anchoring, neither would the wind permit them
to stay; They found the Straight was in about 53 degrees, a hundred and fifty
Leagues long and 10 broad at the entrance, after not above a League, and then
larger again, and at the end no Straight at all but only Islands; The General
perceiving that the cold Winter had impaired some of his men, resolved to have
hastened toward the Line and the warm Sun, but it pleased God to disappoint him;
For Sept. 7. the second day after their entrance into this Peacable, but to
them now Furious Sea, a terrible Tempest arose with such violence that they had
little hope of escaping, and though Sept, 15. the Moon was eclipsed in Aries
and 3 parts darkened which might seem to promise some change of Weather, yet it
brought them no relief, but they continued in a miserable condition full 52
days together, and these furious and extraordinary flaws continuing or rather
increasing, caused the sorrowful Separation of Captain John Thomas in the
Marygold from the Fleet Sept. 30. at night, whom they never met again though
they still hoped to have found them on the Coasts of Peru toward the
Equinoctial the randezvouz appointed by the General, she being well provided
with necessaries, and an able Captain with skilful and sufficient Mariners.
From Sept. 7. when the storm began, to October. 7. they could not possibly
recover Land, being driven to 37 degrees of South Latitude, when entering with a
sorry Sail into an Harbor somewhat Northward of that Cape of America
aforenamed, in hope to enjoy some quiet till the storm was ended, they were
again assaulted with so cruel a flaw, that the Admiral with the fury thereof
left her Anchor behind, and in departing lost sight of the Elizabeth their
Vice Admiral, either through negligence, or the earnestness of some within her
to be eased of these troubles and at home again, as they after understood. For
the very next day October. 8. recovering the mouth of the Streights again, they
returned the same way, and coasting Brasile, arrived in England June 2. the
year following; So that now the Admirals Ship might well have retained her
former name, being like a Pelican alone in this Wilderness of Waters; And
though the General diligently sought the rest of his Fleet, yet he could not
gain the least Intelligence of them.

From this Bay of parting Friends, they were forcibly driven back to 55
degrees, and ran in among the Islands aforementioned on the South of America,
where the passage was very large, and continued here quietly two days, finding
diverse wholesome Herbs and fresh Water, whereby the men, before weak and
impaired, began to recover, especially by drinking of an Herb like Penny-leaf,
which gently purging, much refresht their wearied sickly Bodies; But the Winds
then again returned to their former fury, it seeming as if the Bowels of the
Earth had been set at liberty, and all the Clouds under Heaven summoned
together into one place, the Seas, by nature heavy, being now rouled up from
the depths of the Rocks like a Parchment, and carried aloft into the Air like
Snow by the violence of the Winds to the tops of those lofty Mountains, their
Anchors (like false Friends) forsaking their hold-fast, and seeming to hide
themselves and shrink to the Bottom to avoid the horror of this woeful Tempest,
leaving the distressed Ship and Men to the uncertain rouling Seas which tossed
them even like a Tennis-Ball; In this extremity it signified nothing to let
fall more Anchors, since the depth was so immensurable that five hundred fathom
would reach no ground, so that the inveterate and continual rage of the Sea,
the impossibility of anchoring, or of spreading a Sail, the dangerous Rocks and
Shelves, the difficulty of continuing there, the inevitable peril of getting
out, in short the woeful calamitys wherewith they were encompassed on every
side, afforded them very little hope of escaping utter destruction had not
Divine providence supported their sinking Spirits, it seeming as likely that
the Mountains should have been rent in sunder from the Top to the Bottom and
thrown headlong into the Sea by these prodigious Winds, as that the help of
all the men in the World could have saved any of their lives. Yet that God of
mercy who delivered Jonah out of the Whales Belly, whom not only Winds and Seas
but even Devils themselves and the powers of Hell obey, who hearkens to the
Prayers and Tears of all that sincerely call upon him in distress, even he
looked down and delivered them, so that except the fear and astonishment at
their danger they received no damage in any thing that belonged to them, in
such a dreadful Tempest, as the like is not recorded in any History since Noah's
Flood.

The Storm being somewhat allayed, they ran in again among those Islands from
whence they were lately driven, not far from their former anchoring, hoping now
at length for some peace and security there, especially since they saw the
Natives going from one Island to another in their Canoo's, both Men, Women, and
Young Infants hanging at their Mothers backs, to get a livelihood by trading
with chains of certain Shells and other trifles; Having had a breathing-time
here for three days only, which they employed in providing what they wanted
though with much trouble and danger from the tempest not quite stilled, when
behold it again recovered its former rage with much more violence, driving them
from their Anchors, and assaulting them in all Quarters at once, and at length
chasing them to the utmost Land toward the South Pole, even to 56 degrees,
beyond which no Continent nor Island is to be seen, but the Atlantic Ocean and
South Sea meet freely and openly. Some have imagined these Islands were Main
Land and called them Terra Incognita or, The Unknown World, wherein were many
strange Monsters, which they now saw to be altogether false, as likewise the
common opinion of the impossibility of returning out of the South into the West
Ocean because of the strong Currents and Winds, since they met with neither,
but were often in danger of being driven back, as well as in going forward, and
many times were forced to alter their course losing more sometimes in one
afternoon than they could recover again in an whole day with a reasonable gale,
and since the narrowness of the Passage is reckoned the cause of this swift
current, they now observed that the Passages through were innumerable, and
Southward of these Islands there is a large and main Sea.

Coming to the utmost part of these Islands Oct. 28. the Storm ceased, and all
their calamities except the absence of their Friends were forgotten; As if God
had secretly intended they should make this discovery, and did then stay his
hand and refresh his Servants; In these Southerly parts the night in the latter
end of October was but two hours long; There are few of these Islands but are
inhabited and live after the same manner as those aforenamed; The General gave
one name to them all calling them Elizabethides; After two days Oct. 30. they
Sailed North-West along the Coasts of Peru, hasting to the height of 30 degrees
being the place appointed for the Fleet to reassemble, and to seek for them in
the mean time. In this course they next day met with two Islands stored with
Birds of which they made plentiful provision from whence Nov. 1. they steered
North-West as formerly, but soon found the mistake of the Maps in describing
the Latitude of those Coasts; This part of Peru to Lima 12 Degrees South, is
Mountainous and barren without either Water or Wood except in some few places
inhabited by the Spaniards, and not hearing of their Ships they Anchored Nov.
15. at a great Island called Mucho by the Spaniards for its largeness, very
fruitful of Sheep and other Cattle, stored with Maiz, Potatoes and other Roots,
and thought to be wonderful rich in Gold, wanting nothing fit for the use of
man. The Inhabitants are those Indians who by the horrid severities of the
Spaniards have been driven from the Continent to secure and fortify themselves
here; With this People General Drake thought fit to Traffic for fresh Victuals
and Water, and therefore that very night some of the Company going ashore, they
very courteously came and brought the best Victuals and Provisions they had,
presenting the General with two very fat Sheep, who returned them many
necessary things, assuring them that he came only to exchange such Goods with
them as he wanted and they could well spare, and chiefly such as they had
already brought them, except fresh water which they desired them to bring;
whereat they seemed very well pleased and extreme joyful at their coming,
promising to direct them where to have fresh water next morning, and that they
would bring any thing else they wanted.

Next morning early, the General having prepared all things ready for Traffic,
and Vessels to bring the water, set two of his men ashore to go to the watering
place, assigned the night before, who passed quietly half the way, but were
then violently assaulted and slain by these treacherous people, and in hope to
surprise the General with the rest, about five hundred of them prepared for
mischief, lay in ambush behind the Rocks, who suddenly falling on them, the
Rocks being very dangerous for Boats, and the passage very open to the Sea,
they wounded every man of the Company with their Arrows, Drake himself being
shot in the Face under his right Eye very deep, and in his Head to the great
indangering of his Life; The rest there being nine Persons in the Boat were
grievously wounded, and the Chief Surgeon being dead, and his Mate absent in
the Vice Admiral, none but a Boy being left, their case was very desperate, yet
by the help of God and the assistance of the rest they all escaped. The cause
of this injury from these Islanders proceeded from their hatred to the
Spaniards for their cruelties toward them, and some of the English using the
Spanish word aqua in requiring water, they supposed them of that Nation, and
therefore used this outrage toward them; The General left the revenge of this
wrong to Heaven, wishing only they might be sensible whom they had abused, not
an Enemy but those who would rather have defended them from the injuries of the
Spaniards, and sailed thence that Afternoon, approaching now the place
appointed for meeting the rest of their Ships, and to find a convenience for
reposing their wounded men, and supplying them with necessaries, and at length
Novem. 30. they fell in with a place called Philips Bay in about 32 degrees,
and instantly sent out a Boat for discovery, who after diligent search could
find no appearance of relief, discovering only the heads of wild Beasts but no
sign of any Inhabitant thereabout.

Yet in their return they perceived an Indian Fishing in a Canoe within the Bay
whom they brought aboard the General, he was a proper comely Person clothed in
a white Garment reaching almost to his Knees, his Arms and Head were bare, his
Hair very long, but without a Beard, as most Indians are, seeming to be of a
mild temper, apprehensive to learn every thing, and very thankful for what the
General bestowed on him, and discovering in his carriage the harmless
disposition of the Natives, and how unjustly they have been abused by the
Spaniards; After he had been kindly treated, and furnished with what they had,
giving what he thought convenient in exchange, he was freely dismissed in their
Boat, with his own Canoo made of Reeds, and when landed, desired the English to
stay till his return, who being met by two or three of his Friends, showed them
the Gifts he had received, wherewith they were so pleased, that in a few hours
he with several others, whereof one seemed of Quality, came and brought them
Hens, Eggs, and a fat Hog, all which they sent in a Canoo to their Boat then at
some distance from shore, and to assure them of their faithful meaning the
Captain having sent back his Horse, resolved to commit himself to their
fidelity of these strangers and to go with them alone to their General. By whom
they understood that there was no relief to be had here, but offered to be
there Pilot to a good Harbor Southward, where by way of traffic they might
have fresh Water and all other conveniences; This offer was readily accepted
by the General, the place described being near that where he had appointed his
Fleet to randezvouz; Omitting therefore their design of Hunting and Killing
some of the Buffolo, they by the conduct of this New Indian Pilot came December.
5. into the desired Port.

This Harbor is called by the Spaniards Valpevizo, and the Town adjoining is
St. James of Chinly, in 35 degrees 40 minutes, where though they heard nothing
of their Ships, yet were fully supplied with all necessarys in abundance, and
amongst others they found in the Town diverse Storehouses of Chily Wines, and a
Ship in the Harbor called The Grand Captain of the South and Admiral to the
Islands of Solomon laden with the same liquors, together with a quantity of
fine Gold of Baldivia, and a great Crucifix of Gold beset with Emeralds; They
spent some time in refreshing themselves and easing this Ship of so heavy a
burden, and being sufficiently stored with Wine, Bread, Bacon and the like for
a long season, December. 8. they sailed back again toward the Equinoctial Line,
with their Indian Pilot whom the General bountifully rewarded, and landed at
the place he desired. Having thus supplied their wants, their next care was to
regain if possible the company of their Ships so long separated from them, to
which the General applied his utmost endeavor, and since it was inconvenient
to search every Creek and Harbor with their little Boat, which might happen to
fall into the Spaniards hands who would show them no mercy, he therefore sought
out some safe Harbor to erect a Pinnace, wherein without indangering their Ship
they might leave no place unsought to find out their Countrymen again.

Hereupon December. 19. they entered a Bay South of the Town of Cyppo inhabited by
Spaniards in 29 degrees, where having landed fourteen men to search for a
convenience, they were discovered by the Town, who instantly sent out three
hundred Spaniards on Horse back against them, and about 200 Indians running all
naked and in miserable slavery, like Dogs at their heels, but the English
perceiving their danger escaped first to a Rock in the Sea, and from thence to
their Boat, where they were received and conveyed out of the reach of the
Spaniards fury, without hurt to any but only one John Minevy who careless of
his safety, would not be persuaded to save himself, but resolved singly to defy
and terrify three hundred men, or else dye on the place, which accordingly
happened, for being quickly slain, his ^^ad Body was drawn by the Indians from
the Rock to the shore, and there valiantly beheaded by the Spaniards, his right
hand cut off and his heart plucked out, which they carried away in their sight
causing the Indians to shoot his Body full of Arrows made the same day of green
Wood, and so left it to be devoured of beasts, had not the English again gone
ashore and buried it; This sufficiently discovers the barbarity of the
Spaniards and their continual dread of a foreign invasion, or to have their
throats cut by the wretched unfortunate Natives whom they never suffer to keep
any arms but just for present service, as appears by their Arrows made that
very day, and the report of others who knew it to be true; Yea they think
themselves very kind if they do not daily whip these Wretches with Cords only
for pleasure, or drop scalding Bacon on their naked Bodies which is the least
torture they usually inflict upon these unhappy Indians.

This not being the place they looked for, nor the entertainment they desired,
December. 20. they fell into a more convenient Harbor North of Cyppo in 27 degrees
55 minutes South latitude, where they staid some time to trim their Ship and
build their Pinnace, yet still reflecting on the absence of their Friends,
General Drake having fitted all to his mind, and leaving his Ship at anchor in
the Bay, resolved to go in the Pinnace himself with some choice men, toward the
South if possible to find them out, but after one days Sail the Wind forced him
back again; Within this Bay they had store of Fish like a Gurnet, and never met
with the like except at Cape Blank on the Coast of Barbary, the Gentlemen with
four or five Hooks and Lines taking in two or three hours four hundred of them.
Having dispatched their business here, Jan. 22. they came to an Island in the
Province of Mormorena, where they found Indians in Canoos who undertook to
bring them to a watering place, upon which the General according to his use to
strangers treated them nobly and came where they directed, and having traveled
a long way on the land, they indeed found fresh Water but hardly so much (...)
they had drunk Wine in their Passage thither.

Sailing along continually in search of fresh Water, they came to a place
called Tarapaca, and landing lighted on a Soldier asleep, who had lying by him
thirteen Bars of Silver, weighing about four thousand Spanish Duccats, they
would not willingly have disturbed him, but since they did him that injury,
they freed him of this charge which might otherwise have kept him waking,
leaving him if he pleased to take another nap more securely; Continuing still
their search for Water they again landed not far thence, and met with a
Spaniard and an Indian Boy driving eight Lambs or Peruvian Sheep each carrying
two leather bags with fifty pound weight of refined Silver, and not enduring to
see a Spanish Gentleman turn Carrier, they without asking offered him their
Service and became his Drovers, only they mist his way, for almost as soon as
he parted from them they came into their Boats. Beyond this lie certain Indian
Towns from whence many people came in Boats made of Seals Skins and blown full
of Wind which rows swiftly and carries a great Burden; These seeing their
Ship, brought store of diverse sorts of Fish to traffic with them for Knives,
Stones, Glasses and the like, men of sixty or seventy years old being as fond
of them as if they had purchased Jewels of great value. They appeared a plain
innocent people, and resorted to them in great numbers in that short time.

Near this in 22 degrees 30 minutes lay Marmorena, and another great Indian
Town governed by two Spaniards, whom desiring to deal with, Jan. 22. they
Anchored there, and found them inclined to exchange some goods they wanted more
out of fear than love, and among others some such Sheep as carried the Bags of
Silver aforementioned, they are as large as an ordinary Cow, and three Men and
a Boy sat on one of their backs at once, their feet not touching the ground by
a foot, nor the Beast complaining of its burden, their Necks are like Camels,
but their Heads as other Sheep, and are of great use to the Spaniards, their
Wool is very fine and their flesh good meat, they supply the want of Horses
and carry heavy burdens over the mountains 300 Leagues at once, where no other
beast can travel so well; In this place and so up through the Province of Cusco
the common earth being any where taken up, every hundred pound weight thereof
when refined, yields twenty five Shillings of pure Silver at a Crown an Ounce.
The next place likely to hear news of their Ships was the Port of Arica in 20
degrees there being no harbor in a long way before, where they arrived Feb. 7.
The Town stands in the most fruitful soil on those Coasts in the mouth of a
pleasant Valley abounding with all things, having a constant trade for shipping
both from Lima, and other places in Peru, and inhabited by Spaniards; In two
Barks here, they found above 40 Bars of Silver as large as a Brickbat each
weighing twenty Pound, which burden having taken upon themselves they sailed to
Chowley Feb. 9. And in their way to Lima met with another Bark of Ariquipa, who
had begun to load some Gold and Silver, but upon notice of their coming from
Arica by land, it was again unladen; Yet they took a Bark full of Linen, which
they judged useful for them.

Feb. 15. they came to Lima, and found thirty Ships in the harbor seventeen of
them being the best in the South Sea, all ready provided, yet they had the
courage to fall into the midst of them where they anchored all night, and had
they been revengeful could have done the Spaniards more mischief in a few hours
than they could have again recovered in many years; But their chief care was to
find out their own Company rather than to recompense their cruelty, and though
they had no news of them here, yet they had notice of what much elevated them,
and seemed to recompense all their labor, namely that here was a Ship of one
Michael Angelo's wherein were fifteen hundred Bars of Silver, with Silks and
Linen, and a Chest full of Royals of Plate, which they quickly took possession
of. Here they had some news from Europe and particularly of the death of some
great Persons since their departure, as the King of Portugal, and both the
Kings of Fesse and Morocco killed all three in one battle in one day in
Barbary, the death of the King of France and the Pope, and which was more
welcome, they had intelligence of a rich Ship gone out of the Haven Feb. 2.
laden with Gold and Silver for Panama. Therefore next Morning Feb. 16. they
Sailed when the Wind served, and then towed their Ship toward Panama hastening
if possible to get sight of this Gallant Ship the Cacafogo the glory of the
South Sea gone from Lima fourteen days before; They fell with Cape Francisco
March. 1. passing the Line the day before, and about noon discovered a Sail
ahead of them, and having once spoke with her they lay still in the same place
six days to recover breath being almost spent with their hasty pursuit, and to
recall what advantage they had made since their coming from Lima. They had
notice of this great Prize several times, once by a ship taken between Lima and
Paita; Again by another ship laden with Wines taken in the Port of Paita, by a
third laden with tackle, and implements for Ships, with eighty pound weight in
Gold from Guiaquil, and lastly by Gabriel Alvarez whom they met with near the
Line, by all whose relations, they found this Ship to be really the Rich
Cacafogo, though before they left her a Boy of their own named her the
Cacaplata; They found in her some fruit, Sugar, Meal and other provisions, but
especially that which was the cause of her slow sailing, namely a certain
quantity of Jewels and Precious stone, thirteen Chests of Riyals of Plate,
fourscore pound Weight of Gold, Twenty six Tun of uncovered Silver, two very
large Silver gilt drinking Bowls, and other like trifles valued at about three
hundred and sixty thousand Pezoes; They gave the Master a little Linen and
some other things in exchange for these goods, and after six days bid him
farewell; He hastening somewhat lighter, Panama and they going off to Sea to
consider whither to steer next.

And now considering they were come one degree North of the Line, to the
entrance of the Bay of Panama, and that there was little hope their lost Ships
should be before them since they could get no notice of them in so long a
course and with the strictest search and inquiry, and that the time of the year
drew on wherein their General if ever must prosecute his design of discovering
a Passage about the North parts of America from the South Sea into our own
Ocean, which would be serviceable to his Country for the future, and
themselves might have a much nearer Passage home; They therefore concluded to
find out a convenient place for triming their Ship, and getting Wood, Water and
other provisions aboard, and then to hasten for discovering this Passage
through which they might return with Joy to their much desired homes; Sailing
therefore March 7. toward the Isle of Cainos, they arrived there the 16.
settling themselves in a fresh River between that and the Continent for
finishing their affairs, where there happened a terrible Earthquake, which was
so violent that the Ship and Pinnace though near an English Mile from the shore
trembled and shook as if on dry land; They found here Fish, Wood, and fresh
Water (besides Alegators and Monkeys) with many other necessaries that they
wanted; In their passage hither they took one Ship more, which was the last
they met with on all these Coasts, laden with Linen, China silk and China
dishes, and a Falcon curiously wrought in Gold, with a great Emerauld in the
breast thereof.

From hence March 25. 1579. they resolved to sail the nearest course the Wind
would permit without touching any where in a long way, passing by Port
Papagaia; The Port of the Vale of the most Rich and Excellent Balms of Jericho,
Quantapico and diverse others, as also certain Gulphs hereabout, which
continually send forth such violent winds as much endanger the Spanish Ships if
they go too near. But having notice that they should often have calms and
contrary winds near the Coast, and that if they run off to Sea to avoid them,
they could not then meet with Land again when they would; the General thought
fit to increase their Provisions, and therefore at the next Harbor called
Guatulco, inhabited by Spaniards, they by trading supplied themselves with
Bread and other necessaries, and then departed from the Coast of America, yet
not forgetting to take along with them a pot of about a Bushel full of Ryals of
Plate, that they found in the Town, with a Chain of Gold and other Jewels which
they entreated a Spaniard who was flying away with them to leave behind. Next
day April 16. they went directly to Sea, sailing five hundred Leagues in
Longitude to get a Wind, and by June 3. got fourteen hundred Leagues, coming
into 42 degrees North Latitude, where they felt an extreme alteration from heat
to cold, which much impaired their healths, made the Ropes of their Ships
stiff, and the Rain was turned into Hail, so that they seemed rather in the
Frozen Zone than so near the Sun, and sailing 2 degrees further the cold
increased so severely that their hands were benumbed, and they durst hardly
bring them from under their Garments to feed themselves; Neither could they
impute this to the tenderness of their Bodies, coming out of those very hot
Countries, since their meat almost as soon as from the Fire was frozen, and
their tackle so stiff, that six men were hardly able to perform what was
usually done by three, which very much discouraged them, but General Drake
comforting and persuading them to trust in Gods Providence who never fails his
Children, and that they should now quit themselves like men, and endure this
short trouble and extremity with patience, since they were sure thereby to
obtain speedy comfort and glory; By such motives as these he put new life into
them, so that every man was armed with a resolution to see the utmost Discovery
could be made that way.

The Land in that part of America bearing further West than they imagined, they
were nearer to it than they were aware, and yet the cold still increased. June
5. they were driven by the winds toward the Shore which they then first
descried, and Anchored in a Bay much exposed to the winds and flaws, and when
they ceased, there instantly followed thick stinking Fogs, which nothing but
the wind could remove, and that was always violent. So that not able to stay
here nor go further Northward for the cold and wind which was full against
them, getting to Sea they were forcibly carried Southward from 48 to 38
degrees, where they found the Land low and plain, with some few Hills covered
with Snow; June 17. they came to a convenient Harbor and continued there till
July 23. During which though in the height of Summer yet they had constant
nipping cold (neither for 14 days could they see the Sun for the fogginess of
the Air) which had such influence not only upon their Bodies who came out of
the heat, but on the Inhabitants themselves though accustomed thereto, who yet
came shivering to them in their warm Furs crouding close together to receive
heat of each other, the Trees being without Leaves, and the ground without
Grass even in June and July, the poor Birds and Fowls not dareing to rise from
their Nests (as they often found) after they had laid their first Egg, till they
were hatched, and had got some strength, but had this advantage, that their
Bodies being exceeding hot perfects their young sooner than in other places;
Though the real cause of this extremity is uncertain, yet it is judged to
proceed from the large Continent of America and Asia near together Northward of
this place, from whose high Mountains always covered with Snow, the Northwest
Winds which usually blow on these Coasts bring this almost insufferable
sharpness, which the Sun in his greatest heat is not able to dissolve, from
whence the Earth is so barren, and the Snow lies at their doors almost in the
midst of Summer, but is never off their Hills, from whence proceeds those
stinking Fogs through which the Sun cannot pierce, nor draw the vapors higher
into the Air, except the fierce winds do sometimes scatter them, and when gone,
the Fogs return as before; Some Seamen aboard who had been in Greenland,
affirmed they never felt such cold in the end of Summer as now in these two hot
months, from whence it may be supposed, there is no passage through these
Northern Seas, or if there be it is unnavigable for the Ice and Cold met with
therein; Neither in all their sailing on these Coasts to 48 degrees could they
find the Land bend in the least toward the East, but running always Northwest
as if it directly met with Asia, and even then when they had a Wind to carry
them through, if any such passage had been, yet they had a smooth Sea and
ordinary Tides, which could not have happened had there been a Straight, as
they concluded there was none.

CHAP. VI. General Drake having gained immense Treasures in Gold, Silver and
Jewels, lands at a place named by him Nova Albion, where the Indians Crown him
King of their Country; From hence he sails homeward by the Molucco Islands,
and the Cape of Good Hope, and having thus surroundred the World, returns
joyfully to England about two years and ten months from their first setting
forth; Queen Elizabeth comes aboard his Ship at Deptford and Knights him.
NExt day after their coming to Anchor in the Harbor aforementioned, the
Natives of the Country discovering them, sent a Man to them in a Canoo with
all expedition, who began to speak to them at a great distance, but approaching
nearer made a long Solemn Oration with many signs and gestures after their
manner, moving his hands, and turning his head, and after he had ended, with
great show of respect and submission returned again to shore; He repeated the
Ceremony a second and third time, bringing with him a bunch of Feathers like
those of a black Crow, neatly placed on a string and gathered into a round
bundle, exactly cut and equal in length, which (as they understood afterward)
was a special Badg worn upon the head of the Guard of the Kings Person; He
brought also a little Basket made of Rushes, full of an Herb called Tabah,
which tied to a short Rod he cast into their Boat. The General intended
instantly to have recompensed him, but could not persuade him to receive any
thing except a Hat thrown out of the Ship into the water, refusing any thing
else though it were upon a board thrust off to him, and so presently returned;
After this their Boat could row no way but they would follow it, seeming to
adore them as Gods.

June 21. Their Ship being leaky came nearer the shore to Land their Goods, but
to prevent any surprise, the General sent his men ashore first with all
necessaries for making Tents and a Fort for securing their purchase; Which the
Natives observing came down hastily in great numbers with such weapons as they
had as if angry, but without the least thought of Hostility, for approaching
them they stood as men ravished with admiration at the sight of such things as
they had never before heard nor seen, seeming rather to reverence them as
Deities than to design War against them as Mortal Men, which they discovered
every day more clearly during their whole time of staying among them. Being
directed by signs to lay down their Bows and Arrows they immediately obeyed as
well as all the rest who came continually to them, so that in a little while
there were a great company of Men and Women. To confirm this peace which they
seemed so willing to agree to, the General and his men treated them very
courteously, bestowing on them freely what might cover their nakedness, and
making them sensible they were not Gods but Men, and had themselves need of
Garments to cover their shame, and persuading them to put on Cloths, eating and
drinking in their presence, to satisfy them, that being Men they could not
live without it, yet all would not prevail to persuade them they were not Gods;
In recompense of Shirts, Linen Cloth and the like bestowed on them, they gave
the General and his Company Feathers, Cawls of Network, Quivers for Arrows made
of Fawn-skins and the Skins of those Beasts their Women wore on their Bodies.

Being at length fully contented with viewing them, they returned with joy to
their Houses, which are dug round within the Earth, and have from the surface
of the ground poles of Wood set up and joined together at the top like a spired
Steeple, which being covered with Earth, no Water can enter, and are very warm,
the door being also the Chimney to let out the Smoke, which are made slopous
like the Scuttle of a Ship; Their Beds are on the hard Ground strowed with
Rushes with a fire in the midst round which they lie on, and the roof being low
round and close gives a very great reflection of heat to their Bodies; The men
generally go naked, but the Women combing out Bulrushes make therewith a loose
Garment which tied round their middle, hangs down about their hipps, and hides
what nature would have concealed; They wear likewise about their Shoulders a
Deers-Skin with the Hair thereon, they are very obedient and serviceable to
their Husbands, doing nothing without their command or consent. Returning to
their Houses, they made a lamentable howling and crying, which the English
though three quarters of a Mile distant heard with wonder, the Women especially
extending their voices with doleful shreiks.

Notwithstanding this seeming submission and respect, the General having
experienced the treachery of other Infidels, provided against any alteration of
their minds, setting up Tents, and intrenching themselves with Stone-walls;
which done, they grew more secure. Two days after this first Company were gone,
a great multitude of others, invited by their report, came to visit them, who
as the other, brought Feathers and Bags of Tabah for Presents, or rather for
Sacrifices, believing they were Gods; Coming to the top of the Hill, at the
bottom whereof they had built their Fort, they made a stand, where their Chief
Speaker wearied himself and them with a long Oration, using such violent
gestures, and so strong a voice, and speaking so fast that he was quite out of
breath; Having done, all the rest bowed their Bodies very slowly and reverently
to the ground, crying Oh, as consenting to all had been said, then leaving
their Bows with their Women and Children behind, they came down with their
Presents in such an awful posture as if they had indeed appeared before a
Deity, thinking themselves happy to be near General Drake, and especially when
he accepted what they so willingly offered, getting as nigh him as possible,
imagining they approached a God.

Mean time the Women, as if frantic, used unnatural violence to themselves,
shreiking dreadfully, and tearing their Cheeks with their Nails till the Blood
streamed down their Breasts, rending their Garments from the upper parts of
their Bodies, and holding their Hands above their Heads, thereby to expose their
Breasts to danger, they furiously threw themselves on the ground, not regarding
whether it were wet or dry, but dashed their naked Bodies against Stones, Hills,
Wood, Bushes, Briars, or whatever lay in their way, which cruelty they repeated
(yea some Women with Child) 15 or 16 times together till their strength failed
them thereby, which was more grievous to the English to see, than to themselves
to suffer. This Bloody Sacrifice ended, the General and his Company fell to
prayers, and by lifting up their Hands and Eyes to Heaven, signified that their
God, whom they ought to Worship, was above in the Heavens, whom they humbly
besought if it were his pleasure, to open their Blind Eyes that they might come
to the knowledge of Jesus Christ; While the English were at Prayers, singing of
Psalms, and reading some Chapters in the Bible they sat very attentive, and at
the end of every pause cried out with one voice, Oh! seeming to rejoice
therein; Yea delighted so in their singing Psalms, that after whenever they
resorted to them, they desired this Gnaah, or that they should sing. At their
departure they returned all that the General had given them, thinking
themselves sufficiently happy in having free access to them.

Three days after June 26. the news having spread it self farther into the
Country another greater number of People were assembled, and among them their
King himself, a man of a comely presence and stature, attended with a Guard of
an hundred tall stout men, having sent two Ambassadors before to tell the
General their Hioh or King was coming, one of them in delivering his Message
spoke low, which the other repeated Verbatim with a loud voice, wherein they
continued about half an hour, which ended they by signs desired some present to
their King to assure him of coming in peace, which the General willingly
granted, and they joyfully went back to their Hioh; While after their King with
all his Train appeared in as much pomp as he could, some loudly crying and
singing before him, as they came nearer they seemed more grave in their
Actions; In the front before him marched a tall man of a good countenance
carrying the Scepter or Mace Royal, of black Wood about a yard and half long,
upon which hung two Crowns one less than the other with three very long Chains
often doubled, and a bag of the herb Tabah, the Crowns were of knitwork wrought
curiously with feathers of diverse Colors, and of a good fashion, the Chains
seemed of Bone, the Links being small, thin, and finely burnisht, the number of
Links in one Chain was almost innumerable, and worn by very few, who are
stinted to the number, some 10, 12, or 20, and as they exceed in Chains are
thereby accounted more honorable. Next the Scepter-Bearer came the King
himself with his Guard about him, having on his head a knitwork Cawl wrought
somewhat like a Crown, and on his Shoulders a Coat of Rabbits-Skins reaching to
his Waste; The Coats, of his Guard were of the same shape but other Skins,
having Cawls with Feathers, covered with a down growing on a herb exceeding any
other down for fineness, and not to be used by any but those about the Kings
Person, who are also permitted to wear a plume of Feathers on their heads in
sign of honor, and the Seeds of this herb are used only in Sacrifice to their
Gods. After them followed the common people almost naked, whose long hair tied
up in a bunch behind, was stuck with plumes of Feathers, but in the fore part
only one Feather like an Horn according to their own fancy, their faces were
all painted, some White, others Black or other Colors, every man bringing
something in his Hand for a Present; The Rear of their Company consisted in
Women and Children, each Woman carrying a basket or two with bags of Tabah, a
Root called Petah, (whereof they make bread and eat it either Raw or Baked)
broyled Fishes like Pilchards, the Seeds and Down aforementioned, and such
other things; Their Baskets are made of Rushes like a deep Boat, and so well
wrought as to hold Water, they hang pieces of Pearl shells, and sometimes Links
of these Chains on the brims, to signify they were only used in the Worship of
their Gods, they are wrought with matted Down of red Feathers into various
forms.

General Drake caused his men to be on their Guard whatever might happen, and
going into his Fort made the greatest show possible of warlike preparations (as
he usually did) so that had they been real enemies they might be thereby
discouraged from attempting any thing against them. Approaching nearer, and
joining closer together, they gave them a general Salutation, and after silence
he who carried the Scepter prompted by another assigned by the King, repeated
loudly what the other spoke low, their Oration lasting half an hour, at the
close whereof they uttered a common Amen, in approbation thereof; Then the King
with the whole number of Men and Women (the little Children only remaining
behind) came farther in the same Order down to the foot of the Hill near the
Fort; When the Scepter-bearer with a composed countenance began a Song, and as
it were a dance and was followed by the King and all the rest, but the Women,
who were silent; They came near in their dance, and the General perceiving
their honest simplicity, let them enter freely within their Bulwark, where
continuing a while singing and dancing the Women following with their bowls in
their hands, their bodies being bruised, and their Faces, Breasts, and other
parts torn and spotted with Blood; Being tired with this exercise they by signs
desired the General to sit down, to whom their King and others seemed to make
supplications that he would be the King and Governor of their Country to whom
they were most willing to resign the Government of themselves and their
Posterity, and more fully to declare their meaning, the King with all the rest
unanimously singing a Song, joyfully set the Crown on his head, enriching his
neck with Chains, offering him many other things, and honoring him with the
title of Hioh, concluding with a Song and Dance of triumph that they were not
only visited by Gods, (which they still judged them) but that the great god was
become their King and Patron, and they now the happiest people in the World.

The General observing them so freely to offer all this to him, was unwilling
to disoblige them since he was necessitated to continue there some time, and to
require relief in many things from them, not knowing what advantage it might in
time bring to his own Country; Therefore in the name and for the use of Queen
Elizabeth he took the Scepter, Crown and Dignity of that Land upon him, wishing
that the Riches and Treasures thereof, wherein the upper parts abound, might be
as easily transported hither, as he had obtained the Sovereignty thereof from a
people who have plenty and are of a very loving and tractable nature, seeming
ready to embrace Christianity if it could be preached and made known to them;
These Ceremonies over the common people leaving the King and his Guard mingled
themselves among them, strictly surveying every man and enclosing the youngest,
offered Sacrifices to them with lamentable shreiks and weeping, tearing the
flesh from off their faces with their Nails, and this not the Women only, but
old Men likewise were as violent in roaring and crying as they. The English
much grieved at the power of Satan over them, showed all kind of dislike
hereto, by lifting their hands and eyes toward Heaven, but they were so mad on
their Idolatry that though held from rending themselves, yet when at liberty
were as violent as before, till those they adored were conveyed into their
Tents, whom yet as men distracted they raged for again. Their madness a little
qualified, they complained to them of their griefs and diseases, as old Aches,
Shrunk Sinews, cankered Sores, Ulcers, and Wounds lately received wherewith
diverse were afflicted, and mournfully desired cure from them, making signs that
if they did but blow upon them or touch their maladies they should be healed.
In pity to them, and to show they were but men, they used common Ointment and
Plasters for their relief, beseeching God to enlighten their minds.

During their stay here they usually brought Sacrifices every third day till
they clearly understood the English were displeased, whereupon their zeal
abated; Yet they continually resorted to them with such eagerness that they often
forgot to provide sustenance for themselves, so that the General whom they
counted their Father was forced to give them Victuals as Muscles, Seals and the
like, wherewith they were extremely pleased, and since they would not accept of
Sacrifices, they hating ingratitude, forced what they had upon them in
recompense, though never so useful to themselves; They are very ingenious and
free from Guile or Treachery; Their Bows and Arrows (which are their only
Weapons and almost all their wealth) they use very Skilfully yet without much
execution they being fitter for Children than Men, though they are usually so
strong that one of them could easily carry that a mile together without pain
which two or three Englishmen there could hardly bear; They run very swift and
long, and seldom go any other pace; If they saw a Fish so near the shore as to
reach the place without swimming they seldom mist it.

Having finished their Affairs the General and some of his Company made a
Journey up into the Country to observe their manner of living, with the Nature
and Commodities of the Country; They found their Houses such as you have
heard, and many being fixed in one place made diverse Villages; The Inland was
far different from the Sea shore, it being a very fruitful Soil, furnished with
all necessaries and stored with large fat Deer, whereof they saw thousands in
an Heard, with Rabbits of a strange kind, having tails like Rats and feet like
a Mole, with a natural bag under their chin, wherein after they have filled
their belly abroad, they put the rest for relieving their young or themselves,
when they are willing to stay at home; They eat their bodies, but preserve
their Skins, of which the Royal garments of their King are made; This Country
General Drake called Nova Albion, both because it had white Cliffs toward the
Sea, and that its name might have some likeness to England, which was formerly
so called. Before they went hence the General caused a Monument to be erected,
signifying that the English had been there, and asserting the right of Queen
Elizabeth and her Successors to that Kingdom, all engraven in a Plate of Brass,
and nailed to a great firm Post, with the time of their Arrival, the Queens
name, and the free resignation of the Country by the King and People into her
hands, likewise her Picture and Arms, and underneath the Generals Arms.

The Spaniards had never any commerce nor ever set foot in this Country, their
utmost Acquisitions being many degrees Southward thereof; and now the time of
their departure being at hand the joy of the Natives was drowned in extreme
sorrow, pouring out woeful complaints and grievous sighs and tears for their
leaving them; yet since they could not have their presence, they (supposing
them indeed to be Gods) thought it their duty to entreat them to be mindful of
them in their absence, declaring by signs that they hoped hereafter to see them
again, and before the English were aware set fire to a Sacrifice which they
offered to them, burning therein a Chain and a bunch of Feathers; The General
endeavored by all means to hinder their proceedings but could not prevail,
till they fell to Prayers and Singing of Psalms, when allured thereby,
forgetting getting their folly, and leaving their Sacrifice unconsumed and the
fire to go out, imitating the English in all their actions they lift up their
Hands and Eyes to Heaven as they did July 23. They took a sorrowful leave of
them, but loath to part with them, they went to the tops of the Hills to keep
sight of them as long as possible, making fires before, behind, and on each
side of them, wherein they supposed Sacrifices were offered to their happy
Voyage. A little without their Harbor lie certain Isles, c^lled by them the
Islands of St. James, wherein were plenty of Seals and Fowls, and landing in
one of them next day, they supplied themselves with competent Provision for
some time.

The General now finding the extremity of the cold increase, the Sun being gone
further, and the Winds constantly blowing Northerly, giving no hope of finding
a Passage through those Northern Seas, He resolved with the general approbation
of all, to lose no more time, but Sail directly to the Molucco Islands; And
having a sight of nothing but Sea and Sky for sixty eight days together, they
continued their course through the Main Ocean till Sept. 30. when they spied
certain Islands about eight degrees North of the Line, from whence there came
instantly a great number of Canoo's, having in some four, in others six, 14 or
15 men, bringing Coco's Potatoes, Fish, and several fruits to sell; Their
Canoo's are made of one Tree hollowed within very artificially, and as smooth
as glass all over with a very curious prow and stern hung full of white
glittering shells; On each side were two pieces of Timber about a yard and half
long, at the ends whereof a great Cane was fastened to prevent them from
overturning. The People had the lower parts of their Ears cut round, and
hanging very low on their cheeks wherein they put things of a reasonable
weight, the Nails of some of their Fingers were at least an inch long, and
their Teeth as black as Ink, occasioned by eating an herb with a powder they
always carry with them to that purpose; The first company of Canoo's coming up
to their Ship which Sailed slow for want of Wind, seemed very fair dealers, and
exchanged some goods with them very orderly, making signs for them to come
nearer the shore, but designing treacherously to seize both Men and Ship. These
gone, others presently came, who if they got any thing into their Hands would
neither return it nor give any thing for it, counting all their own which they
once handled, impudently expecting more, but would give back nothing; Upon
which the English refusing to trade with them as Cheats, they were so enraged
that having Stones in their Canoo they let fly a great many at them. The
General scorning to revenge this injury, yet to show them he was able, caused a
great Gun to be discharged which had the desired effect, for they instantly
leapt out of their Canoo's into the Water, and diving under the Keel of their
Boats, staid there till the Ship was gone a good distance from them, and then
nimbly recovering their Canoo's hastened to the Shore.

However new Companys of them still resorted to the Ship, and since violence
would not prevail, pretended now to traffic honestly, yet stole whatever they
could meet with; One plucked a Dagger and Knives from their men's Girdle, which
being again demanded, (...) endeavored to catch at more, neither could they be
rid of this ungracious Company till they made some feel the smart of it, and so
they left this place which they named The Island of Theives; October. 3. they got
clear of these Rocks, and Sailed without sight of Land till the 16. falling
then with four Islands in 7 degrees 5 Minutes North Latitude Oct. 22. they
Anchored and Watered on the biggest called Mindanao, where they met with two
Canoo's who would have talked with them but the Wind prevented it; Oct. 25.
they passed by the Isles of Talao, Teda, Ceylon, Salan, and Suaro so named to
them by an Indian, and Novem. 3. arrived at the Molucco's as they desired, They
are four high spired Islands called Terenate, Tydore, Matchan and Batchan, all
very fruitful especially of Cloves wherewith they were cheaply furnished;
Easterly lies a very great Island called Gillola. They designed for Tydore, but
coming Novem. 4. near an Island belonging to the King of Terenate his Viceroy
came off to their Ship in a Canoo, and without fear went boldly aboard, who
saluting their General earnestly entreated him to go to Terenate, assuring him
his King would be very joyful to see and accommodate him, to whom that very
night he would give notice of them, with whom if he once dealt he should find
him a King of his word, whereas the Portugals of Tydore were altogether false
and treacherous, whom if they first visited, their King would not treat with
them, accounting the Portugals their mortal Enemies.

With these persuasions the General was induced to go to Terenate, and anchored
there very early next Morning, and presently sent a Menssenger to the King with
a Velvet Cloak for a present to assure him they came in peace, desiring nothing
but Victuals which he was destitute of by his long Voyage, and to exchange some
Merchandises with him, which he did require with the more assurance being
invited to come hither by the Viceroy of Mutier who promised them all
necessary provisions; They found the Viceroy had been with the King, and
represented to him to what a mighty Prince and Kingdom they belonged, from whom
by way of Traffic they might for the future obtain great advantages, and
whereby the Portugals their Enemies would be much discouraged; Whereat the King
was so much moved, that before the Messenger got half way he had sent the
Viceroy with diverse of his Nobility and Counselors to the General, offering
them a supply of all they wanted, and declaring the willingness of their King
to enter into friendship and amity with so renowned a Prince as theirs was, and
if she pleased to accept of it, he would prohibit all other Nations from
trading on his Island (especially the Portugals from whom he got nothing but by
the Sword) and reserve it wholly for traffic with the English; In token
whereof he had now sent his Signet to the General, and would very suddenly come
himself with his Brethren in his Boats and Canoos to make him a visit, and to
bring his Ship into safe Harbor.

While they were delivering this Message to them, their own Messenger arrived
at Court, who being met by diverse Noble Persons, was with much Solemnity
brought into the Kings presence, by whom he was very graciously received, and
having delivered his Errand and Present to him, he seemed to blame himself that
he had not already attended their General, who came so far and from so mighty a
Monarch, and therefore instantly made ready to come with his Counselors; His
appearance was very great and strange, as if he designed to give extraordinary
Honor to their Prince; Before him went three large Canoo's filled with his
Nobility all in white Lawn or cloth of Calecut, with a Canopy over their Heads
of fine thin Matts supported with a frame of Reeds; Every one sat according to
his dignity, and the gray Heads of many discovered that the King used the
advice of grave Counselors in managing his Affairs; There were also diverse
comedy young men under the same Canopy, but of an inferior rank, the rest were
Soldiers standing in exact order round about, on the outside of whom sat
three Rowers in Galleries on each side all along the Canoo, three or four yards
from it, one being orderly built lower than the other; In every of which
Galleries was an equal number of Banks whereon sat Rowers there being about 80
in one Canoo; In the forepart of each Canoo were two men, one holding a Tabret
and the other a piece of Brass, whereon they both struck at once with due
distance between each stroke, by the sound whereof they directed the Rowers to
keep time with their Oars, and the Rowers ending their stroke with a song,
warned the others to strike again, and so they went very swiftly; Every Canoo
had a small Gun about a yard long mounted on a Stock set upright; and every man
except the Rowers was furnished with Sword, Dagger, and Target, and some had
Lances, Muskets, Bows, Arrows and many Darts.

These Canoos coming orderly near the Ship, rowed round about them one after
another, bowing their bodies with much reverence as they passed by even to the
very ground, and putting their own Messenger again aboard, signified that their
King was at hand, having sent them before to conduct their Ship into a better
Road, desiring them to throw out a Cable whereby they might tow the Ship to the
place assigned by the King; Who soon approached with six grave ancient men in
his Canoo, who together with the King, did all at once render them such respect
as was unexpected from them; He was tall, very corpulent and of a Princely
presence, and so highly honored by his Subjects that neither the Vice Roy of
Mutir nor any of his Nobility durs speak to him but on their Knees, nor rise a
gain till he commanded. The General extremely pleased with this Royal visit,
received them in the best manner he could, expressing his joy by the thundering
of his great Guns mixed with store of small Shot, sounding of Trumpets and other
Music both small and loud, wherewith the King was so delighted that requesting
their Music to come into the Boat, he joined his Canoo thereto and was towed
an hour together with the Boat at the Stern of the Ship, the General likewise
sending him such further Presents as might requite what favors he had already
received, and confirm that friendship begun between them.

The King seeming even ravished in this Musical Paradise, his Brother named
Moro accompanied with many gallant followers gave the same respects to them as
before, and then fell astern till they came to an anchor, the General
presenting him also with what exceedingly pleased him; Being at Anchor, the
King asked pardon that he must be gone, and taking his leave, promised to come
aboard them the next day, and mean time would send them what provisions they
wanted, and accordingly that night and next morning they purchased what was to
be had by way of Traffic, namely a quantity of Rice, Hens, Sugar Canes, liquid
Sugar, and a fruit named Figo, (the same the Spaniards call Plantains) Cocoes,
and a sort of meal called Sago made of the tops of certain Trees, and tastes
like sour curds, but melts away like Sugar whereof they make a kind of Cake,
which will hold good 10 years, of which they made good provision and of some
few Cloves, lest their Ship should be too much annoyed therewith.

At the time appointed the General having prepared all things ready, expected
the King, but he failed both in time and promise, sending his brother to excuse
him, and to desire him to come ashore himself, offering to stay there for
securing his safe return; The General upon consideration of his breaking his
word, would by no means trust himself in his power, especially hearing some
suspicious words from his Brother, but keeping the Viceroy aboard, sent some
of his Gentlemen to Court with the Kings Brother, and a special Message to the
King himself; Coming near the Castle they were received by another brother of
the Kings and other great Persons, by whom they were conducted to a large fair
House wherein were above a thousand People, the Chief being placed round about
the Room according to their Quality and the rest staying without; The House was
four square covered over with cloth of diverse colors upon frames of Reeds,
open at sides, with seats round about it, being the Council Room; At the side
next the Castle was a Chair of State, with a very long rich Canopy over it, the
floor being covered 10 or 12 paces about with Cloth of Arras; There were
already placed sixty ancient sober Personages, all said to be of his Privy
Council, and at the further end a great Company of handsome young men well
clothed, without on the right hand stood four old greyheaded comely men clothed
in red to the ground like Turks, called Romans and Strangers who were
constantly resident there to continue Commerce with this People, there were
also two Turkish, and one Italian Residents, and likewise one Spaniard who
having assisted the King in recovering the Island from the Portugals served him
now as a Soldier.

After half an hours waiting the King came from the Castle, attended with eight
or ten grave Senators, a rich Canopy (adorned in the midst with Embossings of
Gold) being held over him, and guarded with twelve Lances the points turned
downward; Their men (accompanied with Moro the Kings Brother) arose to meet him
who welcomed and entertained them very graciously; His Voice was low and his
Speech sober, of a Princely deportment and a Moor by Nation; His attire was
after the fashion of the Country, but much costlier; From the wast to the
ground he had a garment all of rich Cloth of Gold, his Legs were bare, and his
Shoes of red Cordivant; His head had a wreath about an Inch and half broad of
plated Gold somewhat like a Crown and very sumptuous; He had about his Neck a
Chain of Pure Gold double, and wore on his left hand a Diamond, a Ruby, an
Emerauld, and a Turkois Stone, being four fair and perfect Jewels, on his right
he had one Ring with a large Turkois, and another with several Diamonds of
smaller size very artificially composed. Sitting thus in his Chair of State
with a Page on his right hand refreshing him with a Fan richly imbroidered and
beset with Saphires, the place being very hot both with the Sun, and the
multitude there present; After a while the Englishmen having delivered their
Message, and received an answer, they were by the Kings special command
conducted safe back again by one of his chief Counselors. The Castle did not
appear very strong, there being only two great Guns to defend it and those at
present unserviceable, having got these and all other furniture of War from the
Portugals, who formerly inhabited the Island and built this Castle, but
tyrannizing over the people, and not content with what they enjoyed, except
they could have secured themselves by destroying all the Blood Royal, they
cruelly murdered the Father of this present King, intending to do the like by
all his Sons, which so enraged the People that they were forced to escape for
their lives leaving their goods and all their Ammunition behind them, and
absolutely to forsake the Island.

The present King with his brethren pursued the Portugals so close that being
quite driven thence they were glad to keep footing in Tidore, and for four
years last past he had been so successful in his military affairs that he was
Lord of an hundred Islands thereabout, and resolved now to attempt the recovery
of Tidore it self from the Portugals; The People are Moors, whose Religion
chiefly consists in certain Superstitious observations of the New Moons, and
fasting strictly at some seasons, of which they had experience in the Viceroy
and his attendants, who lay aboard almost all the time they were there, and
would neither eat, nor drink so much as water while the fasting day lasted, but
would eat three times very largely in the night. The Isle of Terenate is in 27
degrees North Latitude; While they staid in the Harbor here (besides the
Natives) ther^ came aboard their Ship a very complete Gentleman well attended,
with an Interpreter, t^ view their Ship and discourse with their Gen^ral,
clothed much after the English fashion, an^ in his carriage very well
accomplished; H^ told them that himself was but a stranger (...) these Islands,
being born in the Province (...) Pagia in China, that his name was Pausaos
(...) the Family of Homber out of which there (...) eleven Emperors reigned
successively for t^^ hundred years past, and that King Boxog w^^ by the death
of his Elder Brother with a (...) from a Horse, was right Heir to all Chin^
(...) the twelfth of this race, being 22 years of (...) and his Mother living,
having a Wife and one Son by her, beloved and highly honored of all his
Subjects, reigning in great peace and without apprehension of invasion from his
Neighbors: But it was not this Gentleman's fortune to partake of the happiness
of his King and Country as he desired; For (as he told them) being accused of
a Capital Crime whereof though free, yet not able to make his innocence
evidently appear, and knowing the severe Justice of China, if he should be
found guilty by his Judges, he humbly desired the King would please to remit
his Trial to the Judgment and Providence of God by permitting him to travel, on
condition that if he did not return with such remarkable Intelligence as his
Majesty had never heard, and was worth observation and for the advantage of
China, he would forever live in Banishment, or else suffer Death for presuming
to come into his own Country, being assured that the God of Heaven would clear
his innocence. The King granted his suit, and he had been now three years
abroad, and came then from Tydore (where he had resided two Months) to see the
English General of whom he had heard very strange things, and from whom he
hoped for such Intelligence as might further his return into his own Country,
beseeching him to relate the occasion and manner of his coming so far as
England thither, and what accidents happened to him by the way. The General
fully satisfied his request, and this stranger heard his discourse with much
attention and delight, and having a retentive memory, he so firmly imprinted
these Relations in his mind that with great reverence he gave God thanks, who
had brought him to the notice of such admirable occurrences; and then earnestly
entreated the General to visit his Country before he went farther West, since
it would be the most pleasant, honorable, and profitable Voyage he could make,
whereby he should carry home an account of one of the ancientest and richest
Kingdoms in the World; And hereupon he magnified the greatness and number of
their Provinces, the stateliness and riches of their Citys, with the multitude
of men, and abundance of all manner of provisions, and Ammunition of War,
especially of the number of great Guns in Quinzai their chief City, much easier
managed than ours, and so exact as to hit a Shilling, which he said they
invented above two thousand years ago; With many other things which the General
might better observe with his Eyes than he could relate, and that the Wind
would serve very shortly to carry them thither, and did not doubt, but it would
much advance his Honor with the King to bring such a stranger along with him;
But all his Arguments having no prevalence on the General, he with grief
departed, though very glad of the Intelligence he had learned.

Provided with all necessarys the place afforded, they Sailed thence Novem. 9.
in search of a convenient Harbor to trim and repair their Ship, especially
while the calms continued, in pursuance whereof Novem. 14. they arrived at a
small Island in 1 degree 40 Minutes South of the Celebes, which they thought
safest because uninhabited, and anchoring found all necessarys but fresh Water,
which they fetched from another Island farther South; Here they staid twenty six
days, pitching their Tents and intrenching themselves the best they could to
prevent any disturbance from the Natives of a great Island West of this; Having
secured themselves and goods, they set up their Forge to make Iron work, and
their Sea-cole being spent were forced to use Char-coal; The whole Isle is
overgrown with very great high Trees and Woods, the leaves like Broom in
England, among which appeared in the night a vast Swarm of Flies like
Glowworms, which seemed as if a Candle had been lighted on every Twig, and the
whole had been the Starry Heavens; There were also an innumerable company of
Bats or Rere-Mice as big as a Hen, who fly very swift but short, and hang on
the Trees with their Heads downwards; Likewise they met with a great quantity
of Crayfish so large that one would dine four hungry men, being very healthful
and restorative, and a seasonable relief to them; They seem to live always on
Land, breeding in the Earth like Rabbits, and under the Roots of huge Trees in
great Companies together, and upon pursuit clime up the Trees to secure
themselves, whither those that would catch them must climb after; They called
this Crab Island.

Having trimmed their Ship, and recovered their health and strength by the
excellent plenty of all kind of refreshments in this place, they only expected
the Brize or Trade wind which blows only one way for some Months together, and
getting in fresh Water and Wood the day before, December. 12. they set sail
Westward, and in two days had sight of the Islands of Celebes, but were in so
much danger from the Shoals and Sands that they beat about till Jan. 9. When
supposing they had attained a free passage the Land turning visibly Westward,
and the Wind reasonable fair, failing with a full gale without suspicion, in
the first Watch of the night, their Ship suddenly fell upon a desperate Shoal,
and was in all probability on the point of perishing in a moment, without
saving the Lives of any, or the Goods they had ventured such Perils to attain;
All now judging it more necessary to prepare for another World than employ
their thoughts about any thing in this; Yet after hearty prayers to God for
Deliverance, the General earnestly exhorting them to take serious care of their
Souls, and to contemplate on the joys of another Life; and not to be wanting to
themselves, he encouraged them by his own example to ply the Pump and free the
Ship from Water, and finding their leaks did not increase, it gave them some
hope that the Bulk was sound, which they attributed alone to the mercy of God,
since no strength of Iron or Wood, could possibly have endured such a violent
shock as their Ship suffered if the extraordinary Providence of Heaven had not
intervened; Their hope was next to get good ground and anchor-hold, and the
General himself undertook to Sound, but could find no bottom a Boats length
from the Ship, so that their growing hopes were hereby quite dashed again,
though this disappointment was concealed from the generality of the men in the
Ship, the General still cheering them up with the best encouragements he could
think of.

The Ship being so fastened that she could not stir, it seemed very probable
that they must either remain on the place with her, or else commit themselves
to some miserable place of refuge, which was a very hard choice, and threatened
them with a lingering death; The Ship seemed to declare to them that she
expected every minute to be destroyed by the Winds and Seas, so that if they
should escape out of her they were like to lead a miserable life among wild
Beasts or People it may be more barbarous than they, in intolerable Bondage
both of Body and Mind; And if the Ship should still continue undestroyed, yet
her Provisions could not last many days, and there was no possibility of
recruiting, so that Famine might cause them to eat the very Flesh from their
own Arms, which was terrible to consider; The hope of escaping by leaving her
seemed yet more improbable, the Boat not being capable of carrying above twenty
Persons at once, and they were in all fifty eight; The nearest Land was six
Leagues thence, and the Wind directly against them; and the first who had
Landed (while they were fetching the rest) would certainly have fallen into the
hand of the Enemy, and gradually all the rest; But if they should escape death,
yet the woeful Captivity into which they must fall, and be thereby deprived of
the true Worship of God, and continually grieved with the horrible Impieties
and devilish Idolatries of the Natives would make death more elegible than life.

The night being spent in these melancholy thoughts, they rejoiced to see the
morning, and it being then almost full Sea, after humble thanks to the Almighty
for preserving them thus long, and hearty prayers and tears for a blessing upon
their endeavors they again tried to find anchor-hold, but found this second
attempt as fruitless as the former, so that it seemed impossible their Ship
should be ever delivered by any policy or power of man, unless God himself
should miraculously appear for their safety, to whose omnipotent power and
all sufficiency they all concluded to refer themselves, having a Sermon
preached to them, and receiving the Holy Communion together; After this blessed
repast, not to be wanting in any lawful means for preserving themselves they
concluded to unload the Ship, which they had hitherto forborne, wherein they
were so willingly engaged, that they seemed to despise what was necessary for
their defense, yea for sustaining their lives, throwing not only their
Ammunition, but their meal for bread into the Sea, being assured that if it
pleased the Lord of Heaven to save them, he would fight for them against their
Enemies, and not suffer them to perish for want of bread; And at length it was
God alone that delivered them, for having continued in this miserable condition
firmly fixed in the cleft of a Rock, they found that at low Water it was not
above six foot deep on the star-board side, though at a little distance there
was no bottom to be found; The Wind during the whole time blew somewhat stiff
directly against their broad side, and thereby forcibly kept their Ship
upright; In the beginning of the Tide while the water was lowest it pleased God
to calm the Wind, whereby their Vessel which required 13 foot water to make her
swim, and had not then above seven on one side, and wanting the Wind which had
been her prop hitherto on the other, she fell a heeling toward the deep water,
and thereby freed her keel, and filled their hearts with joy.

This Shoal is three or four Leagues in length in two degrees South Latitude,
the day of their deliverance was Jan. 10. and was the greatest danger they met
with in their whole Voyage, though not the last as by the sequel appears; For a
month after they were in continual fear of these Shoals and Islands, among
which they were tossed, and which lie in vast numbers round the South of the
Celebes. Jan. 12. not being able to bear their Sails for fear of Tempests and
Sands, they anchored upon a Shoal, and two days after on an Island, where they
staid a day Wooding and Watering; After which they met with foul weather,
Westerly Winds and dangerous Shoals for many days, so that being weary of this
Coast they sailed for Timor; But could not so easily clear themselves of the
Celebes (which lie in five degrees South Latitude) for Jan. 20. being forced
toward a small Island not far thence, and sending their Boat a good distance
before to search out a place where to Anchor, there suddenly rose a most
violent Storm out of the Southwest, driving them among the perilous and hidden
Shoals, so that they again counted themselves lost, or that they must spend
their days among Infidels, if they should escape with their lives, but that God
who had hitherto preserved them, was pleased once again to deliver them by
unexpectedly stilling the tempest, whereby both their Men and Boat were
likewise restored to them. Getting off hence as well as they could, they
continued their course till Jan. 26. when they were again assaulted with a very
strong West Wind so that they could use no Sail till the end of that month.

Feb. 1. they saw a very high Land which seemed well inhabited, and would fain
have got to it to procure some relief, but the weather being so bad that they
could discover no Harbor they were fearful of venturing too near the shore. Two
days after they saw another little Island but could not reach it; Feb. 6. they
had sight of 6 Islands, one East, and the other 5 Westward of ^^em, at the
largest of which they Anchored, Watered and Wooded next day; Going thence Feb.
8. two Canoo's came up and talked with them, alluring and conducting them to
their Town not far off named Barativa in 7 degrees 13 Minutes South Latitude.
The People are Gentiles or Heathens, very comely of body and civil, just, and
courteous to strangers, seeming very glad of their coming, and readily
releiving their wants with whatever their Country afforded; The men go naked
except their Heads and Secrets, every one having some thing hanging at their
Ears, the Women are clothed from the Wast to the Feet, wearing abundance of
Bracelets (some nine and more) upon their naked arms made of horn of brass, the
lightest weighing near two Ounces; They much value Linen cloth, to make Rolls
for their Heads, and Girdles about their middles, and delight in Stones and the
like trifles; Their Island is rich in Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin and Sulphur,
which they work very artificially into diverse forms and shapes; They have
plenty of Nutmegs, Ginger, long Pepper, Lemmons, Cucumbers, Coco's, Figo's,
Sagu, and several other Fruits, whereof they provided themselves of one like a
Bay berry but pleasant in taste, and being boyld is very soft and nourishing
meat; They continued here two days, not having found more comfort and
refreshment in all their Voyage (except at Terenate) as in this place.

Feb. 12. Coming to the height of eight degrees four minutes, they spied a
green Island to the South, and soon after two more that way, with a large one
toward the North, appearing well inhabited, but they had no occasion to visit
them, and therefore past them by, together with several others; Feb. 18. they
Anchored under a little Island, but found nothing but Wood and two Turtles;
After which they Sailed on Westward without stay or any thing observable till
March 9. when they spied Land, and Anchored that night; Next Morning they bore
farther North and came to an Anchor the second time near the shore; March. 11.
they took in Water, and sending their Boat again ashore, they traded with the
People, and coming nearer the Town, the General sent his man ashore, next day
to present the King with some Silks, and Cloth both Woollen and Linen, which
he thankfully received, returning Rice, Cocoes, Hens, and other Provisions in
recompense; They found it to be Java Island in 7 degrees 30 minutes South
Latitude; March. 13. the General with many of his Gentlemen went ashore, and
presented the King with their Music, by whom they were very generously
entertained; They showed him the English Military Discipline training their
Pikes and Muskets before him; They were treated according to their desire, and
at length dismissed with a promise to have more Victuals sent them; In this
Island there is one Principal, but many petty Kings whom they call Raja's, that
live in much friendship with each other; March. 14. they received Victuals from
two of them, and next day three of these Kings came aboard in Person to visit
the General, and to view their Ship and Ammunition, being much pleased with
their entertainment, and what they saw.

After they had been with them, and related what they found, Raja Donan the
Chief Monarch of the whole Isle came aboard them next day, bringing Victuals
for their relief; And few days past but one or other of them came, whom the
General treated with the best cheer he could make, and showed them all the
rarities of their Ship, with their great Guns, Arms and all the furniture
thereto belonging, and how they were used; Never failing to give them Music,
wherewith they were equally filled with delight and admiration; March 1. Raja
Donan coming again aboard, in requital of theirs presented the General with his
Country Music, which though strange, yet seemed very pleasant; The same day
he sent an Ox to the Water side, which he was willing to exchange for diverse
sorts of costly Silks which he much esteemed; Their Kings as well as the People
are kind, true, and exact in their dealings, they traffickt with them for Hens,
Goats, Cocoes, Plantanes and other Provisions whereof they offered them such
plenty that if there had been occasion, they might have laden their Ship with
them.

Though these Visits and Entertainments were some hindrance to them, yet having
at length washed and trimmed their Ship, and freed her from a kind of Shell Fish
sticking fast, wherewith she was overgrown in this large Voyage, and much
hindered her Sailing, they took their leaves and departed from Java, March 26.
sailing West South West directly for the Cape of Good Hope, or Bon Esperance,
and continued without seeing any thing but Air and Water till May 21. when they
had sight of the Main Land of Africa, very high in some places under 31 degrees
and an half Latitude; They coasted along till June 15. when having very fair
Weather and the Wind at South East, they past the said Cape so near that they
could easily have shot to Land; July 15. they saw Rio de Cesto, and many
Negroes fishing in their Boats, two of which came very near them, but would
neither talk nor deal with them; July 22. they came to Sierra Leona on the
Coasts of Guinea, and spent two days in Watering at the mouth of the River
Tagoine, finding plenty of Oysters and Lemmons which much refresht them; Aug.
15. they found themselves under the Tropic of Cancer, having the Wind North
East, and being 50 Leagues off the nearest Land. Aug. 22. they were in the
height of the Canaries, and upon Monday Sept. 26. 1580. (according to the
computation of those in England, though by passing so many different Climates
they counted it to be Sunday, having lost one day) they with joyful Minds and
thankful Hearts to the Almighty, arrived safely at Plymouth, from whence they
had set forth two years ten months, and a few days before, which they spent in
seeing the Wonders of the Lord in the Deep, in discovering many admirable
things, in performing several strange Adventures, in escaping many dangers, and
overcoming many difficulties in their incompassing this Earthly Globe, and
sailing round the World as has been now related.

Soli rerum Maximarum Effectori,
Soli totius Mundi Gubernatori,
Soli suorum Conservatori,
Soli Deo sit semper Gloria.
To him who Greatest things does bring to pass,
To him who Ruler of the World still was,
To him alone, who still preserves his Own,
To this Great God be Glory given alone.
A while after he brought up his Ship to Deptford, where he Feasted Queen
Elizabeth aboard who Knighted and much honored him for this Service, he being
the first who had accomplished so vast a design, for though Ferdinando
Magellane had already discovered those Streights which still bear his name, yet
he lived not to come home, being slain at the Molucco Islands in endeavoring
to reduce the Natives to the obedience of their New Master the King of Spain.
Drake is said after this Voyage to have given for his Device, the Globe of the
World with this Motto, Tu primus circumdedisti me; Thou do first incompass me
round. His Ship wherein he performed this famous Action was laid up at
Deptford, where it continued several years, and was hold in great admiration by
many who came to see it, but being afterward decayed by time, and at length
broken up, a Chair was made of the planks thereof and presented to the
University Library of Oxford by John Davies of Deptford Esquire. Upon which
Chair a renowned Poet of this Kingdom thus descants.

To this great Ship which round the World has run
And matched in race the Chariot of the Sun
This Pythagorean Ship (for it may claim
Without presumption so deserved a name
By knowledge once and transformation now)
In her new shapes this sacred Port allow,
Drake and his Ship could not have wished from Fate
A more blessed Station, or more blessed Estate.
For (Lo!) a Seat of endless rest is given
To her in Oxford, and to him in Heaven.
Upon the Poets sitting and drinking in the Chair made of the Relics of Sir
Francis Drakes Ship.

Cheer up my Mates the wind does fairly blow,
Clap on more Sail and never spare
Farewell all Lands for now we are
In the wide Sea of drink and merrily we go
Bless me, it is hot! another Bowl of Wine,
And we shall cut the Burning Line.
Hey Boys! She scuds away, and by my head I know
We round the World are sailing now,
What dull men are those that tarry at home
When abroad they might wantonly roam
And gain such Experience and spy too
Such Countries and Wonders as I do?
But prithee good Pilot take heed what you do
And fail not to touch at Peru,
With Gold there your Vessel we will store
And never, and never be poor,
No, never be poor any more.
2.
What do I mean what thoughts do me misguide
As well upon a staff may Witches ride
Their fancied Journeys in the Air
As I sail round the Ocean in this Chair.
It Is true, but yet this Chair which now you see
For all its quiet now and gravity
Has wandered and has traveled more
Than ever Beast, or Fish, or Bird, or ever Tree before
In every Air, and every Sea 't has been.
'T has compassed all the Earth, and all the Heavens has seen.
Let not the Popes it self with this compare
This is the only Universal Chair,
Drakes Vessel now for all her labor past
Is made the seat of rest at last.
Let the case now quite altered be,
And as thou went abroad the World to see,
Let the World now come to see thee.
3.
The World will do 't; for Curiosity
Does no less than Devotion Pilgrims make,
And I my self who now love quiet too
As much almost as any Chair can do
Would yet a Journey take
An old Wheel of that Chariot to see
Which Phaeton so rashly brake.
Yet what could that say more than these remains of Drake
Great Relick! Thou too in this Port of ease
Have still one way of making Voyages;
The great Trade wind which never does fail
Shall drive thee round the World and thou shall run
Along, around it as the Sun.
The Streights of Time too narrow are for thee,
Launch forth into an undiscovered Sea,
And steer the endless course of vast Eternity.
Take for thy Sail this Verse, and for thy Pilot me,
CHAP. VII. The Voyage of Sir Francis Drake into the West Indies in 1585.
accompanied with Captain Christopher Carliel, Captain Martin Frobisher, Captain
Francis Knollis, and many other Captains and Gentlemen; With their taking the
Towns of St. Jago, St. Domingo, Carthagena, and St. Augustine.
THis Worthy Knight having performed that unparalled Exploit of incompassing
the World, obtained so much reputation thereby that every man thought himself
happy who was engaged with this Fortunate Commander; Having therefore only
enjoyed some short breathing since his last great Adventure, he for the service
of his Prince and Country provided a Navy of twenty five Ships and Pinnaces,
aboard which were two Thousand three hundred Mariners and Soldiers with their
respective Captains and other Officers both for Land and Sea service; He
Imbarqued at Plymouth Sept. 12. 1585. himself being General, and Mr.
Christopher Carliel Lieutenant General, Captain Martin Frobisher Vice Admiral,
and Captain Francis Knollis Rere-Admiral; Having dispatched all necessary
Affairs, they sailed thence directing their course for Spain, and spied diverse
sails near the shore, the weather being calm; The Vice Admiral was sent with
the Pinnaces to discover who they were, upon whose approach most of them left
their Ships being Frenchmen laden with Salt and homeward bound; Amongst these
small Ships the General took one, which had no man in her, and detained her for
his service, resolving to satisfy the Owner, as accordingly he did at his
return; He called this Bark the Drake, and dismissed the rest being eight or nine
in number; soon after they met with another French Ship laden with Fish from
Newfoundland, whom the General would not suffer to be meddled with; Next day
they descried another tall Ship of twelve hundred Tun whom they chased and
took, finding her to be of St. Sebastian in Spain, laden with poor Jack, which
being lawful prize, they distributed the Fish into the other Ships, and was
very serviceable during their whole Voyage.

Two days after they put in within the Isles of Bayon in Spain, where part of
the Fleet had no sooner Anchored but the General commanded all the Pinnaces and
Ship Boats to be well manned, and provided with Arms for present service, and
putting himself in his Galley well furnished, they Rowed toward the City of
Bayon with design to surprise it; When advancing half way an English Merchant
was sent from the Governor to know what strange Fleet they were, who coming to
the General, after some brief discourse, he ordered Captain Sampson to go along
with the Merchant to the Governor, and desire him to resolve two Points. 1.
Whether there were any Wars between Spain and England and if not, then. 2. For
what reason the English Merchants Goods were seized and arrested. The General
in the mean time thought fit not to stay for an answer, but to Sail up within
shot of the City, to be ready for any sudden assault upon occasion, before it
was dark; Captain Sampson returned soon after with this Reply. That the
Governor said, he knew of no Wars, and that the power of Peace and War did not
lie in so mean a subject as himself, and as for detaining the Merchants Goods,
it was done by the Kings command without the least design of indammaging any,
and that about seven days since he had sent a countermand, whereby they were
now discharged; To verify which he sent all these English Merchants in Town
aboard, who affirmed the Truth thereof; Upon which after consultation it was
resolved, That since it was late they would Land their men, and quarter ashore
that night, taking all necessary care to secure themselves; Which done, the
Governor sent them Bread, Wine, Oil, Apples, Grapes, Marmalade and other
refreshments; About midnight the Weather being overcast, they thought it safest
to repair aboard; But before they could recover the Fleet a great Tempest
arose, driving diverse Ships from their Anchors; And particularly the Speed-Well
which was carried into England, the rest being again recovered; This Storm
continued three days, after which Mr. Carlisle was sent with his own Ship, three
others, the Galley and diverse Pinnaces to Vigo where they took many Boats and
Carvels laden with several inconsiderable things, especially Household Stuff
going into the high Country, and one with Church Ornaments for the Cathedral
of Vigo wherein they found a great Cross of Silver imbossed and double gilt
over, of a considerable value, and the Owners complained they lost here above
thirty thousand Ducats.

Next day General Drake and the whole Fleet sailed from the Isles of Bayon to a
very good Harbor above Vigo, where L. General Carliel attended his coming, for
the convenience of fresh Water; Mean time the Governor of Gallicia having
mustered up two thousand Foot, and three hundred Horse, marched with them from
Bayon to this place, and lay in sight of the Fleet from whence he sent to the
General to desire a parlee, which he agreed to so it were by Boats in the
Water, and pledges being given on each side for security of their Persons, the
Governor and two more came into the Vice-Admirals Skiff which was fear ashore
to them and the General met them in his own, where it wa^ concluded, That the
English should have free liberty to come aland and furnish themselves with
fresh Water, and all other necessarys paying the usual value for the same.
Having dispatched all business here, they proceeded toward the Canary Islands
about three hundred Leagues from this part of Spain, designing for the Isle of
Palma to furnish themselves with store of provisions which that place
abundantly affords, and to have refresht themselves with the pleasures thereof,
but were prevented by the bad entrance into it, which was secured with very
many great Guns, some of which shot into their Ships, and likewise by the
dangerous Seas and Waves toward the Shore, which threatened the destruction of
many Boats and Pinnaces.

Frustrated of their design here, they fell with the Isle of Ferro in hope of
better success, and landed a thousand men in a Valley under an high Mountain,
where they staid about three hours, when the Inhabitants accompanied by a young
Fellow born in England, came to them, and complained they were so poor as even
ready to starve, which they believed was true, and therefore without getting
any thing, were all again commanded to imbark, and that night they put off
toward the Coast of Barbary; Saturday Nov. 13. They sell with Cape Blank a low
land and shallow water where they caught store of Fish, and doubl^ng the Cape
fell into the Bay, they found diverse French Ships of War, whom they treated
kindly and left there, sailing thence to the Isles of Cape Verde, and Nov. 16.
Anchored their whole Fleet between a Town called Play and St. Jago both on
that Island, putting above a thousand men ashore under L. General Carlisle; The
place where they landed was stony and troublesome, and therefore with much
industry they marched farther up till they came to a pleasant plain about two
miles from the Town of St. Jago, where the L. General having put his men in
order, resolved to attempt nothing till next morning since he had no Guide to
the place; In the morning half an hour before Sunrising he divided his Army
into three parts, and by day light advanced in good order toward the Wall of
the Town, but found no Enemy to resist, whereupon Captain Sampson and Captain
Barton, each with thirty Musketeirs were commanded to go down into the Town,
which was in a Valley under them, and from whence they might plainly view it
all over; After whom was sent the great Ensign having nothing in it but the
plain English Cross which was ordered to be placed in the Fort toward the Sea,
that the Fleet might see St. Georges Cross Triumphant in the Enemies Fortress;
Being arrived there all the Inhabitants were fled, whereupon all the Ordnance
about the Town, being above 50 ready charged, were ordered to be shot off in
honor of Queen Elizabeth's coming to the Crown that day being Nov. 17.
according to the Custom in England, which were answered by the great Guns from
the Fleet, who now approached so near that this thundering noise continued a
great while together. Mean while the L, General continued with the greatest
part of his forces on the top of the Hill till the Town was quartered out for
lodging his whole Army, which being done and every Captain settled in his own
Quarters in the Evening they placed such sufficient Guards about the Town, as
they had no cause to fear an Enemy; Here they staid 14 days taking such spoils
as the place yielded, as Wine, Oil, Meal, Vinegar, Olives and the like, but no
Treasure, nor any thing else of value; The City of St. Jago is of a Triangular
form, having two rocky Mountains on the East and West Side which seem to hang
over it, on the top whereof were built certain Fortifications to secure it;
From thence to the South Side of the Town is the main Sea, and on the North the
Valley lying between those Mountains wherein the City stands, the distance
being very narrow between them. Through the midst of the Valley runs a small
Rivolet of fresh Water, which makes a Pond or Pool near the Seaside where
their Ships took in water with much convenience; At the Towns-end the Valley
growing larger is converted into Gardens and Orchards, replenished with Lemons,
Oranges, Sugarcanes, Coco-Nuts, Plantains, Potatoes, Cucumbers, Onyons,
Garlic, and diverse other Fruits, Herbs and Trees.

During their stay here, a Portugal came to the West Fort with a Flag of Truce,
to whom were sent the Captains Sampson and Goring, who first asked, What Nation
they were, they said, Englishmen; He then inquired, Whether there were Wars
between England and Spain, Who answered, They knew not but if he would go to
their General he would resolve him of all doubts; Offering him safe conduct,
who refused as not being sent by the Governor; They then told him, That if the
Governor desired the benefit of his people and Country he would do best to
come and present himself to their Noble and merciful General Sir Francis Drake
from whom he might be assured of favor both for himself and the Inhabitants,
otherwise within three days they should march over the land and destroy all
places and people with Fire and Sword; With this answer he departed, promising
to return next day, but they never heard of him more; Nov. 24. The General, L.
General and six hundred men marched toward a Village 12 mile within the Land
called Sancto Domingo, inhabited by the Governor, the Bishop and other Persons
of Quality, they arrived there about eight in the morning, but all the people
were fled to the Mountains, where they staid some time to see if any would
appear; Being refresht, the General ordered them to march back again, in their
retreat the Enemy appeared both Horse and Foot, but not so strong as to engage
them, but let them pass by with only gazing at them, so that toward night they
arrived safe back to St. Jago.

Nov. 26. They again prepared to imbark their Army, some being sent in the mean
time to the Town of Play or Pray to search for Ammunition which a Prisoner
taken the day before promised to discover, but when they came there, either he
could or would not do it but searching all likely places, they found one Brass,
and another Iron great Gun; In the Afternoon the General and his whole Fleet
anchored at Play, and coming ashore commanded the Town to be burnt, and
themselves to repair instantly aboard, which being quickly dispatched they all
embarked that night, and put off to Sea Southwest. All the time they were at
St. Jago neither the Governor who was a Portugal, nor the Bishop whose
Authority is great there, nor any of the People ever came (though they expected
they would) to desire them to spare their Provisions, or forbear ruining their
Town, which they judged proceeded from their guilt of the treachery and Cruelty
used toward Mr. William Hawkins of Plymouth, with whom about five years before,
they broke their Faith, and Murdered many of his men, but since they came not
at them, the English left written in several places especially at the
Spittle-house, (which was ordered to be spared from the Fire) the indignation
they had against them, not only for not appearing, but for their Barbarous
usage of the Body of one of their Boys, whom they had taken straggling, and
having beheaded him and taken out his Heart, had in a brutish manner scattered
the rest of his Limbs about the place; In revenge of which Savage and Inhumane
Villainy, they burnt all the Houses they found in the Country as well as the
Town of St. Jago.

From hence they sailed directly toward the West Indies, but had not been many
days at Sea, when above three hundred of their men died, though till seven or
eight days after their coming from St. Jago they had not lost one man in the
whole Fleet; They were seized with an extreme burning continual Ague, and some
spots like those of the Plague appeared upon some of the dead, those few who
escaped with life were much decayed in their understanding a long time after.
In eighteen days they reached from St. Jago to Dominica, being the first Island
they fell with, inhabited by barbarous People going all naked, and painting
themselves red, the men are personable and strong, but hold little
correspondence with the Spaniards, having then two of that Nation Prisoners,
and seem a very treacherous people though they were very serviceable to them
during their short stay, helping their men to bring fresh water on their bare
Shoulders from the River to their Boats, and fetching them great store of
Tobacco and Cassavy Bread from their Houses; and in requital received liberal
rewards of Glass, colored Beads, and other things which the English found at
St. Jago, wherewith they seemed much pleased, and appeared sorrowful at their
departure.

From hence they went Westward to the Isle of St. Christophers, where they
spent some days of Christmas to refresh their sick and cleanse their Ships, but
found no people there; It was here concluded to proceed next to the great
Island of Hispaniola, incited thereto with the fame of the rich City of St.
Domingo, being the most confiderable place on those Coasts, and to further
their purpose, they by the way took a small Frigot bound thither, and having
examined the men, found the Haven was barred, and the Castle upon the shore
well fortified with Artillery, so that there was no convenient landing place
within ten English miles of the City, to which the Pilot engaged to bring them;
this being resolved on, next morning early at the said place about ten miles
West of that famous City, the Forces who were imbarqued into Pinnaces, Boats,
and other small Barks appointed for this service, landed under Lieutenant
General Carleil, and about eight a Clock began to march, approaching the Town
toward noon, where they were met by about an hundred Gentlemen of Quality on
Horseback, but the small shot played so smartly upon them that they were
obliged to retire, and suffer them to proceed to the two Gates of the Town next
the Sea, which were guarded with Soldiers and great Guns, with some Companies
of small shot planted in Ambuscade on the Highway; The English divided their
Army consisting in about twelve hundred men into two parts to assault both the
Gates at once, the L. General publicly declaring to Captain Powel that with
Gods help he would go on till both Parties met in the Marketplace of St.
Domingo.

Upon their approach, the Ordnance were fired upon them which killed one man
near the L. General, who not in the least dismayed, encouraged his men to march
on briskly and prevent them from charging again; which they prosecuted with so
much vigor, that notwithstanding the Ambuscades, they valiantly entered the
City Gates, putting all the Spaniards to flight, and forthwith repaired to the
Marketplace, which was a very fair square before the great Church, whither
Captain Powel according to agreement soon after came; where they secured
themselves that night, and about midnight those in the Castle finding the
English busy at the Gates, abandoned it, some being taken Prisoners and others
escaping by Boats to the other side the Haven. At this time General Drake sent
a Negro Boy with a white Flag, and a Message to the Spaniards according to
their own usage, who unhappily meeting with some of the Officers belonging to
the Spanish Galley then in Possession of the English, one of them was so
enraged that he thrust the poor Boy through the Body with an Horsemans staff,
who had yet strength enough to return and give the General an account of this
Barbarous Act, after which he fell down dead in his presence, whereat the
General was so enraged that he ordered three Spanish Prisoners to be carried to
the same place and hanged, sending them word, That till the Person who had
murdered their Messenger was delivered up to condign punishment, he would hang
two Spanish Prisoners every day till they were all dispatched; Upon which the
next day the Captain of the Kings Galley brought the Offender to the Towns-end,
offering to deliver him into their hands, but they desired that he might be
executed by the Spaniards themselves in their presence, thinking it the more
honorable revenge, and so Execution was accordingly done upon him.

In this place (as formerly at St. Jago) one of their own Company an Irish man
was executed for Murdering his Corporal. In this time many Proposals were
offered by the Commissioners to save their City, which not taking effect, the
English for several Mornings together endeavored to fire the high strong
Stone-houses, but with little success, though two hundred Mariners were
employed every day to perform it, so that at length wearied with firing, and
upon diverse other accounts, they were content to accept of twenty five Thousand
Ducats, (each five Shillings six Pence in value) as a ransom for the rest of
the Town; Among other remarkables in St. Domingo, it is observable that in the
Hall of the Kings House there are the Arms of Spain painted in a large
Scutcheon, under which is placed a Globe of the whole World, with a Horse as it
were leaping on it, and a scrole out of his mouth, wherein was written, Non
sufficit Orbis, the World suffices not; which sufficiently discovers the
unbounded Ambition of the Spanish Monarchy, and the Commissioners being desired
by the General to explain the meaning of it, shook their heads and smiled,
seeming ashamed of it, since they were told, That if the Queen of England would
prosecute the War vigorously against them, they would find it enough to
preserve what they had got, and not think of gaining more from others, as by
the loss of this famous Town did sufficiently appear; They found no great
Riches in it, which was occasioned by the Cruelty used by the Spaniards to the
Natives of Hispaniola, which though almost as large as England, the People were
utterly destroyed in a few years by their Tyranny, so that for want of men the
Mines of Gold and Silver in this Island are wholly given over, and they are now
forced to use only Copper Money, of which they found a great quantity; Their
chief Trade consists in Sugar and Ginger which grow there, and in Ox and Cow
Hides who breed in infinite numbers in this wast Country; They have also store
of strong Wines, sweet Oils, Vinegar, Olives, Wheat-meal and other Provisions;
with Silks, and Woollen, and Linen Cloth brought from Spain, which were a
great relief to them; They met with but little Plate, because they use
Porcellane Dishes for Meat, and Glasses to drink in.

Leaving St. Domingo they sailed along the Coast of the Continent, and at
length came in sight of Carthagena built so near the Sea that they approached
within Musket shot thereof; The mouth of the Harbor was within three Miles West
of the Town, into which they entered about four in the afternoon without the
least resistance; In the evening they landed toward the Harbors mouth under
their L. General Cartile, marching silently by the Shore till within two Mile
of the Town, when they were met with about an hundred Horsemen, who taking the
Alarm upon the first Volley of the English shot, retired back to the Town; At
which instant some great Guns being discharged they understood that according
to agreement the night before, their Vice Admiral and other Captains had in
diverse Pinnaces and Boats attempted the little Fort at the entrance of the
Haven, but to little purpose since it was very strong, and the narrow entrance
chained over, only it gave an Alarm to the other side of the Haven a mile and
half from the place where they were; The English Troops now marching within
half a Mile of the Town, the passage grew narrow, being not above 50 paces
broad having the Main Sea on one side and the Haven on the other, and was
fortified quite over with a Stone Wall and a Ditch behind with flankings all
along, a way only being left unwalled for Horse or Carriages to pass through,
which yet was Barricado'd with Barrels filled with Earth all along; It had six
great Guns which were discharged on their Front at their approach; There were
likewise two great Galleys brought near the Shore planted with eleven pieces of
Ordnance which shot cross the way; With three or four hundred small shot, and
upon the Land, three hundred Muskets and Pikes more for guarding this Straight.

The English coming on, the Spaniards being in readiness spared not for small
and great shot, but the I. General-taking the advantage of the darkness of the
morning before Sunrise, approached by the Sea Shore according to his express
direction the night before, where the Water being sowewhat fallen, most of
their shot was in vain; The English were forbid shooting till they came to the
Wall, and coming to the Barricado of Wine Butts, they instantly fell on,
throwing down the Barrels, and falling in briskly both with their Swords and
Pikes even at their very faces, after their Muskets had given their first
Volley; So that the Spaniards were driven from the place, and pursued into the
Town without giving them any breathing time till the English got to the Market
place, though they sometimes made head to prevent it; And were forced to leave
them possession of the Town, flying into the Country to their Wives and
Families whom they had sent away before. They had raised handsome Barricadoes
of Earth at every Streets end entrenched about, in entering which some small
resistance was made, but they were all soon dispersed, few being either wounded
or slain; They had planted many Indians with Bows in places of advantage, their
Arrows being Poisoned to such a height that if they did but break the Skin, the
wound was usually mortal, they slew some English herewith, and with Spikes a
foot and half long fastened in the ground and Impoysoned, of which they had
planted a vast number in the common way, but they marching by the Sea Shore
happily escaped the greatest part of them; They took Alonzo Bravo the Chief
Commander of the Barricadoe Prisoner, and having utterly routed the rest,
continued in the Town six weeks, the Mortality aforementioned still continuing
among them called by the Spaniards a Calenture, and imputed by them to the Air
of the twilight called La Serena which they affirm mortally infects all who are
then abroad except the natural Indians of the Country, and that those who were
on the Watch were hereby subject to this infection.

The inconvenience of this sickness hindered them from prosecuting their design
of going to Nombre de Dios, and so over-land to Panama in hope of gaining
sufficient Treasure to recompense their tedious Travels, which being found
impracticable, they were resolved to return home without attempting further
that way: One day while they were there, the Sentinel placed upon the Church
Steeple discovered two small Barks at Sea, whereupon several Captains and
Seamen got aboard two small Pinnaces in hope to seize them before they got
nigh the Shore, or had notice from Land of their being in the Town, but
notwithstanding their utmost diligence the Spaniards had given them a sign, so
that upon the approach of the Pinnaces they ran ashore and hid themselves in
the Bushes among other Spaniards who had given them notice of their danger; The
English seeing the Barks empty, rashly went aboard, and standing openly on the
Deck, were suddenly shot at by a Company of Spaniards out of the Hedges,
whereby Captain Varney was slain on the place, and Captain Moon died a few days
after, four or five more being hurt; So that not having Men enough to fight
ashore, most of them being Seamen unarmed, since they hoped to have taken the
Barks with their great Guns, they were forced to return without effecting any
thing, though they might easily have taken them, had they reached them before
they came so nigh the Shore.

During their stay here (as formerly at St. Domingo) several kindnesses passed
between them and the Town, as feasting, visiting and the like; Among others the
Governor of Carthagena, with the Bishop and several other Gentlemen came to
see the General; They had burnt some part of the City before they could make
the Spaniards agree about ransoming it, but at last they concluded to give the
English one hundred and ten thousand Ducats (each five shillings six pence
sterling) to spare the rest; So that though not half so big as St. Domingo, yet
they paid a far greater Ransom, as being of far more importance for its
excellent Harbor, and situation for the Trade of Nombre de Dios, and inhabited
with far richer Merchants; The other being chiefly filled with Lawyers and
Gentlemen, it being the highest Court of Law and Justice for all those Islands
and the Continent also; Their having notice of the coming of the English twenty
days before from St. Domingo, caused them to be so well fortified and prepared,
and had carried away all their Treasure and rich goods; Upon paying the Sum
agreed they left the Town, but drew some of their Soldiers into the Priory or
Abbey a quarter of a Mile below near the Harbor, walled with Stone; telling the
Spaniards, That this was yet their own, and not comprehended in the Composition
lately made; who being sensible of this defect, offered to contract for
securing that and the Block-house likewise; agreeing to pay a thousand Crowns
for the Abbey, but pleaded they were not able to give so much for the other
having done their utmost, whereupon the English undermined the Block-house, and
blew it up with Gunpowder.

Mean while the whole Fleet fell down to the mouth of the Harbor, furnishing
themselves with fresh Water from a great Well in an Island there by, which is
very pleasant, abounding with Orange Trees, and several other choice fruits,
set in such exact order for Walks, that the whole Isle, being about three Miles
round, is all made into Gardens and Orchards; After six weeks abode at
Carthagena they put to Sea March 31. 1586. and two days after a great Ship
taken at St. Domingo, and called by them, The New Years Gift, laden with great
Guns, Hides and other plunder, sprung a great Leak, and in the night lost
Company of the Fleet; Being missed next morning the General doubting some
misfortune, sent and found her out, but in great extremity, all her Men being
tired with pumping and the Talbot Bark, who happily stayed with her was ready
to take out her Men and leave her; Whereupon they all returned to Carthagena,
staying there eight or ten days longer to unload her, and dispose her Men and
Goods in another Ship, and then going once more to Sea, directed their Course
toward Cape St. Anthony, being the East part of Cuba, where they arrived April
27. and parting thence toward the Havana, after 14 days they were forced back
again, and being in much want of Water, found a sufficient supply of Rainwater
(newly fallen as they judged) in the Pits and Marshy ground near the Sea side,
the General being as diligent as the meanest in making necessary provision here
as well as elsewhere, and was much assisted in his Affairs by the prudent
Councels and performances of L. General Carlisle. Three days being spent in
watering the Fleet, they departed a second time for Cape St. Anthony May 13.
and sailing along in sight of the Coast of Florida, May 28. they perceived a
place like a Beacon on the Shore, about 30 degrees North Latitude; upon which
manning their Pinnaces, and coming near, they landed and marched up along the
River side, General Drake himself commanding them, and perceived a Fort newly
built by the Spaniards on the other side the River over against them, and about
a Mile above was a little Town or Village of Wooden Houses without Walls; They
presently prepared their great Guns to batter down the Fort, and the first shot
struck through their Ensign, as they heard by a Frenchman who came to them from
the Enemy; Another shot struck the foot of the Fort, which was all of massy
Timber like Masts of Ships; It was resolved that night to pass the River with
four Companys and assault it, but the L. General going in a Skiff with six
Captains more well armed to make discovery, the Spaniards thinking their whole
Force had been come, took the Alarm, and presently forsook the Fort after
having discharged a few Pieces.

The L. General being returned without knowing they were gone; Immediately a
French Piper who had been their Prisoner, came Piping to them in a little Boat,
and being called by the Guard, told them before he went ashore what he was, and
that the Spaniards were gone from the Fort, offering either to put himself into
their hands or to return back and direct those that would go, to the Fort;
Whereupon the General L. General and some Captains in their Skiffs, accompanied
with three Pinnaces furnished with Soldiers, went over toward the Fort; At
their approach some of the Enemy bolder than the rest staying behind, shot two
pieces of Ordnance at them, but they went ashore, and entered the place without
finding any man there. When day appeared they saw it was built all of Timber,
the Walls being only whole bodies of Trees placed close together like pales,
not having yet made a ditch, nor furnished it, so that they had no reason to
keep it being so subject both to fire and assaults; The platform for their Guns
was the bodies of long Pine-trees whereof they have plenty, laid Cross each
other, and filled up with Earth; They found there 14 Great Brass Guns, and a
Chest locked, wherein was about two thousand pound sterling thought to be the
Kings for payment of the Soldiers who were about 150 men; The Fort thus won,
(which they called St. John's Fort) they designed to go to the Town by land but
were prevented by the Rivers and broken ground, therefore imbarking again they
Sailed thither upon the River called as well as the Town St. Augustine; Coming
toward Land, some Spaniards appeared and gave them a few Shot but presently
withdrew, and in their flight the Sergeant Major finding a Horse ready Sadled
and Bridled, mounted him and followed the Chase before the rest, when suddenly
from behind a Bush he was shot through the head, wherewith falling, two or
three Spaniards more came in and stabbed him with their Swords and Daggers into
the body in three or four places before any could come near to rescue him,
whose death was much lamented.

They understood that in this Town of St. Augustine the King maintained an 150
Soldiers, and at St. Helena 12 Leagues farther North 150 more, only to secure
those Coasts from being inhabited by other Nations; The Governor was the
Marquess Pedro Melender, who had command of both places, and yet ran away from
them with the first; They here resolved to attempt St. Helena, and to find out
the English inhabiting Virginia, and June 9. Observing a very great Fire ashore
the General sent his Skiff to the place and found some English sent thither by
Sir Walter Rawleigh the year before, and one coming aboard gave them directions
where to find a good Harbor; The General sent hence a Letter to Sir Ralph Lane
Governor of the English in Virginia, who was then at his Fort about six Leagues
from the Road in an Island called Roanoac, from whence he sent them supplies of
all they wanted, and next day Mr. Lane and some of his Company came aboard, and
the General with consent of his Captains made him two Proposals; Either to
leave a Ship, Pinnace or certain Boats with sufficient Masters, Mariners and a
months provision, to stay and make discovery of the Country and the Coasts,
and likewise so much Victuals as might suffice to bring them all home being 103
Persons, if they thought fit afterward; Or else if they judged they had already
made sufficient discovery and desired to return into England he would give them
passage; But they being willing to stay, thankfully accepted his first offer,
and the Ship was accordingly received into their charge by some of Mr. Lanes
Company whom he put aboard her, but before they had received the Provisions
allotted them, there rose a very dangerous storm which lasted three days and
drove many of their Ships from their Anchors, and some were forced to Sea,
among which the Ship appointed for Mr. Lane was forced so far to avoid the
Coast that they never saw her again till they came to England, many of their
Pinnaces and small Boats being lost in the Tempest.

Notwithstanding this, the General offered Mr. Lane another Ship, but not much
fit for their purpose, as not being able to be brought into Harbor, nor the
General not thinking fit to spare so much provisions as he intended at first;
So that upon consultation among themselves Mr. Lane and the rest of his Company
desired the General under their hands to give them passage for England, which
being granted, and the rest of the English sent for out of the Country and
Shipped, they left that Coast June 18. and arrived safely at Plymouth July 28.
following; The Purchase of this Voyage was valued at threescore thousand Pound,
whereof those who went the Voyage were to have twenty thousand, amounting to
about six pounds to the meanest man, and the other forty was paid to the
Adventurers; They lost about 750 men, whereof eight were Captains, four
Lieutenants, and eight Gentlemen; They got about 240 Great Guns, whereof above
200 were Brass, and so happily ended their Voyage.

CHAP. VIII. Sir Francis Drake is made Vice Admiral of England, in the Spanish
Invasion in 1588. And performs many Worthy Actions, taking Don Pedro de Valdez
a Principal Sea Commander, Prisoner; The pretended Invincible Armado is utterly
defeated and overthrown.
Heroic Spirits are seldom long at rest being ambitious to be always employed
in glorious Actions and Atchievments) as appears in the Person of our Worthy
Commander Sir Francis Drake, who having adventured so many Perils and Dangers
in incompassing the World with so great advantages to himself, might in reason
have been thought willing to spend the remainder of his days in the quiet
enjoyment of his acquired Honor and Riches; But when the Service of his
Country called him forth, no man was more ready to obey his Prince in the
defense thereof against a Foreign Invasion, as appears by his magnanimous
Exploits in 1588.

The Astronomers of that Age foretold long before that this should prove a
Wonderful year, and the Climacterick of the World, which was in some measure
accomplished in that admirable deliverance of England from the Spanish
Invasion. The design was no less than the Conquest of England, and reducing it
to the obedience of that King, for which many Religious Pretenses were used
besides politic ones, as the Queens supporting the King of Spains Rebels in
the Netherlands, surprising and plundring several Towns both in Spain and
America, with diverse other allegations; So that an Invasion being fully
concluded on by that Court, a great and (as they termed it) Invincible Navy was
with vast charge prepared to effect this mighty Design, consisting of no less
than one hundred and thirty Ships, containing fifty seven thousand eight
hundred and eighty Tun, wherein were eight hundred forty five Mariners,
nineteen thousand two hundred and ninety five Soldiers, and two thousand
eighty eight Gally Slaves, and well furnished with all sorts of Ammunition,
having two hundred twenty thousand great Shot; Four thousand two hundred
kintals of Powder, every Kintal containing an hundred Weight, a thousand
Kintals of Lead for Bullets; Twelve hundred Kintals of Match, seven thousand
Muskets, ten thousand Halberts, with store of murdering Pieces, double Canon
and Field pieces for the Camp when they should have landed; They had also store
of furniture for Carriages, Mules and Horses; So that they were sufficiently
provided both for Sea and Land; Together with Bread, Biscuit and Wine for six
months, and six thousand Kintals of Bacon, three thousand of Cheese, besides
other Flesh, Rice, Beans, Pease, Oil and Vinegar, with twelve thousand Pipes of
fresh Water; They had also store of Torches, Lamps, and Lanthorns, with Canvas
and lead to stop leaks, in short the Army was thirty two thousand men and cost
the K. of Spain thirty two thousand Duccats every day.

The General of this potent Army was the Duke of Medina Sidonia; And the Prince
of Parma built many Ships and flat botomed Boats in the Netherlands by order
from the King of Spain, each Boat big enough to carry 30 Horse with Bridges
fitted to ship and unship them; He made the Rivers deeper from Antwerp to Gaunt
and Bruges, loaded 300 small Boats with Ammunition and Victuals, laid 300 flat
bottomed Boats more in Newport Haven, besides 37 Ships of War at Dunkirk; He
prepared Piles headed with Iron to stop up the mouths of the Rivers; At
Graveling he provided twenty thousand empty Casks with Cords and other
furniture to make floating Bridges to stop up the Havens with an infinite
number of Faggots; He shipped abundance of Saddles, Bridles and other furniture
for Horse, and Horses for Carriage with Ordnance and other Provisions for War;
Near Newport lay four thousand Italian and Walloon Soldiers: At Dyxmeud he
mustered twelve thousand Netherlanders, Spaniards and High Dutch; At Conick
four thousand, and at Watene nine hundred Horse.

The Queen of England having notice of these wonderful Preparations, after
solemn Fasting and Prayers to God for deliverance from her Mighty Adversarys
provided with all diligence as strong a Fleet as she could, with all things
necessary for defense, and having a discerning judgment of men's abilities, she
assigned the fittest to every office; Committing the Command of her Navy to
Charles Howard of Effingham Lord High Admiral of England, and constituting the
renowned Sir Francis Drake her Vice Admiral, whom she sent to the West parts of
England; And for guarding the Narrow Seas the Lord Seymor was appointed to lie
on the Coasts of the Low Countries with 40 Ships to watch the Prince of Parma;
She then ordered the Militia of the Kingdom to be raised and mustered under the
Earl of Leicester, twenty thousand whereof were disposed for the Guard of the
Southern Coasts; Besides whom she had two Armies more one of a thousand Horse
and twenty thousand foot encamped at Tilbury near the Thames mouth, where the
Enemy certainly designed to come; The other of thirty four thousand Foot and
two thousand Horse under the Lord Hunsdon, for a Guard to the Queens Person;
She likewise fortified and manned all the places which were commodious for the
Enemy to land at as Milford Haven, Falmouth, Plymouth, Portland, the Isle of
Wight, Portsmouth, the open Coast of Kent called the Downs, the Thames mouth,
Harwich, Yarmouth, Hull, and other places, with command that the Trained Bands
throughout the Coast shires should be ready to prevent the Enemies Landing, but
if they should Land, then to destroy all the Country therebout, that the Enemy
might have nothing wherewith to subsist but what they brought with them, that
they should amuse them with continual Alarms, but not venture a Battle till
they had sufficient Force to engage them.

Yet amidst these Provisions for War on both sides, the Spaniards pretended
still to Peace, and by the Prince of Parma a Treaty was proposed to that
purpose, and Commissioners on each Party met in Tents near Ostend which was
then in the hands of the English; The Queen demanded, That there might an
absolute suspension of Arms, and a present Truce, since she much suspected the
Spaniards unusual preparations; That for the security of England that great
Army of Foreign Soldiers might be drawn out of the Low Countries; That the
Money she had lent the States, and which the King of Spain promised to restore,
might be paid; That the Netherlands might enjoy their ancient rights and
Privileges, and not be governed by a stranger, but, a Native Prince; That they
might have freedom in Religion, and lastly that the Articles of Pacification of
Gaunt, and the rest might be observed; Which things being granted, she would
upon reasonable Terms deliver up those Towns in the Netherlands now in her
possession, and make it appear that she had hitherto kept them not for her own
advantage but the necessary defense of those Countries. To this the Spaniards
replied, That as to their preparations at Sea they assured them it no way
concerned England; That the King would not send away his Soldiers till the
Netherlands had absolutely submitted to him; That their Privilidges did no way
concern the Queen, neither ought she to prescribe Law to a King; That as to
Religion he would only allow the same freedom as to the other Citys that had
submitted to him; And as for the Money expended about the Towns, the King of
Spain might as well demand of her the Millions he had expended in the Low
Country War since she had supported and protected the Revolters;

Soon after Dr. Dale one of the Commissioners was sent to expostulate mildly
with the D. of Parma about some Libels published against her, who denied his
having any knowledge thereof, protesting That he had so much respect for the Q.
of England, that he honored her in the highest degree, and had persuaded the
King to condescend to this Treaty of Peace, which would be more advantageous to
the Englsh than themselves; For (said he) if the Spaniards be overcome they
will soon recover their loss; But if you be defeated your Kingdom is utterly
undone and all lost; To which Dale replied; Our Queen is sufficiently provided
to defend her Kingdom, and your own wisdom will satisfy you that a Kingdom
cannot be lost with the fortune of one Battle, since the K. of Spain after so
long a War is not able to recover his ancient inheritance in the Netherlands;
Be it so (said the Prince) these things are in the hand of God.

It is recorded that when the Commissioners first met about the Treaty one of
the Spaniards asked in what language they should Treat, another thinking to
affront the English said, We were best treat in French since your Mistress is
Queen of France, To which Dr. Dale smartly replied, Nay then pray let it be in
Hebrew, for your Master calls himself King of Jerusalem.

After the Commissioners had long debated matters without concluding any thing
till at length the Spanish Fleet came in view of England and the thundering of
the great Guns was heard from Sea; the English Commissioners were thereby much
startled having no hostages for their safe return, but they received a safe
conduct from the Prince of Parma, (who in the mean time had drawn down all his
Forces to the Seacoast) and so they were conducted to the Borders near
Callice; And thus this Treaty was utterly ineffectual, begun by Q. Elizabeth as
was thought to divert the coming of the Spanish Fleet, and continued by them to
surprise the English unprovided.

May 29. 1588. This Invincible Armado so named by the Spaniards, (which was
preparing full five years,) sailed out of the River Tayo toward the Groin in
Gallizia the designed Rendevouz as nearest England, but a sudden Tempest drove
the Admiral the Duke of Medina back again, and eight of his Ships being
dispersed on the Seas had their Masts blown over board, and three Portugal
Galleys were driven on the Coast of Bayon in Spain, where by the valor of
David Gwin with the assistance of other French and Turkish slaves they were
delivered into the hands of the French, by killing the Spaniards aboard, among
whom Don Diego de Mondrana was one. About this time the English Admiral and
Vice Admiral Drake having in all about an hundred Ships, whereof 15 were
Victuallers, and nine Gentlemen Volunteers of Devonshire, upon certain notice
that the Spanish Fleet was ready to Sail, resolved to go and fight them by the
way, but meeting with this storm they were forced back again to recruit, only
some of their Scouts discovered some dispersed Spanish Ships, who before they
could reach them veered about to the Groin to the rest of the Fleet.

The Spanish Navy being new rigged and supplied, July 11. with much assurance
they entered the British Channel, where casting Anchor they sent dispatches to
the Prince of Parma of their Arrival. July 20. about Noon this dreadful Fleet
was descried by the English with much surprise; They appeared like lofty Towers
in form of an half Moon, the horns whereof stretched above seven Mile wide,
(the Ocean seeming to groan under them) sailing slowly toward Plymouth; July
21. the Lord Admiral sending a Pinnace called the Defiance before, to denounce
War by discharging her Ordnance, himself followed in the Ark-Royal, and fell
with much fury upon one of the Spanish Ships; Vice Admiral Drake, Hawkins and
Frobisher coming up soon after, and playing violently upon the hindmost
Squadron of the Enemy commanded by Rechalde, who endeavored to keep his Ships
from flying, but being himself made at length unserviceable, they were all
forced to secure themselves in the Main Fleet.

The D. of Medina having rallied his Navy dispersed by the English, kept on his
intended course toward Callice, finding much inconvenience in his large high
Ships, as not able to defend themselves against the brisk Attacks of the small
English Frigots, who for two hours maintained a very hot fight with them; In
this first days encounter two great Spanish Ships were disabled; and falling
into a Roundel, the strongest walling in the rest, they made a flying retreat
to Callice; yet in the hurry a great Gallion commanded by Don Pedro de Valdez,
being much battered, fell foul on another Ship, and was so disabled that she
was left by the rest, and the Lord Admiral, night coming on, supposing she had
neither Soldiers nor Mariners aboard passed by her; July 22. Sir Francis Drake
espied her and sent forth a Pinnace to command her to yield, otherwise his
Bullets would force her, Valdez to assert his credit and pretend to valor,
returned, That they were four hundred and fifty strong, that he himself was Don
Pedro, and stood much upon his honor; and thereupon propounded several
conditions upon which he was willing to yield; But the Vice Admiral replied,
That he had no leisure to parley, but if he thought fit instantly to yield he
might, if not he should soon find that Drake was no Coward; Pedro hearing it
was Drake whose name was so terrible to the Spaniards, presently yielded, and
with 46 of his Attendants came aboard Sir Francis his Ship, where giving him
the Solemn Spanish Congee, he protested, That they were all resolved to have
died fighting had they not fallen into his hands whose Felicity and Valor was
so great that Mars the God of War, and Neptune the God of the Sea seemed to
wait upon all his attempts, and whose noble and generous carriage toward the
vanquished had been often experienced by his Foes; Sir Francis to requite these
Spanish Complements with real English kindness, set him at his own Table and
lodged him in his own Cabin, sending the rest of his Company to Plymouth;
Drakes Soldiers were well recompensed with the plunder of this Ship, wherein
they found fifty five Thousand Ducats of Gold which they merrily shared amongst
them; The same day the Ship of Vice Admiral De Oquondo fell on fire, and the
upper part only being burnt, fell into the hands of the English, and was
brought with the scorcht Spaniards into Plymouth. July 23. They came just
against Portland, when the English falling upon them with the utmost violence,
a very sharp fight ensued, wherein besides other remarkable damages sustained
by the Enemy a great Venetian Ship with some other smaller Vessels were taken,
and the Adversary was again forced into a Roundel to secure their weak and
battered Ships; The Spanish shot generally flew over the English without hurt,
only Cock an Englishman died with honor in the midst of his Enemies in a
little Ship of his own.

July 24. An encounter happened between four great Galliasses with Oars, and
some English who galled the Spaniards severely with their Chain-shot wherewith
they cut their Tackle to their great detriment; But the English wanting Powder
which they had spent so freely, the L Admiral sent some small Ships for supply,
and in the mean time after Consultation it was resolved, that the Fleet should
be divided into four Squadrons, and commanded by four able Captains, whereof
the L. Admiral in the Ark-Royal was Chief, Sir Francis Drake in the Revenge the
second; Captain Hawkins the third, and Capt. Frobisher the fourth. July 25.
being St. James's day the Spaniards came as far as the Isle of Wight, where
they were again assaulted by the English, discharging their broad sides at each
other not above an hundred and twenty yards asunder, and after a long
Engagement the great Spanish Wooden Castles were so sorely battered, that they
were again forced into their former posture for their security; July 26. the L.
Admiral to encourage his gallant Captains, knighted the Lord Howard and
Sheffeild, Roger Townsend, John Hawkins, Martin Frobisher and others; After
which it was resolved not to assail the Enemy any more till they came into the
Channel between Callice and Dover, where the L. Seymour, and Sir Will. Winter
waited for their approach, who in a short time sailing forward were so far from
affrighting the English with the name of Invincible, that several brave young
Gentlemen at their own charges hired Ships to defend their Country, and joined
the Fleet in great numbers.

July 27. The Spanish Navy came over against Dover, anchoring before Callice,
intending to join the Prince of Parma's Forces at Dunkirk; The English followed
so near, that they were within Musket Shot, and being now all joined consisted
of 140 Sail, all able nimble Ships; Yet not above 15 of them sustained the
brunt of the day. From hence the D. of Medina sent to the Prince of Parma to
hasten his Succors, who did his utmost to perform his desire, he himself
having his thoughts fixed upon wearing the English Crown, as some false Prophet
had foretold him; but his flat-bottom'd Boats for the Channel were leaky, his
provisions were unready, and his Mariners deserted him; There were likewise
several Nolland and Zealand Men of War watching before the Havens of Dunkirk
and Newport, so well provided, that though he was a very experienced Commander
he durst not put to Sea unless he should willingly destroy himself and his Men.

But the felicity of Q. Elizabeth's Fortune prevented his diligence, and the
credulous hope of the Spaniards; For by her command next day after they had
cast Anchor, the L. Admiral filled eight of his worst Ships with Wildfire,
Pitch, Rosin, Brimstone, and other combustible matter, and charged their great
Guns with Bullets, Stones, Chains, and the like Instruments of Death, and all
the Men being taken out, Sunday July 28. at two in the morning they were let
drive with the Wind and Tide (under the guidance of C. Young and Prowse)
amongst the Spanish Fleet; When the Pilots returning, and the Trains taking
fire, they received such a dreadful Thunderclap in that dead time of the night
by these Fireships, that they were extremely affrighted and amazed, doubting
their whole Fleet would have been fired, and to avoid the danger, cut their
Cables asunder, and hoising Sail, drove at random into the Sea, in which
horrible confusion one great Galliass fell upon another, and running aground
was set upon by the English and taken, being manned with four hundred
Soldiers, three hundred Slaves, and having in her fifty thousand Ducats of
the Spanish Kings Treasure, which all fell into the hands of the Engilsh as a
reward for their Valor.

July 29. After this miserable disaster wherein many of their Ships were driven
into the Northern Ocean, and others on the Coasts of Flanders, the Spaniards
ranging themselves in the best order they could, approached over against
Graveling, but were again prevented by the English from getting any supply from
Dunkirk, and in the mean time Sir Francis Drake, and several other Captains
played continually upon them, and tore many of their Ships so dreadfully, that
the Water entered on all sides; And some flying for relief toward Ostend were
again shot through and through by the Zealanders. In this Battle the Spaniards
lost one great Gallion, and four other great Ships, two whereof were taken by
the Hollanders; The Spaniards finding worse welcome to England than they
expected, were now willing to get close together, not seeking to offend their
Enemies, but defend themselves; and to prevent the Prince of Parma's
assistance, the Holland Fleet consisting of 35 Ships, furnished with able
Mariners, and twelve hundred old Soldiers, was ordered to stop up the Flemish
Havens, and hinder his coming forth. July 31. betimes in the morning the
Northwest wind blew hard, and the Spanish Fleet endeavored thereby to recover
the Channel again, but were driven toward Zealand, whereupon the English who
had hitherto followed them very close gave over the chase, because they judged
them near their utter ruin, since they must needs run a ground upon those
sands and shallows, but the wind suddenly turning West, they got clear of them,
and that evening calling a Council, they resolved to return into Spain by the
Northern Ocean, since they wanted many necessaries especially great shot, and
their ships were miserably torn, and there was no hope of the Prince of Parma's
coming out with his Fleet.

In pursuance whereof having now got Sea Room for their huge Bodied Bulks, they
spread their Sails, and made away as fast as Wind and Water would carry them,
more fearing the small Fleet and Forces of the English, than valuing the Honor
of their Commanders, or their Invincible Armado; They directed their course
Northward, and the English Admiral followed them lest they should put into
Scotland, but they passed by, and though it was generally thought they would
have returned, yet they at length betook themselves to an absolute flight, and
leaving Scotland on the West, Sailed toward the Coast of Norway, unadvisedly
venturing their shaken and battered bottoms in those black and dangerous Seas;
The Prince of Parma was much blamed as if out of favor to Q. Elizabeth he had
wilfully neglected this opportunity, who (to satisfy the Spaniards) punished
some of the Purveyors, yet secretly scoffing at the Spaniards insolency, who
boasted that they carried assured Victory wheresoever they went, and that the
English never durst look them in the face.

The Duke of Medina Sailing round Scotland and Ireland, at last arrived safely
in Spain, where for his welcome he was deposed from all authority, forbid to
come to Court, and commanded to live private; The rest of the Ships being about
40, fell nearer the Coast of Ireland, where many of them perished, and among
others a great Galliass and two other Venetian Ships of gleat burden, besides
38 more with most of the Spaniards in them, such as got off were driven by a
strong West Wind into the English Channel and were taken by the English, others
by the Rochellers in France, and some arrived at Newhaven in Normandy, so that
of one hundred thirty four Ships that Sailed out of Lisbon only 53 returned
into Spain; Of the four Galliasses of Naples but one; Of the four Gallions of
Portugal but one; Of the 91 Great Hulks from diverse Provinces only 33 returned,
58 being lost. In short they lost in this Voyage 81 Ships, thirteen thousand
five hundred Soldiers, and above two thousand taken Prisoners in England,
Ireland and the Low Countries; To concluded there was no Noble or Honorable
Family in all Spain which in this expedition lost not a Son, Brother, or
Kinsman; And thus this Armando which had been so many years in preparing with
vast expenses was in one month many times assaulted, and at length wholly
defeated with the slaughter of so many of their men not one hundred of the
English being wanting, nor one small Ship taken or lost but only that of Cooks;
And having traversed round all Britain by Scotland the Orcades and Ireland,
most grievously tossed and very much distressed and wasted by Storms, wrecks
and all kind of miserys, at length the remainder came lamely home with
perpetual shame and dishonor, and to the Everlasting honor of the English
name, who by the blessing of Heaven upon the courage and conduct of the Q. and
her valiant Commanders (among whom our r^nowned Sir Francis Drake deserves a
principal place of Honor) obtained so Glorious and remarkable a deliverance.
Some Poems were writ in those times on this notable occasion of which I shall
only give a taste.

Straverat innumeris Hispanus Classibus aequor
Regnis juncturus Sceptra Brittanna suis, etc.
Thus in English.

Spains King with Navys Great the Sea's bestrew'd
To join the English with his Spanish sway
Ask you what caused this proud attempt, 'twas lewd
Ambition drove, and Avarice led the way
2.
It Is well Ambitions Windy puff lies drowned
By Winds; And swelling hear^^ ^y swelling Waves
It Is Well? Those Spaniards who the worlds vast round
Devoured, devouring Sea most justly Craves
Another.
In Eighty Eight Spain armed with potent might
Against our peaceful Land came on to fight.
The Winds, and Waves, and Fire in one conspire
To help the English, frustrate Spains desire.
CHAP: IX. Sir Francis Drakes last Voyage to the West Indies in 1595.
(accompanied with Sir John Hawkins, Sir Tho. Baskerfeild and Sir Nicholas
Clifford and others,) with his Death, Burial and Epithaph.
AS this valiant and heroic Worthy had for many years faithfully served his
Prince, and Country so he died in this honorable employment, and wa^ buried
in that Vast Ocean wherein he had spent the greatest part of his life; The last
Voyage he made was to the West Indies in 1595. himself and Sir John Hawkins
being Generals, Sir Thomas Baskerfield and Sir Nicholas Clifford Lieutenant
Generals, with ten other Worthy Captains and diverse Gentlemen who imbarquing at
Plymouth, Aug. 28. sailed toward the Grand Canaries, and Sept. 6. in the height
of the Northern Cape overtook a French Man of War, and a Rocheller from
Newfoundland whom they quietly let pass, and after that two Biskayners bound
for Barbary; Sept. 9. they spied a Ship of Weymouth, who coming to their
General went with them to the Canaries; Soon after they discovered 20 French
Men of War, who chased but could not reach them; Sept. 19. they met one of the
Earl of Cumberlands Frigots, who told them the King's Men of War were going
homeward. Sept. 25. they discovered two Islands in 28 degrees, one called
Hanseroth, and the other Forteventura, inhabited only by Savage people, and 10
Leagues distant from Grand Canary; In the Port whereof Sept. 26. they imbarqued
in Boats and Pinnaces, endeavoring to land with all speed, but the Enemy
having notice of their coming, had entrenched themselves in the landing-place,
and upon their approach plied them so fast with great and small shot both from
the Castle and Town, that they were constrained with the loss of some Men to
retire to their Ships, the Spaniards being near 400 strong.

The same day they sailed thence to a place Northwest from the Town of S. John
de Luz, where was formerly a famous River running from the Rocks, but now
overgrown, where they watered; The people of this Island are barbarous and
Moutaineers, and Capt. Grimstone with four more were very much wounded and torn
by Dogs kept for that purpose, and some others that stragled into the Country
slain; It yields much Wine, Wheat and other Grain, with store of Rabbits,
Partridges and Tresses which have a Juice like Milk, but rank poison; It has
many large high Rocks in it, and 20 Leagues distant is the Isle of Teneriff,
the Pyke whereof is of a vast height. Sept. 28. they sailed hence directly
West, toward the West Indies, and October. 25. the Hope and Adventure Frigots
fell foul of one another by the darkness of the night, and a great Tempest of
Hail and Rain, so that they were forced to cut down the Missen Mast of the
Adventure, and throw it into the Sea. October 27. They had fight of the Isle of
Martinico inhabited by Cannibals or Man-Eaters, they were thirty days Sailing
from the Canarys to this Island, from thence they went to the Isle of Dominica
12 English Miles thence and stored with Tobacco, the people are not altogether
so rude, but would give them Tobacco for Knives and such other commodities,
they use Bows and Arrows made of reed and headed with a sharp piece of Brasile
Wood, their hair is very long and cut round the Shoulders; Oct. 30. they reached
another Isle called Guadalowpa ten Leagues from Dominica, and went into a River
thereof many of which Issue out of the Mountains on the West side into the Sea;
it is wholly uninhabited and a mere Wilderness, wherein are many wild Beasts
and Serpents of Monstrous Shapes; From hence they Sailed toward Rio de la
Hacha, and Novem. 7. discried three Islands between Guadalowpa and S. John de
Porto Rico, and next day the General landed his Men (...) one of their Ports,
that every Captain might know his own Soldiers; These Islands belong to
Virginia and are many in number but are without Inhabitants, having diverse fair
Harbors wherein a thousand Ships may ride at Anchor, and full of very high
Mountains.

Nov. 12. They arrived at Porto Rico, and anchored within four miles of the
Town under a great Fort, from whence they often received many furious shots; The
same day that worthy and vigilant Commander, Sir John Hawkins dyed there, and
Sir Nicholas Clifford Captain Stratford, and Mr. Brute Brown were wounded with
a Cannon Bullet from the Fort, all at once as they sat at Supper with Sir
Thomas Baskerfield, and Sir Francis Drake, who had the stool struck from under
him as he was drinking, and yet received no further damage; The same night Sir
Nicholas Clifford dyed of his wound, and that night they went and anchored
against the Town; Next day Nov. 13. the General calling a Council, it was
ordered that about nine next night some Muskets, Gunners and Fireworks should
be imbarqued in their Pinnaces and Boats; And accordingly 500 men went into the
Harbor to burn the five Spanish Men of War that lay there, one being 400 Tun,
the rest less; In this great ship were planted store of great Guns, which
together with abundance of small shot played furiously on the English, who yet
fought with so much gallantry, that they burnt, slew and drowned all the men in
the great Ship, wherein there were an hundred and sixty Ordnance, besides small
shot, losing only the little Francis who being taken sometime before gave
notice of their approach and much frustrated their design; By the Prisoners,
taken, the English understood that there was three Millions of Treasure in the
Town, belonging to the King of Spain, which these five Men of War came to carry
away, and the General hearing that his men were Prisoners there, sent the
Governor word to use them well, as he expected the like to the Spaniards their
Prisoners; They had notice there were 300 Soldiers in the Town, which stands
in a very small Island, having the Sea on one side and a great River on the
other, built in a valley, with a strong Fort to defend it, and seems very
large. Nov. 15. Sir John Hawkins, and Sir Nicholas Clifford were thrown
overboard, and the same day they spied a Spanish Carvel, which they instantly
pursued, but being perceived by the Castle of Porto Rico, they shot off a
warning piece to them not to approach, who thereupon ran themselves ashore, and
the men fled to the Mountains so that they could not come at them; Nov. 16.
they departed from Porto Rico, where though they got no great profit, yet it
was a most valiant attempt, and worthy to be recorded.

Being imbarqued, they saild with all speed to St. John Jermans Bay 36 Leagues
from Porto Rico, and landed some Soldiers to guard the Carpenters while they
built the Pinnaces, not far from which is an House called an Ingenio for making
Sugars, inhabited by Spaniards; The same day Mr. Brute Brown dyed, and Nov. 23.
a Court Marshal was held to question John Stanley for some misdemeanors, next
day Sir Thomas Baskerfield took two Negroes of this Island; Nov. 24. the Ship
called John Trelawny of Plymouth was burnt in this Bay, and they sailed to
another Island called Crusao, and arrived there the 29. going thence to a Town
called Rio De la Hacha on the Main Continent. Dec. 2. all the Soldiers being
put into Boats and Pinnaces, about one a Clock in the Night, they entered the
Town, the people being fled into the Country at their approach, leaving only
ten or twelve Soldiers who gave them a volley of shot; Two of whom fighting at
close quarters with bows and arrows, hatchets, spears were taken Prisoners, the
rest making their escape; They found niether victuals nor any thing else of
value in the Town, the Spaniards, having carried all away into the Woods, a
week before upon notice of their coming. Dec. 3. the Spaniards came to treat
about ransoming the Town, and next day brought some Pearl, but much less in
value than they had compounded for, whereupon Sir Francis Drake observing their
falsehood ordered the Town to be burnt; The Governor came again the day after
with many fair pretenses, but they found it was only to delay time till they
had given notice to other places to secure themselves; Dec. 16. they took more
Prisoners and found some of their goods, which they carried to their Ships, and
when the General saw they would come to no fair agreement, he commanded to burn
all places wherever they came, and accordingly the day before their departure
they left this Town on a light fire, except a New Religious House unfinished,
and another whither they use to bring all the Kings Treasure and Merchandise,
and of which the English found a considerable quantity, with some Pearl which
they brought to their General. This Country yields store of Oxen, Goats, Sheep,
Horses, Asses, Pellicans and other Fowls, and great plenty of grass. The
Inhabitants are Indians and Negroes being a wild savage People, except those
miserable wretches who are slaves to the Spaniards. About ten Leagues from this
Town is a very high Mountain always covered with Snow.

December. 19. They came to another Town called Sancta Martha, which they entered,
and found the People all fled to the Woods and Mountains, but following them,
they took some Treasure and other things of value, and made the Deputy Governor
of the Town prisoner, and departed leaving it on fire, being informed by the
Spaniards that they were within 3 Leagues of a Golden Mine. December. 25. They
sailed toward No More de Dios, and two days after anchored before the Town,
where Arnold Baskerfield their Sergeant Major died; They landed a Mile from the
Town, and marching toward them, the Enemy gave them only one Volley of shot,
and then fled into the Woods whither they had carried all their goods before,
leaving nothing but what was the Soldiers which lay in the great Fort, wherein
were only three great Guns, one whereof broke with a shot, and some of the
Soldiers were taken prisoners; The King of Spain usually sends all his
Treasure by Boat; from Panama to this place; They found in the Woods some Oil,
Wine, Vinegar, Meal and Linen Cloth; The General having Intelligence of the
Governors going toward Panama, sent Sir Tho. Baskerfield with 600 men to
surprise him; The way was extreme dangerous to travel in both from the Enemy,
water and rocks, so that they went in much peril of their lives; In their march
they saw abundance of Monkeys and Apes, and could hear the roaring of Lions;
Panama is oh the South Sea 18 Leagues from Nombre de Dios; After they had
marched half way they could go no further being prevented by a Fort built on
the top of a Rock which they must of necessity pass through, and was so narrow
that only one man could pass at a time, so that their men were slain as fast as
they ascended up, and there being no other way they were constrained to retire
with the loss of some of their best Soldiers, and with much trouble at this
great disappointment; Coming back to Nombre de Dios, and finding it almost all
consumed with fire, they hasted to their Ships; In this march a pair of shoos
were sold for thirty Shillings, and a Biscuit Cake for ten Shillings, so great
was their want both of Clothing and Victuals. The night before the English town
on fire had burnt the great House wherein the Kings Treasure use to lie, and 2
Leagues thence a Town inhabited by Negroes was burnt, who gave them a Volley of
shot, and so ran away leaving the Town afire.

Jan. 5. They departed hence for Scoday, and took a Spanish Frigot coming from
the Islands, wherein were four Spaniards and three Negroes, but nothing of
value, she was sent from Nombre de Dios to give notice to the other Towns to
secure themselves; The same day General Drake commanded his sick men to be
carried ashore for refreshment, and built four Pinnaces and took in fresh
Water; This Island of Scoday is a mere wilderness without Inhabitants, but full
of wild Beasts, as Bears, Allegators or Crocodiles, like a Serpent, and Guanoes
like a Snake with four legs and a long tail having many prickles on his back;
They live on Trees like Squirrels, and the Alligators in the Water but prey often
on the Land, his flesh his sweet like musk, and in his Bladder musk is found,
he is as big as a man's thigh, and they eat many of them. Jan. 22. they departed
from Scoday to an Island near Nombre de Dios, and two days after came to Porta
Bella, where the same day they arrived, our famous Hero Sir Francis Drake
departed this Life, his death being supposed to be much hastened by his
unsucces^fulness in this voyage; his great Spirit always accustomed to victory
and success, not being able to bear the least check of fortune, which
occasioned such Melancholy thoughts as were thought to be a chief cause of his
end.

His Death was exceedingly lamented by all the Company who looked upon him to be
the Life and Soul of their enterprises and undertakings; And of whose admirable
valor, wisdom, care, and tenderness they had found such large and constant
experience; His interment was after this manner; His Body being put into a
Coffin of Lead, was let down into the Sea, the Trumpets in a doleful manner
ecchoing out their Lamentations for so great a loss, and all the Cannon in the
Fleet were discharged according to the custom of all Sea Funeral Obsequies.

After this sad Fate, they continued here some while, and in ten days arrived
at Carthagena, and Feb. 31. espied the Isles of Pin^s; March 1. Sir Thomas
Baskerfield having now the sole command of the Fleet, they chased twenty sail
of the Kings Men of War, and fought with them three hours, firing several of
their Ships, the rest flying away; next day they sailed to Cape Anthony, and
soon after descried the Cape of Florida, and Marc^ 9. passed by the Bermuda's;
April 8. 1586. they came to the Isles of Florie inhabited by Portugals where
they staid, watered and traffickt for victuals, wherewith being well refresht,
they in short time arrived safe in England. And thus having brought our
renowned Knight through so many Dangers and Adventures to his watery grave, we
will take our leave of him, with this short Epitaph, write upon him many years
since.

Where Drake first found there last he lost his Name,
And for a Tomb left nothing but his Fame;
His Body's buried under some great Wave,
The Sea that was his Glory is his Grave,
Of whom an Epitaph none can truly make
For who can say; Here lies Sir Francis Drake?
FINIS.
There are newly Published Eighteen very useful, pleasant and necessary Books,
all sold by Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.
I. THE History of the Nine Worthies of the World; Three whereof were Gentiles.
1. Hector Son of Priamus King of Troy. 2. Alexander the Great King of Macedon
and Conqueror of the World. 3. Julius Caesar first Emperor of Rome. Three Jews.
4. Joshua Captain General and Leader of Israel into Canaan. 5. David King of
Israel. 6. Judas Maccabeus a Valiant Jewish Commander against the Tyranny of
Antiochus. Three Christians. 7. Arthur King of Britain, who courageously
defended his Country against the Saxons. 8. Charles the Great King of France,
and Emperor of Germany. 9. Godfrey of Bullen King of Jerusalem. Being an
account of their Glorious Lives, Worthy Actions, renowned Victories and Deaths.
Illustrated writh Poems and the Picture of each Worthy. By R. B. Price One
Shilling.

II. A View of the English Acquisitions in Guinea, and the East Indies. With an
Account of the Religion, Government, Wars, strange Customs, Beasts, Serpents,
Monsters, and other observables in those Countries. And among others, the Life
and Death of Mahomet the Grand Impostor, with the Principal Doctrines of the
Turkish Religion as they are displayed in the Alcoran. Two Letters, one written
by the Great Mogol, and the other by the King of Sumatra in the East Indies, to
our King James the First, of an extravagant style. The cruel Executions in
those parts: with the manner of the Women's burning themselves with their dead
Husbands. Together with a description of the Isle of St. Helena; and the Bay of
Souldania, where the English usually refresh in their Voyages to the Indies.
Intermixed with pleasant Relations, and Enlivened with Pictures. Price One
Shilling.

III. THE English Empire in America, or a Prospect of his Majesty's Dominions
in the West Indies, namely New Foundland, New England, New York, New Jersey,
Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia Carolina, Bermuda's, Barbuda, Anguilla,
Montserrat, Dominica, St. Vincent, Antego, Mevis or Nevis, St. Christophers,
Barbados, and Jamaica; With their Discovery, Situation, and Product; The
Religion and Manners of the Indians, and other excellencies of these Countries;
With the first Discovery of this New World, and of the Remarkable Voyages, and
Adventures of Sir T. Cavendish, the Earl of Cumberland; Sir W. Rawleigh, and
other English Worthies to diverse places therein. Illustrated with Maps and
Pictures. Price One Shilling.

IV. THE Second Edition of Englands Monarchs, very much enlarged; Or, A
Compendious Relation of the most Remarkable Transactions, from Julius Caesar,
to this present: Adorned with Poems, and Pictures of every Monarch from William
the Conqueror, to King James 2. with a List of the Nobility; The Knights of the
Garter, and the Principal Officers in England. The number of the Lords and
Commons in both Houses of Parliament, and many other very useful particulars.
Price One Shilling.

V. THe History of the Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, Containing, 1. The
most Remarkable Transactions and Revolutions in Scotland for above Twelve
hundred years past, during the Reigns of Sixty eight Kings, from 424, to King
James the First in 1602. II. The History of Ireland from the Conquest thereof
by Henry the Second to this time; With the Miraculous Persons and Places,
Strange Accidents, etc. And a List of the Nobility in both Kingdoms.
Illustrated with near Thirty Pictures. Price One Shilling.

VI. DElights for the Ingenious, In above Fifty Select and choice Emblems
Divine and Moral, Ancient and Modern, Curiously Engraven on Copper Plates; with
Fifty Delightful Poems and Lots, for the more Lively Illustration of each
Emblem; Whereby Instruction and Good Counsel may be promoted and furthered by
an honest and pleasant Recreation. To which is prefixed, An Incomparable Poem
Entitled, Majesty in Misery or an Imploration to the King of Kings, written by
his late Majesty, King Charles the First, with his own Hand, during his
Captivity in Carisbrook-Castle, in the Isle of Wight 1648. With a curious
Emblem. Collected by R. B. Price half a Crown.

VII. Surprising Miracles of Nature and Art, in two parts, containing, I. The
Miracles of Nature, or the wonderful signs, and Prodigious Aspects and
Appearances in the Heavens, Earth and Sea; with an Account of the most famous
Comets, and other Prodigies, from the Birth of Christ to this time. II. The
Miracles of Art, describing the most Magnificent Buildings, and other curious
Inventions in all Ages; as, the Seven Wonders of the World, and many other
excellent Structures and Rarities throughout the Earth. Beautified with
Sculptures. Price One Shilling.

VIII. THE Second Edition of Two Journies to Jerusalem, Enlarged, containing
first, an Account of the Travels of Two English Pilgrims, some years since, and
what admirable Accidents besel them in their Journey to Jerusalem, Grand Cairo,
Alexandria, etc. Secondly, the Travels of Fourteen Englishmen in 1669, from
Scanderoon to Tripoly, Joppa, Ramah, Jerusalem, Jericho, the River of Jordan,
the Lake of Sodom, and Gomorrah, and back again to Aleppo, by T. B. With the
rare Antiquities, and Monuments. To which is added, a Relation of the great
Council of the Jews assembled in Hungary, 1650. to examine the Scriptures
concerning Christ; By S. B. an Englishman there present: With the Delusion of
the Jews by a counterfeit Messiah at Smyrna in 1666. and the Event thereof.
Lastly, The Extirpation of the Jews, throughout Persia, in 1666. The Epistle of
King Agbarus to our Savior, with our Savior's Answer. Beautified with
Pictures. Price One Shiling.

IX. THE Fifth Edition of the Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland, being near
a third part enlarged with very considerable Additions, containing an impartial
account of all the Battles, Sieges, and other remarkable Transactions,
Revolutions and Acciden s which have happened from the beginning of the Reign
of King Charles the First, 1625. To his late Majesty's Happy Restoration. The
Illegal Trial of King Charles the First, with his last Speech at his suffering.
And the most considerable matters which happened till 1660. With Pictures of
several remarkable Accidents. Price One Shilling.

X. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and Present State of
London and Westminster, showing the Foundation, Walls, Gates, Towers, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Schools, Inns of Courts, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with an
account of the most remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and other
Occurrences, for above Nine hundred years past, in and about these Cities; to
the Year 1681. Illustrated with Pictures, with the Arms of the 65 Companies of
London, and the time of their Incorporating. Price One Shilling.

XI. ADmirable Curiosities, Rarities, and Wonders in England, Scotland and
Ireland, or an Account of many remarkable persons and places, and likewise of
the Battles, Sieges, Prodigious Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Thunders,
Lightnings, Fires, Murders, and other considerable Occurrences and Accidents
for many hundred years past. Together with the natural and artificial Rarities
in every County in England with several curious Sculptures. Price One Shilling.

XII. WOnderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy, discovered in above 300
memorable Histories, containing, 1. Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists,
Blasphemers, and perjured Villains. 2. The miserable ends of many Magicians,
Witches, Conjurers, etc. with diverse Apparitions and Illusions of the Devil. 3.
Remarkable predictions and presages of approaching Death, and how the Event has
been answerable. 4. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Murderers, etc. 5. Admirable
Deliverances from Imminent Dangers, and Deplorable Distresses at Sea and Land.
Lastly, Divine Goodness to Penitents, with the Dying thoughts of several famous
men, concerning a future state after this Life, Imbellished with diverse
Pictures. Price One Shilling.

XIII. THE Young man's Calling, or the whole Duty of youth, in a serious and
compassionate Address to all young Petsons to remember their Creator in the
days of their Youth. Together with Remarks upon the Lives of several excellent
young Persons of both Sexes, as well Ancient as Modern, who have been Famous
for Virtue and Piety in their Generations, namely, on the Lives of Isaac and
Joseph in their Youth. On the Martyrdom of the seven Sons and their Mother; of
Romanus a young Nobleman, and of diverse holy Virgins and Martyrs. On the Lives
of K. Edward 6. L. Jane, Q. Elizabeth in her youth, P. Henry Eldest Son to King
James, and the young L. Harrington, etc. with Twelve curious Pictures
illustrating the several Histories. Price Eighteen Pence.

XIV. EXcellent Contemplations, Divine and Moral; Written by the Magnanimous
and truly Loyal A. L. Capel, Baron of Hadham; Together with some Account of his
Life, and his Affectionate Letter to his Lady the day before his Death, with
his Heroic Behavior and last Speech at his Suffering; Also the Speeches and
Carriages of D. Hamilton and the Earl of Holland, who suffered with him: With
his pious Advice to his Son. Price One Shilling.

XV. WInter Evenings Entertainments in two Parts; Containing, 1. Ten Pleasant
and delightful Relaions of many Rare and Notable Accidents and occurrences;
with brief Remarks upon every one. 2. Fifty Ingenious Riddles, with their
Explanations, and useful Observations; and Morals upon each. The whole
Enlivened with above Threescore Pictures, for the better Illustration of every
Story and Riddle. Excellently Accommodated to the Fancies of Old or Young, and
exceeding useful to advance cheerful Society and Conversation. Licensed
according to Order. Price One Shilling.

XVI. YOuths Divine Pastime; containing Forty Remarkable Scripture Histories,
turned into common English Verse. With Forty curious Pictures proper to each
Story; very delightful for the virtuous employing the vacant hours of Young
Persons, and preventing vain and vicious Divertisements. Together with several
Scripture-Hymns upon diverse occasions, Price Eight Pence.

XVII. THE Divine Banquet, or Sacramental Devotions, Consisting of Morning and
Evening Prayers, Contemplations and Hymns for every day in the Week, in order
to a more Solemn Preparation for the Worthy receiving of the Holy Communion:
Representing the several steps and degrees of the Sorrows and Sufferings of our
Blessed Savior, till he gave up the Ghost; As, 1. His Agony in the Garden. 2.
His being Betrayed by Judas. 3. His being fasly accused, Smitten, Buffeted and
Spit upon before Caiaphas the High Priest. 4. His Condemnation, Scourging,
Crowning with Thorns, and being delivered to be Crucified by Pontius Pilate. 5.
His bearing his Cross to Golgotha. 6. His Crucifixion and bitter Passion.
Lastly, Our Saviors Institution of the Blessed Sacrament. Together with brief
Resolutions to all those Scruples and Objections usually alleged for the
Omission of this important Duty. With Eight Curious Sculptures, proper to the
several parts. To which is added, The Devout Christians daily Sacrifice, or
Morning and Evening Prayers for every day upon Ordinary Occasions; with Graces.
Price One Shilling.

XVIII A Guide to Eternal Glory: Or, Brief Directions to all Christians how to
attain Everlasting Salvation. To which are added several other excellent Divine
Tracts, As, I. Saving Faith discovered in Three Heavenly Conferences between
Our Blessed Savior and 1. A Publican. 2. A Pharisee. 3. A Doubting Christian.
II. The Threefold state of a Christian, 1. By Nature. 2. By Grace, 3. In Glory.
III. The Scriptures Concord, compiled out of the words of Scripture, by way of
Question and Answer, wherein there is the sum of the way to Salvation and
Spiritual things compared with Spiritual. IV. The Character of a True Christian
V. A brief Directory for the Great, Necessary and Advantageous Duty of
Self-Examination, whereby a serious Christian may every day Examine himself.
VI. A short Dialogue between a Learned Divine and a Beggar. VII. Beams of the
Spirit, or Cordial Meditations, Enlivening, Enlightening, and Gladding the Soul
VIII. The Seraphick Souls Triumph in the Love of God. With short remembrances
and Pious Thoughts. IX. History Improved, or Christian Applications and
Improvements of diverse remarkable passages in History. X. Holy Breathings, in
several Divine Poems upon diverse Subjects and Scriptures. Price One Shilling,

All sold by Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultry near Cheapside.

FINIS.

