the two houses of the English Parliament the House of Lords THE HOUSE OF LORDS
the House of Commons THE HOUSE OF COMMONS


THE WARS IN ENGLAND, Scotland and Ireland. OR An Impartial Account of all the
Battles, Sieges, and other Remarkable Transactions, Revolutions and Accidents,
which have heppened from the beginning of the Reign of King CHARLESI. in 1625,
to His Majesty's happy Restoration, 1660.

Illustrated with Pictures of some Considerable matters curiously Engraven on
Copper Plates.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch and John How, at the Seven Stars in Sweetings
Alley near the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1681.

TO THE READER.
THis small Volume is intended for the use of those who cannot go to the price
of a greater, and yet would willingly be informed of those wonderful
Transactions and Revolutions which have happened in these Three Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, in this last Age, and within the memory of many
now living: And though it cannot be expected that a large Account of every
particular Accident can be comprehended in this little Compendium, yet I have
endeavored, without the least passion or partiality, briefly to comprise the
most considerable Matters.

Now as the Things here inserted are more remarkable, both for their Variety
and Quality, than it may be ever happened at any time heretofore in so short a
space; so the serious perusal and consideration thereof may be very useful and
necessary for quieting the present Discontents and deplorable Distractions that
are now amongst us; since these were the Forerunners of those miserable Wars,
Ruins, and Desolations which are herein related; wherein all Bonds of Religion,
Alliance and Friendship, were utterly destroyed: Wherein Fathers and Children,
Kindred and Acquaintance, became unnatural Enemies to each other; so that with
some little Variation we may apply what Lucan writes of the Civil Wars of Rome
to England in those times, Wars more than Civil on the British Plains
Then happened; and England Distzins
In her own Bowels her Victorious Swords;
Where Kindred Hosts Encounter, all Accords
Of Empire broke; where armed to Impious War,
The strength of all the shaken Land from far
Is met; known Ensigns, Ensigns do desie,
Fathers by Sons, and Sons by Fathers die.
What fury Contrymen, what madness could
Move you to feast your Foes with English Blood,
And choose such Wars as could no Triumphs yield
Whilst yet proud Babylon unconquered held.
Alas what seas, what lands might you have taken,
With that bloods loss, which your own hands have drawn.


Let us all therefore who pretend to the name of Christians, study to be quiet,
and follow Peace with all men; which is the most Effectual means to prevent
those Confusions and Miseries which we have lately suffered, and under the
effects whereof we still groan: and that this short Narrative may be useful to
this purpose, is the earnest and hearty desire of

Your Countryman and Well-wisher RICHARD BVRTON.

THE WARS IN England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc.
BEfore we proceed to give an Account of those Unnatural Wars, Ruins, and
Devastations, which have happened in these Kingdoms in this Last Age, it may
seem necessary, by way of Introduction, to give a Relation of several previous
Transactions before these Woeful Calamities befell us.

Upon the 27th. day of March, in the year 1625, King James departed this life
at Theobalds in the Fifty ninth year of his Age, when he had reigned Twenty two
years complete: And in the Afternoon of the same day Charles Prince of Wales,
his only Son then living, was proclaimed King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland.

The first thing he did, was performing the Ceremonies of his Fathers Funeral,
in which the King himself in Person followed as chief Mourner immediately after
the Hearse; having his Train of black Velvetborn up by the Twelve Peers of the
Realm; at his right hand the Earl of Arundel, and at his left the Earl of
Pembroke. He then proceeded to his Coronation, and after that he consummated
the Marriage with Henrietta Maria, younger Daughter of the Great Henry the
Fourth, King of France, whom he had formerly seen in his Journey through that
Country into Spain; his first Complement to her, when he went to meet her at
Dover, was, That he desired to be no longer Master of himself, then he was
Servant to her, which indeed he made good: for on the day before his deplorable
death, he desired his Daughter, the Lady Elizabeth, to assure her Mother, if
ever he saw her again, That his Thoughts had never strayed from her, and that
his Affections should be the same to the last.

The King then called a Parliament, which Assembled the Eighteenth of June
follwoing, to whom he represented in a short Speech, The urgent necessity of
raising a Subsidy, since it would not agree with his Kingly honor to shrink
from the War with Spain, which his Father upon solid Considerations had by
consent of both Houses undertaken; although prevented by death from putting it
in Execution: That Money, the sinews of War must be levied, without which
neither Army nor Fleet could move; former Contributions being already disbursed
to a penny: That he should seem ridiculous to all Europe, if he did not now at
length proceed to Action: That it was his first Enterprise, the success whereof
would have influence upon his following Reign: That it concerned their own
Reputations herein to Assist him effectually, least the world should judge them
to have betrayed their King: That Celerity was necessary because of Winter then
approaching, a season prejudicial to Martial Attempts: the Pestilence at that
time Reigning in the City, which in all probability might cause a sudden
Dissolution of their Meeting: All which Arguments, if duly considered, did
evidently demonstrate, That it was most Honorable, Opportune and safe, to use
Expedition in the business. As for Religion and Manner of Government, he was
resolved to tread in his Fathers steps, hoping that his former life had
ministered, no just grounds for them to suspect the contrary.

The Parliament acknowledged these Arguments for a Subsidy to be very rational,
but yet would not suddenly resolve upon it, till they had first presented their
two Petitions, concerning Beasons of Religion and Complaint of their
Sufferings, which points had been offered to his Father King James, in the
close of his last Parliament, and by his death were left hitherto unanswered.

In both which they received competent satisfaction, and likewise an account of
the Arrears which were due to the Forces both by Sea and Land, together with an
Estimate of the future Charge and Expense of the Spanish War; upon which the
King obtained of the Laity freely and absolutely, Two Subsidies to be paid by
Protestants, and four from Papists; and three Subsidies, from the Clergy. In
this Parliament Dr. Montague the Kings Chaplain was questioned for certain
Tenets in his Answer to a Book called the Romish Gagger and his defense
thereof; Entitled Appello ad Caesarem: And he being brought before the Bar of
the House, the Speaker declared their pleasure; That they would refer his
Censure till the next meeting; and in the mean time he should stand committed
to the Sergeants Ward, till Two Thousand Pound Bail could be procured for his
appearance next Sessions: And though the King took him into Protection, as his
Servant, yet his Bail-bond remained uncancelled.

Diverse Laws were Enacted in this Parliament, as one about Observation of the
Lord's day; another for restraint of Tippling in Inns, Alehouses, etc. These
passed likewise in the House of Commons, A Bill for Tunnage and Poundage; but
this miscarried in the House of Lords, because the Commons had limited it to a
year, whereas it was formerly granted to the Kings Predecessors during their
lives; it being intended to reduce the Customs to the Rate, at which they were
settled in the Reign of Queen Mary.

During the fitting of the Parliament, the Lord Mordant a Papist, and his Wife
a Protestant, being both desirous of each others Conversion, they put their
cause upon a dispute between James Usher L. Archbishop of Amargh, and one
Rookwood a Jesuit, who called himself Beaumont; this was acted at Drayton in
Northamptonshire, the points disputed on were, Transubstantiation, Praying to
Saints, Images, and the Visibility of the Church; wherein the Learned Primate
so foiled his Adversary, that the Lord Mordant was Convinced and Converted to
the Protestant Religion, and his Lady further confirmed therein.

On the Eleventh of July, 1626, the Parliament by reason of the sickness,
Adjourned till August 1. and then met again at Oxford, where the King first by
himself, and next by his two Secretaries, the Lord Conway and Sir John Cook,
declared to them the necessity of setting forth a Fleet, for the recovery of
the Palatinate, which was the Country of the Prince Palatine of the Rhyns, who
married the Kings Sister, and was then unjustly detained from him by the
Emperor of Germany, and the King of Spain; the Lord Treasurer likewise
instanced the several Sums of Money, which King James died indebted to the City
of London.

This occasioned very warm Debates in the House of Commons, who alleged, That
evil Councels guided the Kings Designs; That the Treasury was misimployed, That
our necessties arose through Imprevidence: That it would be necessary to
Petition the King for a stricter hand and better Council to manage his Affairs:
That though a former Parliament engaged the King in a War, yet if things were
managed with Contrary designs; and the Treasure misimployed, this Parliament
was not bound to be carried blindsold in Designs, not guided by sound Council:
That it was not usual to grant Subsidies upon Subsidies in one Parliament, and
no Grievances rednessed. With several other Passages of the like Nature.

They likewise very much reflected upon the miscarriages of the Duke of
Buckingham. who was then a person of very considerable Trust: but however they
promised to consider of the Kings desires, and presented him a Petition against
Popish Recusants, giving an Account of their damage, ascribing certain Causes
of their growth, and offering diverse Remedies thereunto; unto which a
satisfactory Answer (if any thing would have satisfied) was returned: And
hereupon there followed a Debate about Supplies; some were for contributing
presently, others demurred, as disliking the design in hand; and in conclusion
the Major part agreed not to give: And being incensed against the Duke of
Buckingham, they began to think of divesting him of his Offices, and to require
an Account of the Public Moneys wherewith he had been entrusted; all which
they intended to include in an humble Remonstrance: to prevent which, the King
resolved to Dissolve the Parliament; and accordingly the Usher of the Black Rod
was sent from the House of Lords to the Commons, who were then resolved into a
Grand Committee; and understanding the Kings pleasure, they caused the Speaker
to keep his Seat, while they agreed upon a Message of Thanks to his Majesty for
his Gracious Answer to their Petition for Religion, and for his care of their
Health, in giving them leave to depart this dangerous time of Sickness; with a
dutiful Declaration of their Affection and Loyalty, and of their purposing to
supply him in a Parliamentary way, in fit and convenient time: After which they
were accordingly dissolved.

Now the War with Spain being intended both for the recovery of the Palatinate,
and to prevent disturbance in our Civil Estate, the Council hereupon resolve
with all speed to set forth a Fleet, and to preserve strict Unity and Peace
with France, Denmark, and the United Provinces, and with the Hollanders the
King had already entered into a League Offensive and Defensive against the
House of Austria, and likewise had promised to assist them in soliciting other
Princes to enter into the same Confederation, upon Condition that they should
bear a Fourth part of the Charge of the Fleet; and in pursuance hereof, the
Duke of Buckingham and the Earl of Holland were sent to the Hague, and there
meeting with the Ambassadors of France and Denmark, they concluded a League for
restoring the Liberties of Germany; the two last Ambassadors having no further
power from their Supteams.

A while after the Dissolution of the Parliament, the King published a
Proclamation, Commanding the return of all Children of Noblemen, which had
been sent to be Educated in Seminaries and Popish Schools beyond Sea; that none
who had received Orders from Rome, should presume to confer Orders, or Exercise
Ecclesiastical Functions in any of his Dominions; and likewise that the Statute
be put in Execution for the departure of Priests and Jesuits, out of his
Majesty's Dominions.

By reason of the Dissolving the Parliament, the Act of Subsidies was
prevented, and the King was necessitated to take up Money upon Loan of such
Persons as were of Ability to lend; and to that end he directed his Letters to
the Lord Leiutenants of the several Counties, To return the Names of those Men
whom they thought most sufficient, The places of their Habitations, and what
Sums each might be judged able to lend; and to the persons returned, Letters
were Issued forth in the Kings Name to this purpose,

That his Majesty having observed in the Presidents and Customs of former
times. That all the Kings and Queens of this Realm, upon extraordinary
occasions have used either to resort to those Contributions which arise from
the generality of Subjects, or to the private helps of some well affected in
particular, by way of Loan; in the former of which, as his Majesty has no doubt
in the Love and affection of his People, when they shall again Assemble in
Parliament; so for the present he was enforced to proceed in the latter course
for supply of some Portions of Treasure for diverse public Services, which
without manifold Inconveniences to his Majesty, and his Kingdoms cannot be
deferred: and therefore this being the first time that his Majesty has
required any thing of this kind, he doubts not but he shall receive such a
Testimony of good affection from them among other of his Subjects, and that
with such alacrity and readiness as may make the same so much the more
acceptable; especially since his Majesty required but the Sum which few men
would deny a Friend, and has a mind resolved to expose all his Earthly Fortune
for Preservation of the General: The Sum which His Majesty requires by these
presents is -- which His Majesty promises in the Name of himself, his Heirs,
and Successors, to repay to them or their Assigns, within Eighteen Months after
the payment thereof to the Collector: The Person whom his Majesty has
appointed is -- to whose hands his Majesty does require them to send it within
Twelve days after they have received this Privy Seal; which together with the
Collectors Acquittance, shall be sufficient Warrant to the Officers of Receipt
for their payment thereof at the time limited: And the Collectors of the Loan
were ordered to pay the Sums received into the Exchequer, and to return the
Names of such as went about to delay or excuse the Payment of the Sums required.

And now about the beginning of October the Fleet set to Sea, the Lord Cecill,
second Son to the Earl of Exeter, commanding the Land Forces, and the Earl of
Essex being Vice Admiral at Sea; but they were surprised by so violent a Storm,
that the greatest part of the Navy, which in all made up Fourscore Ships (some
being Dutch) were dissipated and scattered for seven days together, and an
excellent Ship with an 170 Passengers in her, were all cast away, and lost; the
Design was to have furprized Cadiz in Spain, to burn the Ships in the Harbor,
and to have taken the Spanish Plate Fleet, which was daily expected from the
Indies; but by reason of the Plague amongst them, and some other miscarriages
of the Commanders, the business was wholly disappointed, and the Fleet returned
home but four days before the Plate Fleet came.

Upon the Second of February was the Coronation, at which the King did not pass
through the City in State from the Tower, as was usual, but went by Water from
Whitehall to Westminster, for fear of the danger of a Concourse of People; the
Pestilence which raged the year before not being quite ceased: The Bishop of
Lincoln, as Dean of Westminster, should have performed the chief part of the
Ceremony, but being under displeasure, Dr. Laud, then Bishop of St. David's
supplied his place.

Diverse considerable Forces had been raised both for Sea and Land, for the
better Discipline of whom, 150 old Soldiers were sent for from the
Netherlands, by whose Industry they were brought into some good order against
the meeting of the next Parliament, which was summoned to sit Feb. 6. And being
met accordingly, the House of Commons chose Sir Henage Finch for their Speaker.

The first business they insisted upon, was the rendering thanks to the King for
his gracious Answer to their late Petition concerning Religion, then they
debated of the Public Grievances, viz. The miscarrying of the Fleet at Cadiz;
the evil Counselors about the King; misimploying the Kings Revenue; an Account
of the Subsidies and three Fifteens, granted in the 21 Year of King James: And
in the Committee of Grievances, these four particulars were insisted on: 1. The
state of the King in the constant Revenue of the Crown, and how much it had
been diminished by Gifts of Lands, Grants of Pensions, Fruitless Embassies, the
Privy Purse, and other ways. 2. The Condition of the Subject in his Freedom,
about laying new impositions, multiplying Monopolies, Leuying of Customs
without Act of Parliament, and wasting the Treasure. 3. The Cause of the
Nations good success in former times, whereby it was feared, Victorious and
Renowned abroad; which they judged was occasioned by the Wisdom and Gravity of
Counsel, who ordered nothing but by public Debate; whereby there arose a
readiness in the People to Assist their Sovereign in Purse and Person. 4. The
present Condition of the Kingdom, wherein was represented the loss of its
wonted Reputation, through the ill success at Algier in the Palatinate, in
Count Manfields Expedition, and at Cadiz; and this was imputed to the want of
such Counsels as were formerly used; since for fear of not succeeding, men were
now afraid of venturing either there Persons or Purses.

There was likewise a Commit concerning Religion and the growth of Popery,
wherein Mr. Richard Montagues two Books before mentioned were again questioned,
and Articles drawn up against him, charging him with several Passages for
encouraging Popery, and drawing his Majesty's Subjects from the true Religion
Established into Error and Superstition, with other passages dishonorable to
the late King, and full of injurious and railing Language against other
Persons; as likewise that he endeavored to raise Factions in the Kingdom, by
casting the scandalous Name of Puritan, upon such of his Majesty's Subjects as
conformed themselves to the Doctrine of the Church of England: upon which the
House of Commons ordered that he should be brought to Exemplary Punishment, and
to have his Books burnt; nor do we find that he ever made any Defense or Answer
to those Articles that were brought against him: It is affirmed that a while
before the sitting of the Parliament, Dr. Laud understanding from the D. of
Buckingham that the King intended to leave Mr. Montague to a Trial, was heard
to utter these words, Iseem to see a Cloud arising and threatening the Church of
England, God in his Mercy dissipate it.

After this the Commons questioned several persons who were of the Council of
War, upon the Affairs of the Palatinate, concerning the management of that
business, complaint was likewise made in the House of the Scotch and Irish
Nobility, for claiming precedence of the Peers of England, of which redress was
promised; but a while after the Lord Martrevers, Eldest Son and Heir to the
Earl of Arundel, Married the Daughter of the late Duke of Lenox, contrary to
the Kings Mind, who intended her for the Lord Lorn, Son and Heir of the Earl of
Argile; whereupon the Earl of Arundel was committed to the Tower; which upon
the Peers Petitioned to the King, alleging, That no Peer sitting in the
Parliament, is to be imprisoned without Order from the House of Lords, unless
for Felony, Treason, or denying to give security for the Peace. Upon this there
arose a Dispute, which lasted for the space of two Months, and then the Earl
was set at Liberty.

In which time the House of Commons were very busy in searching the Signet
Office, for the Original of a Letter under the Signet, written to the Mayor of
York, for reprieving diverse Jesuits, Priests, and other Popish Recusants: This
was reported by Mr. Pim Chairman to the Committee for Religion; but their
proceedings therein were interrupted by a Meffage from the King, sent by Sr.
Richard Weston, Chancellor of the Exchequer; demanding a supply for the English
and Irish Forces. This was so highly resented, that Mr. Clement Cook, one of
the Members openly Protested, That it was better to die by a Foreign Enemy,
than to be destroyed at home: And Dr. Turner another of the House seconded him
with these Queries.

1. Whether the King had not lost the Regality of the Narrow Seas since the D.
of Buckingham was Admixal? 2. Whether his going as Admiral in this last Fleet,
was not the cause of its ill Success, and return without any considerable
Action? 3. Whether the Kings Treasure has not been impaired by the Dukes
Immense Liberality? 4. Whether he has not Engrossed all Offices, and preferred
his Kindred to most places? 5. Whether he has not sold places of Judicature?
6. Whether Popish Recusants have not dependence upon his Mother and Father in
Law.

These bold Expressions so provoked the King, that he immediately sent Sir
Richard Weston to demand Satisfaction of the House of Commons, whereupon Dr.
Turner presently after made a Speech in Vindication, and for explaining
himself, alleging, That what he had said was for the good of the Kingdom, and
not reflecting upon any one in patticular. That to accuse upon common Fame, he
thought to be a Parliamentary way, and warranted by the Cannons of the Church,
the Imperial Laws, and by Ancient Presidents. The Duke of Suffolk in King Hen.
the Sixths time, having been accused upon Common Fame. He added likewise, That
Mr. Chancellor himself had presented some persons upon particular Fame, and
that he knew no reason why himself might not in that place have as ample
Privilege; and the further debate of the matter being referred till another
time, Dr. Turner in the mean space writ a Letter to the Speaker to excuse his
absence, by reason of some Indisposition, and to signify his desire of putting
himself wholly upon the Judgment and Censure of Parliament.

Sir William Waller, speaking his Opinion concerning Grievances, said, That the
True Cause of them, was, because (as was said of Jews the 11th of France) all
the Kings Council Rode upon one Horse, And that therefore His Majesty was to be
advised, as Moses was by Jethro, to make choice of Counselors, to assist him
that should be thus qualified: 1. Noble, not Upstarts, and of a Nights Growth.
2. Men of Courage, such as would execute their own places, and not commit them
to undeserving Deputies. 3. Fearing God, not inclining to false Worship or
halting between two Opinions. 4. Dealing truly, not given to Flattery, or
favoring Courtship; but such as might be safely trusted by the King and
Kingdom. 5. Hating Covetousness, not such as lived upon other Men's Means, or
that would take Bribes, or sell places in Church or State, or about the King.
6. To be many, in the multitude of Counselors there being safety. 7. To judge
of small matters as well as great (the greatest being to be referred to the
King) much less any one Councellor alone to manage all business. 8. Elders, not
young and unexperienced Men, through whose rash and unadvised proceedings,
great Designs many times miscarry.

And herein he was seconded by Sr. John Eliot, who represented to the House,
The present State of the Kingdom, and the great dishonor the King and Kingdom
had sustained by several miscarriages, and ill management of Matters of the
highest Trust; he likewise mentioned Two Presidents, the first in the 16 year
of Hen. 3. when the Parliament denied the Subsidies demanded till the great
Officers were Examined; and Hugh de Burg being found guilty of Corruption was
displaced. Another Example was in the 10th year of Rich. 2. when Supply was
required, and the Commons complaining that the Earl of Suffolk then overruled
all, they returned Answer, That they could not give.

But notwithstanding these Discourses, the Commons taking the Kings Necessities
into Consideration, Voted Three Subsidies, and Three Fifteens, and that the
Bill should be brought in, as soon as the Grievances which were represented,
were redressed. They likewise considered of the matter of the Duke of
Buckingham, and the misimploying the Revenue; and ordered that the Duke should
again have notice of their Intentions therein: But the King observing they did
not make such have as he expected, to answer his last Message, summons both
Houses together; and by the Lord Keeper complains to them, For not punishing
Dr. Turner, and Mr. Cook, and likewise for searching his Signet Office, and
also justified the D. of Buckingham to have acted nothing of Public Employment
without his Special Warrant, and therefore forbid them to concern themselves
any further therein, as looking upon it to be Libelling his own Government;
lastly he blamed them for being too sparing in the matter of Supply, and for
ordering the Bill not to be brought in till their Grievances were heard and
answered, which he would not admit of. This was the substance of the Lord
Keepers Speech, to which the King himself added.

He must also put them in mind that his Father moved by their Counsel and won
by their Persuasions, broke the Treaties; and that he himself was their
Instrument toward his Father, and was glad to be Instrumental in any thing
which might please the whole Body of the Realm, nor was there any then in
greater Favor than the Duke, whom they now traduced; but that now finding him
so far entangled in a War, that he could make no honorable nor safe Retreat,
they made necessity their Privilege, and set what rate they pleased upon their
Supplies, a Practice not very obliging toward Kings: and whereas Mr. Cook told
them, That it was better for them to die by a Foreign Enemy, than to be
destroyed at home: Indeed he thought it to be more Honorable for a King to be
Invaded, and almost destroyed by a Foreign Enemy, than to be despised at home.

After this, at a Conference of both Houses in the Painted Chamber, the Duke of
Buckingham was commanded by the King, to explain some Expressions in the Kings
and the Lord Chancellors Speeches, which might be subject to misunderstanding,
which the Duke performed accordingly, and then gave a large Account of his
Negotiation in the Low Countries; as soon as the Duke had ended, the Lord
Conway discoursed of the Treaties of Denmark and France, and the business of
the Navy, and affirmed they were not done by single Council, since King James
himself commanded it.

The Commons in Answer to the Kings last Speech, presented him with a
Remonstrance to this purpose; That they gratefully acknowledged His Majesty's
Expressions of Affection to his People and Parliament, That they had taken Mr.
Cooks and Dr. Turners words into Consideration, and might have given a good
Account thereof by this time, if his Majesty's Message had not interrupted
them; That they had the Presidents of former Parliaments for searching the
Letters of his Majesty and his Secretary of State, the Signet Office, and other
Records, upon the like occasions. That it was the unquestionable Privilege of
Parliaments to complain of any Person of any degree, and their proceedings in
relation to the Duke should not prejudice either Crown or Kingdom: That they
were willing to Supply his Necessities Liberally and Faithfully, if Additions
might be made of other things which concerned his Service, and were now in
Consultation among them.

His Majesty having received it, returned this short Answer thereunto, That he
would have them in the first place, Consult about Matters of the greatest
Importance, and that they should have time enough for other things afterward.

This happened in the year 1626, and in the Second Year of his Majesty's Reign;
about which time the Earl of Bristoll (being ordered by the King to be Examined
by a Committee of Lords, concerning his Negotiation in Spain, and having been
in Prison and prohibited access to His Majesty ever since his return) received
a Letter from the Lord Conway, wherein, in order to his Relief he propounded to
him from His Majesty this Choice, Whether he would be quiet, and not be
questioned for what was past, and enjoy the benefit of the late Gracious
Pardon? or whether he would stand upon his Justification? To which he Answered,
That he did humbly acknowledge and accept of his Majesty's Grace and Favor;
And at the same time he Petitioned the House of Lords for his Liberty, or to
come to a Trial; who apylying themselves to his Majesty, he granted a Writ for
the Earls coming to Parliament, but with a Proviso, That his Personal
Attendance should be forborne; whereupon the Earl sent another Petition to the
Lords that he might be heard, both as to his Restraint, and of what he had to
say against the Duke. At which the King was much concerned, and signified to
the Lords, That it was his Royal Pleasure, that the Earl of Bristol might be
sent for as a Delinquent to answer his Offenses to the House, and his
scandalizing the Duke of Buckingham and his Majesty likewise by Reflection.

Upon this the Earl was accordingly brought to the Bar, and being ready to be
impeacht of High Treason by the Attorney General, he besought their Lordships,
That as he was a Freeman and Peer of this Realm untainted, and had something to
say of high Consequence for his Majesty's Service, he might have liberty to
speak. Which being granted him, he said, I accuse that Man the Duke of
Buckingham of High Treason. This unexpected procedure of the Earl, occasioned
the Attorney General to draw up a Charge against him, consisting of Eleven
Articles containing Matters of diverse Natures; whereupon the Earl afterward
gave a large Account of the Duke of Buckinghams proceedings toward him, and
then preferred Twelve Articles against him; and besides these Articles against
the Duke, the Earl of Bristol exhibited Eleven others against the Lord Conway:
the Earl likewise gave in his Answer to each particular Article of his
Impeachment.

Now whilst these two Peers were thus contesting, the House of Commons
presented an Impeachment to the Lords against the Duke, consisting of Twelve
Articles, to each of which the Duke made Replies, and the last of them being a
matter of general Discourse, it may seem necessary to insert it, with the Dukes
Answer thereto.

That the Duke being a Sworn Servant of the the late King, did cause and
provide certain Plasters and Potions for his late Majesty K. James in in his
last Sickness without the Privity of his Majesty's Physicians, and that
although those Plasters and Potions formerly applied, produced such ill
Effects, as many of his Sworn Phisicians did disallow, as prejudicial to his
Majesty's Health, yet the Duke did apply them again to his Majesty; whereupon
great Distempers, and dangerous Symptoms appeared in him, which the Physicians
imputed to those Administrations of the Duke, whereof his late Majesty also
complained: which is an Offense and Misdemeanor of so high a Nature as may be
called an Act of Transcendent Presumption: And the said Commons by
Protestation, saving to themselves the liberties of exhibiting hereafter any
other Accusation, or Impeachment against the Duke, and also of Replying unto
what the Duke shall Answer unto the said Articles, do pray, That the said Duke
may be put to Answer all and every the Premises, and that such Proceeding,
Examinations, Trials and Judgments, may be upon every of them had as is
agreeable to Law and Justice.

To this Article the Duke of Buckingham Replied, That his late Majesty being
sick of an Ague, a Disease out of which the Duke recovered not long before,
asked the Duke what he found most Advantageous to his Health? The Duke replied,
a Plaster, and Possit Drink administered unto him by the Earl of Warwick 's
Physician, whereupon the King much desired the Plaster and Possit drink to be
sent for, and the Duke delaying it, the King commanded a Servant of the Dukes
to go for it, against the Dukes earnest request; he humbly Duke of Buckingham
stabbed by John Felton D: Buckingham stabbed by Felton
William Prynne, Henry Burton, and John Bastwick in pillories; crowd in
foreground, buildings in background Mr Pryn, Burton and Bastnich in ye Pillory
crowd waving sticks and throwing chairs in church; preacher in pulpit The
Tumult in Scotland upon Reading ye Common prayr
craving his Majesty not to make use of it, without the Advice of his own
Physicians and Experiment upon others; which the King said he would do, and in
confidence thereof the Duke left him, and went to London, and in the mean time
he being absent, the said Plaster and Posset Drink were brought; and at the
Dukes return, his Majesty commanded the Duke to give him the Posset Drink,
which he did, the Physicians then present not seeming to mislike it; afterward
the Kings Health declining, and the Duke hearing a Rumor as if his Physic had
done his Majesty hurt, and that he had administered Physic without Advice, the
Duke acquainted the King therewith, who with much discontent replied, They are
worse then Devils that say so.

About this time the King again earnestly pressed the House of Commons for a
speedy Supply, by their Speaker Sir Heneage Finch; giving them to understand,
That if there did not pass the Bill of Subsidy by the end of the week
following, it would enforce him to take other Resolutions; and if by their
denial, or delay, any thing of ill consequence should fall out either at home,
or abroad, he called God and Man to witness, that he had done his part to
prevent it, by calling his People together to advise with him; whose sitting
(if they dispatched this according to his desire) he resolved to continue, for
the dispatch of other Affairs, and after their Recess to bring them again
together the next Winter.

Before the Commons sent an Answer, they drew up a Petition to his Majesty.
That he would be pleased to Remove from all places of Trust and Authority, all
such Persons as were either Popish Recusants, or according to the Direction of
former Acts of State, justly to be suspected to be such. And herewith they
likewise sent a large Scrowl of the Names of all such Noblemen and others as
continued in places of high Trust in the several Counties of England.

The Answer to the late Articles against the Duke of Buckingham, being by him
delivered into the Lords House, he desired their Lordships to send to the
Commons for a speedy Reply; whereupon the Commons required a Copy of his
Answer. But the Duke fearing what might be the Effect thereof humbly applied
himself to the Lords, whom he entreated to allow him the benefit of a free and
general Pardon granted by King James in Parliament in the 21st. Year of his
Reign, and likewise that of the Coronation.

Presently after the Commons drew up another Declaration of Grievances against
the Duke, whom they resolved utterly to overthrow, though contrary to the
Inclination of the King; who being thereat incensed, dissolved the Parliament
the very next day, June 15. 1626. and committed the Earl of Bristol to the
Tower, Publishing a Proclamation for burning all Copies of the said
Declaration. After which the King Published a Declaration, showing the Grounds
and Reasons of his Dissolving this and the former Parliament.

Then several ways were Resolved on for advancing the Kings Revenue, and
special care was taken by the Council for the levying of Customs and Imposts
upon all Merchandises Imported and Exported, as being intended to have been
settled by the Two last Parliaments, but prevented by their sudden Dissolution:
The Forfeitures of Papists likewise, which had been misimployed, were now taken
into a more strict Account; Privy Seals also were issued out, and Benevolence
proposed, and at length a Commission for a General Loan was resolved upon, as
the most convenient Method, since the present state of Affairs admitted not of
the way of a Parliament, and private Instructions were given to the
Commissioners how to manage the business, which upon their Faith and Allegiance
they were commanded to keep Secret, and not to disclose to any.

About this time some Soldiers returned from Cadiz, and were Quattered in the
Countries, and Money was raised for them, which made this Loan the more
unwelcome; and Sir Randolph Crew for not appearing vigorous in promoting the
Loan, was displaced from being L. Chief Justice, and Sir Nich. Hyde advanced in
his place; the Bishop of Lincoln was likewise informed against in the Star
Chamber by Sir John Lamb, and Dr. Sybthorp, for speaking against the Loan, and
seeming to favor the Puritans and Nonconformists: Not long before which Bishop
Laud (hearing that the Bishop of Lincoln endeavored to ingratiate himself with
the D. of Buckingham) Dreamed, That the Bishop came to him with Iron Chains,
but returned free from them, that he leaped upon a Horse, departed and he could
not overtake him; which was afterward interpreted concerning the Bishop of
Lincolns taking Arms for the Parliament in Wales, and his being at liberty,
when Bishop Laud was imprisoned in the Tower.

There were several Occasions at this time which required considerable Supplies
of Money, for besides that of the Palatinate, there was great probability of a
War with France upon this Occasion; the French King, Lewis the 13. had borrowed
of his Brother in Law, the King of England, a Man of War called the Vauntguard,
and six other Merchants Ships in pursuance of a Design against Italy, but with
this express Condition that they should not be employed against the Protestants
at Rochel; there having been an Agreement lately made between them and their
King by the Mediation of the English Ambassadors: But Mounsieur Soulize, who
was for the Protestants, taking the Advantage of the French Armies going into
Italy, suddenly broke that Agreement; for getting some small Ships together, he
Surprised the Isle of The, and some Ships in the Harbor, at which the French
King being offended, turns his whole Design from Italy to Rochel; and with the
Seven English Ships under Admiral Pennington, Twenty Dutch Ships, and the
French Navy, he furiously falls upon Soulize, forces him from his Fastness,
and chaseth him to the Isle of Oleron: The King of England was much concerned
at this Action of the French King, as a breach of his Royal Word, and demanded
Satisfaction; which the French King deferring to give, the King Seized a Rich
French Ship, and the French King Arrested the Goods of the English Merchants in
France, to the value of Three Hundred Thousand Pounds; but at length all was
Reconciled and Restored on both sides.

Thus all seemed quiet at present, till the Insolent deportment of the Queens
Priests and Confessor made another Rupture; who Imposed upon her to go
barefoot, to Spin, to wait upon her Servants at their Dinners, nay to walk on
Foot on a Rainy Morning, from Somerset House to St. Jameses, and from thence as
far as Tybourn Gallows, to offer up her Prayers for the Souls of some Jesuits,
whom they styled Martyrs who were formerly Executed there; her Confessor
himself Riding by her in a Coach. These and several other Arrogancies, being
justly charged upon the Queens French Domestic Servants, they were paid off,
discharged, and sent home: Upon which the French Arrested the Ships of the
English Wine Merchants at Blay Castle, which was so ill Resented by his Majesty
of Great Britain; that he resolved upon a Breach with France: But about the
same time the English Fleet under the L. Willoughby, which were sent to the Aid
of the Rochellers, were so scattered by a Storm, that they could scarce get
into safe Harbor.

The Assessment of the Loan was generally opposed, whereupon the People of the
lower Rank were ordered to appear in the Military Yard near St. Martins in the
Fields, before the Lieutenant of the Tower, to be Listed for Soldiers; it
being thought fit, that those who refused to assist with their Purses in Common
Defense, should be forced to serve in their Persons; others of better Quality,
were bound to appear at the Council Table; several of whom were committed
Prisoners to the Fleet, Marshalsea, Gatehouse, and other Prisons, and among
them Sir John Eliot, who Petitioned his Majesty and repeated many Presidents,
That all manner of Aids and Taxes informer Kings Reigns were never levied but
by the general Consent of the Nobility and Commons Assembled in Parliament.
However he was committed Prisoner to the Gatehouse, and upon the same Account
Sir Peter Hayman was commanded to Serve his Majesty in the Palatinate, which
after he had settled his Estate he did acordingly.

Doctor Sybthorp and Dr. Maynwaring, two Eminent Preachers at Court, about this
time preached up the Necessity and Duty of the Loan; one of them Asserting,
That the Prince has Power to Direct his Council, and make Laws, and that
Subjects, if they cannot Exhibit Active Obedience, in Case the thing commanded
should be against the Law of God, or Nature, or more Impossible, yet
nevertheless they ought to yield Passive Obedience; and in all other Cases they
were bound to Active Obedience. The other Affirmed, That the Kings Royal
Command in Imposing of Loans and Taxes, though without common consent in
Parliament, did Oblige the Subjects Conscience upon Pain of Eternal Damnation.
Which Positions being entertained by the Court with Applause, the Sermon of Dr.
Sybthorp, called Apostolic Obedience, was Licensed and Approved of by Dr. Laud
B. of London; and an express Command was sent from the King to Archbishop Abbot
to License it, which he refused, whereupon having been under some disfavour
before, this Increased it, and he was suspended from his Archiepiscopal See,
and a Commission was granted to Five Bishops to Execute his Office: After which
the Bishop Published a Narrative of the Cause and Manner of his Suspension.

Five of those Gentlemen who were Imprisoned about the Loan; had their Habeas
Corpus granted, and were brought to their Trial before Sir Nicholas Hyde Lord
Chief Justice; where, after arguing the Case between Council on both sides, the
L. Chief Justice concluded, That since they were Committed by the Kings
Authority, the Court could not Free them, so that they were remanded to Prison,
till the Order came out for a General Release.

The Irish Papists, in hope of some Remission of the Penal Laws, offered to
Furnish the King at their own Charge with a standing Army of 5000 Foot and 500
Horse, and a large Contribution for securing the Narrow Seas, which was opposed
in England by Sir John Savil, and in Ireland by the Lord Primate of Armagh and
diverse others, as tending to preserve the Papists Interests, and sinking the
Protestants; upon which the L. Deputy moved the Primate to endeavor to prevail
with the Protestants to supply the Kings Necessities; which he attempted to do
in a very learned Speech, though not with the expected Success.

In 1627, being the Third Year of his Majesty's Reign, the Duke of Buckingham,
to clear his Reputation, as to the Charge of Negligence in his Admiralship,
with much ado completed his Naval Forces, consisting of Six Thousand Horse and
Foot in Ten Ships Royal, and Ninety Merchant Men; with which he set Sail from
Portsmouth June 27, and published a Manifesto of the Kings Affection to the
Reformed Churches in France, and his displeasure against the last misimploying
of his Ships against the Rochellers. But by several Accidents this great Design
miscarried, with the Death of near Two Thousand common Soldiers, Thirty
Prisoners of Note and Forty four Colors taken: But notwithstanding this
Expedition of the Isle of The miscarried, yet at Sea there was somewhat better
Success; a great French Ship was taken upon the Coasts of Holland, Laden with
great Guns, Arms, and Ammunition of all sorts, to a very considerable value;
Sir John Pennington likewise took Thirty Four Rich French Merchantmen, homeward
bound, which were all safely brought to England; the poor remains of the Army
which came from the Isle of The, most of them Irish and Scots, and consequently
rude and boisterous, were quartered in the Country Villages, which was very
troublesome to the People.

At this time the Exchequer was very low, and several late Enterprises having
miscarried, the Rochellers being also now more distressed than ever; the causes
of these evils were gravely represented by Sir Robert Cotton to several Lords
of the Council; whereupon it was resolved on by the Council, that a Parliament
should be called, and Writs were presently Issued out; A Commission likewise
passed under the Great Seal, for raising Moneys through the Kingdom in Nature
of an Excise; and the Lord Treasurer was ordered to pay Thirty Thousand Pound
to Philip Burmelack, a Dutch Merchant, to be returned to Sir William Balfour
and John Dalbier in the Low Countries, for raising a Thousand Horse; which
caused strange jealousies and suspicions among the People, as if these German
Horse were designed to enforce the payment of the Excise. There was some
discourse about Levying Ship money, but it was declined at that time, because
of the Parliament approaching.

In the mean time a company of Jesuits were apprehended in an House at
Clerkenwell, which was designed for a College of that Order; where among other
Papers, a Letter was found, discovering their secret Designs they had laid for
imbroiling Church and State.

Upon the 17th of March 1627, the Parliament Assembled, the Commons choosing Sin
John Finch Speaker, the King in a Speech tells the two Houses, That the
greatness of the danger was such, as required a speedy Supply, and that
therefore they might rest assured it was the principal cause of their Meeting;
wherein he hoped they would show themselves such true Patriots of the true
Religion, the Laws and Liberties of this State, and the just defense of their
Friends and Allies, now in such hazard by Popish Enemies, as not to deceive his
Expectations, which were very great, though indeed somewhat nipt, by
Remembrance of the Distractions of the last Meeting. The Lord Keeper likewise
Enforced the Kings Speech, and earnestly pressed them, to consider of some
speedy way for Supplying his Majesty's Necessities.

Before the Parliament began any debate, a Letter came to them Directed, To the
Members of the House of Commons, called A Speech without Doors; discovering the
Grievances and Inconveniences of the State, from one who had been a Member of
the former Parliament. The first thing taken into Consideration by the Commons,
was the Grievances of the Kingdom, and the first thing Insisted on was the Case
of those Gentlemen for refusing the Loan, and who notwithstanding their Habeas
Corpus, were Remanded to Prison; and after a long Debate between several
Members, who asserted the Illegality of the Loan, and also their Imprisonment
for refusing it; the Lord Chief Justice Hyde and several other Judges were
desired to declare themselves; who justified their own proceedings, alleging,
That if they had granted them Bail upon Habeas Corpus, it would have reflected
upon the King, as if he had unjustly Imprisoned them: But in conclusion it was
resolved upon the Question in the House of Commons, Nemine Contradicente: 1.
That no man ought to be restrained by the Command of the King or Privy Council,
without some Cause of the Commitment. 2. That the Writ of Habeas Corpus ought
to be granted upon Request to every Man that is restrained, though by the
Command of the King, the Privy Council, or any other. 3. That if a Freeman be
imprisoned by the Command of the King, the Privy Council, or any other, and no
Cause of such Commitment expressed, and the same be returned upon an Habeas
Corpus granted for the said Party, then he ought to be delivered or Bailed.

Then the Parliament proceeded to draw up a Petition against Popish Recusants,
consisting of these particulars. 1. That all Laws and Statutes against Jesuits
and Popish Priests, be put in power and Execution. 2. That a strict course be
taken for the Apprehending and Discovering of them. 3. That all Popish
Recusants be prohibited from coming to Court, or within Ten Miles of London. 4.
That no place of Trust or Authority shall be committed to Popish Recusants;
with several other particulars to the same purpose; which Petition was
presented from the Lords and Commons to the King by the Lord Keeper, who gave a
full and satisfactory Answer to every Article; after which Five Subsidies were
granted to the King, which gave so great satisfaction to his Majesty, that he
sent them Word; He would deny them nothing of their Liberties which any of his
Predecessors had granted: A Petition was then presented against Quartering
Soldiers in the Countries, to which the King promised an Answer in convenient
time; whereupon the Commons fell upon the memorable Petition of Right, and
after several of the Members had delivered their Opinions at large concerning
some Clauses in it, the Lords agreed that without any Addition or Preface it
should be presented to the King; the Substance whereof was.

1. They do pray his most Excellent Majesty, That no man hereafter be compelled
to make or yield any Gift, Loan, Benevolence, Tax, or such like Charge, without
common consent by Act of Parliament, and that none be called to make Answer, or
to take? such Oath, or to give Attendance, or be confined, or otherwise be
molested or disquieted concerning the same, or for Refusal thereof. 2. That no
Freeman be taken and imprisoned or be disseised of his Freehold of Liberty, or
his free Customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, but by the lawful Judgment of his
Peers, or by the Laws of the Land. 2. That your Majesty would be pleased to
remove the Soldiers and Mariners now Billeted in several Counties; and that
your People may not be so burdened for the time to come. 4. That the late
Commissions for proceeding by Martial Law, may be revoked and annulled, and
that hereafter no Commission of like Nature may Issue forth to any Person or
Persons whatsoever, to be Executed, least by color of them, any of your
Majesty's Subjects be destroyed, or put to death contrary to Law and the
Franchises of the Law.

All which we most humbly pray your most Excellent Majesty as their Rights and
Liberties according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; And that your
Majesty would also vouchsafe to declare, That all Awards, Doings, or
proceedings, to the prejudice of your People, shall not be drawn hereafter into
consequence and Example.

After this there came a Letter from the King to the House of Lords, wherein
among other things, His Majesty declared it to be his Royal pleasure, which God
willing he would ever continue and constantly maintain; That neither he, nor
his Privy Council, should or would hereafter, command to Prison, or otherwise
restrain the Persons of any for not lending Money: nor for any Cause which in
his Conscience did not concern the public good; nor would he be drawn to
pretend any cause, wherein his judgment was not fully satisfied.

This, Sir Thomas Wentworth (afterward Earl of Strafford) said, Was a Letter
of Grace, but that the People were not so satisfied but by a Parliamentary way,
That the debate would spend much time, That it was not directed to the House of
Commons, and that the Petition it self would rectify all mistakes. When the
Petition of Right was presented to the King, the Answer following was quickly
returned; The King wills that Right be done according to the Laws and Customs
of the Realm; and that the Statutes be put in due Execution, that his Subjects
may have no cause to complain of any wrong or Oppressions, contrary to their
just Rights and Liberties; to the Preservation Whereof he holds himself in
Conscience as well obliged, as to that of his Prerogative.

This Answer being Read in the House of Commons, was not judged Satisfactory;
and therefore upon their Humble Petition for a clear and satisfactory Answer to
the Petition of Right, His Majesty to show how free and candid his Concessions
were to his Subjects, sent them this short but full Answer; Soit Droit Lait
come il est desire, Let it be done according to your desire. Which Answer was
Received with the general joy and Satisfaction of both Houses; and the Citizens
made Bonefires, and Rung Bells, and his Majesty for further Satisfaction was
pleased to receive into Favor Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury, Bishop
Williams, and several others: His Majesty likewise suffered the Commission of
Loan and Excise to be cancelled in his presence, so that all discontents of
every side seemed to be banished.

In 1628 the Fourth year of his Majesty's Reign, the Parliament not being
satisfied of their former disappointment about the Duke of Buckingham, drew up
another Remonstrance against him, and likewise against Bishop Neal, and Bishop
Laud, which they presented to the King with the Bill of Subsidies: His Majesty
telling them, That he expected not such a Return for his favorable Answer to
the petition of Right, and as for the Grievances he would take time to consider
of them.

An Information being likewise Exhibited against the Duke in the Star Chamber,
for diverse Offenses and Misdemeanors, an Order was made in that Court, that all
proceedings thereupon should be taken off the File, by the Kings express Will
and Pleasure: And because it had been reported by a Member of Parliament that
the Duke should say at his Table, Pish, it matters not what the Parliament
does, for without my leave and Authority, they shall not be able to touch the
Hair of a Dog: The Duke made Protestation in the House of Lords, That be never
had those words so much as in his Thoughts. But the King being resolved to hold
up the Duke, sent so brisk an Answer to their Remonstrances, as provoked the
Commons (who had soon forgot his Majesty's late Act of Grace) to question his
taking Tunnage and Poundage; which being of too valuable consideration to be
hazarded, his Majesty obviated by Adjourning the Parliament to the 20th. of
October, there being several Acts passed by them, One About the Lords day,
Another To restrain the sending any to be Popishly bread beyond the Seas,
Another for Confirmation of the Subsidies granted by the Clergy, and for the
grant of Five Entire Subsidies upon the Temporality, and diverse more.

Much about this time Dr. Lamb, who was in great Favor with the Duke of
Buckingham (and had been formerly twice Arraigned, once for Necromancy, and
another time for a Rape) was killed by the furious Multitude in Lothbury, who
hated him both for his own sake and the Dukes, he being called the Dukes Devil;
and though he were guarded by four Constables and their Attendants, yet the
Rabble struk him down, beat out one of his eyes, and left him half dead on the
Ground, from whence he was called to the Poultrey Counter, where he died,
according to his own Prediction the year before; being pitied by few, and loved
of none.

The Earl of Denbigh having a while since sailed with Fifty Ships to the relief
of Rochel, was repelled with much loss; so that despairing of Success, he
returned back to Plymouth; whereupon another Expedition was resolved on, with a
more considerable Navy, and the Duke of Buckingham was designed Admiral, who
going to Portsmouth, in order to hastening of business, one John Felton a
Leiutenant stabbed him to the heart with a Knife; which the Murderer flying,
left sticking in his Body, till the Duke himself dragged it out, and
immediately after died: Felton was soon apprehended by the Servants, and laden
with Irons, and being asked, what inclined him to commit so horrid an Action?
He boldly answered, He killed him for the cause of God and his Country: He
likewise fastened a Paper in the Crown of his Heart, which intimated, That his
only Motive to this Fact, was the late Remonstrance of the Commons against the
Duke, and that he could not sacrifice his Life in a nobler Cause, than by
delivering his Country from so great an Enemy. Felton was afterward Condemned
and Hanged at Tybourn, and his Body hanged upon a Gibbet at Portsmouth.

There was observation made of diverse Passages presaging the Dukes Death, as
that his Picture fell down in the high Commission Chamber at Lambeth, That the
Lady Davis reputed a Prophetess, had foretold in June, that the Dukes fatal
time would not come till August; and lastly, that Mr. Towerson of the
Customhouse was charged by a Phantasm or Ghost, resembling the Dukes Father, to
tell him, That if he changed not his courses, he should shortly become a great
Fairing to the City of London; which was afterward judged to be accomplished
by his death, which happened the day before the Fair, that is August 23. 1628.

However the Fleet set Sail under the Command of the Earl of Lindsey, and came
to the Bar of Rochel Haven, where there was a wonderful Barracado contrived by
Cardinal Richlieu, of Fourteen Hundred Yards, cross the Channel; however the
Earl adventured in, passing the Forts and Outworks, but the Wind changing,
drove the Ships upon each other, which unhappy Accident made the Rochellers
despair of Relief, and occasioned the present surrender of the Town; after
which the Earl of Lindsey brought the Fleet safe home again.

The Parliament was to have met in October, but by reason of some ill news
during this Expedition, they were again Adjourned to January 20th; in which
time the Merchants refusing to pay Custom, had their goods seized; Complaint
whereof being made to the Parliament, the King summons the two Houses to the
Banqueting House at White Hall, and requires them to pass the promised Bill of
Tunnage and Poundage, for ending all differences, since it was too precious a
Jewel of the Crown to be so lightly forgone.

But the Commons being forward enough to take all occasions to put of the Kings
Requests, Answered, That Gods Cause was to be preferred before the Kings, and
they would therefore in the first place consult concerning Religion; and
thereupon appointed one Committee for Religion, and another for Civil Matters;
in the last whereof there was a complaint that the Petition of Right, had been
Printed with the Kings first Answer only, and not with the last which was
judged Satisfactory: Another complaint was likewise made about the Customs, and
Mr. Rolls a Member of the House affirmed, That it was reported some of the
Officers of the Custom-house should say, Though all the Parliament were in you,
we would take your Goods; Mr. Richard Chambers was likewise imprisoned for
saying at the Council Table, That such great Customs and Impositions were
required of the Merchants in England, as were in no other Place and that they
were more screwed up than under the Turk After which a Form of Submission being
sent him from the Star Chamber to subscribe his name there to, he instead of
owning it as a fault underwrit these words, All the abovesaid Contents I
Richard Chambers do utterly abhor and detest, as most unjust and false: and
never to death will acknowledge any part thereof; and quoted diverse Scriptures
against Oppression and Injustice.

As to the Printing the Petition of Right, the Printer was questioned, and for
the other, the Farmer^ of the Customs were challenged to Answer it, bu^ the
King excused them, as Acting by his Command! yet this not being clear to the
Parliament they would have proceeded against them as Delinquents, whereupon the
King sent them Word, That in honor he could not, nor would give way there to:
Which so increased the Parliament, that they Adjourned themselves for some
days, and the^ meeting again, the King Adjourned them further till March 1.
upon which Sir John Eliot stood up, and accused the Lord Trea surer Weston, as
an Enemy to the English Trade, and designing to transfer it to Foreigners;
which Speech caused a further Adjournment to March 10. The Commons enraged
hereat, blamed their Speaker for admitting the Message, and ordered Sir John
Eliot to read their Remonstrance (the Speaker and Clerk refusing to do it)
which was to this purpose;

That the House had considered of the Bill for Tunnage and Poundage, but being
overprest with other business, and that of it self so perplexed, as would
require much leisure to discharge, could not at that time finish it; this
present Session moving hastily to an end; and least his Majesty should
hereafter, as he had done heretofore, incline to Evil Spirits, or to be abused
to believe, that might justly receive the Subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage,
which they humbly declare to be against the Fundamental Law of the Nation, and
contrary to the Kings late Answer to the Petition of Right) therefore they
crave that his Majesty would for the future forbear such Taxes, and not take it
ill, if his Subjects refuse what is demanded by Arbitrary and unwarrantable
Power.

A Report was likewise made from the Committee of Pardons by Oliver Cromwell,
(a fatal name afterward) that Dr. Neal Bishop of Winchester, was chiefly
Instrumental, in procuring the Kings hand to the Pardons of Dr. Sybthorp, Dr.
Maynwaring. Mr. Cousens, and Mr. Montague, and that he had likewise preferred
Dr. Maynwaring to a rich Living, though censured by the former Parliament, and
disabled from holding any Ecclesiastical Dignity; and also that he was a
Countenancer not only of Arminianism, but flat Popery.

The Commons having prepared their Remonstrance about the Bill of Tonnage and
Poundage, they required their Speaker to put it to the Vote, whether it should
be presented to the King, or not; but the Speaker refused it, and accordingly
to the Kings order would have gone away; but Mr. Hollis would not suffer him to
stir till himself had read the Protestation of the House, consisting of 3 Heads.

1. Whoever shall bring in any Innovation of Religion, or by favor seek to
introduce Popery, or Arminianism, or other Opinions, disagreeing from the True
and Orthodox Church, shall be reputed a Capital Enemy to this Kingdom and
Commonwealth. 2. Whosoever shall Counsel or Advise, the taking, or levying the
Subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage; not being granted by Parliament, or shall be
an Actor or Instrument therein, shall be likewise reputed a Capital Enemy to
the Commonwealth. 3. If any man shall yield voluntarily, or pay the same; not
being granted by Parliament, he shall be reputed a Betrayer of the Liberties of
England, and an Enemy to the Commonwealth.

These Articles were entertained with the general Approbation of the Members,
but were much disliked by the King, who immediately sent for the Sergeant of
the Mace out of the House of Commons, but Sir Miles Hobart took the Key from
him, and locking the door would not suffer him to go forth, at which the King
being very much offended, he sends the Usher of the Black Rod to dissolve them,
who was not admitted in, whereupon the King, with his Guard of Pensioners, were
resolved to force their Entrance; which the Commons having notice of, they
suddenly went all out of the House; and this was the end of this Parliament.

After their Dissolution, the King publishes a Declaration of the Causes
thereof; and then questioned Eleven of the Refractory Members at the Council
Table, who were all committed to diverse Prisons. About the same time the
Marquis of Huntley, Sheriff of the greatest part of Scotland, neglecting the
Order of the Council for seizing some Priests and Jesuits, who publicly said
Mass and committed other Insolences at Aberdeen, with several other Lords, who
joined with him, and refused to appear upon Summons, and had likewise given
notice to the Priests and Jesuits to escape, were proclaimed Rebels and
Traitors to the King and Kingdom; upon which they fled into England, The French
King having had much loss by the War with England, did now therefore propose
and conclude a Peace with the King, consisting of several Articles.

A Paper was about this time dispersed abroad, containing some Projects how the
King might Augment his Revenues without the help of Parliaments upon which the
Earls of Bedford, Somerset, and Clare with others, where committed upon
Information that they had dispersed some Copies of them; but Sir David Fowls
soon cleared them, who deposed upon Oath, that it was contrived near Sixteen
years before, by Sir Robert-Dudley Son to the Earl of Leicester, when he was in
Italy.

The dissolving the last Parliament procured great Animosities in the People
against the Prime Ministers of State, which occasioned diverse Invective Libels
to be dispersed abroad, whereof one against Bishop Laud was found in the Dean
of St. Paul's Yard to this Effect. Laud look to thy self, be assured thy life is
sought; as thou art the Fountain of Wickedness, repent of thy monstrous sin
before thou be taken out of the World; and assure thy self, Neither God, nor
the World, can endure such a vile Councellor, or Whisperer. Another very bitter
Libel was scattered against the Lord Treasurer Weston: On the other side some
considering the unsuccesfulness of this and the two former Parliaments, advised
never for the future to call any more Parliaments; and to that end the
forementioned Book of Projects was published, and addressed to the King,
proposing some methods to prevent the Impertinency of Parliaments (as he called
them) for time to come, by the Example of Jews 11th. of France; who pretended
that the Commons or Third Estate, did incroach too much upon the Nobility and
Clergy, dissolved it; and never after suffered the People freely to Elect their
Representatives: but nominated certain Eminent Persons himself instead thereof,
which is called, L' Assembly des Notabiles, or the Assembly of Chief, or
Principal Men; and the Methods proposed to avoid Parliaments were:

1. To have a Fortress in every considerable Town. 2. To cause highways to be
made through all such Towns. 3. To make none of the Inhabitants Governors of
those Fortresses. 4. To let none pass through those Towns without a Ticket. 5.
To have the Names of all Lodgers taken by Innkeepers. 6. To impose a general
Oath upon the Subjects, not to oppose any of these Contrivances. And to
increase the Kings Revenue, the Advice was, 1. To demand the Tenth part of
every Man's Estate. 2. To buy all Leases upon the Crown Lands. 3. To take the
benefit of Salt into his own hands. 4. To demand a Rate for Sealing the Weights
every year. 5. To lay a Tax upon Wools. 6. Upon every Lawyers Fee. 7. Upon
Inns and Victualling Houses for a License. 8. Upon all Cattle, Flesh, and
Horses sold in the Market. 9. Upon all Lands Alienated. 10. To set a Rate upon
all Offices in his Majesty's Grant. 11. To Reduce his Majesty's Household to
board wages. 12. To lay a Tax upon White Meats on fasting days. 13. To lay an
Imposition upon the Papists Lands. 14. To Advance some Hundreds of Persons to
Honors. 15. To prohibit excess in Apparel, which would save the Gentry more
Money, then what they were Taxed would amount to.

In the year 1629 one Bellingham was Arrested in Fleet Street, and several
Gentlemen of the Temple attempting his Rescue, diverse of them were wounded, and
some imprisoned; which so increased the Tumult, that the Templers made a
Barricado at St. Dunstans Church, being about Six Hundred in Number, and the
Lord Mayor and Sheriffs coming against them with a Company of the Trained
Bands, they boldly resisted them, killing five of them, and wounding near a
hundred; but in the end. being dispersed, two of them, that is Captain crowd
attacking Lambeth Palace with sticks or spears The Insurection of the
Apprentices at Lambeth
Earl of Strafford beheaded on Tower Hill: executioner preparing to use ax on
prone figure on scaffold, surrounded by a crowd;Tower of London in background
The E: of Strafford beheaded on Towerhill.
crowd, some on horseback, some waving flags, surrounding several men on
ladders attacking Cheapside Cross monument with hammers while others pull the
cross down from the top with ropes; pikes (?) in the background Cheapside Cross
pulled down in 1643.
Stamford and Captain Ashurst were hanged. though great Intercession was made
to the King for Stamfords Life; who answered, That since he had been formerly
Pardoned for a Murder, and had committed another, a Course ought to be taken
to prevent a Third.

Upon May 29. 1630, the Queen was delivered of a Son at St. James's, who was
Christened Charles; and Preserved by Providence, to Succeed his Father in these
Three Kingdoms, as his Rightful Inheritance, after the Miseries of a long and
tedious Exile from his Native Country, unto which he was at length happily
Restored, with the general Consent and Acclamations of the whole Kingdom, The
King of France, and the Prince Elector Yalatine, represented by the Duke of
Lenox, and the Marquis Hamilton, were his Godfathers, and the Queen Mother of
France, represented by the Duchess of Richmond, his Godmother, It was observed
that at his Nativity a Star was seen at Noonday, which might portend some
extraordinary Passages of this Princes Life.

About this time Dr. Leighton was sentenced in the Star Chamber, to have his
Body Whipped, his Forehead Stigmatized, his Ears Cropped, his Nose Slit; for
publishing a Book called Sions Plea: wherein he exhorted the late Parliament to
smite the Bishops under the Fifth Rib; and called the Queen the Daughter of
Heth, a Canaanite and Idolatress: which Sentence was accordingly inflicted on
him.

In Ireland the Papists presumed on St. Stephens day to say Mass in Dublin,
while the Lords Chief Justices were at Church; who having notice thereof,
ordered the Priests, Crucifixes, and Vestments, to be seized; and Eight Popish
Aldermen were likewise Imprisoned for not Assisting the Mayor; but some Papists
making a Tumult, rescued the Priests, whom the Guards again forced to deliver
back. Upon Information of this Riot and Insolency, Fifteen Houses were by
special Order from the Council seized upon for his Majesty's use; and the
Priests and Friars so disturbed, that two of them hanged themselves: Neither
did the Papists agree together, for there were great Contests in England
between the Jesuits and Secular Priests.

The Earl of Essex had many years before married the Lady Howard, who
complaining of his Insufficiency for Marriage Duties, the Cause was brought to
a Trial; and it being made appear by a Jury of Midwives and the Earls own
Confession, That he never could, and believed he never should, carnally know
her: Thereupon Sentence of Divorce between him and his Lady was pronounced by
the Bishops: However the Earl was resolved to try his Fortune once more, and
therefore upon his return out of the Low Countries, where he had been for some
time a Soldier, he now Married a Daughter of Sir William Paulet of Wiltshire;
but a while after she objecting the same cause of complaint, desired likewise
to be Divorced from him; which the Earl easily cousented to, and it was done
accordingly.

In the year 1631, and the 7th of his Majesty's Reign, Mervin Lord Audly, and
Earl of Castlehaven, was Tried by his Peers upon the Petition of his own Son
and Heir, for Rape and Sodomy; many unnatural and beastly Actions being proved
against him: whereupon he received Sentence to be Hanged, but had the Favor to
be Beheaded at Tower Hill. This Earl was born of a very honorable Family, and
educated in the Protestant Religion, but turned Papist to have the more liberty
to commit wickedness; in which he grew to so great aheight, that he impudently
declared in the presence of some Lords, As others had their several Delights,
some in one thing, some in another; so his whole Delight was in damning Souls,
by enticing Men to such Acts as might surely effect it.

About this time Sir Giles Allington was Convented for Marrying his own Niece,
and was fined Twelve thousand Pound to the King, and to give Twenty thousand
Pound Bond never to cohabit, or come in private with his Niece again; and both
of them to do Penance at St. Paul's Cross, or St. Mary's in Cambridge. which
they accordingly did.

The Protestants were very much discontented in Ireland, that the Papists were
discharged from paying the State Penalty of Twelve Pence a Sunday for not going
to Church; whereby their Number was wonderfully increased: Whereupon the King
recalled the Lords Justices, who then governed that Kingdom, and sent Viscount
Wentworth (afterward Earl of Strafford) thither as Lord Deputy, as judging that
these distempers would be better composed under a single Government.

In the year 1633, and the 9th of his Majesty's Reign, the King made a Journey
into Scotland, attended with several of the Nobility and Persons of Quality;
and June 18 was solemnly Crowned King at Edenbourgh, which Solemnity being
finished, the King calls a Parliament, and passes an Act for Ratification of
the old Acts; though some affirmed, That the Confirmation of Episcopacy was
intended thereby, and therefore (though in vain) opposed it; upon which some of
those Persons became a while after principal Men among the Covenanters: In this
Scottish Parliament, that Nation showed then some signs of diaffection to the
King, by Reason of several Acts which then passed; and the generality of the
People (who without doubt were influenced by the greater Malcontents) would
not suffer the Bishop of Dumblain, Dean of the Kings Private Chapel there, to
perform Prayers twice a day after the English manner; neither durst they
receive the Communiou on their knees, nor wear a Surplice upon Sundays and Holy
days.

Not long before his Majesty went to Scotland, being desirous, if possible to
have prevented that Trouble, the King writ to a Scottish Lord who was entrusted
with that Crown, to bring it into England, that he might be Crowned here; but
the Lord returned Answer, That he durst not be so false to his Trust, but if
his Majesty would be pleased to accept thereof in Scotland, he should find
those his People ready to yield him the highest Honor; but if he should long
defer that Duty, they might perbaps be inclined to make choice of another King.
A very strange and unusual Answer from a Subject to a Prince.

October 13, 1633. The Queen was delivered of her Second Son, who was Baptized
James, and designed Duke of York; and about that time died George Abbot L.
Archbishop of Canterbury, and William Laud Bishop of London was Elected into
his place.

In the Year 1634 the English Coasts were very much Infested by Pirates, and
the Fishing Trade almost engrossed by the Hollanders; and his Majesty having
occasion for Money to Regain his Absolute Dominion over the British Seas, the
Design of Shipmoney was first set on foot; and Attorney General Noy being
consulted about it, he out of some old Records finds an Ancient President of
Raising a Tax upon the Nation, by the Authority of the King alone, for setting
out a Navy in case of danger; which was thereupon accordingly put in Execution,
and by this Tax the King raised by Writ above Twenty thousand pound a Month,
though not without great discontent both among the Clergy and Laiety.

The Discontents in Scotland began to increase, and a Book was published
charging the King with indirect proceedings in the last Parliament and a
tendancy to the Romish Belief, and to blow up these Scoth Sparks to a Flame,
Cardinal Richlieu sent over his Chaplain and another Gentleman, to heighten
their Discontents: The Author of that Book was seized, and found to be abbetted
by the Lord Balmerino, the Treacherous Son of a perfidious Father; who was
thereupon Arraigned by his Peers, and Sentenced to Death, but Pardoned by the
King.

At this time Gregory Panzani a Priest, was sen over by the Pope with a
Commission of Oyer and Terminer to decide the difference between the Jesuits
and Secular Priests, and Insinuating himself into the Favor of the Lord
Cottington, and Secretary Windebank, he endeavors to discover how far the King
might be persuaded about giving Toleration to the Popish Religion; as to allow
them a Popish Bishop to reside here, but nominated and limited by the King; and
that the Pope might send a Nuncio to the Queen; but having made some agreement
between the Jesuits and Priests Panzani returned to Rome, and left the further
transacting of Business to Seignior Con, who staid in his room.

In the year 1635, A Noble Fleet was fitted out, by the Supply of Shipmoney,
consisting of Forty Sail, under the Earl of Lindsey, to scour the Seas from
Pirates; at which time the French and Hollanders had confederated against the
Spaniard in Flanders both by Land and Sea; but the English Fleet removed the
Hollanders from before Dunkirk, and the Common People enraged by the French
insolences at Land, rose up against them, and Assisted the Spaniard to expel
them the Country.

One Robert Par of Shropshire, a Man almost an Hundred and threescore years
old, was this year brought to London by the Earl of Arundel as a Rarity or
Miracle, where he dyed soon after; though it is very probable he might have
lived much longer, if he had continued at home; for his removal from his own
Air, change of Diet, and the tediousness of so long a Journey, may be supposed
to have hastened his end.

December, 23, 1635. the Lady Elizabeth the Kings Second Daughter was born, and
to Congratulate the Queens happy delivery, the Hollander sent an Ambassador
with a present of an extraordinary value; that is, a Massy Piece of
Ambergreece, Two large and almost Transparent China Dishes; a Clock of most
excellent Workmanship, which was made by Rodulphus Emperor of Germany; and
likewise several curious pieces of Painting.

Dr. William Juxon, Bishop of London, about this time was made Lord Treasurer
in the place of the L. Weston Earl of Portland, deceased: And now great
differences arose about Church matters, chiefly occasioned by Arch Bishop Lauds
strict and zealous Enjoining of Ceremonies, as placing the Communion Table at
the East end of the Church, upon an Ascent with Rails, Altar fashion; with many
other things not formerly strictly insisted on, and now vehemently opposed by
those who were usually called Puritans and Non-conformists, which caused them
to be charged with Faction; yet some of the Episcopal Party Asserted, That the
Communion Table ought to stand in the middle of the Quire, according to the
Primitive Example; and a Book supposed to be written by Dr. Williams B. of
Lincoln, was Published to this purpose.

His Majesty considering the good Success of his former Fleet, fits out another
in the year 1636, under the command of the Earl of Northumberland, who going
Northward, scowred the Seas of the Holland Busses, and reduced them to desire
leave of his Majesty to Fish there, which the King upon diverse Considerations
granted them.

Several Gentlemen of Quality had refused to pay the Imposition of Ship Money
and among the rest Mr. Hamden of Buckinghamshire, upon which his Majesty refers
the whole business to his Twelve Judges in Michaelmas Term 1636; Ten of whom
that is, Brampton, Finch, Davenport, Denham, Jones, Trever, Vernon, Berkly,
Crawly, Weston, gave their Judgments against Hamden and his Associates, and
subscribed their Names to be Enrolled in all the Courts ol Westminster Hall;
but Hutton and Crook refused it: This year March the 17. the Kings Kings Third
Daughter, the Princess Ann was born.

In the Thirteenth year of his Majesty's Reign 1637, Dr. Bastwick, Mr. Pryn,
and Mr. Burton received a severe Censure for writing against Bishops and their
Government; they being all three Sentenced to pay Five Thousand Pounds Fine to
the King, to lose their Ears in the Pillory, and to be Imprisoned, which they
accordingly suffered.

Bishop Williams of Lincoln having the great Seal taken from him in the first
year of his Majesty's Reign, he so deeply resented it, that ever after he
studied Revenge; and a Bill being preferred against him in the Star Chamber for
some dishonorable Speeches of the King, he endeavored by some indirect means
to clear his Innocence, and was therefore this year sentenced Ten thousand
Pounds Fine to the King, Imprisonment in the Tower, during Pleasure, to be
suspended ab Officiis, et Beneficiis, from his Bishopric, and the Profits
thereof, and to be referred to the High Commission Court as to what concerned
them.

His Majesty desiring an Uniformity in Religion in England and Scotland (a
thing before designed by King James) in pursuance thereof enjoined the Scots
the use of the English Liturgy, the Surplice, and other Habiliments, and began
first at his own Chapel; and in this year 1637, Proclamation was made that the
same Order should be observed in all Churches, wherewith the Bishops were
contented, but not the Kirk, nor the People; who were so enraged thereat, that
when the Dean of Edenbourgh began to Read the Common Prayer in St. Giles Church
with his Surplice on July 13. the Council, Bishops, Lords, and Magistrates,
being present: the Women, and then the ordinary sort of men, made such a
disturbance and noise with Cursing, Clapping their hands, and so great
Rudeness, that nothing could be heard, but their Clamours; upon which the
Bishop of Edenbourgh, who was to preach that day, stepped up into the Pulpit to
reprove them; which increasing their Fury, they assault him with such a shower
of Stones, Seats, Stools, Cudgels, and whatever else was near; that his life
was much endangered thereby, and the Archbishop of St. Andrews Lord
Chancellor, interposing, was like to have been as rudely handled, had not the
Provost, Bailiffs and others with much trouble turned these Rioters out of the
Church, the Dean then proceeding to read the Service Book, though not without
great noise from the Multitude about the Church. The like disturbance happened
in other places, but in the Afternoon the Book was again read without much
trouble; after which some of the Disturbers were seized and punished, but with
no great Severity; and the Ministers were promised Protection and Maintenance
in Reading it; so that all at present seemed calm and quiet, till after
Harvest; at which time such a confluence of People came to Edenbourgh, as gave
just cause to the Council to fear an Insurrection; to prevent which they Issued
out several Proclamations, That no Church matters should be resolved on, but
that all persons depart home, unless they can show some cause to the Council,
upon pain of Rebellion.

Yet this was so little regarded by the People, that the B. of Galloway going
the next day to the Council was pursued and assaulted by them even to the
Council Chamber; and being with difficulty got in, the House was presently
encompassed, and his Person peremptorily demanded; upon which those within
required Aid of the Provost and Council of Edenbourgh; but their Condition was
as bad, being likewise beset in their Town house by the People, who would not
let them go out till they had subscribed, 1. To join in Opposition to the
Service Book, and in Petitioning to that purpose. 2. To restore two or three of
their silenced Ministers. Which being related to the Council, the Lord Traqnair
and another, went in Person to the Town House, where they found the Tumult
somewhat quieted by those Concessions; but in coming back, they were furiously
assaulted in the Grass-street, and the L. Traquair was trodden under foot, his
Hat, Cloak, and white Wand, was taken away, and himself halled to the Council
House: The Lords whereof weighing their own danger, sent secretly to some of
those Noblemen and Gentlemen who disliked the Service Book, and were then
assembled in the common cause against it; by whom they were safely guarded
through the multitude, to their several Houses.

And now judging themselves secure, they make Proclamation for breaking up all
Conventions and keeping the Peace, which had the contrary effect. Two Petitions
being presented to them. One from the Common sort of Men, Women and Children,
the other in the Name of the Noblemen, Gentlemen and Ministry against the
Service Book and Canons: these Petitions were sent to the King, who being
offended therewith, adjourned the Term to Sterling, and by Proclamation forbid
upon extremest Penalty, such Tumultuous Meetings: Against which Proclamation
the Earl of Hume, the Lord Lindsey, and diverse others, made Protestation; and
in pursuance thereof they set up Four Tables or Committees, 1. Of the Nobility.
2. Of the Gentry. 3. Of the Barons. 4. of the Ministry; to prepare Matters for
the General Council, consisting of several Commissioners taken out of the other.

The next year 1638, the Scots entered inta a Solemn League and Covenant to
preserve the Religion there protest, resolving to maintain it; and to that
purpose, they sent for General Lesly and other Officers from beyond Sea,
providing themselves likewise with Arms and Ammunition; whilst D. Hamilton, who
was appointed to allay these heats and Distempers, seemed secretly to foment
them, by spending a great deal of time in Declarations, Proclamations, Messages
and Letters; and afterward makes such Propositions to the Confederates about
calling a General Assembly, as were very distasteful to the Covenanters and
increased their Fury: Whereupon Hamilton obtained of the King the Sole and
Unlimited Power of Managing that Affair, and then acquainted them with a
Declaration which he had procured of the King; That he did discharge the
Service Book, Book of Canons, and high Commission and likewise did annul and
rescind all Acts for establishing them, and did discharge the urging the
Practice of the Five Articles of Perth: and that all Persons whomsoever shall
be liable to the Censure of Parliament, General Assembly, or any other
Judicatories; according to the Nature of the Offense, That the Ancient
Confelsion of Faith and Band annexed, shall be subscribed and received as in K.
James time. That a General Assembly be holden at Glafcow, Nov. 21. 1638, and a
Parliament at Edenbourgh May, 15. 1639, All former Offenses to be pardoned, and
a General Fast appointed.

This Declaration being published, the Marquess and Council subscribed the
Covenanters Confession of Faith, etc. yet still some matter remained for a
Protestation, which was read by one Johnson; wherein the People were exhorted
to consider with whom they had to deal: and exceptions were made against
Bishops, and their Voting in the Assembly: After this they Elect Commissioners
for the Assembly, whom they moved to cite the Archbishops and Bishops to appear
there, as Guilty Persons; which being refused, they themselves present a Bill
of Complaint against them to the Presbytery at Edenbourgh, who accordingly
warned them to appear at the next General Assembly: At their Meeting the
Bishops sent in a Protestation against their Assembly, which the Covenanters
would not vouchsafe to read, but presumed to forbid Six Lords of the Privy
Council to fit in their Assembly, though nominated by the King. His Majesty
having notice of their proceedings, as to the Bishops, and other matters,
ordered their Assembly to be dissolved, which was done accordingly Nov. 21.
1638; and the Covenanters immediately according to their usual method, Issued
out a Protestation against it, and likewise declared 6 former Meetings (which
were opposite to their ways) to be void and of none Effect; and soon after they
abolished Episcopacy, and then prepared for a War, as being sensible that the
King would maintain the Rights of the Bishops, and would likewise strictly call
them to Account for their late Transactions.

About this time a Letter was sent by the Scots to the King of France, to
implore his Assistance, Signed by several of the Nobility. The King of England
prepares an Army for Scotland, with which in the year 1639 he marches in
Person into the North; but while he stayed at York some of the Scots Nobility
tampered with the Eaglish, telling them that the ruin of the Scots would enable
the King to be more severe toward his English Subjects; by which Intelligence
and Correspondence it was evident that the English had no mind to Fight, though
their Army was much stronger than the Scots; whereupon by the Mediation of some
Persons a Treaty of Peace was begun, and soon finished; wherein it was agreed,
That His Majesty should publish a Declaration, whereby all should be confirmed
which his Commissioners had promised in his Name, That a General Assembly and a
Parliament be held at Edenbourgh in a short time. And lastly, That upon
disbanding their Forces, dissolving their Councils, and restoring the King to
his Forts and Castles, etc. the King was to recall his Fleet and Forces, and
make restitution of their Goods since the Breach.

The Kings Declaration was no sooner published, but the Covenanters set forth
another Protestation, for adhereing to there Assembly at Glasco, and their
Covenant; whereupon the King, who intended to be present at their General
Assembly, not finding the Scots punctual in performing Articles, and perceiving
they would treat of some matters distasteful to him, goes into England; after
which the Assembly sat at Edenbourgh, and abolished Episcopacy, the Liturgy,
High Commission, and Book of Canons; and then made several demands of the King
of a various nature.

His Majesty understanding how things went, and that the Scots levied Taxes and
prepared Arms, he commanded by his Commissioner, the Earl of Traquair, that
their Parliament should be Adjourned for some time; but the Covenanters
declared against this Command, and sent a Remonstrance to the King; and
afterward Hamilton and Traquair, likewise came to London, where there were such
proceedings, as did the more exasperate the jarring parties against each other.

In this year 1639, a Spanish Fleet of near Seventy Sail, and Twenty five
thousand Men, designed to be landed at Dunkirk for the relief of Flanders, were
set upon by the Dutch in the Downs, and Eleven of them taken and sent into
Holland; three perished upon the Coast of France, one near Dover, and five were
sunk in the Fight. What the real intent of this Fleet was, is yet uncertain;
for it seemed unlikely that Twenty five thousand Men should be sent only for a
Recruit, and the Admirals refusing to show his Commission when required thereto
by the King, makes it seem yet mon suspicious.

The Scots Commissioners having delivered their Message, return home to
Edenbourgh, Nov. 19. 1639. the same night that a great part of the Castle Walls
fell down, and the Anniversary of the King Birth day. A while after the King
sent the Lord Estrich, and others, to tepair the Walls, who were resisted by
the Covenanters; as not judging the Lord Estrich to be a fit Governor for the
Castle; which Office was designed him by the King. The King being hereat
extremely offended, resolved, since fair means would not prevail, to force the
Scots to reason, and to that end considers how to make provisions for Men and
Money; and calling a secret Cabinet Council, consisting only of Archbishop
Laud, the Earl of Strafford, and Duke Hamilton (who drove on his own particular
interest) it was concluded. That for the Kings supply a Parliament must be
called in England, and another in Ireland; but because the Debates of
Parliament would take up some time, it was resolved, that the Lords should
subscribe to lend the King money. The Earl of Strafford subscribed Twenty
thousand pound, the Duke of Richmond as much; but Hamilton pretended poverty.
preserving his money for other uses; the rest of the Lords, Judges, Officers,
and other Dependants, and many of the Gentry, yea, even several Popish
Recusants, contributed according to their ability.

The Scots on the other side foreseeing the storm, prepared for their own
Defense, making Treaties in Denmark, Sweden, Holland and Poland; and the
Jesuits, who are never idle, did likewise endeavor to foment the differences;
to which end Con the Popes Nuncio, Sir Toby Matthews, Read and Maxwell, two
Scots, endeavored to persuade the discontented People, That the King designed
to iuslave them to his will and pleasure. Which practices of theirs were
discovered by Andreas Habernsfield, a Nobleman of Bohemia, who declared, That
many of the Nobility of England, and chief Favorites at Court, were consenting
to these Transactions, and particularly the Earl and Countess of Arundel,
Secretary Windebank, and Endymion Porter. Con also performed the part of a
Firebrand, as all his Successors, the Popes Nuncio's that came after him, did
likewise; and had formerly offered a Cardinals Cap to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, in the Popes Name.

In the year 1640, and the Sixteenth of the King, a Parliament was called at
Westminster, April 13. in which the Earl of Strafford was highly honored for
his good service in Ireland, in obtaining four Subsidies, to maintain Ten
thousand Foot, and Fifteen hundred Horse. And that England might follow this
Example, the King tells the Parliament, that if they would supply him, so as to
suppress the Insolences of the Scots, he would acquit his claim to Shipmoney,
and give satisfaction to their just Demands. By which Proposals the Parliament
were sensible of the Kings Necessities, and therefore required satisfaction, 1.
For clearing the Property of the Subject. 2. For establishing the True
Religion. 3. For Privileges of Parliament.

But whilst they were debating whether the Grievances of the People or the
Kings Supply should be first considered, and Matters were in an hopeful
posture, Secretary Vane, either accidentally, or on purpose, overthrew all at
once, by declaring that the King required Twelve Subsidies whereas he at that
time only desired Six; which so much enraged the House, and made things so ill
that by the Advice of the Junto the Parliament was dissolved, having only sat
Twenty two days; however the Privy Council likewise advised their Dissolving,
being assured the heats in the House of Commons were so great, that they
intended that very day to have voted against the War with Scotland; whereby the
King would have been in a worse condition than before their sitting.

About the same time a Convocation of Bishops sat, with Commission to make
such Canons as they judged for the peace of the Church; and amongst other
things, they imposed an Oath called, etc. (Et cetera) as an Anticovenant
against the Scots; which because it occasioned much difference, may not be
unfitly inserted.

I A. B. Do swear that I do approve the Doctrine and Discipline or Government
established in the Church of England, as containing all things necessary to
Salvation; and that I will not endeavor, by my self, or any other, directly or
indirectly, to bring in any Popish Doctrine, contrary to that so established;
nor will I ever give my consent to alter the Government of this Church by
Archbishops, Deans, and Arch Deacons -- etc. (Et cetera, and so forth) as it
stands now established, and as by right it ought to stand, nor yet ever to
subject it to the Usurpations and Superstitions of the Sea of Rome: And all
these things do I plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear, according to the
plain and common sense or understanding of the same words, without any
Equivocation mental Evasion, or secret Reservation whatsoever. And this I do
heartily, willingly and truly, upon the faith of a Christian. So help me God in
Jesus Christ. This Oath was imposed upon all Ministers, and gave great Offense.
This was the chief business of this Convocation, which ended May 26, 1640.

Arch Bishop Laud by his earnest proceedings against Nonconformists and such as
were called Puritans, and by his strict enjoining of Ceremonies, especially
reviving old Ceremonies, which had not been lately observed, procured much
hatred to himself from the People, particularly the Londiners, who had a
particular disgust against him, for his severity upon Mr. Burton, Pryn, and
Bastwick; insomuch, that upon May 9, 1640, a Paper was fixed upon the Royal
Exchange, inciting the Apprentices to rise and sack his House at Lambeth the
Monday after; which they were the more inclined to do, because it was reported
that he was the chief instigator of the King to dissolve the last Parliament;
but the Arch Bishop had notice of their Design, and provided accordingly;
however, upon Monday at midnight about Five Hundred of them beset his House,
and endeovoured to enter, but were repulsed, and forced to depart; having in
some measure vented their Spleen in words, and breaking his Glass-Windows. The
next day many of them were apprehended and imprisoned, but three days after
they were forcibly rescued from thence by their Companions, who broke open the
Prison doors; for which one of the Ringleaders was drawn, hanged and
quartered, and his head and quarters set upon London Bridge.

The King grew daily more offended against the Scots, and calls a Select Juncto
to consult about them, where the Earl of Strafford delivered his mind in such
Terms as were afterward made use of to his destruction; War against them was
resolved on, and Money was to be procured one way or other; the City of London
was invited to lend, but refused, and pleaded poverty, being distasted i^ seems
at some proceedings in the Star Chamber, about their Plantation of London Derry
in Ireland which was judged to be forfeited for some alleged misdemeanors, and
the Undertakers fined; yet the Citizens were willing to offer a large Sum, for
the building a Magnificent Palace for the King in St James's Park, which took
no effect: The Gentry contributed indifferent freely; so that with their
Assistance the Royal Army was completed, the King himself being Generalissimo,
the Earl of Northumberland General, and the Earl of Strafford Leiutenant
General; Northumberland falls sick, and therefore the King takes the Command
upon himself, and sends away part of the Army, Horse and Foot under the Lord
Conway into the North. July 20th 1640. the Queen was delivered of a Son, who
was Ch^istened Henry, afterward Created Duke of Gloucester. In the mean time the
L. Conway had but ill Success, for having drawn about 1200 Horse, and 3000 Foot
to secure the Passes upon the Rive^ Tyne, the Scotch Army under their General
Lesly advanced thither, better provided then before* and August 27, Lesly
desired leave of the L. Conway for his whole Army to pass to the King with
their Petition, which was denied: whereupon about 300 Scotch Horse attempted to
pass the River, but were beaten back by the English Musketeers, who were
placed under a Breast-work.

Lesly comes on with his Horse, and charges Commissary General Wilmot, who
maintained the ground very stoutly till overborn with multitude and Canon, they
were put to a disorderly Retreat, both Horse and Foot; upon which the L. Conway
hastes to the King with the unwelcome News; Sir Jacob, Astly. Governor of
Newcastle finding himself unable to de^end the place, deserts it, sinking the
great Guns ^n the River, whereby Newcastle and Durham, came ^n a short time
into the hands of the Scots. And now Strafford comes up, with whom the King
retreats ^o York and stays there; while Strafford, who was ^ow sole Commander,
charges the whole miscar^iage upon Conway, who as stoutly denies it.

The King had formerly declared the Scots to be Rebels and Traitors by
Proclamation, and commanded that public Prayers should be put up against them
in all Churches, but at this time he is contented to treat with them; and to
that end he receives a Petition from them complaining of their Grievances: To
which he answers by his Secretary of Scotland, that he expects their particular
demands, which he receives in three days, all tending to require a Parliament
to be called in England, without which there could be no satisfactory redress
for them; they had likewise before their March into England published a
Declaration, called, The Intentions of the Army, viz. Not to lay down Arms,
till the Reformed Religion were settled in both Nations upon sure grounds, and
the Causes and Abbettors of their present Troubles, that is Archbishop Laud
and the Earl of Strafford, were brought to public Justice in Parliament. At
the same time Twelve English Peers, that is, the Earls of Bedford, Hartford,
Essex, Warwick, Mulgrave, Bristol, Bullingbrook, Say and Seal, Mandevil,
Howard, Brook and Paget drew up a Petition which they delivered to the King,
for the sitting of the Parliament: After which diverse others were presented to
the same purpose from the City of London, and several other parts of the
Kingdom; all centring in this, that nothing could relieve the Pressures of the
Kingdom but a Parliament.

To this the King condescends in part, giving hope likewise of further
satisfaction ere long; and (...) the present Summons the Lords to appear at
Yor^ Sep. 24. which they did, and upon the first day o^ their meeting it was
agreed, That a Parliame^^ should be called to meet November 3 following, an^
then (for the relief of the North sorely suffering under Leslies Army, the
Bishopric of Durham being then taxed 360 l. and Northumberland 300 l. a day,
it was resolved, that a Treaty should be set on Foo^ and that Sixteen English
Lords, should meet with as many Scots, and York was proposed for the plac^ of
Treaty, which the Scotch Commissioners refused as not judging it safe by reason
of the presence o^ the Earl of Strafford, who has proclaimed them Traitors in
Ireland, and was now chief Commander of the Kings Army, and a Capital Enemy to
their Nation, and against whom they had matter of high Complaint; therefore it
was concluded to be held at Rippon, where among other things it was agreed that
the Scotch Army should be maintained by the English, till the Treaty was ended,
and peace secured; that there should be a safe Convoy for all Letters between
the Scots and the Parliament of England. The first of these Articles seemed
unreasonable and dishonorable to the English Nation* and the Earl of Strafford
was so offended thereat, that he desired leave of the King to give them Battle,
and was willing ( as he writ to Archbishop Laud to undertake upon the Peril of
his Head with his Army of English Grasshoppers to beat those Sons of Anak home
again, for so much Superlour were the Scots then accounted to the English as to
matter of Soldiers; but October 16. the English Commanders, whether through
Fear, Favor, or out of a Political Maxim not to fight against the Scots,
condescended to Articles of Agreement, which were afterward signed by the King
himself:

This Treaty of Rippon was but previous to another of higher Importance at
London for a general concluding and making up all differences between the King
and his Subjects of Scotland; during which Treaty James Earl of Montross made
several Applications to the King, and by Letters offered his service to him,
testifying his disslike of the Scot^ish Proceedings; but these his Letters were
said to have been secretly taken out of the Kings Pockets, and conveyed to the
Covenanters by the means of Hamilton; who understanding Montross his design,
used all means to render him odious to the People, and so unserviceable to the
King.

And now the time approached for the sitting of the Parliament, who accordingly
met November 3. 1640, which was looked upon by Archbishop Laud as a fatal day
for Summoning of Parliaments, in reference to Church matters; the Parliament in
King Henry the Eighths time, which pulled down Abbeys and Monasteries, being
likewise Assembled upon November 3. Whereupon he advised the King for lucks
sake to put off their meeting for 2, or 3 days, but the King not minding any
such Observations, did not regard it.

To give some Account of the temper of those times it may not be amiss to
repeat the words of a Person of Honor, who was then a Member of the House of
Commons, and has lately published some Passages concerning that Parliament.

Never Parliament (says he) was assembled when the People were in an higher
discontent then at this time, such a general Diffidence there was, as they
thought themselves sure of nothing; the increase of Ceremonies made them fear
the approach of a Religion hateful to them; the la^^ business of Ship Money,
together with some Imp^sitions, without the consent of Parliament, cause^ them
to apprehend the loss of Property in the Estates, and they had little hope of
Redress (...) Parliaments, because his then Majesty had bee^ so unhappy as to
be put upon a sudden Dissolutio^ of all Parliaments formerly by him called:
The^ wanted not Persons ill disposed, and seditious (...) trumpet these things
in the ears of the generalty, whereby they incensed them so far, as there^^
they found means to raise a Power against the^^ Sovereign.

Mr. William Lenthal was Chosen Speaker of the House of Commons, and the King
in a Speech t^^^ them that the Scottish Troubles were the Cause o^ their
present Meeting, and therefore requires the^ to consider of the most expedient
means for ca^^ing them out, and then promises that he will hea^tily and clearly
concur with them for the satisfying their just Grievances: After which, he
ga^^ them an Account of his want of Money for the Maintaining of his Army, and
how dishonourabl^ it would be to the English Nation, if his Arm^ should be
disbanded before the Scots were put ou^ of the Kingdom; and desired them to
consider o^ the Oppression of the Northern Countries during the Treaty.

It was ill resented by many that the King should call the Scots Rebels,
whereupon he took occasion to tell them that he must needs call them Rebels as
long as they have an Army which did invade England. The Commons then Voted down
all Monopolies, and all such Members as had any benefit by them were expelled
out of the House; Complain^ was made in the House of Lords against Sir William
Beecher one of the Clerks of the Council, for violating their Privileges, in
searching the Earl of Warwicks and the Lord Brooks Studies, Cabinets and
Pockets, upon the dissolving the last Parliament; upon which he was committed
Prisoner to the Fleet, though he pleaded the Command of the Secretary of State
for his so doing. The Earl of Strafford is Impeached of High Treason by the
Commons in the House of Lords, whereupon he is sequestered from the House and
likewise his Friend Sir. George Ratcliff is sent for out of Ireland by a
Sergeant at Arms: In the mean time the Bishop of Lincoln, who was Prisoner in
the Tower is released; and likewise Mr. Pryn and Mr. Burton, who are brought in
great Triumph to London; and December 3. they presented their Petition against
their Prosecutors.

And now the Papists began to fear a Cloud, for Justice Howard was to deliver
up a Catalogue of all Recusants within the Liberties of Westminster, to prevent
which he was stabbed by one Mr. John James in Westminster hall; for which he
was imprisoned in the Gate House in order to a more severe punishment: But Sir
Francis Windebank Secretary of State, fearing to be called to Account by the
Parliament for reprieving Jesuits and Priests, which he knew would be produced
against him, if not worse matters; fled privately into France. December 7th the
Commons Voted Ship Money, with the Opinion of the Judges thereupon, to be
Illegal; and a Charge of High Treason was ordered to be drawn up against eight
of them; and they resolved to begin with the Lord Keeper Finch. December 11th
Alderman Pennington and some hundreds of Citizens presented a Petition,
subscribed by 15000 Hands, against Church Discipline and Ceremonies, and a
while after the House of Commons Voted, That the Clergy in a Synod or
Convocation have no power to make Canons or Laws without Parliaments; and that
the Canons are against the Fundamental Laws of this Realm, the Kings
Prerogative, the Property of the Subject, the Right of Parliaments and tend to
Faction and Sedition.

In pursuance hereof a Charge was ordered to be drawn up against Archbishop
Laud as the principal framer of those Canons, and other Delinquencies; which
Impeachment was seconded with another from the Scotch Commissioners; upon which
he was committed to the Black Rod, and 10 weeks after Voted Guilty of High
Treason and sent to the Tower, The Scots likewise prefer a charge against the
Earl of Strafford then in Custody, requiring Justice against them both, as the
great Incendiaries, and Disturbers of Church and State, and Sir George Ratcliff
the Earls Bosom Friend, had Articles also drawn against him to this purpose.

That he had conspired with the Earl to bring Ireland under an Arbitrary
Government, and to subvert the Fundamental Laws, and to bring an Army from
Ireland to subdue the Subjects of England. That he persuaded the Earl to use
Regal Power and to deprive the Subjects of their Liberties and Properties. That
he countenanced Papists, and built Monasteries, to alienate the Affections of
the Irish from England. That he withdrew the Subjects of Scotland from their
King. And lastly, That to preserve himself and the Earl of Strafford, he
labored to subvert the Liberties and Privileges of Parliament in Ireland.

The Lord Keeper Finch was the next Person designed to be censured. and
notwithstanding a Speech made in his own Vindication, he was Voted a Traitor
upon several Accounts; and among the rest, for soliciting, persuading, and
threatening the Judges to deliver their Opinions for raising Shipmoney, and for
several ill Offices done in moving the King to Dissolve the last Parliament,
and causing the publishing the Kings Declaration thereupon. Next day he was
accused before the Lords, but he foresaw the Storm, and went over into Holland.

The Parliament having now removed their Enemies, and increasing in Reputation,
were designing a Bill for a Triennial Parliament; for promoting which,
Petitions came from diverse places, one whereof was subscribed with 800 Hands
directly against Episcopacy, which the King took notice of; and calling both
Houses together, tells them, Of their slowness and the charge of Two Armies in
the Kingdom, and that he would have them avoid two Rocks, the one about the
Hierachy of Bishops, which he was willing to Reform but not to alter; The other
concerning frequent Parliaments, which he liked well, but not to give his Power
to Sheriffs and Constables.

About this time one Goodman a Popish Priest, condemned at the Sessions in
London, was reprieved by the King; upon which both Houses petitioned to know
who were the Instruments of it; and receiving an unsatisfactory Answer, they
Remonstrated against the Toleration of Papists, and the Popes Nuncio Rosetti,
and this Goodman, whom they desired might be left to the Justice of the Law, To
this the King answers, That the increase of Popery and Papists in his
Dominions, is extremely against his mind, and that he would use all possible
means for the restraining of it: As for the Popes Nuncio Rosetti, he had no
Commission, but only to preserve Correspondence between the Queen and the Pope,
which was allowed her by the Articles of Marriage, however he had prevailed
with her to remove him and is contented to remit the particular Case of Goodman
to both Houses.

The Scots had been now quartered in England five months, during which a
Cessation had been concluded at Rippon, but the full Pacification was reserved
for London, where Commissioners sat on both Parties to hear the Demands of the
Scots, and to make answer thereunto. After which the Scots presented the great
Account of their Charges, which was Five hundred fourteen thousand, one hundred
twenty eight pounds nine Shillings, besides the loss of their Nation, which was
Four hundred and forty thousand pounds. This Reckoning startled the English
Commissioners, till the Scots told them, They did not give in that Account as
expecting a Total Reparation of their Charges and Losses, but were content to
bear a part of it; hoping for the rest, from the Justice and Kindness of
England, There was some opposition made to the Demands, however Moneys were
raised for the present from the City of London, for the Supply of both the
Northern Armies, as the Parliament had done once before.

At this time a Match was propounded between the young Prince of Orange and the
Lady Mary, Eldest Daughter to the King, which his Majesty liked well of, and
communicated it to the Parliament; with whom it found an unanimous and general
Reception, in regard of the Alliance to be thereupon concluded with the States
General; and likewise that he was of the same Protestant Religion with England,
so that the Marriage was soon concluded.

Presently after four Members of the Commons delivered a Message to the Lords
of a Popish Design of Levying an Army of Fifteen thousand in Lancashire, and
Eight thousand in Ireland, and that the main promoters thereof were the Earls
of Strafford and Worcester.

In February Sir Robert Berkly, one of the Judges about Ship Money, was accused
of High Treason, and committed Prisoner to the Black Rod. In this Month the
King passed that Act for a Triennial Parliament, and to let them know what
value he put upon this great favor his Majesty told the Two Houses, That
hitherto they had gone on in those things which concerned themselves, and now
he expected they should proceed upon what concerned him.

The King then likewise signed the Bill of Subsidies, which gave them such
universal content, that Sir Edward Littleton Lord Keeper, was ordered To return
the Humble Thanks of Both Houses to his Majesty at Whitehall. Upon which there
were Bonefires and Bells ringing in and about London, in the same manner as
formerly upon granting the Petition of Right.

March 1, 1640, Archbishop Laud upon an Accusation of High Treason by the
Commons, was committed to the Tower: And now Episcopacy it self was called in
question, and though the Lord Digby made a witty and weighty Speech in Defense
of it, and Archbishop Usher gave his Judgment for the Moderation and Emendation
of it and the Liturgy, not the Extirpation thereof; yet the Wings of Episcopacy
were shrewdly clipped, for March 10 the Commons Voted, That no Bishop should have
any Vote in Parliament, nor any Judicial power in the Star Chamber, nor be
concerned in any Temporal matters; and that no Clergyman should be a Justice
of Peace.

Upon Monday March 26, 1640. the Earl of Straffords Trial began in
Westminster Hall, the King, Queen, and Prince being present; and the Commons
likewise being there as a Committee at the managing their Accusation; the Earl
of Arundel was Lord High Steward, and the Earl of Lindsey Lord High Constable,
the Earl of Strafford though he had but short warning, yet had gotten his
Defense ready against the time. The Accusation was managed by Mr. Pym,
consisting of Twenty eight Articles, to most of which the Earl made Particular
Replies.

But the Commons were resolved to prosecute him to the utmost, and had
therefore procured the Parliament of Ireland to prosecute him there also, as
guilty of High Treason; which being unexpectedly produced, extorted from the
Earl this passionate Expression, That there was a Conspiracy against him, to
take away his Life. At which the Commons cried out against him, That standing
Impeached of High Treason, he durst accuse the Parliament of two Kingdoms of
Conspiracy against him. But besides all these, certain notes were produced
against him, which were taken by Sir H. Vane in a close Committee of select
Counselors, whom the King had chosen to consult about his second Expedition
against the Scots; out of which it was alleged against the Earl, That he had
given the King advice to borrow an Hundred thousand pound of the City of
London, To levy Ship Money rigorously; and that his Majesty having tried the
Affections of his People, was absolved and loosed from all Rules of Government,
and might do what power would admit; and having an Army in Ireland, might
employ it for the reducing of this Kingdom, which he was sure could not hold
out five months: And London being full of the Nobility, the Commission of Array
was to be set on foot, and all Opposers thereof to be severely dealt with.

To this the Earl replied, That he conceived it lawful for a Privy Counselor
to have freedom of Voting with others; and as to the matter of the English
Army, he thought that the single Testimony of one man (Secretary Vane) was not
of Validity in Law, much less in Life and Death, and that the Depositions of
Secretary Vane was doubtful, as appeared by several Examinations, and that
there were present at the Debate but eight Privy Counselors, whereof two were
not to be produced, and four others declared upon their Honors that they never
heard him speak those words, or any like them; and lastly that if he had spoken
them (which he yet granted not) that the word This Kingdom, could not imply
England, the debate being concerning Scotland, there being not the least
intention of Landing the Irish Army in England; and concluded his Defense with
telling the Lords, that he was accused as guilty of Treason for endeavoring to
subvert the Fundamental Laws of the Land, but it seemed strange to him that it
should be Treason together which was not Treason in any part; and lastly,
desired the Lords to consider how their own Privileges, and other Ministers of
State, would suffer by his Condemnation.

The Commons must now justify their Charge by Law, to which end they produced
the Salvo annexed to the Stat. of 25 Ed. 3. The words were these, Because all
particular Treasons could not be then defined; therefore what the Parliament
should declare to be Treason, in time to come should be punished as Treason;
And so this Salvo was to be the Ground work of the Bill of Attainder. This
being a point of Law, the Earl had Council allowed him, who answered on his
behalf, That the Statute which they cited was but a Declarative and a Penal
Law, awd would no way admit of such Consequential and Inferential
Constructions, and that this Salvo was repealed by an Act of Parliament in the
Sixth of Henry the fourth. And so the Court Adjourned without prefixing any
time of Meeting; for the Commons proceeded to dispatch their Bill of Attainder,
and April 19, 1641, they Voted the Earl Guilty of High Treason, upon the
Evidence of Secretary Vane and his Notes; And upon the 25th. they passed the
Bill and sent to the Lords for their Concurrence, to whom it seemed at first so
perplexed a business, that the Commons were forced to send Mr. Saint John the
Kings Solicitor, to confer with them about it, who gave them such
satisfaction, that thence forward they showed greater propensity to the Earls
Condemnation.

In the mean time the Commons petitioned the King, 1. To remove all Papists
from Court. 2. For disarming of them generally throughout the Kingdom. 3. For
disbanding the Irish Army. To which the King answered, 1. They all knew what
Legal Trust the Crown has in that particular, therefore he shall not need to
say any thing to assure them that he shall use it so, as there shall be no just
cause of scandal. 2. As for the second he is content it shall be done by Law.
And for the last, he had entered into Consultation about it, finding many
difficulties therein, and does so wish the disbanding of all Armies, as he did
conjure them speedily and heartily to join with him in disbanding those two
here, Scots and English.

The House of Commons having finished their Bill of Attainder against the Earl
of Strafford, and the King fearing the Conclusion, and being willing to do some
good Office to him, His Majesty May 1, 1641, calls both Houses together, and in
a Speech tells them, That he had been present at the hearing of that great
Cause, and that in his Conscience, positively he could not condemn him of High
Treason, and yet could not clear him of misdemeanors; but hoped a way might be
found out to satisfy Justice and their fears without oppressing his
Conscience. And so he dismissed them to their great discontent, which was
propagated so far, that May 3. near a Thousand Citizens, most of them armed
with Swords, Cudgels, and Staves, came thronging down to Westminster, crying
out for Justice against the Earl of Strafford; especially applying themselves
to the Earl of Montgomery, Lord Chamberlain by whose persuasions, and promises
their fury was partly abated: However they posted upon the Gate at Westminster
a List of the Names of those who would have acquitted the Earl, whom they
styled Staffordians.

The Parliament being Informed that some endeavors were used, to raise a
Disgust in the English Northern Army against their Proceedings, they now enter
into a National Protestation to maintain with Life, Power, and Estate the True
Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of
England, against all Popery and Popish Innovations: Which was ordered to be
printed and published through the Kingdom.

May 5. The Lords acquainted the Commons, That they thought it the safest
course to lay by the Bill of Attainder, because it brought in the King for
Judge: And the next day they debated the several Articles of his Impeachment,
and voted the Earl guilty of High Treason upon Two of them, that is the 15th.
For Levying of moneys in Ireland by force in a Warlike manner; And the 16th,
For Imposing an Oath upon the Subjects of Ireland.

The Commons had now finished a Bill, For the Continuance of the Parliament;
which having passed the Lords, was tendered to the King to be signed; together
with the Bill of Attainder, His Majesty answered, That on Monday following he
would satisfy them; and on the Sunday before the King spent the whole day in
consulting about the Earl of Strafford with the Judges and Bishops: The Judges
told him, That in point of Law (according to the Oath made by Sir H. Vane of
the Earls advice, to raise Horse to awe this Nation) he was guilty of Treason.
In the evening the Five Bishops, viz. of Armagh, London, Durham, Lincoln, and
Carlisle, were called in to the King to satisfy his Conscience about it, who
all agreed, That the King might show mercy without any scruple, and that he
could not condemn the Earl, if he did not think him Guilty: This was to matter
of Fact, but as to matter of Law, He was to rest in the Opinion of the Judges.

Monday May 10. The King gives Commission to several Lords to pass Two Bills,
one the Bill of Attainder against the Earl of Strafford: The other, For
Continuing the Parliament during the pleasure of both Houses; Which last Act
was occasioned for satisfying the Scots, who required Vast Sums of Money; and
for disbanding both the Armies: whereby great Taxes were laid upon the People
by Act of Parliament, which could not possibly be levied in a short time, and
therefore there needed a present Supply from the City of London, who (as it was
alleged) would not part with their money, least a Dissolution of the
Parliament should happen before payment; upon which Account the King was
pressed to pass this Act.

The same day the Bill was passed against the Earl of Strafford, the King sent
Sir Dudley Carlton, Secretary of State, to acquaint the Earl with what was
done, and the motives thereto, whereat the Earl was greatly astonished; but the
next day the King being troubled, writes a Letter with his own hand to the
House of Lords, and sent it by the Prince of Wales, telling them, That whereas
Justice had been satisfied in his Condemnation, an intermixture of mercy would
not now be unseasonable; and therefore he desired them, that if it might be
done without any discontent to the People, the Earl might be permitted to
fulfill the Natural Course of his Life in close Imprisonment, sequestered from
all Public Affairs, provided he never attempted to make an Escape; however he
thought it a work of Charity to repreive him till Saturday. But nothing could
be obtained in favor of him, but that the Lords said, Their Intention was to
be suitors to His Majesty to show favor to his innocent Children, and that
whatever provision himself had made for them, it might be confirmed.

Some Designs were said to have been laid for his Escape, however May 12, 1641,
the Earl of Strafford was conveyed from the Tower by a Guard consisting of the
Trained Bands, Marshals men, Sheriffs Officers, and Warders of the Tower.
Before him went his Gentleman Usher bare headed, and he himself followed,
accompanied with the Archbishop of Armagh and others. As he went along he
passed by Archbishop Lauds Lodging, and spying him at the Window, he called to
him for his Prayers and his Blessing; but the Bishop at the sight of him was so
surpised that for some time he could not recollect himself, and being
reprehended by his Friends of an undecent Pusillanimity, He Replied; That he
doubted not but when that bitter Cup should come to his turn, he should taste
it with a most Christian Courage,

The Earl being come to the Scaffold upon Tower Hill, addressed himself to the
Archbishop of Armagh to this Effect, That he was come to pay the la^^ Debt he
owed to Sin, with a good hope of rising again to Righteousness: That he dyed
willingly, forgave al^ and submitted to Justice: He professed himself guiltless
as to the matter for which he dyed; He wished a^^ prosperity to the King and
People; and acquitted him from the guilt of his death, as having acted therei^
no otherwise then as constrained: He advised his Adversaries to repent of their
Violent Proceedings against him; and telling them that he thought it a strange
wa^ to write in Blood the beginning of Reformation and Settlement of the
Kingdom. However he wished that hi^ Blood might rest, and not cry against them.
He declared, He died in the Faith of the Church of England for whose happiness
he prayed, and concluded his Speech with entreating the Spectators to pray for
him. After which he kneeled down to Prayer, and rising up again took his last
leave of his Brother Sir George Wentworth and all his Friends, sending his Love
to his Wife, and his Blessing to his Children; with a most strict Injunction to
His Only Son, Never to meddle with the Patrimony of the Church: And the^
giving the sign to the Executioner, his head wa^ severed from his body at the
first stroke.

This was the end of that Great and Able Minister of State, who is reported
when he heard the, King had consented to the Bill of Attainder, to have lift up
his Eyes to Heaven, and clapping his hand upon his heart, to have cried out
(perhaps in immitation of Cardinal Woolseys Complaint) Put not your Trust in
Princes nor in the Sons of Men, for in them is no Salvation. And indeed it
seemed very hard that he should be made guilty of High Treason by a Bill framed
on purpose, without former President; and to which His Majesty's Consent was in
a manner extorted, and which he afterward bewailed with great remorse of
Conscience, though it is said the King was not so much convinced by any thing
said to him, but the chief Motive was a Letter from the Earl, wherein he thus
concluded.

Sir, (To set your Majesty's Conscience at Liberty) I do most humbly beseech
you, for the Preventing of such mischiefs as may happen by your refusal to pass
the Bill, by this means to remove praised be God (I cannot say this accursed
but) this Unfortunate Thing, forth of the way, toward that blessed Agreement
which God I trust shall forever establish between You and Your Subjects. My
consent herein shall more acquit you to God, then all the world can do beside:
To a willing man there is no injury done.

His Character is Expressed by the King his Master, in his Eikon Basilike, who
said, He looked upon the Earl of Strafford as a Gentleman whose great Abilities
might make a Prince rather afraid than ashamed to Employ him in the greatest
Affairs of State.

The fall of this powerful man so startled other great Officers of State, that
several resigned their places: About the same time some discontents arose
between the Parliament and the English Army in the North, but a while after
both Armies were disbanded. The payment of Tonnage and Poundage had been much
questioned since 1628, but now the King at the request of the Commons was
content to relinquish his Claim to it, and afterward pasied a Bill for
Pole Money, and two others for putting down the Star chamber and High
Commission Courts; which had proceeded with too much severity, having so far
out grown the power of the Law, that they would not be limited nor guided by it.

July 5. A Charge was brought into the House of Commons against Dr. Wren Bishop
of Ely, being accused of some Treasonable Misdemeanors in his Diocese; who
thereupon Voted him unworthy and unfit to hold or exercise any Office or
Dignity in Church or State, and desired the Lords to join with them, to request
the King for his Removal from his service; and so he was committed to the
Tower, and about the same time the Writs for Ship money, and all the
Proceedings therein were by the Kings consent adjudged void; and 5. of the
Judges that gave their Opinions for it, were Impeached of high misdemeanors;
that is Bramston, Trevor, Weston, Davenport, and Crawly; and Berkly another of
the Judges was accused for Treason, but no further prosecution was made therein.

August 6. Both the English and Scotch Armies were disbanded, and four-days
after the King went toward Scotland and was entertained with great
demonstrations of Affection by that Nation, and conferred several Places of
Honor and Power upon diverse of them; confirming likewise the Treaty between
the two Nations by Act of Parliament.

October 23, 1641. A Horrid and Notorious Rebellion broke out in Ireland, which
was managed with such secrecy, that it was not discovered till the night before
it was to have been put in Execution; which was in diverse places carried on
with such fury, that Two hundred thousand English Men, Women, and Children,
were in a short space barbarously murdered by all manner of most cruel torments
that their Devlish minds could invent. And this was chiefly occasioned by the
Instigation of the Irish Popish Priests, Monks, and Friars, who every where
declaimed loudly against the Protestants, saying, That they were Heretics, and
not to be suffered any longer to live amongst them, That it was no more sin to
kill one of them then to kill a dog; and that it was a mortal and unpardonable
sin to relieve or protect any of them. Yea the Priests gave the Sacrament to
diverse of the Irish, upon Condition they should spare neither Man, Woman, nor
Child of the Protestants, saying, That it did them a great deal of good to wash
their hands in their blood; and that they were worse than Dogs; and if any of
them died in the Quarrel, before their bodies were cold, their souls should be
in Heaven without ever calling in at Purgatory by the way.

This bloody Rebellion happened in a time wherein the Irish had all the
Privileges and Liberty they could reasonably expect, and the ancient hatred
which the Irish had born to the English did now seem to be forgotten, Forty
Years of Peace having compacted and cemented them together, both by Alliances
and Marriages, which were all now miserably broken and destroyed. The Castle of
Dublin, wherein were Ten thousand Arms, and all other Forts and Magazines in
the Kingdom, were to have been surprised, and all the English Protestants that
would not join with them, were to be murdered; but the seizing of the Castle
was happily prevented by one Owen Conally, from some discourse accidentally in
a Tavern with one Hugh Mac Mahon, Grandson to the Great Earl of Tyrone, the
night before the intended Execution.

Upon this Discovery Mac Mahon and Lord Mac-Guire, were seized by the Lord
Chief Justices of Ireland, and many Principal Conspirators escaped that night
out of Dublin, so was Dublin saved, that all Ireland might not be lost in one
day. But the horrid Design was past prevention as to the General, for the
Conspirators were in Arms at the day appointed in all the Counties round about,
and poor English Protestants daily arrived there, robbed and spoiled of all
they had; giving lamentable Relations how their Houses were seized, the Towns
and Villages fired, and in all parts all manner of cruel Outrages and Villainies
committed. The Lords Justices Sir William Parsons and Sir John Burlace, taking
those Arms which they found in Dublin, and Arming whom they could to defend
themselves, sent Sir Henry Spotswood to the King then in Scotland, with an
Account of all that happened, who dispatched Sir James Stuart with Instructions
to the Lords of the Privy Council in Ireland, and to carry all the Money his
present Stores would supply. He likewise moved the Parliament of Scotland (as
being nearest) for their assistance, but they excused it, because Ireland was a
dependant upon the Crown of England; but if the State of England would use any
of their men for that service, they would make Propositions in order to it. At
the same time likewise, the King sent Post to the Parliament of England, and a
while after Owen O Conally the First Discoverer of the Plot, came to London and
brought Letters to the Earl of Leicester (who was chosen Deputy, but not yet
gone over) wherein the Lords Justices desired some Reward might be given him;
upon which the Parliament Voted him a Gift of 500 l. and an Annuity of 200 l. a
year, and at a Conference of both Houses they passed several Votes for the
Relief of Ireland, yet little was done till the Kings return from Scotland,
which was about the end of November.

The Irish, to dishearten the English from any resistance, bragged, That the
Queen was with their Army, That the King would come amongst them also, and
asist them; That they did but maintain his Cause against the Puritans: That
they had the Kings Commission for what they did (showing indeed a Patent
themselves had drawn, but thereto was affixed an Old Broad Seal which had been
taken from an Ancient Patent out of Farnham Abbey by one Plunket in the presence
of many of their Lords and Priests, as was afterward attested by the
Confession of several:) That the Scots were in the Confederacy with them; And
to seem to confirm this last, they abstained for some time from destroying the
Estates or murdering any of that Nation: And on the otherside, to encourage the
Irish, they produced pretended Letters; wherein they said they were informed
from England, That the Parliament had passed an Act, all the Irish should be
compelied to the Protestant worship, and for the first offense in refusing, to
forfeit all their Goods, for the second their Estates, and for the third their
Lives; And besides this they presented them with the hopes of Liberty, That the
English Yoke should be stricken off; That they should have a King of their own
Nation, and that then all the Goods and Estates of the English should be
divided amongst them.

With these Motives of Spoil and Liberty, which were strengthened by the former,
of Religion, the Rebellion increased. The Rebels in Ulster commanded by Sir
Phelim O Neal, assisted by his Brother, the Brother of the Lord Mac Guire,
Philip O Reley, and several others, had possessed most of the strong places in
that Province; and many other, which they could not take by force nor
treachery, were delivered to them by the English upon Articles, which they
afterward like true (or rather false) Papists, most perfidiously broke;
Butchering and Massacring the poor English without pity or compassion to Age or
Sex; though they still spared the Scotch Plantations in Ulster, because of
their Numbers, and likewise for fear of the Scotch Army, so easily to be
transported to the North parts of Ireland: But now their General Sir Phelim O
Neal (one of the Race of the late Bloody Earl of Tyrone, (a pretended
Protestant till some time before) having got together a vast number of the
Natives, fell upon them and destroyed their Houses and Goods; and though they
did not exercise that Cruelty on their Bodies, yet they stripped them and drove
them Naked to the Scottish Shore; from thence he marched into other parts, and
took Dundalk, incamping at Arde near Tredagh.

The King finding his stay to be longer than he thought left the whole business
of Ireland to the Parliament, who declared a speedy and vigorous Assistance,
and Voted Fifty thousand Pound for a present Supply: By which time the Lords of
the Council of Ireland had Armed as many as were able, and given Commissions
for raising several Regiments, of whom the Earl of Ormond was made Lieutenant
General, and a Regiment was sent from England under Sir Simon Harcourt; about
which time the King returned out of Scotland, and was Entertained and Feasted
at London, and from thence Conducted to White Hall: after which the King
Treated several Chief Citizens at Hampton Court, where diverse of the Aldermen
had the honor of Knighthood.

December 2. The King Summons both Houses together, and tells them, That he had
staid in Scotland longer than he expected, yet not fruitlesly, for he had given
full satisfaction to that Nation; but cannot choose but take notice of, and
wonder at, the unexpected Distractions he finds at home; and then commends to
them the State of Ireland: next he publishes a Proclamation for Obedience to
the Laws, in force concerning Religion, and the performance of Divine Service
without Innovation or Abolishing of Rites and Ceremonies. January 20, His
Majesty makes another Speech to them, and Conjures them by all that is dear to
him or them, to hasten the business of Ireland. After which the Commons ordered
a Select Committee to draw up a Petition and Remonstrance to the King; the
Petition was thus,

Most Gracious Sovereign, your Majesty's most humble and faithful Subjects the
Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, do with joy acknowledge the
Favor of God in your safe return into England, where the dangers and
distempers of the State have caused them to desire your Presence and Authority
to your Parliament, for preventing of imminent Ruin and Destruction to your
Kingdoms of England and Scotland, fomented by a malignant party, for alteration
of Religion and Government, the increase of Popery by the Practice of Jesuits,
and other Engineers and Factors of Rome, corrupting the Bishops and Privy
Council; they being the cause of the late Scottish War, and the Irish
Rebellion: Now for prevention, they pray, That your Majesty would concur with
your Parliament to deprive the Bishops of their Votes, To take away Oppression
in Religion, Church Government, and Discipline, To purge your Councils of such
as are promoters of these Corruptions, and not alienate any Escheated Lands in
Ireland by reason of the Rebellion! and these being granted, we will make you
happy,

This was followed by a large Remonstrance, containing all the Miscarriages and
Misfortunes (which they termed Pressures) since the beginning of his Majesty's
Reign, As 1. The root and ground of these dangers. 2. Their Maturity and
Ripeness. 3. The effectual means used for their Extirpation, and the progress
therein made: 4. The Obstructions and Oppositions interrupting. 5. The best
means for removing these Obstacles, and for accomplishing the Parliaments good
Intentions for restoring this Nation to its Ancient Renown The Actors and
Promoters of these Evils, were described to be, 1. The Jesuited Papists. 2. The
Bishops, and corrupted Clergy. 3. Intereste^ Counselors, and Courtiers. The
root of the mi^chief was, the Malignant Party, whose Practice^ were branched
into four particulars: 1. To foment differences and discontents between the
King and People about Prerogative and Privilege for their own Advantages. 2.
To suppress the purity and power of Religion. 3. To Unite and Conjoyn Papists,
Arminians and Libertines, and out of them all to compose a Body sufficient to
carry on their Designs. And 4. To disaffect the King to the Parliament, by
Slanders and by putting him upon other ways of Supply than by Parliament; and
that the Intentions of these Malignants were to subvert the Fundamental Laws
and Principles of Government: They then charge this Malignant Party more
particularly; as chiefly occasioning the Dissolution of three several
Parliaments without Relief of Grievances. The Imprisoning and Fining several of
the Members, raising great Sums of Money by Loan, Privy Seals, and Excise, and
blasting The Petition of Right, The succesless Attempts upon France and Spain,
and Peace made with the Spaniard without consent of Parliament: The loss of
Rochel occasioned by lending part of our Fleet to the French King, deserting
the cause of the Palatinate, charging the Kingdom with Billeting Soldiers, and
the Design of bringing in German Horse to inslave this Nation to Arbitrary
Contributions: Lastly they reflect upon Scandalous Declarations published
against the Parliament, upon Injustice, Oppression, Violence, Illegal
Inlargements of Forests, Coat, and Conduct Money, Corrupt Councils and
Designs, Projects, Monopolies, Illegal Proceedings in Courts of Judicature, and
Council Table; charging the Bishops likewise with many Enormities, particularly
for contributing to raise an Army for constraining the Scots to conform to
their Superstitious Ceremonies; concluding with what they have done for the
Reformation of these Abuses.

To their Petition the King returned this Answer, That he knows not any Wicked
or Malignant Persons whom he does either countenance or employ; That he would
concur with his People in a Parliamentary way against all Popish Designs, but
would not consent to deprive the Bishops of their Votes in Parliament: That he
judged the power of the Clergy sufficiently moderated by taking away the High
Commission Court, and needing no further Abridgment; That he was willing to
concur with them for removal of any Innovations in Religion by a National
Synod; That he had no Counselors nor Ministers of State whom he would not at
any time expose to Trial, and leave to the Law, but cannot agree that any
others should have the choice of them but himself, That he concurs with them
for not altering the Forfeited Lands in Ireland, but thinks it not reasonable
to resolve, before the Event of War be seen; and doubts not of their Loyal
Endeavors for the support of his Royal State.

In Answer to the Remonstrance, the King Issues out a Declaration to his
Subjects, the Sum of which was, That he thought he had given sufficient
satisfaction to his Peoples Fears and Jealonsies, concerning Religion, Liberty,
and Civil Interests, by the Bills which he had passed this Parliament; desiring
that misunderstandings might be removed on either side, and that the bleeding
Condition of Ireland might persuade them to Unity, for the relief of that
unhappy Kingdom.

Not long after happened the Insolent Tumults of the London Apprentices, who in
a riotous manner went to White Hall and Westminster, to the great disturbance
of the King; who thereupon commanded the Lord Mayor, and Common Council to keep
a double Watch and Guard, for preventing mischief; and Dec. 28. the King sends
a Message to the Lords, That he would raise Ten thousand Volunteers for
Ireland, if the Commons would undertake to pay them: On New Years day a
Proclamation was published against the Irish, declaring, Those that were in
Arms, with all their Adherents and Abettors, to be Rebels and Traitors: Two
days after, the King upon Information that the L. Kimbolton, and Five of the
House of Commons, viz. Mr. Hollis, Sir Authur Haslerig, Mr. Pym, Mr Hamden, and
Mr. Stroud, had correspondence with the Scots, and countenanced the late City
Tumults, He thereupon ordered their Trunks, Studies, and Chambers to be Sealed
up, and their Person Seized; the former of which was done, but having timely
notice they went aside; upon which the Commons Voted the same day, That if any
Persons shall Attempt to Seize the Persons or Papers of any Parliament Men,
such Members shall require the Aid of the Constable to secure such Persons till
further Order of the House; and that it is lawful for any person to Assist the
said Members, and that the said Members may stand upon their Guard, and make
resistance according to the Protestation for defense of the Privileges of
Parliament.

Hereupon the King charges the L. Kimbolton and the 5 Members with several
Articles, and Acquaints both Houses, That he did intend to prosecute them for
High Treason, and required that their Persons might be secured: And the next
day the King Attended with his Guard of Pensioners, and some Hundreds of
Gentlemen, went to the House of Commons, and the Guard staying without, the
King with the Palsgrave, entered the House, at whose entrance the Speaker rises
out of the Chair, and the King sitting down therein, Views the House round, and
perceives the Birds he aimed at were flown, for having warning they had
withdrawn into London; whereupon he tells them, That he came to look for those
5 Members whom he had accused of High Treason and was resolved to have them
where ever he found them; and expected to have them sent to him as soon as they
should come to the House; but would not have them think that this Act of his
was any Violation of Parliament.

This Act of the Kings was so highly resented by the House, that the next day
January 5, the Commons Voted it a Breach of Privilege, and Scandals were
raised in the City, that he intended Violence against the House of Commons, and
came thither with force to Murder several Members, and used threatening
Speeches against the Parliament; with which the City was so possessed, That
unusual Guards and Watches were set, as if some desperate Assault were to be
made upon the City, and the Houses Adjourned till the Tuesday following,
appointing a Committee in the mean time to sit at Guild Hall to consider of the
most Effectual Means for their Security. And then they publish a Declaration,
That whosoever shall Arrest any Member of Parliament by Warrant from the King
only, is Guilty of the Breach of Privileges of Parliament; and likewise that
all those who attended the King when he came to demand the 5 Members, were
Guilty of a Traitorous Design against the King and Parliament, That the
Proclamation for Apprehending and Imprisoning the said Members, was False,
Scandalous, and Illegal, and not of Validity enough to hinder them from
attending the House; and that the publishing of the several Articles of High
Treason was a Breach of Privilege; wherefore they entreat his Majesty, to
discover the Names of those Informers and Evil Counselors; declaring all such
Persons to be public Enemies to the State.

In the mean time the Londoners came thronging to Westminster with Petitions,
inveighing bitterly against some of the Peers, but especially the Bishops, whom
they affronted as they went to the House; upon which they were so affrighted,
that Twelve Bishops absent themselves from the House of Lords, drawing up a
Protestation against all Laws, Orders, Votes, Resolutions, and Determinations,
as in themselves null and of none effect, which had passed, or should pass,
during their forced Absence; desiring their Protestation might be entered by the
Clerk of the House of Peers. Presently after which, at a Conference between
both Houses, it was agreed, That this Protestation of the Twelve Bishops, did
extend to the deep intrenching upon the fundamental Privileges and Being of
Parliaments; and in a short time they were accused of High Treason, seized and
brought on their knees at the Lords Bar: Ten of them were committed to the
Tower, and the other two, in regard of their Age, to the Black Rod.

The King at this time, thinking himself unsafe without a Guard, accepted of
the offer of some Gentlemen of the Inns of Court to be a Guard to him, which
instead of security, was by subtle men made more prejudicial to the King, by
taking this occasion, to raise the rage and jealousy of the City against him;
for at midnight there were cries made ^n the Streets of London, That all People
should rise ^o their Defense, for the King, with his Papists, were coming to
fire the City, and cut their Throats in their Beds; than which, though nothing
were more false, yet it found the effects of truth; and the People by such
Allarms, being terrified from sleep, the impressions of those night fears lay
long upon their Spirits in the day, and filled them almost with madness; of
which the King complained to the Common Council of London.

But the House of Commons, to obviate this, upon suspicion of some design upon
their persons, petition the King for a Guard, to be commanded by the Earl of
Essex, of whose fidelity to the King and State, no question was ever made. This
Petition was denied by the King, as not willing to have them too strong, yet
promised to take such care for their security from Violence, as he would for
the preservation of Himself and Children; and if this general Assurrnce would
not suffice to remove those Apprehensions, he would command such a Guard to
wait upon them, as he would be responsible for to Almighty God.

This Answer being unsatisfactory, the City join with them, and in their Common
Council drew up a Petition, complaining, That the Trade of the City was
decayed, to the utter Ruin of the Protestant Religion, and the Lives and
Liberties of the Subjects, by the Designs of Papists, Foreigners and Domestics
(more particularly their fomenting the Irish Rebellion) by changing the
Constable of the Tower, and making preparations there, By the fortifying of
White Hall, and his Majesty's late Invasion of the House of Commons. Whereupon
they pray, Tha^ by the Parliaments Advice the Protestants in Ireland may be
relieved, the Tower to be put into hands of Persons of Trust, a Guard appointed
for the safety of the Parliament; and that the Five Members may not be
restrained nor proceeded against but by the Privileges of Parliament. And
besides this, The King riding into London, the Citizens in multitudes flocke^
about his Coach, beseeching him, To agree with his Parliament, and not to
violate their Privileges.

To their Petition the King returned Answer That he could not express a greater
sense of Ireland that he had done; That merely to satisfy the City, he had
removed a worthy Person from the charge of the Tower; and that the late Tumults
had caused him to fortify White Hall, for the security of his own Person, That
his going to the House of Commons was to apprehend those five Members for
Treason, to which the Privileges of Parliament could not extend; and that yet
he would proceed against them no otherwise than legally.

And now such numbers of ordinary People daily gathered about Westminster and
White Hall, that the King doubting of their Intentions, thought fit to
withdraw to Hampton Court, taking with him the Queen, Prince, and Duke of
York; where he and his Retinue and Guard quickly increased, by accession of
diverse of the Gentry. But the next day the Five Members were triumphantly
guarded to Westminster by a great number of Citizens and Seamen, with hundreds
of Boats and Barges, with Guns in them, shouting and hallowing as they passed
by White Hall, and making large Protestations at Westminster of their constant
fidelity and adherence to the Parliament. About this time the Parliament had
notice the Lord Digby and Colonel Lunsford were raising Troops of Horse at
Kingston, where the County Magazine was lodged; whereupon they order, That the
County Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, and the Trained Bands, shall take care to
secure the Countries and their Magazine, and suppress all unlawful Assemblies.
Lunsford was seized and sent to the Tower, but Digby escaped beyond Sea. The
King removed to Royston, at which time Sir Edward Harbert, Attorney General, is
questioned at the Lords Bar, to answer concerning the Articles against the Five
Members; where it had gone hard with him, if the King (at his earnest
Supplication,) had not taken him off by a Letter to the Lord Keeper Littleton
(who succeeded L. Finch) wherein the King clears the Attorney General, and
takes the whole business upon himself, yet concludes, That finding cause wholly
to desist from proceeding against the Persons Accused, he had commanded his
Attorney General to proceed no further therein, nor to produce nor discover any
proof concerning the same: And so this Breach between the King and Parliament,
seemed at present to be made up.

At this time the Scots having a considerable Interest in their Britttish
Plantations in Ireland, make Proposals for Transporting 2500 Soldiers thither,
which were accepted by both Houses, and afterward consented to by the King:
after which the Scotch Commissioners interposed their Meditation for composing
the differences between the King and Parliament, which were now grown to too
great an height, for which Mr. Pym was ordered by the Commons to give them the
thanks of the House.

January 20. The King sends a Message to the Parliament, proposing the security
of his own just Rights and Royal Authority, and, That since particular
Grievances and Distractions were too many, and would be too great to be
presented by themselves, that they would comprize and digest them into one
entire body, and send them to him; and it should then appear how ready he would
be to equal or exceed the greatest Examples of the most Iudulgent Princes, in
their Acts of Grace, and Favor to the People.

After this the Commons move the Lords to join with them in Petitioning for the
Militia and the Command of the Tower, but they not complying, the House of
Commons singly of themselves Importune the King to put those things into the
hands of the Parliament, as the only available means for removal of their Fears
and Jealousies. But the King, not willing to part with the Principal Jewels of
his Crown, signified to them: That he thought the Militia to be lawfully
subject to no command but his own, and therefore would not let it out of his
hands, That he had preferred to the Lieutenancy of the Tower, a Person of known
Fortune and unquestionable Reputation, and that he would prefer none but such
to the command of his Forts and Castles; yet would not entrust the power of
conferring those Places and Dignities from himself; being derived to him from
his Ancestors, by the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom; Yet the Commons would
not desist, but again petitioned, and were again refused.

Soon after diverse Petitions were delivered to the Parliament against the Votes
of Popish Lords and Bishops in the House of Peers, as one from Suffolk with
1500, and another from the Londoners with 2000 hands, and a Third from the City
Dames; All which were Answered, That the Commons had already endeavored Relief
from the Lords in their Requests, and should so continue till Redress were
obtained. And shortly after, the Lords passed the Bill For disabling all
Persons in Holy Orders, to have any Place or Vote in Parliament, or to exercise
any Temporal Jurisdiction; At the same time they petition the King again for
the Militia, and for clearing Kimbolton and the Five Members, by his Answer to
both which they understood his Resolution, Not to entrust the Militia out of
himself, nor to clear the Members but only by a General Pardon; which was
unsatisfactory.

The King now at Hampton Court, thought fit to send for all his Domestic
Servants of either House of Parliament, and particularly the Earls of Essex and
Holland, but they refused to come, excusing themselves with, The necessity of
performing their duties in Parliament, and discharging the Trust reposed in
them: For which they were put from their Places at Court.

The Lord Digby about this time sent Three Letters from Middleburg in Zealand
(where he was fled out of England) one to the Queen, and two others to
Secretary Nicholas, and Sir Jews Dives; signifying, That if the King would
openly declare his mind, and betake himself to some place of security, that he
might come freely to him, he doubted not but he should do him some acceptable
Service: These Letters were intercepted by the Parliament, and by them after
perusal sent to the King, with their Entreaties to him, That he would persuade
the Queen not to correspond with Digby or any other whom his Great Council had
proclaimed Traitors.

There was a Report that the Parliament intended to Accuse the Queen of
High Treason, as one that had so much power with the King to misadvise him;
this rumor the Parliament exused, as a public Scandal upon them; which she
seemed satisfied with, yet provides against the danger, and therefore prevails
with the King to accompany her Daughter Mary Princess of Orange into Holland,
carrying with her all the Kings and her own Jewels, together with those
entailed upon the Crown; intending with those, and some other Assistance, to
raise a Party sufficient to maintain the King and his Regalities against the
Parliament.

In the mean time Mr. Pym at a Conferrence complaining of the General Flocking
of Papists into Ireland, affirmed, That since the Lieutenant had ordered a stop
upon the Ports against all Irish Papists, many of the Chief Commanders, now in
the head of the Rebels, had been licensed to pass thither by his Majesty's
immediate Warrant. The King was highly offended at this Speech, which he
signified to the House, who in their Answer to his Message, justify Mr. Pym's
words to be the sense of the House, and, That they had yet in safe Oustody the
Lord Delvin, Sir George Hamilton, Colonel Butler, Brother to the Lord Miniard,
now in Rebellion, and one of the Lord Nettervils Sons: To which the King
replies, That he thought Mr. Pym 's Speech was not so well grounded as it ought
to have been, and that the aforementioned persons had their Passes granted
before he knew of the Parliaments Order of Restraint; and therefore expected
their Declaration for his Vindication from thut odious calumny of conniving, or
underhand favoring that abhorred Irish Rebellion.

But this His Majesty's desire proved fruitless, for they next moved the King
to turn out Sir John Byron out of the Lieutenancy of the Tower, and at their
Nomination Sir John Conyers succeeded; they then proceeded to name fit Persons
for trust of the Militia in the several Counties, and by Act of Parliament
Disabled all Clergymen from exercising Temporal Jurisdiction: After which the
King by a Message offers them, To require by Proclamation all Statutes
concerning Popish Recusants to be put in Execution: That the seven Condemned
Popish Priests shall be Banished, and all Romish Priests within twenty days
shall depart the Kingdom; That he refers the consideration of Church Government
and Liturgy wholly to the Houses, and offers to go himself in Person against
the Rebels in Ireland.

But the Commons were now busy about a Petition for Vindicating their Five
Members, wherein they desire the King to send them the Informers against the
said Members, or otherwise to desert their Prosecution would not suffice;
because the whole Parliament was concerned in the Charge. And then they
proceeded to settle the Militia for the defense of the Parliament, Tower, and
City of London, under the Command of Sergeant Major General Skippon, who had
formerly been an Experienced Soldier in the Low Countries: The King had
deferred his Answer to their Petition for settling the Militia of the Counties,
according to their nomination, till his return from Dover, where he took leave
of his Wife and Daughter, and so returned to Greenwich; from whence he sent to
Hampton Court for his two Eldest Sons to come to him, though contrary to the
mind of the Parliament, who would have dissuaded him from it.

And now the Parliament thought fit to consider of the reducing of Ireland, and
ordered two Millilions and an half of those Acres to be Confiscate, of Rebels
Lands in Four Provinces, shall be allotted to such Persons as will disburse
Money for carrying on that War, and several other Provisions were made for
their Security, which the King confirms Feb. 26. 1641; and in pursuance thereof
a considerable Sum of Money was raised, the People being generally free in
their Contributions.

The King being now at Greenwich, sends this Answer to the Petition about the
Militia, That he is willing to condescend to all the Proposals concerning the
Militia of the Counties, and the Persons mentioned, but not of London, and
other Corporations, whose Government in that particular, he thought it neither
Justice nor Policy to alter; but would not consent to divest himself of the
Power of the County Militia for an indefinite time, but for some limited space,
This Answer did not satisfy, so that the Breach growing daily wider, the King
declined these parts and the Parliament, and removed to Theobalds, taking with
him, the Prince, and the D. of York.

About the beginning of March he receives a petition from the Parliament,
wherein they require the Militia more resolutely than before, affirming, Than
in case of denial, the imminent dangers would constrain them to dispose of it
by Authority of Parliament; desiring also that he would make his abode near
London and the Parliament, and continue the Prince at some of his Houses near
the City, for the better carrying on of Affairs and preventing the Peoples
Jealousies and Fears; All which being refused, They presently Order, That the
Kingdom be put into a posture ^f Defense in such a way as was agreed upon by
Parliament, and a Committee to prepare a public Declaration, from these two
Heads, 1. The just Causes of the Fears and Jealousies given to the Parliament,
at the same time clearing themselves from any Jealousies conceived against
himself. 2. To consider of all matters arising from his Majesty's Message, and
what was fit to be done.

And now began our Troubles, and all the Miseries of a Civil War; the
Parliament every day entertaining (or pretending to entertain) new Jealousies
and Suspicions of the Kings Actions, which howsoever in complement, they made
show of imputing only to his Evil Council, yet obliquely had had too great a
Reflection upon his Person. They now proceed on a sudden to make great
preparations both by Sea and Land; and the Earl of Northumberland, Admiral of
England, is commanded to rig the Kings Ships and fit them for Sea; and likewise
all Masters and Owners of Ships were persuaded to do the like. The Beacons were
repaired, Seamarks set up, and extraordinary posting up and down with Pacquets;
all sad Prognostics of the Calamities ensuing.

The King being now at Roysion, March 9, the Earls of Pembrook and Holland
bring him the Parliaments Declaration, and read it to him; wherein they
represent to him some former miscarriages: As the attempts to incense the late
Nor hern Army against the Parliament. The Scottish Troubles, L. Jermins Treasons
and Transportation by the Kings Warrant. The Petition delivered to Captain Leg,
with the Kings own hand, with the Direction signed C. R. The business of the
Lord Kimbolton and the five Members. The suspicious designing a Guard about his
Person, and under hand promoting the Irish Rebellion. The ordering Sir John
Pennington to land the Lord Digby beyond Sea; from thence to alienate the King
from his Parliament, and to procure Foreign Forces for his Assistance; which
now (said they) appeared more credible by reason of his removal with the
Prince, and the manifold Advertisements from Rome, Venice, Paris, and other
parts, certifying that the Popes Nuncio had solicited the Kings of France and
Spain, to lend his Majesty 4000 Men apeice in reference to some Design against
Religion and the Parliament, and lastly, They desire him to turn away his
wicked Counselors, and to rely upon his Parliament, which if he would do, they
would sacrifice their Lives, Fortunes, and utmost endeavors to the
Supportation of his Sovereignty.

After the reading of the Declaration, the Lords would have persuaded the King
to come near the the Parliament, and to grant the Militia for a time; which his
Majesty refused, and told them in short, That their Fears, and Doubts and
Jealousies were such as he would take time to satisfy the whole World of; but
that his own doubts were not Trivial, occasioned by so many Scandalous
Pamphlets, and Seditious Sermons; diverse public Tumults hitherto uninquired
into, and unpunished; and sometime after the King published a Declaration to
the People, in Answer to theirs; the sum of which was.

That he had no evil Counselors about him, but leaves such to their censure
where they should find them. That he desired the Judgments of Heaven might be
manifested upon those who had any design against the Protestant Profession.
That the Scottish Troubles were buried in perpetual silence, by the Act of
Oblivion, and passed in Parliaments of both Kingdoms. That they charging him
with any inclining to the Irish Rebels, was a high and causless injury to his
Royal Reputation. That he never intended to exasperate the late Army, or in any
wise to use them against the Parliament. That Captain Leg's Petition was
brought to him, subscribed by the Officers of the Army, desiring that the
Parliament might not be hindered from reforming the Church and State, to the
Model of Queen Elizabeth's days; and was advantageous to them: And to assure Sir
Jacob Ashly of his Opinion therein, he writ C. R. That the Lord Digby and Mr.
Jermin, neither were at White Hall, nor had any Warrant from him after the
Restraint. That he had given sufficient Answer about Kimbolton and the five
Members. That the care of his own safety caused him to raise a Guard at
White Hall, and to receive the Loyal Tender, which the Gentlemen of the Inns of
Court did make him of their Service. And that he looked upon their Foreign
Advertisements, by them mentioned, as merely wild and irrational.

The King goes further Northward, whilst the Parliament Voted the Ordinance for
Defense of the Kingdom, not to be prejudicial to the Oath of Allegiance, but to
be obeyed as the Fundamental Laws; and that the Kings Commands for Lieutenancy
over the several Counties were illegal and void; but he coming to Huntington
sends them a Message, March 15. That he intends to make his Residence at York,
and desires them to hasten their Succors for Ireland, and not upon any
pretense of Order or Ordinance (to which he is not a Party) of the Militia, or
any other thing, to Do or Execute against the Laws, which he himself was to
keep, and his Subjects to obey, declaring his Subjects not to be obliged to
obey any Act, Order, or Injunction to which he has not given consent: In
answer to which, they resolve That the absence of the King so far from his
Parliament; was destructive to the Relief of Ireland; and therefore all those
Counselors which advised him to it, are to be suspected as Favorers of that
bloody Rebellion, as likewise those who persuaded his Majesty to question or
contradict their Votes, which was a high breach of Privilege of Parliament.

March 16. The King at Stamford published a Proclamation for putting the Laws
in Execution against Popish Recusants; and from thence he goes to York, and
there March 24, Repeals his Grant for passing the Bill against Tonnage and
Poundage, of June 22 last past, commanding the payment thereof for the future,
according to the Act of the First of King James; and so this year ended.

It was now the year 1642, and the 18th of his Majesty's Reign, when a fresh
Difference arose; for the Earl of Northumberland, Admiral of England, being
indisposed, the King ordered Sir John Pennington, Vice Admiral, to take the
charge of the Summer Fleet for the Narrow Seas; but the Parliament earnestly
desired that it might be conferred upon the Earl of Warwick, but were refused
by the King to their great distaste. During the Assizes at York, the Gentry,
Ministers, and Freeholders of that County, presented a Petition to the King, to
endeavor an Agreement with the Parliament, who advises them to apply
themselves to the Parliament, for the good of all. And next day he sends a
Message to the Houses, That he intended to raise his Guard out of the Counties
near Chester, Two thousand Foot and Two hundred Horse, to be supplied with Arms
from the Magazine at Hull, upon taking the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance,
That if the Parliaments Undertaking for the Irish War, would not suffice to
defray the Charges of raising and paying them, he would pawn or sell his Land
or Houses; desiring them withal, to quicken their Levies for Munster, and
Connaught, as the Scots already did theirs of Ulster; and offers his Person
against the Rebels.

The Parliament having for some time mistrusted the Kings going North, to be
intended for seizing the Magazine at Hull, endeavored to prevent it, declaring
their suspicion of his design to raise an Army, and therefore pray, That it
might be removed from thence to the Tower of London, as a place of more safety,
and easier transport for Ireland; and that the Repreive for the popish priests
in Newgate may be recalled and they executed. And to make all sure, Sir John
Hotham, a Member of the House of Commons, is sent down to take upon him the
Government of that place, who by his sudden coming thither, prevented the Earl
of New Castle, who was designed by the King to be Governor thereof; so that
when the King came to Hull in Person, with his Guard consisting of Lords and
Gentlemen, April 23. 1642, he finds the Gates shut upon him, and the Bridges
drawn up; but from the Wall Hotham appears, and upon his knees entreats his
Majesty, Not to command that, which, without the breach of his Trust, he could
not yield obedience to.

Whereupon the King finding his entrance prevented, caused Hotham instantly to
be proclaimed Traitor; and by Letters to the Parliament, complained of that
Indignity, and required satisfaction; but they justified him therein, and sent
a Committee of the Lords and Commons to reside there, for the better securing
the Garrison to them, and gave the Governor power to raise the Trained Bands
for his defense; after which the King hearing that the Parliament had raised a
Guard of themselves without his consent; and reflecting upon the business of
Hotham, he summoned the Gentry of Yorkshire to a Meeting, and acquainted them,
That his Magazine at Hull was going to be taken from him against his will, the
Militia against the Law and his consent, put in execution, and Sir John Hothams
Treason countenanced, so that he was resolved to have a Guard to secure his
person, in which he desired their assistance, that he might be able to protect
them, the Laws, and the true Protestant Religion, from violation or injury.

The King had hereby indifferently strengthened himself, and more had come in
had not those Members of Parliament, who came to the King at York, prevailed
with some of the Freeholders to protest against it. And the Parliament
declare, That the Subjects unless bound to it by special Service, could not be
commanded to attend the King at his pleasure, without transgressing against the
Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom. And that whosoever, upon pretense of his
Majesty's Command, shall take up Arms in a warlike manner, shall be esteemed
disturbers of the peace, and to be proceeded against accordingly.

In the mean while Sir Thomas Gardener, who had been Recorder of London for six
years, being Impeached by the Parliament, and in danger of hanging, was glad to
shift for himself, and by flight escaped to the King; at which time his Majesty
endeavored to have removed the Term from London to York, but was much opposed
therein by the Parliament, who Voted it Illegal, and forbid the L. Keeper to
issue out Writs, or Seal any Proclamation to that purpose. The Parliament now
proceed to put the people into a Military posture, requiring all Persons in
Authority to put the late Ordinance of the Militia in Execution, which the King
by his Proclamation forbids; but for the Peoples satisfaction the Parliament
published a severe Declaration to the same Effect as their former Remonstrance;
only this was added, That the King at his being in Scotland had countenanced
the Irish in their Rebellious Designs, and that his connivance was manifested
by his tedious withholding the Proclamation whereby they were declared
Traitors, till Jan. 2. being almost a Quarter of a Year after the breaking out
of the Rebellion, and then had appointed but forty Copies to be printed, and
none of them to be published without his pleasure signified; whereas his
Proclamations against the Scots had been dispersed throughout all the Kingdom
with public Prayers and Execrations.

The King makes a speedy Answer hereunto, not much differing from what he had
said before; yet tells them, That as to the business of the Irish, his Council
in Ireland had desired them no sooner, nor so many Copies by twenty as he had
Signed and and sent them. His Majesty had written a Letter to his Privy Council
of Scotland, to take away from them all suspicion of those Imputations so
frequently laid to his Charge, of being Popishly affected, to be guilty of the
bloodshed in Ireland, and to bring in Foreign Forces; Wherewith they seemed so
satisfied, that they returned a most respectful Answer, and presently
interposed their Mediation to heal the Breach before it grew wider; humbly
desiring the King to hearken to his Parliament, as his greatest, his best, and
most unparalled Council; and discouraging him from any personal Journey into
Ireland. This Message was sent by the Earl of Lowden, Chancellor of Scotland,
and after this the Scots Petition to the Kings Privy Council there, Not to
meddle with any verbal or real Engagement for the King against the Parliament.
Hereupon the English Parliament publish a Protestation, wherein they vindicate
their own proceedings, and declare the great sense they had of the Affection of
their Scottish Brethren, manifested unto them in so many particulars, and more
especially the mentioned Petition.

The Earl of Bristol, an Old Experienced Statesman, prudently foresaw that such
unhappy beginings must necessarily have a very bad Issue, and therefore
earnestly endeavored an Accommodation by stating the Case in the House of
Lords; representing the Offers of the King on the one side, and the Professions
of the Parliament on the other; and likewise the dreadful Effects of a Civil
War (then likely to ensue) by the Example of the woeful Desolations in Germany,
and the expensive Troubles in Scotland; and then proposes some methods for
preventing these dangers: as 1. That a select Committee of Parliament should
truly state the matters in difference, with the most probable ways of
reconciling them. 2. To consider particularly what may be expected, either in
point of supporting the King, or releiving his People: And lastly, how the
Conditions agreed upon, may be secured. And to show the necessity of this
course, he discovers the deplorable State of Ireland, the debts and necessities
of the Crown, the distractions which were likely to produce confusion of
Religion, most dangerous and destructive to a State, besides the general
Distraction of the Subjects, who between Commands, and Countermands, knew not
whom to obey, This was admitted as good and solid Reason, but Divine Justice
would not so permit the Sins of the English Nation to go unpunished, and the L.
Bristols Speech, though well received, yet proved ineffectual.

In the mean time the Kings Guard increases at York, which the House Voted a
preparation for War against the Parliament, a Breach of the Trust reposed in
him by his People, and that all such as serve him there are Traitors to the
Laws of the Kingdom, as the 11 Rich. 2. and the 1 Hen. 3. This was followed by
another Declaration or Remonstrance of the misactions of the King, and their
own Privileges, which the King answers and they again reply to; and May 28.
the Parliament ordain, That all Sheriffs, Justices, etc. make stay of all Arms
and Ammunition going to the King at York; the King on the other side forbids
all Persons belonging to the Trained Bands or Militia of the Kingdom, to obey
any Order, or Ordinance of any of the Houses; diverse Members of both Houses
withdrew themselves to the King, as being unsatisfied with their proceedings;
whereupon the Parliament Ordered, That all such as did not make their Personal
Appearance by June 16 ensuing, should be fined an 100 pounds toward the Irish
Wars, such only excepted as were employed by the Parliament.

They likewise understood that the Queen had pawned the Crown Jewels in Holland
for Money to be transported to the King; which to prevent him of, they order,
That whoever has; or shall pay, lend, send, or bring any Money in Specie into
this Kingdom, for, or upon those Jewels; or accept of any Bill hereafter, shall
be an Enemy to the State.

June 2. The Parliament sent to the King Nineteen Proposition: 1. That all the
Kings Privy Council, great Officers, and Ministers of State, may be put out,
except such as the Parliament shall approve; and that an Oath be tendered them.
2. That all Affairs of State be managed by the Parliament, except such matters
as are transferred by them to the Privy Council, and to be concluded by the
major part of the Nobility under their hands, the full number not to exceed
twenty five, nor to be under Fifteen. If any place shall fall Void in the
interval of Parliament, then that the major part of the Council choose one to be
confirmed at the next Session of Parliament, 3. That all great Officers of the
Kingdom, shall be chosen with Approbation of Parliament. 4. That the Government
and Education of the Kings Children, be by appointment of Parliament. 5. That
their Marriages be treated and concluded by Parliament. 6. That the Laws
against Papists, Priests, and others, be executed, without Toleration or
Dispensation, except by Parliament. 7. That no Popish Lord or Peer have Vote in
Parliament; and their Children be educated in the Protestant Faith. 8. That
Church Government be reformed as the Parliament shall advise. 9. That the
Militia be settled as the Parliament have ordered, and that the King recall all
his Declarations, published against their Ordinances therein. 10. That all
Privy Counselors and Judges take an Oath for the maintenance of The Petition
of Right, and other Statutes, which shall be made this Parliament. 11. That all
Officers placed by Parliament hold their places, Quam diu been segesserint, as
long as they shall act justly. 12. That all Members of Parliament put out,
during this time, be restored again. 13. That the Justice of Parliament pass
upon all Delinquents, and that they appear or abide their censure. 14. That the
general Pardon pass with Exceptions, as the Parliament shall advise. 15. That
all Forts and Castles of this Kingdom be disposed of by Parliament. 16. That
the King discharge all his Guards and Forces now in being, and not raise any
other, but in case of actual Rebellion. 17. That the King enter into strict
Alliance with all Protestant Kingdoms and States for their Assistance, to
recover the Rights of his Sister, and her Princely Issue, to those Dignities
and Dominions which belong to them: 18. That the Lord Kimbolton and the Five
Members be cleared by Act of Parliament. 19. That no Peer hereafter to be made,
shall sit in Parliament without their consent.

These propositions were rejected by the King, as inconsistent with his
Regality: so that now Men began to despair of any good issue, for both sides
make preparations for War: The King sending out his Commissions of Array; and
the Parliament published an Order June 10. for bringing in money or plate to
maintain the Horse, Horsemen, and Arms, for the public peace and defense of
the King and both Houses of Parliament; and declared the Kings Commission to be
against the Law, Liberty and property of the Subject; and the Actors therein to
be disturbers of the peace, and Betrayers of the Subjects Liberty. At this time
the Lord keeper Littleton, having delivered the Great Seal to one Eliot, whom
the King sent for it, durst not stay behind for fear of being questioned, but
went to the King to York, as many of the Peers did likewise whom the King
summoning together, as also his Privy Council, he declares and protests to
them, That he would not Usurp any Illegal Authority over them, but is ready to
maintain them against all others that would. And that he would defend them from
all Votes and Orders of Parliament, together with the true Protestant Religion,
the lawful Liberty of the Subject, and the just Privileges of the Three
Estates of Parliament; nor will he Engage them in any War but what shall be for
the necessary defense of his and their rights; Whereupon they all engaged to
him their Duty and Allegiance in a most Solemn-Protestation, After which the
King sent Letters to Sir Rich. Gurney L. Mayor, and the Aldermen and Sheriffs
of London, forbidding them, upon peril of having their Charter questioned, to
levy Arms or raise Money, upon pretense of a Guard to the Parliament, or any
other Account, except only the relief of Ireland, or the payment of the Scotch
Subjects.

At this time the King publishes a General Declaration, wherein he descants
upon all the Parliaments Declarations for the last 7 Months, but especially the
last; professing that hence forward he expects they should break out into
disloyal Actions, declaims against their making the defense of the King, to be
the pretense for their raising Forces; protests his own constant Resolution for
the preserving of Peace, Religion, the Laws and Subjects Liberties, and expects
all his Subjects to assist him against the Traitorous Attempts of such Men as
would destroy his Person, Honor, and Estate, and bring on a Civil War;
engaging that whosoever shall bring to him Money, Ammunition, Horse, or Arms,
shall receive Eight Pound per Cent. Consideration, and have good Assurance of
both Principal and Interest, upon his Forest Lands, Parks, and Houses.

After this the King by Proclamation forbids all Levies of Forces, and all
Contributions to such Levies, without his express pleasure; grounding it upon
several Statutes as 7 Edw. 1. 2 Edw. 3. And then minds them of their Oath of
Allegiance, by which they were bound to be Faithful, not to the King only as
King, but to his Person, as King Charles, contrary to the Parliaments
distinction, betwixt his Person and his Authority; his Person at York, and his
Authority in Parliament; and concludes with justifying his Commission of Array,
which were now Issued out in several Counties in England and Wales; to this the
Parliament reply, and the King again to them, which was followed by several
Messages to and fro; all which rather exasperated than allayed the difference;
and now began England to be divided, as Italy once was into Guelphes and
Gibbellines, so they into Rovallists and Presbyterians, or Cavaleers and
Roundheads.

After this the King makes a Progress from York into the Counties of Nottingham
and Lincoln, and Summons the Gentlemen and Freeholders to Newark, he Caresses
them with the most obliging expressions imaginable. And July 11, 1642, His
Majesty sends a Message to the Parliament to Certify them of his Intentions to
reduce Hull by force, if not forthwith delivered to him, which if they should
do, he would then admit of their future Addresses, and return such Propositions
as might best conduce to prevent the approaching War; together with this
Message he sent them likewise a Copy of the Proclamation, which he had
published against Sir J. Hotham, wherein he complains of the Affront done to
his Person by Sir J. and of the Parl. justifying that Action by their Votes and
Orders; That Hotham having fortified the Town, and drowned the Country, had
also set out a Pinnace at Sea, which had intercepted his Packet Boat with the
Queens Letters, and that the E. of Warwick contrary to the Kings Command, had
taken upon him the Command of the Fleet; for which Reasons the King was
resolved to punish Hotham. Indeed the E. of W. had been by the Parl. commended
to the King as the fittest man for Admiral (the E. of N. being then sick) but
he was rejected by the King, who conferred that place upon Sir John Pennington;
Yet afterward the Parl. conceiving it necessary to get the Fleet into their
hands, they found means, notwithstanding the Oppositions of Sir J. Pennington
and his Adherents, to make the E. of W. Admiral; after which a Ship laden with
Arms and Ammunition from Holland for the King, being ignorant of the matter,
fell in among the Fleet, and was by the E. of W. sent to the Parliament.

The Parliament now thought fit to Arm, and therefore resolve that an Army
shall be raised for Defense (as they term it) of King and Parliament; and the
Earl of Essex to be Capt. General, and the E. of Bedford to command the Horse;
the E. of Holland, Sir John Holland, and Sir Will. Stapleton, were ordered to
carry a Petition to the King then at Beverly; the effect whereof was, To pray
him to disband all his Forces, to recall his Commissions of Array, dismiss his
Guard; and return to the Parliament: All which the King refused. The Parliament
next consider of raising Money, and so declare for Loan upon the Public Faith;
to promote which the endeavors of the Ministers were very serviceable, whereby
in a short time a very considerable quantity of Money, Plate, and Ammunition,
were brought in.

The King was likewise furnished with Money from the Queen upon the pawned
Jewels, and some Contributions from diverse Lords and Gentlemen, and the
University of Oxford. The King goes from Beverly to Leicester, and there
Proclaims the Earl of Stamford Traitor, for removing the County Magazine from
the Town to his own House at Bradgate. Aug. 1. the King comes back to
Yorkshire, and raises a Regiment under the E. of Cumberland, which he called
Prince Charles his Regiment.

The Parliament on the other side, declare the Commissioners of Array to be
Traitors and disturbers of the State and Peace of the Kingdom, and Lievtenants
of ^everal Counties were constituted by Parliament. The King likewise deals
with their Commanders, as ^hey did with his, and Proclaimed General Essex with
all his Colonels and Officers who should not ^nstantly lay down their Arms, to
be Rebels and Trai^ors; and the Marquess of Hartford and his Forces ^^re
ordered to march against him. The King then ^ummons in the Country on the
North side of Trent, and 20 miles Southward, and publishes his Grand
Declaration concerning all transactions between himself and the Parliament.

August 22. 1642. The King comes to Nottingham, and there erects his Standard,
to which some numbers resorted, but far short of what was expected; And three
days after the King sends a Message to the Parliament to propose a Treaty; the
Messengers were ^he Earls of Southampton and Dorset, Sir John Culpeper
Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Sir William Vdall; none of which were suffered
to sit in the House, to deliver their Errand, therefore it was sent in by the
Usher of the Black Rod, to which the Parliament Answered, That until His
Majesty shall recall his Proclamations, and Declarations of Treason against the
E. of Essex, and them, and their Adherents; And unless the Kings Standard set
up in pursuance thereof, be taken down, they cannot by the fundamental
Privileges of Parliament, give his Majesty another answer.

The King replies, that he never intended to declare the Parliament Traitors,
or set up his Standard against them; but if they resolve to Treat, either Party
shall revoke their Declarations against all Persons as Traitors, and the same
day to take down his Standard.

To this they answer, That the Differences could no^ any ways be concluded,
unless he would forsake hi^ evil Counselors, and return to his Parliament; And
accordingly Sept. 6. they Order and Declare, tha^ the Arms which they have, or
shall take up for the Parliament, Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom,
shall not be laid down until the King withdraw his Protection from such
persons as are or shall be Voted Delinquents, and shall leave them to Justice
that so their Estates may discharge the Debts and Loan Moneys of the
Commonwealth.

The War being now begun, the new raised Soldiers committed many Outrages upon
the Country People, which both King and Parliament upon Complaint endeavored
to rectify: The King himself was now Generalissimo over his own, his Captain
General was first the Marquess of Hartford, and afterward the E. of Lindsey,
and the E. of Essex for the Parliamentarians; The Kings Forces received the
first repulse at Hull by Sir John Hotham, and Sir John Meldrum, and the King
takes up his Quarters at Shrewsbury; Portsmouth was next surrendered to the
Parliament, and presently after Sir John Byron takes Worcester for the King; In
September the two Prince Palatines, Rupert and Maurice arrived in England, who
were presently entertained, and put into Command by the King; who having now
got together a potent Army, he made a solemn Protestation to them of his candid
Intentions, and sincere meaning, to defend the Protestant Religion, the Laws
and Liberties of the Subject, and Privileges of Parliament, according to the
former protestation at York.

Sept. 9. the Earl of Essex in great State attended on by the Parliament set
forth out of London toward St. Albans, and from thence to Northampton, where
all his Forces met, amounting to near fourteen thousand men, having with him
the Parliaments Petition which he was to present to the King, the effect of
which was,

That his Loyal Subjects the Lords and Commons in Parliament, cannot without
tenderness of Compassion behold the pressing Calamities of England, and
Ireland, by the Practices of a prevailing Party with his Majesty, to alter true
Religion, and the Ancient Government of this Kingdom, introducing Superstition
into the Churches, and Confusion in the State; Exciting, encouraging, and
fostering the Rebellion in Ireland, and as there, so here begin the like
Massacres; by drawing on a War against the Parliament, leading his Person
against them, as if by Conquest to establish an unlimited Power over the
People, seeking to bring over the Rebels of Ireland to join with them: And all
these evil Counselors are Defended and protected against the Justice of the
Parliament, who have for their just Defense of Religion, the Kings Crown and
Dignity, the Laws, Liberties and Power of Parliaments, taken up Arms, and
Authorized the E. of Essex to be their Captain General against these Rebels and
Traitors. And pray the King to withdraw his Person, and leave them to be
suppressed by his Power, and to return to his Parliament, and that they will
receive him with Honor, and yield him Obedience, secure his Person, and
establish him and his People with all the Blessings of a Glorious and Happy
Reign.

This Petition was never delivered, though Essex sent twice to the King for
safe conduct for those who were to present it; for the King refused to receive
any Address from those whom he accused of High Treason, of whom the E. of Essex
was one: The King then marches from Shrewsbury toward London, upon which the
Parliament ordered the Forces of the Associated Counties of Essex, Hartford,
Middlesex and London to be ready at an hours warning* They likewise order that
the Lands, Rents and Profits of Archbishops and Bishops, shall be Sequestered,
as likewise the Kings Fines about Wards.

A while after Colonel Fines and Sands were routed at Worcester by Prince
Rupert, while they endeavored to take the Town from Sir John Byron, who had it
in possession for the King; but Essex making his approach with his Army, Prince
Rupert and Byron quitted the Town to him; then were Gloucester, Bristol and
other places made Garrisons for the Parliament; But in Yorkshire and Cornwall
the Kings Party grew powerful, and likewise in Wales; where the E. of
Worcester had got together a great number of Welchmen, so that the King seeing
his Army increased, resolved to march toward London, and was gotten one days
Journey before Essex; who perceiving his Error of staying so long at Worcester,
hastens after him, to the relief of his Masters; the King disdaining to be
pursued by a Subject, turns back to mere him, and October 23. 1642. both
Parties drew into the Field between Keinton and Edghill in Warwickshire, where
on both sides were slain between five and 6000. men that day, but night parting
them, the next day both parties quit the Field; the King then marches to
Coventry, and from thence sends a Proclamation of Pardon to the Cities of
London and Westminster, some Persons only excepted. This Battle of Edgehill
was fought on Sunday, the same day twelve Month the Irish Rebellion brake out.

The King then takes in Banbury, the Town and Castle being surrendered without a
blow, and two Regiments of Foot, and a Troop of Horse, took Arms under him;
from thence the King marches to Oxford; and Essex goes to London, where he was
received with great Honor; The Parliament to recruit their Army, declare; That
all Apprentices who will List themselves, shall be free from their Masters for
that time, and shall afterward be received again into service: By which means
abundance were induced to turn Soldiers; they likewise invite the Scots to
come in to their assistance; which the King by a Letter to the Lords of the
Privy Council in Scotland endeavors to prevent, but in vain: At this time
several of the Lords and Commons present a Petition to the King at Colebrook,
to desire him to appoint a place to treat in: To which he answered; He would
expect them at his Castle of Windsor, and desires them to hasten the Treaty.

At the same time, the King hearing that Essex had drawn his Forces and
Ordnance out of London toward him, and that unless he gained Brainford he would
be hemmed in by the Parliaments Army, who possessed most of the Towns round
about him; the King marches thither that night, where part of Col. Hollis's
Regiment that quartered there, made a stout resistance, till the L. Brooks's
and Coll. Hamdens Regiments came in to their relief, who maintained the Fight
till night, and then retreated out of Town, which the King presently took
possession of, with some Prisoners, Arms and Ammunition, 11 Colors, and 15
pieces of Ordnance: Essex hearing this, soon came thither, followed with the
City Militia and Trained Bands, which together made a formidable Army, so that
the King thought fit to march back again to Oxford; This Action in a time of
Treaty, (though not without sufficient ground) was so ill resented by the
Houses, that they Voted to have no Accommodation: Yet afterward upon
consideration, they again Petition him to desert his Army, and return to his
Parliament, but with the same success as formerly.

At this time a Letter from one of the Kings Agents in Holland was intercepted,
in which he is advertised of considerable Forces ready to be sent over for his
Service; from Denmark likewise Arms are sent for ten thousand Foot, and 2500
Horse, with a Train of Artillery, and every thing proportionable, even to the
Drums and Halberts. In Yorkshire the Earl of Newcastle had a sharp rencounter
at Tadcaster with the L. Fairfax, and forced him to retreat: The Counties of
Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Hartford, Cambridge, the Isle of Ely, and the City of
Norwich, are authorized by Parliament to associate under the L. Gray of Wark,
and Winchester and Chester are gained by the Paliament.

Dec. 15. Colonel Goring with the Kings Standard, 80 Old Commanders, and store
of Warlike Provision, join with the E. of Newcastle. About which time the City
of London Petitioned the King, and profess their grief, for his distrust of
their Loyalty, with large Protestations of their zealous Intentions to defend
him, with all the Love and Duty which became good Subjects. The King replies,
That he has a good Opinion of many of them, and could freely and willingly
Pardon all except Pennington the present Mayor, Venn, and some others; and
concludes with declaring his high displeasure against such as shall continue
acting, and assisting his Adversaries: Many of them were startled with this
Answer, yet were revived again with what Mr. Pryn and the Parliament Committee
told their Common Council, of the Parliaments great Love and Affection to them,
and Resolution to live and dye in their Defense.

In the North Sir. Hugh. Cholmly encounters with several Parties of the Kings
Horse at Malton, and Jan. 16. joining with Sir. Matthew Boynton, routed a Party
of 600 Horse and Foot under, Col. Slingsby, Sir. Thomas Fairfax. likewise
take, Leeds with little loss on his side, but 500 Royallists were made
Prisoners, (six of them Commanders) 4 Colors, and much Arms and Ammunition
were taken; The Kings Forces next leave Wakefield and Doncaster, which are
presently garrisoned for the Parliament. The E. of Newcastle brings his Forces
to York, to prepare for entertaining the Queen; and Jan. 17. he proclaims the
L. Fairfax, and his Son Sir Thomas, Traitors, (as the E. of Cumberland had done
before) which the Parliament resenting, proclaimed the L. Newcastle the same.

The Parliament, Febr. 1. make the following Prepositions to the King at Oxford
(which were presented by the Earls of Northumberland, Salisbury, Pembrook, and
Holland, with 8. of the House of Commons.) To disband his Army, and to return
home to his Parliament; To leave all Delinquents to Trial, and all Papists to
be disarmed: To pass an Act for Abolishing the present Church Governors, and
such other Bills as shall be prepared in order to a Reformation; All Popish
Recusants to abjure and renounce Popery; All Malignant Counselors to be
removed, the Militia to be settled according to the Parliaments minds; such
Persons to be preferred to Great Offices and Places of Judicature, as the
Parliament shall name, and all such Justices of Peace as have been lately
turned out of Commission to be again taken in; That an Act pass to Vindicate
the L. Kimbolton, and the 5 Members. And an Alliance be entered into with our
Protestant Neighbors for Recovery of the Palatinate, That a General Pardon
pass, with exception to the E. of Newcastle, L. Digby, and some others; That
such Members of Parliament as have been displaced, be restored to Offices and
Places, and satisfaction made them for their Losses.

On the other side, the King Proposed, That his own Revenue, Magazines, Towns,
Ships, and Forts be restored: That what has been done contrary to Law, and the
King Rights, may be renounced, and recalled: That all Illegal Power claimed, or
acted by any Orders of Parliament, be disclaimed; And as the King will readily
consent to the Execution of all Laws made or to be made concerning Popery, and
Reformation, so he desires a Bill for the preserving the Book of Common Prayer
against Sectaries; And that all Persons excepted against in the Treaty, may be
Tried per Pares by the Equals: That there be a Cessation of Arms, and a Free
Trade.

This made way for a Treaty of Peace, but little was done in it till March 4.
1642. when Sir Ben. Rudyard one of the Commons, told the Parliament plainly,
That the War would ruin all; whereupon they appointed Commissioners, that is,
the E. of Northumberland, Mr. Perpoints, Sir. William Ermine, Sir John Holland,
and Mr. Whitlock, who were to attend the King at Oxford.

Feb. 23. 1642. The Queen landed at Burlington Key, with Officers, Ammunition
and Money from Holland, from whence the E. of Montross, and the Lord Ogilby
conveyed her to York, where she was honorably received by the Earls of
Cumberland and Newcastle, and there she began to form her Army. In the mean
time Coll. Massey advances against Capt. Bridges, who kept Sudly Castle in
Glocestershire, with 60 Soldiers, and all other things sufficient, for the L.
Shandois on the Kings behalf; Coll. Massy offers to storm the Castle, but is
repulsed, yet next day he possessed the Garden under the Castle, and firing
some hay and straw, made so great a smother in the House, that taking the
opportunity thereof, he planted his great Guns so conveniently as forced the
Besieged to surrender upon Quarter, leaving their Arms, and engaging to pay 500
pounds in six days for the goods in the Castle, or else to lose them.

Yet had the Parliament no great cause of boasting of this Victory; For soon
after P. Rupert with 4000 Horse and Foot, making show to regain it, marches to
Cirencester, where the strength and great part of the Magazine of the County
lay, and Feb. 1. he masters the Gaurd, and forces his Passage into the Town,
which in two hours he gained, taking 1100 Prisoners, and 2000 Arms; And next
day he summons Gloucester, which Coll. Massey was resolved to defend, and to
strengthen it, deserts Sudly Castle and other our Garrisons.

The Earl of Worcester and his son the L. Herbert had now raised an Army of
near 1500 Welchmen for the King, with whom he marched to the Forest of Dean,
and beat Coll. Bourroughs Regiment out of a small Town called Coford near
Monmoth; from thence they march to Hingham within 2 miles of Gloucester, and
Coll. Bret, demands the Town for the King, but was answered with scorn; for
Massey with assistance from Capt. Fines at Bristol, weakened them with continual
Shirmishes, till Sir William Waller having taking Malmsbury came to Gloucester,
and joined his Forces with the other, so that this Welsh Army spent near five
weeks without doing any Memorable Action.

But now Coll. Massey draws out all his Horse, with 500 Foot, and some
Ordnance, and held them play the first day; the next morning the great. Guns
give the Alarm, and both Parties engage very fiercely, and the Welsh were like
to have routed him, and taken his Ordnance, at which instant Sir William Waller
comes in to Masseys assistance, who taking courage thereby they run furiously
upon the Welchmen, and drive them back to Hingham house, which they began
presently to batter with their Cannon; whereupon the Welsh found a Parley, and
surrender the Place, and themselves Prisoners, but the Officers were to receive
Quarter according to their Qualities; and next day Waller and Massey led their
booty in Triumph to Gloucester.

The assistance of the Scots had been formerly desired by the Parliament, which
(notwithstanding their late Protestations not to take Arms against their
Prince,) they now hearken to, and having completed their Army, March 13. 1641.
they cross the River Tyne, and march Southward, to employ the E. of Newcastle.

The Irish Rebels about this time (notwithstanding the defeats they met with at
Tredagh and Dundalk) were much increased in number; And the the Pope (a more
unhappy Fisher, than his pretended Predecessor St. Peter, who was for saving,
but he for destroying men) sends two Letters to them, one subscribed to Owen
Oneal, and the other to all Archbishops, Bishops, Nobles and People of the
Kingdom of Ireland, in both which he commends those who had already appeared in
the Quarrel, and exhorts others to engage in the same, declaring his great Joy
for their late Butcheries, and Massacres upon the Protestants, and bestowing
upon them his Fatherly Benediction, and Plenary Pardon and Absolution for
whatever Villainies they had committed. By the Popes thus publicly declaring
himself for them, the Rebels grew very powerful, and many who were at first
afraid of being concerned, now openly appeared for them, insomuch that all
parts of Ireland were overwhelmed by them as with an Innundation.

This year was remarkable for the death of Cardinal Richlieu that great
Firebrand and disturber of Europe, but more pertcularly these three Kingdoms,
of whose distractions he was both a Principal causer, and Fomenter; He led the
way to his Master Lewis 13. who deceased soon after in the midst of his
Conquests in Catalonia, leaving for his successer his eldest son Lewis 14. (the
present French King) under the Government of the Queen Dowager, and Cardinal
Mazarine succeeded in Richlieus stead.

The year 1643. and the nineteenth of his Majesty's Reign, began with a Treaty
of Peace, which was formerly agreed on, but proceeded slowly, till it was again
revived by Sir Ben. Rudyard; The Commissioners on both parties now met at
Oxford, and began to Treat of the Kings Propositions, concerning his Revenue,
Magazines, Forts, and Ships; And the Parliaments Propositions concerning the
disbanding of Armies, which particulars taking up more time than the King
expected, his Majesty April 12. 1643. sends this Message to the Parliament.

That as soon as he was satisfied concerning his own Revenue, Magazines, Ships
and Forces, in which he desired nothing but his Just and Legal known Rights to
be restored to him, and to Persons Trusted by him; And as soon as the Members
of both Houses should be restored to the same capacity of sitting and Voting in
Parliament as they had upon January 1. 1641. (excluding such whose Votes had
been taken away by Bill, or by New Elections, or New Writts:) And that as soon
as his Majesty and both Houses may be secured from such Tumultuous Assemblies
as to the High dishonor of the Parliament had awed the Members of the same (
which he conceived could not otherwise be done, but by adjourning the
Parliament to some place Twenty miles from London, such as the Houses should
agree upon,) His Majesty most cheerfully and readily would consent to the
disbanding of the Armies, and would return speedily to his Two Houses of
Parliament according to the Time and Place which they should agree upon.

Upon this Message the Parliament resolved to call back their Commissioners,
and so April 15. the Treaty ended; About the beginning of last March the L.
Brook marched toward Northampton, and seizing the Ammunition there he went from
thence to Warwick, and so to Stratford upon Avon, and beat Coll. Crockers, and
Lt. Coll Wagstaff's Forces out of that Town; after which Besiegeing Litchfield,
one of the Kings Party shooting at a venture at the window of his Chamber, the
bullet pierced him in the Eye, of which he immediately dyed, yet his Soldiers
being heightened with Revenge, took the Close with the E. of Chesterfield and
all his Soldiers and Ordnance; after which Prince Rupert and the Earl of
Northampton joining their Forces, fell upon the Parliamentarians at Lichfield,
where the E. of Northampton was slain in the head of his Troop, yet Lieut.
Coll. Russel who commanded it, despairing of succor, yielded up the Place to
Prince Rupert upon Honorable Conditions, and marched away to Coventry.

April 17. 1643. the E. of Essex sat down before Reading, and made two
assaults, but was repulsed; The King marched from Oxford to Wallingford for its
relief, but Essexes Army increasing daily with fresh supplies from London, both
Parties happened to Skirmish at Causum Bridge, where many of the Kings Forces
were slain, and forced to retreat; whereupon the Town was a while after
surrendered by Coll. Fielding, who was made Deputy Governor in the room of Sir
Arthur Aston who was disabled by a bruise he received in his head with a
Brickbat: Fielding was for this Sentenced by a Council of War at Oxford to lose
his Head, but by the Intercession of Friends was pardoned.

May 3. Cheapside Cross was demolished a Troop of Horse, and two Companies of
Foot waiting to see it done, and at the fall of the Top Cross, Drums beat,
Trumpets blew, and a great shout was made; Charing Cross, and all other Crosses
in and about London were likewise pulled down about the same time.

In the mean time the breach between the King and Parliament became wider than
ever; so that they proceeded to draw up Articles of High Treason against the
Queen, some of which were; That she had pawned the Crown Jewels in Holland,
That she had favored the the Rebellion in Ireland, That she had endeavored to
raise a Party in Scotland against the Parliament, and that she had gone in the
head of a Popish Army in England; Several other Articles were framed against
her, upon which Mr. Pym carried up an Impeachment to the Lords, who seemed at
first surprised therewith, but they afterward agreed to the Charge.

The Queen had about this time raised an indifferent Army of Horse and Foot,
and leaving some Horse and Foot with Sir Charles Cavendish for defense of
Lincolnshire, and Nottingham-shire, she with 3000 foot, three Companies of
Horse and Foot, six Canons, and two Mortar pieces, met the King at Edgehill,
and goes from thence with him to Oxford.

Several Encounters happened in the West between Sir Ralph Hopton for the King,
and Sir G. Chudleigh then Commander of the Parliaments Forces, where sometimes
one Party was Victorious, and then the other; Colonel Nath. Fines Governout of
Bristoll, about this time discovered a design of Robert Yeomans, and George
Bouchier to deliver up that City to the Kings Forces, upon which they were
Condemned by Council of War, and hanged May 30 notwithstanding the Kings Letter
to the Mayor and Citizens, and General Ruthens to the Governor on their
behalf; And so ends this month, famous by the Death of Mr. John Pym that active
Person in the House of Commons.

In June 1643. Mr. Waller a Member of the House of Commons, Mr. Tomkins, Mr.
Challoner, Mr. Hasel, Mr. Blinkhorn, Mr. White and others, were Arraigned at
Guild Hall London, they being charged, For designing to seize into their
Custody the Kings Children, some Members of Parliament, the L. Mayor, and
Committee of the Militia, all the Cities Outworks, and Forts, the Tower of
London, and all the Magazines, and then to let in the Kings Forces to surprise
the City. Upon this Indictment they were Tried, and Condemned, but Tomkins and
Challoner only were hanged.

Some Skirmishes passed between the E. of Essex and P. Rupert, who engaging
about Tame in Oxfordshire, The Prince routed a body of Horse in Chalgrave
Field, where Mr. John Hambden recieved his mortal wounds; but in the West the
Parliaments Forces had better success, where they took in the Towns of Taunton
and Bridgewater; At this time finding the want of a Great Seal, the Parliament
after long debates Voted, That a new Seal should be made for Confirmation of
their Acts and Ordinances; which was forthwith done, and thereon was Engraven
the Picture of the House of Commons and Members sitting, and on the other side
the Arms of England and Ireland; but between the Voting and making this Seal,
they passed this Order, That if the L. Keeper Littleton upon Summons did not
return with the great Seal within fourteen days, he should lose his Place, and
whatsoever should be Sealed therewith by him after that time, should be null
and void in Law; And presently after Mr. Hen. Martin a Member of Parliament
seized upon the Regalia which were reposited in Westminster Abbey; telling some
of his Accomplices, That the time would come wherein there would be no need of
Crowns and Scepters.

July 5. 1643. Sir Will. Waller meets with Sir Ralph Hopton's Forces at
Landsdown near Bath, who though fewer than Sir Williams, yet maintained the
fight from two in the afternoon till one the next morning; and then Sir
Williams Party forsook the Field; Hopton himself was hurt, and lost diverse
Gentlemen of note, but the Parliaments loss was more; Hopton marches to the
Devizes in Wilt-shire, and Waller after him; whereupon the King sent 1500 Horse
from Oxford to Hoptons relief; Waller draws off to Roundway Down, and there the
Fight began, in which the Parliamentarians were defeated and fled, leaving the
Foot to the mercy of their Adversaries, by whom hundreds of them were Slain,
and more taken, with four brass Guns, Ammunition and Baggage, 28 Colors, and 9
Cornets; Waller having thus lost his Army, posts to London with a few followers
for Recruits. This Fight happened July 13.

Some difference arising in the North between L. Fairfax General for the
Parliament, and Sir John Hotham Governor of Hull, who refused to submit to the
L. Fairfax; the Parliament designed to displace Hotham, which he discovering by
an intercepted Letter, began to project new designs, and his Son Capt. Hotham
being suspected by the Parliament was imprisoned at Nottingham, but made his
escape and underhand Treated with the E. of Newcastle; Upon which Orders were
sent for seizing both Father and Son, which was done accordingly, together with
his wife, and the rest of his Children, who were all sent up Prisoners to the
Parliament; and some Months after Sir John and his Son were brought to Trial in
Guild Hall, the E. of Manchester and others being assigned their Judges; and
the Father is charged, That he had Traitorously betrayed the Trust reposed in
him by the Parliament, and adhered to the Enemy, as appeared by his Words, by
his Letters, and by his Actions, and that he held correspondence with the
Queen, the E. of Newcastle, L. Digby, and others of that Party, and had
endeavored to betray Hull to them. His Son was charged with things of the same
nature; upon which they were both Sentenced to be Beheaded, which was
accordingly Executed, the Son Jan. 1. 1644. and the Father, the next day after.

But to return; July 4. 1643. P. Rupert sits down before Bristoll, and though
Coll. Fines had formerly hanged up some Citizens for intending to have
delivered up the Town to the Prince, yet nevertheless the design took effect,
for being at that time very ill provided for resistance, (which P. Rupert had
notice of from his Correspondents within) the Governor was constrained after 3
days Siege, to surrender it to him.

Aug. 12. the E. of Lindsey being freed from his imprisonment wherein he was
since Edgehill fight, came to the King at Oxford; and soon after P. Maurice
besieged Exeter, flinging in Grenades and firing part of the Suburbs, upon
which a fruitless Parley ensued; the next day the Prince masters the Great
Sconce, and turns the great Guns thereon upon the City, and then the Garrison
agreed to yield, the Officers only to part with their Swords, and the private
Soldiers to march out with Cudgels in their hands. At this time Judge Berkley
who had been imprisoned by the Parliament about Shipmoney, was fined Twenty
thousand pound, made incapable of all Offices, and to continue a Prisoner
during pleasure.

The Parliament were now busied for recruiting Sir William Waller's Army, and
to incline the Londoners to a more cheerful compliance, Pennington the L.
Mayor was made Lieutenant of the Tower; yet Waller was forced to stay because
Essex his Army wanted likewise Reinforcement; Essex musters ten thousand men at
Hounslow Heath; but this would not serve for so weighty an Affair as the relief
of Gloucester, now besieged by the King, and he must therefore make use of the
London Trained Bands.

Gloucester was the place which stopped the current of the Kings successes; Massey
was Governor thereof, and had with him two Regiments of Foot, and an 100
Horse, which with some other Recruits made up 1500 men, with forty Barels of
Powder, and a slender Artillery; yet they within behaved themselves like men of
Resolution, and Allarum'd the Besiegers with frequent Sallies; The King plants
his Cannon against the Gates, which made above 150 shot, and the Grenades did
some Execution in the Town, yet nothing abated the Spirits of the People.
Whereupon the King prepares for a General Storm, and all was ready, they within
being in want and having but three Barrels of Powder left, when news comes that
Essex was on his March with a powerful Army to raise the Siege; whereupon
after consultation had by the King with the General Officers, it was resolved,
the Kings Army should draw off, which was done, and all their Hutts were set on
fire, and Sept. 5. 1643. Essex enters into Gloucester, and having furnished the
City plentifully with provisions, went after the King, who at that Siege lost
that opportunity of marching up to London (the Parliament having then no
considerable Army in the Field) which he could never regain.

The War had hitherto continued in Ireland, and the English Army had commonly
success against the Rebels, but the King now understanding the Parliaments
contracting with the Scots for aid; thought fit to strengthen himself by
recalling part of his Army there, hither; and commissionated the E. of Ormond
his Lieut. General, to agree on a cessation for a year, which was concluded at
Singeston, and Sept. 18. 1643. was proclaimed by the Lords Justices and Council
at Dublin; and soon after some Forces from thence landed in Wales, and took
Hawerden Castle near Chester for the King.

The E. of Essex having relieved Gloucester, speeds after the King, and passing
by Cirencester left a strong Party there, where P. Maurice was expected that
night; but instead of him, comes Essex, and being mistaken for the other,
enters the Town without any Opposition, seizes 400 men, and 30 Cart loads of
Provision, and then marches to Newberry where the King was before, and had
gotten the advantage of the Ground, and planted his Ordnance; Early in the
morning, Sept. 20. 1643. Essex views the Kings Army, and in Newberry Common
draws up his own, and falls to firing, the Kings Army doing the like; That part
of the Army which P. Rupert charged, being overlay'd, were forced to fall off
on the Right hand, where two Great Bodies of Horse marched down the Hill, and
fell in furiously upon the Prince; both sides acting with great valor and
fury, and coming to handy-strokes with their Swords.

The Essexians then wheeling about charged the L. Jermins Regiment, whom they
forced to make their escape through some Bodies of Foot; this Battle caused
great loss and bloodshed on either side, but greater on the Kings, whose other
Bodies of Horse commanded by the Earls of Carnarvan, and Northampton,
notwithstanding the great courage of their Commanders were overpowered, and the
Earls of Carnarvan and Sunderland, Viscount Falkland and many other Officers
and Gentlemen slain; The London Trained Bunds and Auxiliaries did the
Parliament great service in this Fight; Night coming on, both Armies retired,
and next day marched away from each other.

After this, several Places were Garrisoned for the King by Sir William
Vavasor, as Tewksbury, Shudley Castle and other places in Gloucestershire, and
soon after Waller again surpriseth Tewksbury, but is afterward beaten by P.
Maurice. Massey and Waller take Hereford, and Sir William Brereton had the Town
and Castle of Eccleshall delivered upon reasonable Quarter. An Ordinance is now
published by the Parlirment to seize upon the Kings Revenue; And Sir William
Waller is made Major General of Hampshire, Sussex, Surrey, and Kent, and
marching to Farnham beat a Party of the Kings Army, and then took Aulton and
Arundell, Casile; Colonel Nerton was routed by Hopton; and the Paliament
finding the Kings Power increase, they publish, That whoever shall assist the
King with Horse, Arms, Plate or Money against them, are Traitors to the
Paliament, and shall be so preceeded against. The King summons a Parliament at
Oxford, Jan. 22. 1643. where in the great Hall at Christ-Church he tell; them,
That if he had the least Thoughts of disagreeing with the happiness of this
Kingdom, he would not advise with such Counselors as they were; And so the
upper Schools were assigned to the Lords, and the Convocation House to the
Commons. In this Parliament, besides the Prince, D. of York, L. Keeper
Littleton, Treasurer Cottington, D. of Richmond, and Marquess of Hartford,
there were 19 Earls and as many Lords, and 117 Knights and Gentlemen, and
afterward 5 Lords and 23 Gentlemen more came to them; The first thing they
fell upon, was to consider of means for effecting a Peace, to which end a
Letter was written to the E. of Essex, and subsigned by all their hands, who
returned no answer, but sent it to the Parliament at Westminster.

Jan. 16. 1643. The Scots Army entered England by the way of Newcastle, being
18000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, under Genesis Levens; For assisting the Parliament in
pursuance of the Solemn League and Covenant, and declaring the Justness of
their Cause, which they profess to be Reformation of Religion, Honor of the
King, and Peace of the Kingdoms; and that the main end of their coming is to
rescue the King from his pernicious Counselors. The Parliament caresse the
Scots Army, and empower them to assess for themselves the Twentieth part of all
Malignants Estates (as they called them) in the North, besides what other
Counties were assessed for them. But the E. of Newcastle is marching to give
them rougher entertainment, and the L. Fairfax sent his Son Sir Thomas against
him.

Sir John M^ldrum with 700 men besieged Newarks and is blockt up by Prince
Rupert, whereupon they parleyed, and upon Articles were suffered to march away,
leaving their Match, Bullet, Powder, Cannon and all other Firearms behind
them. In the mean time Matters are preparing for Scotland by James Marquss of
Montro's who had formerly sided with the Covenanters, but now the King
understanding he had really forsaken them, gives him a Commission to be General
Governor of Scotland, and orders him Forces to go into the heart of that
Kingdom, for a diversion to the Scots.

In the year 1644. the Twentieth of his Majesty's Reign, Sir. Will. Waller
defeats the L. Hoptons Forces and takes Winchester, and Oliver Cromwell was
made Governor of Ely; Beudly is surprised by Coll. Fox for the Parliament, and
the Garrisons of Selby and Heintough are taken by the L. Fairfax and his Son,
Prince Rupert raises the siege at Latham House. The King at this time in the
presence of the Peers at Oxford received the Sacrament at Christ's Church at the
hands of Bishop Usher, where he used these solemn Protestations:

My Lords, I espy here many resolved Protestants, who declare to the world the
Resolution I do now make; I have to the utmost of my power prepared my Soul to
become a worthy Receiver, and may I so receive comfort by the Blessed
Sacrament, as I do intend the establishment of the True Reformed Protestant
Religion, as it stood in its beauty in the happy days of Q. Elizabeth, without
any connivance at Popery; I bless God that in the midst of these Public
Distractions I have still Liberty to communicate, and may this Sacrament be my
damnation if my heart do not join with my lips in this Protestation.

The Parliament at Westminster Voted it Treason for any Member, or Member of
either House to desert them, and to go to the King, and they never to be
received again. The King marches out of Oxford, and i^ followed by Essex and
Waller, he defeats Waller at Cropredy-Bridge, and Essex is blockt up by the
Kings Forces in Cornwall, and July 4th. the King sends several Letters to the
Parliament about a Treaty of Peace. Sept. 12. the Parliament at Oxford Assemble
again but falling into Factions and Divisions the King in March following
Dissolves them.

The Earl of Newcastle was besieged in York about two months, to whose relief
Prince Rupert advances Northward with a great Power of Horse and Foot, upon
whose approach to the City the Beseigers drew off, and those within sally out
upon their Rear; the E. of Newcastle being thus relieved, joins with P. Rupert,
resolving to follow the Parliamentarians and give them battle, which
accordingly they did upon a Plain called Marston-Moor, where about 9000 men
were slain, for the Royalists having near routed the Parliaments Army, pursued
the Chase so far, that the Victory was snatched out of their hands, and the
Parliament obtained an entire Victory, after 3 hours Fight resolutely
maintained on both sides: After which York was delivered up to the Parliament,
and they soon became Masters of all the North, and Levens the Scotch General
takes Newcastle; After, this Battle which was the greatest both for the
fierceness of it, and for the number of Soldiers on both sides, P. Rupert goes
into Lancashire, but the E. of Neweastle lately made Marquess, with his two
Sons, and his brother Sir Charles Cavendish, General King, the Lord
Falconbridge, the Lord Widdrington, the Earl of Cranworth, the Bishop of
Londonderry, Sir Edward Widdrington, Coll. Carnaby, Col. Basset, Col. Mouson,
Sir. William Vavasor, Sir Francis Mackworth with about eighty other persons,
upon some discontent, refused to engage any further in the Kings Cause, and
went over to Hamburgh.

New Levies are now made by the Parliament and (...) Attempts were made by the
Parliamentarians upon Dennington Castle, but in vain; The Queen go^ng from
Oxford to Exeter was there delivered of a daughter, June 16 1644. who was
called Henrietta Maria, and afterward went from thence to Penden^is, Castle in
Cornwall where she embarked for France, and did not return again to England,
till His present Majesty's Happy Restoration in 1660. Banbury Castle is
relieved by Sir William Compton, having been besieged about 11 weeks by the
Par^iamens Forces; Coll. Mine is defeated by Massy near Gloucester, and himself
slain, and about 170 Officers and Soldiers taken Prisoners; Prince Rupert
sending 500 Horse and Foot to fortify Beachly, in order to his going to
Ashferry, they are routed by Massey, who soon after takes Monmouth Town.

Newberry seemed to be a Place destined for Martial exploits, for October 27.
another great Battle was fought there, between the Kings party and the
Parliaments, under Essex, Waller, and Manchester, wherein the Royalists were
worsted, and between 4 and 5000 men slain on both sides; November. 19. Monmouth
is retaken by the Kings Forces; December. 23. Sir. Alexander Carew was beheaded
for endeavoring to deliver up the Island of Plymouth to the Kings Forces.

Two Principal Irish Rebels, the L. Macguire, and Mac-mahon had been sent from
Ireland, and imprisoned in the Tower, from whence they made their escape, but
being retaken, and Tried, were found guilty of High Treason, and were both
Drawn, Hanged and Quartered at Tyburn, though Macguire pleaded his Privilege
to the Lords, as a Peer of Ireland.

Archbishop Laud having been accused by the Parliament in 1640. as the framer
of the Canons (...) Convocation, and other Delinquencies, and the Scots joining
him and the E. of Strafford in the Grand Accusation, charging him for obtruding
the Common Prayer Book, and Canons and Constitution Ecclesiastical upon their
Nation, and for advising the King to dissolve the last Parliament, and other
su^^ matters, upon which he was first committed to the black Rod, and 10 weeks
after Voted Guilty of Hig^ Treason, and sent to the Tower, where he continue^ 4
years; his Charge was, endeavoring the subversi^^ 1. Of the Laws, 2. Of
Religion, 3. Of the Priviledg^ of Parliament; And after many times attending on
the House, Jan. 4. 1644. they passed their Ordinance o^ Parliament. That he
should be drawn, hanged and quartered; but upon his Petition, They voted him to
be beheaded, which he suffered Jan. 10. after.

Jan. 30. a Treaty was begun at Vxbridge between the King and Parliament, but
took no effect: Basing House was relieved by the Kings Forces, against which
Sir William Waller had lost above 1000 men; About this time the E. of Essex was
cashiered ou^ of his Command, and Sir. Tho. Fairfax was Voted General of the
Parliaments Forces; Col. Rossiter wa^ defeated by Sir Marm. Langdale and the
Kings party.

In April 1645. Colonel Massey defeated by Prince Rupert at Ledbury, and
Blechington House delivered to the Parliament. In May, Oxford was besieged the
first time, and Leicester taken by the King: In June, Leicester regained by the
Parliament; Carlisle after 41 weeks siege delivered by Sir T. Glenham to the
Scots.

June 14. 1645. was fought that unfortunate Battle at Naseby, which proved so
fatal to the King and his Cause: This fight was exceeding bloody, both Armies
being very courageous and numerous, there not being above 500 odds: On the
Parliaments side ^ere slain and wounded above 1000 Officers and ^rivate
Soldiers; but much more was the loss on (...) the Kings side, there being
taken 6 Colonels, 8 ^ieutenant Colonels, 18 Majors, 70 Captains, 8
Lieu^^nants, 200 Enfigns and other inferior Officers, 4500 ^ommon Soldiers,
many Women, 13 of the Kings ^oushold Servants, 4 Footmen, 12 pieces of
Ordinance, ^000 Arms, 48 Barrels of Powder, 200 Carriages, all their Bag and
Baggage, with store of rich Pillage, ^000 Horse, the Kings Standard, and one of
his ^oaches, and his Cabinet of Letters and Papers, which were afterward
published, so that it proved a com^leat Victory to the Parliamentarians.

In July, the Kings Forces were defeated at Lang^ort, about 200 slain, and 1400
Prisoners: Pomfret Castle, Bridgwater, Scarborough, and Bath, deliver^d to the
Parliament. In August, Sherburn Castle ta^en by the Parliament: In Sept.
Bristoll surrendered ^o them, and the Kings Forces worsted at Routon Heath: In
October, Basing-House taken by Cromwell, and L. Digby defeated in Yorkshire;
in December. La^^am House delivered by the Kings Order, and Here^^rd surpised by
the Parliament, before which ^lace the Scots in August had lost about 1000 men:
^n March, L. Ashly defeated near Stow.

In April, 1646. Ruthen Castle Exeter, St. Micha^ls Mount, Dunster Castle, and
Woodstock yielded; Corf Castle taken by Stratagem: Sir Tho. Fairfax resolves ^o
march to Oxford, which put the King upon thoughts of providing for his own
safety, and therefore April, ^3. he goes out of Oxford in Disguise with Mr.
Hud^^ a Minister, and Mr. John Ashburnham, whose Ser^ant he personated, and
went to the Scots Army at Newark. In May, Oxford was besieged, and Banbury and
Radnor surrendered to the Parliament. In June, Litchfield, Worcester,
Wallingford Castle, Borstall, Oxford, and Farringdon, and yielded to the
Parliament: In July, Gothridge and Pendennis the like, and Conway taken by
Storm: In August, Ragland surrendered by the Marquess of Worcester; In
September, Scilly Island and Castle taken, Denbigh Castle also yielded. In
November. Genesis Fairfax marched Triumphantly into London. In February, the Scotch
Army having first sold the King for two hundred thousand Pound, marched into
Scotland, and the King was sent Prisoner to Holmby by the Parliament.

The King being now in the power of his Enemies, they remove him from place to
place, and at length into the Isle of Wight, under the Guard of Coll. H^^mond;
and afterward a Treaty of Peace was there begun, wherein things were so
managed, that his Majesty's Concessions were Voted satisfactory: After which
the Army and some part of the Parliament driving on an Interest contrary to
Peace, turned all such Members out of the House of Commons as they thought
would not comply with their Designs; and then conveyed the King to Windsor:
During which time there happened several Bickerings and Engagements between the
Royalists and the Parliamentarians; the Royal Party being in all places
defeated, especially at Maidstone, Pontefract, Bow, Stratford, Kingston and
Preston, (where the Scotch Army received a very great Overthrow, losing
abundance of men:) And lastly at Colchester, where those two gallant Gentlemen,
Sir Chapter Lucas and Sir George Lisle were shot to death after quarter given,
contrary to the Law of Arms.

After this, the Officers of the Army, and those Members then left in the
House, proceeded to that height as to presume to bring the King to Trial; which
because it was an unparalled Action, it may be necestary to give a more
particular Account thereof.

Charles I (in disguise) and four other figures on horseback leaving Oxford The
King goes from Oxford in disguise 1646
trial of Charles I The Illegal Trial of King Charles the (...)
execution of Charles I: king, executioner bearing ax, and six others standing
on scaffold The Martyrdom of King Charles 1648


Upon the fourth of January, 1648. the House of Commons being turned into a
Grand Committee, passed these following Votes. 1. That the People under God are
the Original of all just Power. 2. That the Commons of England Assembled in
Parliament, being chosen by, and representing the People, have the Supreme
Authority of the Nation. 3. That whatsoever is Enacted and Declared for Law by
the Commons of England Assembled in Parliament, has the force of a Law. 4.
That all the People of the Nation are included thereby; although the consent,
and concurrence of the House of Peers be not had thereunto. 5. That to raise
Arms against the Peoples Representative or Parliament, and to make War upon
them, is High Treason. 6. That the King himself took Arms against the
Parliament, and upon that account is guilty of the Bloodshed throughout the
Civil War; and that he ought to explate the Crime with his own Blood.

After this they proceeded to make a pretended Act for the Trial of the King,
which they ^ntituled, An Act of the Commons of England Assem^led in Parliament,
for erecting of an High Court of justice for the Trying and Judging of CHARLES
STUART King of England: which was in the ^orm following.

WHereas it is notorious, That Charles Stuart the now King of England, not
content with those many encroachments which his Predecessors had made upon the
People in their Rights and Freedoms, has had a wicked design totally to
subvert the ancient and fundamental Laws and Liberty of the Nation: And in
their place, to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, with fire and
sword levied and maintained a cruel War in the Land, against the Parliament and
Kingdom; Whereby the Country has been miserably wasted, the public Treasury
exhausted, Trade decayed, and thousands of People murdered, and infinite of
other mischiefs committed; For all which High and Treasonable Offenses, the
said Charles Stuart might long since justly have been brought to exemplary and
condign punishment: Whereas also the Parliament, well hoping that the restraint
and imprisonment of his Person, (after it had pleased God to deliver him into
their hands) would have quieted the disturbers of the Kingdom, did forbear to
proceed judicially against him: But found by sad experience, that such their
remissives served only to encourage him and his Accomplices, in the Continuance
of their evil practices, and in raising of new Commotions, Designs, and
Invasions; For prevention therefore of the like greater inconveniences, and to
the end that no Magistrate or Officer whatsoever, may hereafter presume
traitorously and maliciously to imagine or contrive the inslaving or destroying
of the English Nation, and to expect impunity in so doing:

Be it Ordained and Enacted by the Commons is Parliament assembled, and it is
hereby Ordained and enacted by the Authority thereof: That Thomas L. F. O. C.
etc. -- shall be, and are hereby appointed Commissioners and Judges, for the
Hearing, Trying, and Judging of the said Charles Stuart, and the said
Commissioners or any Twenty or more of them, shall be, and are hereby
authorized and Constituted an High Court of Justice, to meet at such convenient
times and places, as by the said Commissioners, or the major part, or twenty or
more of them, under their Hands and Seals shall be appointed and notified by
public Proclamation in the great Hall or Palace-yard of Westminster; and
adjourn from time to time, and from Place to place, as the said High Court, or
the major part thereof meeting should hold fit, and to take Order for charging
of him the said Charles Stuart with the Crimes abovementioned, and for the
receiving his Personal Answer thereunto, and for Examination of Witnesses upon
Oath (if need be) concerning the same; and thereupon, or in default of such
Answer, to proceed to final Sentence according to Justice, and the merit of the
Cause, and to be Executed speedily and Impartially, etc.

Presently after this was published, Proclamation was made, That those who had
any thing to say against the King, should have a hearing given them: This was
proclaimed first in Westminster Hall, by the Sergeant at Arms to the
Commissioners, Riding into the Hall with his Mace, attended with six Trumpeters
and other Officers, who likewise rode bare into the Hall with him, the Drums of
the Guard beating in the mean time without in the Palace-yard. And the day
after Proclamation was made to the same effect in Cheapside, and at the
Old-Exchange: And in order to this grand Trial, Hillary Term which usually
begins Jan. 23. was adjourned for fourteen days; The House of Lords, refusing
to concur with the Commons in their Ordinance for the Kings Trial, the Commons
resolve and Vote, That all Members and others appointed to Act in any
Ordinance, are empowered and enjoined to Sit, Act, and Execute, notwithstanding
the House of Peers join not with them.

And now the Ministers in general, and the Presbyterians likewise, who had been
active against the Kings Cause, declare themselves both in their Pulpits, and
by earnest Petitions to the Parliament, to be zealous abhorrers of the Kings
death, and every where publicly protest against this Trial; The Nobility
likewise offer themselves Pledges on the Kings behalf; and the People
universally seem greatly troubled and astonished: Notwithstanding all which the
House of Commons and the Army went desperately on, and a New and Illegal
Tribunal called An High Court of Justice was erected, the Commissioners whereof
met in the Painted Chamber to consult what course to take about the Trial of
the King.

Friday Jan. 19. 1648. The King was brought with a strong Guard of Horse from
Windsor to St. James's; and the next day Sergeant Bradshaw President of the
pretended High Court of Justice, with about seventy of the Members of the said
Court, having Coll. Fox and sixteen Gentlemen with Partisans, and a Sword born
by Coll. Humphrey, and a Mace by Serj. Dandy, with their and other Officers of
the faid Court marching before them, came to the place ordered to be prepared
for their sitting, at the West end of the Great Hall in Westminster; where the
Lord President in a Crimson Velvet Chair, fixed in the midst of the Court,
placed himself having a Desk with a Crimson Velvet Cushion before him: The rest
of the Members placing themselves on each side of him, upon the several Seats
or Benches prepared and hung with Scarlet for that purpose, and the Partisans
dividing themselves on each side of the Court before them.

The Court being thus set, and silence made, the great Gate of the said Hall
was set open, to the end, That all persons, without exception, desirous to see,
or hear, might come into it; upon which the Hall was presently filled, and
Silence again ordered.

This done, Colonel Thomlinson, who had the charge of the King, as a Prisoner,
was commanded to bring him to the Court, who within a quarter of an hours space
brought him attended with about twenty Officers with Partisans marching before
him, there being Coll. Hacker and other Gentlemen, to whose care and Custody he
was likewise committed, marching in his Rear.

Being thus brought up within the face of the Court, the Sergeant at Arms, with
his Mace, receives and conducts him straight to the Bar, where a Crimson Velvet
Chair was set for the King. After a stern looking upon the Court, and the
people in the Galleries on each side of him, he places himself, not at all
moving his Hat, or otherwise showing the least respect to the Court, but
presently rises up again, and turns about looking downwards upon the Guards
placed on the left side, and on the multitude of Spectators on the right side
of the said great Hall. After Silence made among the people, the Act of
Parliament for the Trying of CHARLES STVART King of England, was read over by
the Clerk of the Court; who sat on one side of the Table covered with a rich
Turkey Carpet, and placed at the feet of the said Lord President, upon which
Table was also laid the Sword and Mace.

After reading the said Act, the several Names of the Commissioners were called
over, every one who was present, rising up, and answering to his Call.

The King having again placed himself in his Chair, with his face toward the
Court, Silence being again ordered, the Lord President stood up and said:

President. CHARLES STVART, King of England; The Commons of England Assembled
in Parliament, being deeply sensible of the Calamities that have been brought
upon this Nation, (which is fixed upon you, as the Principal Author of them)
have resolved to make inquisition for Blood, and according to that Debt and
Duty they owe to Justice, to God, the Kingdom, and themselves, and according to
the Fundamental Power that rests in themselves, They have resolved to bring you
to Trial and Judgment; and for that purpose have constituted this High Court of
Justice, before which you are brought.

This said, Mr. Cook Solicitor General for the Commonwealth (standing within a
Bar on the right hand of the King) offered to speak; but the King having a
Staff in his hand, held it up, and laid it upon the said Mr. Cooks shoulder two
or three times, bidding him hold: Nevertheless, the Lord President ordering him
to go on, he said:

Cook. My Lord, I am commanded to charge Charles Stuart, King of England, in
the name of the Commons of England, with Treason and high Misdemeanors; I
desire the said Charge may be read.

The said Charge being delivered to the Clerk of the Court, the Lord President
ordered it should be read, but the King bid him hold; Nevertheless, being
commanded by the Lord President to read it, the Clerk begun.

The Charge of the Commons of England against CHARLES STUART King of England,
of High Treason, and other High Crimes, exhibited to the High Court of Justice.
THat the said Charles Stuart being admitted King of England, and therein
trusted with a Limited Power, to govern by, and according to the Laws of the
Land, and not otherwise; And by his Trust, Oath, and Office, being obliged to
use the power committed to him, for the good and benefit of the people, and for
the preservation of their Rights and Liberties; Yet nevertheless, out of a
wicked design to erect, and uphold in himself an unlimited and Tyrannical
Power, to rule according to his Will, and to overthrow the Rights and Liberties
of the People; Yea, to take away, and make void the Foundations thereof, and of
all redress and remedy of misgovernment, which by the fundamental Constitutions
of this Kingdom, were reserved on the Peoples behalf, in the Right and Power of
frequent and successive Parliaments, or National meetings in Council; He, the
said Charles Stuart, for accomplishment of such his Designs, and for the
protecting of himself and his Adherents, in His and their wicked practices to
the same end, has traitorously and maliciously levied War against the present
Parliament, and the people therein represented.

Particularly, upon or about the thirtieth day of June, in the year of our
Lord, One thousand six hundred forty and two, at Beverly in the Count, of York;
And upon or about the thirtieth day of July, in the year aforesaid, in the
County of the City of York; and upon, or about the twenty fourth day of August,
in the same year, at the County of the Town of Nottingham, (when, and where he
set up his Standard of War,) and upon, or about the twenty third day of
October, in the same year, at Edgehill, and Keinton-field, in the County of
Warwick; And upon or about the thirtieth day of Nov. in the same year, at
Brainford in the County of Middlesex: And upon, or about the thirtieth day of
Aug. in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty and three at
Caveshambridge near Reding, in the County of Berks: And upon, or about the
thirtieth day of October, in the year last mentioned, at, or near the City of
Gloucester; And upon, or about the thirtieth day of November, in the year last
mentioned, at Newberry, in the County of Berks; and upon; or about the one and
thirtieth day of July; in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty
and four, at Cropredy-bridge, in the County of Oxon; And upon, or about the
thirtieth day of September, in the last year mentioned, at Bodmin, and other
places near adjacent, in the County of Cornwall; And upon, or about the
thirtieth day of November, in the last year mentioned, at Newberry aforesaid:
And upon or about the Eighth of June, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six
hundred forty and five, at the Town of Leicester; and also upon the fourteenth
day of the same month; in the same year, at Naseby-field, in the County of
Northampton. At which several times and places, or most of them, and at many
other places in this Land, at several other times, within the years
aforementioned: And in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty and
six: He the said Chapter Stuart, has caused and procured many thousands of the
Free-people of the Nation to be slain; and by Divisions, parties, and
insurrections, within this Land, by Invasions from Foreign parts, endeavored
and procured by him, and by many other evil ways and means; He the said
Charles Stuart, has not only maintained and carried on the said War, both by
Land and Sea, during the years before mentioned; but also has renewed, or
caused to be renewed, the said War against the Parliament, and good people of
this Nation, in this present year, One thousand six hundred forty and eight, in
the Counties of Kent, Essex, Surrey, Sussex, Middlesex, and many other Counties
and places in England and Wales, and also by Sea: and particularly, He the said
Charles Stuart, has for that purpose, given Commission to his Son, the Prince
and others; whereby, besides multitudes of other persons, many such, as were by
the Parliament entrusted and employed for the safety of the Nation, being by
Him or His Agents, Corrupted, to the betraying of Their Trust, and revolting
from the Parliament, have had entertainment and Commission, for the continuing
and the renewing of War and Hostility, against the said Parliament and people,
as aforesaid. By which cruel and unnatural Wars by Him the said Charles Stuart,
levied, continued, and renewed, as aforesaid, much Innocent Blood of the
Free-People of this Nation has been spilt, many Family have been undone, the
public Treasury wasted and exhausted, Trade obstructed, and miserably decayed;
vast expense, and damage to the Nation incurred, and many parts of the Land
spoiled, some of them even to desolation.

And for further prosecution of his said evil Designs, He, the said Charles
Stuart, does still continue his Commissions to the said Prince, and other
Rebels and Revolters, both English and Foreigners, and to the Earl of Ormond,
and to the Irish Rebels and Revolters associated with him: from whom further
Invasions upon this Land are threatened, upon the procurement and on the behalf
of the said Charles Stuart.

All which wicked Designs, Wars, and evil practices of him the said Charles
Stuart, have been, and are carried on, for the advancing and upholding of the
personal Interest of Will and Power, and pretended Prerogative to Himself and
his Family, against the public Interest, Common Right, Liberty, Justice, and
Peace of the people of this Nation, by, and for whom he was entrusted, as
aforesaid.

By all which it appears, that he the said Charles Stuart, has been, and is
the Occasioner, Author, and Contriver of the said Unnatural, Cruel and Bloody
Wars, and therein guilty of all the Treasons, Murders Rapines, Burnings,
Spoils, Desolations, Damage and Mischief to this Nation acted or committed in
the said Wars, or occasioned thereby.

And the said John Cook, by protestation (saving on the behalf of the people of
England, the liberty of exhibiting at any time hereafter any other Charge
against the said Charles Stuart, and also of replying to the Answers which the
said Chapter Stuart shall make to the Premises, or any of them, or any other Charge
that shall be so Exhibited) does for the said Treasons and Crimes, on the
behalf of the said people of England, Impeach the said Charles Stuart as a
Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and a public and implacable Enemy to the
Commonwealth of England: And pray, that the said CHARLES STVART, King of
England, may be put to answer All, and Every the Premises; That such
Proceedings, Examinations, Trials, Sentence, and Judgment may be thereupon had,
as shall be agreeable to Justice.

IT is observed, that the time the Charge was reading, the King sat down in
his Chair, looking sometimes on the Court, sometimes up to the Galleries, and
having risen again, and turned about to behold the Guards and Spectators, sat
down, looking very sternly, with a countenance not at all moved, till these
words, viz. Charles Stuart (to be a Tyrant and Traitor, etc.) were read, at
which he laughed as he sat in the face of the Court.

Charge being read, the Lord President replied,

President. Sir, you have now heard your Charge read, containing such matters
as appear in it; you find, That in the close of it, it is prayed to the Court,
in the behalf of the Commons of England, that you answer to your Charge. The
Court expects your Answer.


King. I would know by what Power I am called hither? I was, not long ago, in
the Isle of Wight, how I came there, is a longer story than I think is fit at
this time for me to speak of; but there I entered into a Treaty with both Houses
of Parliament,, with as much public Faith as it is possible to be had of any
people in the world. I treated there with a number of Honorable Lords and
Gentlemen, and treated honestly and uprightly; I cannot say but they did very
nobly with me, we were upon a conclusion of the Treaty. Now I would know by
what Authority, I mean, lawful; there are many unlawful Authorities in the
world, Thieves and Robbers by the high ways; but I would know by what
Authority I was brought from thence, and carried from place to place, (and I
know not what;) and when I know by what lawful Authority, I shall answer:
Remember I am your King, and what sins you bring upon your heads, and the
Judgment of God upon this Land, think well upon it, I say, think well upon it,
before you go further from one sinto a greater, therefore let me know by what
lawful Authority I am seated here, and I shall not be unwilling to answer; in
the mean time I shall not betray my Trust. I have a Trust committed to me by
God, by old and lawful Descent, I will not betray it to answer to a new
unlawful Authority, therefore resolve me that, and you shall hear more of me.


President. If you had been pleased to have observed what was hinted to you, by
the Court, at your first coming hither, you would have known, by what
Authority; which Authority, requires you, in the name of the people of England,
of which you are Elected King, to answer them.


King. No Sir, I deny that.


President. If you acknowledge not the Authority of the Court, they must
proceed.


King. I do tell them so, England was never an Elective Kingdom, but an
Hereditary Kingdom for near these thousand years, therefore let me know by what
Authority I am called hither: I do stand more for the Liberty of my people than
any here that come to be my pretended Judges; and therefore let me know by what
lawful Authority I am seated here, and I will answer it, otherwise I will not
answer it.


President. Sir, how really you have managed your Trust, is known: your way of
answer is to interrogate the Court, which beseems not you in this condition.
You have been told of it twice or thrice.


King. Here is a Gentleman, (Lieut. Col. Cobbet) ask him, if he did not bring
me from the Isle of Wight by force? I do not come here as submitting to the
Court; I will stand as much for the Privilege of the House of Commons, rightly
understood, as any man here whatsoever. I see no House of Lords here that may
constitute a Parliament, and (the King too) should have been. Is this the
bringing of the King to his Parliament? Is this the bringing an end to the
Treaty in the public Faith of the world? Let me see a legal Authority
warranted by the Word of God, the Scriptures, or warranted by the Constitutions
of the Kingdom, and I will answer.


President. Sir. You have propounded a Question, and have been answered: seeing
you will not answer, the Court will consider how to proceed; in the mean time,
those that brought you hither, are to take charge of you back again.

The Court desires to know whether this be all the Answer you will give, or no?


King. Sir, I desire that you would give me, and all the world, satisfaction in
this; let me tell you; it is not a slight thing you are about. I am sworn to
keep the Peace by that duty I owe to God and my Country, and I will do it to
the last breath of my body, and therefore you shall do well to satifie first
God, and then the Country, by what Authority you do it; if you do it by a
usurped Authority, that will not last long. There is a God in Heaven that will
call you, and all that give you power, to account: Satisfy me in that, and I
will answer, otherwise I betray my trust, and the Liberties of the People, and
therefore think of that, and then I shall be willing. For I do avow, that it is
as great a sin to withstand lawful Authority, as it is to submit to a
Tyrannical, or any other ways unlawful Authority; and therefore satisfy God,
and me, and all the World in that, and you shall receive my Answer: I am not
afraid of the Bill.


President. The Court expects you should give them a final Answer; their
purpose is to adjourn till Monday next, if you do not satisfy your self,
though we do tell you our Authority; we are satisfied with our Authority, and
it is upon Gods Authority and the Kingdoms, and that peace you speak of will be
kept in the doing of Justice, and that is our present work.


King. Let me tell you, if you will show me what lawful Authority you have, I
shall be satisfied: But that you have hitherto said, satisfies no reasonable
man.


President. That Is in your apprehension, we think it reasonable that are your
Judges.


King. It Is not my apprehension, nor yours neither, that ought to decide it.


President. The Court has heard you, and you are to be disposed of as they
have commanded.


Two things were remarkable in this days proceedings.

1. It is observed, That as the Charge was reading against the King, the silver
head of his Staff fell off, the which he wondered at, and seeing none to take
it up, he stooped for it himself, and put it in his pocket.

2. That as the King was going away, he looking with a very austere countenance
upon the Court, without stirring of his Hat, replied, Well Sir, (when the L.
President commanded the Guard to take him away) and at his going down, he said,
I do not fear that, (pointing with his staff at the Sword.) The people in the
Hall, as he went down the stairs cried out, some, God save the King, and some
for Justice.

O yes being called, the Court adjourned till Monday next, January 22. at 9. in
the morning to the Painted Chamber, and from thence to the same place again in
Westminster Hall.

January 21. being Sunday, the Commissioners kept a Fast at White Hall; there
Preached Mr. Spigge, his Text was, He that sheds Man's blood, by Man shall his
blood be shed: next, Mr. Foxeley, his Text Judge not, least you be judged.
Last, was Mr. Peter's, his Text was, I will bind their Kings in Chains, and
their Nobles in fetters of Iron.

At the High-Court of Justice sitting in Westminster Hall, Monday, Jan. 22.
1648.
O Yes made: Silence commanded, The Court called, and answered to their Names.

Silence commanded upon pain of imprisonment, and the Captain of the Guard to
apprehend all such as make disturbance.

Upon the Kings coming in a shout was made.

Command given by the Court to the Captain of the Guard, to fetch and take into
his custody those who make any disturbance.

Mr. Solicitor. May it please your Lordship, my Lord President, I did at the
last Court in the behalf of the Commons of England, exhibit and give into this
Court a Charge of High Treason and other high Crimes, against the Prisoner at
the Bar, whereof I do accuse him in the name of the People of England, and the
Charge was read unto him, and his Answer required. My Lord, he was not then
pleased to give an Answer, but in stead of answering, did there dispute the
Authority of this High Court. My humble Motion to this High Court, in behalf of
the People of England, is, That the Prisoner may be directed to make a positive
Answer, either by way of Confession or Negation; which if he shall refuse to
do, that the matter of. Charge may be taken pro confesso, and the Court may
proceed according to Justice.

President. Sir, You may remember at the last Court, you were told the occasion
of your being brought hither, and you heard a Charge against you, containing a
Charge of high Treason, and other high Crimes, against this Realm of England;
you heard likewise that it was prayed in the behalf of the People, that you
should give an answer to that Charge, that thereupon such proceedings might be
had, as should be agreeable to justice; you were then pleased to make some
scruples concerning the Authority of this Court, and knew not by what Authority
you were brought hither; you did diverse times propound your Questions, and were
as often answered, that it was by Authority of the Commons of England assembled
in Parliament, that did think fit to call you to an account for those high and
capital misdemeanors wherewith you were then charged. Since that, the Court
has taken into Consideration what you then said; they are fully satisfied with
their own Authority, and they hold it fit you should stand satisfied with it
too; and they do require it, that you do give a positive and particular Answer
to this Charge that is exhibited against you, they do expect you should either
confess or deny it; if you deny, it is offered in the behalf of the Nation to
be made good againsts you; their Authority they do avow to the whole world,
that the whole Kingdom are to rest satisfied in, and you are to rest satisfied
with it, and therefore you are to lose no more time, but to give a positive
Answer thereunto.


King. When I was here last, it is true, I made that Question, and truly if it
were only my own particular case, I would have satisfied my self with the
Protestation I made the last time I was here against the Legality of this
Court, and that a King cannot be tried by any Superior Jurisdiction on Earth;
but it is not my case alone, it is the Freedom and the Liberty of the people of
England; and do you pretend what you will, I stand more for their Liberties.
For if power without Law, may make Laws, may alter the fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom, I do not know what Subject he is in England, that can be sure of his
life, or any thing that he calls his own; therefore when that I came here, I
did expect particular Reasons to know by what Law, what Authority you did
proceed against me here, and therefore I am a little to seek what to say to you
in this particular, because the Affirmative is proved, the Negative often is
very hard to do: but since I cannot persuade you to do it, I shall tell you my
Reasons as short as I can.

My Reasons why in Conscience, and the duty I owe to God first, and my People
next, for the preservation of their Lives, Liberties and Estates; I conceive I
cannot answer this, till I be satisfied of the legality of it.

Here the King would have delivered his Reasons.
All proceedings against any man whatsoever --


President. Sir, I must interrupt you, which I would not do, but that what you
do, is not agreeable to the proceedings of any Court of Justice; you are about
to enter into Argument, and dispute concerning the Authority of this Court,
before whom you appear as a Prisoner, and are charged as an high Delinquent; if
you take upon you to dispute the Authority of the Court, we may not do it, nor
will any Court give way unto it, you are to submit unto it, you are to give in
a punctual and direct Answer, whether you will answer to your Charge or no, and
what your Answer is.


King. Sir by your favor, I do not know the forms of Law, I do know Law and
Reason, though I am no Lawyer professed, yet I know as much Law as any
Gentleman in England; and therefore (under favor) I do plead for the Liberties
of the People of England more than you do, and therefore if I should impose a
belief upon any man without Reasons given for it, it were unreasonable; but I
must tell you, That by that Reason that I have as thus informed, I cannot yield
unto it.


President. Sir, I must interrupt you, you may not be permitted; you speak of
Law and Reason, it is fit there should be Law and Reason, and there is both
against you. Sir, the Vote of the Commons of England Assembled in Parliament,
it is the Reason of the Kingdom, and they are these too that have given that
Law, according to which you should have ruled and reigned. Sir, you are not to
dispute our Authority, you are told it again by the Court. Sir, it will be
taken notice of, that you stand in contempt of the Court, and your contempt
will be recorded accordingly.


King. I do not know how a King can be a Delinquent: not by any Law that ever I
heard of, all men (Delinquents or what you will) let me tell you, they may put
in Demurrers against any proceedings as Legal, and I do demand that, and demand
to be heard with my Reasons, if you deny that, you deny Reason.


President. Sir, you have offered something to the Court, I shall speak
something unto you the sense of the Court; Sir, neither you nor any man are
permitted to dispute that point, you are concluded, you may not demur the
Jurisdiction of the Court; if you do, I must let you know, that they overruled
your Demurrer, they sit here by the Authority of the Commons of England, and
all your Predecessors, and you are responsible to them.


King. I deny that, show me one President --


President. Sir you ought not to interrupt while the Court is speaking to you,
this point is not to be debated by you, neither will the Court permit you to do
it; if you offer it by way of Demurrer to the Jurisdiction of the Court, they
have considered of their Jurisdiction, they do affirm their own Jurisdiction.


King. I say Sir, by your favor, that the Commons of England was never a Court
of Judicature, I would know how they came to be so.


President. Sir, you are not to be permitted to go on in that Speech, and these
Discourses.

Then the Clerk of the Court read as follows.

Charles Stuart, King of England, You have been accused on the behalf of the
People of England, of High Treason, and other high Crimes, the Court have
determined, that you ought to answer the same.


King. I will answer the same as soon as I know by what Authority you do this.


President. If this be all that you will say, then Gentlemen, you that brought
the Prisoner hither, take charge of him back again.


King. I do require that I may give in my Reasons why I do not Answer, and give
me time for that.


President. Sir, It Is not for Prisoners to require.


King. Prisoners! Sir, I am not an ordinary Prisoner.


President. The Court has considered of their Jurisdiction, and they have
already affirmed their Jurisdiction; if you will not answer, we shall give
order to record your default.


King. You never heard my Reasons yet.


President. Sir, your Reasons are not to be heard against the highest
Jurisdiction.


King. Show me that Jurisdiction, where Reason is not to be heard.


President. Sir, We show it you here, the Commons of England; and the next time
you are brought, you will know more of the pleasure of the Court, and it may
be, their final determination.


King. Show me wherever the House of Commons was a Court of Judicature of that
kind.


President. Sergeant take away the Prisoner.


King. Well Sir, remember that the King is not suffered to give his Reasons for
the Liberty and Freedom of all his Subjects.


President. Sir, You are not to have liberty to use this language; how great a
friend you have been to the Laws and Liberties of the people, let all England
and the World judge.


King. Sir, under favor, it was the Liberty, Freedom, and Laws of the Subject
that ever I took -- defended my self with Arms; I never took up Arms against
the People, but for my people and the Laws.


President. The command of the Court must be obeyed; no Answer will be given to
the Charge.


King. Well Sir.


Then the Lord President ordered the default to be recorded, and the Contempt
of the Court, and that no answer would be given to the Charge.

And so was guarded forth to Sir Robert Cotton's house.

Then the Court adjourned to the Painted Chamber on Tuesday at twelve a clock,
and from thence they intended to adjourn to Westminster Hall, at which time all
persons concerned were to give their attendance.

Resolutions of the Court at their meeting in the Painted Chamber, Lunae Jan.
22. 1648.
This day the King being withdrawn from the Bar of the High Court of Justice,
the Commissioners of the said High Court of Justice sat private in the Painted
Chamber, and considered of the Kings carriage upon the Saturday before, and of
all that had then passed, and fully approved of what the Lord President had
done and said in the managing of the business of that day, as agreeing to their
sense. And perceiving what the King aimed at, viz. to bring in question (if he
could) the Jurisdiction of the Court, and the Authority thereof, whereby they
sat; and considering that in the interim he had not acknowledged them in any
sort to be a Court or his Judges; and through their sides intended to wound (if
he might be permitted) the Supreme Authority of the Commons of England, in
their Representatives the Commons assembled in Parliament, after advice with
their Council learned in both Laws, and mature deliberation had of the matter:

Resolved, That the King should not be suffered to argue the Courts
Jurisdiction, of that which constituted them a Court, of which debate they had
not proper Conusance, nor could they, being a derivative Judge of that Supreme
Court which made them Judges, from which there was no Appeal, and did therefore
order and direct, viz.

Ordered, That in case the King shall again offer to dispute the Authority of
the Court, the Lord President do let him know, that the Court have taken into
consideration his demands of the last day, and that he ought to rest satisfied
with this Answer; That the Commons of England assembled in Parliament have
constituted this Court, whose power may not, nor should be permitted to be
disputed by him.

That in case the King shall refuse to answer or acknowledge the Court, the
Lord President do let him know that the Court will take it as a Contumacy, and
that it shall be so Recorded.

That in case he shall offer or answer with a saving, notwithstanding of his
pretended Prerogatives, above the jurisdiction of the Court, That the Lord
President do in the Name of the Court refuse his protest, and require his
positive Answer, whether he will own the Court or not.

That in case the King shall demand a Copy of the Charge, that he shall then
declare his intention to Answer, and that declaring his intention, a Copy be
granted unto him.

That in case the King shall still persist in his contempt, the Lord President
do give command to the Clerk, to demand of the King, in the name of the Court,
in these words following, viz.

Charles Stuart King of England, you are accused in the behalf of the People of
England, of diverse high Crimes and Treasons, which Charge has been read unto
you. The Court requires you to give a positive Answer, to confess or deny the
Charge, having determined that you ought to Answer the same.

At the High Court of Justice sitting in Westminster Hall, Tuesday, Jan. 23.
1648.
O yes made. Silence commanded. The Court called. Seventy three Persons present.

The King comes in with his Guard, looks with an austere countenance upon the
Court, and sits down.

The second O Yes made, and silence commanded.

Mr. Cook Solicitor General. May it please your Lordship, my Lord President,

This is now the third time that by the great grace, and favor of this High
Court, the Prisoner has been brought to the Bar, before any Issue joined in
the Cause. My Lord, I did at the first Court exhibit a Charge against him,
containing the highest Treason that ever was wrought upon the Theater of
England: that a King of England, trusted to keep the Law, That had taken an
Oath so to do, That had Tribute paid him for that end, should be guilty of a
wicked design to subvert and destroy our Laws, and introduce an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Government, in the defiance of the Parliament and their Authority,
set up his Standard for War against his Parliament and People; and I did humbly
pray, in the behalf of the People of England; that he might speedily be
required to make an answer to the Charge.

But, my Lord, instead of making any Answer, he did then dispute the Authority
of this High Court; your Lordship was pleased to give him a further day to
consider, and to put in his Answer, which day being yesterday, I did humbly
move that he might be required to give a direct and positive answer, either by
denying, or confession of it; but (my Lord) he was then pleased for to demurre
to the Jurisdiction of the Court, which the Court did then overrule, and
command him to give a direct and positive Answer. My Lord, besides this great
delay of, Justice, I shall now humbly move your Lordship for speedy Judgment
against him. My Lord, I might press your Lordship upon the whole, That
according to the known Rules of the Law of the Land, That if a Prisoner shall
stand as contumacious in contempt, and shall not put in an issuable plea,
Guilty or not Guilty of the Charge given against him, whereby he may come to a
fair Trial; That as by an implicit confession, it may be taken pro confesso,
as it has been done to those who have deserved more favor than the Prisoner
at the Bar has done: but besides, my Lord, I shall humbly press your Lordship
upon the whole Fact; the House of Commons, the Supreme Authority and
Jurisdiction of the Kingdom, they have declared, That it is notorious, That the
matter of the Charge is true, as it is in truth (my Lord) as clearas Crystal,
and as the Sun that shines at noonday; which if your Lordship and the Court be
not satisfied in, I have notwithstanding, on the people of Englands behalf,
several witnesses to produce: And therefore I do humbly pray, and yet I must
confess it is not so much I, as the innocent blood that has been shed, the cry
whereof is very great for justice and judgment, and therefore I do humbly pray,
that speedy Judgment be pronounced against the Prisoner at the Bar.


President. Sir, you have heard what is moved by the Council on the behalf of
the Kingdom against you. Sir, you may well remember, and if you do not, the
Court cannot forget, what dilatory dealings the Court has found at your hands:
you were pleased to propound some Questions, you have had your Resolutions upon
them. You were told over and over again, That the Court did affirm their own
jurisdiction: That it was not for you, nor any other man, to dispute the
Jurisdiction of the Supreme and highest Authority of England, from which there
is no Appeal, and touching which there must be no dispute; yet you did persist
in such carriage, as you gave no manner of obedience, nor did you acknowledge
any Authority in them, nor the High Court, that constituted this Court of
Justice.

Sir, I must let you know from the Court, That they are very sensible of these
delays of yours, and that they ought not, being thus Authorized by the supreme
Court of England, to be thus trifled withal, and that they might in justice,
if they pleased, and according to the Rules of Justice, take advantage of these
delays, and proceed to pronounce judgment against you; yet nevertheless they
are pleased to give direction, and on their behalfs I do require you, that you
make a positive Answer unto this Charge that is against you: Sir, in plain
terms; for Justice knows no respect of persons, you are to give your positive
and final Answer in plain English, whether you be guilty or not guilty of these
Treasons laid to your Charge.


The King after a little pause, said,

When I was here yesterday, I did desire to speak for the Liberties of the
People of England; I was interrupted: I desire to know yet whether I may speak
freely or not.

President. Sir you have had the Resolution of the Court upon the like Question
the last day, and you were told, That having such a Charge of so high a Nature
against you, your Work was, that you ought to acknowledge the jurisdiction of
the Court, and to Answer to your Charge. Sir, if you Answer to your Charge,
which the Court gives you leave now to do, though they might have taken the
advantage of your Contempt, yet if you be able to Answer to your Charge, when
you have once Answered, you shall be heard at large, make the best Defense you
can. But Sir, I must let you know from the Court, as their commands, that you
are not to be permitted to issue out into any other discourses, till such time
as you have given a positive Answer concerning the Matter that is Charged upon
you.


King. For the Charge I value it not a Rush, it is the Liberty of the people of
England that I stand for; for me to acknowledge a new Court, that I never heard
of before, I that am your King, that should be an example to all the people of
England, for to uphold Justice, to maintain the old Laws; indeed I do not know
how to do it; you spoke very well the first day that I came here, (on Saturday)
of the Obligations that I had laid upon me by God, to the maintenance of the
Libertyes of my People: The same Obligation you speak of, I do acknowledge to
God that I owe to Him, and to my people, to defend, as much as in me lies, the
ancient Laws of the Kingdom; therefore until that I may know that this is not
against the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, by your favor, I can put in no
particular Answer: If you will give me time, I will then show you my Reasons
why I cannot do it, and this -- Here being interrupted, he said,

By your favor, you ought not to interrupt me; how I came here, I know not,
there is no Law for it, to make your King your Prisoner: I was lately in a
Treaty upon the public Faith of the Kingdom, that was the known -- the two
Houses of Parliament, that was the Representative of the Kingdom, and when that
I had almost made an end of the Treaty, then I was hurried away and brought
hither, and therefore --

Here the President interrupted him and said, Sir, you must know the pleasure
of the Court.


King. By your favor Sir, --


President. Nay Sir, by your favor, you may not be permitted to fall into
these discourses; you appear as a Delinquent, you have not acknowledged the
Authority of the Court; the Court craves it not of you, and once more they
command you to give your positive Answer -- Clerk. Do your Duty.


King. Duty Sir!


The Clerk reads,

Charles Stuart, King of England, you are accused in the behalf of the Commons
of England of diverse high Crimes and Treasons, which Charge has been read unto
you; the Court now requires you to give your positive and final Answer, by way
of confession, or denial of the Charge.

King. Sir; I say again to you, so that I might give satisfaction to the people
of England of the clearness of my proceedings, not by way of Answer, not in
this way, but to satisfy them that I have done nothing against that Trust that
has been committed to me, I would do it; but to acknowledge a new Court
against their Privileges, to alter the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom; Sir,
you must excuse me.


President. Sir, this is the third time that you have publicly disowned the
Court, and put an affront upon it; how far you have preserved the Privileges
of the people, your Actions have spoke it; but truly Sir, men's intentions ought
to be known by their Actions, you have written your meaning in bloody
Characters throughout the whole Kingdom; but Sir, you understand the pleasure
of the Court: -- Clerk Record the default, -- and Gentlemen, you that took
charge of the Prisoner, take him back again.


King. I will only say this one word to you, If it were only my own
particular, I would not say any more, nor interrupt you.


President. Sir, you have heard the pleasure of the Court, and you are
(notwithstanding you will not understand it) to find that you are before a
Court of Justice.


Then the King went forth with his Guard, and Proclamation was made, That all
persons who had then appeared, and had further to do at the Court, might depart
into the Painted Chamber, to which place the Court did forthwith adjourn, and
intended to meet in Westminster Hall by Ten of the clock the next morning.

Crier. God bless the Kingdom of England.


His Majesty intended to have delivered in writing his Reasons against the
Pretended Jurisdicton of the High Court of Justice, upon Monday, Jan. 22. but
was not permitted.

Saturday the 27 of January, 1648.
O Yes made. Silence commanded. The Court called; Sergeant Bradshaw, Lord
President, in his Scarlet Robe (suitable to the work of this day) with sixty
eight other Members of the Court called. As the King came into the Court, in
his usual posture with his Hat on, a Cry made in the Hall by some of the
Soldiers for Justice, Justice, and Execution.

King. I shall desire a word to be heard a little, and I hope I shall give no
occasion of interruption.


President. You may answer in your time, hear the Court first.


King. If it please you, Sir, I desire to be heard, and I shall not give any
occasion of interruption, and it is only in a word; a sudden judgment --


President. You shall be heard in due time, but You are to hear the Court first.


King. Sir, I desire it, it will be in order to what I believe the Court will
say; and therefore, Sir, a hasty Judgment is not so soon recalled.


President. Sir, you shall be heard before the Judgment be given, and in the
mean time you may forbear.


King. Well Sir, shall I be heard before the judgment be given?


President. Gentlemen, it is well known to all, or most of you here present,
That the Prisoner at the Bar has been several times convented and brought
before the Court to make answer to a Charge of Treason and other high Crimes
exhibited against him in the Name of the People of England; to which Charge,
being required to Answer, Here an honorable Lady interrupted the Court,
saying, Not half the People, but she was soon silenced.
he has been so far from obeying the Commands of the Court, by submitting to
their Justice, as he began to take upon him to offer reasoning and debate unto
the Authority of the Court, and of the highest Court that constituted them to
try and judge him; but being overruled in that, and required to make his
Answer, he was still pleased to continue contumacious, and to refuse to submit
or Answer: Hereupon the Court, that they may not be wanting to themselves, to
the trust reposed in them, nor that any man's wilfulness prevent Justice, they
have thought fit to take the matter into their consideration; They have
considered of the Contumacy, and of that confession which in Law does arise
upon that contumacy; They have likewise considered of the notoriety of the Fact
charged upon the Prisoner, and upon the whole matter they are resolved, and
have agreed upon a Sentence to be now pronounced against this Prisoner: but in
respect he does desire to be heard before the Sentence be read and pronounced,
the Court has resolved that they will hear him; yet Sir, thus much I must tell
you beforehand, which you have been minded of at other Courts; that if that
you have to say be to offer any Debate concerning jurisdiction, you are not to
be heard in it, you have offered it formerly, and you have indeed struck at the
root, that is, the power and Supreme Authority of the Commons of England, which
this Court will not admit a debate of, and which indeed is an irrational thing
in them to do, being a Court that acts upon Authority denived from them, that
they should presume to judge upon their Superiority, from whom there is no
Appeal. But Sir, if you have any thing to say in defense of your self
concerning the matters charged, the Court has given me command to let you know
they will hear you.


King. Since that I see that you will not hear any thing of debate concerning
that which I confess I thought most material for the peace of the Kingdom, and
for the Liberty of the Subject, I shall wave it, I shall speak nothing to it;
but only I must tell you, That this many a day all things have been taken away
from me, but that, that I call more dear to me than my life, which is My
Conscience and my Honor; and if I had respect to my life more than the Peace
of the Kingdom, the Liberty of the Subject, certainly I should have made a
particular defense for my self, for by that at leastwise I might have delayed
an ugly Sentence, which I believe will pass upon me; Therefore certainly, Sir,
as a man that has some understanding, some knowledge of the world, if that my
true zeal to my Country had not overborn the care that I have of my own
preservation, I should have gone another way to work than that I have done: Now
Sir, I conceive that an hasty Sentence once past, may be sooner repented than
recalled: And truly the self same desire that I have for the Peace of the
Kingdom, and the Liberty of the Subject, more than my own particular, does
make me now at last desire, That having something for to say that concerns
both, I desire before Sentence be given, that I may be heard in the Painted
Chamber before the Lords and Commons; this delay cannot be prejudicial to you
whatsoever I say, if that I say no Reason, those that hear me must be Judges, I
cannot be Judge of that that I have; if it be Reason, and really for the
welfare of the Kingdom, and the Liberty of the Subject, I am sure on it very
well, it is worth the hearing; Therefore I do conjure you, as you love that you
pretend, I hope it is real, the Liberty of the Subject, the Peace of the
Kingdom; that you will grant Me the hearing, before any Sentence be passed; I
only desire this, that you will take this into your consideration, it may be
you have not heard of it beforehand; if you will, I Will retire, and you may
think of it: but if I cannot get this Liberty, I do here protest, that so fair
shows of Liberty and Peace are pure shows, and not otherwise, then that you
will not hear your KING.


President. Sir, You have now spoken?


King. Yes Sir.


President. And this that you have said is a further declining of the
Jurisdiction of this Court, which was the thing wherein you were limited before.


King. Pray excuse me Sir, for my interruption, because you mistake me, it is
not a declining of it, you do judge me before you hear me speak: I say it will
not, I do not decline it, though I cannot acknowledge the Jurisdiction of the
Court; yet Sir, in this give Me leave to say, I would do it, though I did not
acknowledge it in this, I do protest it is not the declining of it, since I
say, if that I do say any thing but that that is for the Peace of the Kingdom,
and the Liberties of the Subject, then the shame is mine. Now I desire, that
you will take this into your consideration, if you will, I Will withdraw.


President. Sir, this is not altogether new that you have moved unto us, not
altogether new to us, though the first time in person you have offered it to
the Court: Sir, you say you do not Decline the Jurisdiction of the Court.


King. Not in this that I have said.


President. I understand you well Sir, but nevertheless that which you have
offered, seems to be contrary to that saying of yours; for the Court are ready
to give a Sentence: it is not as you say, That they will not hear your King,
for they have been ready to hear you, they have patiently waited your pleasure
for three Courts together, to hear what you would say to the Peoples Charge
against you, to which you have not vouchsafed to give any answer at all; Sir,
This tends to a further delay: Truly Sir, such delays as these neither may the
Kingdom, nor Justice well bear; You have had three several days to have
offered in this kind what you would have pleased; This Court is founded upon
that Authority of the Commons of England, in whom rests the Supreme
Jurisdiction; That which you now tender, is to have another Jurisdiction, and a
coordinate Jurisdiction, I know very well you express your self. Sir, That
notwithstanding that you would offer to the Lords nnd Commons in the Painted
Chamber, yet nevertheless you would proceed on here, I did hear you say so; but
Sir, that you would offer there, whatever it is, must needs be in delay of the
Justice here; so as if this Court be resolved, and prepared for the Sentence,
this that you offer they are not bound in justice to grant; but Sir, according
to that you seem to desire, and because you shall know the further pleasure of
the Court upon that which you have moved, the Court will withdraw for a time.


King. Shall I withdraw?


President. Sir, you shall know the pleasure of Court presently, the Court
withdraws for half an hour into the Court of Wards.


Sergeant at Arms: The Court gives command that the Prisoner be withdrawn, and
they give order for his return again.

The Court withdraws for half an hour and returns.

President. Sergeant at Arms, send for your prisoner.

Sir, You were pleased to make a motion here to the Court, to offer a desire of
yours touching the propounding of somewhat to the Lords in the Painted Chamber
for the Peace of the Kingdom: Sir, you did in effect receive an answer before
the Court adjourned; Truly Sir, their withdrawing and adjournment was pro forma
tantum, for it did not seem to them that there was any difficulty in the thing;
they have considered of what you have moved, and have considered of their own
Authority, which is founded (as has been often said) upon the Supreme
Authority of the Commons of England assembled in Parliament, The Court acts
accordingly to their Commission: Sir, the return I have to you from the Court,
is this, That they have been too much delayed by you already, and this that you
now offer has occasioned some little further delay, and they are JUDGES
appointed by the highest JUDGES, and Judges are no more to delay, than they are
to deny justice: they are good words in the old Charter of England, Nulli
negabimus, nulli vendemus, nulli deferemus Justitiam. There must be no delay;
but the truth is, Sir, and so every man here observes it, That you have much
delayed them in your contempt and default, for which they might have long since
proceeded, to judgment against you, and notwithstanding what you have offered,
they are resolved to proceed to punishment, and to Judgment, and that is their
unanimous resolution.


King. Sir, I know it is in vain for me to dispute, I am no Sceptick for to
deny the power that you have, I know that you have power enough; Sir, I confess
I think it would have been for the Kingdoms peace, if you would have taken the
pains for to have shown the lawfulness of your power; for this delay that I
have desired, I confess it is a delay, but it is a delay very important for the
peace of the Kingdom, for it is not my Person that I look on alone, it is the
Kingdoms welfare, and the Kingdoms peace: it is an old sentence, That we should
think on long, before we have resolved of great matters suddenly; Therefore,
Sir, I do say again, that I do put at your doors all the inconveniency of an
hasty Sentence; I confess, I have been here now I think this week, this day
eight days, was the day I came here first, but a little delay of a day or two
further, may give peace, whereas an Hasty Judgment may bring on that trouble
and perpetual inconveniency to the Kingdom, that the Child that is unborn may
repent it; and therefore again out of the Duty I owe to God, and to my
Country, I do desire that I may be heard by the Lords and Commons in the
Painted Chamber, or any other Chamber that you will appoint me.


President. Sir, you have been already answered to what you even now moved,
being the same you moved before, since the Resolution and the Judgment of the
Court in it, and the Court now requires to know whether you have any more to
say for Your self, than you have said, before they proceed to Sentence.


King. I say this Sir, That if you will hear me, if you will give me but this
delay, I doubt not but I shall give some satisfaction to you all here, and to
my people after that, and therefore I do require you, as you will Answer it at
the dreadful day of judgment, that you will consider it once again.


President. Sir, I have received direction from the Court,


King. Well Sir.


President. If this must be re-inforc'd, or any thing of this nature, your
answer must be the same, and they will proceed to Sentence if you have nothing
more to say.


King. I have nothing more to say, but I shall desire that this may be entered
what I have said.


President. The Court then Sir, has something to say unto you, which although
I know it will be very unacceptable, yet notwithstanding they are willing, and
are resolved to discharge their Duty.

Sir, you speak very well of a precious thing that you call Peace, and it had
been much to be wished that God had put it into your heart, that you had as
effectually and really endeavored and studied the Peace of the Kingdom, as now
in words you seem to pretend; but as you were told the other day, Actions must
expound Intentions, yet Actions have been clean contrary; and truly Sir, it
does appear plainly enough to them, that you have gone upon very erroneous
principles; the Kingdom has felt it to their smart, and it will be no ease to
you to think of it; for Sir, you have held your self, and let fall such
Language, as if you had been no ways subject to the Law, or that the Law had
not been your Superior. Sir, the Court is very well sensible of it, and I hope
so are all the understanding people of England, That the Law is your Superior:
That you ought to have ruled according to the Law, you ought to have done so
Sir: I know very well your pretense has been that you have done so, but Sir,
the difference has been, who shall be the Expositors of this Law; Sir, whether
you and your party out of Courts of Justice, shall take upon them to expound
Law, or the Courts of Justice, who are the Expounders; nay, the Sovereign and
the High Court of Justice, the Parliament of England, who are not only the
highest Expounders, but the sole Makers of the Law. Sir, for you to set your
self with your single judgment, and those that adhere unto you, against the
highest Court of Justice, that is not Law: Sir, as the Law is your superior,
so truly Sir, there is something that is superior to the Law, and that is
indeed the Parent or Author of the Law, and that is the People of England. For
Sir, as they are those that at the first, (as other Countries have done) did
choose to themselves this Form of Government, even for Justice sake, that
Justice might be administered, that Peace might be preserved; so Sir, they gave
Laws to their Governors, according to which they should govern; and if those
Laws should have proved inconvenient, or prejudicial to the public, they had a
power in them, and reserved to themselves, to alter as they should see cause.
Sir, it is very true, what some of your side have said, Rex non habet parem in
Regno; This Court will say the same while King, That you have not your Peer in
some sense, for you are Major singulis, but they will averr again, that you are
Minor universis; and the same Author tells you, that in exhibitione juris,
there you have no power, but are quasi minimus.

This we know to be Law, Rex habet superiorem, Deum and Legem, etiam and
Curiam, and so says the same Author; and truly Sir, he makes bold to go a
little further, Debent ei ponere fraenum, They ought to bridle him; and Sir, we
know very well the stories of old; Those Wars that were called the Barons Wars,
when the Nobility of the Land did stand out for the Liberty and Property of the
Subject, and would not suffer the Kings that did invade to play the Tyrants
here, but called them to account for it, we know that truth, That they did
fraenum ponere: But Sir, if they do forbear to do their duty now, and are not
so mindful of their own honor and the Kingdoms good, certainly the Commons of
England will not be unmindful of what is for their preservation, and for their
safety: Justitiae fruendi causa Reges constituti sunt. This we learn is the end
of having Kings, or any other Governors, it is for the enjoying of Justice,
that is the end. Now Sir, if so be the King will go contrary to the end of his
Government; Sir, he must understand that he is but an Officer of trust, and he
ought to discharge that trust, and they are to take order for the animadversion
and punishment of such an offending Governor.

This is not Law of yesterday, Sir, (since the time of the division betwixt you
and your People,) but it is Law of old; And we know very well the Authors and
Authorities that do tell us what the Law was in that point upon the Election of
Kings, upon the Oath that they took unto their People, and if they did not
observe it, there weere those things called Parliaments; The Parliaments were
they that were to adjudge (the very words of the Author) the plaints and wrongs
done of the King and Queen, or their Children; such wrongs especially, when the
People could have no where else any remedy. Sir, that has been the People of
Englands case, they could not have their remedy elsewhere but in Parliament.

Sir, Parliaments were ordained for that purpose, to redress the grievances of
the People, that was their main end; and truly Sir, if so be that the Kings of
England had been rightly mindful of themselves, they were never more in Majesty
and State, than in the Parliament: but how forgetful some have been, Histories
have told us; We have a miserable, a lamentable, a sad experience of it. Sir,
by the old Laws of England, (I speak these things the rather to you, because
you were pleased to let fall the other day, you thought you had as much
knowledge in the Law, as most Gentlemen in England; it is very well Sir. And
truly Sir, it is very good for the Gentlemen of England to understand that Law
under which they must live, and by which they must be governed. And then Sir,
the Scripture says, They that know their Masters Will and do it not, what
follows. The Law is your Master, the Acts of Parliaments.) the Parliaments were
to be kept anciently, we find in our Author, twice in the year, That the
Subject upon any occasion, might have a ready remedy and redress for his
Grievance. Afterward, by several Acts of Parliament in the days of your
Predecessor Edward the third, they must have been once a year. Sir, what
intermission of PARLIAMENTS has been in your time, it is very well known, and
the sad consequences of it, and what in the interim instead of these
Parliaments, has been by you, by an high and Arbitrary hand introduced upon
the People, that likewise has been too well known and felt. But when God by
his Providence had so brought it about, that you could no longer decline the
calling of a Parliament; Sir, yet it will appear what your ends were against
the Ancient, and your Native Kingdom of Scotland: The Parliament of England,
not serving your ends against them, you were pleased to dissolve it. Another
great necessity occasioned the calling of this Parliament, and what your
designs and plots and endeavors all along have been for the ruining and
confounding of this Parliament, has been very notorious to the whole Kingdom;
And truly Sir, in that you did strike at all; that had been a sure way to have
brought about that that this lays upon you, Your Intention to subvert the
Fundamental Laws of the Land. For the great bulwark of Liberty of the People,
is the PARLIAMENT of England; and to Subvert and Root up that, which your aim
has been to do, certainly at one blow you had confounded the Liberties and the
Propriety of England.

Truly Sir, it makes me call to mind, I cannot forbear to express it, for Sir,
we must deal plainly with you, according to the merits of your cause, so is our
Commission; it makes me call to mind (these proceedings of yours) that we read
of a great Roman Emperor, by the way let us call him a great Roman Tyrant,
Caligula, that wished that the People of Rome had had but one Neck, that at one
blow he might cut it off: and your proceedings has been somewhat like to this,
for the body of the people of England has been (and where else represented
but) in the Parliament, and could you have but confounded that, you had at one
blow cut off the neck of England: but God has reserved better things for us,
and has pleased for to Confound your designs, and to break your Forces, and to
bring your Person into Custody, that you might be responsible to Justice.

Sir, we know very well, That it is a question on your side very much Pressed,
By what president we shall proceed? Truly Sir, for Presidents, I shall not at
this present make any long discourse, but it is no new thing to cite Presidents
almost of all Nations, where the People (when power has been in their hands)
have not sticked to call their Kings to account, and where the change of
Government has ensued upon occasions of the Tyranny and Mis-government of
those that have been placed over them; I will not spend time to mention France,
or Spain, or the Empire, or other Countries, Volumes may be written of them;
But truly Sir, that of the Kingdom of Arragon, I should think some of us have
thought upon it, where they have the Justice of Arragon, that is a man tanquam
in medio positus, betwixt the King of Spain, and the people of the Country,
that if wrong be done by the King, he that is the King of Arragon, the Justice
has power to reform the wrong, and he is acknowledged to be the Kings
Superior, and is the grand preserver of their privileges, and has prosecuted
Kings upon their miscarriages.

Sir, What the Tribunes of Rome were heretofore, and what the Ephori were to
the Lacedaemonian State, we know that is the Parliament of England to the
English State; and though Rome seem to have lost its liberty when once the
Emperors were, yet you shall find some famous Acts of Justice even done by the
Senate of Rome; that great Tyrant of his time, Nero, condemned and judged by
the Senate. But truly Sir, to you I should not mention these Foreign examples
and stories. If you look but over Tweed, we find enough in your native Kingdom
of Scotland. If we look to your first King Forgusius, that your stories make
mention of, he was an Elective King, he died, and left two Sons both in their
minority, the Kingdom made choice of their Uncle his Brother to govern in the
minority; afterward the Elder Brother giving small hopes to the People that he
would rule or govern well, seeking to supplant that good Uncle of his, that
governed them justly, they set the Elder aside, and took to the Younger. Sir,
if I should come to what your stories make mention of, you know very well you
are the 109th King of Scotland; for to mention so many Kings as that Kingdom,
according to their power and privilege, have made bold to deal withal, some to
banish, and some to imprison, and some to put to death, it would be too long;
and as one of your Authors says, it would be too long to recite the manifold
examples that your own stories make mention of; Reges (say they) we do create,
we created Kings at first; Leges; etc. We imposed Laws upon them; and as they
are chosen by the suffrages of the People at the first, so upon just occasion,
by the same suffrages, they may be taken down again: and we will be bold to
say, that no Kingdom has yielded more plentiful experience than that your
Native Kingdom of Scotland has done, concerning the deposition and the
punishment of their offending and transgressing Kings, etc.

It is not far to go for an example near you, your Grandmother set aside, and
your Father an Infant crowned; and the State did it here in England; here has
not been a want of some examples, they have made bold (the Parliament and the
People of England) to call their Kings to account, there are frequent examples
of it in the Saxons time, the time before the Conquest; since the Conquest
there wants not some Presidents neither; King Edward the second, King Richard
the second, were dealt with so by the Parliament, as they were deposed and
deprived: and truly Sir, whoever shall look into their stories, they shall not
find the Articles that are charged upon them to come near to that height and
capitalness of Crimes that are laid to your charge, nothing near.

Sir, you were pleased to say the other day, wherein they descend, and I did
not contradict it, but take altogether: Sir, if you were as the Charge speaks,
and no otherwise admitted K. of England, but for that you were pleased then to
allege, how that almost for a thousand years these things have been, stories
will tell you, if you go no higher than the time of the Conquest; if you do
come down since the Conquest, you are the 24th King from William called the
Conqueror, you shall find one half of them to come merely from the State, and
not merely upon the point of Descent; it were easy to be instanced to you, the
time must not be lost that way. And truly Sir, what a grave and learned Judge
said in his time, and well known to you, is since printed for posterity, That
although there was such a thing as a Descent many times, yet the Kings of
England ever held the greatest assurance of their titles, when it was declared
by Parliament: And Sir, your Oath, the manner of your Coronation does show
plainly, That the Kings of England, and though it is true by the Law the next
person in blood is designed; yet if there were just cause to refuse him, the
people of England might do it. For there is a Contract and Bargain made between
the King and his People, and your Oath is taken, and certainly Sir, the Bond is
reciprocal; for as you are the liege Lord, so they liege Subjects, and we know
very well that has been so much spoken of, Ligantis est duplex. This we know
now, the one tie, the one Bond, is the bond of perfection which is due from the
Sovereign, the other is the bond of Subjection that is due from the Subject.
Sir, if this bond be once broken, farewell Sovereignty, Subjectio trahit, etc.

These things may not be denied, Sir; I speak it the rather, and I pray God it
may work upon your heart, that you may be sensible of your miscarriages. For
whether you have been, as by your Office you ought to be, a Protector of
England, or the Destroyer of England, let all England judge, or all the world
that has looked upon it. Sir, though you have it by Inheritance in the way
that is spoken of, yet it must not be denied that your Office was an Office of
Trust, and an Office of the highest trust lodged in any single person: For as
you were the grand Administrator of Justice, and others were as your Delegates,
to see it done throughout your Realms, if your great Office were to do Justice,
and preserve your People from wrong, and instead of doing that, you will be the
great wrong-doer your self; If, instead of being a Conservator of the Peace,
you will be the Grand Disturber of the Peace, surely this is contrary to your
Office, contrary to your Trust. Now Sir, if it be an Office of Inheritance, as
you speak of, your Title by Descent, let all men know that great Offices are
seizable and forfeitable, as if you had it but for a year, and for your life;
Therefore Sir, it will concern you to take into your serious consideration your
great miscarriages in this kind.

Truly Sir, I shall not particularize the many miscarriages of your Reign
whatsoever, they are famously known, it had been happy for the Kingdom, and
happy for you too, if it had not been so much known and so much felt, as the
story of your miscarriages must needs be, and has been already.

Sir, That that we are now upon by the command of the highest Court, has been
and is to Try and Judge you for great offenses of yours. Sir, the Charge has
called you Tyrant, a Traitor, a Murderer, and a public Enemy to the
Commonwealth of England. Sir, it had been well if that any of all these terms
might rightly and justly have been spared, if any one of them at all.


King. Ha?


President. Truly Sir, we have been told, Rex est dum been regit, Tyrannus qui
populum opprimet; and if so be that be the definition of a Tyrant, then see how
you come short of it in your Actions, whether the highest Tyrant by that way of
Arbitrary Government, and that you have sought to introduce, and that you have
sought to put, you were putting upon the People, whether that was not as high
an Act of Tyranny as any of your Predecessors were guilty of, nay many degrees
beyond it.

Sir, the term Traitor cannot be spared, we shall easily agree it must denote
and suppose a breach of Trust, and it must suppose it to be done by a
Superior; and therefore Sir, as the People of England might have incurred that
respecting you, if they had been truly guilty of it, as to the definition of
Law; so on the other side, when you did break your Trust to the Kingdom, you
did break your Trust to your Superior: For the Kingdom is that for which you
were trusted: And therefore Sir, for this breach of Trust, when you are called
to account, you are called to account by your Superiors. Minimus ad Majorem in
judicium vocat. And Sir, the People of England cannot be so far wanting to
themselves, which God having dealt so miraculously and gloriously for, they
having power in their hands, and their great Enemy, they must proceed to do
Justice to themselves and to you: For, Sir, the Court could heartily desire,
That you would lay your hand upon your heart, and consider what you have done
amiss: That you would endeavor to make your peace with God. Truly Sir, These
are your high crimes, Tyranny and Treason.

There is a third thing too, if those had not been, and that is Murder, which
is laid to your charge. All the bloody Murders that have been committed since
this time that the Division was betwixt you and your People, must be laid to
your charge, that have been acted or committed in these late Wars. Sir, it is
an heinous and crying sin; and truly Sir, if any man will ask us what
punishment is due to a Murderer, Let Gods Law, let Man's Law speak. Sir, I will
presume that you are so well read in Scripture, as to know what God himself
has said concerning the shedding of Man's blood: Genesis 9. Number. 35. will tell you
what the punishment is, and which this Court in behalf of the Kingdom are
sensible of, of that innocent blood that has been shed, whereby indeed the Land
stands still defiled with that blood, and as the Text has it, It can no way be
cleansed, but with the shedding of the blood of him that shed this blood. Sir,
we know no Dispensation from this blood in that Commandment, Thou shall do no
Murder; we do not know but that it extends to Kings, as well as to the meanest
Peasants, the meanest of the People, the command is universal. Sir, Gods Law
forbids it, Man's Law forbids it, nor do we know that there is any manner of
exception, nor even in man's Laws, for the punishment of Murder in you. It Is
true, that in the case of Kings every private hand was not to put forth it self
to this work for their Reformation and punishment. But Sir, the People
represented having power in their hands, had there been but one wilful act of
Murder by you committed, had power to have convented you, and to have punished
you for it.

But then Sir, the weight that lies upon you in all those respects that have
been spoken, by reason of your Tyranny, Treason, breach of Trust, and the
Murders that have been committed, surely Sir, it must drive you into a sad
consideration concerning your eternal condition: As I said at first, I know it
cannot be pleasing to you to hear any such things as these are mentioned unto
you from this Court, for so we do call our selves, and justify our selves to
be a Court, and a High Court of Justice, authorized by the highest and
solemnest Court of the Kingdom, as we have often said; and although you do yet
endeavor what you may to dis-court us, yet we do take knowledge of our selves
to be such a Court as can administer Justice to you, and we are bound, Sir, in
duty to do it. Sir, all I shall say before the reading of your Sentence, it is
but this; the Court does heartily desire, that you will seriously think of
those evils that you stand guilty of. Sir, you said well to us the other day,
you wished us to have God before our eyes: Truly Sir, I hope all of us have so,
that God that we know is a King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, that God with whom
there is no respect of persons, that God that is the avenger of innocent blood,
we have that God before us, that God that does bestow a Curse upon them that
withhold their hands from shedding of blood, which is the case of guilty
Malefactors, and that do deserve death; That God we have before our eyes, and
were it not that the conscience of our duty has called us unto this place, and
this employment, Sir, you should have had no appearance of a Court here: but
Sir, we must prefer the discharge of our duty unto God, and unto the Kingdom,
before any other respect whatsoever: and although at this time many of us, if
not all of us, are severely threatened by some of your party, what they intend
to do. Sir, we do here declare, that we shall not decline, or forbear the doing
of our duty in the administration of Justice even to you, according to the
merit of your offense, although God should permit those men to effect all that
bloody design in hand against us. Sir, we will say, and we will declare it, as
those Children in the fiery Furnace, that would not worship the golden Image
that Nebuchadnezzar had set up, That their God was able to deliver them from
that danger that they were near unto; but yet if he would not do it, yet,
notwithstanding that, they would not fall down and worship the Image: we shall
thus apply it: That though we should not be delivered from those bloody hands
and hearts that conspire the overthrow of the Kingdom in general, of us in
particular, for acting in this great work of Justice, though we should perish
in the work, yet by Gods grace, and by Gods strength, we will go on with it:
And this is all our Resolutions. Sir, I say for your self, we do heartily wish
and desire, that God would be pleased to give you a sense of your sins, that
you would see wherein you have done amiss, that you may cry unto him, that God
would deliver you from bloodguiltiness. A good King was once guilty of that
particular thing, and was clear otherwise, saving in the matter of Vriah. Truly
Sir, the Story tells us, that he was a repentant King, and it signifies enough
that he had dyed for it, but that God was pleased to accept of him, and to give
him his pardon: Thou shall not dye, but the Child shall dye, thou have given
cause to the enemies of God to blaspheme.


King. I would desire only one word before you give sentence, and that is, That
you would hear me concerning those great imputations that you have laid to my
charge.


President. Sir, you must give me leave to go on, for I am not far from your
Sentence, and your time is now past.


King. But I shall desire you will hear me a few words to you, for truly
whatever Sentence you will put upon me, in respect of those heavy imputations I
see by your speech you have put upon me, that I, Sir, it is very true that --


President. Sir, I must put you in mind, Truly Sir, I would not willingly at
this time, especially, interrupt you in any thing you have to say, that is
proper for us to admit of; but Sir, you have not owned us a Court, and you look
upon us as a sort of people met together, and we know what Language we receive
from your party.


King. I know nothing of that.


Pres. You disavow us as a Court, and therefore for you to address your self to
us, not to acknowledge us as a Court to judge of what You say, it is not to be
permitted; and the truth is, all along from the first time, You were pleased to
disavow and disown us, the Court needed not to have heard You one word; for
unless they be acknowledged a Court, and engaged, it is not proper for you to
speak: Sir, we have given you too much liberty already, and admitted of too
much delay, and we may not admit of any further; were it proper for us to do,
we should hear You freely, and we should not have declined to have heard You at
large, what you could have said or proved on your behalf, whether for totally
excusing or for in part excusing those great and heinous charges that in whole
or in part are laid upon You. But Sir, I shall trouble You no longer, Your sins
are so large a dimension, that if you do but seriously think of them they will
drive you to a sad consideration, they may improve in you a sad and serious
repentance. And that the Court does heartily wish, that You may be so penitent
for what You have done amiss, that God may have mercy at leastwise upon your
better part. Truly Sir, for the other, it is our parts and duties to do that
that the Law prescribes, we are not here Jus dare, but Jus dicere; We cannot be
unmindful of what the Scriptures tell us, For to acquit the guilty is of equal
abomination as to condemn the innocent; we may not acquit the guilty; what
Sentence the Law affirms to a Traitor, Tyrant, a Murderer, and a public Enemy
to the Country, that Sentence you are now to hear read unto you, and that is
the Sentence of the Court

The Lord President commands the Sentence to be read. Make an O Yes, and
command silence while the Sentence is read.

O Yes made, silence commanded.

The Clerk read the Sentence, which was drawn up in parchment.

Whereas the Commons of England in Parliament have appointed them an high Court
of Justice for the Trying of Charles Stuart King of England, before whom he had
been three times convented, and at first time a charge of high Treason, and
other crimes and misdemeanors was read in the behalf of the Kingdom of England,
etc.

Here the Clerk read the Charge.

Which Charge being read unto him as aforesaid, He the said Charles Stuart, was
required to give his Answer, but he refused so to do, and so expressed the
several passages at his Trial in refusing to answer.

For all which Treasons and Crimes, this Court does adjudge, That the said
Charles Stuart, as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and a public Enemy, shall be
put to Death, by the severing his Head from his Body.

After the Sentence read, the Lord President said, This Sentence now read and
published, it is the Act, Sentence, Judgment, and Resolution of the whole Court.

Here the Court stood up, and assenting to what the President said.


King. Will you hear me a word Sir?


President. Sir, you are not to be heard after the Sentence.


King. No Sir?


President. No Sir, by your favor Sir: Guard withdraw your Prisoner.


King. I may speak after the sentence --

By your favor Sir, I may speak after the sentence ever.

By your favor (hold) the sentence Sir --

I say Sir, I do --

I am not suffered for to speak, expect what Justice other people will have.


O Yes, All manner of persons that have any thing else to do, are to depart at
this time, and to give their attendance in the Painted Chamber, to which place
this Court does forthwith adjourn it self.

Then the Court rose, and the King went with his Guard to Sir Robert Cottons,
and from thence to White Hall.

The Names of those Persons that were present at the Sentencing of the KING to
Death.
John Bradshaw President. John Lisle, William Say, Oliver Cromwell, Henry
Ireton, Sir Hardresse Waller, Valentine Walton, Thomas Harrison, Edward Whaley,
Thomas Pride, Isaac Ewers, Lord Gray of Groby, Sir John Danvers Knight, Sir
Thomas Maleverer Bar. Sir John Bourchier Knight. William Heveningham, Alderman
Pennington, William Purefoy, Henry Martin, John Barkstead, John Blakiston,
Gilbert Millington, Sir William Constable Bar. Edmond Ludlow, John Hutchinson,
Sir Mich Livesay Bar. Robert Tichborn, Owen Roe, Robert Lilburn, Adrian Scroop,
Richard Deane, John Okey, John Hewson, William Goffe, Cornelius Holland, John
Carew, John Jones, Miles Corbet, Francis Allin, Peregrine Pelham, John Moore,
John Aldred, Henry Smith, Humphrey Edwards, Gregory Clement, Thomas Woogan, Sir
Gregory Norton Knight. Edmond Harvy, John Venn, Thomas Scot, Tho. Andrews
Alderman, William Cawly, Anthony Stapley, John Downs, Thomas Horton, Thomas
Hammond, Nicholas Love, Vincent Potter, Augustine Garland, John Dixwel, George
Fleetwood, Simon Meyne, James Temple, Peter Temple, Daniel Blagrave, Thomas
Wait.
Ordered that Sir Hardress Waller, Coll. Harrison, Com. General Ireton, Coll.
Dean, and Coll. Okey, are appointed a Committee to consider of the Time and
Place for the Execution of the King, according to his Sentence given by the
high Court of Justice.

Painted Chamber, Lunae, Jan. 29. 1648.
Upon report made from the Committee for considering of the Time and Place of
the Executing of the Judgment against the King: that the said Committee have
resolved that the open Street before White Hall is a fit place; And that the
said Committee conceive it fit, that the King be there Executed the morrow, the
King having already notice thereof; The Court approved thereof, and ordered a
Warrant to be drawn for that purpose, which Warrant was accordingly drawn and
agreed unto; and ordered to be engrossed, which was done, and Signed and Sealed
accordingly, as follows.

At the High Court of Justice for the Trying and Judging of Charles Stuart King
of England, January 29, 1648.
WHereas Charles Stuart King of England, is, and stands Convicted, Attainted
and Condemned of high Treason, and other high Crimes, and Sentence upon
Saturday last was pronounced against him by this Court, to be put to death by
the severing of his head from his body; of which Sentence, Execution yet
remains to be done: These are therefore to will and require you to see the said
Sentence Executed in the open street before White Hall, upon the morrow, being
the 30th day of this instant month of January, between the hours of Ten in the
morning, and Five in the afternoon of the same day, with full effect; And for
so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant. And these are to require all
Officers and Soldiers, and other the good people of this Nation of England, to
be assisting unto you in this service.

Given under our Hands and Seals.
To Coll. Francis Hacker, Coll. Huncks, and Lieuten. Coll. Phray, and to every
of them:
Sealed and subscribed by J. Bradshaw, O, Cromwell, Hen. Ireton, Har. Waller,
Jo. Lisle, Val. Walton, Tho. Gray, Ed. Whaley, Mich. Livesey, Jo. Okey, Jo.
Danvers, Tho. Maleverer, Will. Goffe, Tho. Pride, Tho. Harrison, Jo. Hewson, Ri.
Dean, Robert Tichborn, Ow. Roe, Jo. Barkstead, G. Fleetwood, Gil. Milington,
Tho. Horton, W. Say, W. Constable, Miles Corbet, Jo. Ven, Hen. Martin. etc.

Painted Chamber. Jan. 30. 1648.
The Commissioners met, and ordered, That Mr. Marshall, Mr. Nigh, Mr. Caryll,
Mr. Salway, and Mr. Dell, be desired to attend the King, to administer to him
those Spiritual helps as should be suitable to his present condition, and
Lieutenant Colonel Goffe is desired forthwith to repair unto them for that
purpose.

Who did so, but after informed the Court, That the King being acquainted
therewith, refused to confer with them, expressing that he would not be
troubled with them.

Ordered, That the Scaffold upon which the King is to be executed, be covered
with Black.

The Warrant for executing the King being accordingly delivered to those
parties to whom the same was directed, Execution was done upon him according to
the tenor of the Warrant about two of the Clock in the Afternoon of the said
30. of January.

After Sentence, The King being hurried from their Bar, as he passed down the
stairs, the common Soldiers (laying aside all Reverence to Sovereignty)
scoffed at him, casting the smoke of their stinking Tobacco in his face (no
Smell more offensive to him) and flinging their foul pipes at his feet; But one
more insolent than the rest, defiled his venerable Face with his spittle, for
his Majesty was observed with much patience to wipe it off with his
Handkerchief, and as he passed, hearing them cry out Justice, Justice, Poor
soul (said he) for a piece if money, they would do so for their Commanders.
That Night being Saturday, January 27. the King lodged at White Hall; that
evening a Member of the Army (acquainted the Committee) with the desires of the
King, that seeing they had passed Sentence of Death upon him, and the time of
his Execution might be nigh, that he might see his Children, and receive the
Sacrament, and that Dr. Juxon Bishop of London, might be admitted to pray with
him in his private Chamber; both which were granted.

The next day, being Sunday, January 28. the King was attended by his Guard, to
Saint James's, where the Bishop of London preached privately before him; his
Text was in Romans 2.16. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of all men
by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel.

Monday Jan. 29. His Children were permitted to come to him, where passed this
following Discourse, as it was set down in writing by his Daughter the Lady
Elizabeth (which Lady Elizabeth some months after, being confined to
Carisbrough-Castle in the Isle of Wight, died there with grief for the
sufferings of her Dear Father.)

His Children being come to meet him, He first gave his Blessing to the Lady
Elizabeth, and bad her to remember to tell her Brother James, whenever she
should see him, that it was his Fathers last desire that he should no more look
upon Charles as his eldest Brother only, but be obedient unto him as his
Sovereign; and that they should love one another, and forgive their Fathers
Enemies. Then said the King to her, Sweetheart you will forget this: No (said
she) I shall never forget it whilst I live; and pouring forth abundance of
tears, promised him to write down the particulars.

Then the King taking the Duke of Gloucester upon his knee, said, Sweetheart,
now they will cut off thy Fathers head (upon which words the Child looking very
steadfastly on him,) Mark child what I say, They will cut off my head, and
perhaps make thee a King: But mark what I say, you must not be a King, so long
as your brothers, Charles and James, do live; for they will cut off your
Brothers heads (when they can catch them) and cut off thy head too at last: and
therefore I charge you do not be made a King by them. At which the child
sighing said, I will be torn in pieces first: which falling so unexpectedly
from one so young, it made the King rejoice exceedingly.

Tuesday Jan. 30. (The Fatal Day) He was about Ten of the Clock brought from
his Palace at Saint James's to White Hall, marched on foot (guarded with a
Regiment of foot Soldiers) through the Park, with their Colors flying, and
Drums beating, his private Guard of Partisans about him, Dr. Juxon Bishop of
London on one side, and Collon. Tomlinson on the other, both bare-headed,
bidding them go faster, saying That he now went before them to strive for an
heavenly Crown with less solicitude, than he had oftentimes bid his Soldiers
to fight for an Earthly Diadem. Being come to the end of the Park, he ascends
the Staris leading to the long Gallery in White Hall, and so into the Cabinet
Chamber, where he formerly used to Lodge; there his Majesty with the Bishop of
London continued for some time in Devotion, and received the blessed Sacrament
from the hand of the said Bishop; at which time he read for the second Lesson,
the 27. Chapter of Saint Matthews Gospel, which contained the History of the
Death and Passion of our Blessed Savior; the Communion ended, his Majesty
thanked the Bishop for selecting so seasonable and comfortable a portion of
Scripture. The Bishop modestly replied, No thanks were due to him, for it was
the Chapter appointed by the Rubric of the Church for the second morning
Lesson for that day being Jan. 30. Here the King continued at his Devotion,
refusing to dine, only about Twelve of the Clock, he eat a bit of bread, and
drank a Glass of Claret, from thence about one a Clock he was accompanied by
Dr. Juxon and Coll. Thomlinson, and other Officers formerly appointed to attend
him, and the private Guard of Partisans, with Musketeers on each side, through
the Banqueting House, adjoining to which the Scaffold was erected, between
White Hall Gate, and the Gate leading into the Gallery from Saint James's: The
Scaffold was hung round with Black, the Floor covered with black Bays, and the
Ax and Block laid in the middle of the Scaffold. There were diverse Companies of
Foot of Colonel Prides Regiment, and several Troops of Horse placed on the one
side of the Scaffold toward Kings-street, and on the other side toward
Charing Cross, and the multitudes of people that came to be Spectators very
great. The King being come upon the Scaffold, it was expected he would say
somewhat to the people, the which he did.

But because we have no other Relation of what his Majesty then spoke, save
what was taken in short hand on the Scaffold by three several Gentlemen, who
were very exquisite in that Art; nor had his Majesty any Copy (being surprised
and hastened by those who attended him to the Scaffold,) save only a few heads
in a little scrip of Paper, which after his death, the Soldiers took from the
Bishop of London, to whom he gave it: Therefore the Reader must be content with
this Copy, which was by them upon joint comparing of their Copies published,
some few words being altered to make the sense perfect.

The King being come upon the Scaffold, and looking about him upon the people,
who were kept off by Troops of Horse, so that they could not come near to hear
him, omitted what he had purposed to have spoken to them (as it is thought) and
turning himself to the Soldiers and Officers (the Instruments of the Regicide)
spoke to them to this effect*

The King being come upon the Scaffold, looked very carnestly upon the Block,
and asked Coll. Hacker if there were no higher: and then spoke thus (directing
his Speech chiefly to Coll. Thomlinson.)
King. I Shall be very little heard of any body here, I shall therefore speak a
word unto you here: indeed I could hold my peace very well, if I did not think
that holding my peace would make some men think, that I did submit to the Guilt
as well as to the Punishment; but I think it is my duty to God first, and to my
Country, for to clear my self both as an honest Man, a good King, and a good
Christian. I shall begin first with my Innocence; In troth, I think it not very
needful for me to insist long upon this, for all the world knows that I never
did begin a War with the two houses of Parliament, and I call God to witness,
to whom I must shortly make an account. That I never did intend for to encroach
upon their Privileges, they began upon me; it is the Militia they began upon,
they confessed that the Militia was mine, but they thought it fit for to have it
from me: and to be short, if any body will look to the dates of Commissions, of
their Commissions and mine, and likewise to the Declarations, will see clearly
that they began these unhappy troubles, not I: so that as to the guilt of these
enormous Crimes that are laid against me, I hope in God that God will clear me
of; I will not, I am in charity: God forbid that I should lay it upon the two
Houses of Parliament, there is no necessity of either, I hope they are free of
this guilt: for I do believe that ill instruments between them and me, has been
the chief cause of all this bloodshed: so that by way of speaking, as I find my
self clear of this, I hope (and pray God) that they may too: yet for all this,
God forbid that I should be so ill a Christian as not to say that Gods
judgments are just upon me: Many times he does pay Justice by an unjust
Sentence, that is ordinary. I will only say this, That unjust Sentence
Strafford.
that I suffered for to take effect, is punished now by an unjust Sentence upon
me: So far I have said, to show you that I am an Innocent man.

Now for to show you that I am a good Christian: I hope there is ( Strafford.
Pointing to Dr. Juxon,) a good man that will bear me witness, That I have
forgiven all the world, and even those in particular that have been the chief
causers of my death; who they are, God knows, I do not desire to know, I pray
God forgive them. But this is not all, my Charity must go further, I wish that
they may repent, for indeed they have committed a great sin in that particular:
I pray God with St. Stephen, that this be not laid to their charge, nay not
only so, but that they may take the right way to the peace of the Kingdom; for
my Charity commands me, not only to forgive particular men, but my Charity
commands me to endeavor to the last gasp the Peace of the Kingdom. So (Sir) I
do wish with all my Soul (and I do hope there is some here Turning to some
Gentlemen that wrote.
will carry it further) that they may endeavor the Peace of the Kingdom.

Now (Sirs) I must show you both how you are out of the way, and will put you
in the way: First, you are out of the way, for certainly all the way you ever
have had yet, as I could find by any thing, is in the way of Conquest;
certainly this is an ill way: for Conquest (Sir) in my opinion is never just,
except there be a good just Cause, either for matter of wrong, or just Title,
and then if you go beyond it, the first quarrel that you have to it, is it
that makes it unjust at the end that was just at first: But if it be only
matter of Conquest, then it is a great Robbery, as a Pirate said to Alexander,
that he was the great Robber, he was but a petty Robber: and so, Sir, I do
think the way that you are in, is much out of the way. Now, Sir, for to put you
in one way, believe it, you will never do right, nor God will never prosper
you, until you give God his due, the King his due (that is, my Successors) and
the People their due: I am as much for them as any of you: You must give God
his due, by regulating rightly his Church, (according to his Scriptures) which
is now out of order: For to set you in a way particularly, now I cannot, but
only this, A National Synod freely called, freely debating among themselves,
must settle this; when that every Opinion is freely and clearly heard.

For the King, indeed I will not -- ( Then turning to a Gentleman that touched
the Ax, said, Hurt not the Ax, that may hurt Meaning if he did blunt the edge.
me.) For the King, the Laws of the Land will clearly instruct you for that;
therefore, because it concerns my own particular, I only give you a touch of it.

For the people: and truly I desire their Liberty and freedom as much as any
body whosoever, but I must tell you, that their Liberty and freedom consists in
having of Government, those Laws by which their Life and their Goods may be
most their own. It is not for having share in Government, (Sir) that is nothing
pertaining to them: A Subject and a Sovereign are clean different things, and
therefore until they do that, I mean, That you do put the people in that
Liberty, as I say, certainly they will never enjoy themselves.

Sir, It was for this that now I am come here: If I would have given way to an
Arbitrarie way, for to have all Laws changed according to the power of the
Sword, I needed not to have come here; and therefore I tell you (and I pray God
it be not laid to your charge) that I am the Martyr of the people.

In Troth Sirs, I shall not hold you much longer, for I will only say this to
you, that in truth I could have desired some little time longer, because I
would have put this that I have said in a little more order, and a little
better digested than I have done, and therefore I hope you will excuse me.

I have delivered my Conscience, I pray God that you do take those courses
that are best for the good of the Kingdom, and your own salvations.


Dr. Juxon. Will your Majesty (though it may be very well known, your Majesty's
affections to Religion, yet it may be expected that you should) say somewhat
for the worlds satisfaction.


King. I thank you very heartily (my Lord) for that I had almost forgotten it.
In Troth Sirs, My Conscience in Religion I think is very well known to all the
world, and therefore I declare before you all, That I die a Christian,
according to the profession of the Church of England, as I found it left me by
my Father, and this honest man Pointing to Dr. Juxon.
I think will witness it. Then turning to the Officers said, Sirs, excuse me
for this same, I have a good cause, and I have a gracious God, I will say no
more. Then turning to Colonel Hacker, he said, Take care they do not put me to
pain, and Sir, this, and it please you. But then a Gentleman coming near the
Ax, the King said, Take heed of the Ax, pray take heed of the Ax. Then the King
speaking to the Executioner, said, I shall say but very short Prayers, and when
I thrust out my hands --


Then the King called to Doctor Juxon for his Nightcap, and having put it on,
he said to the Executioner, Does my hair trouble you? who desired him to put it
all under his Cap, which the King did accordingly by the help of the
Executioner and the Bishop: then the King turning to Doctor Juxon, said, I have
a good Cause, and a gracious God on my side.

Doctor Juxon. There is but one Stage more, this Stage is turbulent and
troublesome, it is a short one: But you may consider, it will soon carry you a
very great way: it will carry you from Earth to Heaven; and there you shall
find a great deal of cordial joy and comfort.


King. I go from a corruptible to an incorruptible Crown; where no disturbance
can be, no disturbance in the world.


Doctor Juxon. You are exchanged from a Temporal to an Eternal Crown, a good
exchange.

The King then said to the Executioner, Is my hair well? Then the King took off
his Cloak and his George, giving his George to Doctor Juxon, saying, Remember
(* It is thought for to give it to the Prince.) Then the King put off his
Doublet, and being in his Wastcoat, put his Cloak on again, then looking upon
the Block, said to the Executioner, You must set it fast.


Executioner. It is fast, Sir.


King. When I put my hands out this way, stretching them out, them --


After that, having said two or three words (as he stood) to himself, with
hands and eyes lift up; Immediately stooping down, laid his Neck upon the
Block: and then the Executioner again putting his hair under his Cap, the King
said (thinking he had been going to strike) Stay for the sign.

Executioner. Yes, I will and it please your Majesty.


And after a very little pause, the King stretching forth his hands, the
Executioner at one blow severed his head from his body: The head being off, the
Executioner held it up, and showed it to the people; which done, it was with
the Body put in a Coffin covered with black Velvet for that purpose, and
conveyed into his Lodgings there: And from thence it was carried to his house
at Saint James's, where his body was embalmed and put in a Coffin of Lead, laid
there a fortninght to be seen by the people; and on the Wednesday sevennight
after, his Corpse embalmed and coffined in Lead, was delivered chiefly to the
care of four of his Servants, viz. Mr. Herbert, Captain Anthony Mildmay, his
Sewers, Captain Preston, and John Joyner, former Cook to his Majesty; they
attended with others, clothed in Mourning Suits and Cloaks, accompanied the
Hearse that night to Windsor, and placed it in that which was formerly the Kings
Bedchamber; next day it was removed into the Deans Hall, which Room was hanged
with black, and made dark; Lights burning round the Hearse, in which it remained
till Three in the Afternoon, about which time came the Duke of Lenox, the
Marquess of Hertford, the Marquess of Dorchester, the Earl of Lyndsey, having
obtained an order from the Parliament, for the decent Interment of the King
their Royal Master, provided the expense thereof exceeded not five hundred
pounds: At their coming into the Castle, they showed their Order of Parliament
to Colonel Wichcot Governor of the Castle, desiring the Interment might be in
St. Georges Chapel, and by the Form in the Common Prayer Book of the Church of
England; this request was by the Governor denied, saying, It was improbable
that the Parliament would permit the use of what they had so solemnly
abolished, and therein destroy their own Act. To which the Lords replied, There
is a difference betwixt destroying their own Act, and dispensing with it, and
that no Power so binds its own hands, as to disable it self in some cases: All
could not prevail, the Governor persisting in the Negative, the Lords betook
themselves to the search of a convenient place for the Burial of the Corpse; the
which after some pains taking therein, they discover a Vault in the middle of
the Quire, wherein, as is probably conjectured, lies the body of King Henry
the Eighth, and his beloved Wife the Lady Jane Seamor, both in Coffins of Lead;
in this Vault, there being Room for one more, they resolve to inter the body of
the King, the which was accordingly brought to the place, born by the Officers
of the Garrison, the four Corners of the Velvet Pall born up by the aforesaid
four Lords, the pious Bishop of London following next, and other Persons of
Quality; the Body was committed to the earth with sighs and tears, especially
of the Reverend Bishop, to be denied to do the last Duty and Service to his
Dear and Royal Master; the Velvet Pall being cast into the Vault was laid over
the Body, upon the Coffin was these words set, KING CHARLES 1648.

After the Regicides had committed this Horrid and nefarious Act, the
prevailing Power consisting of a patcht number of the House of Commons, and the
chief Officers of the Army, combined together, and seeing how successfully and
unopposed they had effected this so unparalleled a Deed, to which they knew the
generality of the Nation were utterly averse, and as far as they durst, showed
their absolute dislike; They in the next place fall upon the alteration of the
Government, thinking to make sure work by subverting the Ancient Monarchy of
this Realm, and instead thereof introducing that which they called a Free
State, or Commonwealth. For constituting of which the first thing they did,
was to Vote and publish by Proclamation, That whereas several pretenses might
be made to the Crown, etc. to the apparent hazard of the public Peace, no
Person whatsoever should presume to proclaim or any way promote Charles Stuart,
Son of the said Charles late King of England, or any other person to be King or
chief Magistrate, etc. by color of Inheritance, or any other claim whatsoever,
without the free Consent of the People in Parliament; first signified by a
particular Act for that purpose, any Law or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding; and whosoever should contrary to this Order proclaim, etc.
shall be adjudged a Traitor, and suffer accordingly.

This proceeding was founded upon a Maxim which they had taken up, and agreed
on among themselves, namely, That all Power and Authority is Originally in the
People: But well knowing that their Councils had soon been confounded, and
themselves interrupted in the course they had begun, if they had incorporated
again with those of their Members which had been forcibly kept out by the Army,
they Resolve and decree, 1. That all those Members who had assented to the Vote
of December. 5. concerning the Kings Concessions (for that was the occasion of
their seclusion) should never be readmitted, and that those that Voted in the
Negative, should presently enter their said dissent, or before they were to be
admitted.

And together with the fortune of Monarchy was involved that of the House of
Peers, who having sent to desire a Conference about settling the Government, in
regard the Judges Commissions were determined by the Kings Death, instead of an
Answer to their Message, the Junto of the Commons upon debate Voted, the Lords
House to be useless and dangerous, and therefore to be laid aside, as in like
manner they declared the Kingly Office to be unnecessary and Burthensom, and
therefore fit to be abolished; only they allowed the Lords the Privilege of
being capable to be chosen Burgesses into the House of Commons; But the Lords
were so highly incensed thereat, that there was suddenly published a
Declaration in the name of all the Peers and Barons of the Realm, wherein they
protest against the Proceedings of the Commons. And a while after some of the
Kings friends in despite of all Votes, Acts, and Orders to the contrary,
promoted a Proclamation, in the name of all the Nobility, Gentry, and
Commonalty of the Kingdom, for proclaiming Charles our present Sovereign to be
King of England.

But little could unarmed Declarations prevail against the reigning Power of an
Armed faction, who now assumed new Ensigns of Sovereignty, cancelling the Old,
and caused all Writs, Commissions, and Instruments of public Concernment, to
be issued out under a new Style and Test, that is of, The Keepers of the
Liberties of England by Authority of Parliament. They ordered the old Great
Seal to be broken, and a new one to be made, with the Arms of England and
Ireland on one side, and this Inscription, The Great Seal of England; and on
the other side the House of Commons with this Inscription, In the first Year of
Freedom by Gods blessing restored, 1648. and appointed the Money to bear the
Arms of England and Ireland, with this Motto, God with us; and the Great Seal
was entrusted with three Commissioners: They likewise caused the Kings Arms to
be pulled down every where, and the Kings Picture in the Old Exchange they
caused to be defaced, and the following Inscription to be be set behind it in
Golden Letters: Exit Tyrannus Regum ultimus, Anno Libertatis Angliae Restitutae
Primo, Anno 1648. Jan. 30.

They next proceed to erect another Illegal High Court of Justice, wherein they
brought to Trial D. Hamilton taken at the fight at Preston, the E. of Holland
at Kingston Fight, and the L. Capell and L. Goring taken at the Seige of
Colchester; The three first were Condemned and beheaded at the Palaceyard at
Westminster; After this the L. Fairfax having laid down his Commission, the
Parliament made Oliver Cromwell their General, who a while after was sent into
Ireland, where he proved very successful.

His Majesty was now in France, and hoped to get aid there, but found none; but
the Junto proceeded to make Sale of the King and Queens Lands, and made a
formal Act for abolishing Kingly Government and disinheriting the Roval Issue,
and seting up a Republic or Free State; This Act Alderman Reynardson was
commanded to proclaim in the City, which he refusing, was committed to the
Tower, with three Aldermen more; and a new Lord Mayor was chosen by a
Common Hall, who attended with several other Aldermen as complyant as himself,
readily obeyed the Commands of his Masters, and proclaimed their Edict in
several places of the City.

A while after, His Majesty was solemnly Proclaimed in Scotland, and after
great debate among them there, they at length agree on some Propositions to be
sent to the King, who was then in the Isle of Jersey, and Mr. Windram Lord of
Libberton was appointed Messenger; who bringing them to the King, they were
stiffly debated on each side; but at last Breda in Holland was appointed for
the place of a Solemn Treaty, where Commissioners from the Estates and Kirk met
the King, and delivered their Propositions: During which Treaty, the Marquess
of Montross was seized in Scotland, and for opposing the Kirk Party, was
condemned and Executed upon a Gibbet near fifty foot high, with all imaginable
Contempt; which His Majesty having an Account of, was much troubled, and the
Treaty had like to have been broken off, but at length through the necessity of
Affairs was concluded, and being carried to Edinburgh, after much debate it was
resolved, another Message should be sent to invite the King over; but the
Parliament here in England having notice of all these Proceedings in Scotland,
prepared an Army thereupon to invade Scotland, under the command of their
General Oliver Cromwell.

About this time General Blake their Admiral, took, sunk and burnt most of
Prince Ruperts Fleet, which was a great damage to the Kings Affairs. And now
the King being arrived at Spey in the North of Scotland, some Lords were sent
down to accompany him to Edinburgh: As he came along he was entertained with
the general Joy of all the People, and at Aberdeen he was presented with 1500
Pounds, which thing was ill taken by the Committee of Estates, and Kirk; and
therefore they sent an Injunction to prohibit other Places from doing the like;
The King being now come to Edinburgh was again Proclaimed King, July 15. 1650.
but his Coronation was deferred by reason of the then Troubles, since the
English Army was upon the Borders, and the Scots now began to think how to
defend themselves, and therefore marched under the Command of Montgomery and
set upon the English at Muscleborough, but were worsted by them, and at Dunbar
the English wholly routed them, taking the pass there.

At the same time the Scots were divided among themselves into three Parties,
but the King returning with Montgomery to St. Johnstons they were all
reconciled, and the King on Jan. 1. 1650. was Crowned at Scone; and soon after
set up his Standard at Aberdeen, resolving to be himself Generalissimo of the
Scotch Army; About which time Sir Hen. Hyde was beheaded at London for his
Loyalty; and not long after Captain Brown Bushel received the like Doom, for
performing some signal services to the King; the King began to fortify
Sterlang, and the English drew near it: and Cromwell perceiving he could not
draw the Scots to a Field Battle, suddenly transported over Fyfe 1600 foot, and
four Troops of Horse, who with the help of Lambert and Okey, routed the Scots
under Sir John Brown, taking him and several other Persons of Quality
Prisoners, killing 2000 on the place, and taking about 120 Prisoners; not long
after Mr. Gibbons and Mr. Love were Beheaded on Tower Hill upon the discovery
of a Plot in England against the Parliament by the Presbyterians.

The King seeing the English prevail so fast, thought it best to quit Scotland,
and so Marched for England, July 30. 1651. which Cromwell observing, sent
Lambert after him with a select Party of Horse: The Kings Army being now in
England, the Parliament caused numerous Forces to be raised in most Counties in
England, and his Majesty marched on to Worcester and fortified it: In the mean
time Maj. General Lambert gained the pass at Vpton, by a desperate attempt, in
caussing some of his Troopers to swim the River on Horseback, carrying their
Pistols and Holsters in their hands, to save them from wet: whereby they put
Maj. Genesis Massey and his men to the Retreat, so that the Kings Party was forced
to quit the Town, and leave the pass to the Parliamentarians, who quickly made
a Bridge over the River; and Cromwell joining with the rest of the Forces
against the King, after some Sallies out of the Town against them, at length
the King in the Front of his men, sallied out of Town on Sept. 3. 1651. and so
valianty charged Cromwells Lifeguard, that they were forced to retire, till
seconded by fresh Forces, they put the Kings Party to the Retreat; and the King
had his Horse twice shot under him, and not able to rally again, they were
forced to fly into the Town, where Cromwells Party entered Pell Mell with them,
and then the Cry went, Save the King, Save the King.

The King seeing all lost, with some of his Nobles and Servants, escaped with
much difficulty to a Farmers house in Staffordshire, where he disrobed
himself, and for want of Scissers had his Hair out off with a Knife; and so
with the Company of one Friend (who brought him Provision toward night) he
betook himself to a Wood, where he made an Oak his Palace; the Soldiers
hunting about for him, and a thousand Pound promised as a Reward to those that
could take him; It is supposed there were about three thousand slain at
Worcester, and seven hundred taken Prisoners, and not long after the E. of
Derby who was one of them, was Beheaded at Bolton in Lancashire.

His Majesty through many dangers and difficulties arrived at last safely at
Paris in France; And a while after Oliver Cromwell, April 20. 1653. Dissolved
the long Parliament, which had sat Twelve years, six months and seventeen
days. In this year and the next, there were five bloody Engagements at Sea
against the Dutch, in most of which the English were Victorious. Oliver
Cromwell called another Junto this year, which was termed the Little
Parliament, who sat some short time, and then delivered back their Power to
him from whom they had received it; And December 16. 1653. Cromwell was Sworn
Lord Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland, etc. And so the Government was
now again in a single Person, and in April after, the Protector concluded a
Peace with the Dutch, whose aid and assistance the King had strongly solicited
against him.

His Majesty after this sought a Reconciliation between France and Spain, and
hoping thereby to further his own Interest, he left France, and departed for
Germany, accompanied with his Cousin Prince Rupert; about which time Cromwell
had discovered a Plot in England against his Authority, and Colonel Gerrard
and Mr. Vowell suffered for the same at Tower Hill; Scotland began likewise to
stir again, the Earl of Glencarn, Monro, and Middleton having gotten some
Forces together, intended to have prosecuted the Kings Cause, but they were
routed by General Monk and Colonel Morgan.

According to the Treaty with France, Cromwell sent over some Forces to aid the
French in his Wars against Flanders, and the English were to have Dunkirk in
consideration thereof, which upon taking of it was accordingly delivered. In
the same year 1656. Cromwell by a Parliament garbled to his mind, was installed
L. Protector in Westminster Hall: and a while after, another Plot was
discovered; Sir Henry Slingsby, Dr. Hewet, Mr. Aston, and Mr. Stacy, suffered
Death upon the same Account, the two first being beheaded, and the other Drawn,
Hanged and Quartered, being charged to be concerned therein.

Upon Sept. 3. 1658. O. Cromwell departed this life in Whitehall, and lay in
State in Somer set-house till Nov. 23. following, when he was buried with great
Pomp in Westminster Abbey* After whom his Son Richard Succeeded, but was soon
thrust out of his Protectorship by Fleetwood and Lambert, who with the rest of
the Army called the Long Parliament again; after. which several Gentlemen in
Cheshire, under the conduct of Sir George Booth rose for defense of their
Privileges, but were defeated by Lambert; who soon after turned out this
remnant of the Long Parliament again, and erected a Government which they
called the Committee of Safety. All which Revolutions still advanced the Kings
Cause; Lambert now Marches North as far as New-Gastle to fight against General
Monk, but his men were unwilling to engage; and in the mean time the remainder
of the Long Parliament had again gotten together, and dissolved the Committee
of Safety, and then invited General Monk to march with his Army to London,
which he did accordingly, and was received with Joy, and soon after he procured
the Dissolution of that Long Parliament; and he calling another upon April 25.
1660. who being sat, unanimously Voted the restoration of his Majesty to his
Kingdoms, and accordingly upon May 29. following the King accompanied with the
Dukes of York and Gloucester, and attended with several Lords and Gentlemen,
arrived at Dover, where he was met by diverse Noble Personages, and among the
rest General Monk, who was dignified with the George and Garter.

In October following, several of the Regicides of the late King were Tried in
the Old Baily, and ten of them Executed at Charing Cross; that is, Thomas
Harrison, John Carew, Adrian Scroop, John Jones, Gregory Clement, Thomas Scot,
John Cook, Hugh Peter's, Francis Hacker, and Daniel Axtell.

Mary Princess of Orange coming over to Visit the King her Brother, fell sick
of the Small Pox and dyed; and in January after, one Vennor a Wine-cooper, and
some others in whom he had infused Enthusiastic Principles, put themselves in
Arms, and came into the City, but being opposed, they killed 22 of his
Majesty's Subjects, and about as many of them were slain, and the rest were
taken and dispersed; eleven of whom, and Vennor their leader, were executed in
several places in the City.

In the beginning of the next year Prince Henry D. of Gloucester dyed, and upon
April 23. following, being St. George's day, His Majesty K. Charles the 2. was
Crowned at Westminster, with great splendour and Solemnity; having the day
before made a Magnificent Passage from the Tower through the City of London
(where four curious Pageants were erected,) to Whitehall. And here we shall
conclude this abstract of so many various affairs, wishing all happiness to his
Majesty, and the preservation of the Protestant Religion forever.

FINIS.

