THE Secret History, OF THE Four Last Monarchs OF GREAT BRITAIN:

VIZ. James I. Charles I. Charles II. James II.


To which is added, An Appendix, Containing the Later Reign of James the
Second, from the Time o^ his Abdication of England, to this present November.
1693. Being an Account of his Transactions in Ireland, and France: With a more
particular Respect to the Inhabitants of Great Britain.

London, Printed in the Year 1693.

THE PREFACE.
THough it has pleased God to reserve the Art of reading Men's Thoughts to
Himself; yet as the Fruit tells the Name of the Tree, so do the outward Works
of Men, so far as their Cogitations are acted, give us, whereof to guess at the
rest: N^ Man can long continue Masqu^d in a counterfeit Behavior; The things
that are forced for pretenses, having no Gr^und to Truth, cannot long dissemble
their own Nature.

And though we ought not rashly to rake into the Ashes of the Dead (much less of
Deceased Princes,) and Express either their Personal Miscarriages or their
Failures in Managem^nt of the Government; yet, no doubt, but the making them
Public, may sometim^s contribute not a little to the General Good.

It is one of the Encomiums, given to Suetonius, That he made Public to the
World, the Vices and Miscarriages of the Twelve Caesar's, with the same freedom
with which they were by them Committed.

And there is no question, but one of his chiefest Reasons for so doing, was
this, Because he would not deceive Posterity; and all agree, that he was
Contemp^rary with the Three last. So that the Enormities of Domitian could not
but be fresh in his Memory, when he wrote his Life; and th^re might be several
Persons living, as might have the same particular Affection for Domician, as
there are now Adorers of our late Monarchs: For which reason, there is a wary
Caution among some People, That Truth is not always to be spoken. Which perhaps
may be som^tim^^ true; but, as the Case stands with th^se Sheets, not at all to
be taken notice of: The pa^ns of this short History, being as well to
Vindicate, as to Inform, and Written in Opp^sition to one of the French King's
most Scandalous Libe^s, and bi^ter Invectives against our present Sovereign;
Entitled, The True Portraicture of William Henry of Nassaw, etc. Now, to have
made a particular Answ^r to all the Extravagancies and Impertinent Flams of a
Malicious Libeller would have been a Fending and Proving altogether Fruitless.
It was therefore thought the more concise way, to bring our Late Monarchs Reign
upon the Stage; and then let all the World judge of the Furberies and Tyranny
of those Times, and the Integrity, Sincerity, and Sweetness of Their present
Majesty's Reign; since by comparing them, the most wilfully Blind may be
convinced, how infinitely happy we are under Their present Majesty's
^overnment, beyond what we were in the late R^ign; which were but a very
considerable matter (if any thing) below the French Tyranny, and considering
the unparalled Virtue, that are so Resplendent in our Gracious Sovereigns, we
may^ with all the reason in the World, assure our selves o^ a lasting Peace;
and as much Happiness under Them Now, as we had Troubles and Confusions under
the Former For Their Religion, Integrity and Moderation (which must always be
in conjunction, with Princes that are truly Patries Patriae) are as N^torious
to the World (so that Their greatest Enemies cannot deny them) as were the
Atheism, and furious Bigottism of the former Reigns; Vices much of the same
pernicious Consequences to a Kingdom, if the latter be not the more dangerous,
since the greatest Villainies that ever were perpetrated in the World, have been
Masqued with seeming Zeal for Religion.

But since there are not a few, wh^, though they seem to decry the Tyrannies of
the T^wo late Kings, yet approve of much the same Actions of Two that Preceded
them, (One of whom, some Men have Vainly, if not Blasphemously, compared to the
King of King;) not considering that they laid the Foundations of that Tyranny,
which the others brought to so great a Perfection. As to the former of them,
viz. K. James the I^ it will easily appear from this following History, what
great steps he made toward Tyranny: It is certain, that the reason He gave for
setting up Episcapacy in Scotland, was, That He might have so many Friends to
rely upon in Parliament, i. e. That by them, as the Dead Weight, He might the
better carry on His Designs there. And herein his Politics did not deceive
Him; for by their means, He and his Succ^ssors found it no hard m^tter to
reduce that Kingdom to as great Slavery, as any in Europe h^th groaned under of
late Years. How great a Pr^ficient he was in the Art of Dissimulation, or
King-Craft, I shall only insert one Instance of it here, which I omitted in the
History; especially, because I think it may not be ungrateful to the Reader,
viz. That after his Return from Denmark to Scotland, seeming mightily satisfied
with the Care the Kirk-Party had taken to preserve the Kingdom in Peace, during
his Absence; He was pleased to express himself thus, in a general Assembly,
That He blessed God, that He was Born at sike a Time of the Gospel, and to be
King of sike ^ Kirk, the purest Kirk in the World: The Kirk of Geneva, (says
He,) keeps Yuel and Pasche: What have they from the word of God for That? And
for our Neighbor Kirk of England, What is their Service, but an ill-said Mai^
in English? And concluded with the Solemnest Promises, to Maintain and Preserve
the Kirk; when (in the mean while) He was taking all underhand Methods to
supplant it, as He did a few Years after.

And as to His Successor, though a Kalender'd S. Yet after all the lying
Insinuations of self-designing, and -- ridden Persons of that Prince's singular
Religion, that very Act of Instituting Plays and Sports on the Lord's Day, is
no extraordinary Proof of it.

The Learned Sir Walter Rawleigh, in the Close of the Preface to his most
admirable History, advises the Reader to take heed, how he follows Truth too
close at the heels, lest it strike out his T^eth: I h^pe these Relations begins
with a distance of Time, not so far ^ff, that the Footsteps of Truth are worn
out, nor yet so near, as the Footsteps of it need to be feared.

And so irresistible is the F^rce of Truth, and the Divine Providence so great,
that however all possible Diligence may have been used to carry things in
Secret, and to Act by colorable Pretenses (Men often acting like Tumblers that
are Squint Eyed, looking one way, and Aiming another) yet in these our days,
God has brought great things to Light discovering many secret and close
Contrivances, many Private Consultations, and hidden Designs, which otherwise
probably neither We nor our Posterity should have ever known. I conclude this
my Preface, without the R^marks of a Learned Spaniard on History in general.

Satis est Historiae, si sit vera; quae ut reliqua habet omnia.

Siveritatem non habet obtinere nomen non Potest.

THE SECRET HISTORY. OF King JAMES I.
TIme, which puts a period to all things under the Sun, began now to shea^^ the
Sword of War, that had been long disputing the Controversy, which Religion and
Policy (that Princes mix together) had for many Years so fiercely maintained:
The w^^ring out of that old, but glorious, and most happy Piece of Sovereignty,
Queen Elizabeth, bating the Spa^ish Violence, and ending with the Irish
Rebellion, and Submission of the great Earl of Tyrone; as if the old Genius of
Iron-handed War, and a new one Crowned, with a Palm of Peace, had taken
Possession of the English Nation; James the Sixth, King of Scotland, was
Proclaimed King of England. For though Princes that find here a Mortal
Felicity, love not the noise of a Successor, in their Life time, yet they are
willing (for the Peace of their People) to have one, when they can hear no more
of it. That which this Blessed Queen could not endure from others, She was
pleased to express her self, and bequeath in her last Will, as a Legacy to
this, then happy Na^ion. He was Thirty Years of Age when he came to the Crown.
How dangerous the passage had been from his v^ry Infancy to his middle Age, is
not only written in may Histories, but the untam^d and untractable Spirits of
many of that Nation, are a sufficient Witness and Record.

The wise Queen found many petty Titles, but none of that Power, any other Hand
that should have reached for the Crown, might have caught a Cloud of Confusion;
and those Support^rs and Props, that held up Her Greatness (loath to submit to
Equals) made Scaffolds to his Triumphs.

In the prosecution of what I shall remark, relating to this King^ I shall
avoid all unnecessary Severity, and observe mo^e Duty and Respect than may
possibly be thought due by Posterity, to the Person of a Prince, that (after so
exact a Pattern as Queen Elizabeth left him) did, by debauching Parliaments,
and so often breaking his Word, so far irritate, no less than impoverish the
Subject, as his Son was forced to give Concession to one rend^red indissolvable
but by their own Will: A mischief never could have befallen England, had King
James left them in the same blessed Serene temper he found them, at the Death
of the Queen. The News of which was brought him first by Carry, after Earl of
Monmouth; who, not able to satisfy such a concourse of Doub^s and Questions^
as far more resolute Natures than His do often muster up on less occas^ons, the
King stood as in a maze, being more affected through the fear of Opposition,
than pleased with the present Report, till, by a lamer Post, He was adver^ised
of His being joy^ully Proclaimed in London, by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen; and
of the unquestioned Recep^ion His Title, in all Places, met with no less than
that the Hopes of some, and Fe^rs of the major part, assisted by the prudent
Carriage of the Treasurer, and ranting Protestations of the Earl of
Northumberland (that in all Places vapoured he would bring Him in by the Sword)
had stopped their Mouths, that desired he might be obliged to Articles: Amongst
these truly Noble, Heroic, and Public Spirits, was Sir Walter Rawleigh, the
Lord Cobham, Sir John Fortescue etc. Who were all af^erwards ruined by the
King; and the Noble Sir Walter most Barbarously c^t o^f.

This Prince held his Thoughts so intent upon Ease and Pleasure, that, to a^oid
any interruption, likely to impede any part of the Felicity he had possessed
his imagination with, from the Union of these Crowns, and to fit an Example for
his Neighbors imitation, whom he desired to bring into the like Resolution, he
cast himself, as it were, blindfold into a Peace with Spain, far more
destructive to England than a War. King James, throughout his whole Reign,
contenting himself with the humble thought of being a Terror to his own People,
not valluing that himself or Nation should make any considerable Figure among
Foreign Princes.

At his first coming, he was long detained from Westminster by a Plague, looked
upon as the greatest, till exceeded in that which broke out after his Death;
taken by the ill boding English for a presage of worse Days than they had
already seen: The good Government of Queen Elizabeth not being in probability
likely to bear the Charges (without falling into some destructive commotion) of
Two such Expensive Princes Succession, without having one more popular to
intervene.

After the Peace, of too much concernment to his Catholic Majesty, to afford
him leisure to imagine, much less to insert so rugged an Article as the
performance of any Promise our King had ^ade before his Reception, in case the
Papists did not oppose (which I have found Registered by many, and so high as
amounted to a Toleration at least, if not an Establishing of Popery; he then
observed in prudence it could not be conceded by this new King, having so many
of his Subjects Protestants for one of the Romish Profession; and being besides
no more Zealous than other Princes, that make use of a Religion only for a
Fence to immure their Persons and Prerogatives; but ^steem it a mere accident
where reason of State drives on a Bargain without it.

These neglects of the Kings of Spain and England; the first remaining as
careless of his Faith, as the other did of the performance of his Word, put the
Roman C^tholicks, for the present, into so great a Despair^ that led them into
that damned Conspira^y, called the Gun powder Treason; the account of which, in
general, is so well known, that I need not here ^nlarge, only give some hints
concerning it, which is not common to be met with. The French Ambassador, then
resident at Court, affirming to some Persons of Quality, his Intimates, That
the first Intimation of the Powder T^eason came from his Master, who received
it from the Jesui^s of his Faction, to the end he might share in our Ruins:
The Kingdom of England being, in the Pope's own Judgment, (at that time) too
great an addition to that of Spain; where, though it was first coined (some say
during the days of Queen Elizabeth^) yet the Priests that undertook the
promoting of it, sought to render it the most beneficial they could to their
respective Patrons. And here I cannot omit, that after this happy Discovery,
his Majesty sent an Agent on purpose to Cougratulate King James's great
Preservation: A Flattery so palpable, as the Pope could not refrain laughing in
the Face of Cardinal D' Ossat, when he first told it him; nor he forbear to
inform his King of it, as may be found in his Printed Letters; it being
notorious, that at King James's first assumption to the Throne of England, none
sought his Destruction more cordi^lly than the Spaniard, till a continued Tract
of Experience had fully acquai^ted him with his Temper. Nor was our King
himself backward in ^omenting this Inuocent Opinion amongst his Neighbors, but
did, as soon as he could possibly, by neglecting the Royal Ships, and casting
Cont^mpt upon all formerly in Military Employment (the Wings^ Nails, and Teeth
of this Nation) to testify to the World he meant to spoil no People of their
Honor, Lands, Felicity, Goods, or Laws, but only those all Princes celebrated
for Wisdom and Gallantry think themselves tied in Nature to preserve; by which
he entailed Misery upon his Succ^ssion; and, without the more Mercy of God,
Eternal Slavery to, etc. For, by penning up the English Valonr, and opening the
Fountain of Honor with a Succession of neglect cast upon the Nobility and
Commons in their Representatives, by denying them their reasonable Demands, or
deluding them after the Royal assent given, by going contrary to what was
Enacted; these Practices put him upon such low Shifts, that he at last having
rendered himself incapable of Trust, did send to have the Money given by the
Parliament, deposited into the hands of Commissioners; out of which he did,
notwithstanding after ^orce it, according as his impertinent Expenses demanded
Supplies. Nor was he more steady, faithful, or just in his compacts with
Foreign Princes, who, in a small time became so well acquainted with his
Complexion, that his Promise did not incite them either to Hope or Fear, or
raise in any of them the Passions of Love or Hatred. And this is one of the
Reasons th^n given, why the most Christian King did so far indulge his
Pr^serva^ion, as to advertise him of t^^ former Conspiracy, lest he should
exchange Herb John for Col^quintida. Another, but in my opinion a very w^^k one
(for what obligation can restrain a Prince, that ^ees an advantage before him)
was the F^vours received from hence, ^uring the L^ag^e? But the most probable,
was the Advantage Spain was likely to make of it, first, by reason he had an
Army then ready in Fland^rs to Land in the huge Mist, so black a Cloud must
needs have caused over the Nation. Nor could his Holiness himself look upon our
Ruin with any affection, England being of too great a Consequence to ^all
under any other Jurisdiction save her own.

To conclude, whosoever reveal^d this Conspiracy, it cost the King of France
his Life, not only by questioning the truth of his Conversion, but did raise so
a high Suspicion of the immense Treasure, and mighty Army, he had with no less
industry than secrecy gotten together (not one living owning to this day the
knowledge of his Design) in the Hearts of Spain and R^me, as they procured his
Death: His freedom to the King of Great Britain rendering this Silence the more
suspected.

Now, to take off the Subjects Eyes from observing the great Indulgency used by
King James, in behalf of the Papists, a Qu^^rel was revived (now ^lmost asleep,
because it h^d long escaped Persecution, the Bellows of Schism) with a People
styled Puritans, who meeting no nearer a definition than the Name of all the
Conscientious Men in the Nation shared the Contempt. Since under that general
term were comprehended not only those as did oppose the Discipline and
Ceremonies of the Church, but such as out of mere honesty refrain^d the Vices
of the Times, were branded by this Title; weaved o^ such a fashion, as it
became a covering to the Wicked, and no better than a Fools Coat to Men truly
Conscientious. Neither was any charged with it, though in the best Relation,
thought competent for Preferment in Church or Commonweal, which made the Wicked
glory in their Impiety, and such as had not an extraordinary measure of Grace,
asham^d of any outward profession of Sanctity. Court Sermons were fraught with
bitter Invectives against th^se People, whom they seated in a Class far nearer
the con^ines of Hell than Papists, yet the wisest durst not define them.

To avoid the imputation of Puritanism (a greater rub in the way to Preferment
than Vice) our Divines^ for the generality, did sacrifice more time to Bacchus
than Minerva; and being excellent Company, drew the most ingenious Laiety into
a like excess: And, for their ordinary Studies, they were School-points and
p^ssionate Expressions, as more conversant with the Fri^rs than the Fathers,
scorning in their ordinary Di^course at Luther and Calvin, but especially at
the last; so as a certain Bishop of this stamp, thanked God he never (though a
good Po^t himself) had read a Line in Him or Chaucer. The same used this simile
at C^urt, That our Religion, like the Ki^gs-Arms stood b^etween two Beasts, the
Puritan and Papist. Nor did the notorious debauchery of the Episcopal Clergy
add a little to the Rent of the Church, much augmented by the Scottish
Propensity to Pr^sbitery, though the chiefest promoters of it in their Doctrine
and Example were the Lecturers, Vicars, and Parsons of inconsiderable Worth and
Livings, being the readier to oppose Authority, as having little to loose,
becoming, by this means, the darlings of the Rabble. Nor did the sudden
Translation of Bishops, from less to greater Sees give time to visit
sufficiently their respective Charges; being more intent upon the receipt of
such Taxer, as a long abused Custom had estated them in, than upon Reformation.
I have been the more punctual, because from the Pulpit came all our future
Miseries, God not being served there as he ought. The Court Sermons informing
the King he might, as Christ's Vicegerent, command all; and that the People, if
they denied him Supplement, or inquired after the disposure of it, were
presumptuous Peepers into the sacred Ark of the State, not to be done but under
the severest Curse, though it appeared likely to fall, through the falsehood or
folly of those at the Helm. But on the contrary, the other qualified Preachers
did sulminate against Non-residency, Profanation of the Lords Day, connivance
at Popery, Persecution of Gods People^

Now, by this time the Nation grew feeble, and over-opprest with Impositions,
Monopolies, Aids, Privy Seals, Concealments, pretermitted Customs, etc. besides
all ^orfeitures on Penal Statutes, with a ^^lcituee of tricks more to cheat the
English Subject (the most, if not all, unheard of in Queen Elizabeth's Days)
which were spent upon the Scots, by whom nothing was unasked, and to whom
nothing was denied; who, for want of honest Traffic, did extract Gold out of
the Faults of the English, whose Pardons they begged and sold at intolerable
Rat^^; Murder it self not being excepted; Nay, I dare boldly say, one Man might
more safely have killed another, than a raskal Deer; but if a Stag had been
known to have miscarried, and the Author fled, a Proclamation, with the
Description of the Party, had been presently Penned by the Attorney General,
and the Penalty of His Majesty's high Displeasure (by which was understood the
English Inquisition, the Star Chamber) threatened against all that did abet,
comfort, or relieve him. Thus Satirical, or if you please Tragical, was this
Sylvian Prince, against Deer-killers, and indulgent to Man-slayers. This Star
Chamber was a Den to Arbitrary Justice, where the Keeper for the time being,
two Bishops, two Judges, and as many wise Lords, and great Officers Sat, as
thought fit to come; the most of whom, though unable to render a reason for
their Censure, did, every Wednesday and Friday, in Term-time, concur like so
many Canibals, to tear such as refused to Worship the Minion, or to yield to
the pretended Royal Prerogative. Nor did they escape who were any way Satirical,
a thing not to be avoided by the Lovers of Truth; Corruption being as common as
Execution, with which it seldom went other than hand in hand.

The palpable Partiality that descended from the King to the Scots, did estate
the whole love of the English upon his Son Henry; whom they engaged, by so much
expectation, as it may be doubted, whether it ever lay in the Power of any
Prince, merely hum^ne, to bring so much Felicity unto a Nation, as they d^d all
his Life propose to themselves at the Death of King James. The Government of
this Young Princes House, was with much Discretion, Modesty, Sobriety, and
(which was looked upon as too great an upbraiding, the contrary proceedings of
his Father) in an high reverence to Piety, not Swearing himself, nor keeping
any that did: through which he came to be advanced, beyond an ordinary measure
in the Affections of the City; to whom he was not only plausible in his
Carriage, but very just in Payments, so far as his Credit out-reached the
King's both in the Exchange and the Church; in which the Son could not take so
much Felicity, as the Father did Discontent, to find all the worth he imagined
in himself wholly lost in the hopes the People had of this young Gentleman;
from whence Kings may be concluded far more unhappy than ordinary Men; for though
whilst Children are young, they may afford them safety, yet when arrive at that
Age, which used to bring comfort to other Parents, they produce only Jealousy
and Fear: For if Deformed, Foolish, or Vicious, they offend the natural
Disposition of a Father, who cannot but desire his Issue perfect; if they prove
otherwise, and be excellent, that of a Prince, because his Reign must needs be
thought dim and tedious who has such a Spark to succeed him as this Henry,
which, in all Men's Judgments, appeared more illustrious than his old Father.
Thus are Kings found as remote from Felicity with Children, as from safety
without: And, as the last of these Considerations have tempted some to
Acknowledge the Issue of Strangers.

If the positive Assertions of some, as well as common Fame does not outstrip
Truth, King James was by Fear led into great and strange Extremes (finding his
Son Henry, not only averse to any Popish Match, but saluted by the Puritans, as
one prefigured in the Apocalypse for Rome's Destruction) insinuating, as if the
Prince was not kindly dealt by: ^ should quite have omitted this conjecture,
and left it wholly to the Decision of the great Tribunal, was it not certain,
that his Father did dread him; and that the King, though he would not deny him
any thing he plainly desired, yet it appeared rather the result of Fear and
outward Compliance, than Love and natural Affection,

This King's extravagant Anti-Suppers was a Vanity not heard of in Forefathers
time, or ever practiced since; and for ought I have read, unpractised by the
most Luxurious Tyrants: The manner of which was, to have the Board covered at
the first entrance of the Guest with Dishes seven Foot high, filled with the
choicest Viands Sea or Land could afford, and all this once seen, and having
seasted the Eyes of the invited, was in a manner thrown away, and fresh set on
to the same height: An Attendance on the King Eat at one of these Suppers a
whole Pie valued at Ten Pounds Sterling, being composed of Ambersgreece Musk,
etc.

As no other reason seemed to appear in this Kings choice but handsomness; so
the love the King showed wa^ as amorously conveyed, as if he had mistaken their
Sex, and thought them Ladies; which Somers^t and Buckingham did labor to
resemble, in the Es^eminateness of their Dressings; though in wanton Look^, and
wanton Gestures, they exceeded any part of Womankind, Nor was his Love, or
what else the World will please to call it, carried on with a Discression
sufficient to cover a less scandalous Behavior; for the King kissing them
after so lascivious a Mode in Public, and upon the Theater (as it were) of the
World, prompted many to imagine things done in the Tiring-House, that exceed my
Expression, no less than they do my Experience.

Now, as to the Poisoning Business of Sir Thomas Overbury; on which account
King James made so many dreadful Imprecations upon himself and Posterity, not
to spare any that were found Guilty, but how he f^iled the Relation will inform.

The Earl of Montg^mery declining in his Favor with King James, Mr. R. Carr, a
very handsome Gentleman, and well bred, appeared upon the Stage; who chose for
his chief Companion Sir Thomas Overbury, a Gentleman of excellent Parts, but
very Proud and Haughty. Now was Carr Knighted, and Overbury's Pride rose with
the others Honors; then was the strife between the Two great Statesmen,
Salisbury and Suffolk, who should most indear themselves with this great
Favorites Creature Overbury, but he with a kind of scorn neglected both their
Friendships.

Northampton finding himself neglected by so mean a Spark (as he thought)
followed Balaam's Counsel, by sending a Moabitish Woman unto him, in which he
made use of one Coppinger, a Gentleman who had spent a fair Estate, and to
supply his necessities, was turned a kind of Procurer, or what the present Town
calls a Cock Bawd. This Meabitish Woman was a Daughter of the Earl of Suffolk
and Wife to the young Earl of Essex.

This Train took, and the first private Meeting was at Coppinger's House: This
privacy in their stolen Pleasure, made Coppinger a Friend to Northampton and
Suffolk, though but a Servant to Viscount Rochester, for so was Carr now made.

Overbury was that John Baptist that reproved the Lord for that Sin of using
the Lady, and abusing the young Earl; he would often call her Strumpet, and her
Mother and Brothers Bawds, etc.

Then to satisfy Overbury, and blot out the name of Sin, his love led him into
a more desperate way, by a Resolution to Marry another Man's Wife; against this
then did Overbury exclaim much louder: On which a Council was held to concert
about the best means to be rid of him.

The Plot then was, he must be sent a Leidger Ambassador into France; which by
obeying, they should be rid of so great an Eyesore; by disobeying, he incurred
the Displeasure of his Prince, ^ C^ntempt that he could not expect less than
Imprisonment for, and by that means be sequ^stred from his Friends.

And thus far I do believe the Earl of Somerse^ (for so was he now made) was
consenting; this Stratagem took, and Overbury might truly say, ( Video meliora
deteriora sequar) for he indeed made the worst choice, it could not be thought
but such an Employment was much better to him to have accepted, than to be
confined to a loa^hsome Prison.

Having him now fast in Prison, Herodias, by pleasing her Herod, must also ask,
and have his Life; for, Perscelus ad scele^^, tuti^r est via; to that end they
preferred Emposides to be Servant to Sir Gervase Elway's, then Lieutenant of
the Tower, and a very Wise, Religious Gentleman, he was so ignorant of the
Pl^t, as he never Dreamt of any such matter, until one day (as it should seem)
Weston being told E^^ays did know wherefore he was preferred unto him to wait
on Overbury; he a^ked the Lieutenant whether he should now do i^, Elways
replied, What? Weston at that being somewhat abashed, which Elways quickly
apprehended, replied, No, not yet; for he did believe there was something known
to Weston; instantly he hasted away (being a little before Dinner) and went
into his Study, and Weston being come, he exa^i^ed him the meaning of that
Question; at last, between fair means and threatening, persuaded him to con^ess
the truth; then Elways, as he well could, laid before Weston the horridness of
the Fact, the torments of Hell, etc. At last made him so sensible, that he gave
the Lieutenant humble thanks, for that he had been instrumental in saving his
Soul, by putting him off from so soul intentions, and faithfully promised never
to be concerned in so foul at Act, and for a long time as faithfully performed.
The Lieutenant ordered Weston to bring him such things as were sent to give
Overbury, which he accordingly did; the Lieutenant ever gave them to Dogs and
Catts, some of which died presently, others lingered some time.

During this time, the Earl continued sending to visit Overbury, wheedling him
with an assurance that he did not forget his Release: At last, the Countess
growing impatient, sent for Weston, reviling him, saying, he was a Treacherous
Villain, on which he promised her Fidelity to the future; yet the Countess
would not trust him alone any more, but joined one Franklin to him, a greater
Villain than himself.

Some time after these Two Villains had carried Overbury the Tarts, they went
to his Chamber, and found him in great Torment, with Contention between
strength of Nature, and working of the Poison, and they fearing Nature would
have gotten the better, and that it might come upon the judgment of Physicians
that foul Play had been offered him, they immediately stifled him between Two
Pillows, and so ended his miserable Life, with the assurance of the
Conspirators, that he dyed by Poison, none thinking otherwise but the Two
Murderers.

Now this grand obstacle being removed, the Adulterous Marriage must be brought
about; and for the more easy effecting of it, they did (without much trouble)
make the King a Party in this Bawdy business, and the Bishops likewise must be
principal Actors in bringing this Bawdery to a Marriage, of whom Bilson, Bishop
of Winchester was chief; for which the King Knighted his Son.

The Bishops had many Meetings, in which there wanted no Bribes from the Lord
and Lady to h^ve this Nullity brought to pass, wherein the Discourse would have
better befitted the Mouths of Bawds and Ruffians than grave Divines.

Archbishop Abbot opposed and protested against all their Proceedings: for
which the King held him in disgrace to his Dying day.

To make up the full measure of Bawdry, and to justify the Nullity; a search
must be made into the Lady, to find whether there had been a Penetration, and a
Jury of grave Matrons were found fit for that purpose; who, with their
Spectacles ground to lessen, not to make the Letter larger, after their
Inspection into the Premises, gave Verdict, she was Intacta Virgo, which was
thought very strange, for the World took notice, that her way was very common,
before ever Somerset trod in it; besides they two having lived so long in
Adultery together. The Plot was contrived thus, The Lady of Essex, pretending
Modesty, makes humble Suit to the Bawdy Bishops (who were all concerned in this
Stratagem) that she might come Veiled into the Court, which they all readily
granted: One Mrs. Turner was dressed in the Countesses Clothes; and at that
time too young to be other than Virgo Intacta.

Now is the Nullity pronounced, and the Marriage with Somerset speedily
Solemnized, but sweet Meat must have sour S^wce: For not long after, Thrumbal,
Agent at Bruxels, had (by one Reeve, an Apothecaries Prentice in London, that
was come there on some Occasions) gotten hold of this Poisoning Business, on
which he presently wrote to Secretary Wynwood, that he had business of great
consequence to discover, but would not send i^ therefore desired License to
come over; which after some time the King granted; and now had they good
Testimony by the Apothecary, who revealed Weston, Mrs. Turner, and Francklin,
to be the Principal Agents; yet, it being the time of the King's Progress,
nothing was done in it till his Return.

Secretary Wynwood having been affronted, and much abused by Somerset, in his
Secretaryship, does now carry himself in a kind of braving way against him,
being struck in with the Faction of Viller's who was now the risi^g Sun, and
King James's darling Favorites.

King James being returned from his Summers Progress, returns to Windsor, from
thence to Hampton Court, then to White Hall, and sho^tly after to Royston, to
begin his Winter Journey. And now begins the Game to be played, in which the
Earl, and Countess of Somerset must be Losers; the Lord Chief Justice Coke, and
Secretary Wynwood, the managers against them.

The day the King went from White Hall to Theobald's, and so to Royston, he
sent for all the Judges, (his Lords and Servants encircling him) where kneeling
down in the midst, he spoke to them as follows.

My Lords, the Judges, It is lately come to my hearing, that you have now in
Examinati^n a Business of Po^soning, Lord! in what a most miserable Conditi^n
shall this Kingdom be (the only famous Nation for Hospitality in the World) if
our Tables should become such a S^are, as none could E^t without danger of
Life; and the Italian Custom be introduced among us: Therefore, my Lords, I
Charge you, as you will answer it at the great and dreadful day of Judgment,
that you will examine it strictly, without F^v^^^, Affection, or Partiality;
and if you shall spare any that are found Guilty of this Crime, God's Curse
light on you, and your Posterity: And if I spare any, God's Curse light on Me,
and my Posterity for ever. But how this dreadful Thunder Curse or Imprecation
was performed, the following account will show.

The King goes to Ro^ston, accompanied with the Earl of S^merset; the next day
the Earl being to go to London, went to kiss the King's Hand, who hanged about
his Neck, slabberi^g his Cheeks, saying, When shall I see you again? On my
Soul, I shall neithe^ Eat nor Sleep until you come again: The Earl told him in
about three days: For God's sake let me, said the King, Shall I, shall I? Then
lolled about his Neck, slabbering his Cheeks as formerly; the Earl was scarcely
in his Coach, when the King used these very Words, I shall never see his Face
more. Let the Reader judge whether this Motto of Qui nescit dissimilare, nescit
regnare, was not as well performed in this Passage, as his Beati Pacifici, in
the whole course of his Life. But before Somerset's approach to London, his
Countess was apprehended; at his Arrival, himself.

Now are in Hold, the Earl, his Countess, Sir Thomas Monson, Mrs. Turner,
Weston, and Franklin, with some others of less Note; the three last Named were
immediately Arraigned, Tried, and Executed.

The next that came on the Stage was the Countess, and Sir T. Monson, but the
King being informed that the latter would discover some Secrets of Prince
Henry's Death, and other Court Intreagues, He immediately dispatched an Order
to Coke to stop Prosecution: And now for the last Act enters Somerset himself
on the Stage, about whom many S^ratagems were used, and the King was put in
great Fear before they could get him from the Tower to Westminster, to take his
Trial; but it was at last affected by a Stratagem of Sir George Moor,
Lieutenant of the Tower, but yet (for fear he should fly out into some strange
Discovery against the King) he had two Servants placed on each side of him,
with a Cloak on their Arms, giving them a peremptory Order, if that Somerset
did any way stie out on the King. they should instantly Hoodwink him with that
Cloak, and take him violen^ly from the Bar: But the Earl finding himself thus
overreached, recollected a better Temper, and went on calmly in his Trial,
where he held the Company till Seven at Night: But whoever h^d seen the King's
res^less motion all that Day, sending to every Boat he see Landing at
Greenwich-Bridge, Cursing all that came without Tidings, would have easily
judged all was not right, and there had been some grounds of his Fears of
Somerset's Boldness: But, at last, one brings him word he was Condemned, and
the Passages, all was quiet.

And there were other strong Inducements to believe Som^rset knew, that (by
him) he desired none other should be partaker of, and that all was not Peace
within, in the Peace^maker himself; for he ever cour^ed Somerset to his dying
Day, and gave him Four Thousand Pounds, per Annum, for Fee Farm Rents, after he
was Condemned, and the King kept Correspondence Weekly with him by Letters, to
his Death.

Some are of Opinion that his Countess and he would both have suffered, had it
not been for an unhappy Expression of Chief Justice Coke, who, in a vain
glorious Sp^ech, to show his Vigilance, enters into a Rapture, as he sat on
the Bench, saying, God knows what become of that sweet Bab^, Prince Henry; But
I know somewhat. And surely, in se^rching the Cabinets, he lighted on some
Papers, that spoke plain in that which was ever whispered; which had he gone on
in a gentle way, would have fallen in of themselves, not to have been
prevented; but this solly of hit Tongue stopped the breath of the Discovery of
that so foul a Murder.

And now begins Villers, the new Favorite to Reign, without any controulment;
now he rises in Honor as well as Pride, being broken out of the modest bounds
that formerly had impailed him, to the Highway of Pride and Scorn, turning
out, and putting in all he pleased. First, he gets the Lord-Admiral turned out,
and himself made Lord High Admiral. Next, He procured the Seal to be taken from
Egerton, Lord ^eeper, and procures the place for Bacon, who was to pay him a
large Pension out of it; Heath, Attorney General, paid a Pension; Bargrave
Dean, paid a Pension; with multitudes of other^: Fo^herhy made Bishop of
Salisbury, paid down 3500 l. for his Bishopric. There were Books of Rates on
all Offices, Bishoprics, Deaneries in England, that could tell you what Fines,
what Pensions; all which went to maintain his numerous Beggarly Kindred, which
otherwise it had been almost impossible to have maintained them with Three
Kingdoms Revenue.

Then must these Women Kindred be Married to Earls, and Earls Eldest Sons,
Barons, or chief Gentlemen of greatest Est^tes; insomuch that the very Female
Kindred were so numerous, as sufficient to have Peopled any Plantation: Nay,
the very Kitchin-Wenches were Married to Knights Eldest Sons.

Proposals being made for a Match with the Infanta of Spain, and some Progress
being made therein, it was resolved, That Sir John Digby, by Commission under
the great Seal, was authorized to treat and conclude the Marriage; and because
the matter of Religion was in chief Debate, those qualified Articles that were
brought out of Spain, were sent back^ signed with the King's Hand. They were to
this Effect.

That the Pope's Dispensation be first obtained by the mere Act of the King of
Spain.

That the Children of this Marriage be not constrained to be brought up
Protestants, nor their Titles to the Crown prejudiced in case they prove
Catholics.

That the Infanta's Family may be Catholics, and shall have places appointed
for their Divine Service, according to the Use of the Church of Rome, and that
the Jesuits, and other Ecclesiastics and Priests may walk in their proper
Habits.

That she shall have a competent number of Jesuits, Priests and Chaplains; and
a Confessor always attending Her, one whereof shall have Power to govern the
Family in Religious Matters.



The People of England having in Memory the intended Cruelty of 88. and hating
the Popish Religion, generally hated this Match, and loathed the thoughts of
having the Romish Priests to walk about the Streets in their Habits, and would
have bought it off at the dearest Rate; and, what they durst, opposed it by
Speeches, Counsels, Wishes, Prayers; but if any one speak louder than his
Fellows, he was soon put to silence, disgraced, and crossed in Court
Preferments. The Roman Catholics desired the Match above Measure, hoping for a
Toleration, yea, a total Restoration of their Religion: For, besides the
public Articles, these following private ones, in Favor of the Roman
Catholics, were subsrcribed and sworn to by the King; they were in substance
as follows, I. That particul^r Laws made against Roman Catholics, as
likewise general Laws, under which, all are equally comprised, if so be they
are such which are Repugnant to the Romish Religion, shall not hereafter on any
Account, or Means, be put in Execution against them. II. That no other Laws
shall hereafter be made anew, against the said Roman Catholics; but that there
shall be a perpetual Toleration of the Roman Catholic Religion. III. That We,
and the Prince of Wales, will interpose our Authority, and will do as much as
in us shall lie, That the Parliament shall Approve, Corfirm, and Ratify, all
and singular Articles, in Favor of the Roman Catholics. And that hereafter we
will not consent that the said Parliament should ever at any time Enact, or
Write any other new Laws agaonst Roman Catholics.


The great Concessions of King James, toward the Roman Catholics, brought
great swarms of Priests and Jesuits into England, who were busy in drawing the
People from the Protestant Religion: And a titular Bishop of Calcedon,
privately came to London, to Exercise Episcopal Jurisdiction over the Roman
Catholics of this Kingdom.

It Is said that the King had now so much confidence of the Match, as to say
openly in the Cour^ That now all the Devils in Hell could not break it.

The Spaniards, the better to cover their Designs, ordered that the Infanta
should be styled the Princess of England; and she was kept no longer in her
Virgin Retirements.

The Spanish Match having been long in Treaty, and it being suspected now, that
the Spaniard did juggle with the States in this, as they formerly did in a
Match with that brave Prince Henry. Whether the King suspected any such matter,
or any whimsie came into the Brains of the great Favorite and Prince, to
imitate the old Stories of the Knights Errand; but agreed it was (it should
seem) that the Prince must go himself very privately into Spain, with his
Favorite Buckingham, under the borrowed Names of Jack and Tom Smith; and they
had the Ports laid so, that none should follow them to give any Notice to the
French Court, through which they must pass.

And now many Lords, and other Servants, flock over, that he might appear the
Prince of Great Britain. Many Treaties were, so^etimes Hope, sometimes Fear,
sometimes great Assurance, then all dashed again. At last, after many Heats and
Cools, the Prince wrote a Letter to his Father, of a desperate Despair, not
only of not enjoying his Lady, but of never more rerurning.

Now the folly of this Voyage began to appear, many smiling at the Follies,
that were concerned in it; and however the King was a cunning Dissembler, and
showed much outward Sorrow, as he did for Prince Henry's Death; yet the Court
believed little Grief came near his Heart; for that secret Hatred he had of
late bore to Buckingham (as being satiated with him,) and his Adorning the
Rising Sun, made it generally thought that he would not value the losing his
Son, so that Buckingham might be lost also: Yet Buckingham had so much awe over
the King, that he durst not make show to affect any other.

One great Reason of the King's Hating of Buckingham was, a large Information
that he privately received from one Inniosa, an Extraordinary Ambassador from
Spain, of Buckingham's Design on his Person, whether by Poison, Pistol, Dagger,
etc. he could not tell.

Buckingham being fully satisfied on several Accounts of the great Hatred the
King now bore unto him. He turned as great a Hater of the King; and though the
King had more power to Revenge, He had less Courage. And however, the World did
believe the King's Inclinations was out of a Religious ground that he might not
Revenge; yet it was no other but a Cowardly Disposition, that durst not
adventure. But although the King lost his opportunity on Buckingham, yet the black
Plaster and Powder did show, Buckingham lost not his on the King; and that it
was no Fiction, but a Reality, that Padro Macestria had formerly told the King.

And now the Prince returns from Spain, and all the fault of the Match not
succeeding is laid on Bristol, who was Ambassador there. And Buckingham, from
an Accused Man in the former Parliament, came to be the Darling of this
Parliament. And in the Banqueting House, before both Houses of Parliament,
does Buckingham give an Account at large of his Spanish Voyage; and to every
full point (as a further A^testation) he says, How say you, Sir? To which the
Prince answered, I, Yea, or Yes. Bristol having some Friends that sent Advice
of All into Spain. He immediately posts into England, makes Buckingham's
Relation and Accusation wholly False and Scandalous, and becomes a great
Favorite to King James. I shall now bring the Secret Story of this King's Life
to an end.

He now goes his last Hunting Journey (I mean the last of the Year, as well as
his Life) which he ever ended in Lent, and was seized on by an extraordinary
Tertian Ague; yet 'twas not the Ague, as himself confessed to many of his
Servants; one of which c^ying, Courage Sir, this is but a small Fit, the next
will be none at all: At which he most earnestly looked, and said, Ah! It is not
the Ague afflicts me; but the black Plaster and Powder given me, and laid to
my Stomach. Nor was it fair Dealing, if he had fair Play (which himself
suspected, often saying to the Earl of Montgomery, whom he trusted above all
Men, in his Sickness, For God's sake look I ^ave fair Play) to bring in an
Emperick to apply any Medicines, whilst those Physicians appointed to attend
him, were at Dinner; nor could any but Buckingham answer it with less than his
Life. Buckingham visiting the King just as he was at the point of Death^ who
mournfully fix^ his Eyes on him, as who would have said, You are the Man that
has ruined me.

It were worth the knowledge what his Confessions was, or what other
Expressions he made of himself, or any other, but that was only known to the
Dead Archbishop Abbot, and the then living Bishop Williams. and the
Lord Keeper; and it was thought, Williams had blabbed something which incensed
the King's Anger, and Buckingham's Hatred, so much against him, that the loss
of his Place could not be explatory sufficient, but his utter ruin must be
determined.

Now have we brought this King (who styled himself the King of Peace, and put
on Mortality the 27 th, of March) to rest in all Peace: We shall conclude his
Remarks, with an Appendix, sh^^ing the particulars of a great man^ Millions of
good English Money, even to an almost incredible Sum, this King Expended on his
Fruitless Emb^ssies, B -- ng Favorites, Beggarly Scots, Ant-Suppers,
Masqueradoes, and other Buffoons, even to a far greater Sum than his
Predecessor (Queen Elizabeth of Happy Memory, Expended in all Her Wars in
Ireland, and with Spain, etc. during her Forty Four Years Reign.

King James's LETTER TO Pope CLEMENT.
Most Holy Father,
HAVING understood by several Reports, how diligent the Rivals of our Condition
have been, that the Sword of your Authority should he unsheathed against us,
and with what constancy your Prudence has hitherto refused it, we could do no
less than return Thanks for such a good turn received, especially upon so fair
an Occasion, when the Bearer of these, a Scotch Man, by Nation, but a Roman, by
Adoption, was returning unto your Dominion; We recommend him to your Holiness
(to whom, for his good Parts, you have been already Beneficial) that you would
attentively bear him in those things which he shall deliver in our Name: And
because we know there is no better Remedy against the Calumnies of Ill Willers
(who by commemorating our Injuries done to Catholics, procure Envy to us, and
Thanks to themselves) then that some of our Contrymen, Zealous of the Truth,
though differing from the Religiin which we have sucked from our Infancy,
should have an H^nourable Occasion of making their abode in the Court of Rome,
from whom your Holiness may be certainly insormed of the state of our Affairs.
In this regard, We recommend to you the Bishop of Vazion; who, as he does
impute whatsoever increase of his condition to your Holiness alone; so We are
earnest Suitors, that for our sake especially, the H^nour of the Cardinals Cap
may be added to his former Advantages. By this means the Calumny of our Enemies
will cease, when such are present with you, who may be able to assert the truth
of our doing. We do not desire any of our Actions should be concealed from just
Arbitrators; for though We have been bred up in the Truth of that Religion
which we now profess, yet We have always determined, That there is nothing
better and safer than piously, and without ostentation, to endeavor the
promoting of those things which really belong to the Glory of God's Name, and
laying aside the Goads of Envy, and applying the warmth and fomentation of
Charity, diligently to consider what belongs not to the empty Name of
Religion, but to the Holy Symbol of true Piety. But because we have discoursed
more at large of these things, with the Bearer hereof, a Man not Vnl^arned, and
indifferently well conversant in our Affairs, We have thought best to be no
more tedious by a long Letter.

From Holy Rood, September. 24. 1599. Your Holiness's Most Dutiful Son, James Rex.


This Letter was conveyed by Edward Drummond, the Lawyer, whom the King sent to
the Pope, the Duke of Tuskany, the Duke of Savoy, and other Princes and
Cardinals.

First, You shall most respectively Salute, in Our Nam^, the Pope, and those
other Prin^es and Cardinals, and having delivered our Letters of Credence shall
signify.

That we exceedingly desire to reserve with them the measure of Love and Good
Will, which is fitting to remove not only all suspicion, but any thing that
may be the cause of suspicion.

That although we persist in the Religion which we sucked from our I^fancy, yet we
are not so void of Charity, but to think well of all Christians, if so be they
continue in their Duty first toward God, and then toward the Magistrate,
whose S^bjects they are.

That we never exercised any Cruel^y against the Catholics, for their Religion.

And because it does very much concern us, that we may be able to assert the
Truth, by our Friends and Subjects, with the same diligence that Slanderers
Lie; therefore you shall endeavor to the utmost to persuade the Pope, a^ well
at our Entreaty, as for the desire of th^se m^st illustrious Princes, whom in
our Letters we have solicited on our behalf, to make the Bishop of Vazion
Cardinal, wherein if you be successful, as so^n as we shall be certified
thereof, we will proceed further. You must be cautious not to proceed any
farther in this business^ either with the Pope, or the most Illustrious
Cardinals, ^^less there be a certain hope of our wished event.

THE SECRET HISTORY OF King CHARLES I.
THE Misfortunes of this Monarch, Son to King James, with the uncouth, dismal,
and unexpressable Calamities that happened thereupon, was in a great measure
caused by the imprudent Commissions, and voluntary Omissions of King James: As
it may justly be said, He, like Adam, by bringing the Crown into so great a
Necessity, through profuse Prodigality, became the Original of his Sons Fall;
who was, in a manner compelled to stretch out his Hands toward such Gatherings
and Taxes as were contrary to Law; by which He fell from the Paradise of a
Prince, to wit, The Hearts of his People, though the best Politicians ex^ant,
might Miscarry in their Calculation of a Civil-War, immediately to follow, upon
the Death of Queen Elizabeth, in Vindication of the numerous Titles and
Opinions then current: Yet the Beggarly Rabble attending King James, not only
at his first coming out of Scotland, but through his whole Reign (like a fluent
Spring) found still c^ossing the River Tweed, did so far justify the former
conjecture, as it was only thought mistaken in relation to time.

The first thing this King did, after the performing his Father's Funeral
Rights, was the consummating the Marri^ge with Henrietta Maria, a Daughter of
F^ance, whom he had formerly seen in his Journey, through that Country into
Spain.

The King then called a Parliament, who met the 11th. of June following; to
whom he represented, in a short Speech. The urgent necessity of raising a
Subsidy, to ^a^ry on the War with Spain.

But the Parliament presented first their Two Petitions, concerning Reas^ns of
Religion, and Complaint of their Suff^rings; which points had been offered to
his Father, King James: In both which they at present received Sati^faction.
Upon which the King obtained two Subsidies to be paid by Protestants, and four
by Papist Laiety, and three from the Clergy.

On the 11th. of July, 1629. the Parliament was Adjourned ^ill August the 1st;
when the King declared to them the necessity of setting for^h a Fleet, for the
Recovery of the Palatinate: The Lord Treasurer ins^anced the several Sums of
Money King James died Indebted to the City of London; this occasioned very warm
Debates in the House of Commons, who alleged, That Evil Councils guided the
King's Designs: That the Treasury was misimployed: That it would be necessary
to Petition the King for Honester and Abler Council^: Tha^ it was not usual to
grant Subsidies upon Su^sidies in one Parliament, and no Grievances Redressed;
with many other of the like nature. And being incensed against the Duke of
Buckingham, they began to think of divesting him ^f his Office, and to require
an account of the public Money, etc. To prevent which the King Dissolved the
Parliament.

And now the King's put upon taking up Money upon Loan, of such Persons as were
thought of Ability to Lend. To whom Letters were Issued out in the King's Name
to ex^ite them to it.

But this not answering, the King Summons a Parliament to Si^, Feb. 6. and
being Me^, they ^ell immediately upon Debate of the public Grievances, much
the same as the former.

Then the House of Commons were very busy in searching the Signet Office, for
the Original of a Le^ter, under the Signet, written to the Mayor of York, for
Reprieving diverse Priests and Jesuits. This was Reported by Pim, Chairman to
the Committee for Religion; but the King immediately demanded a supply for the
English and Irish Forces. This was highly resented by the Commons, and several
sharp Speeches were made in the House.

But notwi^h^^anding, the Commons a^ last Voted Three Subsidies, and Three
Fifteen^; and the Bill shall be brought in as soon as the Grievances, which
were Represented, were Redressed. But the King observing they did not make the
has^e he expect^d, sends a sharp Message to them, complains against their
Grievances, and justifies the Duke of Buckingham.

The Commons in Answer, present an high Remonstrance, and justify themselves.

To which the King sends them Answer, by Finch, their Speaker, That if they did
not pass the Bill of Subsidy, by the end of the week following, it would
enforce him to take other Resolutions, etc.

Before the Commons sent an Answer, they Petitioned His Majesty, That he would
be pleased to remove from all Places of Trust and Authority, all such Persons
as were either Recusants, or suspected to be such.

And the Commons then drew up another Declaration of Grievances, against the
Duke of Buckingham, who being thereat Incensed, Dissolved the Parliament, the
very next day, June 15. 1626. Then the King's Cabal Council resolved on several
ways for advancing the King's Revenue: First, Levying of Customs, and Imposts
on all Merchandise. Privy Seals were Issued out, and Benevolences proposed;
and, at length, a Commission for a general Loan was resolved on: But the
Assessment of the Loan was generally opposed; whereupon, the People of the
lower Rank were ordered to appear in the Military-Yard, next St. Martins in the
Fields, before the Lieutenant of the Tower, to be Listed for Soldiers; it being
then thought necessary, for the better security of the Liberty of the Subject,
That those which refused to assist with their Purses, should be forced to Serve
in their Persons: Others of bette^ Quality were committed Prisoners to the
Fleet, Marshalsea, Gate House, etc. And among others, Sir I. Elliot, who
Petitioned his Majesty, and repeated many Precedents, That all manner of Taxes,
in former Kings Reigns, were never Levied, but by consent of Parliament:
However, he was Committed, and Sir P. Hayman, was forced to serve the King in
the Palatinate.

Dr. Sybthorp and Maynwaring, Two Court Preac^ers, about this time, preached up
the Necessity and Duty of the Loan; one of them asserting, That the Prince had
Power to direct his Council, and make Laws himself. The other affirmed, That
the King's Royal Command, in imposing of Laws and Taxes, though without cons^nt
in Parliament, did oblige the Subjects Conscience, upon pain of Eternal
Damnation.

Which Position was entertained with such great A^plause a^ Court, that Abbot
was suspended his Archi^piscopal Sea, for refusing to License the Sermon
wherein it was contained.

In 1627^ (being the Third Year of the King's Reign) the Exchequer being very
low; and several late Enterprises having miscarried, a Parliament was called,
and on the 27th. of March they A^sembled; and the King, and Lord K^epers, in
Two Speeches, earnestly pressed them to consider of some speedy w^y for
supplying his Majesty's Necessities. The first thing taken into Co^sid^ration
by the Commons was the Grievances of the Kingdom: And the first thing insisted
on, was the Case of those Gentlme^n for refusing the Loan; and who,
notwithstanding their Habeas Corpus, were rem^nded to Prison; and it was
Resolved, in the House, Nemine Contradicente, That no man ought to be
B^strained by the King or Privy Council, without some Cause of the Commitment.
Secondly, That the W^it of Habeas Corpus ought to be granted to every Man upon
Request, that is Restrained, on which he ought to be Bayled, if cause of
Commitment be not Decla^ed.

Then the Parliament petitioned against Popish Recusants; to which the King
gave them a satisfactory Answer. Af^^r which, five Subsidies were granted to
the King, which gave him so great Satisfaction, that he sent them word, He
would deny them nothing of their Liberties which any of his Predecess^rs had
Granted: Whereupon, the Commons f^ll upon the Memorable Petition of Right. And
when it was pr^sented, the Answer the King gave to it, was not judged
Satisfactory by the Commons^ and therefore upon their Petition, the King gave
them this short, but full Answer, Let it be done according to your desire.
Which Answer mightily pleased both Houses. And his Majesty for further
Satisfaction, suffered the Commission for Loan and Excise to be Cancelled, and
received Abbot and Williams into his Favor again; so that all Discontents on
every side seemed to be banished.

In 1628. (the Fourth year of the King's Reign) the Parliament drew up a
Remonstrance against Buckingham, Bishop Neal, and Laud, which they presented to
the King, with the Bill of Subsidies; His Majesty told them, That he expected
not such a Return for his favorable Answer to the Petition of Right; and as
for the Grievances, he would take time to Consider. An Information being
likewise Exhibited against the Duke in the Star Chamber. The King, by his
express Will and Pleasure, Ordered that it should be taken off the File, and
the King resolving to hold up the Duke, Adj^urned the Parliament to the 20 th.
of October following. But soon after, the Duke was summoned to Answer at a
Higher Tribunal, by the means of one Felton, a Lieutenant, who stabbed him to
the Heart with a Dagger.

The Parliament were further Adjourned to January 20. in which time the
Merchants refusing to pay Custom, had their Goods seized: Complaints thereof
being made to the Parliament, the King requires them to pass the promised Bill
for Tunnage and Poundage; but the Commons answered, That God's Cause was to be
preferred before the King's; and that they would therefore, in the first place,
Consult about Religion: One Committee being for Religion, and another for Civil
Matters. At the last, was a Complaint about the Customs, and the Farmers of the
Customs were Challenged. But the King vindicated them; and the Parliament being
upon proceeding against them as Delinquents, the King Adjourned them till the
10 th. of March. The Commons enraged thereat, blamed their Speaker for
admitting the Mes^age, and Ordered Sir I. Elliot to draw up their Remonstrance;
which was in very high Terms, about Tunnage and Poundage, etc. The substance
was as follows, I. Whosoever shall endeavor to Introduce Popery,
Arminiauism, or other than Orthodox Opinion, shall be reputed a Capital Enemy
to the Kingdom. II. Whosoever shall Counsel the taking of Tunnage and
Poundage, or shall yield Voluntary, or pay the same, without being granted by
Parliament, shall be deemed a Betrayer of, and Enemy to the Liberties of
England.


These things were so much disliked by the King, that he sent the Usher of the
Black Rod to Dissolve them, who was not admitted in: Whereupon, the King with
his Guard of Pensioners, were resolved to force their Entrance; which the
Commons having notice of it, they suddenly went out of the House. And this was
the end of that Parliament.

Some, considering that neither this nor the Two former Parliaments complied
with the Humor of the King, or Ministers of State, advised the King never to
Call another: And to that end, the Famous Book of Protects was Published, and
Addressed to the King, proposing some Methods to prevent the Impertinency of
Parliaments (as he calls them) from time to time, by the Example of Lewis XI.
of France; who, pretending that the Commons did encroach too much on the
Nobility and Clergy, Dissolved it; and never after suffered the People freely
to Elect their Representatives.

In the Year 1634. The Design of Ship Money was first set on Foot; and Attorney
General No^ being consulted about, he pretends, out of some Musty Records, to
find an Ancient President of raising a Tax on the Nation, by the Authority of
the King alone, for setting out a Navy in case of danger; which was thereupon
put in Execution, though no^ without great Discontent, both among the Clergy
and Laiety.

Discontents in Scotland likewise began to increase, and a Book was Printed and
Published, charging the King with indirect Proceedings, and having a tendency
to the Rtmish Belief. And now, to blow up these Scotch Sparks to a Flame, C.
Richeli^ sent over his Chaplain, and another Gentleman, to heighten their
Differences. And some time after, viz. the latter end of the Year, 1653. great
Differences arose about Church Matters in England, chiefly occasioned by A. B.
Laud's strict enjoining many new Ceremonies, not formerly insisted on, and now
vehemently opposed, by those called Puritans, to whom adhered many of the
Episcopal Party.

Several Gentlemen of Quality had refused to pay the Ship Money; and among the
rest, Esquire Hambden of Bucks; upon which the King refers the whole Business
to the Twelve Judges, in Michdelmas Term, 1636. Ten of whom gave their
Judgments against Hambden; but Hutton and Cook refused it.

The King, 1637. Issuing out a Proclamation in Scotland, Commanding the Use of
the Liturgy, Surplice, Altar, etc. There occasioned great Disorders and Tumults
among the Common People, who, sometime after, with the Gen^ry, entered into a
Solemn League and Covenant, to preserve the Religion then professed. The
Covenant, the Scots were resolved to maintain, and to that purpose, they sent
privately for General Lesley, and other great Officers from beyond Sea,
providing themselves likewise with Arms, etc. After this, they Elect
Commissioners for the general Assembly, whom they cite to move the Arch Bishops
and Bishops to appear there, as guilty Persons, which being refused, the People
present a Bill of Complaint against them, to the Presbitery at Edenburg: who
accordingly warned them to appear at the next General Assembly. At their
Meeting, the Bishops sent in a Protestation against their Assembly; which the
Covenanters thought not fit to Read; And soon after, they abolished Episcopacy,
and then prepared for a War.

On which, the King prepares an Army against them; with which, Anno. 1639. He
Marches in Person into the North; but, by the Mediation of some Persons, a
Trea^ise of Peace was begun, but soon broken off. The King therefore confiders
how to make Provisions for Men and Money; and calling a Secret Cabinet Council,
consisting only of Lau^, Strafford, and Hamilton, it was concluded, That for
the King^s Supply, a Parliament must be Called in England, and another in
Ireland.

The Scots foreseeing the Storm, prepared for their own Defense, making
Treaties in Swede^, Denmark, Holland, and Poland: And the Jesuits, who are
never ^dle, endeavored to Foment.

In the Year 1640. and the Sixteenth of the Kings Reign, a Parliament was
Called, in which the King pr^sses the^ ^or a speedy Supply, to Suppress (what
he calls) the Violences of the Scots; bu^ this Parliament not complying with
the Kings desire, were, by the advice of the Iuncto, Dissolved, having only
sat Twenty Two Days.

Laud, by his violent Proceedings against those called Puritans, and by his
strict enjoining of old, un-observed Ceremonies, which by many were thought
Popish, procured to himself much Hatred from the generality of People; That
upon May 9. 1640. a Paper was fixed on the Royal Exchange, inciting the
Prentices to go and Sack his House at Lambeth, the Monday after; but the
Archbishop had notice of their Design, and provided accordingly; that at the
time when they came, endeavoring to enter his House, they were repulsed.

The King calls a select Juncto to consult about the Scots, where the Earl of
Strafford delivered his Mind, in such terms, as afterward proved his ruin.
War against them was resolved on, and Money was to be procured one way or
other: The City was invited to Lend, but absolutely re^used: Some of the Gentry
contributed indifferent freely: So that with their assistance the Army was
completed, the King himself being Generalissimo, marches his Army into the
North, where was some Action, in which the Scots had the better. A Treaty is
then set on foot, and at last concluded; the chief Conditions for the calling a
Parliament in England, who accordingly Met, Nov. 3. 1640. And the King, in his
Speech, tells them, That the Scottish Troubles were the cause of their Meeting^
and therefore requires them to consider of the most expedient means for c^sting
them out; and desired a Supply from them for maintaining of his Army.

The Commons began with the Voting down all Monopolies; and all such Members as
had any benefit by them, were voted out of the House: They then voted down
Ship Money, with the Opinion of the Judges thereupon, to be Illegal; and a
charge of High Treason was ordered to be drawn up against Eight of them, and
they begun with the Keeper Finch, December. 11. Alderman Pennington, and some
Hundreds of Citizens, presented a Petition, subscribed by 15000 Hands, against
Church Discipline and Ceremonies; and then the Commons Voted, That the Clergy
in a Convocation have no power to make Canons or Laws without Parliaments; and
that the Canons are against the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, the King's
Prerogative, and the Property of the Subject, the Right of Parliaments; and
tend to Fa^tion and Sedition.

In pursuance hereof, a Charge was ordered to be drawn up against Archbishop
Laud, and others, and after voted Guilty of High Treason, and sent to the Tower.

The Sc^ts likewise preferred a Charge against the Archbishop, and the Earl of
Strafford, requiring Justice against them both, as the great Incendiaries and
Disturbers both of Church and St^te.

On Monday, March 25. 1640. the Earl of S^rafford's Trial began in Westmin^ter
Hall, the King, Queen, and Prince, being present; and the Commons being there
likewise as a Committee, at the managing their Accusation; the chief of whom
was Pym. The Earl made a long defense, but the Commons were resolved to
prosecute him to Death, and to proceed against him by Bill of Attainder, which
they proceeded to dispatch. And upon the 25th. of Ap^il, they passed the Bill,
and a few days after the Lords did likewise.

The Bill being finished, and the King willing to save the Earl, May 21. makes
a Speech to both Houses in the Earl's behalf, and so Dismissed them to their
great Discontent: Which was propagated so far, that May 23. we^e 1000.
Citizens, most of them Armed, came thronging to Westminster, crying out for
Justice against the Earl of Strafford. On Sunday following the King consulted
the Judges, and several Bishops.

M^nday, May 10. The King gives Commission to several Lords to Pass Two Bills^
One the Bill of Attainder against Strafford; the Other, for continuing the
Parliament, during the Pleasure of Both Houses.

The next day the King writes a Let^er to the House, to excuse his not Signing
Strafford's Execution. But the Commons would not be satisfied until the Bill
was signed.

The Fall of this great M^n, startled many other Officers of State, and
occasioned the resigning their Places.

August 6. Both the English and Scot^h Armi^s were Disbanded and Four Days
after, the King went toward Scotland, and was entertained with great
Demonstrations of Affection by that Nation, and conferred several Places of
Honor and Power upon diverse of them: He confirmed likewise the Treaty between
the Two Nations, by Act of Parliament.

October. 23. 1641. The Horrid and Notorious Massacre and Re^^llion broke out in
Ireland. At which time the Irish, to dishearten the English from any
Resistance, asserted, That the Queen was with their A m^, That the King would
come amongst them also an^ assist them; That they did but maintain his C^use
against the Puritans; That they had the King's Comm^ssi^n for what they did.
Whether these Assertions were true or false^ we shall not pretend to determine,
but leave it to the Readers own Sen^iments^ only we beg le^ve to incert here,
by way of Parenthesis, a Letter sent to the Pop^, by order of Charles the II.
when he had taken the C^ven^nt, and was professing the Presbyterian Religion in
Scotland; it was carried thither, and pressed forward by one Dally an Irish
Priest, and Confessor to the then Queen ^f Portugal, under the Title of
Propositions and Motives for, and on the behalf of the most i^vincible King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, to Pope Innocent the X. in the Year of
Jubilee, 1650. which Dally, taking France in his way, spoke with the Queen
Mother, and received her Directions for the better management of the Affair.

Most Blessed Father,

OUR Agent, at present Residing at Rome, with all Humility, shows your
Holiness, That the principal Cause and Occasion of that Regicide: Tyranically
perpetrated upon the Person of Charles the First, Father of the aforesaid
Charles the Second, by his Rebels, and cruel Subjects (the like whereof was
never heard of from the beginning of the World, not only among Civil Nations,
but even among the most Barbarous themselves) have been the Graces, Favors,
and Concessions, so often and so many ways extended to the Catholic Religion,
and the Asserters and Professors thereof, in the Kingdom both of England and
Ireland. The Truth of which appears in that the aforesaid Charles the First
gave Authority to the Marquess of Ormond, by several Commissions, for the
Establishing and Perfecting all Conditions with the Confederate Catholics of
the Kingdom of Ireland, of sufficient Security for the Catholic Faith.
Furthermore, the said Charles the First, fearing lest the said Ormond (being an
Heretic) should not satisfy the said Confederates in all things, He sent
thither the Marquess of Worcester, a Man truly and wholly Catholic, with a
more ample Commission; in which Commission, the said Marquess of Worcester,
had f^ll Authority of concluding a Peace with the said Confederate Catholics,
and of giving them Conditions altogether satisfactory, as well concerning
Liberty of Religion, as also as to other Injuries that had been done unto them;
which the said Marquess of Worcester, making with them an ab^olute Peace, did
abu^dantly fulfill.

Further, This appears in that the said Charles the First, even in England it
self, did by Commissions set the Catholics, namely, the said Marquess of
Worcester, Sir Arthur Ashton, and many others. over his Armies; and made them
Governors of Cities, Castles, and Strong Holds, notwithstanding the Clamor of
the People against it; and which was not a slight motive of the Regicide
committed upon him, whe^eby it appears, that although the said King Charles the
First dyed not a Catholic, yet he died for them.

Again (most Blessed Father!) the same Agent most humbly ^epresents, That the
present King Charles II. the true and undoubted Heir of the fores^id Charles I.
and of all his Kingdoms (to whom the said Kingdoms belong of Right, according
to that of Christ, Give to Caesar the thing, that are Caesar's) while his Father
yet lived, was known to have good and true Inclinations to the Cath^lick Faith,
following which, and going on in his Fathers steps, he did not only r^commend
it to the Marquess of Ormond, but gave it him in Express Command to satisfy in
all things the Confederate Ca^holicks in Ireland, namely, That he should grant
them the ^ree Exercise of their Religion; That he should abrogate the Penal
Laws made against them; and that he should restore to the said ^atholicks,
whether Laics or Ecclesi^sticks, their Lands, Estates, Possessions, or what
other Rights did at any time belong unto them, and by the said Laws had been
unjustly taken away. In Obedience to which Commands, the said Marquess, in the
Name, and by the Authority of the said two Kings, namely, Charles the First,
and Second, made and concluded a firm Peace, with the said Confederate
Catholics: By the Conclusion of which Peace, the said present King^ and all
his Dominions, has involved himself with the Catholics in an irreconcilable
War against the Parliamentar^an Regicides of England, whose Blood therefore,
the said Cruel Tyran^s insatiably thirst after, as they did after his Fathers.

The said Agent further offers to your Holiness, That the inhumane Regicides do
wickedly Usurp to themselves in the Dominions aforementioned, all the Authority
of the King; do most cruelly Persecute all the Catholics both in England and
Ireland, p^rtly by condemning them to Banishment; partly by putting them into
Prisons, and otherwise corporally punishing them; and lastly, by putting them
to Death, a Witness of the Truth hereof, is that great Slaughter made by
Cromwell in the taking of the two Cities of Droghedah and VVex^o^d, and other
Places, where all the Catholics, without Distinction of either Sex or Age,
were Slaughtered; Witness hereof, also the raging Persecution and Death of
Catholics in England; by all which, and by their Parliamentarian Decrees
themselves, and their Covenant with God (as they call it) it is evident, even
beyond the clearness of the light of the shining Sun. That these Tyrannical
Regicides do ultimately intend and put forth all their Power for the utter
Destruction of all Catholics, and to ^xtirpate by the Root, and wholly to
extinguish the Catholic Faith throughout the World, openly asserting and
boasting with great Glory, that these things being once finished in those
Dominions, they will then invade France, and after that run through Germany,
Italy, and all Europe, throwing down Kings and Monarchs, whose very Titles are
most odious and abhorrent unto them: Briefly, they have no other thing in their
Aim than these Two, Namely, The extirpation of the Catholic Religion, and the
destruction of Monarchy. To which wicked Machination of theirs, forasmuch as it
could never have any the least Hopes, that either the King or his Father should
at any time in the least Assent, they have put the one to Death, and the other
to Exile: And these Rebels now, with a ne^arious boldness, have lately called
themselves a Commonwealth.

To meet with and prevent the infernal Endeavors of such Rebels, our Agent
most humbly offers to your Holiness, the following Propositions.

1. That your Holiness would make an annual Supply out of your own Treasury,
unto the said Charles the Second, of considerable Sums of Money, suitable to
the maintaining the War against those Rebels, against God, the Church, and
Monarchy. 2. That you would cause and compel the whole Beneficed Clergy in the
World, of whatsoever Dignity, Degree, State and Conditions soever, to
contribute the Third or the Fourth part of all their Fruits, Rents, Revenues,
or Emoluments, to the said War, as being Universal and Catholic. And that the
said Contribution may be paid every three Months, or otherwise, as shall seem
most expedient to your Holiness. 3. That by your Apostolic Nuncio's, your
Holiness would most ins^antly endeavor, with all Princes, Commonwealths, and
Catholic States, that the said Princes, Commonwealths, and States, may be
admonished in the Bowels of Jesus Christ, and induced to enter into, and
conclude an Universal Peace, and that they will unitedly supply the said King.
And that they will by no means acknowledge the said Regicides and Tyrants for a
Commonwealth or State; nor enter into, or have any Commerce with them. 4. That
by the said Nuncio's, or any other way, all, and every the Monarchs of all
Europe may be timely admonished, and made sensible in this Cause; wherein,
beside the detriment of the Faith, their own proper Interest is concerned: The
foresaid Tyrants being Sworn Enemies to all Monarchy, as they themselves do
openly assert, both by Word and Writing; and to that end, both in Germany,
Spain, France, Poland^ etc. and in the very Dominions of the great Turk, they
have raised dangerous Insurrections; being raised, they foment them, and to
that purpose, they supply the Charge, and make large Contributions to it. 5.
That your Holiness would Command, under pain of Excommunication, Ipso facto,
all and singular Catholics, that neither they, nor an^ of them, directly nor
indirectly, by Land or by Sea, do serve them in Arms, or assist them by any
Counsel, or to help, to favor or supply them any way, under whatsoever pretext.

Holy Father! the premised Remedies are timely to be applied, by which the
Catholic Faith, now exposed to extreme and eminent Hazard, may be conserved,
and infinite number of Catholics may be preserved from Destruction, Monarchy
may be established, and the most invincible King of Great Britain restored to
his Rights: All which things will bear your Holiness to Heaven with their
Praises, whom God long conserve in safety, etc.

The Propositions and Motives abovesaid (if occasion be) our Agent will more
largely set forth, Viva voce.



This Letter, as it seems to clear a great portion of Doubts and Suspicions of
Charles the Second's Integrity to the Prot^stant Religion; so it is a shrewd
Argument, that all that glistered in this King and his Father, was not Gold.
But I must beg the Readers Pardon for this long digression.

The Lords Justices sent Sir H. Spotswood from Dublin, to the King then in
Scotland, with an Account of all that happened. He dispatched Sir. I. Stuart,
with In^tructions to the Lords of the Privy Council in Ireland. He applied
himself to the Parliament of Scotland (as being near) for their Assistance. And
an Express was sent to the Parliament of England.

The King being returned out of Scotland, December 2 d. Summoned both Houses
together, and tells them; That he had staid in Scotland longer than he
expected, yet not fruitlessly; for he had given full Satisfaction to the
Nation; but cannot choose but take Notice of, and wonder at the unexpected
Distractions he finds at Home; and then Commends to them the State of Ireland.

After which, the Commons ordered a Select Committee to draw up a Petition and
Remonstrance to the King. The one was against Bishops, and Oppressures in
Church Government; and for Punishing the Authors of it. And the other contained
all the Miscarriages and Misfortunes, since the beginning of the King's Reign.

Not long after happened the Tumults of the London Apprentices at Whitehall,
and Westminster.

December 28. The King sends a Message to the Lords, That he would raise Ten
Thousand Volunteers for Ireland, provided the Commons would pay them.

Some time after, the King upon Information, that the Lord Kimbolton, and five
of the House of Commons, viz. Hollis, Sir A. Has^erig, Mr. Pym, Hambden, and
Stroud, had Correspondence with the Scots, and Countenanced the late City
Tumults; He thereupon ordered their Trunks, Studies and Chambers to be Sealed
up, and their Persons seized; the former of which was done, but they having
timely Notice, they went aside: Upon which, the Commons, the same day, Voted
high against these Actions of the King. Hereupon the King Charges Kimbolton,
and the five Members, with several Articles, and ^cquaints both Houses, That he
did intend to Prosecute them for High Treason, and required that their Persons
might be secured: And the next day, the King, attend^d with his Guard of
Pensioners, and some Hundreds of Gentleman, went to the House of Commons; and
the Guard staying without, the King with the Palsgrave, entered the House; at
whose Entrance, the Speaker rises out of the Chair; and the King sitting down
therein, views the Houses^round, and perceives the Birds he aimed at were
flown; whereupon He tells them, That he came to look for those five Members,
whom he had Accused of High Treason, and was r^solved to have them, where ever
He found them; and expected to have them sent to Him as soon as they should
come to the House; but would not have them think, that this Act of His was any
Violation of Parliament.

This Act of the King was highly Resented by the House, that the next day,
January 5. the Commons Voted it a Breach of Privilege: And it it was said in
the City, that the King intended Violence against the House of Commons, and
came thither with Force to Murder several Members, and used threatening
Speeches against the Parliament.

The next day the Londoners came thronging to Westminster with Petitions,
envying bitterly against some of the Peers; but especially the Bishops, as the
Authors of all these Disturbances: Upon which they were so affrighted, that
Twelve Bishops absented themselves from the House of Lords, drawing up a
Protestation against all Laws, Orders, Votes, Resolutions, and Determinations,
as in themselves Null, and of none Effect, which had Passed, or should Pass,
during their Absence. Presently after which, at a Conference between both
Houses, it was agreed, That this Protestation of the Twelve Bishops did extend
to the deep intrenching on the Fundamental Privileges, and Being of
Parliaments: And, in a short time, they were Accused of High Treason, Seized,
and brought on their Knees at the Lord's Bar: Ten of whom were Committed to the
Tower; and the other Two^ in regard of their Age, to the Black^Rod.

And now such Numbers of ordinary People, daily gathered about Westminster and
White Hall, that the King (fearing their Intentions) thought fit to withdraw to
Hampton Court. The next day, the Five Members were Triumphantly guarded to
Westminster by a great number of Citizens and Seamen, with Hundreds of Boats
and Barques. About this time the Parliament had notice, that the Lord Digby,
and Coll. Lunsford, were raising Troops of Horse at Kingston, where the Country
Magazine was lodged: Whereupon they Order, That the Country Sheriffs, Justices
of the Peace, and the Trained Bands, shall take care to Secure the Countries
and their Magazines. Lunsford was Seized, and sent to the Tower, but Digby
escaped beyond Sea.

The King removed to Royston, and January 20. He sends a Message to the
Parliament, proposing the Securi^y of his own Rights and Prerogative; and as to
matter of their Grievances, He would equal, or exc^ed the most Indulgent
Princes in Compliance with them.

After this, the House of Commons importune the King to put the Militia and
Command of the Tower in^o their Hands, as the only available Means, for the
removal of their Fears and Jealousies. But the King not willing to Comply with
their desire, signified to them, that He thought the Militia to be lawfully
subject to no Command but his own; and therefore would not let it go out of his
Hands, it being derived to Him from his Ancestors, by the Fundamental Laws of
the Kingdom.

The King b^ing now at Hampton^C^urt, sent for the Earl of Essex and Holland,
and other Memb^rs of both Houses, that were his Domestics, but they refused to
come. In the mean time, Mr. Pym, at a Confer^nce, complaining of the general
s^ocking of Papists into I^el^nd, affirmed, That since the Lieutenant had
orde^ed a stop upon the Ports, against all Irish Papists, many of the chi^f
Commanders now at the H^^d of the R^bels, had been Licensed to pass thither by
the King's immediate Warrant. The King was highly^ offended at this Speech,
which he signified to the House, w^o, in their Answ^r to his Message^ justify
Mr. Pym's words to be the sense of the House^ and that they had yet in safe
Custody, the Lord Delvin, Sir G. Hamilton, Colonel Butler, and Mr. Nettervil:
To which the King replys, That the aforementioned Persons had their Passages
granted before He knew of the Parliaments Order of Restraint; therefore
expected their Declaration for his Vindication from that odious Calumny of
Conniving, or underhand Favoring that horrid Rebellion.

But the King's Desire proved fruitless; for they next moved to have Sir I.
Byron tnrned out from being Lieutenant of the Tower; and, at their nomination,
Sir I. Coniers succeeded.

They then proceed to Name fit Persons sor Trust of the Militia of the several
Counties, particularly that for the Defense of the City of London, the
Parliament, the Tower, to be Commanded by Major General Skipton.

The King had deferred His Answer to their Petition, for settling the Mi^itia
of the Counties, according to the Nomination, till his Return from Dover, where
he took leave of his Wife and Daughter, and so returned to Greenwich; where he
being Arrived, sends his Answer to the Petition about the Militia; That He was
willing to divest Himself of the Power of the County Militia for a limited
time, but not of London, and other Cities and Corporations. This Answer did not
in the least satisfy; so that the Breach growing every day wider, the King
declined these Parts, and the Parliament, and moved to Theobald's.

About the beginning of March, He receives a Petition from the Parliament;
wherein they require the Militia more fervently than before; affirming, That in
ease of denial, the eminent dangers would c^nstrain them to dispose of it by
the Authority of Parliament; desiring also, That He wnuld make his Abode near
London, and the Parliament, for the better carrying on of Affairs, and
preventing the Peoples Jealousies and Fears. All which being refused, they
presently o^der, That the Nation be put into a posture of Defense, in such a
way as was agreed upon by Parliament, and a Committee to prepare a public
Declaration from these Heads.

1. The just Causes of the Fears and Jealousies given to the Parliament^; at
the same time clearing themselves from any Jealousies conceived against
Himself. 2. To consider of all Matters arising from His Majesty's Message, and
what was fit to be done.
And now began our Troubles, and all the Miseries of a Civil War: The
Parliament every day entertaining new Jealousies and Suspicions of the King's
Actions; They now proceed on a sudden, to make great Preparations both by Sea
and Land: And the Earl of Northumberland, Admiral of England, is commanded to
Rig the Kings Ships, and fit them for Sea: And likewise all Masters and Owners
of Ships were persuaded to do the like. The Beacons were prepared, Sea-marks
set up, and extraordinary Postings up and down with Pacquets: All sad
Prognostics of the Calamities ensuing.

August 22. 1642. The King comes to Nottingham, and there erects his Standard:
to which, some Numbers resorted, but ^ar shot of what was expected. And three
days after, the King sends a Message to the Parliament, to propose a Treaty,
which was accepted, but quickly broke off again.

The War being now begun, the New raised Soldiers committed many Outrages upon
the Country People, which both King and Parliament, upon complaint, began to
Rectify. The King himself was now Generalissimo over his own, and the Earl of
Essex for the Parliament: The King's Forces received the first Repulse at Hull,
by Sir I. Hotham, and Sir I. Meldram, and the King takes up his Quarters at
Shrewsbury: Portsmouth was next Surrendered to the Parliament; and presently
after, Sir I. Biron takes Worcester for the King. In September, the two Princes
Palatines; Rupert and Maurice Arrived in England, who were presently
Entertained, and put into Command by the King.

This uncivil Civil-War was carried on in general with all the Ruins and
Desolations immaginable, wherein all Bonds of Religion, Alliance, and
Friendship were utterly destroyed: Wherein Fathers and Children, Kindred and
Acquaintances, became unnatural Enemies to each other. In which miserable
Condition this Nation continued for near Four Years, viz. From August the 22.
1642. (the time the King set up his Standrrd at Nottingham) to May the 6. 1646.
(the time when the King, quitting all Hopes, put himself into the Protection of
the Scotch Army at Newark.) During this Process of time, several M^ssag^s past,
diverse Treaties set on Foot, and other Overtures of Accommodation, but all came
to no effect.

The War in England being now (after so much Bloodshed and ^uine) brought to
some end, the Parliament were at leisure to dispute with the Scots, concerning
the keeping of the King; who, f^aring least Fairfax should fall upon them, and
compel them to deliver him up, Retreated further No^thwa^d^, toward
New Castle, The Parliament sent an Invitation to the Prince of Wales, to come
to ^ondon, with Promise of Honor and Safety; but he did not think fi^ to
venture. The King sends from New-Cas^le to the Army, about a Treaty; and the
House of Commons Vote, That the Kings Person should be d^manded of the Scots,
and that their whole Army return home, upon Recei^^ of part of their Arrears,
the rest to be sent after them. And a Committee is appointed to Treat with the
Scotch Commissioners, about drawing up Propositions to be sent to the King;
wherein much time was spent in wrangling, whilst the English deny the Scots to
have any Right in the Disposal of the King of England; and the Scots as stiffly
alleged, He was their King, as much as of the English; and they had as good
Right to dispose of the King in England, as the English could Challenge in
Scotland: But at last they agreed on Sixteen General Propositions, which were
presented to the King at New Castle, July 27. 1646. But these Propositions were
such that the King did not think fit to comply withal.

The Scots general Assembly sent a Remonstrance to the King, desiring him to
settle Matters in England, according to the Covenants, etc. But all this did
not do; and therefore the Scots, who had hi^herto so sharply disputed about the
Disposal of the Kings Person, are content, upon the Receipt of Two Hundred
Thousand Pounds to depart home, and leave the King in the Power of the
Parliament, who Voted him to Holmby-House, and sent their Commissioners to
receive him from the Scots at New Castle; to whom Feb. 8. 1646. He was
accordingly delivered; and the Scots returned home.

Some Petitions from Essex, and other Places, are presented to the Parliament,
inveighing against the Proceedings of the Army, which much vexed the Soldiers,
who sharply Apologize for themselves.

And now the Army, to the great Terror of the Parliament, march toward London,
and came as far as St. Alban's, notwi^hstanding a Message from Both Houses, not
to come within Twenty Five Miles of the City; which the General excused,
saying, That he Army was come thither before they received the Parliaments
Desire: And here he obtains a Months Pay. The Parliament then drew up
Propositions of Peace to be sent to the King at Hampton Court; the same in
substance with those offered at New Castle, and had the like effect. The
Business of Episcopacy being always the main Objection, which the Parliament
were resolved to Abolish: And the King preferring that before all other
Respects, would rather loose All, than consent thereunto.

The Scots Commissioners send a Letter, November. 6. 1647. to the Speaker of the
House of Commons, and require, That the King may be admitted to a Personal
Treaty; or at least, That he should not be carried from Hampton Court
violently, but that Commissioners of both Parliaments may ^reely pass to and
from Him to Treat for the Settlement of the Kingdom, After which, diverse
Mes^ages past between the King and the Parliament, and several Conferrences
were set on Foot, particularly that of Henderson's; but they proving ^ruitless,
the Parliament, with most of the Officers of the Army that joined with them,
brought the King to a Trial, by a Judicature of their own setting up, which
proved his Ruin.

THE SECRET HISTORY OF King CHARLES II.
WHEN Charles the Second was restored to the Thrones of England, Scotland, and
Iroland, never any Monarch in the World came to the Possession of so large a
Dominion with more Advantages to have done good sor Himself, to his Subjects at
Home, and to his Allies Abroad: The People all experienced in Ma^tial
Discipline, as having but newly sheathed the Sword of Civil War, and Foreign
Conquest; so that their Valor was dreaded abroad, wherever he should have
menaced an Enlargement of his Territories: Besides all this, he had the Love of
his Subjects, Equal, if not Superior, to any Prince that ever Reigned before
him: And he had the Affection of his Parliament to the highest degree.

But after all this, he was no sooner settled in his Throne, but through the
Influence of Evil Counselors, upon a Disposition naturally Vicious, and easily
corrupted with Esseminate Pleasures; he abandoned himself to all manner of
Softness, and Voluptuous Enjoyments, and harboring in his ^osome the worst of
Vices, base ingratitude, betra^ed Himself, that he might betray his People; for
where the Constitution of a Nation is such, That the Laws of the Land are the
Measures both of the Sovereign's Commands, and the Obedience of the Subjects;
whereby it is provided, That as the one is not to invade, what by Concessions
and Stipul^tions is granted to the Ruler, so the other is not to deprive them
of their lawful and determined Rights and Liberties: There the Prince who
strives to Subvert the Fundamental Laws of the Society is the Traitor and the
Rebel, and not the People, who endeavor to Preserve and Defend their own. Nor
must we ascribe the Miscarriages of his Reign altogether to the Remissness of
his Nature, but to a Principle of Revenge, which his Mother had infused into
him, not so much for the loss of her H^sband, but out of her inbred Malice to
the Protestant Religion, which no where flourished in that Splendour, as in
England, fostered and cherished by the vowed Enemy of this Nation, his Brother,
the Duke of York, who had been openly heard to declare in his Bedchamber at
St. James's, That he was resolved to be revenged upon the English Nation for
the Death of his Father; and what an Ascendant this Brother had over over him,
the whole Kingdom has felt by sad and woeful Experience: For indeed the King had
all along an Affection for him; so entire, and baneful to the Nation, that he
could only be said to Reign, while his Brother Ruled. With all these Royal
Virtues, and imbred and fomented Animosisies, to render him at his Return a
Gracious Sovereign to this Kingdom, let us trace him from his Cradle to find
out those Princely Endowments, which invisibly increasing with him as he grew
in Years, dazzled in such a manner the Eyes of do^ing Politicians of that Age,
to recall him against that known and vulgar Maxim of Common Prudence.

-- Regnabit sanguine multo
Ad Reg^um quisquis unit ^b eilio^
When he was but very young, he had a very strange and unaccountable Fondness
to a Wooden Bi^let, without which in his Arms he would never go abroad, nor lie
down in his Bed: From which the more observing sort of People gathered, that
when he came to years of Maturity, either Oppres^ors and Blockheads would be
his greatest Favorites; or else, that when he came to Reign, he would either
be like Jupiter's Log, for every Body to deride and contemn; or that he would
rather choose to command his People with a Club, than Rule them with a Scepter.
And indeed, They that made the first and last conjectures, found in due time
they were not altogether in the wrong. For the Throne was no sooner empty by
the Death of his Father, before he could be permitted to s^at himself in it,
but he gave the World a plain Discovery what sort of People they were; who,
when he came to Reign, were most likely to have the principal Room in his
Favor and Trust, and by whose Assistance he was in hopes to Tyrannize over his
E^glish and Scotch^ Subject^, particularly those of the latter.

For when the Parliament of Scotland sent for him; as he was then Cruising
about Guernsey, to treat about receiving him to be their King, he would not so
much as transact with them, till he had first sent into Ireland, to assure
himself, whether those Rebels, who had murdered no less than Two Hundred
Thousand Protestants, were in a Condition or no for him to cast himself upon
their Assistance. But those hopes failing, in regard they were in a fair way to
be subdued themselves, he was at length inclined to entertain the Overture made
him by the Scots. And yet even then was his Mind so full fraught with the
thoughts of Despotical Dominion, and purposes of introducing Popery in^o his
Territories; that had it not been for the Prince of Orange, he would never have
complied with the Terms which the Scots had ordered to propose, though no other
than what were necessary for the Security of the Lives, Liberties, Laws, and
Religion of his People. And how he employed his Wooden ^illet afterward, may
easily be understood by his many Acts of Barbarous Tyranny` over those poor
People.

This Prince began early in Hypocrisy, and Breach of Promise: For the
Confirmation of which, to be a certain Truth, there needs no more than to lay
the Foundation of the Proof upon his own Words, and solemn Engagements. For in
the King's Letter to the Speaker of the House of Commons, just before his
Restoration, he has these Words:

We assure you upon our^ Royal Word, That none of our Predecessors have had a
greater Esteem for Parliaments than We have, as well in Our Judgment, as from
our Obligation. We do believe them to be so Vital a part of the Constitution of
the Kingdom, and so necessary for the Government of it, that We well know,
neither Prince nor People can be in any tolerable degree happy without them;
and therefore you may be confident, That We shall always look upon their
Counsels as the best We can receive, and shall be as tender of their
Peiviledges, and as careful to Preserve and Protect them, as of that which is
most near to Our self, and most necessary for Our own Preservation.

This in part demonstrates his Prevarication with Man. Now for his
Prevarication with Heaven, we must produce another Paragraph of the same
Letter, wherein he uses these flattering Expressions^

If you desire the Advancement and Propagation of the Protestant Religion, We
have, by Our constant Profession of it, given sufficient Testimony to the
World, That neither the Unkindness of those of the same Faith toward Us, no^
the Civilities and Obligations from those of a contrary profession, could in
the least startle Us, or make Us swerve from it; and nothing can be proposed to
manifest Our Zeal and Affection for it, to which We will not readily assent.
And we hope, in due time, Our self to propose something to you for the
Propagation of it, that will satisfy the World, that We have always made it
^oth Our Care and Study, and have enou^h observed, what is most like to bring
Disadvantage to it.

Now, as for his Veneration of Parliaments, or his Zeal for the Reformed, or
truly any Religion, the Succeeding transactions of his Reign, which are to be
related, will plainly make it appear how far those words were from his Heart,
when dictated by his Lips.

To show that this Prince was a great Lover of Comedies and Enterludes, and
could act his part with e're a Moon or Lacy of them all, there is a Story must
not be omitted, which may serve to light us into the occasion, how he came to
gain the addition of Pious: Otherwise, as it is impossible for us to give any
Account why Virgil so often gives the Epithet of Pious to his Hero AE^eas,
after he had so dishonourably cheated, and broke his Faith with Queen Dido; so
it is as little to be expected, that we should afford a reason why Charles the
Second should be so universally dignified with the name of Pious, after such a
prank of Hypocrisy as we are going to relate. This Story is this.

While he lay at Breda, daily expecting the English Navy for his
Transportation; the Dissenting Party fearing the worst, thought it but
reasonable to send a select number of most eminent Divines, to wait upan his
Majesty in Holland, in order to get the most advantageous Promises from him
they could for the Liberty of their Consciences. Of the number of these
Divines, Mr. Case was one, who, with the rest of his Brethren, coming where the
King lay, and desiring to be admitted into the King's Presence, were carried up
into the Chamber next (or very near) the King's Closet, but told withal, That
the King was busy at his Devotions, and that till he had done they must be
contented to stay. Being thus left alone (by contrivance no doubt) and hearing
a sound of groaning Piet^, such was the curiosity of Mr Case, that he would
needs go and lay his Ear to the Closet Door: But Heavens! How was the good old
Man ravished, to hear the Pious Ejaculations that fell from the King's Lips. --
Lord, Since thou art pleased to restore me to the Throne of my Ancestors, grant
me a Heart constant in the Exercise and Protection of Thy true Protestant
Religion. -- Never may I seek the Oppression of those, who out of his
tender^ess of their Consciences, are not free to conform to outwar^ and
indifferent Ceremonies. With a great deal more of the same Cant; which Mr. Case
having overheard, full of Joy and Transport returning to his Brethren, with
Hands and Eyes to Heaven up-lifted, fell a Congratulating the Happiness of
Three Nations, over which the Lord had now placed a Saint of Paradise for their
Prince. After which, the King coming out of the Closet, the deluded Ministers
were to Prostitute themselves at his Feet; and then it was that the King gave
them those Promises of his Favor and Indulgence, which how well he after
performed, they felt to their Sorrow.

Soon after he arrived into England, where he was received with all the Pomp,
Splendour, and Joy that a Nation could express; but then, as if he had left all
his Piety behind him in Holland, care was taken against the very first Night,
that his Sacred was to lie at White Hall, to have the Lady Castlemain seduced
from her Loyalty to her Husband, and enticed into the A^ms of the happily
restored Prin^e.

Thus, from the first hour of his Arrival into these Kingdoms, he sat himself
too much by his own P^rswasion and Influence, to withdraw both Men and Women
from the Laws of Nature and Morality, and to Pollute and Infect the People with
Debauchery and Wickedness. He that ought to have shown like the North-Star in
the Firmament of Royalty, to direct his Subjects in the Paths of Virtue, was
the Sovereign Igni^ fatuus to misguide them into all the Snares of Ruin and
Perdition: Execrable Oaths were the chief Court-Acknowledgments of a Deity,
Fornications and Adulteri^^ the Principal Tests of the Peoples Loyalty and
Obedience.

Certain it is, That the Kingdom was never in a better Posture for the King to
work upon it, than at the time of his return into England: For such were the
Contests for Superiori^y, among those who had taken upon them the Government,
after the Death of Oliver; such the Confusions and Disorders that from thence
arose, that no body could probably see where would be the end of the general
Distraction, unless it were by reducing all things to their primitive
Condition, under a Prince whose Title was so fair to the Crown: For which all
Parties were the more inflamed, by the King's reiterated Oaths, Promises and
Decla^ations to those of the Church of England, to maintain the Protestant
Religion; to the Dissenters, That he would Indulge their Tender Consciences
with all the Liberty they could rationally desire. And so in^atuated they were
with these Ingratiating Wheedles, that should all that knew him Beyond Sea,
both at Colen and in Flanders, have spoken their Discoveries with the Voices of
Angels, nay, should the Letter which he Wrote with his own Hand in the Year
Sixty Two, to the Pope, have been shown them in Capital Letters, they would
have been all looked upon but as Fictious, and Inventions to obstruct the
Happiness of the Nation.

The king was not ignorant, that (in order to bring his intended Designs about)
he was furnished already with a Stock of G^ntl^men. who being forced to share
the misfortunes of his Exiles, and consequently no less imbitteted against
those whom they looked upon as their Oppressors, he had molded many of them to
his own Religion and Interest, by Corrupting them in their Banishment with
them; insomuch, that a certain Gentleman offered to prove, one day in the
Pensionary House of Commons, That of all the P^r^ons (yet Persons of all Ranks
and Qualities) who sojourned with the King Abroad, there were scarce any then
alive, except Prince Rupert, Lord M. and Mr. H. Coventry, who had not been
prevailed upon by His Majesty to -- Nor could, their being restored to their
^states at his Return, separate them from their Master's Interest; for that,
besides the future expectations, with which the King continually fed them, they
had bound themselves by all the Oaths and Promises that could be expected from
them, to assist and cooperate with him in all his D^signs, though they were
dispensed with from appearing barefaced. So soon therefore as the Parliament
that gave him Admittance into the the Kingdom was Dissolved, the King call
another, the first of his own Calling; and so ordered the matter, that the
greatest part of the Masked Revolters got in among the real Protestants: By
which means, all things went Trim and Trixy on the King's side^ They restored
him the Milltia, which the Long Parliament took from his Father^ They
Sacrificed the Treasure of the Nation to his Profuseness and Prodigality: They
offered up the Righ^s and Liberties of the People, by advancing ^is
Pr^rogative; and what was most conducing to the King's P. Designs, they made
him by private Instructions, those Penal Statutes which divided the Two
prevailing Protestant Parties, and set them together by the Ears, by Arming one
Party of the Protestants against the rest; such a darl-advantage to the
Papists, and upon the obtaining of which, he set so high a value, that neither
the necessity of his A^^airs at any time afterward, nor the Application and
Interposure of several Parliaments for removing the Grounds of our Differences
and Animosities, by an Indulgence to be past into Law, could prevail upon him
to forego the Advantages he had got of keeping the Protestants at mutual Enemy
one with another, and making them useful to his own Designs.

Nor was this all, But that he might carry on his Popish Designs the more
sa^ely and covertly, under the cursed Masque of Hypocrisy, he procured the
passing of an Act in his Pensionary Parliament, 1662. whereby it was made
Forfeiture of Estate, and Imprisonment, for any to say, The King was a Papist,
or An Introducer to P^pery. Nevertheless, notwithstanding he was thus become a
Protestant by the Law of the La^d, to repeat how he exerted the Power given him
by the Parliament, how he Persecuted and Prosecuted the Protestant
Nonconformists throughout the Kingdom; how he caused to be Excommunicated,
Imprisoned, and Harrased, when not a Papist in the Three Kingdoms was so much
as Troubled or Mole^ted, is a thing that would be altogether needless, as being
so well known to the World.

I had almost forgot another great kindness which the Parliament did him, which
was at the private Instance of the King, to Abrogate the Trienial Act, by which
the Sitting of a Parliament once in Three Years, was infallibly secured to the
Kingdom. So well did this Monarch know where the Shoe pinched him; and so
crafty was he to take his Advantage from the Delirium and Frens^e, the Nation
was in upon his Restoration, to obtain the repealing of the Principal Laws, by
which his wrigling into Arbitrary Government would have often been curbed and
restrained.

But whether it were that the prodigal Zeal of those Members began to cool,
conscious, perhaps that they had already opened too large a Gap to Tyrannous
Invasion upon the Liberties of the People, which they had so Treacherously laid
at the King's Mercy; or whether it were that the King resolved to quicken his
to Arbitrary Rule, to the end he might see Popery flourish in his own days;
certain it is, that the next attempt was to make Parliaments themselves the
Ministers and Instruments of his own Popish Ambition, and our Slavery. In order
hereunto, He falls a Buying and Purchasing at certain and Annual Rates, the
Vote of the Members, at what time the greatness of the Number of those that
stood ready for Sale (as well as their Indigencies and Lusts) made the Price,
at which they were to be bought so much the easier. Now, being thus hired by
His Majesty, with their own free Offerings of the Nations Money: How many Bills
did they pass into Acts for Ensl^ving and Ruining a Third part of the Kingdom,
under the Notion of Phanaticks and Dissenters? And all this, in graritude of
their Sallaries, and to accomplish the Will and Pleasure of their Lord and
Master, the King, whose Bought and Purchased Vassals and Slaves they were? All
this while, what can we say or think other, but that the Purchaser as well as
the Sellers were guilty of betraying the People, who had entrusted them? And
then to make a President by Law for Tyranny, these Hirelings empowered the
Justices of the Peace to disleize Men of their Estates, without being Convicted
and found Guilty by Legal Juries, of the Transgressions whereof they stood
Accused: By which they not only overthrew all the Commons, and Stature Law of
the Land, but they Subverted and altered the Fundamental Constitution, in
making English Men liable to be turned at the Arbitrary Pleasure of the King.
And as an addi^ion to this, those Mercinary Members, by the Orders and
Directions of their most Pious and Protestant Play Master the King, past another
Law, which was styled, The Act for Corporations; by which Men of Principles and
Integrity were debarred all Offices of Magistracy in Cities and Corporate
Towns; the woeful effects of which, the Kingdom, not long after, both saw and
felt, in the Surrender of Charters, and Betraying of Franchises, by Persons
upon whom the Government of ^he Corporations came to be delivered by Virtue of
that Act, which excluded so many Honest, Able, and Virtuous Men, the Persons
whom the King for his by-ends, nominated for fit and Loyal Men, would never
have risen above the Offices of Scavengers, Headboroughs, or Constables at the
highest.

To this, as mainly contributed to the King's Design of Enslaving us, we may
subjoyn their passing an Act, whereby they did both limit and confine those
that were to present Petitions to the King, not to exceed Ten Persons. Let the
Matter to be represented be never so Important, or the Grievance to be
redressed never so Illegal or Oppressive, yet it was made no less than a Riot,
if above Ten Persons Addressed themselves to the King to crave the b^nefit of
the Law: A Trouble which the King c^re^ully provided against, knowing how many
La^s he had to break, and how Burdensome and Oppressive he must be to the
People, before ^e could complete the Fabric of Slavery and ^^p^ry, which he
was Erecting.

Nor was this all, For the King being Conscious ^f his own sa^^ing, and finding
that through his own (...), and the Importunities of his consuming Mis^es, he
could not depend on any defini^e Su^m for accomplishing his Promises to his
Holy Father, the Pope, and his Trusty Confederate the French King, got Two
Bills prepared, and carried into the House, the passing of which, had
completed the Nations Misery, and made him Absolute. The one was, To Empower
His Majesty upon extraordinary Occasions (of which he would not have failed to
have been the Judge as often as he pleased) to raise Money without a
Parliament: And the other was, For settling an Universal Excise upon the Crown.
The Passing either of which, the King well knew would have been soon enabled
him to have Governed by Basha's and Ianizaries, and redeemed him from having
any further need of Parliaments.

But what the King had so finely projected to enslave the Nation, and obtain
whatever he had a mind to, proved the Ground of their Disappointment, and the
occasion o^ the Nations escape from the snare that was laid for it: For the
Mercenary Members foreseeing, That the passing these Bills would have put an
end to these Pensions, by rendering them useless for the time to come,
consulting their Gain, and preferring it above what the Court called their
Loyalty, fell in with the honest Party, and so became assistant in throwing out
the Bills.

However, Piou^ AEneas finding the Nation grew sensible of his covert
Intentions, and Encroachments upon their Laws and Liberties, and desparing of
getting any more Acts passed in Parliament, toward the promoting his Desings,
resolved to Husband the Laws he had already obtained, as much as he could, to
the Ruin of the N^tion; and where they failed of being Serviceable to his Ends,
to betake himself to other Methods and Means: And therefore, besides the daily
Impoverishing, Confining, and destroying of infinite numbers of Honest and
Peaceable People: Under pretense of Executing the Laws, he made it his business
to invent new Projects to tear up the Rights and Liberties of the People, by
ways and means which had not the least shadow of a Law to countenance them.

Having made this fair Progress toward the enslaving both the Souls and Bodies
of his own Subjects at home, let us take a view of his Zeal to the Protestant
Religion abroad. And first for the Protestants of France: When Monsieur Rohan
came into England to acquaint his Pious Majesty with the Resolutions taken at
Paris to persecute, and if possible, to root out the Reformed in France, and
proposed Overtures to the King, as would have been greatly for his Glory and
Interest, yet no way contrary to the Allegiance of that poor People, he
remitted the Monsieur to his Brother, the D. of York, who not only informed the
French Ambassador of the Gentleman's Errand, but placed him behind the
Hangings, to hear what Monsieur Rohan had to represent and propose to him.
Which, although the Ambassador to could not but abhor in the Two ^rothers, and
was ashamed of in himself, yet he could do no less than inform his Master of
what he had seen and heard. Upon which, the poor Gentleman, on his Return out
of England, was so narrowly watched, that being Apprehended upon the Borders of
Switzerland, he was carried back to Paris, and there broken upon the Wheel.

Nor did it satisfy ^he King and his dear Brother the Duke, to have thus
Betrayed, as well as Abandoned the Protestants in France; but with the utmost
Malice that Popery could inspire into them, they sought the Destruction of the
Seven Uni^ed Provinces, upon no other Account, but their being Protestant
States, and for giving Shelter to those who being Persecuted by himself and his
Confederate (the French Tyrant) for their Religion, fled thither for Protection
and Safety: For knowing what in due time they intended to bring upon the
Protestants at home, they thought it most requisite to destroy those Protestant
States in the first place, that there might remain no Sanctuary for their
Persecuted Sub^ects: And indeed, abaring this, and one more Ground of their
Quarrel with those State^; never was a War undertaken upon more ^rivilous
Pretenses, than those Two which the King engaged in against the Seven
Provinces, in the Year 1667. and 1672. Nor can any thing justify the
Discretion and Wisdom of the Wars, had they not been undertaken merely in
Subserviency to the promoting Popery and Slavery; seeing, that upon all other
Grounds that Reason and Prudence can suggest, it was the Interest of England,
as still it is, to preserve the Government of Holland entire. Nor can we have a
true Account of the Grounds, upon which the Two Monarchs of England and France
agreed the War against Holland, in the Year 1672. than by the Representation
which the French Ambassador made of it both at Rome and Vienna. For though his
Public Declaration pretended no more, but that it was to seek Reparation for
the Diminution of his Glory; yet the Account he gave to the Pope of his
Masters, and consequently of our Protestant Mon^rch, his first Confederate,
undertaking that War, was, That he did it in order to the extirpation of
Heresy: And in the same manner they sought to justify the Piety of that
Enterprise to his Imperial Majesty, by alleging, That the Hollanders were a
People that had forsaken God^ and were Heretics, and that all good Christians
were bound to Associate and Unite for their Extirpation. Upon which Account it
seems, our King and the Duke thought fit to exchange the Appellation of of G^od
Protestants for that of Good Christians. However, from hence it was plain, what
sort of Good Christians they were, since it was evident, that their Uniting
with France in that War, was to des^roy the P^otestant Dutch Heretics.

These being the real Grounds and Motives that induced the King of England to
begin that Impolitick War against the Dutch, in the year 1665. whatever was
openly and publicly pretended. How strangely was the Parliament deluded and
blinded by the King's Oaths, and Protestations of his Zeal for the Protestant
Religion? What Sums of the Subjects Money they gave this Monarch, to defray the
Expenses of that nnnecessary and baneful War, is too well known; and yet after
all, saving one brisk Engagement ill managed, though with some los^ to the Dutch,
at length no Fleet was set out, and the choicest of their Royal Navy either
Burnt, or taken in Harbor to save Charges. And though the French at leng^h
joined themselves in assistance with the Dutch against us, yet, by the Credit
he had with the Queen Mother, he so far imposed upon, that upon assurance,
which no M^n of Prudence and Foresight would have believed, That the Dutch
would have no Fleet at Sea that Year, he forbore to make ready, and so incurred
that ignominious Disgrace at Chatham: the like, to which the English never
suffered since they claimed the Dominion of the Sea.

And now we come to the best Act that ever he did in his Life, had he pursued
it; which showed how happy a Prince he might have been, had he been ever
faithful to his own, and the Interests of his People, and that Religion which
he outwardly professed.

For upon Conclusion of that Peace, having leisure to look about him, and to
observe how the French had in the Year 1667. taken their opportunity, and while
we were embroyled and weakened by the late War, had in Violation of all the most
Sacred and Solemn Oaths and Treaties, Invaded, and Taken a great part of the
Spanish Netherlands, which had always been considered as the natural Frontier
o^ England; the King then prompted more by his own Fears, then out of any
kindness he had for the Nation, judged it necessary to interpose, before the
Flames that consumed next Neighbor should throw the Sparks over the Water.

Thereupon he sent Sir William Temple, then his Resident at Brussels, to
propose a nearer Alliance with the Hollanders, and to take joint Measures
against the French; which Proposals of Sir William Temple's being entertained
with all Compliance by the Dutch, within Five days after Two several Treaties
were concluded between the King and the States: The one a Defensive, and
stricter Leag^e than before, between the Two Nations; and the other a joint and
reciprocal Engagement to oppose the Conquest of Fland^rs, and ^o procure,
either by way of Meditation, or by ^orce of Arms, a speedy Peace between France
and Spain, upon the T^rms therein mentioned: And because Sweeden came into the
same Treaty, within a very little while after, from the Three Parties concerned
and engaged, it was called the Tripple League. In pursuance of which, the
Treaty of ^ix la Chapelle was also forced upon the French, and in some measure
upon the Spaniards, who were unwilling to part with so great a part of their
Country by a Solemn Treaty.

The King of France thus stopped in his Career by the Tripple League, and by
the Peace of Aix la Chapelle, soon after concluded, though for a while he
dissembled his dissatisfaction, yet resolved to untye the Tripple League,
whatsoever it cost him, and therefore set his Counsels to work, to try all the
ways he could possibly think on, in order to compass his sad Design. To which
purpose (and as it is generally thought, that which a^^ected it) the Duchess of
Orleance was sent over to Dover; where, if common Fame say true, several
Chamber Secrets were performed.

This Treaty was for a long time, a work of Darkness, and lay long concealed,
till the King of France, to the end the King of England being truly set forth
in his Colors, out of a despair of ever being trusted, or forgiven by his
People hereafter, might be pushed to go on bare faced, and follow his steps in
Government, most Treacherously and Unking like, cau^ed it to be printed at
Paris; though upon Complaint, made at the French Court, and the Author (though
he had his Instructions from Colbert) to humor the King, committed to the
Bastile for a short time, and then let out again. However, the Book being
Printed, some few Copies lit into safe Hands; from whence take the Substance of
the Mystery of Iniquity as follows: After that Monsieur de Croisy, the French
Ambassador at London, had laid before the Eyes of the King of England, all the
Grounds which his Majesty had of Complaint against Holland, etc. He told him,
That the time was come to revenge himself of a Nation that had so little
Respect for Kings, and that the occasion was never more favorable, seeing many
of the ^rinces of Germany were already entered into the League; and that the
King of France was powerful enough to be able to promise to his Allies, in the
Issue of that War for satisfaction, both as to their Honor and Interests,
whereby he prevailed with that Prince to enter into Secret Alliance with
France. And for his greater Assurance, and the more to confirm him, Henrietta,
Duchess of Orleance, went for England, and proposed to her Brother, in the
Name of the most Christian King. that he would assure him an abs^lute Authority
over his Parliament, and ^ull power to establish the Catho^ick Religion in his
Kingdoms o^ England, Scotland and Ireland: But withal she told him, that to
compass this before all things else, i^ would b^ necessary to abate the Pride
and Power of the Dutch, and to reduce them to the sole Province o^ Holland; and
that by this means the King of England sh^^ld have Zeal^nd ^or a Retreat, in
case of necessity, and that the rest of the Law-Countries should remain to the
King of France, if he could render himself Master of it.

This is the Sum of that Famous Leage, concluded at D^v^r, framed and entered
into on purpose, for the Subjuga^ion of these Three Nations to Popery and
Sl^very.

Soon after this, the Emperor o^ Germany, the Duke of L^rrain, and several
other G^rman Princes, desired to be admitted into the Tripple League, but it
was absolutely refused them.

Nay, So soon as the Two Cons^derate Monarc^s ha^ thus made a shift to cut the
Gordian Knot, the now pitiful, but formerly vaunted Tripp^e Leagu^, was
trampled under foot, turned into Ridi^ni^ and less valu^d than a Ballad:
Insomuch, that to talk of admi^ting others into the Tripple League, was
appr^hended in Print as a kind of Fi^^^ of Speech, comm^nly called a Bull.

And this i^ is plain, That the T^i^ple Lea^ue was (...) to the Ends of the
French King, to ruin the Dutch, and to bring the Three Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, under the Yokes of Ar^itrary Power, and Roman Catholic
Idolatry, after a Total Abolition of the Name of Parliaments, and Subversion of
the Fundamental Laws, Gratias tibi piissime atque invictissime Rex, Carole
Secunde. And that he might not as much as in him lay, meet with after rubs, Mr.
H. C. was dispatched into Sweeden, to dissolve the Tripple League in that
Kingdom; which he did so effectually, by cooperating with the French Ministers
in that Court, that the Swede, after it came to Rupture, never assis^ed to any
purpose, ^r prosecuted the ^nds of the said Alliance, only by Arming himself at
the expense of the League; first under a disguised Mediation, acted the French
Interest, and at last threw off his Vizard, and drew his Sword on the French
side in the Quarre^. And at home, when the Project repined, and grew hopeful,
the Lord Keeper was discharged from his Office, and both he, the Duke of
Orm^nd, Prin^e Rupert, and Secretary Trevor, were discarded out of the
Committee for Foreign Affairs, as being too honest to comply with the
Intreagues th^n on Foot.

The Exchequer for some Years before, by the B^it of more than ordinary Gain,
h^d de^^y'd in the greatest part of the most Wea^thy Goldsmiths, and they the
rest of the Moneyed People of the N^tion, by the due Payment of Interest, till
the King was run in Debt, upon what Account no Bod^ knew, above Two Millions
St^rling, which served for one of the Pretenses in the Lord-Keep^rs Speech, at
the opening of the Parliamen^, to demand and obtain a Grant of the
fore-men^ioned Supplies, and might plentifully have sufficed to dis-engage the
King with Peace, and any tolerable good Husbandry: But as if it had been
perfidious to have applied them to any of the Purp^ses declared, instead of
Payment, it was privately resolv^d upon to shat up the Exchequer, lest any p^rt
of the Money should have been legally exp^nded, but that all might be
appropriated to the Holy War in prospect, and those f^r more Pious uses to
which the ^ing had Dedicated it.

This Affair was carried on with ^^l the Secrecy imaginable, lest the
unseasonble venting of it should ^ave spoiled the Wit and M^lice of the Design:
So that all on a sudden, u^^ the first of Ia^uary, 1671. to the great
Astonishment, Ruin and Despair of so many Interest Persons, and to the Terror
of the whole Nation, by so Arbitrary a Fact, the Proclamation Issued forth in
the midst of the Confluence of so many vast Aids, and so great a Revenue,
whereby the Crown published it self Bankrupt, made Prize of the Subject, and
broke all Faith and Contract at Home, in order to the breaking of both Abroad
with more Advantage.

What was this but a Robbery committed upon the People, under the Bond and
Security of the Royal Faith? By which, many Hundreds were as really
impoverished and undone, as if he had violently broken into their Houses, and
taken their Money out of their Coffers: Nay, that would have look^d Generous
and Great, whereas the other was Base and Sneaking: Only it seemed more
agreeable to His Majesty's Temper, to Rob his Subjects by a T^ick, than to
Plunder them by direct and open Force.

There remained nothing now, but that the King, after this Famous ^xploit upon
his own Subjects, should manifest his Impartiality to Foreig^ers, and assert
the Justice of his intended Quarrel with the H^llanders. Thereupon, the Dispute
about the Flag, upon occasion of the Fansan Yatch, was started a fresh, and a
great noise was made of Infamous Libels, horrid Pictures, Pillars set up, and
Medals Coined, to the infinite dishonor of his Majesty's Person, his Crown and
Dignity, though not one of the Libels or Pictures could be produced; and as for
the Pillars, they never had any Being, but in the imagination of those that
made it their business to raise Jealousies between the Two Nations. It Is true,
there was a Medal coined, which might have been spared; but so soon as it was
known in Holland, that Exceptions were tak^^ as it, the Stamp was broken to
p^eces.

Some time after, the French King seeing the English (after the Affair of Sir
R. H. on the Smirna Fleet) engaged past all Retrea^, comes in with his Fleet,
not to Fight, but only to sound our Seas, to spy our Ports, to learn our
Building, to learn our way of Fighting, and to consume ours, ^and preserve his
own Navy: For no sooner had the Duke of York, as the Design was laid, su^^ered
himself to be shamefully surprised; but the Vice Admiral,^ the Earl o^ Sandwich
was Sacrificed, and the rest of the E^glish Fleet so torn and mangled, that the
English Honor was laid not in the Dust, bu^ in the Mud, while his Royal
Highness did all that was expect^d from him, and Monsieur D' Estre^s, who
Commanded the French, did all that he was sent for.

There was Three other several Engagem^nts o^ ours with the Dutch the next
Summer. But while nothing was tenable at Land against the F^ench, so it seemed,
that to the English every thing was impregnable at Sea, which was not to be
ar^ri^^ted to the want of Courage, or Conduct o^ the then Commanders, but
rather to the unlucky Conju^ction of the Engi^sh to the French, like the
Disasters that happen to Men, by being in ^ll Company.

In the mean time the hopes of the Spanish and Sm^rna Fleet being vanished, the
slender Allowance from the French, not sufficing to defray farther Charges, and
the ordinary Revenue of His Majesty, with all the former Aids, being in less
than one Years time exhausted, the Parliament, with the King's most Gracious
leave was permitted to Si^ again at the time appointed. At what time, at the
King's and the Lord-Keepers usual daubing way, the War was first Communicated
to them, and the Causes, the Necessity, and Danger so well pointed out, that
upon the King's earnest Suit, the Commons, though in a War begun without their
Advice, readily Vo^ed no less than One Million, Two Hundred and Fifty Thousand
Pounds Steoling, though they would not say it was ^or the War, but for the
King's extraordinary Occasions.

And now the King, having got the Money into his H^nds, a new Project was set
on ^oo^, to set up an Army in ^ngland, for the introducing of Slavery and
Poper^, under the pretense of Landing in Holland, which was raised with all the
expedition imaginable. over which was Coll. Fitz Ge^ald, an Irish Papist, made
Major General, so were the greatest number of the Captains, and other Officers
of the same stamp.

And because that pretense was soon blown over, it was afterward still
continued on foot, under the more plausible Color of a War wi^h France.

But after all these cunning Contrivances, to do with them what he pleased;
whereas before the^ h^d Power to A^semble every Three Years, by an Enacted Law:
And no le^s frankly they Surrendered the Power of the Militia into his Hands; of
both which Acts, being done in haste, they had leisure enough af^erwards to
repent.

But notwithstanding all the great Kindness of this Parliament, and their more
than extraordinary Liberality to the King, of several Millio^s of the Peoples
Money, which was with the same Profusion, wasted upon his Pleasures, and the
carrying on his Designs for the Introducing of Popery and French, not a Penty
hardly to the good of the Nation, while ^h^ S^amen were sed with a Bit and a
Knock; and the Merchants that supplied the Stores of the Navy were Cheated of
their Money, and never paid to this day; with what Scorn and Contempt he ^sed
them, and how far from that Esteem and Veneration he profes^ed to have for
them, while he was wheedling for his Restoration, is apparent to all the
Kingdom. It Is true, the King continued them till all Men of impartial Knowledge
and Judgment thought them Dissolved by Law; and ^ill that they were Dissolved
by himself, the 25th. of January, 1678. not that they Sat so long, but were
discontinued, and contemptuously spared from Meeting to Meeting, many times by
the in^imated Orde^s, and to promote the Designs of the French King, and ^ever
suffered them to Sir, but when the King was in extre^m necessity of Money.
Among the rest o^ those Proroga^ions, there was one, at a time when the
greatest urgency in Affairs, the grea^est danger that threatened the E^glish
Nation, required their Sittlng, when they were diving into the Bottom of the
Popish Plot, and endeav^uring to bring to condign Punishment the chief
Instruments, which the King had made use o^ ^o comp^ss his Arbitrary and Popish
Design: Very remarkable is the Actions of the Preceding Night, which was
followed by the Morning Prorogations; the relation of which is so gross, that
we think to draw a Curtain over it, lest common Fame should lead us into an
Error in any particular. However, this is certain, that Prince Rupert the next
Morning, understanding what Resolutions were taken, pressed the King with all
the vehemence imaginable, that Argument and Reason could enforce; but at the
same time the Duke of York stuck close to his Pro^her, telling him, That his
Cousin Raved, etc. so that the Duke that advised for the Ruin of the Nation
was believed; but the Prince that spoke his Mind freely for the Good of the
Kingdom was dismisled for a Madman.

So well did the King Act his Part, that when his well-meaning Counselors lent
their assisting hands, to prevent the Consequences of French and Popish
Dictates, they were mistaken in the Man, and gave their wholesome Advice to him
that was not ^ound to take it.

During this Sessions of Parliament, many foul things came to light; for while
the King had raised an Army, and pr^ssed the Parliament for Money to maintain
them, under pretense of making a War with France, which was the earnest desire
of all the Protestant p^rt of the Kingdom. The Parliamen^ were ^ully informed,
that while the King boasted of the Allia^ces which he had made for the
Preservation of Flanders, and the Protestant Religion, both at home and abroad.
he was secr^tly entered into Treati^s and Alli^nc^s at the same time with the
French King; and Mr. Garroway of the House of Commons had gotten a Copy of the
private Tre^ty between the King of England, and the French King, at the same
Inst^nt that the Secretary and the others of the Court Par^y cried out a War;
i^somuch that several that were then in the House of Commons began to blush
when they saw the Cheat so palpably discerned. It was farther discovered, That
a great Favoueite of the Dukes had been sent over into France, under a pretense
o^ Expostulating, and requiring Satisfaction for the Injuries which the English
had received from the French; but in reality to carry the Project of Articles
for the Peace, and to the set^le and confirm all things fas^ about the Money
that was to come from France, and to agree the Methods for Shamming the
Con^ederates, about their expected Alliances. They found themselves cheated of
all the Pole Bill Money, which they had given so little a while before, upon
the Assurance of a War intended against France^ the greatest part of which they
perceived was immediately, tho appropriated to the French War only, converted
to other Uses, as the paying of old Debts, so that very little was left for
paying any Necessaries bought, or to be bought, toward the pretended War with
France.

Nor were they ignorant of the real Design for which the King had raised his
Army, and what care the King and his Brother took, that there should be no
other Officers in that Army, than what were fit for the Work in Hand, which was
to introduce Popery and French Government by main force. The greater part being
downright Papists, or else such as resolved so to be upon the first In^imation.
The Duke recommending all such as he knew ^it for the Turn, and no less than an
hundred Commissions were Signed to Irish Papists to raise Forces,
no^withstanding the Act, by which means both the Land and Naval Forces were in
safe Hands. And to complete the Work, hardly a Judge, Justice of the Peace, or
any Officer in England, but what was of the Dukes promotion. Nor were they
ignorant of the private Negotiations of the, Duke, carried on by the Kings
Connivance with the Pope, and Cardinal Norfolk, who had undertaken to raise
Money from the Church, sufficient to supply the King's Wants till the Work werd
done, in case the Parliament should smoke their Design, and refuse to give any
more. Nor was the Parliament ignoran^ what great Rejoicing there was in Rome it
self, to hear in what a posture His Majesty was, and how well provided of an
Army and Money to begin the Business.

The Parliament also understood, while they were laboring the War with France,
and to resist ^he growth of Popery and Arbitrary Power, That the King
underthand assisted the French with M^n and Ammunition of all sorts; and soon
after that, a C^ssation was concluded, both at Nimeguen and Paris. That the
King had got some Money from France for that Job; by which the French King was
now sure to hold all his Conquests ^bro^d which had England been real to the
Co^^ed^rates, might have been easily wrested out of his Hands. But it seems it
was not so much Money as our King expected, which made him Angry; so that he
began to threaten, That if the F^ench King did not perform his Promise of
300000 l. Annuity for Three Years, he would undo all tha^ he had done against
the next Parliament. But the French King derided those vain Threat^, menacing
in his turn, That if the King of England would not be content with his T^rms,
and do and say to the Parliament according to his Directions, he would discover
both him and hi^ Correspondents in betrayi^g the N^tion, and discover all his
Secret Con^rivances against the Kingdom, as afterward he Published the Dover
Treaty at Paris, which was the reason, that after ^h^t His Majesty of England
never durst disoblige the French Mouns^^eur, but became a perfect Slave to his
Interest: a Bondage he never needed to have undeagone, had he been but half as
sincere to his English Parliament: But to them he was never true, with them he
always broke his Faith and Royal Word.

So that now all things running on the Papistical side, to their Hearts desire,
what with the Popish Soldiers, Popish Officers, Popish Councils, Popish Priests
and Jesuits, swarming about the Town and Country, and France at leisure to help
them, who had helped him to be more a Conqueror by the Peace, than he could
have expected by a War. The Duke of York was for the King's pulling off his
Vizard, and for setting up Alamode of France according to what had been so
often debated at W^ite-Hall, and St. Iame^'s.

But while the King and his Brother were thus riding Post to ruin the Laws and
Religion of the Kingdom, the Discovery of the Popish Plot by Dr. Oats, broke
all their Measures for a time, by laying open their Secret Contrivances for the
introducing of Popery and Arbitrary Government^

This Plot was no sooner made known to the King, but he imparts it to the Duke;
not the knowledge of the Plot, ^or that he knew before, but the News of the
Plots being discovered. Upon which they set themselves, with all the Care they
could, to stop the further Progress of the Discovery. To which purpose, the
Duke gives notice of it to his trusty Secretary Coleman, and the Priests and
Jesuits in the Sav^y; by which means, what Popery and Persons were to be
concealed and conveyed away, was carefully looked after. All this while, by
this seasonable Detection of the King and his Brother to the Priests and
Jesuits, Oats himself narrowly escaped being Massacred.

Oats finding himself thus Betrayed, and abandoned by the King, applies
himself to Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, with a Scheme of the Plot fairly drawn up,
by that means to be introduced before the Council, to have the Business there
unfolded, which, with much ado, was done, and Oats sent for to be Examined at
White Hall, where he managed himself with that Courage, that tho he were
Brow-beaten, and opposed most strenuously; tho there were many that studied by
all the ways and means imaginable to dash and confound him, yet it was
impossible; he stood as firm as a Rock, and gave such pregnant Reasons for what
he said, that the Council, how unwilling soever to meddle, or stir in his
behalf, yet at last were constrained, by the clearness of the Evidence, to
grant Warrants for the seizure of several Priests that Night, who were taken
and sent to Prison.

Upon this followed the Assassination and Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey,
perpetrated by the Countenance and Contrivance, nay, express Command of the
Duke: For proof of which, a little opening of the Cause and Occasion, and a
short Relation of the Effects, Consequences, and Events which ensued upon it,
will both enlighten us to the Truth of Matters, and confirm our Belief, who
were the Authors of, and Acc^ssors to it.

For, as has been already said, That Gentleman had received an Information upon
Oath, from Dr, Oats, about a Plot against our Laws, Lives, and Religian; but
finding something in the Deposition that reflected upon Mr. Coleman, with whom
he had an intimate Acquaintance; he thereupon took an opportunity to let him
understand what Information he had received, and to tell him, That the only way
to justify his own Innocence, was, To contribute all his Endeavors and
Assistance to prevent so bloody a Design: But Coleman, instead of denying the
Truth of those things which Sir Edmund related, or offering his endeavors to
obstruct the Progress of it, or to defeat the Success of that Plot, not only
acknowledged, That there was a Conspiracy against our Laws, Liberties, and
Religion, but it was advanced so far, and seconded by Persons of that Quality
in the Nation and Figure in the Government, there was no possibility to give a
Let or Dis^ppointment to it. And more particularly, he told him, That the King
was a Promoter himself of the Design of Overthrowing the Protestant Religion,
and altering the Government: which Coleman calling to Mind, after his being
committed to Newgate, and considering, That by that means Sir Edmund was
enabled to come in a second Witness against him. He therefore ordered it so, as
not only to get the Duke acquain^ed with his own Danger, but that his Highness
and Others, whom he had mentioned in his Conversation with Sir Edmund, were in
the same Predicament, and would certainly be brought upon the Stage. To which
he received this Answer from the Duke, That he should not be apprehensive of
any danger from Sir E^mund, in regard there would be a way found out to prevent
his hurting of Coleman, or any body else. Now, that he was thereupon most
Barbarously Murdered, is a thing too well known; and then who were concerned,
the Circumstances make it plain.

First, The Circumstance of the Place, viz. S^merset-House, leading to the
Savoy, in some of the Apartments of which said House, the Murdered Body was
also concealed for several days. The next Circumstance was, The Guarding of the
Ga^e and Avenues of the Palace so strictly all that time, and denying the
People their wonted Liberty of Access ^o the House, and Passage through; which
could not have been done, but by the King's Authority. Nor would some great
Ladies have adventured to have gone and viewed the Body while it lay there
concealed, by which they involved themselves in the Guilt of the Crime, but
that they knew they could hardly be called to an Account for it, considering by
whose Connivance and Command the Fact was committed. Nay, some severe Cens^res
were passed on the Account, and others which were Charged with that Murder,
were protected from Justice.

Add to this, That when we consider the Motives; that urged the necessity of
this Murder, which was Coleman's having acknowledged to Sir Edmund, That the
King, as well as the Duke, was in that part of the Conspiracy, to alter the
Government, and overturn our Religion: And no body, at that time, was more
^^rry for the Detection of the Plot than the King; neither did any body labor
afterward to ba^^le the belief of it more than he did. Nor had he any thing in
the World to excuse himself for so doing, but that he was concerned in that
part of the Popish Plot which related to the overthrow of the Religion and Laws
of the Nation, and the destruction of the Chief and most Zea'ous Protestants of
the Kingdom, as was sufficiently acknowledged by Coleman, not only to Sir
Edmundbury Go^frey, but to the Committ^e of P^rli^ment that Examined him at
Newgate: Which was so plain, that nothing influenced those Gentlemen to conceal
that part of his Confession in their R^por^ to the House, but their pity and
compassion ^o the King, which would not permit them to expose him so black; tho
it was as certain, that they frequently imported their knowledge to their
Friends.

No^ did it a little add to confirm the Truth of what is here related. That
Emislari^s should be s^nt from the Court to deal underhand with the Coroner
and the Jury, to have gotten a Verdict of Felo de se^ But the Proofs of his
being murdered were so apparent; such as his Neck being broke, and the
cleanness of his Sho^s, that nothing could corrupt the Jury from bringing it in
otherwise than it was.

Under these distresses did the King and Duke labor, terribly afraid of the
approaching Parliament, for the sake of their Popish Minions and Instruments,
whose utmost Care and Industry could not prevent it^ but that several of
Coleman's Letters and Papers were found, which detected the Negotiations of the
King and Duke, (for all the World can never separate them, by maintaining that
the Duke durst ever have transacted such Treasons abroad, being then no more
than another Subject, without his Brother's consent) so that they were in an
extraordinary quandary, whether the Parliament should Sit or not: But the
King's extreme necessity for Money prevailed upon him to let them Sit: Besides
that, the King who had all along acted under his Protestant Mask, was sensible
that the Kingdom would have cried out Shame^ had he put off the Parliament at
such a conjuncture of Combu^tion and Distraction as that was.

But when the Parliament met, according to the usual wont, how many Stories and
Shams was there endeavored to be put upon them?

For in the interval of the Session, notwithstanding that the Parliament had
giv^n him Money to Disband the New-raised Army, He, to try an Experiment how
the Nation would brook his wrigling i^to that Arbitrary Power which he aimed at
all along, had spent the Money upon his other Occasions, and kept up the Army
still. Nevertheless, to excuse the Fraud which he had put upon the disgusted
N^tion, he tells the Parliament, That he had been obliged ^o keep up his
Troops, to keep his Neighbors from absolute Despair; and that he had been
sollicit^d from abroad, not to Disband them.

Now, was ever such a Story told by a Prince, and vouched in the Face of the
Nation by a bred Lawyer, viz. his Chancellor, to justify the Breach of a Law
of the Three Esta^es of the Kingdom, as soon as made; and then to ^^im the
Parliament off, with Christendom, and the Worlds commending us for the breaking
our own Laws, to patch up a Peace, which tended to nothing but the ruin of
those for whom it was made. The Sum of which was, in short, that the King, to
serve his own Arbitrary Ends, had run himself into an Inconvenience, by
defrauding the Nation; however, the Parliament was to be contented with it, and
to pay for it to boot; that is, to pay double for the keeping up a Popish Army
to secure the Protestant Religion.

But the Parliament taking little notice of these fine Stories, fell to the
main Business, which was, to sound the depth of the Plot. Upon Examination of
which, notwithstanding that many Papers of great Importance had, with a more
than ordinary Industry been conveyed away; ^et, by those that were sound, so
much appeared that the House Vo^^d it to be a Damnable Plot, to root up and
des^^^y the Religion and Government of the Kingdom; and privately got the Lord
Chief Justice Scroggs to Sign Warrants for the Apprehending the Popish Lords,
which was done accordingly. An^ for their further Security, they prepared a
Bill for putting the Nation into a posture of Defense, and for raising the
Mi^i^ia throu^ hour the Kingdom, to be in A^ms for so many days, which passed
both Houses without any difficulty; but the King, out of his Zeal to the
Protestant Religion, refused to Pass it. And then it was, that the Parliament
found too late the Complement which they had pas^ed upon him, in returning him
the Power of the Militia, which he made use of keeping up standing Armies for
their Destruction, but refused for the Security of the Nation.

This therefore not prevailing, they began to provide against Papists Sitting
in either House; and ^ram'd a Bill, with a Test to be taken by every Member of
both Houses,^ or else to loss their Seat. This, though his Protestant Majesty
did not openly oppose himself, yet after a close Consul^ation held at St.
James's, He ordered all his Instruments in the Lords House to wit^stand the
passing of it there^ which, though ^hey could not Effect, yet they prevailed so
far, that they got a Proviso in it ^or the D. of York, whereby they did him the
kindness as to declare him a Papist to all the World.

After this, the Parliament proceeded to the Impeach^ng of such Persons as they
had found to be d^epest in the Contrivance of all our Mischiefs; but, That his
Majesty looked upon it as a Business that so ^early concerned his own Honor,
that, like his Father, when the Duke o^ B^ckingham was accused of poisoning
James I he would not end^re the Parliament, in such a Iehu-like Chase after the
Popish Conspirators, but Foot ba^^ed them again with a Prorogation for several
Months. So careful was his Pro^estant Majesty to sti^e as much as in him lay,
and to prevent the Prosecution of an In^ernal Plot, which he knew was so deeply
laid, like the Axe of Popary, to the Root of all his Protestant Dominions.

Nor was this all, for so soon as he had dismissed the Parliament, and had
secured his Accomplices, he took all the Care imaginable to discredit Oats and
Bedlow's Evidence. Forty One was again inculc^ted into all the ignorant Pa^es
about the Town, and Merry ^ Andrew (Roger) had his Pension out of the Gazette,
coutinued to ridicule the Plot, which he did in a most lewd and shameless
manner; and Money given to set up a new Divinity Academy in a public
Coffee-House, to Act the Protestant Whore of Babylon, and give about his
Revelation Cup to the Raw Inferior Clergy, and instract them in be^^er Doctrine
than ever they learnt in the University.

Nor did he stop at the endeavoring to discredit the Testimonies of those
Witnesses, but sent his Head Emissa^ies to corrupt them to a denial, and
retracting what they had discovered; and when that would not do, Kn^x and Lane
were sub-armed to accuse Oats of Buggery, thereby to have taken him.

Add to this, his Dissolving of this Enquiring Parliament, at the Solicitation
of the Duke; and the extraordinary diligence of his Protestant Majesty to get
the next Parliament fit for his Turn, which was suddenly to be called, to stop
the Mouths of the People.

To which purpose, all the Money that could possibly be spared out of the
Exchequer, was Issued out to diverse Persons, to manage the Elections all ov^r
the Kingdom, under the old notion of Secre^ Service; in one Article 1500 l. in
another 2000 l. and the Guineas flew about the Country far and near to the
Corporations, to Hire Places, and get fit Men, the Heads of the Counties and
Corporations were sent for, and told what Men would be serviceable and
acceptable to the King^ and particularly the Gentlemen of E^sex were sent to,
by the Chief Justice Scroggs, and Cau^ions that they should not choose Mildmay
whatever they did. And new Charters were obtained for some Corporations, with
new Privileges, and sent them down to be hung out at the Windows, to animate
the People to choose such Men as they were directed. What more could have been
done by a Protestant Prince, to destroy his Protestant Subjects, and advance
the Roman Catholic Cause? When this Parliament Sat, the King pursued his old
Method of Speaking with his Lips what was farthest from his Heart, and being in
the House of Lords, he there tells Both Houses a plausible Story, how he had
consented to the Exclusion of the Popish Lords from their Seats in Parliament,
to the Execution of several Criminals, both upon the Score of the Plo^, and the
Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; but above all, how he had Commanded his
Brother to absent himself from him, because he would not leave the most
Malicious Men room to say, he had not removed all Causes which could be
pretended to Influence him to Popish Counsels. In all which there was not one
word of Truth, as to the Motives that engaged him to do what he did.

For as to the Exclusion of the Popish Lords, he knew it was what he could not
avoid, unless he would have absolutely thrown off his Protestant Mask, which he
was sensible it was not seasonable for him so to do. As for the Jesuits that
were Hanged for the Plot, he pleased himself as well as the People, by
Sacrificing a few Inconsiderable Miscreants to his own Revenge, for
ungrate^ully Plotting against his Life, who had all along been so faithful to
their Cause; and indeed it was but ^ust they should dye like Knaves and
Traitors, who ^ad been such Fools to mistrust so true a Protestant Prince. As
to the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, what could he have done less, except
he would have expos^d himself to the Clamor of the whole Nation. That would
have been the greatest Folly in the World, for a Prince that loved to Sleep in
a whole Skin, as he did, for the Preservation of Three or Four Rascals,
Convicted of a Bloody Murder, to have Sacrificed His Honor and His Safety to
Publick^Scandal and Resentment.

And then as for the Removal of his dear Brother, it was done after a long and
deep Consultation, upon these Considerations. First, That the Duke being out of
the way, might stop the ^arther Examination of the Plot, in Relation to
himself, and thereby one of the chi^f Conspirators be preserved safe. And
Secondly, For a show that the King was such an Enemy to Popery and Popish
Counsels, that he would not suffer so much as the Breath of a Brother near him,
for fear o^ Infection. For in these Gracious Protestant Acts lay all his hopes
of making the Parliament give Credit to his Words, and getting Money from them,
at a time when the French King most Treacherously failed him.

Notwithstanding these things, the Parliament, not being to be deluded by all
those seeming Acts of Protestant Grace, took little notice of those G^^dy
Trappings of the Kings Discourse, but fell briskly to work upon the Plot, and
the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey^ to which purpose they made choice of a
Secret Committee to pursue that Business, and laid all other Considerations
aside, but those of securing the Nation against Popery and Arbitrary
Government; in order whereunto, they began to think of bringing the Lords and
others in the Tower to their Trials: And upon a Report of their Committee, of
the Duke of York's Letters, wherein it appeared what great Joy had been
conceived at Rome, for the Dukes Conversion, even to draw Tears from his
Holynesses Eyes, with several other Papers, discovering much of the Court
Intreague; with Rome. They Voted the Hopes of his coming to the Crown, to be
one of the chief Causes of the Popish Plot; and ordered a Bill to disinable him
to Inherit the Imperial Crown of the Realm.

These Proceedings were of so high a Nature, and so directly tending to the
overthrow of that Structure, which the King and the Duke had been so long
erecting, that it was thought requisite to Treat them wi^h all the Art and
Subtilty imaginable, which produced Two of the greatest Master pieces that ever
were acted by the Conspirators ever since their first designing Popery and
French Tyranny. The first was, To blind and cousen the House of Commons, by
seeming to show an utter dislike of all former Councils that had brought the
Nation to the Condition it was in. In pursuance of which, the old Council was
Dissolved, and the greatast Sticklers against the Plot, and for the Protestant
Religion, chosen in their room: to the end that if any Miscarriages happened,
they might be all laid to their Charge; or that Miscarriages might receive a
more Candid Interpretation, as being done by such good Men against whose
Fidelity the Nation had no exception.

The next Device was, To turn the whole Plot, and the Odium of it, upon the
Protestants, under the Notion of Presbyterian and Phanaticks; which is so well
known needs no repeating,

But in the midst of th^se Court Intrigues to run down the Plot, the House of
Commons went on vigorously bo^^ against the Plot, and Popish Delinquents; which
grated so hard upon the Popish Party, and was such an Obstruction to their
Designs, That the King compassionating their Grievances more than those of his
Protestant Subje As, give way to the Dissolution of the Parliament; yet, with
promise of another to meet toward the latter end of the Year, under pretense
of frequent Parliaments; but in reality, to try if he could get another fitter
for his turn.

Ane now the King having laid aside the Parliament, and freed his Instruments
from the Terror of it, was so far from not permitting himself to be influenced
by Popish Counselors, that he began to play the Old Game, and first of all the
popular Protestant Lords of the Council were by degrees decently laid aside,
and the Duke was sent for home. The Lord Shaftsbury, for opposing it, was
severely Reprimanded in Council, with a Wonder, How any Person that sat at
that Board, durst so bolply affront his Royol Highness? For the Face of Affairs
was changed, and the King was now swimming in his own Element again. Only it
was strange, that he was no more concerned to see the strain of the whole
Kingdom run against him. For notwithstanding all his Industry to have brought
in his Band of Pensioners again, it was found, the new Chosen Parliament, which
was by this tim^ ready to Sir, was likely to prove wo^se for his turn than any
of the former, which made him have recourse to his old Shifts of Proroguing,
which was done by Proclamation, to gain a little time for the acquitting of Sir
Ge^rge Wakeman. So kind was his Protestant Majesty to help out his desponding
Friends at a dead lift, in order to the Sha^ Plot, which he was afterward
designing.

For now the Parliament being cut off, He was at leisure to advise with his
Popish Instruments, who were no less sedulous to give their Advice to the
utmost that their active Brains^ could reach. By this sedulity it was, That the
Meal Tub Anti-Plot was contrived and hatched: Only Tools were wan^ing to manage
and carry on the Treach^rous Design. Therefore, not knowing where else to find
Miscrea^ts fit for such Diabolical Enterprises, all the Goals about the Town
were raked for needy Profligates. It will be needless to give H^stery of that
which has been so sufficiently discovered for an abominable Imposture.

The Miscarriage of this Blessed Design, caused a second Prorogation of the
Parliament, upon hopes of 200000 l. from France, which was dexterously
prevented by the Duke of Buckingham; which the King so ill resented, That his
Attorney General had Orders in Council to Indict him of Buggery, with a design
to have taken away his Life, and repair the French Disapointment, by the
Confiscation of his Estate, had the Project taken. Never so much Villainy in
Contrivance; never so much Money ill spent, and never worse luck. The like
Success happened in that damned Sham Plot Intrigue between Fitz Harris, Nell
Wall, with the French Duchess, etc.

Nor must it be omitted a^ an Argument of His Ma^esties great Zeal for the
Protest^^^ Re^igion, That when one S^rgeant, a Priest^ made a Discovery of the
Popish Plot from H^lland, which he caused to be transmitted to the Court, with
an Intention to have discovered s^veral others^ he was first bribed off, and
then sent for into England, slightly and slily examined, had his Pardon given
him, and sent back with Five pound a Week to say no more^

Nor was it a thing less astonishing to the Nation, to see the Parliament
prorogued from time to time, to less than seven time^, before permitted to Si^,
on purpose to get time for the Popish Duke to settle the Protestant Religion in
Scotland; and to the end, the Conspirators might get heart and footing again,
and retrieve their Losses in England; and in this Interval it was, That
Mess^ngers were sent to their Friends at Rome, and others their Associates, for
Money to strike while the Iron was hot, in regard that Scotland by this time
was secured, and all things in such a forwardness, that now or never was the
time; but the Pope had such an ill Opinion of our Sovereigns Fidelity, that he
slipped his Neck out of the Collar^ and in imitation of him, the rest excused
themselves upon the Score of their poverty.

Thus missi^g Money from Rome, and the rest of their Popish Associates; and the
King of France refusing to part with any more Cash, there was no way but one,
at a forced put, which was to let ^he Parliament Sit, and to make them more
willing to give Money to undo the Nation. The King, in a framed Speech, told
them, of the wonderful advantageous Alliances for the Kingdoms good he had made
with Foreign Princes, and particularly with Holland; and how necessary it was
to preserve Tang^er, which had already run him in Debt. Upon which
Considerations, the Burden of his Song was^ M^re Money.

But the Parliament Incensed at the frequent pr^r^gations, fell upon
Considerations more profi^able for the Kingdom, such as were the bringing to
condign punishment the Obstructers of their Sitting: The Impeachment of North
for drawing the Proclamation against petitioning, and Three of the Judges for
dismissing the Grand Jury, before whom the Duke was Indicted of Recusancy,
before they could make their presen^ments; the prosecution of the Popish Plot,
and the Examination of the Meal Tub Sham; all which they looked upon to be of
greater Moment than the Kings Arguments for his Want. For it was well known,
That by his per^idious Dealings abroad, he had so impared his Credit with all
the Foreign Princes, to whom he sent, that they slighted his Applications, as
one upon whose Word they could never Rely. And as for the preservation of
Tangier, there was nothing less in his Thoughts. A fine Credit for a Prince,
and an excellent Character to recommend him to po^terity, That he had no other
than his own sinister Ends upon the Grand Council of his Kingdom; nor no other
way to work them to those Ends, unless by forging Untruths, to make him
accessory to the betraying of the people that had entrusted them.

The Parliament therefore bent all their Cares to secure the Kingdom from
Popery; concluding that the D^kes Aposta^izing from his Religion, was the sole
Evil under which the Nations in a more particular manner gro^med^ and
consequently that he was to be Disinherited. But the King being resolved not to
forsake his Brother, whatever became of the Kingdom, took such a high
Resentment against these honest and just proc^edings of the Houses, that after
he had Sacrificed the Lord Stafford to his hopes of obtaining Money, upon the
Dukes u^dertaking to furnish him, he Dissolved this Parliament too, with
promise of another at Oxford, to sweeten the bitter pill which he had made the
Nation to swallow.

In the mean time, all the Care imaginable wa^ taken to bring the Protestant
Plot to perfection; preparative to which, Judges were selected, with
Dispositions, Thoughts, and Minds as Scarlet as their Gowns. And the choice of
Sheriffs was wrested, by force from the people, that they might pick out Juries
without Conscience or Honesty. A Plot contrived by perfidiousness and
treachery, beyond the parallel of History. A Plot with Parisian Massacre in the
Belly of it, designing no less an Innundation of Innocent Protestant Blood,
under the color and forms of Justice; and yet, who but he, who in his last
wheedling Speech, to pick the Nations pocket, had promised to consent to any
Laws against Popery. And the better to carry on this damned Design, What a Crew
of Devils, in the Shape of Men, a Regiment of Miscre^nts, in whom all the
Transgressions of the Law and Morality were mustered together? I say, what a
Band of such Ca^tiffs were Rendezvouzed, and with that Money which Parliaments
give to promote the Security of the Kingdom, caressed and pampered even to
Excess, for the destruction of the Innocent? And all this, at the Expense of
him that bore the Style and Character of our Gracious Sovereign. For full
proofs of which, there needs no more than to look into the Trial of Fitz Harris
himself; therefore, to recite the particulars of a Design already so well
known, and publicly exposed to all the World, would be a repetition altogether
needless. This however was observable, That we were come to the height of
Tyberius's Reign; when informers, and false Accusers, a sort of Men found out
for the Ruin of the public; And for the punishment of which, no Laws can be
too severe, were encouraged and courted with Rewards. Nullus a p^na ^^minum
cessari^ dies; dicreta accusa^o^ibius pra^^^^^ premia; nemine delatorum sides
abrogata; omne C^imen pro Capitali receptum, etiam paucorum simpliciumque
Verborum. No day passed without some Punishment inflicted; great Rewards given
to Informers, no Informer but what was beli^v'd; all Crimes were adjudged
Capital, though merely a few idle Words. Such a harmony there was between these
Times, and pernicious Reign of that Master in Cruelty and Dissimulation,
Tiberius.

But the Roguery being discovered, while Fitz Haris thought to have put Everard
upon this Dilemma, either to Hang, or fix the Libel upon others, he came to run
himself into the Noose. Lord! into what an Agony it put the King, the Duke his
dear Brother, and their then Juggling Instruments; that the King, who a little
before was so overjoyed with the acco^nt of the contrivance, which was given
him at Whitehall, that he could hardly contain himself from displaying the
Raptures of his Soul, was now so highly incensed against Fitz Harris, that he
was heard to say, That he should Die if there were no more Men in England. But
his Confession to the Recorder, Sir George Treby, so enraged his Employers,
that he was presently locked up in the Tower, out of the reach of all Men, but
the Lie^t^ to damn him for spoiling so good a Design: But above all things,
there was such a dread amongst the Conspirators, lest the Parliament should
come to the knowledge of the depth of the Design, that their resolute insisting
to have the Cognizance of the Crime within their own Jurisdiction, was the
occasion of the sudden Dissolution. After which, a Chief Justice was Exalted,
on purpose to Hang Fitz-Harris out of the way, to prevent his farther
Discovery; for no sooner was the Parliament Dissolved, but Fitz-Harris was
Hanged; and by that means, many a Mystery of Iniquity concealed.

The Dissolution of this, and the forgoing Parliament, was justified by a
Declaration in the King's Name, which being published with all the Severity and
Reproach that could be cast upon those Worthy Patriots, verified the Report of
what the King had been heard to say, That he would make the name of Parliaments
to be forgotten in England. However, the Parliament being blown up, and the
King running away in a pretended pannick Fear from Oxford, to color the
ensuing Projects of Plotting and Subordination; no sooner was he settled again
at London, and Fitz-Harris hanged, to the great Joy of those that Adored him
before, but the Gazette was crammed with Addresses from all Parts of the Nation,
to thank the King for his Expressions and Promises to Govern by Law, which was
no more than his Duty: But those Addresses were only Signed by the unthinking,
loose, and rascally part of the People, who were not sensible of the Mischief
which was thereby intended, which was to make the Nation out of Love with
Parliaments, thereby to unhinge the Government, and to introduce Tyranny and
Arbitrary Power: And that the Addressors were only the C^^^ile of the Kingdom,
with only a Tool of Quality at the Head of them, the Con^well k^ew.

Some time a^^^^, Fitz-^^^^^^ was Executed, a Paper was Published, in the name
of his Re^^^^tion, which his Wi^^ hearing ^r^ed (...) and viewing ^^, ^^ked
(...) those were her H^^bands Papers (...) her, They were: To which (...) band
w^: D^^^ed, for t^^t she (...) all th^^ (...) to be false.

However, upon the Gro^^d-work of this Re^^ntation, a Committee of
Subordination w^s^ ^ected; by whose Directions, Tu^bervil, Dugdale, and all the
Irish Evidence, who had been most conversant with the Earl of Shaftsbury, upon
the Account of the Irish Plot, together with one Booth, by whom a full
Detection of the whole Villainy has since ^een made, with a full disclosure of
all the Artifices made use of, to have corrupted the Integrity of that honest
Gentleman, Captain Wilkinson. And all those Varlets were now lis^ed and
received into Pay, by the said Committee of Subornation, and a swearing School
being set up according to the directions of the Committee, they receive every
one their distinct Cues and Lessons, to con and get by Heart, against occasion
should serve, by the Settlement of the Committee, which was approved, as was
every thing else they did, by his Protestant Majesty.

Colledge's Trial is too well known to be here repeated, but after Ages will
observe how he was removed from London, where he had been acquitted, to another
remote Country, where his Prosecutors were assured of his Destruction, by
deluded Ignorance and partial Knavery; how he was accused and testified against
by Nab^^h's ^vidence, the Scandal and Reproach of all Mankind, whose Memories
stink upon the E^rt^, and would soon be forgotten, but that their Names are
made use of to transmit the Infamy of their Employer^ to Posterity. All the
severi^es used at his Trial were^ palpable Demonstrations of that Innocent
Man's being determined to Destruction right or wrong, on purpose to lay the
Foundation of farther Butcheries; so that being f^e^hed by this Success, the
next attempt of the King's Justice was upon the ^arl of Shaftsbury, for the
same pre^ended Treason for which College had suffered. And here Posterity will
make the same Observations and Conclu^ion^ in general, as in Col^^dge's Case:
But more particularly will after Ages easily conclude from hence, That it was
not for any contrivance of his Lordship, but by a Project of Court and Popish
Revenge, to destroy a Person, who by his Courage, Wisdom, and good
Intelligence, had Opposed and Defeated so many of their Designs, against the
Religion and Welfare of the Nation: For that this Plot upon his Lordship was so
early communicated to Rome, and other Foreign Parts. That it was talked of at
Paris, and in Flanders, sometime before his Lordship was imprisoned in England.
They will observe the Injustice done his Lordship, in refusing to let him see
or know the Persons that deposed against him, which was not denied either to
Coleman or the Jesuits; and which being so contrary to Law, was a plain
Demonstration, That either the Witnesses were not thought of Credit sufficient
to support the Confinement of so great a Peer; or else, that it was not
convenient to trust the general course of their Lives to be scrutined too soon.
The Motives that induced the Court to begin with this great and eminent Peer,
will be easily discernable to su^ceeding Ages: For to what Man of Sense and
Reason is it not apparent, That it was the Policy of the Court, That their
Revenge against this Earl should not be Adjourned, till they had tried the
Credit of their Witnesses, upon other considerable Persons, for fear, lest by
his Lordships Industry and Abilities, he should not only have detected and
exposed the whole Intrigue, but have broken the Engine, by which the Two
Brothers thought to have made themselves absolute Lords of the Religion, Laws,
and Liberties of the Kingdom. For which Reason it was thought best to Assault
him by way of Surprise, and to hurry him to Prison, upon a pretended
Conspiracy, which People would be astonished at, but not have time ^^ unravel.
For the King and his Brother were assured, That the Convicting of the Earl of
Sha^ts^ury, upon a Charge of Levying War, and Conspiring to seize his Person,
would be a kind of Moral proof against every other Person, whom they had a mind
to accuse of the same Crime. Since People would be easily persuaded, That a
Person of his Prudence and C^nduct, would not easily embark himself in such a
dangerous En^erprise, without a proportionable number of Persons, who by their
Power, Quality and Interest, might be supposed to be able to carry it on: So
that all the Noblemen and Gentlemen of England, that ever had any converse or
acquaintance with the Earl, supposing them to be Persons obnoxious to the
Court, were involved in his Ruin.

But it will remain an eternal Monument of Reproach upon R. Subordination, That
after all the Industry of the Court, and their obs^quious Instruments: after
all their layi^g their Heads together, to form cohering and probable Proofs of
the Charge intended to be laid against him, after an illegal Trick devised to
have tried him within their own Jurisdiction on the Verge; which was so
contrary to Law, that it was exploded by their own Been placito Lambskin Men;
that at length he was acquitted by a Grand Jury, the most Substantial for
Estates, Integrity, and soundness of Judgment, that had been returned for many
Years in the City, to the never dying praise of the Two Sheriffs, Mr. Pilkinton
and Mr. Shu^e. A Disappointment, which so ince^sed the King, and his dear
Brother, That they resolved to make an Istington Village o^ the chief
Metropolis of the whole Nation; and what they could not do by Fire, to effect
by wresting from them their Franchises and Privileges, ^ar more ancient than
the descent of those that wrested them for a time out of their Hands: For this
reason the Attorney General was ordered to b^ing a Quo Warranto against the
City Charter, under the pretense of their petitioning for the Sitting of the
Parliament; a thing so far from being a Crime, that it was the undoubted Right
of the Nation. And yet such was the awe which the antiquity and legality of the
Charter had upon the Judge, that the Fountain of Justice was forced to shift
his Chief Justice, till he could fix upon one that durst to adventure to
pronounce Sentence against it: Which, as it was the greatest Invasion that
could be against the ancient and fundamental Constitution of the Kingdom; so it
plainly laid open the King`s pious Intentions of Governing by Law; which,
according to the new Interpretation of the Court, was the downright subverting
of all that was most Sacred and Valuable in the Nation, to the end the King
might have it in his Power to violate the electing of a Parliam^nt, and
nominate and obtrude upon all Persons of the Kingdom, his own Slaves and
Creatures, Papists and Traitors to their Country; so by reducing one of the
most ancient Corporations, and levelling it with one of the meanest Villages in
the Kingdom, that he might command the Mayor and Sheriffs, and, by their means,
the Juries of the City, on purpose to have the Lives of all his Protestant
Subjects at his Mercy.

And that this was his end, was apparent by the Consequences; for when once the
King, by the overthrow of the Charter, had made sure of his own Sheriffs and
Juries; Heavens! How were the Laws of God, and the Kingdom wrested by
misinterpretation? How were the Precepts even of Morality it self, transversed?
The Wi^nesses for the King caressed and countenanced in their known
Subordination? The Testimonies for their pretended Criminals brow-beaten, and
all the Arguments of Law and Reason urged by the most Learned Council of the
Nation, overruled by Hectoring and Swaggering Judges, to take away the Lives
of the L. Russel, Col. Sidney, Armstrong, and several others, merely to
gratify the Rage of Popish Revenge.

Such were the Violences of the Court at that time, in defiance of Justice, as
if all fear of giving account to future Parliaments, had been thrown off, or
that they never intended to be troubled with them more, till they had framed
the Nation into such a posture, as to choose such Members as would not only
forgive such Villainies, but go sharers with them in the spoil of the Kingdom.

But then followed the Barbarous and Horrid Murder of the Earl of Essex, which
how far it could be laid to the King's Charge, we shall not here pretend to
determine, tho it seem somewhat strange, that the King could find no other
Morning to accompany his Brother to the Tower, but that very Morning that the
Earl was Murdered, will, no doubt very much augment the Suspicion of future
Ages; and it will be as odly looked upon, that when Letters and Proposals were
sent to some great Persons near the King, That if his Majesty would but grant a
Pardon to Two or Three Men that shyuld be named, when the Favor was granted,
the whole Mystery of the Contrivance should be discovered, and the Contrivers
and Actors be particularly derected; such a Proposal should be slighted and
neglected.

Now, after all these Tricks and Stratagems of the King, to introduce Tyranny
and Slavery, to stifle the Popish Plot, by throwing it upon his Protestant
Subjects; after such an obstinate and steadfast Conjunction with the Sworn Enemy
of the Nation, the French King, for the Subversion of our Laws, Liberties, and
Religion; after so many Slights and Contempts to put upon the grand Council of
the Kingdom, which he never assembled, but to empty and drain the Purses of the
Nation. But to shut the Door against all Objections that can be made in his
behalf, there is one proof yet remaining behind, which must be an undeniable
convincement to all the World, of the Truth of what has been hitherto said, as
standing still recorded under his own Hand, if the Original of the Instructions
be extant, and that is the following Memorial of his Ambassador to the King of
Poland, in the Year, 1667.

Most Illustrious Prince,
THE King, my Master, has Commanded me to let Your Majesty know the Resolutions
he has taken in All Points, to concur with the mos^ Christian King, in giving
your Majesty all possible Assistance for the Establishing your Majesty's Title
in such ^ays as your Majesty shall think most Effectual for the s^curing your
Crown and Dig^i^y, and further Hon^ur of your Queen and Royal Issue, The King,
my Master, being truly sens^ble of the great Misfortune^ of those P^inces whose
Power must be bou^ded, and Reason regulated by the Fantastic Humor of their
Subjects. Till Prince; can be ^reed from these Inconveniences, The King, my
Master, sees no possibl^ prospect of establishing the Roman Catholic Religion.


If thi^ be not enough to discover his Inclinations, and the whole drift of his
intriguing Reign, there can be nothing sharp enough to penetrate the stupid and
beso^ted Bigortry of those that stand in his Justification, But notwithstanding
the willful blindness of such People, it is to be hoped, that other Men, less
biased, and having the same just pretenses to common Understanding, have a
greater value for their Reason, than to forfeit it to prejudice, and an
Interest now exploded by all the sober part of the World: And having once
disintangled their Judgments from the Encumbrances of Iure Divino Nonsense,
they will then find, That the whole course of his Reign was no more than what
this Memorial discovers; and that the frequent Breaches of his Word and
Promises, both to his Parliaments and People, were but the Effects of the
Religion he Professed, and owned in his Ambassadors Memorial, one of the chief
Principles of which it is, Not to keep Faith with Heretics; and by which he
was obliged to be more faithful to the King of Poland, than the King of Heaven.
Hence it was, that notwithstanding his Declaration at Breda, designed and
penned to obtrude a seeming appearance of Truth, and specious Face of Integrity
upon the Nation; after he came to be restored and settled, we found our selves
deceived in all that we expected from the Faith and Credit of his Royal Word.
To which we may subjoin that other Famous Declaration, upon shutting up the
Exchequer: Wherein, tho his Sacred Word and Royal Faith, were, in plain and
emphatical Terms, laid to pledge for Repayment; yet the Events in the Ruin and
Impoverishing of so many Families, did no way consist with his Gracious and
Solemn Promises,

As for the Covenant, whatever the Oath were, it matters not here to dispute;
but they who were Witnesses of his taking it, observed, that if ever he seemed
sincere in what he did, it was in binding his Soul by that So^emn Oath; and yet
he not only openly and avowedly broke it, but c^used it to be burnt in all the
Three Nations, by the hands of the Common-Hang-man. Where can we find a more
matchless piece of Dissimulation, than in his Signing that Declaration in
Scotland, which he published under the Title of, A Declaration of the King's
Majesty, to his Subjects of the Kingdom of Scotland, England and Ireland.

Charles the II. having long trifled with the Papists, his beloved Friends, and
indeed had so carried himself, that neither Papist nor Protestant could tell
what to make of him, yet the Papists resolved they would be no longer dallied
with by him: And therefore, so soon as he had made all Things ready for his
Brother's Exaltation; after he had prevented his Exclusion from the Thr^ne, and
put all the Power of his Dominions into his hands, to give way for him that
truly Reigned, while he but only wore the Name of King, he was struck with an
Appoplexy, as it was given out, (for let the true ^ause be what it will, a
Prince always dies of some Disease or other in the Physicians Catalogue) but
such were the Circumstances of his Death, that Men began to discover their
Suspicions freely to the World, before he was cold. However it were, certain it
is, that he was Absolved from all his Sins, by his great Friend John
Huddleston; and that the Priests gave him Extreme Unction. At what time, one of
his Relations forcing his way into the Room, and seeing them at it, could not
forbear saying, That now they had Oyl`d and Greased his Boots, they had made
him fit for his Journey. And this is yet more remarkable, That all the while he
lay upon his Deathbed, he never spoke to his Brother, to put him in mind of
preserving the Laws and Religion of his People: but only recommended to him the
Charitable Care of his Two C^ncubines, Portsmouth, and poor Nelly,

Nor was it a small Aggravation of the general Suspicion, to find him hurried
to his Grave, with such ^n Ungrateful Secrecy, in the dead of the Night, as if
they had feared the Arresting of his Corpse for Debt, not so much as the mean
pomp of the Blue-Coat B^yst, S^ng him to Heaven. Insomuch, that he was hurried,
by his Brother, whom he had so highly obliged, with far less decency then was
perrmitted for the Funeral of his Father, by his Capital Enemies that had
beheaded him. But that perhaps might be so ordered by Providence, to signi^ie
that he was not worth the public Lamentation of the People, whose Religion and
Liberties he had been always designing to subvert.

THE SECRET HISTORY OF King JAMES II.
TO him succeeded James the II. not more pernitiously desining, but more
eagerly bent in the Chase of National Ruin and Destruction. He came into
England full freighted with his Mothers Religion, and her Malice to the People
of the Nation; but wore at first the same Vizard Mask of Protestantism which
his Brother did. But tho he were fitter for the Business they both designed,
yet he understood not how to manage it so well; so that had he been the Elder
Brother, we may undoubtedly presume to say, he would have been much sooner
thrown out of the Saddle, greatly to the saving both the Honor and Treasure of
the Nation, and the Life of many a worthy Gentleman, and true Lover of his
Country.

It Is well known, and a thing confirmed by Two Letters yet to be seen, wherein
one of the Kings own Chaplains, then upon the spot when it was done, impar^s
and laments it to a Bishop. That the Duke of York, while he was yet but very
young, made a solemn Renunciation of the Protestant Religi^n, and was
reconciled to the Church of Rome, while he sojourned with his Mother in France,
in hopes (by the assistance of the Papists) to have defeated his Elde^ Brother
of his Right of Inheritance, tho he had all the Indulgence imaginable to
conceal his Convulsion, where it might be for his private Advantage, and the
general good of the Cause.

And so ea^ly was this Ambition of his to supplant his Elder Brother, that when
^he Scots were treating with the exiled King, to restore him to the Throne of
Scotland, That he was at that very time practicing with such as remained
faithful to the King's Title here, that they would renounce his Elder Brother,
and choose him for their Sovereign. And for that Reason it was that the Duke
forsook him at Bruxels, and withdrew into Holland; so that the King was
necessitated, not only to command him upon his Allegiance to return, but was
constrained to send the Duke of Ormond, and some other Pesons of Quality, as
well to threaten as persuade him, before he would go back.

And as he was an early Traitor to his Brother' so he did no less treacherously
attempt the disowning of his first Wife. For finding her extraordinary Chastity
to be such, that he could not be admitted to her Bed, but upon the lawful score
of Matrimony, he was at last Married to her, but so very privately, that only
the King, and some very few Friends were privy to it: After which, perceiving
that his Brother's Restoration was fully determined in England, under pretense
that it would be more for his own, and the Honor and Interest of his Brother,
to Marry with some great Princess, that would both enrich and strengthen them
by the largeness of her Dowry, and the graatness of her Relations, he would
have taken an Occasion from the privacy of the Nuptials, to deny her being his
Wife` and disavow all Contracts and Ceremonies of Marriage between them: But
the King detesting so much buseness, as being himself a witness of the
Marriage, would not suffer the Lady to be so heinously abused; but constrained
him, after great reluctance, to declare it publicly to all the World A happy
Providence for England, which by that' Conjunction blessed us with two P^otestant
Princ^sses, matchless in Virtue and Pretty, and all those other Graces that
adorn their Sex; to the eldest of which we are beholden ^or our Deliverance
from an Inundation of Slavery and Popery, under the Auspicious Condu^^ o^ a
Sovereign, truly meriting the Noble and Ancient Titles of King of Men, and
Shepherd of the People, and the yet more dignified Addition of Defender of the
Faith. And from the youngest of which we have already the earnest of a hopeful
Issue to guard us from the like Invasions. Such is the Provision of Providence,
that many times it happens, the most venomous Creatures carry about them the
particular Antidote against their own Poisons.

Certain it is, that the Duke of York, would never have pulled off his
Protestant Vizard, nor have declared himself of the Roman Communion so soon,
had he not been thereto necessitated by a Stratagem of the King his Brother;
for the Papists having a long time waited for the Accomplishment of the King's
Oaths and Promises for restoring their Religion; and having annually
contributed large Sums of Money toward the effecting of it, at length grew
impatiently sullen. and would advance no more, unless the King, or the Duke,
would openly declare themselves for Popery: Which the King thinking no way
seasonable for him to do, and not being able by all his Arguments and
Importunities to prevail with his Brother to do it, he (at length) bethought
himself of this Project, which was, To get the Queen to write a Letter,
intimating her Intention to withdraw into a Monastery; which Letter was to be
left upon her Closet-Table, that her Priests, as it was concerted beforehand,
might there seize it, and seeing the Contents of it, carry it forthwith to the
Duke. Upon which, the Duke being Jealous left the King, upon the Queens
relinquishing her Husband, might be induced to marry again, and thereby deprive
him of the hopes of succeeding, than which there was nothing which he thirsted
after more, upon obtaining a previous Assurance, that in case he declared
himself a Papist, she would not withdraw, immediately pulled o^f his Mask, and
renounced Communion with the Church of England.

Being thus quit of his fears from the King, his next work was to did himself
of all his Jealousies of the Duke of Monmouth. To which purpose he lay day and
night at the King, to require him to turn Roman Catholic. Which the King out
of his Tenderness to the Romish Cause, as well as to gratify his Brother,
undertook to do, and accordingly sent him into France, with an express Command
to reconcile himself to the Church o^ Rome: However, the Duke of Monmouth, out
of an aversion to ^he Fopperies of that Religion, failed in his Performance;
which so incense^ the Duke of York, that from that time ^orward he studied all
the ways imaginable to bring him to Destruction,

In the mean time, having by his publicly decl^ring himself a Papist, engaged
all those of the same Religion, to his Person and Interest, he resolved to
drive on Iehu like, and to promote the Catholic Cause, with all the vigor and
swiftness he was able, and to make the utmost use of his Brothers good
Intentions. And such was his Bigottry to the Romish Church, That according to
the Principles of that Religion, he stuck at nothing per fas and nefa^, to
bring about his Popish Designs.

I shall not here dila^e upon his secret Negoti^tions at Rome, his
Correspondencies with Foreign Priests and Jesuits, or his private Intrigues
with the French King, which have been all sufficiently exposed already in
Print; as for tha^ whatever has been already said of the King, is also to be
said of him in general, while he was Duke, in regard they both drew in the same
Yoke, for the Ruin of the Nation. For this is as certain as the rest, that he
had a most eager desire to Rule, and Rule dispotically, which was the Reason he
was frequently heard to say. He had rather Reign one Month as the King of
France, than Twenty Years as his Brother the King of England did. And besides,
it was as plain, That he had a mortal Autipathy against the Protestant
Religion, and more particularly against the Professors of it in England; but
more especially the Dissenters, upon the score of revenging his Fathers Death.
An imbittered hatred, which he derived from his Mother, who mortally malliced
England upon the same Account, and which he acknowledged in his Bedchamber, at
St. James's, where he openly declared, That he was resolved to be revenged upon
the English Nation ^or his Fathers Death. Which if those unthinking People, who
are so eager to have him again, would but consider, they would not be so
forward for his Return. For it is in vain for the Church of England^ Men, of
what degree soever, to think that their refusing to swear Allegiance to King
William and Queen Mary, would excuse them from that Universal Revenge which he
would take upon the Nation, were it ever again in his Power.

Only here was the Difference between the Two Brothers, That the King thought
to ruin his Enemy by main force, and the fair hand of Victory; but the Duke
hoping to kill two Birds with one Stone, made it his business, at the same
time, to ruin the Enemy by force, and his own Country by treachery. Thus when
he had engaged his Brother in the first Holy Dutch War, of the Extirpa^ion of
Heretics, he permits the English, at first, to exercise all the Bravery of
their Skill and Cou^age, to a great probability of Success; but then falls
asleep in the height of his Conduct, to the end, the Dutch (for want of Orders)
might have ^n opportunity to wrest the Victory out of the hands of the English,
on purpose to keep the bal^^nce of Destruction on both sides even. Thus he
^^rmitted himself to be surpised at Soul-Bay, knowing there were eno^gh to
maul the Enemy, but not enough to preserve those that sought on our ride. So
that the Dutch may be said to be well ^hrashed, and the E^glish to be well
sacrificed. And as a farther Demonstration o^ his per^idious Soul; when he
found the Contest would be too tedious between two Nations so well matched, it
was the Dukes Contrivance, to Suborn and Bribe two indigen^ and desperate
Vil^ains, to go over and Fire the (...) Ship^, as they lay in their ^arbours,
and when he had done that^ it was the same Treachery, that with a sham story
lulled his ^rother ^^l^ep, and pr^cured the Firing of our Ships at ^^^^ham.

The burning of London was such a mar^hless piece, as could not have entered
into the Breast of any but a bejesuited Herostratus, in hopes to purchase the
infamous immortality of a Popish Saintship, by reducing to Ashes, the graetest
Bulwark and Magazine of the Protestant Religion in Europe. Rome was set on Fire
by Nero, to have rebuilt it again more Glorious^ and that he might have space
enough for one of the most sumptuous Palaces so designed, under the Sun;
thereby to have made the Mistress of the Earth, the Wonder of the World: But
London was Fired, not only to destroy the Wealth and Habitations of the City,
never to have risen more, but with an intention to extirpate the Inhabitants
themselves to boot, and to have turned the Venerable and Spacious Pile into a
depopulated Wilderness, by a general Massacre of the People, under the
Consternation of the spreading Flames. The standing S^reets provided and
furnished with Incendiaries, with fresh Materials to revive and restore the
weary Con^^^gration, and when taken in the Act, res^ued out of the Hands of
those that seized them, and sent to St. James's, to be there secured from the
Rage of the Mul^itude, and then dismissed without Persecution. An excellent way
to have made all sure, by mixing the Blood of the Inhabitants with the Ashes of
their Dwellings, the only Cement which the Papists believed would fasten and
bind the Fabric of the Romish Church; and what greater piece of Persidy could
there be, than while the Duke was riding about the Streets, under Pretense of
Assisting to quench the Fire, that his Guards were, at the same time, employed
to prevent the People from rem^ving their Goods; and his Palace made the Refu^e
of such as were taken in the very ^act of cheris^ing and fomenting the Flames!
This the Committee of Parliament traced so far, that it cost the Life of the
poor Gentleman that gave the Information of these Things, to the Chair man of
the Committee, to prevent any further Discovery, and secure the D. from the
Danger of his Life.

Coleman's crying out, There was no Faith in Man, was a most undeniable
Testimony of the Treachery of his Master, notwithstanding all the faithful
Service he had done him; and was it not a Magnanimous and generous Act of a
Prince, to betray, as he did, to the Gallows, not only his most trusty Servant,
but his Fellow Partner in the Conspiracy?

More Inhumane still was the barbarous Murder, actually contrived, and brought
to perfection, by the encouraged Instruments of the Duke. For he it was that
sent word to Coleman, to bid him ^ake no care, for that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey
should be removed out of the way, and at the same time took the like care that
his Servant Coleman should follow him: For it was Detection that he feared, and
the Duke well knew that the Dead could never tell Tales. The Particulars of the
Murder, and how far the Circumstances of it reached the Duke, are too fresh in
Memory ^o be here inserted; and Dis^ensation for Deeds of the blackest hew,
were so easily obtai^ed, that it was no wonder the Duke so little boggled at a
single Murder, to conceal the Designs of general Mas^acres, wherein he was
engaged.

In pursuance of which, he was no les^ industrious to bring the Presbyterians,
and all the Dissenting Protestants, within the Snare of his Sham-Plot, in order
to the Destruction of Thousands of innocent Persons.

This, Dangerfield discovered to the World, and his Information taken upon
Oath, before Sir William Roberts, and Sir William Poultney, are extant; wherein
he gives an Accoun^ of his being introduced several times, into the Duke of
York's Prefence. Partic^larly, that being once among the rest, admitted to the
Duke of York'; Closet at White Hall, he kissed his Hand upon his Knees: And
then being taken up by the Duke, he gave him a little Book, containing the
whole Scheme of the Presbyterian Plot, for which the Duke thanked him, as also
for his diligence to the Catholic Cause, and wishing good Success to his
Undertakings; added these words: That the Presbyterian Plot was a thing of most
mighty Consequence; and I do not question, but the Effects of it will answer
our Expectation; especially, in the Northern Parts, where I am well assured,
the Major part of the Gentry a^e my Friends, and have given sufficient
Demonstrations to me, as also of their Intentions to prosecute this
Prescyterian Plot, for they are no Strangers to the Design.

At the same time, he ordered Dangerfield to be very careful of what he
communicated to the Persons who were to be Witnesses in that new Plot, lest he
should be caught in the Subordination, and so bring a terrible Odium upon the
Catholics, and make himself incapable of any further Service.

Then for Encouragement in the Prosecution of the Sham Plot, the Duke promised,
that he would take Care that Money should not be wanting, and ordered him, with
all the Expedition the Thing would allow, to make a Discovery to the King. At
the same time, the Duke also made diverse Vows, and bitte^ Execrations to stand
by him in the Thing, and engaged upon his Honor, to be his Rewarder; and, in
earnest, give him Twenty Guineas, with his own Hand; and telling him withal,
what a great Reputation he had gained among the Catholics, and that in a short
time he should see the Catholic Religion flourish in these Kingdoms; with a
great deal more to the same purpose.

Of the truth of which, among many others, there could not be a more convincing
Proof, than the bitter Enmity which the Duke bore to Dangerfield after his
Discovery; and the severe Usage which he received from Iefferies, the Duke`s
Creature, and the Rhadamantine Dispenser of his Revenges.

In Scotland he Rul`d, or rather Reign`d, though in his Brother's Lifetime,
with a more Arbitrary and Lawless Control. And there it was that he breath`d
for^h his Venom against the Protestants, utter^d his Tyrannous Maxims with
more ^reedom, and exercised his Tyranny with a more boundle^s and exorbi^ant
Extravagance. For there it was, that he first undertook to exercise the power
of Sovereign Rule, re^using to take the Oath of High Commissioner, which the
Law of the Coun^r^ required, as here he had d^nied to take the ^est; and to
show how he intended to Govern England, when it came to his turn, there it was,
that in the hearing of Persons of great Credit, he had this worthy Apothegm,
That tho` in England the Lawyers ruled the Court, yet in Scotland he would rule
the Lawyers. There is was that he positively denied to give the Parliament any
security for the Preservation of their Religion, in case he succeeded to the
Crown. And being told of the Terms that the King had offered to the Parliament
of England, tho` much harder and more dishonorable than any which they
required, he replied, That the King never intended any such Limitations should
pass; nor did he offer them, but when he knew they would not be accepted. And
farther, to demonstrate his imbitter`d hatred of the Protes^ants, and with what
Rage and Fury he intended to prosecure them, he told several Members of the
Parliament, when they were endeavoring to get some Bills to pass for the
Security of their Religion, in case of a- Popish Successor, That whatever they
intended, or prepared against the Papists, should light upon others. Which,
tho` it stopped him from taking the Advantage of any new Bills, yet he was so
just to his Word, in behalf of the Papists, that he pour`d all the Rigor of
the Penal Laws against the Papists, upon the Protestants in that Kingdom, under
the Name of Dissenters, whom he Persecuted with that insatiable Violence, as if
according to his own Expression, he had fully concluded, That it would never be
well with Scotland, till all the South Side of Ferth were made a Hunting Field.
For indeed that was the true intent and drift of all his envenom`d Prosecutions
of those People, as well in England, as in Scotland, in hopes by so severe an
Exasperation, they would have broken out into open Rebellion, and so have given
him a fair opportunity to have rooted them from the Earth by the Sword: Which
was evident from another Saying of his; for that having one day given his
Opinion of sober Dissenters, and setting them forth, as he thought, in their
Colors, he concluded, That if he might have his VVish, he would have them all
turn Rebels, and betake themselves to Arms. Which, tho` it showed his good Will
yet whether it were so prudently spoken by a Person that had so little, either
of Courage or Conduct as himself, is a question, unless he thought he could
subdue them with the Spiritual Weapons of the Popes Excommunications and
Curses: Nor did he at the same time remember that the heavy Oppressions of the
Spanish Inquisition, tore from the Dominions of the Spaniard all the Seven
United Provinces, notwithstanding all that D`A^va, Parma, and Spinola could do,
though their Military Fame far exceeded his.

Thus we have seen the extent of his Christianity; which we find cooped up
within the narrow bounds of Popery. Now for his Morality, which if it signalize
it self in my Virtue that celebrates a Great and Glorious Prince, it must be in
those two, of Justice and Mercy, which God appropriates most nearly to himself,
as the brightest Ornaments of his Divinity: But whether the Duke were either
Just or Merciful to the E. of Argyle will be the Question^ This Gentleman was
one of the most Ancient, and one of the most eminent Noblemen in Scotland, and
a Person of extraordinary Endowments, and, as such a one had ^erved the King
with his Parts, his Person, and Estate, beyond what most Men of any Degree in
the Nation, either had done, or were able to p^rform; but because he would not
so far comply with, and oblige the Duke, as to fall in with his Councils, for
the Establishment of Popery, and yield himself an Instrument to carry on his
Designs of Popery and Arbitrary Power, his Head must be brought to the Block,
the ancient Honor of his Family must be attainted, and his ample Fortunes be
confiscated. To which purpose, a certain Test being fram`d for all the Nobility
and Gentry of Scotland to take, not excepting all others who were capable of
any Office or Employment in the Kingdom, easy enough for the Papists to
swallow, as being Calculated for their peculiar Advantage; but difficult for
the Protestants, as being tha^ which strangely confused and entangled their
Consciences. However, the Earl was not so scrupulous neither, to avoid all
Occasions possible of incurring his Highness's Displeasure, but offered to take
it, with this Proviso That he might declare in what sense he was willing to be
Sworn. Accordingly he did draw up an Explanation of his own meaning; and tho`
he were allow`d to take the Oath according to that Explanation, which was also
conformable to an Expl^nation, which themselves were forced to make for the
satisfaction of the greatest p^rt of the Ki^gdom, that was dissatisfied in the
Oath, as well as the Earl; nay, tho` his Lordship did take it according to his
own allowed Interpretation, which was so far accepted, that he was admitted to
take his place in the Council; yet upon a Caprico of the Duke`s Justice, the
matter was call`d in question again; but then such a horrid Treasons were
pick`d out of the Earl`s Interpretation, that he was Arraigned, and Condemned
to lose his Head; and Execution had been certainly done, had he not made his
escape in his Sister's Habi^, but a ^ew hours before the Express Arrived from
England^ with Orders for his immediate Execution^ Nevertheless, his whole
Estate was seiz`d, he was divested of all his Titles and Dignities; and
contrary to the Custom of the Kingdom, his Coat of Arms was despitefully torn
at the Public Market Cross of E^inburgh, and his Person hunted after in all
places, whether they thought he might be withdrawn, even as far as Hamburgh.
And yet aft^r all the scrutinies which sober Men have made, the chiefest of the
Sc^ts Lawyers, that were of unbiassed Principles, could never find any thing in
the Earl^s Interpretation, but wha^ his indispensible Duty obliged him to, both
as a Christian, a Subject of Scotland, and a Privy-Co^nsellor to the King. But
the D. was resolved to destroy him right or wrong: And therefore being told
wha^ the E. of Argyle had said or done, which could (...) made a Crime by the
^aw of the Land, his Highn^ss, out of the gr^^t Affection which he bo^e ^o so
true a Protestant Peer, was pleased to reply; But may it not be wrested to
Treason? Which was such an Encouragement, that when his Mind was once
understood, he wanted not Instruments that labored Day and Night to make the
Question subservient to the D.'s impatient Thrist of Revenge, and their own
Advantage; or else it might be to signalize his Resolution to over^rule the
Lawyers in Scotland, had they denied their Submission to his good Will and
Pleasure.

By the same Justice it was that Blackwood was Condemn`d, upon a pretense of
having entertained upon his Ground certain Persons, who were reported, and said
to have be^n at Bothwell-Bridge^ And this, although there had been no notice
given of their being Criminals, or any ways Offenders; nor any Proclamations
were issued out against them, by which Blackwood could be obliged to take
Cognizance of the Circumstances they lay under; and that which aggravated the
I^justice was this, That the Gentleman suffered after a General Act of
Indemnity granted, and that it was after the Council themselves had for Four
Years passed them by, that either ^he Persons whom he had relieved came to be
accused, or he to be prosecuted upon this account.

And by the same Justice it was, that Mr. Robert Bailzie, of Ierismond, was
Hanged, and Quartered for a Crime, of which he had been Impeached and Tried
before the Council, and fined Six Thousand Pounds Sterling. And all this his
Highness did by overruling the Lawyers of Scotland, by which means he had made
the Judges and Jury as malicious against the Protestants, and is Revengeful
against the Asserters of the Liber^ies of Seotland, as himself. Such
Exorbitancies of Injustice and Arbitrary Power, that his Brother could never
have e^dured in a Subject, had they not been a^^ed all along with his Knowledge
and Consent. Otherwise, had not the King been strangely infatuated, to beli^ve,
that whatever his Brother d^d, was for the Advancemen^ of that Cause, to which
he was so well effected himself, he could never have been so un-apprehensive of
the Danger he was in, from a Brother so actually in a Conspiracy against his
Life: For which Reason he was, by the E. of Shaftsbury, said, to be a Prince,
not to be paralell`d in Hist^ry. For certainly, besides the early Trial which
the King had of his Ambition beyond Sea, he h^d a fair warning of the hasty
Advances which he made to his Throne in a s^ort time after his Marriage to the
Queen: For no sooner was it discovered, the Queen was unlikely ^o have any
Issue by the King, but he and his Part^ made Proclam^tion of it to the World,
and that he was the certain Heir.

He takes his Seat in Parliament, as Prince of Wales, with his Guards about
him: He assumes the Princes Lodgings at White Hall, his Guards upon the same
place, without any intermission between him and the King; so that the King was
in his Hands and Power every Night. All Offices and Preferments are bestowed
upon him, and at his Disposition, not a Bishop made without him. After this, he
changes his Religion to make a Party, and such a Party, that his Brother must
besure to die, and be made away` to make room for him. And for the undeniable
Proof of all this, a^ length the Plot breaks out, headed by the Duke, his
Interest vnd Design.

Plain it was, that wherever he came, he endeavored to remove all Obstacles
to his intended Designs out of the way. And therefore, some there are who
attribute the Extremity of the Duke`s rigor toward the Earl of Argyle, to the
great Authority which the Earl had in some part of the High-Lands, and the Awe
which he had over the Papi^ts, as being Lord Justiciary in those parts, and his
being able upon any occ^sion to check and bridle the Marq. of Huntly, now Duke
of Gourdon, f^^m attempting the Dist^rbance of the Public Peace, or the
prejudice of the Protestants. However, this is observable, That notwitstanding
the height of severity, which was extended to him, there was as much favor
shown the Lord Macdonald; whose invading the Shire of Argyle with an Armed
Force, merely because he was required by the said Earl, as being given him for
what he did; though when the Council sent a Herald to him, to require him to
di^band his Forces, he caused his Coat to be torn from his Back, and sent him
back to Edinburgh with all the Marks, both of Contempt of themselves, and
Disgrace to the Public Officer. But his Religion was sufficient to atone at
that time for his Treason.

And now the Duke, having a standing Army of Five Thousand Foot, and Five
Hundred Horse in Scotland, at his Devotion, as well as in England, and the
Parliament, the main Object of his Hatred, and his Fear; being dissolved, back
he returns into England; where, under the shelter of his Brother`s Authority,
he began in a short time to exert his Tyrannous Disposition, and play the same
unjust and Arbitrary Pranks, as he had done in Scotland; and because it was not
seasonable yet to make use of Armed Forces, he set his Westminster Hall
Red-Coats, like Pioneers before a Marching Army, to level the way for Popery
and Arbitrary Control, to march in over the ruined Estates, and murdered
Bodies of their Opposers. The Judges were his Slaves, the Iuries at his be^k;
nothing could withstand him; the Law it self grows lawless, and Iefferies
ridden, pl^ys the Debaushee, like himself. Justice, or something in her
likeness, Swaggers, Hectors, Whips, Imprisons, Fines, Draws, Hangs and
Qu^rters^ and Beheads all that come near her, under the Duke's displeasure.
Alderman Pilkington, the Late Honorable Lord Mayor, for standing up for the
Rights and Liberties of the City, and for refusing to pack a Jury to take away
the Earl of Shaftsbury's Life, is Prosecuted upon a Scandalu^ Magnatum, at the
Sui^ of the Duke, Convicted and Condemned in a Verdict of an Hundred Thousand
Pounds. And Sir Patience Wa^d, for offering to confront the ^uborn'd Witnesses,
is Indicted of Perjury, for which, he was forced to fly to Vtretcht, to avoid
the Infamy of the Pillory; though in all his Dealings so well known to be a
Person of that Justice and Integrity, that for all the hopes of the Duke, he
would not have told an untruth. Sir Samuel Bernardiston, for two or three
treacherously intercepted Letters to his Friends in the Country, fined ten
thousand pounds, which he was not suffer^d to discharge by Quarterly Payments,
but the Esta^e seized by the Duke's Sollicitors, to the end he might have an
opportunity to be the more prodigal in the wake o^ it.

But this hunting after the Lives, as well as the Estates of others, was more
intolerable, and that be the prostituted Testimony of sub^rn'd I^ish^ Rogues
and Vagabonds; and when that would not take the desired Effect, by the ^orced
Evidence of Persons, ensnared and shackled under the Terrors of Death, till the
drudgery of Swearing was over. Men so fond of Life, that they bought the
uncertain prolongation of a wicked Mortality, at the unhollowed price of
certain and immortal Infamy. And therefore, not knowing how to die, when they
knew not how to live, accounted it a more gainful Happiness to quit the Pardon
of Heaven's Tribunal for the Broad Seal of England.

By this means fell the Virtuous Lord Russell, a Sacrifice to the Bill of
^xclusion, and the Duke's Reveege; and yet of that Integri^y to his Country,
and untainted course of Life, of whom never any spoke evil, but those that knew
no evil in him; only because he was one of those who sought to exclude the Duke
from the hopes of Tyranny and Oppression, the Duke was resolved to exclude him
from the Earth.

But then comes the Murder of the Earl of Essex, for that it was a most
Barbarous and Inhumane Murder, committed by Bravo`s, and bloody Ruffians, set
on, hired, and encouraged by potent Malice and Cruelty, the preguant
Circumstances, no less corroborated by Testimonies, wanting only the
confirmation of Legal Judicature, has been already so clearly made out, that
there is no place left for a hesitating belief. A Truth so conspicuous, as
stands in defiance of the Ridiculing Pen of R. L`Estrange, to sham it over with
the Buffoonry of his bantering Acquirements, i^ cannot be imagined, but that so
black a Deed of Darkness, was carried on by the Contriv^rs, with all the
Secrecy that could ^e studied, by Humane Wit. But never yet was Humane Wit so
circumspective, but that the most concealed of Villainies have been detected, by
s^range and little Accidents, which all the Foresight of Humane Sagacity could
never prevent. More especially, after such a curious Inq^isition, and so much
Labor and Industry, pursuing the Cry of this innocent Noble-man's Blood. Both
the Circumstances and Depositions, besides the Declarations of others, ready to
depose, are made public at large to the World, and therefore to omit the
long-since sifted, and winnoed Contradictions of the Witnesses, that were made
use of, to prove the Earl a Felo de se, there are three things since
discovered, that carry a strong Conviction with them, of another sort of
Murder, in the new Deposition of Dorothy Smith, detecting the Motives, the
Author and Contriver, the Resolution taken to murder a Noble Protestant Earl,
the manner concluded, and the joy of those Infatuated Bigots, when the Deed was
penetrated; and all this overheard by the Maid, at the Meeting of one Lovet,
and several other Persons, privy to the Plot, in the House of one Holmes, whom
she then served, a Trusty Papist, seated in a by-corner of the Town, and where
they thoughi themselves, for that Reason, in the greatest safety in the World.

This Meeting was Nine Days before the Earl's Death, where after they had
vomitted out their Malice against the Earl, in the opprobrious Terms of Villainy
and Dog, and laden him with Curses, it was said, That he knew so much of their
Designs, and was so very averse to their Interest, that unless he were taken
off, they should never carry them on. Inducements, which, as they had carried
off Sir Edmundbury Godfrey before, might be as easily admitted for the
Destruction of a more considerable Obstacle; more especially harbored in the
Breasts of Men, that make it p^culiar propagate their Religion by Blood and
Massacre.

Therefore, to remove this great Obstruction out of the way, their great
Oracle, the Duke of York, was consulted; who, after some Meditations, was for
Poisoning the Earl: But his Highness being told, that manner of Death would not
look well: There was another; who proposed to his Highness, that he might be
stabbed; but that not being approved of neither, at length his Highness
concluded, and ordered his Throat should be cut, and promised to be there when
it was done.

To all which, there needs no other Comment, but that the Earl's Throat was cut
soon after, and that the Duke was in the Tower, separated from the King^ and
close by the Earl's Lodging, when the Murder was committed.

After this, the Maid goes on, and deposes, That three days after, the same
Persons met in the same House, and declared, That the Cutting the Earl's Throat
was concluded on, but that it was to be given out, that he had done it himself,
and that if any should deny it, they would take them up, and punish them for
it. All which being spoken, as a thing contrived before the Fact was done, and
verified in every particular after it was committed, are Circumstances that
would hardly be wrestled with before Impa^tial Judges, at an Old Bailey
Sessions; where it would be also considered, that the terrible Prosecution of
Braddon, for making Enquiry into the Murder, came all from White Hall, under
the Management of Court-Injustice and Corruption.

But lastly, the Maid swears, That the same day the Earl died, the same Pesons
met again at her Masters House, and fell a Caparing about the Room for Joy; at
which time one of them striking her Master upon the Back, cried, The Feat was
done; upon which, Holmes demanding, whether the Earl's Throat was cut, the
other answered, Yes, and added withal, That he could not but laugh to think how
like a Fool the Earl looked, when they came to cut his Throat: Whereupon Holmes
asking whether his Highness was there, the other replied, Yes. With which
agreed the Informations of several Soldiers, that about a quarter of an Hour
before the Earl's Death was discovered, observed the Duke to separate from the
King; at what time he beckned to two Persons, who coming to him, he sent them
to the Earl's Lodging, from whence they returned smiling, in less than a
quarter of an hour, and told him the business was done, as one of them more
particularly declared; for which particular knowledge of his, he was afterward
sent out of the World.

Nor was the Informa^ion of the Woman less to be heeded, who in^orms, That as
she was walking, a little before the Earls Death, before the Chamber Window,
she heard a very great trampling and bustling in the Earl`s Chamber, saw three
or four Heads move close together, and heard a loud and doleful cry of Murder.
And whereas Floyd, the Sentin^l denied at Braddon`s Trial, the letting of any
Men into the Earl^s Lodgings before his Death, yet af^erwards with great
remorse of Conscience, he confessed that he did let in Two or Three Men by the
Special Order of Hawl^y, the Warder.

It will be an un-accountable thing to Posterity, that the E. of S. should so
readily part with his Money to Holland, suspected to be one of the Bloody
Rus^ians, when^ ever he went or sent for it, though a prof^^igate, at the same
time convicted in Newgate for Robbery upon the Highway.

It will also seem as strange, that Webster, an Under- Bailiff of St.
Katherines, and an indigent Ale- Draper, should of a sudden be Master of Five
Hundred Pounds, at such an unlucky nick of Time, as immediately after the
Earl`s Murder.

But I forbear to enlarge any further upon a Theme already ^o labouriously
discussed, and Public to the World. Only this is to be added, That it might
seem strange, that after the Murder was done, such Care should be taken, and
such strict Command given for the conveying the News to the Old Bailey, till we
hear to what end it was done, by the King`s Counsel snapping so quickly at it,
as if they had had their Lesson before, and improving it with all their
Eloquence, to the Destruction of the Lord Russell. Nor is it unlikely, that
Iefferies might be either privy to the Design in some measure at that time, or
else be more fully acquain^ed with it in order to B^addon`s Trial. More
especially, if it be true, which is confidently reported, That his Lordship
being at some public Place, where he took an occasion to speak largely, in
praise of the deceased King, when he had done However, (said he) whispering a
Gentlem^n in the Ear, Had he liv`d Six Months longer, we had been all Hang`d,
notwithstanding my Encomiums.

The Discovery of which Alteration of the King, by a severe Expression which
dro^t from his Lips upon reading a Letter from a Lord, who eat his last Meal
with the Duke, and wrote the same on his Death Bed, as it seems to be confirmed
by this Saying of Iefferies, so it was by many concluded to be the occasion of
hastening the King`s Death. Concerning which, the Opinions of the World are
various, and some severe, and bearing hard enough upon his Successor: But in
regard it is a Mystery, as the Embrio of Conj^cture, which is only to be
matur`d in the Womb of Time, and to be Midwiv`d into the World by future
Discovery, we leave it to higher Scrutiny. The Justice of Heaven, perhaps not
minding a present Revenge of his Death, who had not only prevented the
Prosecution of Noble and Innocent Essex`s Blood, but so severely punished the
Industrious Enquiry after it, only this is further to be mark`d, that the Irish
Papists could for some time before, fix upon the utmost Period of his Reign,
and the Duke was sent for in haste out of Scotland, without any apparent Reason
for it; besides that the King's Permission was obtained with some difficulty.

However, by the violent and tremendous Death of his ^rot^er, he at length
arrived at the long long wished ^^r Heaven of his Ambitious Desires; and
beholds himself mounted upon the Pinicle of Ro^alty, only that his Fall might
be more conspicuous.

He was no sooner Proclaimed, but he decl^red his Religion openly to his Privy
Council; however, he began with a mild and caressing Declaration, which he
afterward broke in every Line of it: A mere Trap, baited with Indulgence to
Tender Consciences, on purpose to catch the Dissenting Mice, to deliver them,
when caught, into the Paws of his ravenous Popish Cats; but no sooner was he
Crown`d; but as if his Coronation Oath, and all his Promises so lately made,
had been no more ^han so many Pills of Opium, and believing himself environed
with Power, sufficient to maintain his Tyranny and Opr^ssion, he invades
Property, by Expulsion of the right Owners; tramples upon the Laws by his
pretended Prerogative of suspending Power, and goes about to pull down the
stately Structure of the Protestant Religion, by the Suspension of one, and
imprisoning and Arraigning at his Criminal Bar, no less than seven of the most
Eminent Fathers of the English Church. And by a strange alteration of the Face
of Government, Treason overrules the Law, and Traitors impeached, are fetched
out of Jayl, to sit Triumphantly domineering at the Helm of State; and
Iefferies, the Daniel, that in some measure might be said to be taken out of
the Lions Dens, for the Cruelty of his Nature, is advanced in open Hostility to
Justice, to wage War with the Fundamental Constitutions of the Kingdom, A mean
Spirit, insulting over his Inferiors, but a Spaniel to his Superiors: who,
though he knew himself no more than a Tool in the Hand of a Popish Artificer;
the Shadow of Grandieur; lofty under Contempt, and domineering only in Public;
yet having pawned his Soul for the hopes of an Embroidered Purse, rather than
decoil to Goodness, careers on in Mischief, and as if his Robes had not been
Scarlet enough, dies them deep in Innocent Blood, and becomes his Master's
Vassal, to en^lave the Nation. Such Counselors as these hurried on the new
Crowned King with such a Rapidness, to accomplish the great Work of introducing
Tyranny and Popery, to which his own Fears of leaving the Papists worse than he
found them, as furiously carried him, that he threw his Brother into his Grave,
as if he had not had leisure to Bury him, or as if he had deemed him not worth
a Funeral, whom he thought not worth a longer Life: Unless perhaps he thought
the Hypocrisy of pompous Obsequies, would have but provoked his Brother`s
injur`d Manes, with which, as common Fame had spread it, he was already too
much pestred.

I will not here dispute the Truth of Apparitions, nor insist upon the vulgar
Censures about the Town upon the Priests, for not detaining him in the
half-way-Prison, but singing him out of Purgatory, to make his Brother
melancholy, by facing him several times, and giving him an astonishing st^oke
upon the back, as he was going down a pair of Stai^s in White Hall; yet this
may be asserted, That Guilt accompanied with Terror, forms those Apparitions in
the Mind, which work the same effect, and obtain the same belief, when once
divulged among the Credulous, as if they were real: However it were, it showed
he thought himself but little beholding to him for living so long, and
consequently no way obliged to retaliate a Succession so late in the year, with
so much loss of time.

And now the first influences of his Tyranny and Fury against the Protestants,
flew into Scotland, where, whatever Indulgence he showed in England, he issued
forth a dreadful Proclamation against the Dissenters, under the Notion of
Enemies to the King and Government, and Destroyers of the British Monarchy;
sufficient to have given a more early Alarm to the Dissenters in England, had
they not been ^ul^ed asleep by the softness of a present Repose, and the Charms
of their Decoy-Duke Penn, the effect rather of their Simplicity than their
Policy.

But the first Act of his Revenge in England, brake forth upon Dr. Oats: He
could not forget the Doctor's Detec^ion of his Conspiracies against the
Kingdom. And because he could not ^ind ou^ a way to hang him, his Chief Justice
Iefferies found out a punishment to gratify his Royal Fury, worse than Death
it self, and till then unknown among Ch^istians, in Im^tation of the Roman
^^stuarium, by which the Roman Soldiers were often drubb'd to death; or if they
escaped, sent into perpetual Banishment: As the Doctor was first of all
Scourged by the common Executioner, beyond all Precedent. and then Condemned to
perpetual Imprisonment. A Sentence of void of all Christian Compassion, that
only a Iefferies could have invented. A goodly sight to see Protestant Judges
condemning a Protestant, and the De^ector of a most horrid Popish Plot, upon
the Evidence of known Papists, and some of them nearly related to the Executed
Traitors, and this for Per^ury too, upon the Testimony of Witnesses already
^alsified. As if Justice were a thing that never had been Naturalized in
Heaven, but only depended upon the Will of the Prince, a kind of Tool to ^e
used by his Bene-placito Slaves, at his or their Discretion, or the grand
Poppet of the World, to be showed in various Dres^es and Disguises, as the
force of Judicature required^ But as for Dangerfield, he had been once ^is
Darling, frequently admitted to kiss his Hand, while he was in Conspiracy with
him to suck the Blood of the Innocent. But there was no Atonement for his
Revolting, and Revealing the hidden Mystery of Iniquity. Therefore he must
dance the same Dance that Oats had done; only the King did the World this
small piece of Justice to throw away an inconsiderable Roman Cathotlick, to
satisfy the general Discontent upon his being Murdered.

In the next place he calls a Parliament, and renews his A^^urances and
Promises to preserve the Government, both in Church and State, as by Law
established; and vows to hazza^d his own Person, as he had formerly done in
d^fence of the just Liberties and Properties of the Nation. But still the
Burden of his Song was, More Money. Which the Parliament, willing to engage
him, if possible, by all the Testimonies of their Duty and Loyalty, or at least
to show that nothing should ^e wanting on their part, readily granted. And in
regard that A^gyle was said to be Landed, under the Notion of a Rebel in
Scotland, they declare^ their Resolutions to ^^an^ by, and assist him, wi^^
their Lives and For^^^es, against all his En^mies w^a^ever. No less quick were
they to gratif^e, than he to make th^^e Promises which he n^v^r intended to
perform. And indeed, under the Const^rnation the King was then in, upon the
Landing of Arg^le in Scotland, and the Duke of Monmouth in England both at the
same tim^, p^^haps the Parliament might have bound him u^ ^o what Conditions
they pleased, had they no (...) their Opportunity. But those two Storms b^^^
fortun^tely blown over, the one by ill Co^du^^, the other by the Treachery of
pretended Friendship, and both Argyle and the Duke of Monmou^h safe in their
Graves, the King was so pu^^ up with a petty Victory over a few Club-Men, and
so wrapped up with a Conceit, That he had now Conquered the whole Nation, that
after he had got as much as he thought he could in M^desty desire, or they part
withal, unless they saw great^r Occasions than they did; which neverthel^ss
were no small Sums in the heat of their obliging Generosity at the Commencement
of a Reign, he turn`d them off, after he had sold them two or three
inconsiderable Acts for all their Money.

And now being freed from any further thoughts of Parliam^nts, believing
himself Impregnable^ he resolves to be reveng`d upon the Western People for
siding with his Capital En^my, Monmouth; an^ to that purpo^e, send^ down his
Ex^cutioner in O^dinary, Iefferies, not to decimate according to the Heathen
way of Mercy, but with the B^^o^ (...) his Cruelties, to sweep the Country
before (...) and to depopulate, instead of Punishment. At what time,
acquaintance, or Relation of any that^ sell in the Field, with a slender
Circumstance tack`d to either, was a Crime sufficient for the Extirpacion of
the Family. And Young and Old were hanged, in Clusters, as if the Chief Justice
had design^d to raise the Price of Hal^ers; besides the great number of those
that upon the bare Suspicion were transported beyond Sea, and there sold ^or
^laves, an^ the Purchase-Money given away to satisfy the Hunger of needy
Papists. After Ag^s will read with Astonishment, the barbarous Usage of those
poor people, of which, among many Instances, this one may seem sufficient,
whereby to take the Dimensions of all the rest: That when the Sist^r of the two
Hewlands hung upon the Chief Iustic^`s Coach, imploring Mercy on the behalf o^
^er Brothers; the Merciless Judge, to make her let go, c^^sed his C^ach-man to
cut her Hands and ^^^gers with the lash of his Whip: Nor would he ^ll^w the
Respite of the Execution but for two Days, though the Sister wi^h Tears in her
Eyes, offered a Hundred Pound for so small a Fav^ur. And whoever sheltered any
of those sorlorn Cre^tures, were hurried to the Sl^ught^r-House with the same
in^xorable ou^r^ge, without any Consideration of either Age or Sex; Witn^ss the
Execution of the Lady Lisle at Winchester. As for Argy'e and the Duke, though
they might die pi^ied, yet could they not be said to be unjustly put to death,
in regard they had d^clared open ^ostili^y, and therefore it was no more than
they were to expect upon ill Success. However, since they were betrayed into
the Victor's hands, before any great harm was done, the Crime was not so great
that nothing but a Mass^cre could atone for it; more esecially considering what
great Advantage the King made of these Rebellions. For it gave him a fair
Oppertunity ^o increase the Numebr of his Standing-Forces, under pretense, That
the Militia was not to be depended upon, and of the Reputation he had lost of
being so miserably unprovided against so wretched an Attempt as Monmouth's was.
For which Reason he was resolved to be better provided henceforward for the
Security of the Nation; and to crowd in his Popish Officers into Commands,
under the Notion of Persons of Loyalty, and therefore such whose Persons he was
neither to expose to Disgrace by a Removal, nor himself to suffer the want of:
Cautions and wary of Removing his Popish Commanders, but minding not at all to
remove the Fears and Jelousies of the Nation.

However his plausible Promises, and this important Nccessity of augmenting his
Standing Forces, were urged upon the Parliament, as undeniable Reasons for more
Money. So great a Confidence the King had either in the Awe which he had upon
the Parliament, or that they were so Blind that they could not see through his
Cobweb Pretenc^s. But he soon found that he was deceived in his Expectations,
and therefore perceiving his gilded Hooks could not take, they were decently
Dismissed after ten Days si^ting, with a Prorogation from October till February
ens^ing.

But it seems King James was so confidently assured, That the Bands of
Friendship and Alliance between him and the French King were so Indissoluble,
That wha^ever Assistance the Parliament deny`d him in England, he should not
sail of from his Dear Friend and Confederate in France; That the Parliament
being call`d for no other Intent or Purpose than to betray the Nation, by
Furnishing the King to accomplish his Designs of Popery and Arbitrary
Government; when they refused to be subservient to those Wicked Designs, and
thought it more Honorable to be true to the Nation whom they Represented, than
Serviceable to the Encroachment of his Tyranny, he laid them aside, as things
no longer useful for him.

And therefore like a man cased with their just demial of his Demands, he
resolves the utter Subversion of English Parliaments, the only Remora`s of his
ungodly Projects, by completing the Disfranchising of all the Cities and
Corporations throughout the Nation, so fairly begun in his Brother`s Reign, to
make way for the Introduction of a French Parliament, That should at once have
surrender`d all the Ancient Liberty of the Kingdom, and the whole Power of the
Government into his hands. And this to terrify men into flavish Compliance,
with his Tyrannical Will and Pleasure, the Names of all such Persons, as out of
Honor and Conscience, refused to Co^operate with his Popish Ministers toward
the Public Ruin of Liberty and Religion, and prostitute their own and the
Freedoms of their Posterity to his Arbitrary subjection, were Threatened to be
return`d up to the Attorney General, to the end of their Persons and Estates
might be undone by Illegal Prosecutions.

In the next place, to set himself Paramoumt above all the Control of Law, out
of a vain Opinion that Kings are accountable to none but God; A set of Judges
are picked out to overturn the very Fundamentals of Humane Society, and
Annihilate the very ends of Goveroment. This the King knew must be done by
Judges that had abandoned all ^igh Opinon of God and Nature, and had quitted
all sense of Conscience and True Honor; and had wholly given up their
Judgments to the foolish Enticements of Ambition and Flattery: And when he had
found out such, it was easy for him to say, with ^is Grandfather of the same
Name, Let me make what Judges I please, and I will easily have what I please to
be Law, No wonder then these Judges having Instruments drawn up by Brent, which
passed the Great Seal to Indemnifie them for whatever they did or said
Illegally, affirm`d it to the King for Law, That the King was an Independent
Prince.

That the Laws of the Kingdom, were the Kings Laws.

That the Kings of England might Dispense with all Laws, that regarded
Penalties and Punishments, as often as necessity required.

That they were Judges and Arbitrators who have Power to Judge of the Necessity
which may induce them to make use of these Dispensations.

And Lastly, That the King of England could not Ronounce a Prerogative annexed
to the Crown.

By Virtue of which Concessions and Opinions of the Judges, all the Laws in
England made in the Reigns of our four several Princes for the security of the
Natinn against Popery and Arbitrary Government, were rendered of no Effect.

By Virtue of these Concessions, Arundel of Warder, was made Lord Privy Seal,
Alibon a Judge, and Castlemain was sent with great Pomp an Ambassador to Rome,
to be there contemn`d and dispis`d by his Holiness, for the bad name which his
Master had among all the Princes of Europe, and the ill Opinion the Pope
himself had of him.

By Virtue of these Concessions it was, that the greatest part of the Kingdom`s
Military Safety and Defense, was put into the hands of persons incapable to be
entrusted with them by the Express Laws of the Kingdom; and that the Execution
of the Ancient Laws and Statutes of the Realm against diverse sorts of Treasons
and other heinous Crimes was stopped.

By Virtue of these Concessions, Sir E^. Hale`s wa^ made Lieutenant of the
Tower, to Terrify the City with his Morter-pieces, and level his Great Guns to
the Destruction of the Metropolis of the Kingdom, when the Word should be given
him.

By Virtue of these Concessions it was, that Peter's was made a Privy
Counselor, to outbrave the Archbishop r^ Canterbury and the Bishop of London:
that he had his four Provincial Bishops, and that the Priests and Jesuits
swarm`d in all parts of the Kingdom, Built themselves Convents, hired
Mass-Houses, made open Profession of their Foppish Religion in the Chief City
of the Nation, and in several of the Great Cities and Towns of the Kingdom, and
publicly Ridicul`d the Scripture in their Pulpits. All which Transgressions of
all the Laws of the Land both Civil and Ecclesiastic, are so fully Represented
in the Memorial of the Protestants to their Highnesses the Prince and Princess
of Orange, That they cannot be more fully, nor more sensibly repeated.

But the Inundation stopped not here, it was to be a general Deluge, or nothing
at all. To which purpose, all Obstructions, that oppos`d the Torrent, were to
be level`d or remov`d out of the way; for effecting of which, there could be no
Engine thought sufficient, but that of the Ecclesiastical Commission, so
Arbitrary in its Original, that it had nothing but the Pillars of the
Prerogative to support it; and mana`d with that Arbitrary Fury by Iefferies,
That he look`d like a Monstrous Titan Warring against the Heaven of Law and
Justice. For he had no way to carry Illegality with a high hand, but by
arrogant Domineering, and surely Incivility, while he had nothing to offer to
any Person, that offer^d Law to him, but Sic Volo, Sic Iubeo. To tell a Peer of
England and the Bishop o^ London so much his Superior, only that he sat upon
the Throne of his Commission, he that was not to be mentioned with the Bishop
in the same day, was such a foul piece of Exe^berance of his Guild Hall
Eloquence, which only could have dropped from the Lips of insulting Barbarism.
All that can be said for him is this, That as many Men commit Absurdities when
laden with Wine, this was one of his Extravagancies in his Drink of Honor.
And indeed, after he had tasted of that potent Charm, the whole Course of his
Behavior seemed, to be a mere Intoxication, which made him afterward make use
of the same Receipt to drown both his Life and his Dishonor together.

However, the Suspending this Noble Peer and ^ishop, contrary to all pretense
of Law, for re^using to ^bey the Kings unjust and illegal Command, was no such
Advantage to the King's Caus^, that he had so much reason to ^hank the
Chancellor, or Peter's either, for putting him upon committing a greater A^t of
Injustice, to justify a less. The Bishop was too w^ll, and ^oo generally
beloved among all the Professors of Pr^testantism, for the Papists to put such
an Affront upon ^o Eminent a Father of the Pro^estant Church, for them not to
refent it; even, the more prudent Papist^ thought it a Proceeding too harsh and
unreasonable, and the more moderate looked upon it as too base and unworthy, so
that the Hot-spurs of the King's Council were losers on every side. And
besides, it was such a stabbing Contradiction to the King's Speech in Council
upon his Brother's Death, That since it had pleased God he should succeed so
good and gracious a Prince as his dear Brother, he was resolved to ^ollow his
Example, more especially in that of Clemency and Tenderness to his People. That
the Barbarous suspending this Bishop was one of Royal Word. Which though he had
falsified already in his severity to Oats and Dangerfield, yet the Person of a
Peer and Bishop, and a Star of the first Magnitude in the Church of England
rendered much more conspicuous. But the King was under a necessity; he had
declared one thing to the Protestants, but he had bound himself to do another
for the Papists. If he falsified with the Protestants, the Papists could
absolve him; if he proved unfaith^ul to the Papists, they would never forgive
him. And in this Dilemma he resolved to ^ollow the Maxim of his Profession, Not
to keep Faith with Heretics. Neither were the steps he made, the steps of
State^convenience, now and then upon an exigency; but all in a huddle, out of
his Zeal, to make large steps, for fear, he should die and leave the Papists
worse than he found them.

These severe Proceedings against the Bishop of London, werd the Violation of
that part of his Declaration, wherein he promised the Preservation of the
Ecclesiastical Government, as Established by Law. But the Barbarous usage of
the Gentlemen of both Maudlin Colleges, was an unsanctified breach of another
part of his Declaration, wherein he no less solemnly engaged to maintain the
Protestants in all their Properties and Possessions as well of Church as
Abby-Lands, as of all other their Properties whatsoever. Notwithstanding all
which, how he turned these Gentlemen out of their Legal Freehol^s by the
Arbitrary Power of his High Commission, how he violated the Constitutions of
the deceased Founders, and with what an embittered rage and fury he rated them
like Dogs, when they lay prostrate at his Feet, more like a Pagan Tyrant, than
a Christian King, is notoriously known; and all this, to make a Popish Seminary
of one of the most noble and best Colleges in the University And this Peter's
looked upon as one of his great Masterpieces, as appears by a Letter of his
written to the French King's Confessor, Father La Chese, wherein he had the
vauntidg expression, I bave gained a great point, in persuading the King to
place our Fathers in Magdalen College in Oxford, where they will be able to
tutor the young Scholars in the Catholic Religion,

Nor was it thought sufficient to turn the Proprietors out of their Freeholds,
but under pretense of Disobedience to the King's Commands, they were also made
incapable of any Eccles^^tical Preferment, or of the Exercise of Holy Orders,
and deprived of all those other ways and means of Livelihood, for which their
Education had qualified them. Which as it was a piece of Inhumanity without
Parallel, so it was a plain Demonstration of the main drift and design of the
King and his Popish Furies, first to draw the Protestant Clergy into the snare
of Disobedience, and then under pretense of Obstinacy and Stubborness, totally
to suppress and silence them.

And yet after all this, for the King so publicly to give himself the Lie, by
proclaiming to all the World, as he did, such a notorious Untruth, as That he
had never invaded the Property of any Man since his coming to the Crown, was
such a piece of Dissimulation, that Oliver Cromwell himself, with all the
Irreligion laid to his Charge, was never guilty of. Unless his Father Confessor
designed it for a Miracle to be Recorded among Popish Wonders, That he who had
done nothing else from the beginning of his Reign, but invaded the Liberties
and Properties of his Subjects should be so confident as to deny it. But
whatever, through the frailty of his memory, he had till then forgot, he was
resolved, it seems, for the future, to make amends for his Omission. To which
purpose he was now provided with such a Gun-powder-Plot, that had it taken
Effect, would, ere a few months had gone about, have blown up all the
Properties of the whole Clergy of England, without Exception of any Person that
had either Honor or Conscience, and the greatest part of the Bishoprics and
Livings of England would have been pronounced void, to make way for Sa^dals and
shaved Crowns.

This was that cunning Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, whereby he
undertook to dispense with the Laws, by the sole virtue of his Prerogative. An
Attempt wherein his Brother had miscarried, being forced to surreeder up, and
Cancel the Illegal Contrivance he had prepared for a Trial. But King James
pu^^ed up with the great Exploits he had in Person performed upon
Hounslow-Heath, and the Glorious show his Army made there, Rendezvouzed at the
same time in the same place, to add terror to his Commands, resolved to make
all Opposition to bow the Knee to Baal.

In pursuance of those Resolutions, he Orders his Declaration to be Printed,
requires the Bishops to cause it to be distributed through all their Diocesses,
and to take Care that it should be Read in all the Churches and Chapels
throughout the Nation.

Upon this the Bishops Petition the King, setting forth the Illegality, and the
ill Consequences of it to the whole Nation, both in Church and State; and beg
the King not to insist upon the Reading it. This so in^ensed Peter's and the
rest of the furious Hotspurs, and oonsequently provoked the King to that
degree, That the Court-Lawyers are presently consulted, who adjudge the
Petition Tumultuary and Libellous; and thereupon the Archbishop of Canterbury,
together with the Bishop of Asaph, Ely, Chichester, Bath and Wells,
Peterborough, and Bristol, are first sent to the Tower, and then Arraigned and
Tried for Mutiners against the King's Popish Government, being Charged with an
Information for Publishing a Seditious, Pernicious, and Scandalous Libel. But
notwithstanding all that the King's Council, and the C. J. Wright, and Alibone
the Papist could do, Judge Holloway, and Judge Powel, to the Eternal praise,
stuck so close to their Protestant Principles, and so strongly opposed the
King's Dispensing Power, for which they were turned out the next day, that the
Bishops were acquitted, to the general Joy and Satisfaction of the whole
Nation; and particularly the Soldiers upon Hounslow-Heath, whose Shouts and
Acclamations upon the News of their Acquital, were so harsh and unpleasant in
the King's Ear, that from thence forward, he began to wish he had more Irish,
and fewer English in his Army.

But notwithstanding this Fatal Blow, the most undanted High Commissioners
drove on furiously, sending forth their Mandates to the Chancellors,
Archdeacons, etc. of the several Diocesses, to send them an ex^ct account of
all such Ministers as had refused to Read the Declaration. And there is no
question to be made, but tha^ the severity of that Imperious Court would in a
short time have swept the Kingdom clear of all the Protestant Clergy, had not
indulgent Heaven put a stop to their impetuous Career.

That which follows is so Romantic, that it looks more like a Novel, than a
Story fit to gain Credit, hardly carrying so much Probability with it, as the
Fable of Bacchus, cu^ out of Jupiter's Thigh; and which looks more Romantic
than all the rest: That the King himself should believe^ and urge it for an
Argument to delude the World, That he who had suffered so much for Conscience
sake, could not be capable of so great a Villainy to the prejudice of his
Children; and in ^orcing the same Argument yet further, by saying, That it was
his Principle, to do as he would be done by, therefore would rather dye a
Thousand Deaths, than do ^he least Wrong to his Children. When the World was
convinced, that he could not have suffered such an Affront to have been put
upon him, but for the very Reason he alleged; and that, as for his doing as he
would be done by, it was apparent by all his Actions, that he could not speak
those Words from his Heart, without some Mental Expositions reserved to himself.

Certainly therefore, since it was for the Preservation of the Roman Catholic
Religion, that the Contrivance was set on foot, it argues, that his Conscience
was under the most dreadful Subjection to his Popish Confessors, or that his
Zeal was no less strangely Governed by an Imperious Woman, that for the sake of
Popery, he should consent to a Conspiracy against his own Flesh and Blood. He
would not endure to be Excluded from the Succession, but that he would Exclude
his own Daughters from the Succession, and yet tells us, ^tis his Principle, To
do as he would be done by, as if he thought the way to make us credit a Story
of his Son, were to tell an untruth of himself.

The World, that grows Wiser every day than another: will never be made
believe, that a Person debilitated by the unfortunate Effects of the
exasperated Revenge of an injured Bed, and meeting with a Consort no less
infirm, by whom he never had before any Child, but what dropped into the Grave as
soon as Born, not having any substantial Rafters for Life to build upon, should
so seasonably nick it, to be both the Parents of a sound Offspring for the
Preservation of Popery.

She, who ought to have taken all advantages, to have had public and
undeniable Testimonies of her Glory, to be the Mother of a Prince, so
providentially sent from Heaven, to Support and Establish the Roman Catholic
Faith, in a Revolted Kingdom, would never have been so reserv`d, and shy of
exposing the Symptoms of her Pregnance, but only to a few that were privy to
the Imposture.

But omitting the manif^ld Circumstances, sufficiently already c^nv^ss^d, to
detect the Pious Fraud, and the Chyrum of Affidavits to cover the Chea^, all
brought upon the public Stage, by dire constraint on the one side, and
immodest Bigotry on the other; the unhappy occasion of revealing the A^cana of
Generation to every Turn-spi^, and serving only to inflame the Desires of
wanton Youth: Omitting, I say, the Circumstances, there are others, no less
remarkable of another Nature, as the sending Castlemain to Rome, among other
things, ^o Impart this Affair to his Holiness, and to know whether the
Apostolic Sea would stand by the pretended Prince, in case the Peop^ should
dispu^e his Title. And this seems to be co^fi^m^d by the coming over of Count
Dada, in the Quality of the Pope's Nu^cio, just as the Force was contriving,
and the Pope's being afterward Godfather to the Child.

In the next place, about the time that the Conception was pretended, Father
Peter's was taken into the Privy Council, to give the Report all the Favor
imaginable at the Board, to prevent the being of it Contestee, or if it were to
satisfy all manner of Doubts, and so incite the Lords to make such Orders, as
the Case required, which had not been so proper for the King, or the rest of
the Popish Lords, who knew not so well what to insist upon. Another thing was,
that the Child was no sooner Born, but it was translated to Richmond, lest the
pretended Mother should have been put to the Trouble of a forced Fondness;
which, had the Child continued with her, would have proved a part so irksom,
and so ill for her to act, that notice would have been taken of it.

Nor was it less observable, that at the same time the Bishops were locked up
safe, that they might ^e out of the way of being called for Witnesses, whose
Impartiality otherwise would have been desiring more satisfaction to their
Consciences, than the depth of the Mystery required.

To which may be added, That at the first, the King himself, who had most
Reason to know, did not seem to give Credit to the thing, or at least, was very
doubtful of it; and therefore, when the News was first brought him, as one that
rather wished it true, than thought it to be real; he made answer to the
Messenger, If 'twere so, it was very odd, till finding, that the Lady of
Loretto would take Bribes, and had espoused the blessed Design, he was bound to
believe, that his Mother-in Law`s Prayers, and the Diamond Bodkin had
prevailed; and that his Royal Consort had been impregnated by an Apparition,
like the Mother of Damaratus, King of Sparta.

However, it was looked upon all over Eu^^pe, as a very low and mean
Condescension of a Sovereign Prince, Hedge-Sparrow like, to hatch the
Cucko`s-Egg, and own the suppositious Issue of another Man; which they, who
pre^end to make the best Excuse for, seem willing to believe, proceeded more
from Fear than Conscience, in re^^rd, that being Privy to the many Conspiracies
of the Priests and Jesuits against his Brother`s Life, it possessed him with
such a dread of their Popish Mercy, that he yielded to whatever they desired,
for his own Preservation. On the other side, the Priests and Jesuits were so
terribly afraid of a Revolution after his Death; that by the Power of his
imperious Queen, and their own Importunities, they hurried him on to all those
Impolitick Exorbitances, that hastened both their own and his Ruin.

For now the Nation, no longer able to brook such a deluge of illegal
Oppressions, and the whole Body of the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom,
observing such a general Desolation impending upon their Religion, Lives and
Fort^nes, apply themselves to their Highnesses the Princess and Prince of
ORANGE, as the only Cherubims on Earth, under whose Wings they could retire for
Safety and Protection. Who no sooner, with a Generosity becoming a true
Defender of the Protestant Faith, appeared in their Defense, but Consternation
seized King James, and all his raving Counselors.

Upon the first News of the Heroic Prince's Preparations, he takes off the
Bishop of London's Suspension, restores the City^Charter, with all those other
Franchises which had been so tempestuously ravished from other Corporations,
and returns the Ejected Gentleman of both Universities to the Freeholds which
he had wrested out of their hands. But yet to show how firm he was in his
Resolutions to resume the same Despotick Power again, had his Success once
answered his Expectations; after he had ordered the Bishop of Winchester to put
in the Fellows of Maudlin College, he no soone^ heard of the Prince's being
put back by storm, with some small Loss, which was heightened out of Policy in
Holland, but he recalled his Orders to the Bishop, sent for him to London, and
stopped the Readmission of the Fellows, till he heard the Prince was again
Embarked, and prosperously bending his Course for England.

So soon as he heard the Prince was Landed, he summons his Affidavit Lords and
Ladies about him, in hopes to have sworn his pretended Son into the Succession,
in case of any Miscarriage of his own Person, which he never intended to
endanger. After that he flew to Salisbury, believing the Terror of his Name
would have gain`d him present Victory^ But not meeting the good Fortune he
expected, all that he did there, was to discourage his Soldiers with his
Pusilla^imo^s Fears and Frights upon every little Alarm of a Post-Boy: So that
although he had good Counsel given him, to Horse all his Foot, displace all the
Colonels, and advance the other Officers gradually, and fall upon the Enemy
while they were ^et laboring under the Inconveniences of the Sea, and before
their Numbers increased, he rejected it, unless he might keep his Teagues about
him, and expose the English to the usual Dangers of s^oad-bea^ers. Which,
together with their ununwillingness to Engage the Deliverers of their Country,
so aliena^ed their Hearts from him, that they deserted him by Troops and
Regiments. Despo^ding at this, and more terrified with a little bleeding at the
Nose, than he had been with all the innocent Blood which he had caused to be
spilt, ^e returns back to London; and having sent his Queen and her Babe
before, which was sufficient Warning for Dada, Peter's, and the rest, to provide
for themselves, he withdrew from the City; but being taken, rifled, and seized
by the Country People, near Feversham, before they knew him, he was brought
back to White Hall, where, having his Choice given him to stay in England, or
to go beyond Sea, he rather chose by a voluntary departure, to ab^icate the
Realm. To which he was advis`d by his Council, that assured him, The
Distractions of the Kingdom would make way for his Return in a little time;
Which God forbid.

And thus, to the surprise of all Men, came to pass a Revolution so Sudden, so
Great, and Unexpected, that History cannot parallel. It seem`d a Laybyrinth of
Providence, to which the Belov`d of Heaven WILLIAM HENRY only had the Clue;
while Prudence and Fortitude were the Araidnes that gave him their Assistance
to subdue the Minotaur that devoured our Religion and Liberties. Two
conspicuous Examples at once of Heaven`s Indignation, and the Almighty^s
Favor; the one pursuing to his downfall, an Apostate from God, and an Oppressor
of his People, and exposing him among unbelieving B^g-Trotters upon the
lingering Deathbed of his gasping Glory, the fettered Vassal of the once
fawning Confederate. The other prospering with Miracles of Success, the
Generous Redeemer of the True Reformed Religion, from the devouring Jaws of
that double headed Monster, Popery and Slavery: By whose Auspicious Conduct,
two late languishing Kingdoms, groaning under the heavy weight of Misery and
Tyranny, enjoy a Jubilee of Peace and Tranquillity, and freed from the d^ily
fears of Mas^acre and Destruction in the fair way to recover their Pristine
Glory, have now no more to do, but to repay their Praises to Heaven, and their
due acknowledgments to them that have approved themselves the truly indulging
Father and Mother of their Country: A Prince, the wonder of His Age; a
Princess, the Miracle of Her Sex; in whom all Virtues, as in their proper
Center meet, rendering the Nation happy in Two in One, as the whole World is
blessed in Three in One; and upon whom, next under Heaven, depend ^he Hopes of
all that cordially desire the Welfare, and Prosperity of Christendom.

Here ends the Secret History of the Four Last Monarchs of Great Britain.
AN APPENDIX, Containing the Secret History OF King JAMES the II.
Since his Abdication of England, Continued to this present November, 1692/3.
Being an Account of his Transactions in Ireland and France. With a more
particular Respect to the Inhabitants of Great-Brittain.

WHen one looks back, and reflects upon the continued Conduct of our late
Monarch, both before, and after his Accession to the Crown, and the dismal
Consequences thereof to these Three Kingdoms, and at last to himself; I cannot
but regret the Fate of those Princes, that abondon their true Interest, Reason,
Conscience, and Honor to Iesuitick Councils, and enslave themselves to a
Party, justly abominated by the better part of the Romish Church it self, for
their gross Encroachments upon Religion, Morality, and all that is Sacred among
Men. When I look back to the many Tragedies, acted by that Fraternity, both in
this, and the last Age, scarce a Kingdom, or State in Europe, where their
Villainies have not come up to the utmost reach of depraved Nature. When I call
to mind the horrid Desolations, Murders and Wars, they have been instrumental
of, in the most remote parts of the World; witness some Millions of Souls in
Iapan, and other parts of Asia, Sacrific`d not many Years ago, to their
Ambition and Intrigues, under the Notion of propagating the Catholic Faith; I
say, when I consider all these things, I am the less surprised with the dismal
Effects of their Councils in England, since the same Fate attends them every
where. But I must confess, that among all the Martyrs to Lo^ala`s Principles,
the late King James is the Subject of Admiration: To see a Prince imposed upon
by these jealous Bigots, to trample upon the Religion and Liberties of his
People, contrary to the Fundamental Laws, and the most solemn Promises and
Oaths, under the false Mask of Piety and Zeal to the Catholic Faith, and at
length to find him seduced to abandon his Kingdoms, and thereby an absolute
necessity put upon the Representatives of the People, to fill up his Throne,
vacated by his own Fault, is a Subject that naturally displays the Vanity of
humane Greatness. And I may add, That the unaccountable Doctrine of Passive
Obedience, as it was the Source of a great many Mischiefs among our selves; so
what has b^^allen th^^ King, may be partly imputed to it; for the b^^^^ing.
That without control he might do what he pleased, encouraged him to take such
^easures as have brought upon him all his Misfortunes.

Soon after, the late King James's Abdicating of England, and retiring to
France, it was judged by him, and his doubly Deputy Fyrconnel, the ^ittest time
to put the long contrived Designs of Sub^erting the Protestant Religion, and
i^troducing Popery into full Execution in the Kingdom of Irel^nd,
(^otwi^hstanding the ill Success the like Attempt had met with in England) upon
which, in December, 1689, there was a Mo^ion made in Cou^cil for disarming all
the Pr^testants of that Kingdom that had any Arms left them; which being known,
and most concluding, that as soon as their ^rms were taken (there being then a
hot discourse of a general Mass^cre) 'twas only to leave them more naked, and
exposed, so as that it might have its full Effects more easily, and with less
opposition upon them, which alarmed the Protestants so, that many Thousands
came flocking over, to avoid that fatal stroke. Now were the few Protestants,
who liv`d dispersed, left to shift for themselves. In the mean time, the Lord
Tyrconnel (who still had the Sword undemanded, and undisposed of to any other)
issues new Commissions, not only to the Roman Catholics, who had some Estates,
bnt to all, who were willing to stand up for the Cause, that were Men of broken
Fortunes, and worse Fame, that could influence the Rabble, and raise Companies,
only with this Salvo, that they should maintain them for three Months, at their
own Cost and Charges, and then they should have their Commissions given them;
by which it was adjudged, in regard there was but little Money in the Treasury,
they should be fitted for Service against King James should come, or send them
Money; or, that if the Deputy found an Army ready to Land out of England, what
Money was there would be little enough to bear his Charges, and furnish him
with necessaries on his flight. But these Commissions (or rather
Encouragements) being very many; for every one that could get about Sixty
Kearns, or Country Fellows, to join with them, and own him as their Captain,
immediately strutted, and looked very big, and was honored by the Name of
Captain; so that it was nothing strange to have 20 or 30 Companies in a County,
and these the noted Vagabonds, and Cow-stealers; so that presently the Captains
(many of which had not Three Cows of their own) had several Hundreds of Cattle
driven into Nookes and By-corners; and all that were branded were sure to go to
Pot, in regard the Horn (as they called it) spoke English: The rest were sent
into other remote Counties, to the Officers there, and those again sent there
stolen Cattle in exchange for the other (which was done to elude a Proclamation
from the Lord-Deputy, on the many and daily Complaints he received on the
Account of the stolen Cattle) requiring all Officers, as well as others, to be
aiding and assisting to recover the stolen Cattle, and to punish the Offenders,
which passed for Current: For it was well if a Protestant could go safe to the
next G^rrison, who sometimes would be so civil (especially if a Sum of Money
were given his Men, to assist in the search) as to send Eight or Ten Miles, but
besure the Cattle must be far enough from the place searched: and sometimes,
when 30 or 40 far Bullocks came to be made a Prey, that about a Third or Fourth
part mu^t be laid aside for the Pott; the rest, for a Bribe of 5 or 6 l, would
be got by some of the Soldiers, who would swear lustily they were forced to
promise much to the Spy; yet no sooner (on the delivery of the greater part of
the Cattle, and the Money received) but besure in a Night or Two, the Cattle
were again stolen. Thus the merry Drovers (as they called themselves) valued
not to join, about 60 or 80, or an 100 in one Party, and force away what Cattle
they had a mind to: So that sometimes an Hundred Sheep would scarce seed the
Drivers, and their Families, and Friends; and a Purchase of an Hundred was only
fit to be divided among them and their Crew, into Lors and Parts. And now these
new raised Forces were almost half Armed out of the Stores, the rest were
pretty well fitted for Pikes, made in the Country; and the Priests and Friars,
Commanded (on Obedience to the Holy See) that no Person whatsoever should
appear at Mass without his long Skeene, and half-Pike, which accordingly was
performed; and one Person, who had not ore Foot of Land, but what he Farmed
from an English Gentleman, had 12 Dozen of each made for himself and Tenants;
an Account whereof was sent to the Government, but no notice taken.

And now it was thought fit, that these new raised Forces should betake
themselves to Garrisons, which was s^ddainly done. And not only were the King's
Garrisons, Forts and Castles, well stored with them, but in many Gentlemen's
Houses that were any thing, (or whose Owners were ^udged disaffected to them)
we^e likewise filled with their Numbers, and the Proprieters, or Possessors
turned out, and the Provision Seized (and as it was an extraordinary Favor to
get off any Goods, that were of any Value) or pretense that they were for the
King`s Use, and that he would make Sa^isfaction, when, how, and in what manner
he thought fit, and that was not the least thing done by his Command.

Now was it plain, that this Army was not designed to fight with Butter-flies,
and that the Lives of all the Protestants that stayed, were in apparent danger.
On which, an humble Requ^st was made to one or two Persons of greatest Quality
and Station, to stand up for the ^rotestant Religion, and English Interest. But
others, through a mistaken Zeal for Loyalty, or judging the scattered and
dispersed Protestants, too weak to withstand their shock (much less to disarm
the Party design`d) `twas therefor declined, and judged unfit to attempt, as
they proposed, seizing the Sword, Lord Deputy and Dublin.

Now Tyrconnel, having by King James's expr^ss Command, disarmed the
Protestants in g^neral, throughout Ireland; the Irish Cutthroats, Sons, and
Grand-Sons of the Massaker of Forty One, being Armed in their room; the Act of
Settlement broken throughout Ireland, the Irish Clergy having re assumed their
Bishoprics and Livings, committing great Abuses on the Protestant Clergy, (as
has been already hinted at) Advice came to Dublin of King Iames`s being Landed
at Kinsale, and that he was on his way for the City: At this Prince^ first
Arrive^ in Ireland, to ingroriate^ himself with the Protestants, and to ^eget
an Opinion of his great Clemency among the People, he very Graciously
condescended to grant a general Pardon to the Inhabitants of the Town of
Bandon, amusing them with an assurance of an absolute Ind^mnity ^or their
Transgressions; but soon after he remitted them to the Severity of the Law, and
exposed them ^o a Trial for their Lives, upon which they were ^ll found guilty
of High Treason; and no otther Consequence could rationally be expected, when
both Judges and Jury were composed of inex^^rable Papists: And, in the mean
time, this mighty Crime was no more than that the Inhabitants of the place
observing their Neighbors to be openly Robbed and Pi^aged, and from
Clandestine Thievery, to proceed to violent Depradation, they ^hought it
prudent to shut their Gates, and avoid Plunder by a necessary Defense, and
self-Prese^vation.

This was the first E^^ay of the Gracious Indulgence of a Popish King to his
Protestant Subjects. This was a plain Specimen of what is to be expected from
him, who will Mortgage his Reason to the Humor of his Priests.

Soon after this, King James, to ing^atiote himself with the People of England,
sends over a specious Paper, which was privately dispersed by his Friends in
London, under the Title of King James His Declaration to all His Loving
Subjects in the Kingdom of England, which was in Substance as follows
Although the many Calumnies, and dismal St^ries, by which Our Enemies have
endeavou^ed to render Vt and Our Government odious to the World, do now appear
to have been advanced b^ them, not only without any Ground, but against Their
own certain Knowledge, as is ^vident by their not daring to attempt th^se
Charges to the Wo^ld, which we cannot but hope, has opened the Eyes of Our
good Subjects, to see how they have been imposed upon by des^^ging Men, who, to
promote their own Ambiti^us Ends, care ^^t what Slav^r^ ^h^^ reduce Our
Kingdom^ to.

That since Hi^ Ar^i^al in Ireland, the Defense of His P^otestant Subjects (as
he calls them) the^r Religion, Privilodges and Properties, is especially His
Care, with the Recovery of his own Rights.

And to this end, he ha^ preferred such of them, of whose Loyalty and Affection
he is satisfied, to Places, both of the highest Honor and Trust about his
Person, as well as in his Army.

That by granting his Royal P^otection in Ireland, to such, whose Minds were
shaken by the Arts of His Rebellious Subjects, has dispelled their
Apprehensions, and e^^ectually secur`d them against the Attempts, even of their
private Enemies. And then adds, His Ears have been alwas open to their just
Complaints.

And so far has His Royal Mercy been extended to those that were in Arms
against Him; that he has actually pardoned several Hundreds of them, and most
notorious Criminals are swept in an easy Con^inement. Then he goes on with his
wonted Professions of kindness to the Protestant Religion, Church of England,
and Protestant Dissenters, etc.



It seems, King James continues in His wonted Road, of taking wrong Measures,
both of Persons and Actions, which has been the occasion of all His
Misfortunes, When he talks of His Enemies th^^ have rendered Him and His
Government odious to the World; He mistakes himself, if he means those worthy
Patriots, that being weary of his insupportable Encroachments upon the
Religions, and civil Liberties of these Nations, did lend a Hand, to deliver
themselves, and Fellow Subjects, from a Ruin that seemed almost inevitable.

The reading those Lines, wherein he makes great pretensions of Defending the
Protestant Subjects in Ireland, puts me in mind of the Parallel, so exact^^
observed betwixt the French King, and Kin^ James, in all their Conduct, and
particularly in both there way of asserting the calm Methods, used by them
tow^^ds their Protestant Subjects. When that Common Enemy of the Christian part
of Europe. (as a late Pope was pleased to call him) had outdone ^ll the
Neroes, and Iulians of old, in the Art of Persecution, and had rendered himself
abominated to the World, by the Cruelties committed by his Dragoon Missionaries
upon those very People that had done him the best Offices, and preserved the
Crown upon his Head in his Minority; yet at the very same time, Lewis the X^V.
and his Ministers have had the Impud^nce to affirm, That no other Methods were
used to convert those poor Victims, but those of a fair Persuasion and
Calmness. Just so, King James, that he may follow as near his Corpse as
possible, having, since his Arrival in Ireland, abandoned the Protestants of
that Country, to the Merciless Rage of an Enemy irreconcilable, from both a
Principle of Religion, and civil Interest; who, within his View, have laid
desolate whole Counties, and acted Barbarities, proper only to themselves, and
their French Confederates, and by which, they forced away a great many
Thousands from their Country, at the point of starving, having saved nothing of
their Fortunes from so universal a Calamity. Yet, notwithstanding all this
appears in the Face of the Sun, King James, that he may nor come short of his
Patron, boldly affirms, That the Religion, Privileges and Prop^rties of his
Protestant Subjects (as he names the^) are his chie^est Care, over and above;
and so much for the Declarations.

It is a Matter, not unworthy the Observation, how dexterously the Government
in Ireland could prevaricate in their Dealings with the poor enslaved
Protestants; for upon any Apprehensions of Succors, arriving from England, or
other pre^ext to fleece and squeeze them; an Information was presently given,
how numerous the Protestants were, and what danger may rise from thence; and
then they were forthwith con^ined, and hurried away to Prison, and their Houses
and Goods exposed to the Rapine of the Irish and French. At another time, when
it might be sub^evient to their Designs, to lessen the number, and under-value
the Strength of the Protestants, then they give out, that their number was but
small, and their Interest inconsiderable. And this is very remarkable in a late
Passage at the City of Lymerick, where the Cabal of the Papists projecting to
get the Churches there into their Hands, represented to the King and Council,
that the Protestants in that place were so very few, that there was no need to
assign them any more than one Church for their Meeting,

If at any time an Information was given to the Government of any Money, Plate,
or other things valuable in the Hands of a Protestant, though guarded by the
Solemnity of a Protec^ion, this was soon seconded by the Suspicion of some Plot
against the Government; and immediately a Party was sent to seize their
Persons, to search, and Plunder their Houses; and so, after the Infliction o^
all sorts of Misery and Distress, they are admitted to Liberty, under the
Caution of Bonds for good Behavior; but nothing left to s^^^^in them, or to
prevent the Calami^ous Assaults of Poverty and Famine.

At another time, they proceed with more Jesuitical fierceness; for having in
their Eye a concealed Purchase of Money, or good Movables, in the Hands of a
Protestant, immediately an Order was secretly granted, to seize the Persons,
and secure their Goods; and then, to amuse the World with an Opinion of their
Justice and Lenity, a Proclamation was contrived with a plausible promise of
Indemnity to all Protestants under their Protection, and an Invitation to all
Men to rest secure under the Benignity of it. But in the mean time, the Matter
is so ordered^ that the Proclamation shall not be Published, or delivered into
the Sheriffs Hands, or other Officers, tho` antidated before the issuing such
Order, till a certain Advertisement be received^ that the Order is executed,
and the Work done.

What a miserable an unexpected Oppression is it, that the poor Subjects shall
be compelled to part with their Goods and Merchandise, for a contemptib^e Lump
of Brass and Pewter? Yet such has been the const^nt proceeding of the late
King toward his Subject^ in Ireland; whose Goods and Commodities he rather
Seized than Bought, and becoming the grand Merchant of the Kingdom, he was the
general Ingross^r of all Trade, which he Vends and Expo^ts to his dear
Correspondent in France: Bargaining with the Owner at such a rate, as the Buyer
is pleased to make, and discharging his Contract in Bills of Copper, Pewter,
and Brass, which can in no way avail the poor Seller, or support him in the
Circulation of his Trade. I will only present the Reader with one instance,
(among innumerabl^ others) and give him an Aut^en^ick Account of what Goods
were taken up in Dublin at one time ^or the King's Use ( i. e.) were Seized by
Armed force, and a Price set upon them at the pleasure o^ the Taker.

Seized in the City of Dublin, for the king`s use, Feb. 6 th. 1689.

Of T^n^ed Hides, 18771. Of Raw Hides, 14687. Of St^nes of Wool, 61105. Of
Tun^ of Tallaw, 389. Of Stones of Butter, 40.

The like Methods were put Execution in all parts of the Country, Seizing and
carrying away what the Protestants had, in order to be sent after the former.

After the King had made Brass-Money current in Ireland, it was at first
pretended to pass only in Payment between Man and Man, in their daily Commerce
and Dealings, and in public Payment in Debts to the Exchequer.

But soon after, the Irish beginning to consider, that they were generally
indebted to the English, and that this might be a fit season, and a lucky
opportunity to get their Debts easily, and cheaply discharged. A Proclamation
was published, enjoining and requiring, That Copper and Brass Money should p^s^
as Current Money, within the Realm of Ireland, in the Payment of Bills, Bonds^
Deb^s by Record, Mortgages, and all other Payments whatsoever. By which knack,
many a poor Protestant was fobb'd out of his Right, and compelled to take an
heap of Trash for Debt. One of the most emine^t Silver^ Smiths of Dublin,
having sold all his Plate to a Papist, who promised to pay him his Price
(agreed upon) in Silver and Gold; but no Faith being to be kept with Heretics,
the Goldsmith was compelled to take Brass and Copper. And soon after this, the
late King put forth his Savoury and Fruitful Proclamation, to make Brass Money
pass in Satisfaction of all Debts, Signed at Dublin-Castle, Feb. 4 th. 1689.
But I challenge all Histories and Records of Nations, to parallel the late
shameful usage of the poor Protest^n^s Prisoners in G^llway, upon whom was
placed so odious a Cheat, so unman-like a Sham, that Posterity will hardly be
induced to believe it; and I must implore the Charity of the present Age, nor
to look it as a Fable; but it is ^o certain, and so sad a Truth, that I defy
the Subtility and Impudence of a Jusuite, to gain say, or contradict.

There was a Stipulation made some time ago, between King James, and the French
Tyrant, to exchange some Regiments of Auxillaries, and about 5000 Men being
accordingly sent from France, and Landed in Ireland, the late King ordered the
like number of Irish to be forthwith Embarked, and Transported into France,
among whom, the Regiment of Colonel Rob. Fielding was appointed to be one; but
before he could get his Regiment on Board, a great number of the Men run away,
according to their natural and usual Custom; so that he became mightily puzzled
what shift to make to recruit his Regiment, whereupon this expedient was found
out. There was in Galloway about 120 English Prisoners, who had endured the
Misery of close Confinement, Cold, Hunger, and daily Expectation of violent
Death, for above 14 Months for pretended Treason. To them Coll. Fielding
applied himself, promising, that for every one that would raise ^ight Men, and
deliver them to him to recruit his Regiment, such should not only have their
immediate Liberty, but an absolute Pardon; and to that purpose he produced the
l^te King's Warrant ^or a General Pardon. The poor Gen^lemen overjoyed wi^h the
security of their Lives, and the Prospect of their Liberties, consented
readily; and in a short time, about 14 of the Prisoners (with extraordinary
Pains and Charge^) brought in the number demanded, and delivered them to the
Conduct of the Colonel; whom, with his Men^ was no sooner Shipped off, but an
Order was sent from the late King, to seize upon those deluded Gentlemen, and
to recommit them to their former Prison, on pretense, that Fielding`s Contract
with them, was not done with his Allowance: The Great Turk would blush to be
charged with such an Action, and the very Heath^n would abhor it! An Action,
fit only for the Monsieur of France, and such Princes as are influenced by his
Ex^mple.

The French had not been Two Days in Dublin, when they murdered Two or Three
Protestant Clo^thiers, in a part of the City, called Comb, for that ^reat Crime
of protecting their Wives from being made Prostitutes to the French; of which
Inhumane Act, no Notice was ever taken by the late King, or his Government,
more than if Two Dogs had been shot. About the same time, some of them took a
Country-Maid, that came to Market with her Father, and defloured her in the
open Street at Noonday. A motion was made in Council, that the City of Dublin
should be fired, the Protestants being first shut up in the Churches and
Ho^pitals; and then, if they lost the Day at the Boyne^ to set Fire to all:
Whereupon the Irish Papists, Traders in the City, and those of the Army, that
either themselves, Relations, or Friends, owned Houses in it, applied
themselves to their King, and told him, They should suffer in that Expedition,
as well as the Protestants, and that they would not draw a Sword in his
Defense, unless all Thoughts of Burning the City were set aside; and declared,
That as soon as they saw or heard of any Appearance of Fire, they would fly
from his Service, and submit to King William's; Mercy; of which, now they had a
good Experiment.

The World is very sensible, that `tis the common Ambition o^ degraded Princes,
how just soever Dethroned, to endeavor their own Restoration.

There is a Chance in a Crown, and `tis an extraordinary Resignation that can
quit the P^etences to Titles so great, though never so deservingly forfie^ed.
We do not therefore at all wonder at the Irish and French Army, prepared for
King Iames`s intended Descent, and Invasion of England last Year, nor the early
Naval Preparations of the French on that Occasion. Such Expedition on so
important an Attempt, carried some little Face of Glory in it. His very Enemies
could not deny, but such an Enterprise had been an Ambition, well pushed; and
had he suceeded, he mighty fairly have written himself James the Conqueror. But
as bold and gallant Achievements in the U^iversal Standard of Honor, carry a
great Name; and which true Greatness possibly, has no occasion to be ashamed
^f. Nevertheless, there may be those poorer Designs; that instead of being
either Great or Glorious, perhaps may carry the Vilest, and most abject Face,
that a much less Character then King James ought to blush at. As for Example,
the followi^g Commission.

James, By the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, and Ireland, King^ Defender
of the Faith, etc. To Our Trusty, and Well-Belovd, Capt. Patrick Lambe^t.
KNow Ye, That we Reposing special Trust in the Approv`d Fidelity and Va^our,
have Asn^^ed, Constituted and Appointed you, Commander of the Good Frigate,
called, the Providence, and further, We give you full Power and Authority to
enter into any Port or River of the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
or any Territories thereunto belonging, and either there, or at Sea, to Take,
and Apprehend; and in case of any Opposition or Resistance, to Sink, Burn, or
otherways, Destroy all Ships and Vessels, together, with their Goods, Loading,
and Merchandises belonging to the Inhabitants of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, or either of them, together with the Ships Goods, and Merchandises of
the States of the United Provinces, or Their Subjects, and to bring and send up
all such Ships and Goods, as they shall take in some Port of France, and to
procure the same to be Adjudged, Lawful Prize in the next Court of Admiralty,
Established by our Dear Brother, the most Christian King. And the Tenths, and
other Dues a^ising out of the said Prizes are to be paid to Thomas Stratford,
or in his Absence to Iean Nimport, of Breast, or to such other Persons as shall
have Authority from Us to receive the same.

Signed, Melsort.
Given at Our Court, at the Castle of St. Germans, Feb. 22. 1691/2.

Here you find, instead of a more warrantable Ambition of recovering Three
Kingdoms, he poorly descends to grant his Commissions to Privateers to Rifle,
and Spoil all the Subjects of England, Scotland, and Ireland, indifferently to
Burn, Sink, and Fire their Vessels, etc. and all this without respect of
Persons, Interests or Religion. The severest Ro^anists, or most violent
Iacobi^e, (without exception) is to be swept in the common Doom. So that
instead of pretending all his former promised Impurity and Tenderness to the
People of England, or instead of Bravely grappling at his Royal Rival in the
Imperial Seat, he vilely assumes little less than a common Pyrat, Authorizes
the Depredations of the E^glish Merchants, even by the very Hands of English
Men. This last poor Spirited Meanness must either plainly tell us, that he has
utterly renounced all Hopes of Recovery of his Kingdoms, and so under that
Despair, he resolves to play at a small Game, rather than stand out, (which
indeed is the best Title I can give it) and consequently (like the famous
Dyonisius, sumed Pedagogue) when he can scourge Kingdoms no longer, he prepares
his lesser Rods for a more Tyrannick Lash; or else, that forgetting that he
ever was a Monarch, and therefore blushing at nothing, though never so
Unprincely, he contents himself with being under-Secretary to the French King,
whilst the little James is b^t a Subscription to the Great Lewis. The French
King deputes him as his Emanuensis, to Copy Commissions for him; and the
contented Receiver of that high Favor, is paid to officiate in the Trust. It
was Remarkt of him, that at his first Departure from England, upon his
Transport from Feversham, he uttered this Expression. That he had rather be a
Captain of Light Horse, under the French King, than Reign King of England,
udder the L^sh and Countroul of Parliaments. A Captain of a Troop of Horse is
no over-high Post: But truly, of the two, it is much the more Honorable, than
the Granting of such Commissions. But indeed, all these tend to the aggradizing
of the French King; the Poorer the Subjects of England, the stronger the Grand
Lewis; his inviolable Zeal and Fidelity, therefore to the most Christinn (so
titled) Nero, supercedes all other Considerations, and ( fas aut nesas) Right
or Wrong, Honorably or Infamous, nothing comes amiss that carries the least
Shadow of Service to that darling Idol. One thing is very remarkable in the
Ianus Faces of King James's Pre^ences. This very Commission found on Board a
Prize, taken on the West of England the last Summer, was dated at St. Germans,
the 22 th of Febr. 1691/2;. which (pray observe) bearing date before his
intended Invasion; impowers this Privateer to enter into any Port or River of
England, Scotland, or Ireland; and commit all those Hostilities of Fireing,
Sinking, Burning, and^. A^l Tr^ders, Vessels whatever, at the same time that
this Declaration, prepared for his Reception in England, intimated all the
Affection and Tenderness imaginable to the Interests, Property, and what not,
of his Subjects of England, viz. That he was coming only to recover his own
Right, Establish and Restore their Laws and Liberties; and yet, at the same
time he gave out Commissions to Wast^e, Ruin, and Destroy the most innocent
Traders of the Kingdom, possibly no way^ interested in the Titles, and Disputes
of Princes, in Parties or Causes; but on the contrary, only endeavoring a
peaceable Acquisition of their Bread, by their honest Commerce and Industry.

To conclude, From all this Prince's Actions, in the whole Series of his Life,
it is no difficult matter to make a Judgment of what we may justly expect from
him, if ever Divine Judgment, as the Reward of our Ingratitude for so great a
Deliverance, should permit us to fall again under the heavy Yoke of a Popish
Prince, whom we have so justly and happily thrown off. King James is of a
Religion, that has, infamous Council, decreed, That no Faith is to be kept with
Heretics, much less with Subjects, that he looks upon us as so many and will
not miss to treat them as such, whenever they give him the Opportunity of
doing it. For his greatest Admirers do not run to the height of Idolatry, to
imagine him so much Angel, as nor^ to take all Methods to revenge such an
Affront, and secure himself at our Cost, from such Treatment for the future.
The Apprehensions of which Resentment^ would strike such a Terror in Men's Mind,
that nothing would be capable to divert them offering up All for an Atonement;
and Popery and Slavery will be thought a good Bargain, if they can but save
the^r Lives. Then we might lament our Miseries, when it would be out of our
Power to help them; for a Prince of Orange is not always ready to rescue us,
with so vast Expense, and hazard of his Person. And I must say, if ever our
Madness should hurry us thus far, we should become rather the Objects of
Laughter, than of Pity: In short, if there be any of the Prostant Persuasion,
so strangely infa^uated, as but to wish his Return, I shall entertain them with
no other Answer, but the recommending to the^ the Ninth of Ezra, v. 13, 14. And
after all that is come upon us for our evil Deeds, and for our great Trespass,
seeing that thou our God have punished us less than our Iniqui^ies deserve, and
have given us such a Deliverance as this: Should we again break thy
Commandments, and j^^n in affinity with the People of these Abominations;
would not thou be angry with us, till thou had consumed us, so that there
should be no Remnant, nor escaping.

FINIS.

