AN ESSAY ON TRADE, etc.

AN ESSAY ON THE STATE OF ENGLAND, In Relation to its TRADE, Its Poor, and its
Taxes, For carrying on the present War against FRANCE.

By JOHN CARRY, Merchant in Bristoll.

BRISTOLL: Printed by W. Bonny, for the Author, and are to be sold in London by
Sam. Crouch, at the Corner of Popes Head-Alley in Cornhill, and Tim. Goodwin,
at the Queen's Head, near the Temple; also by Tho. Wall, and Rich. Gravett,
near the Tolzey, in Bristoll, Novem. 1695.

TO THE KING's Most Excellent MAJESTY.
May it please Your Majesty,
IT is not a Desire to appear in Print has made me to write, or a fond Opinion
of what I have written, to affix Your Great Name to these Papers, but a true
Affection to my Native Country, and the Cause Your Majesty is now ng aged in; A
War, on whose good Success depends the Security of Religion, Liberty, and
Property, both to Your own Subjects, and likewise to all the Protestant
Interest in Europe; A War, as it is absolutely necessary, and must be carried
on with Vigor, so it is like to be long and chargeable, and so much longer, as
we abate in Our Vigorous Prosecution; A War, which may strain the Nerves and
Sinews of our Treasure before it be ended, and therefore as in Martial
Discipline great Wisdom must be used to secure those Posts where the Enemy
bends most of his Forces, so here it is Prudence to strengthen our Treasure, by
advancing and securing our Trade which must bring it in; If this was done,
Taxes would be easily paid, and little felt, and without it this Nation will at
last become Bankrupt, when its Expenses exceed its Profits.

The Foundations of the Wealth of this Kingdom are, Land, Manufactures, and
Foreign Trade, these are its Pillars, which ought not to be overshaken, they
have hitherto borne the Burden, and felt the Smart of the War, and it is time
now they should slide their Necks out of the Collar, other ways may be found
out to raise a greater Sum annually than Your Majesty's Occasions will
require, without Four Shillings per Pound on the first, Excises on the second,
or a Tunnage Bill on Ships on the last, an Act which lighted heavy on the
Merchant, and left no room to consider whither he gained or lost by the Voyage,
or whither the Ship returned home full or empty.

The Methods for Raising Money must be easy, when the annual necessary Sums
are to be so great, therefore it would be Policy in our Lawmakers to make use
of those which may least hurt any part of our Vitals, such as Land and Trade
are; I mean that part of Trade which is useful to the Public God, not that
which is managed only for private Men's Advantage; it may be possible to rate
the Trader, and yet to spare the Trade.

There are two things which seem to be of great Importance to this Nation, and
very necessary to be looked into.

First, The better securing our Plantation Trade, so as it may more absolutely
depend on this Kingdom than it has hitherto done; this will not only encourage
our Navigation, when all their Product shall be imported hither, but also much
advance Your Majesty's Revenues, when such quantities of Tobacco shall not be
carried thence directly to foreign Markets; to prevent which, and secure Your
Majesty's Duties when Imported, plain and practicable Methods may be proposed;
and the Consequence thereof would be, that this Kingdom being the Mistress of
that Commodity, Your Majesty's Coffers would be filled, not only from its Home
Expense, but also by a Tribute raised from Foreign Nations, where it would very
much lie in Your Majesty's Power to set its Price; I do not think new Imposts
upon the Importer will so much advance Your Majesty's Revenue as they will
discourage the Merchant, 'twould be better to take away those already laid, and
instead thereof to raise a far greater Sum on the Consumer, which may be done
without the Clog or Oppression of Officers, in such a manner, that it shall
scarce be felt, either by the Retailer or Spender.

The next thing is the securing our Wool at Home, and making this a Market for
all the Wool of Christendom, whereby England would soon become the Queen of
Europe, and flourishing in its Manufactures grow Rich by the Labor of its
People, and consequently might better afford to import Commodities to be spent
on Luxury; I take it to be one great Reason why the Kingdom of Spain still
continues poor notwithstanding its Indies, because all that the Inhabitants buy
is purchased for its full Value in Treasure or Product, their Labor adding
nothing to its Wealth, for want of Manufactures; I am apt to think greater
Steps may be made in this than have hitherto been done, and our Wool may be
kept at home, not by punishing the Exporter with Death, but by apt Methods to
prevent his doing it; and when a Lock is put on Ireland and Rumny-Marsh,
Foreign Countries will more easily be prevailed on to send us theirs.

These things seem worth the Consideration of the ensuing Parliament, a great
many Members of the last to my certain Knowledge began to be much in Love with
Trade, and have often lamented the dark Notions That House had of it, for want
of being put into a better Light by those who ought to have represented it
truly to them.

Which has been a great Inducement to me in the writing this Tract, that I
might set forth the Interest of England in Relation to its Domestic and
Foreign Traffic, and how both may be better improved to the Advantage of the
Nation.

King Solomon, who was pleased to encourage Trade in his Dominions by his Royal
Example, soon found it to be the weightiest Jewel in his Dyadem, bringing him
in more Treasure from abroad, than all the Tribute he received from Judea; The
Trade of this Kingdom has always been a profitable Ornament to the Crowns of
Your Royal Predecessors, Kings and Queens of this Realm, and it may be still so
to Your Majesty's, if the Causes of its languishing were inquired into, and apt
Methods applied for its Recovery.

That it may please God to make this Nation happy, by giving Your Majesty a
long Life, crowned with Victories over the Enemies of its Peace and
Tranquillity, is the Prayer of

Your Majesty's most Faithful, And most Obedient Subject, John Carry.

TO THE HONORABLE THE Commons of England IN Parliament Assembled.
May it please Your Honors,
IT is the greatest Happiness of the People of England that the Laws by which
they are governed cannot be made without the Consent of their Representatives,
who as they obtain good Ones from the Favor of their Prince, so it is their own
fault if they pass such as are bad.

Amongst all our Laws none tend more to the promoting the Wealth of this Nation
than those which advance its Trade and Manufactures, by the latter we not only
employ our Poor, and so take off that Burden which must otherwise lie heavy on
our Lands, but also grow Rich in our Commerce with Foreign Nations, to whom we
thereby sell our Product at greater Prices than it would otherwise yield, and
return them their own Materials when wrought up here, and increased in their
Value by the Labor of our People.

This little Tract I humbly offer to this Honorable House, not to direct, but
with all Humility to lay before Your Honors an Anatomy of the Trade of
England, dissected and laid open so as to discover its Vitals, which have
seemed to be struck through by some late Acts.

Whatever does Prejudice to our Manufactures, or burdens our Foreign Trade
above what it is well able to bear, stabs them to the Heart, and where Taxes
are thus laid, they disable the Subject, and consequently are so much more
burdensome as they make him less able to pay them; But when our Manufactures
are encouraged, and our Foreign Trade made easy, and well secured, the Lands
of England will be advanced, and Taxes paid without Discontent, because they
will scarce be felt, especially when equally laid; and in such a Manner, that
every Man shall pay his Proportion in a Regular way.

If what I have written may be serviceable to this Honorable House, I shall
think my Time and Labor well employed.

That God will direct your Councels, to the Advancement of his Glory, and the
Welfare of this Nation, shall ever be the Prayer of

Your Honors most truly Devoted Servant, John Carry.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE following Treatise was the Employment of some leisure Hours which I
thought could not be better spent, than in digesting so copious a Subject as
Trade is, I am sure could be no way more advantageously employed to the
Nation's Interest, than by proposing Methods for its Improvement; I have herein
considered the State of England in respect to its Trade, its Poor, and its
Taxes for carrying on the present War: The first I have divided into the Inland
and Outland Trade; the Inland into three parts, viz. Buying and Selling,
Husbandry, and Manufactures; Under the former Head I have comprehended all
those Employments whereby Men get by one another, without making any Addition
to the Wealth of the Nation in general: Husbandry I have divided into Pasture
and Tillage, and have been the longer thereon to show from how small
Foundations the Primums or Principles of all our Trade are derived; which
indeed is wonderful, when we consider that the Lands of England according to
the Act of Four Shillings in the Pound cannot come to above Eight Millions Five
Hundred Thousand Pounds sterling per annum, that whole Tax with Personal
Estates amounting to Nineteen Hundred and Seventy Thousand Pounds, whereof I
compute about Two Hundred and Seventy Thousand Pounds to be raised on Personal
Estates, so the Remainer is Seventeen Hundred thousand Pounds, which being the
fifth part of the whole (if that Tax were equally and justly laid) the
Computation is rightly made; but suppose they are worth Thirteen Millions per
annum, it is a very small Sum if compared with the vast Expenses of this
Nation, which, with the Charges of carrying on the War, maintaining the Civil
List, and the Profits laid up by particular Men, cannot be less than One
Hundred Millions per annum, the rest is raised by Manufactures, Trade, and
Labor; the first of which (though the third in my Division) is the most
profitable part of our Inland Trade, being That whereby our Product is advanced
in its value, and made fit both for our own use, and also for Foreign Markets;
from whence are again Imported hither sundry other Materials, the Foundations
of Manufactures different in their Natures from our own; these I have handled
under several Heads, and likewise showed by what Methods they may be improved,
and so have closed the Inland Trade: Before I entered on the Outland, I have
considered Navigation as the Medium between both, and given my Thoughts how
some Evils that attend and discourage it may be removed; I have then proceeded
to our Foreign Traffic, or the Trade we drive with other Nations, which I have
spoken to under several Heads, viz. East Indies, West Indies and Africa,
Maderas, Ireland, Scotland, Canaries, Spain, Portugal, Turkey, Italy, Holland,
Hamburgh, Poland, Russia, Sweden, Denmark, Norway, and France, and have
endeavored to show how we get or lose by each, and by what Methods they may be
improved, and made more advantageous to this Kingdom.

As to the second part of this Discourse, the Poor, I have showed how this
Habit of Laziness and Begging first crept in amongst us, how it may be
prevented from spreading farther, how Employments may be provided for those who
are willing to work, and a force put on those that are able, and how the
Impotent Poor may be maintained, and those whose Labor will not support their
Charge assisted.

In the last place, I have proposed general Rules for raising of Taxes to carry
on the present War, and better Husbanding the Money when raised, wherein I have
rather aimed to show that these things may be done, than published Methods for
doing them, which (because they would swell this Discourse above it designed
Brevity) are omitted here, as being more proper to be laid before a Committee
of Parliament.

AN ESSAY ON TRADE, etc.
Trade in general.
THE general Notions of a National Trade whereby it may be Discovered whither a
Kingdom Gets or Looses by its Managment are things well worth our
Consideration. It being possible for a Nation to grow Poor in the Main whilst
private Persons increase their Fortunes: For as in the Body Natural, if you
draw out Blood faster then the Sangufying parts can suply, it must necessarily
wast and decay. So where the Exports of a Nation in Product and Manufactures
are outballanced by Imports fit only to be consumed at home, though one Man may
get by the Luxury of another; the Wealth of that Nation must decay, all one as
a private Person whose Expenses exceeds his Incomes, though he may for some
time live on the Main, yet in the end he must fall to ruin.

Its Original.
The Profits of England arise Originally from its Product and Manufactures at
home, and from the grouths of those several Plantations it has settled Abroad,
and from the Fish taken on the Coasts, all which being Raised by the Industry
of its Inhabitants are both its true Riches, and likewise the Tools whereon it
Trades to other Nations, the Products coming from the Earth, and the
Manufacturing them being an Addition to their value by the Labor of the
People. Now where we Barter these Abroad only for things to be Eat and Drank,
or wasted among our selves, this does not Increase our Wealth, but it is
otherwise where we change them for Bulloin, or Commodities fit to be
Mannufactured again.

The first Original of Trade both Domestic and Foreign was Barter; when one
private Person having an Overplus of what his Neighbor wanted, furnished him
for its Value in such Commodities the other had, and he stood in need of. The
same when one Nation abounding in those Products another wanted supplied it
therewith, and received thence things equally necessary in their Rooms, and by
how much those Products exceeded the Expense, so much both the one and the
other grew Richer, the remainder being sold for Bulloin, or some Staple
Commodities allowed by all to have the same Intrinsic Value. And as People
increased so did Commerce, this caused many to go off from Husbandry to
Manufactures and other ways of living, for Convenience whereof they began
Communities, this was the Original of Towns, which being found necessary for
Trade, their Inhabitants were increased by expectation of Profit; this
introduced Foreign Trade, or Traffic with Neighboring Nations; this
Navigation, and this a desire to settle rather on some Navigable Rivers, then
in remote Inland Places, whereby they might be more easily supplied with
Commodities from the Country, and disperse those they Imported from abroad.

The Trade of England.
I shall now take the Trade of England as it is divided into Domestic and
Foreign, and consider each, and how they are Advantageous to the Nation, and
may be made more so.

Inland Trade.
The Inland Trade of England consists either in Husbandry, Manufactures, or
Buying and Selling, Buying and Selling.
the last of which is of least Advantage to the Nation, and rather to be
allowed for Convenience then encouraged, whereby one Man lives on the Profits
he makes by another without any Improvement to the Public, Peoples Occasions
requiring Commodities to be Retailed to them by such small parcels as would fit
their Necessities, they were willing to give a profit to him who bought them in
greater. And as this way of Trade came more in use, so the first Buyer not only
sold his Commodities to the Consumer at home, but also dispersed them amongst
those who were seated in the Country at a distance in order to supply the
Inhabitants there, who allowed them a profit on what they bought; this begat
the Ingrosing of Commodities, and thence came in skill and cunning to foresee
their Rise and Falls according to their Consumption and prospect of supply;
hence came the vitiating our Manufactures, every one endeavoring to under buy
that he might under sell his Neighbor; which way of living being found in time
to have less of Labor and more of Profit than Husbandry and Manufactures, was
the occasion so many fell into it. From these Bargains Differences arising
increased another sort of People which were thought useful, whose business was
either by their Wisdoms to persuade, or by their Knowledge in the Laws to force
the unjust Person to do right to his fellow Trader, an Honorable employment at
first, and is still so in those who keep to the strict Rules of its
Institution, which Differencies being to be Decided in the Courts of Justice
(at first settled in Westminster Hall, and afterward for the Subjects ease
carried into the Country by Itinerent Judges) these Orators were desired by the
Complainants to present their Suites to the King in those Courts, to be heard
and determined by his Judges, and to set forth the Case of the Plantiff, and
Produce Evidence to prove the Truth thereof against the Defendant, who also
appeared by another to make his Defense. But as Suites increased, it was
thought necessary to confine all to one Method of Proceeding, which was called
The Prastice of the Court, therefore another sort of People called Attorneys
were appointed to observe that Mechanical part of the Law, and see that all was
Regularly and Formally managed; hence arose Sollicitors, who were to attend
both, as well to represent the Matter rightly to the Orator or Council, as to
see the Attorney fit things for a hearing, and also to Reward them for their
pains, so that this Produced another way of living separate from Husbandry and
Manufactures: And as Trade increased so Courts of Justice were Appointed in
several great Towns and Cities, which being of different Natures, Multitudes of
People gave Attendance, expecting to get livelihoods by them.

Trade brought Riches, and Riches Luxury, Luxury Sickness, Sickness wanted
Physic, and Physic required some to separate themselves to Study the Natures
of Plants and Simples, as also those several Diseases which bring Men to their
ends, who in requital for their Advise and Medicines received Gratuities from
their Patients: These brought in Apothecaries and Surgeons as necessary
Attendants to their Employments, all which were maintained by preserving People
in their Healths; many also of ripe Parts were fitted for the Service of the
Church, others of the State; great numbers were Employed in providing
Necessaries of Meat Drink and Apparel both for themselves and other People,
such as Butchers, Bakers, Brewers, Tailors, etc. Others to fit things for their
Pleasures and Delights, and by this means leaving Husbandry and Manufactures
flockt off daily to Livelihoods which may seem to come under the third Head,
who though useful and convenient in their respective Stations, yet these Men
cannot be said to Augment the Riches of the Nation, only live by getting from
one another, those two being the profitable Employments out of whose Product
and Improvement it gathers its Wealth.

Husbandry.
The next part of the Inland Trade of this Kingdom is Husbandry, which
Anteceded Buying and Selling in point of time, though the other has the
Precedence in this Discourse, and this consists either in Feeding or Tillage,
by both which we raise great Store of Cattle, Corn, and Fruits, fit for the
Food, Service, and Trade of the Inhabitants.

Feeding*
To begin with Feeding; and here it would be endless to enumerate the various
sorts of Cattle raised and bred by the care of the Husbandman, but those of
most Note as they have relation to our Trade, are

I. The Beef; which as it Transcends the whole World in the goodness of its
Flesh, so it affords many Necessaries for our use and Trade, besides its
Service in Tillage* with this we both nourish our Inhabitants at home, Victual
our Ships for Foreign Voyages, and load them with the several Manufactures
wherewith it does supply us, from the Milk we make Butter and Cheese, from the
Flesh Beef, from the Skin Leather, from the Fat Tallow, and of the Horns
several useful Necessaries, of all which the overplus above our home
Consumption we Transport and sell in Foreign Markets.

II. The Sheep; whose Golden Fleece being the Primum of our Woollen Manufactures
does thereby Employ Multitudes of our People, which being of different lengths
and finenesses, makes them of different sorts, whereof they afford us a yearly
Crop whilst living, and at their Deaths Bequeath us their Flesh and Skins, the
first serves for our Food, and the latter we make fit to be used at home, and
Traded with Abroad.

III. Horses; whose Labor is so necessary that we could neither carry on our
Husbandry or Trade without them, besides their fitness for War, being the
boldest in the World, and for all these uses are Transported abroad, for the
former to our Plantations in the West Indies, for the latter to some of our
Neighboring Nations; but their Flesh is of no use, their Skins of little, the
Leather made thereof is very ordinary, only the longest of their Hair is used
in Weaving.

There are many other sorts of Beasts, some whereof require no care in raising,
others little, others are more tender, such are the Stag, the Dear, the Rabbit,
the Hare, the Fox, the Badger, the Goat, whose Skins are necessary for our
Trade, and assist in our Manufactures.

Tillage.
Agriculture is that whereby we raise our Corn by turning up the Earth, the
several sorts whereof are Wheat, Rye, Barley, Pease, Beans, Fetches, Oats, which
not only afford nourishment to our selves and the Beasts we use in labor, but
serve for Trade, as they give Employment to our People at home, and are
Transported abroad more or less according to the overplus of onr expense, and
the want of our Neighbors, besides the great Quantities used in our Navigation.

These Products of both sorts are clear profit to the Nation as they are raised
from Earth and Labor, whose Advantages arise chiefly from their being Exported
either in their own kind or when Manufactered, the Remainder spent at Home
tending only to supplying the use, not advancing the Wealth of the Nation; now
these Exports being according to the Rates and Prizes they bear in other
Countries, and those Rates arising from the Proportion their Lands hold with
ours in their Yearly Rents, are not so great in specie as when workt up, Butter
is the greatest, wherewith we supply many Foreign Markets, and did formerly
more, till by making it bad and using Tricks to increase its weight, we have
much lost that Trade, and are now almost beat out of it by Ireland, which every
day makes better as we make worse, besides they undersell us in the Price, as
they do also in Beef, occasioned by the low Rents of their Lands, and more
especially by the Act of Prohibition, which put that Nation on finding out a
Trade in Foreign Markets for what they were denied to bring hither, which
being Exported thence direct yields them greater profit, the sweetness whereof
has encouraged them to take more care, and this has raised them from a
Sloathful to be an Industrious People. As for Corn, Foreign Markets are
supplied therewith both from thence and other places in the Sound, also from
the Western Islands, cheaper then the price of our Lands will admit. But our
Plantations have still some Dependence on us for our Product, and would more if
that Act was removed, and Ireland made a Colony on the same Terms with them.

The other Fruits of the Earth, as Apples, Pears, Cherries, Plumbs, together
with the Herbs and Plants, also the Fowls and Fish taken in this Land, serve
rather for our Delight and Food than Trade. Some Cider we do Export, also
Spirits raised by the Distiller both from some of these, and also from many
other things.

Fish.
On the Sea Coasts we catch great Quantities of Herrings and Pilchards, which
we save, and sell in Foreign Markets.

Minerals.
Nor is this all the Product of our Earth, whose Womb being big with Treasure
longs to be Delivered, and after many Throws brings forth Lead, Tin, Copper,
Calamy, Coal, Culm, Iron, Allom, Copperas, and sundry other Minerals, which
return us great Treasure from Foreign Markets whither they are Exported;
besides the several Shrubs and Trees that adorn our Fields, among which the
Oak, the Ash, and the Elm, are the chiefest, these not only serve in Building
our Sips, but do also furnish us with Materials wherewith our Arificers make
many things fit for Forregn Commerce, and it were much to be wished better care
were taken for preserving Timber, lest out Posterities want what we so
Prodigally squander away.

Manufactures.
The next thing is our Manufactures, whereby we Improve the value of our
Products by the Labor of our Inhabitants, and make them useful in sundry
manners both for our selves and others, fitting them for such Services as of
their own Natures without the help of Art they would not have been proper, and
those to suit the Necessities and Humors both of our own and Foreign Countries
to which we Export them, where they yield a price not only according to the
true value of the Materials and Labor, but an overplus likewise suitable to
the Necessity and Fancy of the Buyer, and this adds to the profit of the
Nation, and increases its Wealth.

These Manufactures as they Employ Multitudes of People in their making, so
also in Transporting them, and fetching several Foreign Materials used with
our own, such as Oil, Dye-stuffe, Silk, Wool, Cotton, Barrilia, and many
others, which are either Manufactured here of themselves, or wrought up with
our Product.

Sheeps Wool.
And first to begin with Sheeps Wool, whereof either by it self or mixed with
Silk or Linen we make various sorts of pretty things fit for all Climates, and
proper for the wearing of both Sexes, wherein the Invention and Imitation of
our Workmen is so great that they have no Idea represented or Pattern set
before them that is not soon out done* from a strong heavy Cloth fit to keep
out cold in Winter they turn their Hands to a fine thin sort which will scarce
keep warm in Summer, Ladies may now wear Gowns thereof so light that they can
hardly know they have them on; from hence they fell on Perpets, Serges, Crapes,
Stuffs, Says, Rattoons, Gauzes, Anthrines, and many other sorts fit both for
outward Garments and inward Linings, of various Colors Stripes and Flowers,
some of them so fine and pleasant scarce to be known from Silk; besides those
multitudes of courser Clothes for the Poor, also Rugs, Blankets, and all
Furniture for Houses, and such a Progress have they made in this sort of
Manufactures, that a Man may have his Picture wrought in Tapestry with the same
exactness both for Life and Colors as if drawn with a curious Pencil; for this
I refer the Reader to those Hangings at the Custom-House in London, where he
may see the several Officers so lively represented in their Stations, that want
of Motion seems to be the only thing which differs them from their Originals;
One Workman endeavoring to exceed another they make things to answer all the
ends of Silks, Calicoes, and Linen, of bare Sheeps Wool, which if they were by
Fashion brought into wearing would then be thought as handsome; fine Flannel for
Shirts; white Crape for Neckclothes, Cuffs, and Head-Dresses; besides the
pretty Laces, whereof we see various sorts used about the Dead; and Caduce of
several Colors in imitation of Ribbons; also Hats, Stockings, and many such
things are made of Wool and other Mixtures, both worn at home and Exported
abroad

Cotton Wool.
The next Material for our Manufactures is Cotton-Wool, which is now become a
great Employment for the Poor, and so adds to the Wealth of the Nation; this
being curiously picked and spun makes Dimities, Tapes, Stockings, Gloves,
besides several things wove fit for use, as Petticoats, wastcoats, and Drawers,
of different Fancies and Stripes, and I doubt not our Workmen would exceed the
East Indies for Calicoes had they Incouragment; with all which we supply
Foreign Markets besides the Consumption at home.

Hemp and Flax.
Hemp and Flax are the Grounds for another Manufacture, for though Weaving of
Linen is not so much used here as of Woollen, yet several Counties are
maintained thereby, who not only supply themselves, but furnish those Bordering
on them with such Cloth as answers the ends of French Linnens, besides which
great Quantities of Ticking of all finenesses, Incle, Tapes, Sacking, Girtwhip,
are daily made thereof, also Cordage, Twine, Nets, with multitudes of other
Manufactures which Employ the Poor, and bring by their Exports Profit to the
Nation.

Glass.
Glass is a Manufacture, lately fallen on here, and in a short time brought to
a great Perfection, which keeps many at work, the Materials whereof its made
being generally our own and in themselves of small value costs the Nation
little in Comparison of what it formerly did when fetched from Venice* those
noble Plate Glases of all sizes both for Coaches and Houses are things of great
Ornament, and much used, which also show forth the Genius of the English
People; and for common uses what various sorts of Utensils are made of Flint
fit for all the occasions of a Family, which look as well as Silver, and
'twould be better for the Nation they were more used in its stead; besides the
ordinary Glass for Windows, and also Glass Bottles; all which find a greater
expense both at home and abroad by their cheapness.

Earthen Wares.
And as for Earthen Ware, though the Progress we have made therein is not
suitable to the other, yet it has been such as may give us cause to hope that
time and Industry will bring it to a perfection equal if not to exceed the
Dutch.

Silk.
Silk is another Material for a great Manufacture, which being brought from
abroad Raw we here twist, dye, and weave into different goodness, both plain,
stripped, and flowered, either by it self, or mixed with Gold and Silver, so
richly brocadoed that we exceed those from whom at first we had the Art;
besides great Quantities of Ribbons, Silk Stockings, and other things daily
made not only to serve our selves but also to Export.

Distilling.
Distilling is an Art so exceedingly Improved in a few Years that had it not
met with Discouraging Laws 'twould by this time have attained to a great
height; this brings great profit to the Nation, for next to that of making
something out of nothing is the making something of what is worth nothing,
therefore this Art ought to have been Handled very chearily, to have been
trained up with a great deal of gentleness, and not laden with Taxes in its
Infancy, like the Hen in the Fable, we had not Patience to expect its Treasure
as Time and Nature could produce it, but by our Avarice were like to discourage
it in the beginning, however it has still bore up under all the weight laid
upon it. 'Twas a great mistake to appoint Measures by Act of Parliament to the
Distillers in their workings, Men's knowledge increases by Observation, and this
is the reason why one Age exceeds another in any sort of Mystery, because they
improve the Notions of their Predecessors, therefore confining Distilling only
to Corn was an Error, it is true other things were allowed to be used, but on
such Terms and Restrictions as were next to a Prohibition, had the makers of
that Law then Prohibited Coffee and Tea to be drank in Public Houses it might
more probably have answered their ends in advancing the price of Barley by a
greater consumption of Ale, and by degrees the Distillers would have fallen on
that Commodity themselves, using it with other mixtures, and thereby drawing
from it a cleaner Spirit then it does afford of it self, which they might in
time have Rectified to such a fineness as to have increased very much its use.
No Nation can give more encouragement to the Mystery of Distilling then
England, whose Plantations being many and well Peopled where those Spirits are
so necessary and useful for the Inhabitants, and these depending wholly on us
for all things, might have been supplied with them hence only, besides the
great Quantities used in our Navigation, therefore a total Prohibition of their
Importation from other Nations (who make them generally of such things which
are else of little value) would be very convenient: We have many Materials of
our own Product to work on, such as are Melasses, Cider, Perry, Barley, etc. all
which in time they would have used, for as the Distillers found their sales
increased they would have made new Essays: It was a great discouragement both
to them, and also to the Sugar Bakers and Brewers, to hinder Distilling on
Mellasses, Scum, Tilts, and Wash, a fault the Dutch nor no Trading Nation
besides our selves would have been guilty of, and proceeded from ill Advice
given that Parliament by those who under pretense of advancing Corn designed to
discourage Distilling, only took it by that handle they thought would be best
received in the House, which being generally made up of Gentlemen unskilful in
Trade looked no deeper into it than as it answered that plausible pretense;
whereas were Trading Cities and Towns more careful in choosing Men well Verst in
Trade (...) 'twould be much better for the Nation: I cannot omit what a worthy
Member of the House once told me in private Discourse, says he, I have always
observed that when we have meddled with Trade we have left it worse than we
found it, which proceeds from want of more Traders in the House, the places we
depend on for them sending such Members as are able to give us but little
Information, (...) so partial that we can take no true measures of them; The
truth is great Cities are to blame in this, who ought to think none so fit to
represent them in Parliament as those who have their Heads filled with good
Notions of Trade, such who can speak well to it, and be heard when they speak;
Trade and Land go Hand in Hand as to their Interest, if one flourish, so will
the other, encourage Distilling, and it will spend Hundreds of things now
thrown away.

Sugar-baking.
Refining of Sugars has given Employment to our People, and added to their
value in Foreign Parts, where we found great Sales, till the Dutch and French
beat us out, and this was much to be attributed to the Duty of Two Shillings
and Four Pence per Cent lately laid on Muscovado Sugars, whereby they were
wrought up abroad above Twelve per Cent cheaper than at home, and though that
Law is now expired, yet it is harder to regain a Trade when lost, than keep it
when we have it.

Tobacco.
Tobacco also has employed our Poor by Cutting and Rolling it, both for a home
Consumption, and also for Exportation, the latter we decay in every Year, but
Methods may be offered in Parliament to render those two Manufactures of Sugar
and Tobacco more advantageous to the Nation than ever hitherto they have been.

Tanning.
Tanning of Leather is an Employment which ought to be encouraged, as it
furnishes us with a Commodity fit to be manufactured at home, and also to be
transported into Foreign Countries; I know the Exportation of Leather has been
much opposed by the Shooe-makers and others who cut it at home, and represented
as attended with ill Consequences, one whereof is the making it dear here, but
would it not be of much worse to confine and limit that Employment to an Inland
Expense, on the other side would it not naturally follow that when Leather
rises to a great Price the Exportation must cease because Ireland would
under-sell us, and would it not seem an unreasonable Discouragement to Trade if
Tobacco, Sugar, and Woollen Manufactures were debarred from Exportation only
because they should be sold cheaper here; for suppose the occasions of the
Nation could not consume all the Leather that is made, to what a low price must
Hides be reduced, for no other reason but that the Shooemakers may get more by
their Shoes? It Is true, if they could make out that those Countries must then
have their Shoes from us who now have their Leather, I should be of their
Minds, but it must needs have a quite contrary effect, especially whilst
Ireland is able to supply them: This proceeds from a very narrow Spirit, and
such as ought not to be encouraged in a Trading Nation; Ireland has already
made great Progress in this Mystery, occasioned by our Imprudence, and should
we give Encouragement to other Countries we might too late repent it. A good
Export for Leather would cause a great Import of Raw Hides, which would be more
Advantage to the Nation than if they were tanned in Ireland, and sent abroad
thence.

Iron.
Nor can I omit Iron, which is the great foundation of sundry Manufactures, not
only used at home, but wherewith we supply our Plantations and other Places
abroad, as Howes, Bills, Axes, Cases, Locks, Nails, and a thousand such
Necessaries, the Workmanship whereof adds much to their Value.

Clockwork.
There are many other things which may be and are daily improved amongst us; as
Clockwork, wherein we sell nothing but Art and Labor, the Materials thereof
being of small value; I have seen Watches and Clocks of great Prizes made for
the Courts of Foreign Princes.

Paper-Mills.
Paper-Mills are a Benefit to the Nation, as they make that Commodity from
things of themselves worth little; so are are Powder-Mills; Powder-Mills.
also Artificers, Artificers.
who bring advantage to the Nation by supplying it with things which must
otherwise be had from abroad for its own use, as also with others proper to be
sent thither for Sales, and when Exported are more or less profitable as the
labor of the Subject adds to their value; In like manner things are cheaper to
us when we pay only for the first Materials whereof they are made, the rest
being work done at home is divided amongst our selves, so that on the whole it
appears to be the great Interest of England to advance its Manufactures,
Methods to improve our Manufactures.
and this I humbly conceive may be do^e these several ways.

By employing the Poor.
1. By providing Workhouses for the Poor, and making good Laws both to force
and encourage them to work; but designing to speak larger to this before I
close this Tract shall referr the Reader to it.

By freeing the Manufactures from Customs.
2. By discharging all Customs payable on them at their Exportation, and also
on the Materials used in making them at their Importation; for as the one would
encourage the Merchant to send more abroad, so the other would enable the
Manufacturers to afford them cheaper at home, and it is strange that a Nation
whose Wealth depends on Manufactures, and whose Interest it is to outdo all
others (especially in the Woollen) by underselling them in Foreign Markets,
should load either with Taxes.

Logwood.
Here I cannot but mention that of Logwood, a Commodity much used in Dying,
which pays Five Pounds per Tun Custom in, and draws back Three Pounds Fifteen
Shillings when shipped out, by which means the Dyers in Holland use it so much
cheaper than ours; now if it was Imported Custom Free, and paid Twenty five
Shillings per Tun at its Export, the Dyers there would use it so much dearer
than ours here, dying and dressing (...) Woollen Manufactures at home.
and I think it would be well worth Inquiry, whither a Prohibition either total
or in part of Shipping out our Manufactures thither and to the Northern
Kingdoms undyed or undrest might not be made, I am sure it would be of great
Advantage to this Kingdom if it might be done without running into greater
Inconveniences, which for my part I do not foresee, the Dutch discourage their
being brought in dyed or dressed, that they may thereby give Employments to their
own People, and increase their Navigation by the consumption of great
quantities of Dye-stuff, and the same reasons should prevail with us to dye and
dress them here, But this deserves the consideration of a Committee of
Parliament to hear what may be said both for and against it.

3. By not importing things manufactur'd.
By discouraging the Importation of Commodities already manufactured either from
our own Plantations or other Places, such as clay'd and refined Sugars, wrought
Silks, Calicoes, Brandy, Glass, Earthen Ware, Irish Frizes, Tanned Leather,
Gloves, Lace, etc. and instead thereof we should encourage bringing in the
Materials whereof they are made, to be wrought up here; this may be done by
Laws, and also by being in love with our Home Manufactures, and bringing their
Wearing into Fashion.

By freeing the Manufactures from Excises.
4. By freeing the Manufactures from burdensome Excises, which do much
discourage small Stocks, who are not able to carry on their Trades and make
Provision for such great Payments; the Distillers have long groaned under them,
and I fear the Glass-makers now will, especially those in and about London, who
have another load by the Duty of Coals, besides the Swarms of Officers to which
we lay open the Houses of those Men who deserve all the Encouragement we can
give them, and ought to have things made as easy to them as may be; had the
like Methods been used to our Woollen and Leather (as was intended) we might
have repented it at Leisure; Taxes when laid on our Manufactures ought to be
raised by such easy Methods as shall give least trouble to the Makers: Trade
ought to be handled gently, and he that considers the Expenses of this Nation
at Five Pounds per Head comes to Forty Millions, and the Lands of England but
to Twelve, will imagine easy Methods may be found out to raise a greater Tax
annually then we pay, without loading either Land or Trade as now we do, a
Scheme whereof may be easily drawn up.

5. By not exporting Materials till Manufactured.
By prohibiting as much as may be the Exportation of things to the Plantations
fit to be manufactured there till they are first done here, thus 'tvvas better
Shoes were Transported to the Plantations than Leather, so things made of
Iron, than Iron it self, this would employ our People, and add to the value of
what we ship out.

6. By securing (...) Foreign Trade.
By defending the Merchants in their Trades who export the Manufactures, and
making it as easy to them as may be; To this end good Conveys should be
allowed, and good Cruisers maintained to preserve their Ships, it being certain
that whatever is diminish^d out of the Merchants Stock does so far disable him
in Trade, and then consequently lessen his Exports and Imports; Courts of
Merchants
Courts of Merchants should be also erected for the speedy deciding all
differences relating to Sea Affairs, which are better ended by those who
understand them, than they are in Westminster Hall, where all things are tried
by the Nice Rules of Law, to whom after much Attendance and Expense they are
often referred by the Judges, by this means they would see short ends to their
differences, and not be detained at home to attend long Issues; but there can
be no general Rules given for these Courts, which must be settled according as
they best suit the convenience of every Trading City.

I am of opinion that the Trade of this Kingdom might be secured with no
greater Expense to the Government than now it is at, but then better Methods
must be taken, and Men employed whose Interests it is to see them put in
Execution: When we first began this War the Nation had many Difficulties to
cope with, the French seemed to vye with us at Sea, whilst their Armies
out-number'd ours at Land, but now blessed be God the Scale is turned, we force
their Garrisons and storm their Castles whilst they look on unable to relieve,
and at the same time our Navy-Royal blocks up theirs, whilst our smaller Fleets
Bombard their Seaport Towns, we not only ride Admirals in the British Seas but
also in the Mediterranean, and yet do now suffer more Loss in our Navigation
than formerly we did; The French are come to a new way of fighting, they set
out no Fleet, but their Privateers swarm and cover the Sea like Locusts, they
hang on our Trade like Horse-Leeches, and draw from it more Blood than it is
well able to spare, whilst we still go on as we did, without new Methods to
countermine them; The French King breeds up a Nursery of Seamen at our Charge,
whilst his Subjects are made Rich by our Losses; the Act for Cruisers was well
designed had it been as well put in Execution, the Parliament thereby showed
what might secure our Trade, but left things so discretionary to the Managers,
that the Merchant knows not when he receives the Benefit thereof, or how to
complain if he does not, and by this means is in a worse Condition than he was
before the making that Law, adventuring larger because he thinks he Trades
securer; I confess for my own part I value nothing that cannot be reduced to a
certainty in its practice, things seem difficult to those who do not understand
them, if we are to Besiege a Town we make use of Soldiers, if to storm a
Castle, Engineers, if to build a Ship, Carpenters, and so in lesser things, and
yet Gentlemen are thought fit to sit at Helm, and steer the Ship wherein is
Embarked the Treasure of our Trade, who are altogether unskilled therein, on
whose good Conduct the Nation's Weal or Woe depends; Thus things do fall into
Confusion, whilst Men undertake what they do not understand and set the Nation
in a flame, whilst they injudiciously guide the Chariot of the Sun; This makes
Foreign Commodities dear, and advances the Prizes of Materials used in our
Manufactures, so that as Trade grows worse Expenses grow greater, and at the
same time no Body is a Gainer, The Merchant pays such high Fraights and
Insurances, that he gets little by Trade though he sells his Imports for great
Prizes; and yet the Insurers complain they lose by underwriting, and therefore
advance their Premios, which is a new advance on Trade; and the Owners of Ships
get nothing by their Fraights, because they pay great Wages to the Saylors, and
meet with such Delays both at home and abroad that the length of time eats up
all their Profi^s, so that Fraights must rather rise than fall; nor do the
Saylors get, who generally brought home more Money to their Families in the
time of Peace at three Years end when they served for Twenty-four Shillings per
Month than they now do at Fifty, one lost Voyage bringing them more behind-hand
than two good ones put them forward; Now if Heads well verst in Trade were set
at work, Methods might be thought on to secure all with little Charge to the
Government, and hereby the Kingdom might flourish, and be supplied by the
Merchant with Commodities cheaper, whilst the Insurers underwrote for less
Premio, Fraights let on lower terms, the Wages of Mariners fallen, and All got
more than now they do; our Numbers of Seamen might then be increased, and every
Ship that goes abroad be a Nursery for the Fleet at home; Privateering, which
is now become a Trade amongst the French, must then necessarily sink all
concerned therein, its own Weight and Charge would crush it did we prevent
their taking Prizes; and no doubt the Merchants of England would not oppose
such Regulations in their Trades as they saw were to their Advantage, or refuse
to be at some Charge when they saw those Payments saved Money in their Pockets,
and that the management of things was put into the Hands of Persons engaged in
the common Interest of Trade with themselves: This seems to me of great
Importance in our Manufactures, when the foreign Materials shall be furnished
cheaper to the Maker; besides if Trade were well secured the War would scarce
be felt, Losses by Sea discourage the City, and the ill Consequences thereof
reach the Country, whereby both suffer more than by all the Taxes they pay
toward carrying it on.

7. By lowering the Interest of Money.
By falling the Interest of Money; this would very much quicken Trade, and
indeed is the true Measure of it, the Merchant would be better able to cope
with Competitors abroad in the Manufactures when his Interest did not eat so
deep as now it does, and the Maker would be enabled to sell them cheaper at
Home; if Interest were fallen 'twould make all Trades flourish, for whilst we
stand not on the same Terms with our Neighbors herein we must expect to be
undersold every where by them; the Dutch pay but Three per Cent, and are
thereby enabled to Trade so much lower than we can; the truth is it is a shame
Money should yield more by being put to Interest than 'twould do if laid out
either in Land or Trade; the first does not clear Four per Cent, the latter
will not bring the Borrower Five for all his Pains and Industry when the Userer
is paid, whilst the other runs little Risque, and is a Drone in the
Commonwealth; as for Orphans and Widows, (which is the main Objection against
it) let their Expenses be lessened suitable to its Fall, and for all other
People, let them employ their Money in Trade if they think 'twill yield more;
And here I judge it not amiss to mention Banks and Lumbards, Banks and Lombards
which I take to be so many Shops to let out Money, for which they receive such
Security, and for such time, as stands most for the convenience of Trade, and
therefore the more the better, because every one will endeavor to underdo
another.

8. By Rectifying the Current Coin.
By rectifying the Current Coin of this Kingdom, which is now so debased that
Men rather truck than sell for Money, not knowing whither the next Man they
deal with will take what they just before received for their Goods; this makes
Payments precarious, and Trade uneasy, money rising and falling on Men's Hands
daily, so that now nothing is more uncertain than that which should be the Rule
of certainty in the value of all other things.

I do not think it convenient to advance our Coin, but let Bullion be of the
same value when coined as it was before, else we have not the true worth of the
Commodity we sell for it, but are deceived by the Stamp, which may be
counterfeited by the Dutch and other Nations for the profit of the Overplus,
besides it will seem ridiculous for a Man to give Twenty Shillings worth of
Silver for Eighteen Shillings of the same specie, only because it is medall'd;
this will necessarily be followed by the advance of Silver suitable, the
consequence whereof will be the selling our Manufactures abroad cheaper, as we
receive less Bullion for them, and the whole Profit redound to the King of
Spain, whose Indies by the advance of his Bullion will be worth more than they
were before; nor will this hinder its being carried abroad, perhaps it may keep
our Coin at home* but not our Silver, which will be still carried out in
Specie; not that I am of their Opinions who think the advance of Money would
raise the price of Foreign Commodities among us, our own Experience shows it
will not, we buy and sell as much for Twenty Shillings in Farthings as for so
much Silver Coin; nor will their comparison with the Portugal Trade hold here,
for when that King advanced the value both of Pieces of Eights, and also of his
own Coin, the Importer was obliged to advance the Price of his Goods, because
Silver was the Specie wherein he was to make Returns, which he received not as
it was worth in Coin but in value by the Ounce, whereas had he laid it out in
Commodities the Case had been otherwise, I make a great difference between
Money as it is the Medium of Trade, and as it is the Commodity we make returns
in; there are better Reasons than this why Coin should be kept up to its true
value.

And for the more easy calling it in when the Parliament shall see fit, I
think 'twere best to cry down all clipped Money at once, only to be received for
six Months by the King in his Taxes, who may send it into the Mint, and if the
Computation be allowed that we have about six Millions of Coined Silver Money
in the Kingdom, suppose four of it to be clipped, the Taxes of Customs, Excise,
Aids, etc. which we pay in six Months will require near that Sum; and if there
remain Two Millions unclipt, it will serve the ordinary Expense till so much
new Money can come abroad, at the end of which time let all the rest be called
in by the same Method; This will bring forth the Broad Money, which is now
hoarded up, and during this Scarcity both the King's occasions and those of
Trade will be very much answered by Gold and Bank Notes; and for better
preserving our new-coined Money, let none for the future exceed Shillings, or
at most Half Crowns, and those be made broad and thin, with the Ring on the
Extent of the Circumference, which will prevent both Clipping and Drilling, and
if the Stamp be not deep 'twill prevent casting.

As for the Iron and Counterfeit-Money, (which is supposed to be about a
Million) it must be lost to those who have it; and I suppose a Tax of about
Fifteen Hundred Thousand Pounds will make good the other.

9. By discouraging Stockjobbing.
By discouraging Stockjobbing; This has been the Bane of many good
Manufacturies, which began well, and might have been carried on to Advantage if
the Promoters had not fallen off to selling Parts, and slighted the first
Design, winding themselves out at Advantage, and leaving the Management to
those they decoyed in, who understood nothing of the thing, whereby all fell to
the Ground; This may be prevented (I mean so far as concerns Corporations) by
Laws framed for that end, or by Clauses in their Charters.

10. By taking away Privileged Places.
By taking away all Privileged Places, and making it easier for Creditors to
recover of their Debtors; Men now betake themselves to Sanctuary, and spend
what they have at defiance with those to whom they owe it; on the other side if
Laws were made for the more equal Distribution of the Estates of those who fall
to decay, with a Reserve of some part thereof to themselves on a fair
Discovery, and a force on the minor part of the Credits to agree with what
Composition should be made by the major, so many People would not then be
necessitated to such Methods, or be ruined by lying in Goals, as now there are,
but be enabled to put themselves again into ways for a future Maintenance;
Misfortunes may and often do befall industrious Men, whose Trades have been very
beneficial to the Nation, and to such a due Regard ought to be had; but for
those who design under the shelter of a Protection or Privilege to spend all
they have, and thereby cheat their Creditors, no Law can be too severe.

11. By preventing Exportation of Wool.
By strengthening the Laws against Exportation of Wool by such practicable
Methods as may prevent its being done; and such may be thought on; for when a
Nation's Interest does so much depend thereon, no Care can be too great, or
Methods laid too deep; Laws concerning Trade whose sole Strength are Penalties
(and especially such as end in Death) rarely reach the thing aimed at; but
practicable Methods, whereby one thing answers another, and all conspire to
carry on the same Design, hanging like so many Links in a Chain, that you
cannot reach the one without stepping over the other, these are more likely to
prevent Mischiefs; Its one thing to punish People when a Fact is done, and
another to prevent the doing it by putting them as it were under an
impossibility; now where the Welfare of the Kingdom lies so much at Stake,
certainly it cannot be thought grievous to compel a submission to good Methods,
though they may seem troublesome at first.

Thus there have been severe Laws made against carrying the Plantation
Commodities directly thence to Foreign Markets, and stealing the Customs when
brought home, and what effect these have had we all know, thousands of
Hogsheads of Tobacco being yearly Shipped to Spain, Scotland, and Ireland, both
from New England, and other Places; whereas Sound and Practicable Methods may
and are ready to be laid down to prevent both, with few Officers, and fewer
Penalties.

(...).
And that we may better see the Mischiefs which attend the carrying abroad our
Wool unwrought to other Nations, let us consider the Consequences thereof in
what is Shipped to France, whose Wool being very course of its self, and fit
only for Ruggs and ordinary Cloth, is by mixture with ours and Irish used in
the making of many sorts of pretty Stuffs and Druggats, whereby the Sales of
our Woollen Manufactures are lessened both there and in other places whither we
export them, and by this means every Pack of Wool sent thither works up two
besides it self, being chiefly combed and combing Wool, which makes Woofe for
the French Wool, and the Pinions thereof serve with their Linen to make course
Druggats like our Linsey-Woolsey, but the Linen being spun fine and colored
is not easily discerned, also the finest short English Wool being mixed with
the lowest Spanish makes a middling sort of Broad Cloth, and being woven on
Worsted Chains makes their best Druggats, neither of which could be done with
the French Wool only, unless in Conjunction with ours or Irish, Spanish Wool is
too fine and too short for Worsted Stuffs, and unfit for Combing, so that
without one of those two sorts there cannot be a piece of fine Worsted Stuff or
middle Broad Cloth made, no other Wool but English or Irish will mix well with
Spanish for Cloth, being originally of the same kind, raised from a Stock of
English Sheep, the difference in fineness coming from the nature of the Land
whereon they feed; of this we have Examples in our own Nation, where we find
that Lemster Wool is the finest, next, part of Shropshire and Staffordshire,
part of Gloucestershire, Wilts, Dorset, and Hampshire, part of Sussex, and part
of Kent, Somerset, Devon, and Cornwall, these are most proper for Cloth, some
small part for Worsted; Sussex, Surry, Middlesex, Hartfordshire, and some other
Counties produce Wool much courser and cheaper; But then Barkshire, Buckingham,
Warwick, Oxon, Leicester, Notiingham, Northampton, Lincoln, and part of Kent
called Rumny-Marsh, the Wool in most of these Connties is so proper for
Worsled, that all the World except Ireland cannot compare with it, therefore
requires our greater Care to prevent its Exportation, and more especially from
Ireland, whence it is often Exported to our Neighboring Nations, and sold as
cheap as in England.

By making Bonds and Bills assignable.
12. By making Bonds and Bills assignable, and being Assigned and Transferred
from one to another, the Assignee to be capable in his own Name to Prosecute
the Debtor whose Bond or Bill it is, without using the Name of the Assignor, or
any Letter of Attorney from him to require or recover the same; by this means
young Men of small Stocks and Credits may on sale of their Goods and taking
Bills for Payment return to Market again, and purchase with those Bills such
Commodities as they want to carry on their Trades; this also will produce a
great Punctuality amongst Traders, for all Men to keep up the Reputation of
their Bills will endeavor to be exact in their Payments, that so they may be
current, and freely accepted in Commerce, every One's Credit will then be
esteemed according as he is punctual in the payment of his Bills; Besides, this
Punctuality will produce another good effect, those Bills will be bought up by
mony'd Men for the Advantage of their discount, and it will by degrees lessen
the Extortion of Usurers.

13. By confining to a method in Trade.
By prohibiting Persons from following several Trades at once, viz. The Merchant
from being a Shopkeeper or Retailer, and the Shopkeeper from being a Merchant
or Adventurer at the same time; hereby each Trade would be better managed, and
with more Advantage to both, for whilst the Merchant employs his Stock abroad
in Exporting the Commodities of the Kingdom, and supplying it with others, the
Retailer would keep his at home, ready to buy up those Imports, and disperse
them into the Country, and both would go on unanimously in their Trades,
because neither would interfere in the others Business.

14. By managing Treaties of Peace to the Advantage of Trade.
By taking Care that in all Treaties of Peace and other Negotiations with
Foreign Princes a due Regard be had to our Trade and Manufactures; that our
Merchants be respected, and not affronted by the Governments among whom they
reside; that all things be made easy to them, and both their Liberties and
Properties secured; that our Manufactures be not prohibited, or burdened with
unreasonable Taxes, which is the same in effect; that speedy Justice be done in
recovering Debts contracted amongst the Natives, and punishing Abuses put on
our Factories by them; These are pressures our Trade has long groaned under,
whereby the Merchants abroad and Manufacturers at home have been much
discouraged, and the English Nation has been forced to truckle under the
French in Foreign Parts (especially in Portugal, and the Islands belonging to
it only because that King sooner resented Injuries done to his Traders, and
took more Care to demand Reparation, than our last Reigns have done; but
blessed be God we have now both Power and Opportunity to do the same, and there
is no cause to doubt His Majesty's Royal Inclinations to make use of both for
the Good of his Merchants when things are duly represented to him.

Liberty of Conscience.
I should in the last place have added Liberty of Conscience, but that being
already settled by Law I need not mention it, only this, that it were to be
wished some way might be found out to make Methods of Trade more easy to the
Quakers than now they are; The Quakers in respect to Oaths.
I am apt to think that he who appears in the Face of a Court to give Evidence
on his word if he be a Man of Couscience looks on himself equally obliged to
speak the Truth as if he was sworn, and nothing will deter a dishonest Man like
she fear of punishment.

The Importation of Materials to be manufactured will encourage Trade.
Nor will the prohibiting things already manufactured be any way a hindrance to
Foreign Trade, but rather an Encouragement; more Ships will be fraighted, and
more Saylors employed by the Importation of Materials, besides the great
Advantage to the Nation in the balance of its Trade, which must then be
returned in Bullion by so much more as they cost less abroad than the others;
and this will enable us to afford a greater Consumption of Foreign Commodities
spent on our Palates, such as Wines, Fruit, and the like, all which fill our
Ships, and are fit Subjects for Trade when the Profits of a Nation enable it to
bear their Expense.

Navigation.
And thus I have run through the several Parts of our Inland Trade, the Profit
whereof depends on our Product and Manufactures; Before I proceed to our
Outland or Foreign Trade I shall speak something of Navigation, which is the
Medium between both; This is carried on by Ships and Saylors, the former are
the Sea Wagons, whereby we transport and carry Commodities from one Market to
another, and the latter are the Waggoners which drive or manage them; these are
a sort of merry unthinking People, who make all Men rich save themselves, have
often more Money than is their own, but seldom so much as they know how to
spend, generally brave in their Undertakings, they go through any kind of
Labor in their own way with a great deal of cheerfulness, are undaunted by
Storms and Tempests, the Sea being as it were their Element, and are allowed by
all to be the best Navigators in the World; they are our Wealth in Peace, and
our Defense in War, and ought to be more encouraged than they are in both, but
especially in the latter, which might be done if better Methods were used to
engage them in that Service, and better Treatment when there; Manning our Ships
of War.
Now I should think if a List were taken of all the Sailors in England, and a
Law made for every Person who enters himself on that Employ at the Age of Years
to have his Name registered, with the place of his Abode, and be obliged to
appear on Summons left at his House, and no Man to be forced into the King's
Service till he had been at Sea three Years, nor to stay therein above three
Years without his free consent, and then to be permitted to take a Merchant's
Employ for so much longer, and during his being in the King's Service good
Provision to be made for his Family at home, and a Maintenance for them in case
of his death or being disabled, This would encourage them to come willingly
into the Service, which they look on now to be a Slavery whereto they are bound
for their Lives, whilst their Families starve at home; Pressing Saylors.
This and the manner of pressing them discourages many, and hinders very much
the making of Saylors, People not caring to put their Hands to an Oar lest the
next day they should be halled away to the Fleet, though they understand
nothing of the Sea; I do not think too much Care can be taken for the well
manning our Men of War, but I would have it also done with able Seamen, and not
with such who will only stand in the way, and are useless when most wanted, and
this must not be done by pressing, but by practicable Methods which shall draw
every Man to take his turn at Helm; Embargoes.
I take Embargoes to be no helps toward it, for many Saylors do then lie hid,
who would appear to serve in Merchant's Ships, and might be easily met with at
return of their Voyages; by this means in a short time there would be a double
set of Mariners, enough both for the Service of the Fleet and Trade, the latter
would every year breed more; let the Commanders of Merchants Ships on Arrival
give in Lists of the Saylors they have brought home, for whose appearance their
Wages should be Bail, and then those whose turn it is to serve in the Fleet
should after due time allowed for finishing their Voyages be sent thither, and
a penalty on every Master of a Ship who carried a Saylor to Sea after his three
Years Prodict was expired; such Laws and Time would bring things into regular
Methods.

Inconvenience of pressing Saylors from Ships on their Voyages.
This would also prevent great Mischiefs and Inconveniences which arise from
pressing Saylors our of Merchants Ships whilst on their Voyages, many of them
being thereby lost at Sea, and others detained in the West Indies, to the great
Discouragement of Trade; whereas better ways might be found out of supply the
Men of War abroad, all Merchants Ships bound to the places where they are might
have a proportionable Number of Sailors delivered them by the Admiralty to be
carried out Gratis for their Use and Service; and this would prevent another
Mischief too often practiced abroad, where Captains of Men of War press Saylors
from one Merchants Ship only that they may make profit by selling them to
another.

Short Voyages breed Saylors.
It Is supposed that no Trade raises more Seamen than that of Coals from
Newcastle, which imploys many Hundreds of Ships to supply the City of London
and other Ports of England, and being a home Trade does thereby breed and
encourage Saylors more than long Voyages would do.

Outland Trade.
To come now to the Trade which England drives with Foreign Countries; here it is
necessary to enquire how each does encourage our Product and Manufactures, how
our Navigation, what Commodities we receive in Returns, and how the Balance of
Trade stands in either; among which I esteem none to be so profitable to to us
as that we manage to Africa and our own Plantations in America, and none so
detrimental as that to the East Indies.

East Indies.
To begin therefore with the East India Trade, which for many Reasons I take to
be mischievous to the Kingdom.

To clear this we are to consider how a Trade may be advantageous or
detrimental to a Nation, and then to draw Inferences thence applicable to the
above Proposition; I shall therefore lay down such general Notions as may
without dispute be allowed by all unbyassed Persons, which are these:

1. That that Trade is advantageous to the Kingdom of England which Exports our
Product and Manufactures. 2. Which Imports to us such Commodities as may be
manufactured here, or be used in making our Manufactures. 3. Which supplies us
with such things, without which we cannot carry on our Foreign Trade. 4. Which
encourages our Navigation, and increases our Seamen.
And consequently that Trade which exports little or none of our Product or
Manufactures, nor supplies us with things necessary to promote Manufactures at
home, or carry on our Trade abroad, nor encourages Navigation, cannot be
supposed to be advantageous to this Kingdom; especially when its Imports hinder
the consumption of our own Manufactures, and more especially when those Imports
are chiefly the purchase of our Bullion or Treasure.

And because I would be rightly understood in my third Proposition, I mean
those Commodities without which we are not able to fit out our Ships for a
Foreign Trade, such as are Pitch, Tar, Hemp, Sail-Cloth, Masts, Timber, and
such like; These are so absolutely necessary, that we must have them though
purchased for Bullion, as being the chief Hinges whereon Trade turns, and the
Tools by which we Mechannically navigate our Ships, those Bulky Mediums of
Foreign Trade; but for those things which are Imported only in order to be
Exported again as Commodities to trade on, these cannot be so advantageous to
this Kingdom as they may be to the Dutch, who having little Land are maintained
rather by Buying and Selling than Manufacturing, whereas England being a large
spot of Ground, and having a great Product of its own, (besides what comes from
our Plantations) capable to be wrought up or manufactured here, gets by the
Employment of its People, therefore it would be the great Wisdom of our
Government to regulate all Foreign Trades by such Methods as may best make then
useful in the promoting our Manufactures.

How England may be said to be enricht by Trade.
Here it will not be amiss to consider again how and in what manner a Nation may
be said to be enriched by Trade; for there must be a difference made between a
Nations growing rich and particular Men's doing so by it, and I humbly propose
that it may be possible for private Men to be vastly improved in their Estates,
and yet at the Years end the Wealth of the Nation not to be a whit greater than
at the beginning, and this both in an Inland and an Outland Trade; for whilst
the thrifty Shopkeeper buys at one Price, and sells at another to the prodigal
Beaux, and the industrious Artificer vents his Labor to the idle Drone, and
the politic Contriver outwits the unthinking Bully, one raises his Fortunes on
the other's decay; the same for our Outland Trade, if we Export the true Riches
of the Nation for that which we consume on our Luxury, though private Men may get
by each other, yet the Wealth of the Nation is not any way increased: For
suppose by one Hundred Butts of Wines the Importer gets Five Hundred Pounds,
yet when drank among our selves, the Nation is not thereby Richer but Poorer,
and so much poorer as those Wines cost at first; for if Imported by English Men
in English Ships we loose but the first Purchase, the rest being Freights,
Customs, and Profits, are divided amongst our selves, but if they are brought
in by Foreigners, the Nation loses all but the Customs; I take the true Profits
of this Kingdom to consist in that which is produced from Earth, Sea, and
Labor, and such are all our Growth and Manufactures.

To apply this now to the East India Trade, we will first consider what are its
Exports and Imports, and then inquire Cui Bono? whither the Contest for this
Trade does proceed from a design to serve the Nation, or from Principles of
Self-Interest? or whither the Members of that Company who strive so much about
it, would if in other Circumstances still be of the same Mind? for Principles
that are in themselves true are always so, we may change our Opinions, but they
do not change their Certainty; I confess as the state of a Nation alters so
must our measures in Trade, but then it must appear that the State of the
Nation and not our private Interests makes us to alter them; Now when I find
that it is not the true Interest of this Nation to advance the Product and
Manufactures thereof I shall change my Opinion.

First then to begin with their Exports; and here I need not say much, it is
generally allowed by the Traders themselves that our Product and Manufactures
are the least part thereof, consisting chiefly in Gold and Silver.

But it is alleged that in Returns they Import such Goods which being again
Exported do bring from Foreign parts much more Treasure in specie; which leads
me secondly to consider what those Imports are, and what becomes of them; They
chiefly are, Saltpeter, Pepper, Callicoes, Druggs, Indigo, and Silks both
wrought and raw, many of which Commodities are very necessary as well for our
Home Expense as to export again, others vastly prejudicial to us, as they
hinder the consumption of our own Manufactures both Abroad and at Home, and
this latter outweighs the former; Calicoes and wrought Silks are the things I
chiefly aim at, and hope to make it plainly appear that those two Commodities
do us more prejudice in our Manufactures than all the Advantage they bring
either to private Purses or to the Nation in general, and it were to be wished
the Wisdom of our Parliament would prohibit their being worn in England, else
like the ill-favored lean Kine they will destroy the use of our Manufactures,
which might be fitted to answer all the ends they serve for; Nor is the
lessening the wearing our own Manufactures at home all the Mischief Callicoes
have done us, their Importation having thrown out the wearing of Silesia, and
other German Linnens has been attended with as bad a Consequence from thence,
where those Looms which were formerly employed on weaving them were thereon
turned to the Woollen Manufactures, wherewith they not only furnish themselves
but Poland, which has made those Countries very careful to increase and improve
their breed of Sheep, whose Wool was generally brought hither before, and used
in making Hatts, but is now much of it wrought up there; for when we slighted
their Manufactures they fell on ours, whereas if we had encouraged the Wearing
their Linen they would have still depended on us for Woollen; This has been a
means to abate the Exportation of many thousand Pieces of Cloth, which would
have brought more Advantage to the Nation than all the Trade we have driven to
the East Indies, and will never be retrieved till we return again to the use of
their Linnens.

He that considers how wonderfully Fashions prevail on this Nation may soon
satisfy himself how things of little value come to be prized, and to justle
out those of greater worth; Fashion is Fancy, which as it has of late Years
brought in a disuse of our native Commodities by Imitation, so if our Nobility
and Gentry would turn their Fancies to them again I doubt not it would have the
same effect, and if our Workmen could receive Encouragement, no question the
Genius of this Kingdom would soon reach to such a pitch as to answer all the
Uses of both those Commodities, even with a Thread spun out of Sheeps Wool; It
was scarce thought about twenty Years since that we should ever see Calicoes
the Ornaments of our greatest Gallants (for such they are, whither we call them
Muslins, Shades, or any thing else) when they were then rarely used save in
Shrouds for the Dead, and that chiefly among the Poor, who could not go to the
Price of finer Linen, and yet were willing to imitate the Rich, but now few
think themselves well dressed till they are made up in Callicoes, both Men and
Women, Callicoe Shirts, Neckcloths, Cuffs, Pocket-Hankerchiefs, for the former,
Head-Dresses, Night-royls, Hoods, Sleeves, Aprons, Gowns, Petticoats, and what
not, for the latter, besides India-Stockings for both Sexes; and indeed it will
be a hard matter to put them out of this Fancy, nothing but an Act of
Parliament or humor of the Court can do it, the latter is the most natural
means, and would easier make way to introduce the former, for besides that
'twould bring with it the Prayers of the Poor for those who have cut them out
new Employments, it would likewise wonderfully tend to advance the Gentlemen's
Estates, first by expending their Wool, and next by keeping the Poor at work,
who would consume more Wheat and Barley, Beef and Mutton in their Houses, and
yet they need not fear having Laborers enough in their Harvests, though
perhaps at a little higher Rates, which would be abundantly made up by an
Advance on the Product of their Lands, besides what would be saved in the
Poor's Rates, and it has been a constant Observation grounded on reason that
this Nation never thrives more than when the Labor of the Poor is at such
Prises as they may live comfortably by it.

We will next consider:

1. How far the Manufactures of this Kingdom have been already made to answer
the uses of Indian Silks and Callicoes, and what did encourage it. 2. What
farther Improvement may be made thereon, and the means to bring it about. 3.
Why the People of England are so much against their Native Manufactures as to
be more in love with Calicoes and Indian Silks.
1. As to the first, I will go no farther than the Act for Burrying in Woollen;
how averse were the People of England to it at first? as if the Dead could not
rest easy in their Graves if wrapped in our Native Commodities, or that it would
trouble them inter Hades that they had occasionally given Employment to their
poor surviving Countrymen; no, the fault was not there, Experience has taught
us that it is all one to them, and Time has more reconciled us to that Statute
when we saw the good effects it produced by putting our People on making so
many pretty sorts of Woollen Vestments, as Ornamental to the Dead as the others
formerly were thought to be, and of such different Finenesses and Prizes, that
Qualities are as easily distinguished by them; and since our dead Friends were
to be dressed in our native Wool, we thought it most seemly to imitate them by
wearing the same at their Funerals, hence it came to pass that our Mourning
Attire was made of White Crape, a Garb not only Decent and Profitable, but
Honorable to the Nation, as it both showed our Esteem for our Woollen
Manufactres, and also how soon those employed therein could turn their Hands to
any sort of Work.

2. Let us consider what farther Improvements may be made on the Manufactures
of this Kingdom to answer the ends of Indian Silks and Calicoes, and the means
to bring them about; Here let us see what Progresses have already been made
step after step by our Manufactures to imitate, and in many things to exceed
all they have seen from abroad; witness those noble rich Silks, wherein they
have attained to so great a height; Our brave noble Arras or Tapestry of all
Prises, not to be outdone by those very Nations from whom we at first learned
the Art; And this is allowed by all, that the English Workmen in great things
outdo their Patterns, and no doubt they may soon turn their Hands to a slight
Manufacture, which People do now chiefly desire, and I take to be as profitable
to the Nation; How are we come from a strong and stubborn to a slight thin
Broad Cloth, from thence to Stuffs, Perpets, Says, Rashes, Shalloones, Gauzes,
and lately to Antherines, which last look as handsome as Indian Silks, and
serve as well in Linings for our Clothes, also Crapes of such different sorts
both of Silk and Wool, that not only Clothes for Men and Women are made
thereof, but also Hatbands, Cuffs, Neckcloths, Hoods, Head Dresses, etc. Now
was there a Law to encourage, or would the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom
by their Examples promote the wearing our own Manufactures, no doubt they might
be soon brought to answer all the ends of Indian Silks and Calicoes, and I
cannot see what reason may be given against a total Prohibition of their being
worn in England, which will be the quickest way to have them disused.

3. The third is to enquire why the People of England are so much against their
Native Manufactures as to be more in love with Calicoes and Indian Silks? The
chief reason is Fashion and Imitation of One another, though many others are
alleged, as the Ruffness and Ill Color of Woollen, which keeps it from
answering the ends of Calicoes, Its weight and thickness, which renders it
improper for the ends of slight Silks in Linings; These are not substantial but
pretended Reasons, and would as well serve against Calicoes and Indian Silks
were we more used to our Native Manufactures, and they now to be introduced;
for as to the Ruffness of Woollen, may not that be helped by its fineness? and
are not course Calicoes altogether as Ruff? A fine Flannen-Shirt feels soft and
pleasant to him that has been used to wear it, so strange Impressions do
Custom and Fashion make on us; and as for Color, it is only Fancy, when Yellow
is in Fashion it looks as decent as White, and as much Art is needful to strike
it well as there is Curiosity about the other, witness when Women wore Yellow
Hoods, both Men and Women Yellow Vestments, besides, no doubt ways might be
found out to add to the Native Whiteness of our Woollen Manufactures, which do
not therein fall shorter of Calicoes than they do of Hollands and Cambricks and
as to the ends of Silks, Thinness and Lightness, I think our Workmen have given
very great Instances in their Crapes Gauzes and Antherines what they could do
had they Encouragement.

But if a Manufacture of Wool will not please, why may not one of Cotton, the
Primum of which Calicoes are made, whereof we have great quantities imported
every Year from our own Plantations in America, and no doubt we might in a
short time attain to an excellency therein, not only to supply our selves, but
also Foreign Markets; He that considers how far we have gone in this already
will have no cause to doubt a Progress, and if Encouragements were proposed to
that Person who should spin the finest Thread either in Cotton or Wool, to be
adjudged and paid in each County, 'twould excite Industry and Ingenuity, and no
doubt we might in time make Calicoes equal in their sorts with those Imported
from India, and afford them as cheap as that Company now sells them, enough not
only for our home Expenee, but also for Exportation.

We will next see what Employment this Trade gives to Ships as it is now managed
in a Company, and how far it promotes Navigation by making Saylors; The Number
of the first is but small, and I think far from making Seamen, long Voyages
being usually their Bane, those Ships seldom bringing home so many Saylors as
they carried forth, whereas shorter Voyages do more, made out of Land-Men, both
the Imployers and the Employed being desirous to make their first Trials on
such Voyages; besides, longer require better Saylors to provide for the
Casualties which attend them, and may be said rather to use Seamen than to make
them; and this is one great Reason why the Dutch raise them so easily, most of
their Employments being a home Trade.

If then it appears this Trade is no more profitable to the Nation in general
we will next see how it is to that Company in parricular; I do not say to the
particular Members thereof, who by ill Practices have raised their private
Fortunes, many of which have been lately laid open, but to the Company as such;
and here we find that a former failed; the last is thought to have gotten
little, considering the long time they have been a Monopoly; and what Advantage
the new Fund will make Time must show, the Tricks used to engage Men therein
causes me to doubt whither 'twill answer the Expectations of the Subscribers.

On the whole let us consider what Arguments can be offered to the Wisdom of
the Nation to limit this Trade to an exclusive Company as was desired, or (as
in truth it is) to turn it into a Monopoly by Law, a thing very contrary to the
Genius of the People of England, and seems to bar the Freedom and Liberty of
the Subject.

Were Monopolies to be allowed it must certainly be in One of these three
Respects.

1. That we might put off our own Commodities to other Nations in Barter for
those we received from them. 2. That we might keep down the Prices of their
Commodities, whilst we advanced our own. 3. That as the Consequence of these
two we might encourage our Manufacturers at home, and furnish Foreign
Commodities cheap.
But when a Monopoly shall cause quite different Effects it is not to be allowed
on any Terms.

As for the first; the East India Company takes off little of our Manufactures,
nor do I think the Trade will admit it, for I cannot see how that Nation can be
supplied with Manufactures hence fit for their Wearing answerable in Price to
their own, except they were a Luxurious People who cared not what they gave to
please their Fancies, which I do not take them to be, but generally very
Provident; for if we consider that when the East India Company has brought
their Calicoes and Silks hither with great Charges, and sold them at an
extraordinary advance, they find vent by their cheapness, how can we believe
that any of our Manufactures can afford them a profit in India, where they must
be sold suitable in price to the others first cost; and therefore 'twould not
be amiss if the Government were put on making a narrow Inquiry whither the
Company do bona fide export so much of the Product and Manufactures of rhis
Kingdom and land them in India as they are obliged to do by their Charter, elfe
many ways may be found out to evade it, and the Nation be deprived of the only
Advantage expected from that Monopoly.

The Dutch and we deal not thither on the same Terms, their Manufactures are
small, and so no Matter what they Trade on, besides their Settlements in the
East Indies are so great, that what they bring thence may almost be called
their own Product, whereof by monopolizing that Trade they make greater Prices
in Europe, which being chiefly spent either in Foreign Markets or by Temporary
Residents brings them more Profit; They have also great Advantages above us in
their East India Trade, being possessed of the whole Traffic to Japan, whither
they carry Cloth, Lead, and other Commodities from Holland, Calicoes, Spices,
etc. from India, which they sell for Gold and Silver, increasing thereby their
Bullion as we diminish ours; Besides their East India Company is not settled on
such a narrow Foundation as ours, which being limited to one City exclusive of
all others sells their Commodities for greater Advance than any other Traders,
whither we consider their Risque, or the time they are out of their Money,
which should be the standing Rules in Trade; Nor can it be otherwise whilst
they remain a Company, the Charges both abroad and at home being much more than
when managed by private Stocks, besides the affected Grandeur in all which must
be paid by the Nation, whereon I take that Monopoly to be a Tax so far as it
might be supplied with them on cheaper Terms if the Trade were laid more open
by a Regulation; I know there is much talked by the Company about Forts Castles
and Soldiers to defend their Interests in India, but I cannot see the use of
them, for either they are thereby defended against the Natives, or the Dutch
their Competitors; the former have no reason to quarrel with them, for bringing
them a Trade so highly their Advantage as the purchasing their Product and
Manufactures with Money, especially if they pay for what they buy; And as for
their Competitors the Dutch, if they were not better defended against them by
our Fleets at home, and the Protection of the Princes they trade with, than by
all the Force they have there, the Trade had been but ill-secured, and must
have sunk long ago; Only those great Words serve to hold us amused, whilst
their Guineas in the two last Reigns were the Support of their Charter.

One thing which I aim at in this Discourse is to persuade the Gentry of
England to be more in Love with our own Manufactures, and to encourage the
wearing them by their Examples, and not of Choice to give Employment to the
Poor of another Nation whilst ours starve at home.

West Indies.
We will next proceed to the West India and African Trades; which I esteem the
most profitable of any we drive, and do join them together because of their
dependence on each other.

But before we enter farther I will consider of one Objection, it having been a
great question among many thoughtful Men whither our Foreign Plantations have
been an advantage to this Nation; the reasons they give against them are, that
they have drained us of Multitudes of our People who might have been
serviceable at home, and advanced Improvements in Husbandry and Manufactures;
That the Kingdom of England is worse Peopled by so much as they are increased;
and that Inhabitants being the Wealth of a Nation, by how much they are
lessened, by so much we are poorer than when we first began to settle our
Foreign Colonies; Though I allow the last Proposition to be true, that People
are or may be made the Wealth of a Nation, yet it must be where you find
Employment for them, else they are a Burden to it, as the Idle Drone is
maintained by the Industry of the labourious Be, so are all those who live by
their Dependence on others, as Players, Ale-Houses-keepers, Common-Fidlers, and
such like, but more particularly Beggars, who never set themselves to work; Its
my Opinion that our Plantations are an Advantage to this Kingdom, and I doubt
not but 'twill appear to be so by the consequence of this Discourse, though not
all alike, but every one more or less, as they take off our Product and
Manufactures, supply us with Commodities which may be either wrought up here,
or Exported again, or prevent fetching things of the same Nature from other
Princes for our home Consumption, employ our Poor, and encourage our
Navigation; for I take England and all its Plantations to be one great Body,
those being so many Limbs or Counties belonging to it, therefore when we
consume their Growth we do as it were spend the Fruits of our own Land, and
what thereof we sell to our Neighbors for Bullion, or such Commodities as we
must pay for therein, brings a second Profit to the Nation.

These Plantations are either the great Continent from Hudson's Bay Northward
to Florida Southward, containing Newfound-land, New-Eugland, Virginia,
Maryland, New York, Pensilvania, Carolina, etc. and also our several Islands,
the chief whereof are Barbados, Antigua, Nevis, St. Christophers, Montserat,
and Jamaica; the Commodities they afford us are more especially Sugars, Indigo,
Ginger, Cotton, Tobacco, Piamento, and Fustick, of their own growth, also
Logwood, which we bring from Jamaica, (though first brought thither from the
Bay of Campeacha on the Continent of Mexico belonging to the Spaniard, but cut
by a loose sort of People, Subjects to this Kingdom, Men of desperate Fortunes,
but of wonderful Courage, who by force have made small Settlements there and
defend themselves by the same Means) besides great quantities of Fish taken the
Coasts of Newfound-land and New England; These being the Product of Earth Sea
and Labor are clear Profit to the Kingdom, and give a double Employment to the
People of England, first to those who raise them there, next to those who
prepare Manufactures here wherewith they are supplied, besides the Advantage to
Navigation, for the Commodities Exported and Imported being generally bulky do
thereby employ more Ships, and consequently more Saylors, which leaves more
room for other laboring People to be kept at work in Husbandry and
Manufactures, whilst they consume the Product of the one and the Effects of the
other in an Employment of a distinct Nature from either.

This was the first Design of settling Plantations abroad, that the People of
England might better maintain a Commerce and Trade among themselves, the chief
Profit whereof was to redound to the Center; and therefore Laws were made to
prevent the carrying their Product to other places, or their being supplied
with Necessaries save from hence, and both to be done in our own Ships,
navigated by English Saylors, except in some cases permitted by the Acts of
Navigation, and so much as the Reins of those Laws are let lose, so much less
profitable are the Plantations to us; The Interest therefore of this Kingdom
being to prevent any practices contrary to the first Design, it would be the
great Wisdom of the Parliament to frame such Laws as may more effectually do it
than any yet made; I do not mean Laws whose chief Strength shall be their
Penalties, but such whose plain Methods being capable to be reduced to Practice
may do it without Oppression of Officers, for I esteem them so far weak as they
need the Support of either the one or the other; and it were to be wished that
both our Customs and all other Taxes might be raised with less Charge and
Burden than now they are, for which ways might be sound out if it were well
considered of, and then Multitudes of useless People might be sent into the
Vineyards of Husbandry and Manufactures.

Among these Plantations I look on that of New England to bring least Advantage
to this Kingdom, for being settled by an industrious People, and affording few
Commodities proper to be transported hither, the Inhabitants employ themselves
by trading to the rest of the Plantations, whom they supply with Provisions and
other their Products, and from thence fetch their respective Growths, which
they after send to Foreign Markets, and thereby iniure the Trade of England;
Now as to the first part, it is neither convenient for them nor the Plantations
that they should be debarred it, what they carry thither being for the most
part Fish, Deal-Boards, Pipe-staves, Horfes, and such like, which the others
cannot be well supplied with hence, also Bread, Flower, and Pease; but then
they should be obliged to make their Imports hither, I mean to bring all the
Good; they load at those Plantations to this Market, and from hence let them be
supplied again with what thereof shall be necessary for their Home Expense, as
they are with all European Commodites; by which means England would become the
Center of Trade, and standing like the Sun in the midst of its Plantations
would not only refresh them, but also draw Profits from them; and indeed it is a
matter of exact Justice it should be so, for from hence it is Fleets of Ships
and Regiments of Soldiers are frequently sent for their Defense, at the Charge
of the Inhabitants of this Kingdom, besides the equal Benefit the Inhabitants
there receive with us from the Advantages expected by the Issue of this War,
the Security of Religion, Liberty, and Property, toward the Charge whereof
they contribute little, though a way may and ought to be found out to make them
pay more, by such insensible Methods as are both rational and practicable.

Methods to render the Plantations more profitable to England
Now the means to render these Plantations more profitable to this Kingdom are
by making Laws.

1. To prevent (as much as conveniently may be) the Product of either to be
transported from the place of its Growth to any other place save England. 2. To
prevent its being Imported hither after manufactured there. 3. To prevent (as
much as may be with Convenience) the Exporting hence any simple thing in order
to be manufactured there, such as Iron, Leather, etc. which 'twere better for
this Kingdom were first wrought up here. 4. In Lieu of all to lay open the
African Trade, that the Inhabitants may be supplied with Negroes on easy
Terms.
These are general Rules, but not without some Exceptions; for when I say the
Commodities of one Plantation should not be carried to another, I mean those
only which are fit for Trade, and may be brought hither, and be hence dispersed
again, as Sugars, Cotton, Indigoe, Tobacco, Ginger, and such like; but for
Provisions, Timber, Horses, and things of like natures, they may and ought to
be permitted, because this Nation cannot so conveniently supply them hence; and
therefore the Act of Trade gave leave to transport the former from Ireland,
which has laid open a Gapp to that Peoyle, who carry the first Beef to those
Markets, wherein they anticipate us, and get the best Prises, besides the
Charges we are at in sending our Ships thither to load, which they save; Nor is
this all, for going to the Plantations without giving Bonds to discharge in
England what they take in there as the Law does require, they frequently unload
either all or part of their Loadings elsewhere, in opposition to the the Act of
Navigation, therefore if a new Law was made that all Ships Trading to the
Plantations from Europe should first give Bonds in England, and for default
thereof be seized on their Arrival there, it would be a great Step toward
preventing this abuse, and then plain and easy ways may be offered to hinder
Landing any part of their Cargoes elsewhere; And when things are brought to
this State, that the Product of our Plantations shall necessarily be centered
here, we may put almost what Rates we will on them to our Neighbors; it is true
it is the Interest of England that what is consumed among our selves should be
sold at reasonable Prises, but the higher they yield abroad the more Treasure
they bring to the Nation, provided we strain not the Staple so as to be
undersold from other Markets; But there must be a Regard had to our Fisheries,
that the Liberty of carrying that Commodity direct to Foreign Parts be not
restrained.

Next by their being brought home unmanufactured they would give great
Employments here; Cotton Wool by being spun up and made into several sorts of
pretty things; Tobacco by Cutting and Rolling; and Sugar by refining; for I
would have no Tobacco brought home save in Leaf, nor Sugar above Muscovado; the
last would employ abundance of Sugar-Houses in England to clay and refine it,
not only for a home Expense, but to be transported to Foreign Markets; a Trade
we have been lately beat out of by the Industry of the Dutch helped on by our
own Imprudence, for no wise Nation would have given such an advantage to a
Rival Trader as by Law to put their Refiners on terms of working Sugars Three
Shillings per Cent cheaper than our own, therefore when the thing comes to be
well weighed, I believe 'twill be found the Interest of this Nation to suffer
all those Commodities to be Imported Custom Free, and to lay a Duty on what is
Exported again unwrought, (I mean all West India Commodities) and to raise an
Excise on what is spent at Home, for which easy and practicable Methods may be
proposed; and this would salve all those Disputes about running Tobacco, or
drawing back Debentures after relanded; which Duty might be collected with few
Officers, and little Charge, and the King might have an Account of every
particular Parcel how it was transferred from Man to Man till 'twas paid.

Africa.
But if the Planter should complain at his being denied to Import wrought
Sugars, it would be abundantly made up to him by opening the African Trade,
that so he might be supplied with Negroes both in greater Numbers and at
cheaper Rates than now he is; a Trade of the most Advantage to this Kingdom of
any we drive, and as it were all Profit, the first Cost being little more than
small Matters of our own Manufactures, for which we have in Return, Gold,
Teeth, Wax, and Negroes, the last whereof is much better than the first, being
indeed the best Trassick the Kingdom has, as it does occasionally give so vast
an Employment to our People both by Sea and Land; These are the Hands whereby
our Plantations are improved, and it is by their Labors such great Quantities
of Sugar, Tobacco, Cotton, Ginger, and Indigo, are raised, which being bulky
Commodities employ great Numbers of our Ships for their transporting hither,
and the greater number of Ships imploys the greater number of Handecraft Trades
at home, spends more of our Product and Manufactures, and makes more Saylors,
who are maintained by a separate Employ; for if every One raised the Provisions
he eat, or made the Manufactures he wore, Trade would cease, Traffic being a
variety of Employments Men have set themselves on adapted to their particular
Genius's, whereby one is serviceable to another without invading each others
Province; thus the Husbandman raises Corn, the Millard grinds it, the Baker
makes it into Bread, and the Citizen eats it; Thus the Grazier fats Cattle, and
the Butcher kills them for the Market; Thus the Shepherd shears his Wool, the
Spinster makes it into Yarn, the Weavet into Cloth, and the Merchant exports
it, and every one lives by each other: Thus the Country supplies the City with
Provisions, and that the Country with Manufactures; Now to advise a Government
to monopolize, and consequently to lessen this Trade, by confining it to a
limited Stock, is the same as to advise the People of Egypt to raise high Banks
to confine the River Nilus from overflowing, lest it should thereby fertilize
their Lands, or the King of Span to shut up his Mines, lest he should fill his
Kingdom too full of Silver; This Trade indeed is our Silver Mines, for by the
Overplus of Negroes above what will serve our Plantations we draw great
Quantities thereof from the Spaniard; a Trade we are lately fallen into by a
Compact of the two Natious, for which a Factory or Assiento is settled by them
at Jamaica, where what their Agent buys is paid for in Pieces of Eight, besides
oftentimes Thirty per Cent Cambio for running the risque to the Continent, all
discharged in the same specie with great Punctuality.

Nor is this all the advantage the Nation reaps thereby, it has introduced
another sort of Commerce, and given us Opportunities of selling our
Manufactures to that People, with whom we now grow into some sort of
Familiarity, and may be a means in time to make way for a larger Acquaintance,
whereby we may reap the best part of the Treafure of those Mines, Jamaica being
now become a Magazine of Trade to New-Spain and the Terra Firma, from whence we
have yearly vast Quantities of Bullion imported to this Kingdom both for the
Negroes and Manufactures we send them, which as it was opened for the sake of
their having the former, so when that supply ceases, it will be removed to some
other place, and our industrious Neighbors are ready to receive it, who would
perhaps take more care to encourage it than we have done; for by the slow steps
of the African Company, and the Hardships they have ^ut on the Interlopers or
private Traders, the number of Negroes imported thither has been so small, and
so much below our promises and the Spaniards Expectations, that this profitable
Assiento or Factory has for some time stood on Tiptoe, ready to waft it self
to another Island, as it certainly had done long since if the Interlopers had
not given a better Supply than the Company.

We will now inquire what Reasons should persuade any Government to monopolize
or limit this Trade, and what have been the Consequences thereof?

As for the first; the necessity of having Forts Castles and Soldiers to defend
the Trade, which could not be carried on without great Charge and a joint
Stock, these and such like Arguments attended with a Cloud of Guineas had force
enough to prevail on an easy Prince, who though of a temper not inclined to
Mischief, and had natural parts capable to understand both his own and the
Nation's Interest, yet being persuaded by those Hargyes, who like so many Horse
Leach^ constantly hung upon him, and required more Treasure than his Income
could afford, he was many times allured to d^ things which his own Judgment
would not allow, so mischievous are evil Cou^cellors (especially of the fair
Sex) to ^ good-natured Prince.

But let us consider what these Fo^^ Castles and Soldiers now settled by the
Company are, their Use, and whither (...) good Securities for the Trade may not
(...) made by a regulated Company, out o^ Stock to be raised on its Members,
(...) those to be admitted for small Fines, and (...) pay a Duty on the Goods
they Export, such as the Court of Assistants shall think fit to settle; which
Stock to be employed for Buying or Building Forts where thought necessary, and
defraying all public Charges for carrying on the Trade.

I do not remember that the greatest number of Soldiers proved at the Committee
appointed by the Honorable House of Commons, to enquire into that Affair did
exceed one Hundred and Twenty on the whole Coast; nor did their Forts and
Castles appear to be any thing else save Settlements for their Factors, which
(to secure their Goods from the Natives, and the sudden Insults of other
Nations) they guarded both with Men and Guns, all which was proposed to be done
by a regulated Company; Besides, when more Factories are settled, consequently
there will be more People, which will soon exceed their number of Soldiers, and
be more formidable, whilst every Man fights for his own Interest, whereas those
Soldiers (as it was there proved) were ill provided for, worse paid, and kept
only by Constraint.

It was never made out (or indeed pretended) before that Honorable Committee
that those Forts and Castles were to wage a National War, or to secure against
a National Invasion, the defense of their Guns could not exceed their reach,
which was not above a Mile at most; nor were there any Magazines of Provisions
laid up to expect a Siege from the Natives; neither could they hinder
Interlopers who traded on the Coasts of what Nation soever; but for that end
the Company had obtained Frigates from the Government, who by illegal
Commissions destroyed our own Merchants Ships (unless permitted on the payment
of Forty or Fifty per Cent at home on the Goods they carried out) whilst they
let others alone; This being seconded by their Factors in the several
Plantations, who seized them and their Cargoes there if they escaped the
former, discouraged our private Traders, who else found no Difficulties, the
Natives receiving them as Friends, and choosing rather to deal with them than
the Company; whose Factories also being at remote distances from each other,
great part of that Coast was unguarded, and untraded too by them.

Nor do I see what need there was to fight our way into a Trade altogether as
advantageous to the Natives as to us, for whilst we supplied them with things
they wanted, and were of value amongst them, we took in exchange Slaves, which
were else of little worth to the Proprietors; and it cannot be thought that the
People of England who have settled such large Colonies on the Continent of
America (besides its several Islands) where there was no reasonable Prospect of
Encouragement, and have increased their Numbers so as to be able to defend
their first Footings without the help of a Company, not only against the
Natives where they found any, but likewise against all other Nations, should
fall short in carrying on this Trade, which does at the first view offer the
Prospect of so great a Profit.

Let us now consider the Inconveniences that have attended this Monopoly, and
consequently the Conveniences which would come to the Nation by digesting it
into an open and free, though a regulated Company; sure if confining the working
in a Golden Mine to one day in a week which would afford the like Treasure
every day to the Nation cannot be its advantage, no more can the limiting this
Trade; for if we send more Ships we fetch more Negroes, and vend more
Commodities for their Purchase; besides every Negro in the Plantations gives a
second Employ to the Manufacturers of this Kingdom, and had we many more to
spare the Spaniard would buy them, so there can be no Ground for putting this
Trade into few Men's Hands, except it is designed those few shall grow Rich,
whilst for their sakes the Nation suffers in its Trade and Navigation; The
Company have made this detrimental advantage of their Charter, that they have
thereby been enabled to buy up our Manufactures cheaper at home, and to make
the Planters pay dearer Rates for Negroes abroad, than could have been done if
there had been more Buyers for the former, and Sellers of the latter; besides
the ill Supply they gave the Plantations, and the partiality in their Lots and
Dividends there, the effect whereof was that one Planter who was befriended
grew Rich by having good Negroes, whilst another was ruined by having none but
bad; and this drew with it another ill Consequence, their Factors as it were
Monopolized Trade to themselves, by obliging the Planters to deal with them for
other things if they expected favor when the Negro Ships arrived, so that the
rest of the Merchants were forced to look on whilst the others had any thing to
sell, and all because they were restrained by a Monopoly from supplying the
Planter with the same Commodity, for which likewise the Company expected ready
Pay, whilst the others gave long time.

This was fully proved before the Honorable Committee at one of their
Meetings, to whom I heard an eminent Merchant of London of an undoubted
Reputation and well acquainted with the Trade to Africa affirm, That on a
former little relaxation of the severity of their Charter, which was then
called in question by the Honorable House of Commons, some of our Woolen
Manufactures fit for that Trade rose instantly Fifty per Cent to his certain
knowledge, occasioned by the Multitudes of Buyers, whereof he was one; and
indeed it is not to be wondered at, for whilst that Company was in power many
of the English Interlopers were forced to fit in Holland, where they also
furnished their Cargoes, it being thought cause sufficient to stop a Ship here
if any part of the Goods entered out gave Suspicion she was bound for the Coast
of Gui^^^, which would have made a Stander by to have thought that the Dutch
had given Pensions in that Court as well as the French.

It is not to be doubted but that the Vendding our Product and Manufactures and
promoting our Navigation on advantageous terms is the true Interest of this
Nation, and all Foreign Commerce as it advances either is more or less
profitable, now the Confinement of the African Trade to a limited Stock
promotes the ends of neither, and I believe it is one reason why we know so
little of that large Continent, because the Company finding ways enough to
employ their Fund among those few Factories they had settled on the Sea Coast
never endeavored a farther Inland Discovery, whereas if it was laid open, the
busy Merchant that Industrious Be of the Nation would not leave one River or
Creek untraded to, from whence he might hope to make Advantage.

It Is to Trade and Commerce we are beholding for what Knowledge we have of
Foreign Parts, and it is observable that the more remote People dwell from the
Sea the less they are acquainted with Affairs abroad; Africa is a large
Country, and doubtless the Trade to it might be much enlarged to our Advantage,
and better Settlements made and secured if good Methods were taken; Use and
Experience make us at last Masters of every thing; and though the first
Undertakers of a Design fall short of answering their private Ends, yet they
may not the Ends of the Nation, by laying open a beaten Path for Posterity to
tread in with Success where they miscarried; when all places in England may
freely send Ships, and be permitted to the management of their own Affairs,
this encourages Industry, and sets Peoples Heads at work how they may outdo
each other by getting first into a new Place of Trade; besides, the more
Traders the more Buyers at Home and Sellers Abroad, and by this means our
Plantations on that large Continent of America would be better furnished with
Negroes, for want of which the Inhabitants there could never arrive to those
Improvements they have done in the Islands, the Company having given them
little or no Supply, who rather chose to send them to the latter, because they
were able to make better Pay; But the Interlopers have done it, though under
great discouragements from the Company and their Factors, who like the Dog in
the Fable, would neither supply those Plantations themselves, nor suffer others
to do it.

As for the other Commodities brought in Returns from Africa, Wax and Teeth,
one serves for a Foreign Trade without lessening the Expense of our own
Product, the other imploys our Manufacturers at home, and is afterward
Exported to other Markets; and as for the Gold brought thence, I need not
mention how much it does advance our Wealth, all agree it to be a good Barter.

On the whole I take the African Trade both for its Exports and Imports, and
also as it supplies our Plantations, and advances Navigation, to be very
beneficial to this Kingdom, and would be made much more so, and better secured,
were it laid open by being formed into a Regulated Company.

Made as,
The next thing we will enter on is the Trade driven to Maderas; and here though
I must confess I am in my own Judgment no Friend to Monopolies, and have not
yet seen any reason to alter my Opinion, yet as that destructive Element of
Fire may and often is used to Advantage in its proper place, and Poison with
Correction makes good Physic, so the ends of a Monopoly being truly answered,
it may sometimes be very serviceable, such as are the vending our own
Manufactures at good Rates in Foreign Markets, whilst for them we receive in
Barter the Product of another Nation at reasonable Prices; And this effect
cannot be produced by incorporating any Trade into a joint stock so naturally
as that of Maderas, where by the late ill management of our Factors things are
come to such a Pass, that nothing less than this can recover it into a good
Method, the Inhabitants of that Island by the others Imprudence have gotten so
much Advantage of us that they take off little of our Wolen Manufactures,
whilst on the other side we buy their Wines for Money, which heretofore we
purchased in Truck; a Commodity laden off thence chiefly by the English
Nation, for the Dutch ship little, the French less, the remainer (except what
is spent on the Island, or sent to Brazile) is drank in our Plantations; and
yet we are treated by them, not as though they depended on us, but rather as if
they thought we could not live without their Wines, prohibiting sometimes one
part sometimes another of our Manufactures, instead whereof they supply
themselves from Lisbon, with things though not so good, yet such as they content
themselves with to promote Manufactures of their own, so wise are other Nations
to choose rather to wear what is made amongst themselves than what is brought
by Strangers, though better in its kind; whilst we prefer any thing that comes
from abroad, only because it does so.

But then great care must be taken that the Profit of this Monopoly does
redound to the Nation, and not only to the enriching private Persons, and that
it be continued no longer than it appears to be for the public Good, and a fair
Account must be given that the quantity of Manufactures carried hence do in
some measure equalize the Wines laden thence, also that the Plantations abroad
be supplied at reasonable Rates; By this means the English being the only
Buyers, and they having put the Trade into one Hand, may sell their
Manufactures for better Prices, and set the Rates of the others Wines, and
consequently afford them cheaper in our Islands; Thus whereas those two
Monopolies of the East India and African Companies prey only on their
Fellow Subjects, this would make its Profits on a Foreign People; besides it
would as it were create a new Market in a place where our Manufactures are
almost disused.

I confess could it be done any other way I should not advise this, but I know
none, unless those Wines were for some time prohibited to be carried to the
Plantations, which would be very inconvenient for the Inhabitants, who cannot
well subsist without them; the heat of the Climate spends Nature apace, which
must be supported, and nothing has been found so agreeable to their
Constitutions as the Wines brought from that Island.

Ireland.
We come now to speak of Ireland; which of all the Plantations settled by the
English has proved most injurious to the Trade of this Kingdom, and so far
from answering the ends of a Colony, that it does wholly violate them; for if
People be the Wealth of a Nation, then it is certain that a bare parting with
any of them cannot be its Advantage, unless accompanied with Circumstances
whereby they may be rendered more useful both to themselves, and also to those
they left behind them, else so far as you deprive it of such who should consume
its Product and improve its Manufactures you leffen its true Interest,
especially when that Colony sets up a Separate, and not only provides
sufficient of both for its self, but by the Overplus supplys other Markets, and
thereby lessens its Sales abroad; This to a Kingdom so much made up of
Manufactures as England is must needs be attended with great Disadvantages, and
yet to maintain a good Correspondence with Ireland is very convenient, I shall
therefore consider what Topics may be laid down as general Rules for the
Advantage of the former, and best agreeable with the true Interest of the
latter.

It was a Question once put by Pilate, what is Truth? And when he had said this
he went out again unto the Jews, etc. which Question seems to me rather to
arise from a Perturbation in his own Mind occasioned by the fluctuating of
several Interests, than from any Desire he had to receive an answer, for we do
not find he staid to expect it; and the Consequence showed 'twas so, for his
being willing to do the Jews a pleasure, and fearing lest he should not be
accounted a Friend to Caesar, made him pass Sentence against his Judgment on an
innocent Person, of whom he confessed, he found no fault in him; Interest does
generally biass our Judgments in such a manner that the very supposing a thing
to be so makes us uneasy under any Discourse that persuades only to enquire
into it; but Truth is the same still, and the easiest way to discover it is by
walking in the Paths of Plainness; Falsehood wants Sophistry to lacker and set
it off, therefore Men usually represent their private Interests under the name
of a public Good, and thereby endeavor to guild the Pill they would have go
down.

The Heads I shall proceed on are these Two.

1. To show that Ireland as things now stand is very destructive to the
Interest of England. 2. That the Methods which may be used to render it more
serviceable to the Interest of this Nation will also render it more serviceable
to its own.
These are plain Propositions, understood by every Man, and I hope to make them
out with the same plainness.

1. As to the first, that Ireland is now destructive to the Interest of
England, I think it will admit of little Dispute; for as long as that People
enjoy so free and open a Trade to Foreign Parts, and thereby are encouraged to
advance in their Woollen Manufactures, they must consequently lessen ours, than
which they cannot do us a greater Mischief, being the Tools whereon we Trade,
when they sink our Navigation sinks with them.

Now the Advantage Ireland has above England in making the Woollen Manufactures
will soon give them opportunities of outdoing us therein, first as it produces
as good or rather better Wool, and next as it furnishes all Provisions cheaper
to the Workmen, which renders them able to live on easier terms than ours can
here, and this will in short time give Invitation for many more to remove
thither.

2. But it is the second Proposition which will not be so easily allowed; how
the true Interest of Ireland will be advanced by such means as shall be used to
promote that of England.

Here we must consider, what is the true Interest of Ireland, and wherein it
does consist? Whither in Trade and Manufactures, or in Improvement of its Lands
by a good Settlement? And I doubt not but on a strict Scrutiny it will appear
to be the latter; for indeed till that is made, no Trade can be serviceable to
any People farther than it does help toward it; Nor is it the Advantage of an
ill-peopled Colony whose Riches are to be the Fruits of the Earth to divert any
number of the Inhabitants from its Cultivation, whilst they can find Vent for
their Product, and be supplied with conveniences another way; had our American
Plantations done so, they had never been well settled, but much more of their
Lands at this time unimproved; and this I take to be one great Reason why the
English in Ireland have always lain open to the Insults of the Natives there,
the Country being slenderly peopled in the more Inland Parts; if so, then
certainly whatever hinders the Peopling, and consequently the cultivating and
improving the Lands of Ireland, does so far hinder the advancing its true
Interest.

Now nothing does this more than Trade Abroad, and Manufactures at Home.

1. As they divert great Numbers of People which cannot be spared from
Husbandry. 2. As they so far lessen the Strength and Security of that Island.
The true Interest then of Ireland being Husbandry, Trade and Manufactures
stand diametrically opposite thereto; for Trade being of it self less
laborious, and the Poor maintained thereby living more easy than such as are
employed in the Field, does invite them rather to settle in that way than the
other; this is the reason why such Multitudes of People daily flock into Cities
from the Country, if they have either Encouragement themselves, or can foresee
any for their Children, whereas few withdraw from Trade to the Labor of a
Country Life; of this we have an eminent Example in New England, which though it
was the first peopled, and by its Trade has drawn thither great Numbers of
Inhabitants, yet that large Colony has not cultivated so much Ground as far
less Numbers have in other Plantations much later settled; for whereas in them
the Product was thought to be their Wealth, and therefore the Setlers dispersed
themselves, and with all the Assistance they could get endeavored to clear and
fit the Ground for breaking up, these took another Course, and by keeping
together chose rather to live on Buying and Selling, by which means their
Improvements are very small, and their Product of no value suitable to their
Numbers, so that it seems at present rather a Magazine of Trade, their chief
Employment being to supply the other American Plantations with Fish caught on
the Coasts, and some other things raised near the Seaside, and in Returns bring
thence the Commodities of their Growth, which they again barter with us, or
Ship to Markets themselves, and here it is to be noted that the great Balance
of their Ttade is Ships, which (having plenty of Timber) they build on
reasonable Rates, either for Sale, or to be employed for transporting their own
Commodities, which being generally bulky, such as Timber, Mackrill, Bread,
Horses, for the Plantations, and Codfish for Europe, great part of their value
arises from their Freights; This was indeed their oversight at first, and now
scarce to be retrieved; for had they then began with Planting, and followed
that closely for some time, they might in all probability long since have made
themselves Masters of a greater Product, which would have laid the foundations
of a much larger Trade both to Europe and other places in America; they are
indeed a thrifty sort of People, but want Commodities of their own Product, and
the Profits of a Nations Trade being very much limited according to that, if
the Parliament should think fit by new Laws to hinder the Freedom they now
enjoy in our American Plantations (which I judge absolutely necessary, because
so much abused by their carrying those Commodities to Foreign Markets without
touching first in England, to the lessening our Customs, and discouraging our
Merchants here) their Trade must sink, and they see their error too late.

2. And as Foreign Trade and Manufactures lessen the Number of Husbandmen in
Ireland, so secondly it lessens the Strength and Security of that Island, which
lies in a good Number of hardy People, enured to Labor, who with it defend
their own Interests, and cannot depart thence without leaving their All;
whereas Merchants and Traders being but Temporary Residents may and often do
leave a place when it most requires their Stay for its Defense; an Instance of
this we had lately, when the trading Part of the Inhabitants thereof who could
remove their Effects left it soonest, whilst the Men of Land came more uneasily
away, because they left their Estates behind them, and had no Methods of
maintaining themselves in England but by living on what they brought with them,
whereas the others soon fell into Trade here, and though they changed the place
were still in their Employments; now the Security of the Freeholders of Ireland
is to engage as many as they can in the same Interest with themselves, which
may be done by dividing the Lands into particular Farms, in bigness suitable
to the Stocks of such as undertake them; by this means they fix their Roots in
the Ground, and bind them with a Band of Iron; nor would many of their People
(if Trade were discouraged) return to England again, but employ themselves and
their Stocks in improving such Farms as they should purchase either for Lives
or Years at easy Rents, or making themselves Freeholders.

And as the security of Ireland is lessened at Land by Trade, so likewise at
Sea, for which they depend on the Kingdom of England; now can it be thought
this Nation will be at continual charges only to raise a People which shall vye
with them in their Trade? Or that we can be able to do it when our Navigation
decays? which it must do as the others increases, who afford us few Sailors
toward Manning our Fleet, whilst our own are harrast by continual Presses; for
let them be sure if the French King could have marched an Army thither as easy
as he could to Flanders, the Lands of Ireland might long since have had other
Landlords, maugre all the defense they could have made.

Nor does the Profit of this Trade and Manufacture redound to the Freeholders,
but only to the Traders, who as I hinted before are a separate Interest, and
remove at their Pleasures.

But if the People of Ireland think England is bound to defend them against a
Foreign Invasion an Account of its own Interest and Security, they must be
allowed to be in the right, yer let them consider also that we have power to
limit their Trade so as it may be least prejudicial to our own, which in my
Judgment cannot better be done than by reducing that Kingdom to the State of
our other Plantations, confining the Exportation of their Product only hither,
and that also unmanufactured, and preventing their being supplied with
Necessaries from other Nations; this will make Ireland profitable to England,
and in some measure recompense the vast Charges we have been at for its
Reduction and Delivery out of the Hands of Foreign Powers and Popish
Cutthroats, and that not less than twice in forty Years, all paid by the
People of England, a Gvess whereat may be made by this, that the last cost
above Three Hundred and Forty Thousand Pounds only in Transport Ships, for
which we now pay Interest; and if the Charge of Transporting our Army thither
with their Provisions and Ammunition cost so much, what did the pay of the
first and Purchase of the latter amount unto? Now it is very reasonable the
Nation should some way or other receive Satisfaction for its Expenses, and none
seems more just and equal than this, which would only limit the Profits of a
few Merchants, who carry on a Trade to the Prejudice of England; As for the
Freeholders, they would be supplied with Necessaries on as cheap terms as now,
and find Chapmen for their Product, which would be bought up by Factories
settled from England, or they might send them hither themselves if they thought
fit, and by this means all would be manufactured here, and Foreign Markets must
be supplied hence as they are now thence.

This is the way to prevent transporting their Wool for other Places to the
Prejudice of our Manufactures, and Importing Tobacco with other of our
Plantation Commodities directly thence to the prejudice of our Customs and
Merchants; this also would employ our Navigation, and by its short Voyages make
Multitudes of Seamen; In short, we cannot imagine the Advantages it would bring
to this Kingdom till Experience has showed us.

Act of Prohibition.
But then the Act of Prohibition must be repealed, there must be free Liberty to
bring in Cattle both alive and dead, and all things else which that Land
produces; and here I must again renew the Question, What is Truth? 'Twill be as
difficult to persuade the Gentlemen of England that this is their true
Interest, as it is those of Ireland that theirs does not consist in Trade and
Manufactures, one being biased by the breeding part of this Nation, as the
others are by their Merchants, who represent their private Profits as the
Nations; and it is not to be wondered they have Success therein when it carries
so much the face of a present advantage; but that the Gentlemen of England
should be still fond of that Act after so many Years smarting under it seems to
me very strange, than which I know no Law in my time has been more pernicious
to the Traffic of this Kingdom; 'twas this first put those of Ireland on that
Trade which has since almost eat out ours; 'twas this set them on
Manufactures, which were so far advanced before the late troubles, that the
sales of one Market as I have been informed came to a Thousand Pounds per Week;
for so long as they had Liberty of Importing their Product hither, and found a
constant Sale when Imported, they were contented therewith, but being put on a
necessity of finding out Foreign Markets for their Provisions, this made their
Merchants (who were before generally Factors to those of England, and are to
give them their due an ingenious prying People) dive deeper, and since we
refused to take the Flesh, they chose to keep the Fleece, and either to Ship it
to Foreign Countries where 'twould yield a greater Price, or by a Manufacture to
render it fit for those Markets wherein they vended the other; 'Twas this that
has produced such great Quantities of Wool in Ireland as have at least
equalled if not exceeded England, for the greatest part of the Lands of that
Kingdom by reason of the thinness of its Inhabitants being turned rather to
pasture than Tillage, and this Prohibition discouraging the raising black
Cattle, put the People on stocking them with Sheep; which Overplus would again
decrease if Ireland becoming better peopled in its Inland Parts by laying aside
Trade fell more on Tillage, or by repealing this Act the Inhabitants received
Encouragement to betake themselves again to breeding black Cattle; now if it be
true that not the quantity of a Commodity at Market but the Demand when there
makes it bear a Price, it will appear that the Makers of that Law were out in
their Politiques, by not considering that the Product of Ireland must be
consumed somewhere, and if sent to Foreign parts formerly supplied hence
'twould abate the Exportation of ours, the Consequence whereof would be the
lessening their Expense abroad more than it was increased at home; nor did they
at the same time take care to put us on any footing equal with the others by
abatement in the Customs on Exportation, and thereby enabling the Merchants of
England to sell suitably with those of Ireland, but still continued Three
Shillings per Barrel on Beef, and Four on Pork, whilst the others paid much
less there, the same on Butter, Bread, Flower, and other Provisions, so that a
Stander by would have thought this Law had been contrived for the Advantage of
Ireland; all which proceeded from the mistaken Interest of one part of the
Kingdom, which (were it true) ought not to prevail to the Detriment of a
National Trade, and the true Interest of the Remainer.

Nor will it be reasonable unless this Liberty be given to bind up Ireland from
a Foreign Trade, and consequently to confine the consumption of its Product to
a Home Expense, except what we shall occasionally fetch from them to carry
Abroad; This as it will discourage the Freeholders there, so will it Industry
here, and the Trade must be managed by great Funds, small Stocks not being able
to engage in transporting the Commodities they receive in Barter to Foreign
Markets, which they might in bringing them to England, being a shorter Voyage;
and so consequently the Product of Ireland would have more Buyers, and the
Inhabitants be supplied with Necessaries on cheaper Terms by this free Trade,
than when their whole Dependence should be on those Monopolizers.

The next Question will be what effect the taking off this Prohibition will
have on our native Product? Whither it will lessen its Consumption? I am of
opinion it will not, because our Exports must be increased as theirs from
Ireland are lessened, unless we do imagine Foreign Markets will not consume the
same quantities they did before, or will find out new ways to be supplied with
them from other places; besides, by how much more charges are added to the
Products of Ireland (as those of Freight and other petty Expenses on such bulky
Commodities will be if brought hither) so much will ours be put on the same
Footing with them, and bear a better price.

It Is well known that the Exporting our Wool to Foreign Markets has by the ill
Consequences thereof abated its Price at Home; This has been observed by
Calculations made by considering Men, and the reason was, because those
Countries were thereby enabled to work up much larger Quantities of their own
into various sorts of Manufactures, which both fitted their occasions at Home,
and supplied Markets abroad where we generally vended ours; by this means our
Sales growing slack, and finding new Competitors in our Trade, we were forced
to sell our Manufactures cheap, and this was done by making them slighter, and
by lessening the Prices both of Wool and Labor; whereas had we kept our Wool
at Home these Mischiefs had been prevented, and the French and other Nations
could not have made such a Progress in Manufactures as they have done; their
Wool being unfit to be wrought up by its self (unless mixed with English or
Irish) must have sought a Market here, and been returned again to them in
Manufactures, which is the true way to enrich this Kingdom; This would have
drawn over great Numbers of People to be employed in the Clothing Trade, who
would likewise have consumed our Product; and as these had increased so also
had their Employment, which would have kept up the Price of Wool, things being
of value in Markets according as they are supplied by Nation's standing in
competition for Trade, and it must be allowed that it was not the Interest of
England to fall its Manufactures abroad had we been the only Sellers, for
according as they yielded there, so much is the Wealth of this Nation advanced;
This our Forefathers knew when they made Laws not only to prohibit the
Exportation of Wool hence, but also from Ireland, which Laws cannot be too
strong, on whose due observation depends our Wealth or Ruin; now if the Trade
of Ireland was reduced to that of our other Colonies, and the same Care taken
about the Commodities of its growth, our danger from that Kingdom in Relation
to this would be at an end, when Methods may also be used to prevent its being
Exported hence.

Nor is there any reason to be offered why Ireland should have greater Liberty
than our other Plantations, the Inhabitants whereof have an equal Desire to a
free Trade, forgetting that the first design of their Settlement was to advance
the Interest of England, against whom no Arguments can be used which will not
equally hold good against Ireland.

1. As it was settled by Colonies spared from England.

2. As it has been still supported and defended at the Charge of England.

3. As it has received equal Advantages with the other Plantations from the
Expense England has been at in carrying on Wars Abroad and Revolutions at
Home; And on this last there is greater Reason against Ireland than any of the
rest, we having lately paid more Money for the Purchase of that Trade than the
Profits thereof may bring to us and our Posterities for many Generations; so
that 'twould be a piece of great Ingratitude for the Freeholders of Ireland
unwillingly to submit to any thing whereby the Interest of England may be
advanced, to the Inhabitants whereof they are indebted for their Lands, who
have laid down their Lives and spent their Treasures to reinstate them in their
Possessions.

As for Corn, Fish, and Horses, whither a Liberty may not be allowed to
transport them thence direct for other Markets on Ships first entering here in
England is a point worth serious Consideration.

But the main objection as to England is yet behind, a great part of the
Gentlemen of this Kingdom thinking it will sink the Rents of their Lands if
Irish Cattle are admitted to be brought over alive, others that the Importation
of Provisions thence will fall the Price of our own; and though in the former
they do not so generally agree, differing according as their Lands are
Situated, and proper for Breeding or Feeding, yet in the latter they more
unanimously consent, and cry out, This is the great Diana of the Ephesians, the
less Provisions are brought in, the more our own will be expended, whereas if
they did impartially consider, they would find it an empty Idol; Nothing will
advance their Lands like Trade and Manufactures, therefore whatever turns the
Stream of these elsewhere lessens the Number of Inhabitants who should consume
their Provisions, and when those increase so do the others, which (besides a
home consumption by People engaged in Employments distinct from Husbandry) does
always invite many Foreigners hither, who being Temporary Residents spend our
Product, it being a sure Maxim that where the Carcass is there will the Eagles
be gathered together.

Besides, when the Irish Provisions are broughr hither, those Markets which
were supplied with them thence before will then have them hence, though perhaps
at dearer Rates, and with them great Quantities of our own; No Man can imagine
what Expense there would be of English Cattle were we once fallen into the
Trade of making Provisions here, England as well in its Beef as Manufactures
exceeding all other Countries, with this farther Advantage, that the former for
Goodness and Price cannot be supplied from any other place save Ireland; nor do
I suppose it so much the Interest of this Kingdom when Provisions are advanced
only by a Home Expense, as when it is done by a Foreign Export, the first makes
particular Men grow Rich by preying on their Neighbors, but the Nation grows
Rich by the latter, when we vend them abroad at good Prices; nor would our
Plantations which now take off the greatest part of the Cattle slaughtered in
Ireland spend one Barrel less if killed here.

All Trade had a beginning, occasioned by some lucky Accident which put People
on new Projects, and why England which has so many Plantations depending on it
should suspect a consumption for its Cattle I cannot imagine; we might then set
the Rates of Provisions there, and the Merchants afford to give better Prices
for them here, when they shall load them at Home, and save the Charges of going
to Ireland, without fear of having their early Markets forestalled thence; and
the Planters being now grown rich are likewise able to give greater Rates for
them than they could at their first Settlement; England had never a fairer
Opportunity of making an Entry on this Trade than now it has, which would soon
consume great Numbers of Cattle, and consequently give Encouragement to our
Breeding Countries as well as the Feeding.

But if a Manufactury is thought fit for Ireland, and its Circumstances will
admit thereof, let that of Linen be encouraged* this may draw over Multitudes
of French Resuges, and put them upon an Employment wherewith they were formerly
acquainted, which we must assist by the benefit of Importation Custom free, and
the Advantage of Fashion; and then these two Kingdoms encouraging different
Manufactures will be serviceable to each other, for which Stocks would not be
wanting even from the People of England, who would delight to see Ireland
thrive when their Manufactures crossed not ours; This would in time alter the
Balance of our Trade with France, when we shall send thither more Woollen, and
receive thence less Linen.

If the wisdom of the Parliament shall think fit by these or any other Methods
to make Ireland more serviceable to the Trade of England it will advance both
the Lands and Traffic of this Kingdom, and so make us all better able to pay
the Charge of this long and expensive War.

Scotland.
I shall next say something to the Trade of Scotland, which has formerly
consumed more of our Woollen Manufactures than now it does, since that Nation
is fallen on making them there, which they do out of their own Wool, with the
help of what they get from us, also of Spanish, both from hence and from
Holland.

But their chief Manufactures are Linen, Butter, and Herrings; 'twere to be
wished the former was more encouraged by this Government, with Liberty to bring
it hither Custom free, provided they would send us also their Wool, and then
our Manufactures would not justle with each other; King James the II. limited
their Trade to his Pleasure by Act of Parliament, which I take to be a great
reason why that People were so much at his Devotion, but the Liberty of a free
Trade was made one of the Terms whereon his present Majesty received the Crown,
who has since given them Encouragement to settle Plantations abroad, such as
they shall either plant, or buy from Foreign Princes, which he has promised to
enfranchise with the same Rights and Privileges he does grant in like Cases to
the Subjects of his other Dominions.

They have also fallen lately on the thoughts of Codd-Fishing, whereof they
have great shoals about their Coasts, which formerly they used to pickle and
send away in Casks, but now intend to cure after the manner it is done in
Newfoundland.

And doubtless these three things would much encourage Trade had they Stocks to
manage them, but those they want; I have heard it discoursed that the Cash of
that Kingdom amounted to One Million of Pounds Sterling, but I scarce believe
it does to One Half, perhaps not one Third which properly belongs to its
Inhabitants; therefore they propose to carry on the Woollen Manufactures
Plantations and Fishery by English Stocks, the two last by Companies, which
will consist chiefly of Londoners, who first promoted the Designs, and will
furnish Moneys for managing them; Now I cannot think any Nation can settle
Plantations abroad to advantage which wants Stock and Manufactures of its own
to supply them, the great Profit of Plantations being to encourage Manufactures
at Home, and the means to settle them is by giving long Credits to the Planters
abroad, and when this is done by Money taken up at Interest from another Nation
the whole Profit will redound to the Lenders, so that the Scotch may make
Settlements abroad, but if neither the Stock nor Manufactures are their own,
they will have only the name of being Proprietors whilst others carry away the
Profits, like a Gentleman who pays as much for Interest yearly as the Rents of
his Lands bring in, he may have the Possession, but the Userer has the Income
of his Estate; so for their Fishing, which being managed on English Stocks will
bring them only so much as shall pay for the labor of those employed about it;
The same for their Woollen Manufactures.

On the other side if the Trade to these Plantations is driven by an English
Corporation, the Scotch indeed will get Employments for their Saylors, but all
the Product will be other Men's, who will take care for their own advantage to
keep the Planters poor abroad, and the Inhabitants from inspecting into it at
home.

Besides, that Kingdom being now supplied from England with West India
Commodities at cheaper Rates than they can expect to raise them, will want vent
for their new Product when brought Home, unless absolutely prohibited to be
imported thither from hence, which will be a new Tax on the Spender, paid only
to a Foreign Monopoly; neither can they Export them to sell on equal Terms with
the English; so that on the whole I cannot see what advantage the Scotch can
make at this time of day by settling Plantations, which if they do attempt, we
must besure to take care of Ireland, and by reducing it to the terms of a
Colony prevent their selling the Product there, which I am apt to think is the
main thing they aim at.

Canarys.
The Canary Trade brings us nothing but what we consume, and takes from us
little of our Product or Manufactures, we chiefly purchase those Wines for
Money therefore if it was reduced to the same Terms I have proposed for Maderas
it would do very well: By this means we should at least buy Wines cheaper
there, and then their Prices must be limited at Home, both on the Importer and
Retailer; 'twill be convenient to regulate this Trade, but not to discourage
it, for since we must drink Wines, 'twere better we had them from the Spaniard
than the French, the first takes off much of our Manufactures, the other
little, and though perhaps the Canary Islands may not, yet I am apt to think
those Wines are paid for out of what we send to the Continent of Spain.

Spain.
This brings me to the Spanish Trade, which I take to be very profitable to
this Kingdom, as it vents much of our Product and Manufactures, and supplies us
with many things necessary to be used in making the latter; I shall divide it
into three parts, Spain, Biscay, and Flanders.

To begin with Spain; by which I mean that part from the Bay of Cadiz Eastward
into the Streights of Gibralter; whither we send all sorts of Woollen
Manufactures, Lead, Fish, Tin, Silk and Worsted Stockings, Butter, Tobacco,
Ginger, Leather, Beeswax; and in Returns we have some things fit only for
Consumption, such as are Fruit and Wines; others for our Manufactures, such as
are Oil, Cochineal, Indigo, Anato, Barilia; with some Salt; but the greatest
part is made in Bullion, both Gold and Silver, with which this part of the
Kingdom abounds, being supplied therewith from their large Empires on the Main
of America, whither they again Export much of the Goods we carry thither.

The Spaniards are a Stately People, not much given to Trade or Manufactures
themselves, therefore the first they drive on such Chargeable and Dilatory
terms both for their Ships and Ways of Navigation, that other trading Nations,
such as the English, French, Dutch, and Genoese, take advantage thereby, only
that to the West Indies is on strict Penalties reserved to themselves, but
having no Manufactures of their own, the Profit thereof Returns very much to
those who furnish them; indeed of late they have made a small beginning on
Bays, but will not be able to hold it when the War is ended; Nor have they so
well secured the West Indies but that it is very plentifully supplied by us
with Manufactures, and many other things from Jamaica, which is accompanied
with greater Advantage than when sent first to Cadiz; for whereas we generally
sold them there at Twenty per Cent advance, we do by this Means make at least
Cent per Cent, all paid for in Bullion, which adds to the Wealth of the Nation;
this I take to be the true Reason why our Vent for them at Cadiz is lessened,
because we supply New-Spain direct with those things they used to have thence
before.

By Biscay I mean all that part under the Spanish Government which lies in the
Bay of that Name; the Commodities we send thither are generally the same;
likewise formerly great Quantities of Refined Sugars, till we gave the French
and Dutch leave to undermine us, partly by the Advantages they had by the late
Imposition on Muscovadoes, and partly by the Imprudence and ill Management of
our Sugar-Bakers, who would not take Pains to comply with the humors of that
People as the others did; but I hope if due care be taken, that profitable
Trade may be recovered again.

The Commodities we have thence are very advantageous, such as Sheeps Wool,
Iron, and Bullion, whereof the first is the best, as being the subject Matter
of a great Manufacture, which could we secure wholly to our selves (though it
cost all Bullion) 'twould be of great Advantage to the Nation, but both the
Dutch and French come in for their Shares.

The third part of our Spanish Trade is that to Flanders, whereby I mean all
that part of the low Countries now under its Government; whither we send
Commodities much of the same nature with those we send to the other Parts, though
not in so great Quantities; and among our Woollen Manufactures more course
Medlys; also Coals from Newcastle; but not so much Leather, being supplied
freely with raw Hides from Ireland, which are tanned there; This might be
prevented were that Kingdom reduced to the State of a Colony, and the Profit
thereof would then return hither; We have thence Linnens, Thread, and other
things, which are used at home, and shipped off to the Plantations.

Portug^^.
The next is the Trade we drive to the Kingdom of Portugal; where we vend much
of our Product and Manufactures, little different in their Kinds from what is
sent to Spain; and from thence we have in Returns Bullion, Salt, Oil, Woad and
Wines; of the latter we have lately imported great Quantities, which as they
take well with the People of England, so its more our Interest than to have
them from France, whence our Imports are more than our Exports, and to this
Kingdom our Exports are greater than the Product thereof can make us Returns,
especially since we have desisted from bringing home their Sugars, a Commodity
wherewith we are more advantageously supplied from our own Plantations, and did
before the War furnish Foreign Markets cheaper than they could.

This People were formerly the great Navigators of the World, to whom we are
indebted for their many Discoveries both in the East and West Indies, besides
the several Islands of the Azores, Cape de Verde, and also Maderas; to these
Islands they admit us a free Trade* but their remoter Settlements on the
Continent of America they reserve more strictly to themselves, whither they
Export many of the Commodities we send them, and in Returns have, Sugars,
Tobacco, with some other things, which are again Transported to the European
Markets, though little of them hither; Their Islands we supply direct from
England with our Manufactures, and from the Azores load Corn, Woad, some
Sugars, Wines and Bullion, all received in Barter for them, but chiefly the
first, which we carry to Maderas, where it is again Bartered for Wines, shipped
thence to our Plantations in America; in all these the Inhabitants live well,
and are very rich, but those residing on the Cape de Verd Islands are generally
a poor despicable People, made up of Negroes, Molattoes, and such like, who
having but little Product to give in Returns are therefore but meanly supplied
with Commodities, and those very ordinary, so that they have scarce wherewith
to cover themselves, much less for Luxury; Asses Bieves and Salt being all we
have from them, which we generally carry to our Plantations in America; Beife
might be made very cheap there could it be saved, being purchased for little,
and Salt for less, but the Climate will not admit it; the chief of which
Islands is St. Jago, very rich, well governed, and a Bishops Sea, where they
are well supplied, because they have Money to pay for what they buy.

The Portugueze as they are now become bad Navigators, so they are not great
Manufacturers; some sorts of course Cloth they do make, and did once attempt
Bays, for which they drew over some of our Workmen, but it soon came to an
end, and they returned home again by Encouragements given them hence, so
prudent a thing it is to stop an Evil in the beginning.

Since this War they have had great Advantages in their Navigation, for being
engaged on neither side they have by that means drawn Employments from all;
Lisbon has also been as it were a free Port for several Commodities to be
thence Transported to France, whence among other things it has been supplied
with Lead, which occasioned once an Order of Council here for stopping all
Ships bound thither with that Commodity, esteemed so useful to them in carrying
on the War, but on second Thoughts it was recalled, for which Order there
seemed to be no good Ground at first, as if the French King, who doubtless
would not refrain taking the Plate out of his Churches to support the Charge of
his War, should out of Reverence spare the Lead that covered them if he wanted
it, and could not elsewhere be supplied with it, which was not probable, since
'twas so plenty in every part of his Kingdom, one Tun whereof according to a
moderate Computation making above Thirty Thousand Bullets; I wish he were
better furnished with our Product and Manufactures, and we had his Money for
them, which would much more weaken him, than the other would enable him to
carry on the War; Ireland supplies Portugal with tanned Leather and Woollen
Manufactures, which would be sent hence if the Trade of that Kingdom was well
regulated.

Turkey,
The Trade driven to Turkey is very profitable, which affords us Markets for
great Quantit^^s of our Woollen Manufactures and Lead, shipped hence to
Constantinople, Scandaroon and Smyrna, and from thence dispersed over all the
Turkish Dominions, also to Persia: The Commodities we have thence in Returns
are Raw Silk, Cotton Wool and Yarn, Goats-Wool, Grogram-Yarn, Cordivants,
Gauls, Potashes, and some other things, which are the foundations of several
Manufactures different from our own, by the variety whereof we better suit
Cargoes to Export again; and though it must be allowed that the Turkey Merchants
carry thither Bullion, and 'twas to be wished the Trade could be driven without
it, being better for this Nation if we bought all things in Barter for our
Product and Manufactures, (which above the Foreign Materials they are made off
are all Profit) yet if we rightly consider, we shall find great difference
between Buying for Money Commodities already manufactured, which hinder the use
of our own, such as those brought from the East Indies, or things to be spent
on our Luxury, such as Wines and Fruit, and buying therewith Commodities to
keep our Poor at work, these must be had though purchased with all Bullion, and
therefore we ought highly to esteem that Trade wherein we receive so great a
part of them in Barter for the other.

Italy.
To the several Ports of Italy we ship great Quantities of Lead and other our
Product, and many sorts of Woollen Manufactures, but chiefly those made of
Worsted, also Fish, and Sugars both White and Brown, the last principally to
Venice, but more thereof in times of Peace than we do in this time of War,
Freights being high, and the Commodity dear at home; we bring thence Raw and
Thrown Silk, and Red Wool, which are wrought up here; also Oil and Soap, used
in working our Wool; some Paper and Currants.

Both Venice and Genoua have made some Progress in a Woollen Manufacture, being
furnished with Wool from Alicant and those Eastern parts of Spain; wrought
Silks and Glass are not so much Imported thence as they were, since we have
fallen on making them at home.

Holland.
The Dutch do likewise buy many of our Manufactures, and some of our Product,
as Coals, Butter, Lead, Tin, besides things of smaller value, such as Clay,
Redding, etc. which are all Exported to Holland, not only for their own use,
but being a Mart of Trade for Germany they disperse them for the Expense of
those Countries, among whom also they vent our West India Commodities, as
Sugars, Tobacco, Indigo, Logwood, Fustick, Ginger, Cotton Wool, besides what
they use themselves; These are an industrious People, but having little Land do
want Product of their own to trade on, except what they raise by their
Fisheries, and bring from the East Indies, whereof Spices and Saltpeter are
many times admitted to be brought hither, though contrary to the Act of
Navigation; Indeed the Trade of the Dutch consists rather in Buying and Selling
than Manufactures, most of their Profits arising from that and the Freights
they make of their Ships, which (being built for Burden) are employed
generally in a Home Trade for Bulky Commodities, such as Salt from St. Ubes to
the Sound, Timber, Hemp, Corn, Pitch, and such things thence to their own
Country, which Ships are Sailed with few Hands, and this together with the
lowness of Interest enables them to afford those Commodities at such Rates that
many times they are fetched thence by other Nations cheaper than they could do
it from the Places of their Growth, all Charges considered; it is strange to
observe how those People buz up and down among themselves, the vastness of
whose Numbers causes a vast Expense, and that Expense must be supplied from
abroad, so one Man gets by another, and they find by Experience that as a
Multitude of People brings Profit to the Government, so it creates Employment
to each other; besides, they invent new ways of Trade, by selling not only
things they have, but those they have not, great quantities of Brandy being
disposed of every Year, which are never intended to be delivered, only the
Buyer and Seller get or lose according to the Rates it bears at the time agreed
on to make good the Bargains; such a Commerce to England would be of little
Advantage, no more than jobbing for Guineas, this Nation would no way advance
its Wealth thereby, whose Profits depend on our Product and Manufactures; But
that Government raising its Incomes by the Inhabitants, (who pay on all they
eat, drink, or wear) cares not so much by what means each Person gets, as that
they have People to pay, which are never wanting from all Nations, for as one
goes away another comes, and every Temporary Resident advances their Revenue;
therefore to increase their Numbers they make the Terms of Trade easy;
contrary to the Customs of Cities and private Corporations with us, the
narrowness of whose Charters discourages Industry and Improvements both in
Handecrafts and Manufactures, because they exclude better Artists from their
Societies, unless they purchase their Freedoms at unreasonable Rates.

Hamburgh*
Another great Market for our Manufactures in Hamburgh: This City vents great
Quantities of our Cloth, Sugar, Tobacco, and other Plantation Commodities,
which are thence sent into Germany; from whence we have Linnens, Linen Yarn,
and other Commodities, very necessary both for the use of our selves and our
Plantations, and no way thwarting with our own Manufactures.

Poland.
Poland also takes off many of our Manufactures, wherewith it is supplied
chiefly from Dantzick within the Sound, whither they are first carried, and
thence dispersed into all parts of that Kingdom, which has but little Wool of
its own, and that chiefly in Ukrania; but the Expense of our Cloth has been
lessened there, since Silesia and the adjoining parts of Germany have turned
their Looms to that Commodity, occasioned by our disusing their Linnens, and
wearing Calicoes in their room; We have thence some Linnens, also Potashes.

Russia.
Russia is likewise supplied both from Dantzick, and also by way of St. Angelo
with our Woollen Manufactures, and in Returns we have Linen, Potashes, Hemp*
Leather, and many other Commodities, both useful at Home, and fit to be carried
Abroad.

Sweden:
Sweden and its Territories take off great quantities of our Manufactures both
fine and course, besides Tobacco and Sugars; but the Sale of our Broad Cloth
has been much lessened there of late, occasioned by their loading it with
great Duties, on purpose to encourage a Manufacture of their own, their Wool is
course, but Scotland sends them finer to mix with it, so consequently the Cloth
made thereof must be ordinary, however the King encourages its wearing by his
own Example, and thinks it his Interest so to do, as it advances his Revenue by
better enabling his People to pay it, yet this Manufacture must fall,
especially if Scotland sets up any themselves, however all sorts of Serges,
Stuffs, and Perpets, are carried thither as freely as before; whither we
formerly sent also great Quantities of Calamy, till by a late Act its
Exportation was laden with a Duty above its value, occasioned by a wrong
Information given the House of Commons, that it could not be supplied from any
other place, the smart whereof those concerned in the raising and calcining
that Commodity have felt, none being Shipped off ever since, Sweden being
furnished therewith from other Countries, who formerly sent it thither, though
they could not do it on such reasonable Terms as we did, whereby we beat them
out of the Trade, but by this means having the Market wholly to themselves will
thereby receive such Encouragement as to put an end to ours, unless that Act be
soon repealed.

Denmark and Norway.
Denmark has no Supply of Woollen Manufactures but from us, yet takes no great
Quantities, and Norway less, the People of the latter being generally very poor
are content with any thing they can get to cover themselves; some Tobacco and
Sugar is also Shipped hence, and spent amongst them.

From these Northern Kingdoms we are supplied with Pitch, Tar, Hemp, Masts,
Timber, Iron, all very useful in our Navigation, and without which we cannot
carry it on, Commodities which we must have though purchased with Money; I look
on any thing which saves our Timber at Home to be advantageous to this Nation,
which the great quantities of Baulks and Boards imported thence do.

France:
The French Trade has every age grown less and less profitable to our Woollen
Manufactures, not only as the Inhabitants make wherewith to supply themselves,
but also other Nations, which they could not do were they not furnished with
Wool from hence and Ireland, their own being unfit to work by it self; if the
latter were reduced to the Terms of a Colony it would put a stop to it there,
and then ways might be found out to prevent it here; nor does France spend much
of our other Manufactures, or of the growth of this Kingdom, or Product of our
Plantations, some Tobacco it does, also Coals, Butter, Calve-Skins, Bottles,
and a few other things; it also furnishes us with nothing to be manufactured
here; so that the Trade we drive thither turns rather to their Advantage than
ours, which being generally for things consumed amongst us, and our Imports
exceeding our Exports, must needs be loss to this Kingdom; But if Linen
Manufactures can be settled in Scotland and Ireland, Distilling, Paper, and Silk
Manufactures, encouraged here, the Balance will soon be altered, especially if
the Portuguese make Improvements in their Wines, for which they now receive
great Encouragement, the People of England being not so fond of the French as
they were.

What Foreign Trades are profitable, and what are not to our Manufactures.
And thus I have run through most of the Trades driven from this Kingdom, and
showed how they advance its Interest by taking off our Product and
Manufactures, and supplying us wiih Materials to be manufactured again, wherein
`tis a certain Rule that so far as any Nation furnishes us with things already
manufactured, or only to be spent among our selves, so much less is our
Advantage by the Trade we drive thither, especially if those Manufactures
interfere with our own; therefore I think the East India Trade to be
unprofitable to us, hindering by its Silks and Calicoes the Consumption of more
of our Manufactures in Europe than it does take from us; the Spanish, Turkey,
and Portugal Trades are very advantageous, as they vend great Quantities of our
Product and Manufactures, and furnish us with Materials to be wrought up here,
and disperse our Commodities to other places where we could not so conveniently
send them our selves; This Spain does to all parts of its Settlements in
America, Turkey to the Black Sea, Perfia, and all its Territories both in
Europe and Asia; Portugal does the same to Brazile; the Dutch, Hamburgh, and
Dantzick Trades are very useful, as they supply Germany, Poland and Russia,
with our Manufactures, and little interfere with us therein; Sweden and Denmark
are profitable, both in what they take from us, and what they supply us with
again; Irelrnd as now managed is destructive to us; Scotland, for want of Stock
is not capable of making any Advance either in Manufactures or Plantations to
our Prejudice; Italy takes off great Quantities of our Worsted Manufactures,
and sends us little of its own save wrought Silks, whereof we shall every Year
Import less as we increase that Manufacture here; but above all I esteem the
African and West India Trades most profitable to the Nation, as they employ
more People at home, and encourage Navigation abroad, all their Product is our
Wealth, and has been a means to balance our Losses this War, and yet they
might be better improved to our Advantage; but the French Trade is certainly
our Loss, France being like a Tavern, with whom we spend what we get by other
Nations; it is strange we should be so bewitched to that People, as to take off
their Growth which consists chiefly of things for Luxury, and receive a value
only from the Esteem we put on them, whilst at the same time they prohibit our
Manufactures, in order to set up the like amongst themselves, which we
encourage by supplying them with Materials; and not only so, but they lay a Tax
on our Ships for fetching away their Product, which must else perish on their
Hands.

The Balances of Foreign Trades.
The Balance of that Trade is always against us, from whom we have in Goods
more than we Ship them; The Balance of Spain and Portugal is always in our
Favor; as for the Dutch, Germany, and Hamburgh, their Balances in Trade are
not yet agreed on, some think we ship them most, others that we receive most
from them, I incline to the former, the Exchange at all times seems to confirm
me therein, and though a Pound in Holland is now worth above a Pound sterling,
yet I judge it to proceed from the great Remittances we are forced to make for
our Armies, which the Exchangers know how to improve to their own Advantage;
the Northern Crowns supply us with more than they take from us, but the
Commodities we have from them are better than Money; Turkey takes Money from us,
yet is very beneficial; Italy will grow more and more in its Balance on our
side every year, as the Importation of Wrought Silks is lessened and turned
into Raw and Thrown; Now considering that almost the whole World is supplied by
our labor, and that our Plantations do daily bring us such Incomes, it is
strange if this Nation should not grow Rich, which doubtless it would do above
all its Neighbors were things well managed.

What Nations do chiefly cope with us in our Manufactures.
Those who cope with us in our Manufactures are chiefly, the French, Dutch, and
Ireland; as to the latter, it lies in our Power to give Rules to them; and for
the French, let due care be taken to prevent their being supplied with Wool
from hence and Ireland, and we shall soon see an alteration therein; it is true
they are of more danger than the Dutch, because they have more Wool of their
own, but this they cannot work without ours or Irish* The Commodities they make
are generally pretty slight Stuffs, wherein they use a great deal of Combing
Wool, and these they not only wear themselves, but send to Portugal and other
Places with good Success, to countermine which we have fallen on the same by
Assistance of the French Refugees; I wonder at the fancy of those who are
always finding fault that we do not make our Manufactures as good and as strong
as formerly we did, wherein I think they are to blame, for we must fit them to
the humors of the Buyers, and slight Cloth brings an equal Profit to the
Nation with strong, and gives the same Employment to our People; yet where
Seals and other Marks are set I would have them be certain Evidences to the
truth of what they certify, either to the length of the Piece, or that the
inside is suitable to the outside, or that it is truly wove, and without Flaws;
the same in respect to the Color, that it is woaded, or madder'd, or the like;
and I take it to be a great deal of difference between this and obliging the
Manufacturer to make his Cloth or Stuff to a certain weight and thickness,
without any respect to the humor of the Buyer, or the Climate of the Country
to which it is sent; As for the Dutch, as I take them to be no good Planters,
so no good Manufacturers, their Heads are not turned that way, but rather to
Navigation and Traffic, they were once famous in the Art of Cloth-making,
which was maintained by the Wool they fetched hence, but King Edward the III.
considering the Advantage they made by employing their People with our Growth
whilst our own stood still, prohibited the Exportation of Wool, and the
Importation of Foreign Cloth, and cunningly persuaded the Dutch Manufacturers
by Privileges granted them to settle here; if then the prohibiting Wool to be
carried out had so good an effect at a time when clothing was the great
Support of that People, why should not our greater Care to prevent it now have
a far better, when the whole Trade of that Nation seems to be in the United
Provinces, and they chiefly set on Buying and Selling? We cannot hinder them
from Spanish Wool, but we may from our own and Irish: As for Scotland and
Sweeden, their Manufactures will come to nothing, and it would be the great
Wisdom of this Nation to encourage them to bring all their Wool hither, though
at some charge to the Public; as for Germany, the Woollen Manufacture is not
so natural to them as the Linen, which they would soon turn to, if we gave
them Encouragement by wearing it here and in our Plantations; this would be
more advantageous to England than by the use of Calicoes to force a
Neighboring Nation to fence with us at our own Weapons, which they very
unwillingly undertake; the Woollen Manufactures in Italy are but small, and
those chiefly among the Venetians, something among the Genouese, these we
cannot hinder, being supplied with Wool from those parts of Spain which are
near to them, except we could promote a Contract with the Spaniard for all he
has, to which we never had a fairer Opportunity, and I do not believe the
Dutch would much oppose it if we gave them liberty to bring it in as
Merchandise, I should be glad to see such a Barter made, though by relinquishing
to them our part of the East India Trade; Had we once the Command of all the
Wool of Europe, we might then set what Prices we would on our Manufactures in
Foreign Markets, which now we cannot do, but must sell them cheap, lest we be
undersold by other Nations who vye with us therein, and our Manufactures
selling well abroad, Wool would yield a good Price at home; But if it be
doubted that too much Wool will be Imported, 'twould be better to burn the
Overplus at the charge of the Public (as the Dutch do their Spices) than to
have it wrought up abroad, which there is no reason to fear, seeing all the
Wool of Christendom is manufactured some where or other; and if the Act for
Burying in Woollen did extend to our Plantations, 'twould be of great use
toward the Consumption of our Wool: Thus when the Nation comes to see that the
Labor of its People is its Wealth, 'twill put us on finding out Methods to
make every one work that is able, which must be done either by hindering such
swarms from going off to Idle or Useless Employments, or by preventing such
Multitudes of lazy People from being maintained by Begging.

Difference between employing our own Ships, and those of other Nations.
And this is farther to be noted, that where a Nation does fetch from us our
Manufactures themselves, and Imports to us Materials, we get less by that Trade
than if we did it in our own Bottoms, because that does also encourage our
Navigation; thus we get more by the Spanish Trade, because we both supply them
with the former, and fetch their Wool, Oil, etc. in our own Ships; and we lose
more by the French when they bring us their Wines and Brandy than when we fetch
them our selves, and accordingly we must take our Measures in judging of all
other Trades.

Whither the Balance of Foreign Trade may be truly judged.
It has been a great Debate how the Balance of our Foreign Trade shall be
computed, and what Methods must be taken to know whither we get or lose
thereby; some have thought that if we Export more than we Import we lose by
Trade, others that if we Export of substantial Commodities more in value than
we Import in such we then lose by it, and this seems to be the most rational
Computation, but I do not think there is any certainty in the Account we can
have of either; our Exports indeed are better known than our Imports by the
Custom-House Books, the Bullion and such things being not entered there, and
seldom presented, besides many Commodities both outward and inward are run, and
never come under the Cognizance of those Officers; but suppose a more exact
Account could be kept, since so great a part of the Trade of England is driven
by Exchange, and such vast quantities of Commodities are imported from the
West Indies and others exported thither for Account of the Inhabitants of those
Plantations, the Balances whereof they design to lie here as foundations of a
secure Settlement for themselves at home* which Commodities are Exported (...)
to Foreign Nations on the Accounts of its Inhabitants, who pay for them here by
Bills of Exchange, I cannot see how any moderate Computation can be made
thereby of our general Trade, much less of that we drive with any particular
Nation, the Commodities which we receive at one place being often carried to
another; Thus we transport to Italy the Sugars we receive for our Manufactures
in Portugal, and bring thence Silks and other things to be manufactured here;
thus we carry to Turkey the Money we receive at Cadiz, which helps us there in
the selling our Manufactures, and purchasing Materials more protable to this
Nation than the Money would be if Imported in Specie; and yet we must not
conclude we lose by the Portugal or Spanish Trades because the Returns fall
short by the Custom-House Books, or that we get more by the Italian Trade
because it does not appear by them how we exported Commodities to pay for those
we Import, so the thing must still remain doubtful.

A Committee of Trade would be of great advantage to the Kingdom.
I think it would be a consideration becoming the wisdom of the Nation if a
standing Committee of Trade were appointed at the charge thereof, made up of
Men both honest and discreet, and I doubt not such may be found, whose only
business should be to consider the State thereof as to its Trade; to find out
ways how it may be improved both in its Husbandry, Manufactures, and
Navigation; to see how the Trade with Foreign Kingdoms grows more or less
profitable to us; how and by what Methods we are outdone by others in the
Trades we drive, or hindered from enlarging them; what is necessary to be
prohibited both in Imports and Exports, and for how long time; to hear
Complaints from our Factories settled in Foreign Kingdoms; to correspond with
our Ministers abroad about Trade, and to represent all things rightly to the
Government, with their advice what Courses are proper to be taken for its
Encouragement; and generally to study by what Means and Methods the Trade of
this Nation may be improved both abroad and at home; if this was well settled,
the good Effects thereof would soon be seen; but then great care must be taken
that these Places be not filled up with Courtiers, who know nothing of the
Business, and so this excellent Constitution become only a Matter of Form and
Expense; and herein I would propose for Pattern the Members of the Bank of
England, who wisely foresaw if that project should fall into such Hands,
'twould soon come to decay; therefore the first thing they did was by
fundamental Rules to shut out all from having a share in the management, who
had not a good Interest in its Profits or Losses, and next to choose out of
that number such for their Officers, who being bred up in Business knew how to
improve it to the best advantage: The French King found this Method very useful
in the Management of his War, and his Opponents soon saw that Monsieur Colberts
Head did them more Mischief than an Army in the Field, because the latter only
put in Execution abroad what he advised at home; and I think there is not more
need of Policy in War than in Trade, the curious Fibers by which it moves are
so fine and thin that if strained by injudicious Hands they are soon broken,
and yet our Parliaments generally handle it very coursely, and usually do more
Hurt than Good when they meddle with it, not foreseeing the ill consequences of
what they do will overballance the Good they intend, and that the Methods they
use will not answer their ends, the reason whereof is because the Conceptions
they have of it are too gross for a thing so full of Spirit as Trade is; He
that will but consider the Irish Prohibition Act, the Clogg put on Distilling
by the Barley Act, and on Navigation by the Tunnage Act, will soon see they are
in Truth Hindrances to what that Honorable Assembly intended by them, the
Advancement of Land.

Insurance*
I cannot close this Discourse without saying something of Insurance, the first
design whereof was to encourage the Merchant to export more of our Product and
Manufactures, when he knew how to ease himself in his Adventure, and to bear
only such a proportion thereof as he was willing, but by the irregular
Practices of some Men (especially since this War) the first Intention is wholly
obviated, who without any Interest have put in early Policies, and gotten large
Subscriptions on Ships, only to make advantage by selling them to others, and
therefore have industriously promoted false Reports, and spread Rumors on the
Exchange to the Prejudice of the Ship or Master, filling all Men's Minds with
Doubts, whereby the fair Trading Merchant when he comes to insure his Interest
either can get no one to underwrite, or at such high Rates that he finds it
better to buy the others Policies at great advance; by this means these
Stockjobbers of Insurance have as it were turned it into a Wager, to the great
Prejudice of Trade; likewise many ill designing Men their Policies being
over-valued have it is to be feared to the Disparagement of honest Traders
contrived the loss of their Ships; on the other side the Underwriters when a
Loss is ever so fairly proved boggle in their Payments, and force the Insured
to be content with less than their Agreements, only for fear of engaging
themselves in long and chargeable Suits.

Now if the Parliament would please to take these things into consideration,
they might reduce Insurance to its first Intention, by obliging the Insured to
run a proportionable part of his Adventure the Premio included, and the
Insurers to pay their full Subscriptions without abatement, and if any
differences arise, to direct easy ways for adjusting them, without attending
long Issues at Law, or being bound up to such nice Rules in their Proofs as the
Affairs of Foreign Trade will not admit; and for the better security of the
Insured it will be worth consideration whither the Subscriptions of the
Insurers should not be of equal force in Law with their Bonds.

Whither the Price of Labor discourages our Manufactures, or hinders
Improvements in our Product.
Here I intended to have made an end; but being lately present where among
other Discourses the question was put by an Ingenious and Worthy Gentleman, (a
true Lover of his Country) whither the labor of our Poor in England being so
high does not hinder the Improvement of our Product and Manufactures? Which
having some Relation to the Subject Matter of this Discourse, I humbly make
bold to offer my Thoughts thereon, viz. That both our Product and Manufactures
may be carried on to advantage without running down the labor of the Poor.

As for the first, our Product, I am of opinion that the running down the
Labor of the Poor is no advantage to it, nor is it the Interest of England to
do it, nor can the People of England live on such low Wages as they do in other
Countries; for we must consider that Wages must bear a Rate in all Nations
according to the prices of Provisions, where Wheat is sold for One Shilling per
Bushel, and all things suitably, a laboring Man may work for Three Pence per
diem, as well as he can for Twelve Pence where it is sold for Four Shillings;
and this price of Wheat must arise from the Rates of Land; it cannot be
imagined that the Farmer whose annual Rent is Twenty Shillings per Acre can
afford it as low as he who pays but Half a Crown, and has the same Cropp, nor
can he then expect labor so cheap as the other; This is the case of England,
whose Lands yielding great Rents require good Prices for their Product; and
this is the Freeholders advantage, for suppose Necessaries were the current
Payment for Labor, in such case whither we call a Bushel of Wheat One Shilling
or Four Shillings it is all one to him for so much as he pays, but not for the
Overplus of his Cropp, which makes a great difference into his Pocket; you
cannot fall Wages unless you fall Product, and if you fall Product you must
necessarily fall Land.

And as for the second, our Manufactures, I am opinion that they may be carried
on to advantage without running down the labor of the Poor; for which I offer,

1. Observation, or Experience of what has been done, we have and daily do see
that it is so; the Refiners of Sugars lately sold for Six Pence per Pound what
yieled twenty Years since Twelve Pence; The Distillers sell their Spirits for
one third part of what they formerly did; Glass-Bottles, Silk-Stockings, and
other Manufactures, (too many to be enumerated) are sold for half the Prices
they were a few Years since, without falling the labor of the Poor, or so
little as not to stand in Competion with the other.

But then the question will be, how this is done? I answer, It proceeds from
the Ingenuity of the Manufacturer, and the Improvements he makes in his ways of
working thus the Refiner of Sugars goes through that operation in a Month, which
our Forefathers required four Months to effect; thus the Distillers draw more
Spirits, and in less time, from the Simples they work on, than those formerly
did who taught them the Art; the Glass-maker has fonnd a quicker way of making
it out of things which cost him littie or nothing; Silk-Stockings are wove
instead of knit; Tobacco is cut by Engines instead of Knives; Books are printed
instead of written; Deal-Boards are sawn with a Mill instead of Men's Labor;
Lead is smelted by Wind-Furnaces, instead of blowing with Bellows; all which
save the labor of many Hands, so the Wages of those employed need not be
lessened.

Besides this, there is a Cunning crept into Trades; the Clockmaker has
improved his Art so high, that Labor and Materials are the least part the
Buyer pays for; The variety of our Woollen Manufactures is so pretty, that
Fashion makes a thing worth both at Home and Abroad twice the Price it is sold
for after, the humor of the Buyer carrying a great sway in the value of a
Commodity; Artificers by Tools and Laves fitted for different Uses make such
things as would puzzle a Stander by to set a price on according to the worth of
Men's Labor; The Plummer by new Inventions casts a Tun of Shot for Ten
Shillings, which an indifferent Person could not guess worth less than Fifty.

The same Art is crept into Navigation; A Tun of Sugars which cost a few Years
since from Six to Eight Pounds Freight from the Plantations, was commonly
brought home before the War for Four Pounds Ten Shillings, and whereas it then
weighed but Twenty-five Hundred, 'taws increased to Forty-five, and yet Saylors
Wages were still the same; Ships are built more for Stowage, and made strong
enough to carry between Decks; Wool is steeved into them by Skrews, so that
three or four Baggs are put where formerly one would scarce lie; Cranes and
Blocks draw up more for One Shilling than Men's Labor could do for Five.

New Projections are every day set on foot to render the making our
Manufactures easy, which are made cheap by the Heads of the Manufacturers, not
by falling the Price of poor Peoples Labor; cheapness creates Expense, and
Expense gives fresh Employments, so the Poor need not stand idle if they could
be persuaded to work.

The same for our Product; Pits are drained and Land made Healthy by Engines
and Aquaeducts instead of Hands; the Husbandman turns up his Soil with the
Sullow, not digs it with his Spade; fowes his Grain, not plants it; covers it
with the Harrow, not with the Rake; brings home his Harvest with Carts, not on
Horse-backs; and many other easy Methods are used both for improving of Land,
and raising its Product, which are obvious to the Eyes of Men verst therein,
though do not come within the Compass of my present Thoughts; all which lessen
the number of Laborers, and make room for better Wages to be given those who
are employed.

Cheapness of our Product no Advantage to our Inland Trade.
Nor am I of opinion with those People who think the running down the Prises of
our Growth and Product (that so they may buy Provisions cheap) is an advantage
to the Inland Trade of this Kingdom, but on the contrary I think 'twould be
beter for it if they were sold higher than they are, which may seem a Paradox
at first, till the thing be rightly stated; suppose then the common and usual
price of Beef to be Two Pence halfpenny per Pound, and Wheat Three Shillings
and Six Pence per Bushel, and all Flesh and Grain suitable, 'twould be better
for our Inland Trade if the former yielded Four Pence, and the latter Five
Shillings, and other things in Proportion.

To prove this, let us begin with the Shopkeeper or Buyer and Seller, who is
the Wheel whereon the Inland Trade turns, as he buys of the Importer and
Manufacturer, and sells again to the Country; suppose such a Man spends Two
Hundred Pounds per Annum in all things necessary for his Family, both
Provisions, Clothes, House-Rent, and other Expenses, the Question will be what
proportion of this is laid out in Flesh, Corn, Butter, Cheese, etc. barely
considered according to their first cost in the Market? I presume we shall find
Fifty or Sixty Pounds per Annum to be the most, and suitably the advance
thereon will be about Twenty-five to Thirty Pounds per annum, but the
Consequence thereof in the Profits of his Trade will be much more; for by this
Means the Farmer may give a better Rent to his Landlord, who will be enabled to
keep a more Plentiful Table, spend more Wines, Fruit, Sugars, Spices, and other
things wherewith he is furnished from the City, wear better Clothes, suit
himself and his Family oftener, and carry on a greater Splendour in every thing:
The Farmer according to his condition may do the same, and give higher Wages to
the Laborers employed in Husbandry, who might then live more plentifully, and
buy new Clothes oftener, instead of patching up old; by this means the
Manufacturer would be encouraged to give a better price for Wool, when he
should find a Vent as fast as he could make; and a Flux of Wealth causing
variety of Fashions would add Wings to Men's Inventions, when they shall see
their Manufactures advanced in their Values by the Buyer's Fancy; this likewise
would encourage the Merchant to increase his Exports, when he shall have a
quick Vent for his Imports; by which regular Circulation Payments would be
short, and all would grow rich; but when Trade stops in the Fountain, when the
Gentleman and Farmer are kept poor, every one in his order partakes of the same
fate; and this has been a certain Rule grounded on the Observation of all Men
who have spent time to look into it, that in those Countries where Provisions
are low the People are generally poor, both proceeding from the want of Trade:
So that he who would give a right judgment must not always consider things
prima facie, as they offer themselves to us at first sight, but as they appear
to be in their Consequences.

The Poor*
Having thus gone through the State of this Nation in respect to its Trade, we
will next consider it with respect to the Poor.

And here it cannot but seem strange that England which so much abounds in
Product and Manufactures, besides the Employment given in Navigation,
shouldwa^^ work for any of its People; the Dutch (who have little of the two
former if compared with us, and do not exceed us in the latter) suffer no
Beggars; whereas we whose Wealth consists in the labor of our Inhabitants seem
to encourage them in an idle way of living, contrary both to their own and the
Nation's Interest: Idleness though it cannot be called the Image of the Devil,
who is a busy active Spirit, yet fits for any Impression, for whilst People
neglect by some honest Labor to serve the public Good, they too often fall on
such Courses as render them public Evils: Livy (that famous Historiographer)
observed it was the greatest Sedition that ever was in Rome, when the Citizens
went about with their Hands in their Pockets, and would do nothing: Hence it is
that so many die Spectacles at Tyburn, and offer themselves up Victims to Vice,
no councels could persuade nor Examples fright them from those evil Habits they
had contracted by Idleness: The Curse under which Man first fell was Labor,
That by the Sweat of his Brows he should eat his Bread; this is a State of
Happiness if compared to that which attends Idleness; he that walks the Streets
of London, and observes the Fatigues used by the Beggars to make themselves
seem Objects of Charity, must conclude that they take more pains than an honest
Man does at his Trade, and yet seem to me not to get Bread to eat; and I wish
that was all the Encouragement they met with, I fear it is not, such swarms of
idle Drones would not then fill the Streets, who are a Nursery of Vice: Beggary
is now become an Art or Mystery, to which Children are educated from their
Cradles; any thing which may move Compassion seems a livelihood, a sore Leg or
Arm, or (for want thereof) a pretended one; the Tricks and Devices I have
observed therein have often made me think that those parts if better employed
might be more useful to the Commonwealth.

In handling this subject let us consider,

1. What has been the cause of this Mischief of Idleness, and how it has
crept in on the Nation. 2. What must be done to restrain it from growing
farther. 3. What Methods may be used to provide for those who are past their
Labors.
As to the first; we shall find that Sloth and a Desire of Ease is the
principal Cause; which appears by People's setting themselves on such ways of
Living as our Forefathers would have been ashamed of; nothing but this could
induce young Men in their full Strengths slavishly to attend on selling a Cup
of Ale, or depreciate themselves to be Pimps to Vice, they think by these ways
to be maintained in Sloth; Hereby Religion is despised, and Vice promoted, Men
thinking if they should profess the first or discountenance the last they could
not live on such lazy Terms; and whence does this proceed? Truly partly from
the abuse of those Laws we have, and partly from want of better: Licenses for
Alehouses were heretofore granted for good Ends, not to draw Men aside from
their Labor by Games and Sports, but to support and refresh them under it; And
as they were then a Maintenance to the aged, so poor Families had opportunities
of being supplied with a Cup of Ale from Abroad, who could not keep it at Home;
great observation was also made to prevent idle Tippling, our Forefathers
considered that time so spent was a loss to the Nation, whose Interest was
improved by the work of its Inhabitants; whereas now Alehouses are encouraged
principally to promote the Income of Excise, on whom there must be no
Restraint, lest the King's Revenue be lessened; thus we live by Sense, and look
only to things we see, without revolving what the Issue will be, not
considering that the Labor of each Man if well employed whilst he sits in an
Alehouse would be worth more both to the King and Nation than all the Excise
he pays; Industry usually brings Wealth as its Concomitant, and though Success
may not always accompany private Men's Labors, yet the Public gets thereby.

Nor did we fall into this Habit of Sloth at once, but by degrees; when Luxury
first crept in this was in the Embrio, but has been cocker'd up under it to
the Pitch it is now arrived; much proceeds from Imitation, our Gentry who have
Estates betaking themselves to an useless way of Living, those who had them not
soon fell in love therewith, and to this much of the Misery of the Nation is
owing, Men affect to be thought what they are not, and leaving honest Labor
spend their Patrimonies in fine Clothes, and keeping Company, till being put to
their shifts they are forced to betake themselves to play or begging.

Another thing which has increased our useless People is the Nobility and
Gentrys leaving the Country, and choosing to reside in London, whither they
bring up with them Multitudes of lusty young Fellows, who might have done good
Service at the Plough had they continued there, but having now no other
Employments than to hang on their Masters Coaches forget to work, and rarely or
never return again to Labor.

Add to this the great Numbers who are employed in Offices about the Revenue,
Men who might have been serviceable either in Husbandry or Manufactures, but
now they and their Families are wholly taken off from both, the Fathers chief
Aim being to get the Son into the same way of Living.

What Multitudes of Coffee-houses are there in London and other places, who
keep lusty Servants, and breed them up to nothing whereby they may be
profitable to the Kingdom?

What swarms of Youth go off to the Law, who being the Sons of Yeomen and
Handecrafts Trades had been more useful to the Nation if bred up in their
Father's Employments?

Besides those who live only by Buying and Selling, wherein wanting Success
they have no way to maintain themselves or their Families.

But above all, our Laws to put the Poor at work are short and defective,
tending rather to maintain them so, then to raise them to a better way of
Living; it is true those Laws design well, but consisting only in generals, and
not reducing things to practicable Methods, they fall short of answering their
Ends, and thereby render the Poor more bold, when they know the Parish Officers
are bound either to provide them Work, or give them Maintenance.

Now if England delighted more in improving its Manufactures, ways might be
found out to employ all its Poor, and then 'twould be a shame for any Person
capable of Labor to live idle; which leads me to the second consideration,
what must be done to restrain this habit of Idleness from growing farther; Here
I find that nothing but good Laws can do it, such as will provide work for
those who are willing, and force them to work that are able.

To begin with Manufactures; Here I should think Workhouses very expedient,
but then they must be founded on such Principles as may employ the Poor, which
can never be done on any thing I have hitherto seen; nor will such Workhouses
take effect till the Poor can every Week make Returns of their Stock, which
might be contrived did the Genius of the Nation set in earnest about it; they
must be fitted for the Poor and the Poor for them; Employments must be provided
in them for all sorts of People, who must also be compelled to go thither when
sent, and the Workhouses to receive them; the Stocks whereby they are
maintained must likewise turn often, for to put the Poor on ways of Traffic is
too dilatory for the Ends intended, they must be rather Assistants to the
Manufacturers than such themselves.

Now the Materials which seem most proper for these Workhouses are Simples,
such as Wool, Hemp, Cotton, and many others, which might either be sent in by
the Manufacturers on such equal Shares as the Justices should think fit, or be
bought up on a stock raised for that end, in both cases to be taken off and
paid for when brought to such a perfection as the Rules of the House should
direct, and that every week, or so often as the Stock should require to let the
Poor have their Wages to serve their Occasions; these things would employ great
Numbers of People, of both Sexes, and all Ages, either by beating and fitting
the Hemp for the Ropemaker, or dressing the Flax for the Shops, or more
especially by Carding and Spinning the Wool and Cotton, of different
finenesses, which would be used in the various sorts of Manufactures we make;
and if a reward were given to that Person who should spin the finest Thread of
either, to be adjudged yearly, and paid by the County, 'twould very much
promote Industry and Ingenuity, whilst every one being pricked on by Ambition
and Hopes of Profit, would endeavor to exceed the rest, by which means we
should grow more excellent in our Manufactures.

Nor should these Houses hinder any who desire to work at home, or the
Manufacturers from employing them in their own, the design is to provide places
for those who care not to work any where, and to make the Officers of Parishes
industrious to find out such Vermin, when they shall know where to send them,
by which means they would be better able to maintain the Impotent.

It seems also convenient that these Workhouses when settled in Cities and
great Towns should not be Parochial only, but one or more in each place as will
best suit it, which would prevent the Poor's being sent from Parish to Parish
as now they are, and provided for no where.

Oakham also is a fit Material for them, which might be beat there, and for
that end Old Junk be bought up, and those who caulk Ships be obliged to take it
off at a certain Price.

Tobacco also would employ multitudes of People, in picking, stripping,
cutting, and rolling it, which might be wrought up either in Public or Private
Workhouses, where Boys might be employed till they came to Years fit for the
Sea; and when once the Poor shall come by use to be in Love with Labor, 'twill
be strange to see an idle Person; then they will be so far from being a Burden
to the Nation, that they will be its Wealth, and their Lives also will become
more comfortable to themselves.

There are other things which will employ the Poor besides our Manufactures,
and more proper for Men, which are also equally beneficial to the Nation, such
as are Navigation, Husbandry, and Handecrafts, Here if these or such like Rules
were observed, they might be made more Advantageous to all.

As first let every Gentleman who takes a Footboy be obliged to put him into
some way for his future Livelihood, to whom he should be bound for a certain
number of Years, and no Person should be permitted to continue so after such an
Age.

Let every Merchant or Trader who keeps a Footboy be also obliged to breed him
up in Business, and at a certain Age to set him to some Trade, or employ him in
Navigation, wherein he should cause him to be instructed; by this Means that
which now makes lazy Beggars would then be the Nation's Advantage; I think it a
comely sight when I see Commanders of Ships attended on by such Boys, because
it is rarely seen but that they breed them up to be useful Men, and when the
Pride of Living tends to the Common Good it is very well directed.

Another way to provide for our Youth would be by giving a Power to Justices of
the Peace to assign them to Artificers, Husbandmen, Manufacturers, and
Mariners, at such Ages as they shall think them fit to go on those
Employments, who should also be obliged to receive them; and though at first this
may seem hard, as hindering their Masters from taking Servants who might bring
them Money, yet after some time it would not, when those who were so bound out
shall only do for others what was done for them before; and this also may now
be made good to them by such an Overplus of Years in their Apprentiships as may
countervail the Money.

I allow that these Methods are more proper for younger People than for those
of elder Years; As for such (who will rather choose to beg than work) let them
be forced to serve the King in his Fleet, or Merchants on board their Ships;
the Sea is very good to cure sore Legs and Arms, especially such as are
counterfeit through Sloth, against which the Capster accompanied with the
Taunts of the Saylors is a certain Remedy.

Next for Alehouses, Coffee-Houses, and such like Employments, let them be
kept only by aged People, or such who have numerous Families, and tended by
Youth, before they are fit to be put abroad.

And as for Maidservants, let them be restrained from Excess in Apparel, and
not permitted to leave their Services without Consent, nor be entertained by
others without Testimonials; this will make them more orderly and governable
than now they are.

No Servant should be permitted to wear a Sword, except when Traveling; and if
all People of mean Qualities were prohibited the same 'twould be of good
consequence, for when once they come to this, they think themselves above
Labor.

'Twould likewise be of great use to the Nation if Masters of Ships were
obliged to carry with them some Land-men every Voyage, which would much
increase our Seamen, therefore the Justices should have power to force them to
enter such as were willing, and to settle the Rates of their Wages; I mean by
Land-men those who have not been above three Voyages at Sea.

Young People should be prohibited from Hawking about the Streets, and from
selling Ballads; if these things must be allowed they are fitter for the Aged.

Stage Plays, Lotteries, and Gaming, should be more strictly looked after,
Youth in this Age of Idleness and Luxury being not only drawn aside by them,
but more willing to put themselves on such easy ways of living than Labor.

These and such like Methods being improved by the Wisdom of a Parliament may
tend not only to the introducing a habit of Virtue amongst us, but also to the
making Multitudes of People serviceable who are now useless to the Nation,
there being scarce any one who is not capable of doing something toward his
Maintenance, and what his Labor does fall short must be made up by Charity,
but as things now are, no Man knows where it is rightly placed, by which means
those who are truly Objects do not partake thereof; And let it be also
considered, that if every Person did by his Labor get one Half Penny per diem
to the Public, 'twould bring in Six Millions Eighty Three Thousand Three
Hundred Thirty Three Pounds Six Shillings and Eight Pence per Annum,
(accounting Eight Millions of People to be in the Kingdom) which would pay the
Charge of the War, so vast a Sum may be raised from the Labors of a
Multitude, if every one paid a little.

Nor is the sending lazy People to our Plantations abroad (who can neither by
good Laws be forced, or by Rewards encouraged to work at Home) so Prejudicial
to the Nation as some do dream, they still serve it in one of its Limbs, where
they must expect another sort of Treatment if they will not labor; it is true
they give no help to the Manufactures here, but that is made up in the Product
they raise there, which is also Profit to the Nation; besides, the Humors and
other Circumstances of People are to be inquired into, some have been very
useful there, who would never have been so here, and if the People of England
are employed to the advantage of the Community, no matter in what part of the
King's Dominions it is; many Hundreds by going to those Plantations have become
profitable Members to the Commonwealth, who had they continued here had still
remained idle Drones; now they raise Sugar, Cotton, Tobacco, and other things,
which employ Saylors abroad, and Manufacturers at Home, all which being the
Product of Earth and Labor I take to be the Wealth of the Nation.

The Employment of Watermen on the River Thames breeds many Saylors, and it
were good to keep them still filled with Apprentices; also the Employment of
Bargemen, Lighter-men, and Trow-men, both on that and other Rivers does the
same, who should be encouraged to breed up Landmen, and fit them for the Sea.

Confining the Importation of Sugars from the Plantations to Muscovadoes would
give Life to our Refining Houses at Home, so would prohibiting (as much as may
be) the Shipping thither things unwrought give Encouragement to our
Manufactures, both which would employ the Poor.

Idleness is the Foundation of all those Vices which prevail amongst us, People
aiming to be maintained any way rather than by Labor betake themselves to all
sorts of Villainies, the ill Consequences whereof cannot be prevented but by
encouraging Youth in an early Delight of Living by Industry, which would keep
up a true English Spirit in them, and create a Desire to secure a Property in
what they have; whereas a sloathful Dependence on another's Bounty makes Men
slavishly give up all at the Will of their Benefactors, and having no
Properties of their own to secure, are easily persuaded to part with their
Liberties; this a former Reign knew well, when the Ministers of that Court
found an Inclination in the People to sell their Privileges for Luxury and
ease.

And certainly nothing has so much supported the Rights and Privileges of the
Commons of England as making so many of them Freeholders, whereby they are
encouraged to make Improvements where they have Properties, and to defend them
when made, Estates raised by their own Industry and Labors; which likewise
stirrs up Tenants to endeavor by the same means to attain the same ends; a
Spirit great wherever it is, tho in the meanest Peasants, when they rather
desire to live of their own than by Dependence on others; this puts them on
honest Endeavors, these get them Credit and Reputation, which gives
Opportunities of advancing their Fortunes, and if this Emulation went through
the Kingdom we should not have so many lazy Beggars or Licentious Livers as now
there are; nor is God more honored among any than He is among these
industrious People, who abhor Vice on equal Principles of Religion and good
Husbandry, Labor being usually a Barrier against Sin, which does generally
come in at the Doors of Idleness.

The third Consideration is what Methods may be used to provide for those who
either are not able to work, or whose Labors cannot support their Charge* Here
I take Almshouses to be good Gifts, where they are designed to relieve
Impotent old Age, or educate Youth; not to maintain idle Beggars, or ease rich
Parishes, but to provide for those who have been bred up in careful
Employments, though notable to stem the Current of a cross Fortune; Mr Edw.
Col^on, near Bristoll.
Such a one is magnificently built, and suitably endowed by a certain Gentleman
near a great City, for which he deserves to be truly honored, though perhaps
he may scarce be imitated.

Another way to provide for those who are true Objects of Charity is by taking
care that the Poor's Rates be made with more equality in Cities and Trading
Towns than now they are, especially in the former, where the greatest number of
Poor usually residing together in the Suburbs or Out-Parishes are very
serviceable by their Labors to the Rich in carrying on their Trades, yet when
Age Sickness or a numerous Family makes them desire Relief, their chief
Dependence must be on People but one step above their own Conditions, by which
means those Out-Parishes are more burdened in their Payments than the
In-Parishes are, though much Richer, and is one reason why they are so ill
inhabited, no one careing to come to a certain Charge; And this is attended
with another ill Consequence, the want of better Inhabitants makes way for
those Disorders which easily grow among the Poor; whereas if Cities and Towns
were made but one Poor's Rate, or equally divided into more, these
Inconveniences might be removed, and the Poor maintained by a more impartial
Contribution.

And that a better Provision may be made for the Relief of Saylors, (who having
spent their Labors in the Service of the Nation, and through Age or Disasters
no longer fit for the fatique of the Sea, ought to be taken care for at home,)
let a small Deduction be made from Seamen's Wages, and Freights of Ships, to be
collected by a Society of honest Men in every Sea Port; This, with what
addition might be made by the Gifts of worthy Benefactors, would be sufficient
to raise a Fund capable to maintain them in their old Age, who in their Youth
were our Walls and Bulwarks; but it must be settled by Law, and no Man left at
his Liberty whither he will pay or no; These are generally the most Laborious
People we have, I do not mean those Scoundrel Rascals who often creep in
amongst them, but the true old Saylor, who can turn his Hand to any thing
rather than Begging, and I am troubled to see the miserable Conditions they and
their Families are many times reduced to when their Labors are done;
Almshouses raised for them are as great Acts of Piety as building of Churches;
Age requires Relief, especially where Youth has been spent in Labor so
profitable to the Public as that of a Saylor, and not only themselves, but
their Widows and young Children ought to be provided for; In this the
Worshipful Society of the Merchants Adventurers within the City of Bristoll are
a Worthy Pattern.

And as for those who lose their Lives or Limbsfighting against the Enemy,
themselves or Families ought to be rewarded with a bountiful Stipend, which if
raised by a Tax would be cheerfully paid; it is attended with sad Thoughts when
a Woman sees her Husband pressed into the Service, and knows if he miscarrys her
Family is undone, and she and they must come on the Parish; whereas if this
Provition were made, the Fleet would be more easily manned, our Merchant-Ships
better defended, Saylors more ready to serve in both, and their Wives to let
them go; but great care must be taken that this Charity of the Nation be not
abused, nor put into the Pockets of those appointed to dispose of it,
Confiscation of their Estates should be made a Penalty to detert them from such
ill Practices.

Taxes to carry on the War.
We will next consider the State of the Nation with regard to its Taxes.

When I consider the necessity of the War we are now engaged in, and the
Consequences of its Event, (the Liberties of Christendom, and the Security of
the Protestant Religion depending on the Success thereof) I think it the Duty
of every good Subject to offer his advice in a matter of this Importance.

Money we know to be the Sinews of War, it is that which does strengthen the
carrying it on, and I believe there are few Men who do not by this time see,
that not the longest Sword but the strongest. Purse is most likely to come off
Victor; we are too far engaged to look back, and if we do not go on with Vigor
it will encourage our Enemy, and make him think better of his own Strength; we
cannot preserve at too high a Rate those inestimable Jewels of Liberty and
Property, which (if we miscarry in this War) we are very likely to lose;
therefore how unpleasant soever Taxes may seem, Money must be raised, till the
French King can be brought to such Terms whereon a safe and lasting Peace may
be concluded; but great Prudence ought to be used in the Methods of raising it,
lest the People be thereby disgusted against that happy part of our
Constitution, Parliaments, when they see their only work is to find out new
Methods for raising Taxes; to whom every such Act seems a new Arrow levied at
them, by these it is they are discontented, and think themselves shot through and
through, because that under different names they hit the same Persons again and
again; besides the great charge^ the Crown is at in those small Collections, as
any Man will see who considers particularly that of the Hackny-Coaches, whereof
near one quarter part goes away for its management; and indeed few of the
Projects I have yet seen seem to be the effects of a considering Head, or to be
so weighed as to support themselves against common Objections, their greatest
Foundation was Necessity; besides, many of them cannot be renewed, their Income
being anticipated for many Years; so that for the future new Projects must be
thought on, and what this will at last tend to no Man can foresee.

I am apt to think most Men would agree with me in this, that if a Method could
be found out whereby Four or Five Millions might be raised Yearly with little
Charge and great Ease and Equality it must be much better than now it is, and
this to be a Fund out of which the Parliament to appropriate what Sums they
see necessary for every use, so that then they would have Leisure to spend much
of their time on other Affairs, which is now wholly taken up about Ways and
Means; besides, when the People knew there was no new Tax to be raised, they
would more cheerfully look upon the opening of a Sessions; and the French King
must be exceedingly discouraged, when he shall see that after so great Expenses
we come on with new Vigor, and have provided a Fund for carrying on the War
till he can be brought to such Terms as will establish a safe and lasting
Peace, which by the Means hitherto used we cannot expect, every Tax we have
given being like the Gasps of a Man laboring for Life, whereby he concluded we
could not subsist a Year longer, and doubtless his Emissaries in England have
not failed to represent things to him in their worst Colors; but I hope both
He and They will find that the People of England, to defend their Religion,
Liberties, and Properties, neither want Money, nor a Will to give it.

The Taxes of this Kingdom are chiefly to be raised on Land or Trade, the first
must be eased, and what is laid on the latter must be done with great Caution
and Consideration, things must be well weighed, and the Principles whereon we
proceed must be sure and solid, and then a thinking Man may improve them by
well-digested Notions; Trade like the Camel will stoop to take up its Burden,
but the weight thereof must not be greater than it can cheerfully rise under,
otherwise we destroy it, and shall by our inconsiderate Covetousness lose those
Golden Eggs it every day would bring us.

Another thing to be considered in the laying a Tax is, that the Poor bear
little or none of the Burden, their Province being more properly to labor and
fight than pay; He that gets his Money by the Sweat of his Bt ows parts not
from it without much Remorse and Discontent, and when all is done, it is but a
little they pay, therefore Taxes that light heavy on them (such as
Chimney-Money, and oftentimes a Poll) tend rather to unhinge than assist the
Government, by disgusting such a number of robust and hardy Men as carry a
great personal Balance in the Kingdom, and may be apt when they think
themselves oppressed to join with any for a present Relief, not being well able
to foresee the Consequences of things at a distance.

Great Care should also be taken of our Manufactures and Manufacturers, that
they be not oppressed.

A general Excise cannot do well, for besides the great Charge and Oppression
of Officers, it shows no Respect to the Poor, but they pay more than the
Wealthiest of their Neighbors suitable to what they have; for though a rich
Man spends more in excisable things than a poor Man does, yet it is not his
All, whereas the other's Poverty gives him leave to lay up nothing, but it is as
much as he can do to provide Necessaries for his Family, out of all which he
pays his Proportion.

Much like this is a general Poll, where it is very difficult to tax People
equally.

But out of all these something may be taken which may be both easy and
practicable, and a Project may be framed which may raise annually enough to
carry on the Charge of the War, on equal and easy Terms, with little or no
Anticipation.

In the well laying whereof these following Rules seem fit to be considered.

1. That what is laid on Trade be so weighed, that where the Trader pays he may
see an apparent Advantage. 2. That the charge of Collecting be on such easy
Terms as not to eat up a great part of what is raised. 3. That the Poor bear
little or none of the Burden. 4. That the Manufacturers be not discouraged. 5.
That that Sum be not raised by many Acts which may be raised by One. 6. That
the Consequence of a Tax be, either to remove a Public Grieviance, or to make
it pay toward the Charge of the War. 7. That it be chiefly laid on those who
have hitherto least felt former Taxes, have least suffered by the War, and
whose Employments tend more to their own Private Advantages than the Support of
the Government. 8. That ways be found out to make all People pay their Shares
for carrying on the Expense of the War who are protected by it, whither they
live in England or elsewhere. 9. That the Lands of England be eased. 10. That
the Revenue suffer not by Anticipations.
But after all is done, when Money is raised with Ease and Equality to the
Subject, yet if great Care be not taken to see it well laid out, 'twill fall
short of answering the end designed; good Methods are as necessary in this as
the former, and the Nation will be more willing to give cheerfully, when it
shall see the Public Treasure managed to Advantage; 'twill be no difficult
Task to make its Credit equal with private Merchants, and its Penny pass as
far, this will be done when its Payments are as punctual; but then things must
not be begun in the middle, but at the right end; we quarrel in vain with a
Colonel for not paying an Hundred Pounds to his Regiment, when perhaps he
receives but Seventy to do it with; nor can the Captains pay their Soldiers to
the full, when the Money grows less in every Hand through which it passes;
Labor is spent to no purpose about the Conduit Pipes, when the Water stops in
the Spring; Errors in the Foundation are most fatal; when things are set right
at the Fountain Head, then 'twill be time to enquire into the defects of the
several Currents; Payments punctually made according to agreement would
encourage all Men to sell their Commodities cheap, and put an end to the Abuses
of Agents, Cloathiers of the Army, and Ticket-Buyers, who do now prey on the
Public; the King would then have his Money well laid out, and those who serve
him be paid without dilatory and chargeable Attendances; and when the Nation
comes to be satisfied that what Money is raised for carrying on the War is
justly applied to its use, and managed with good Husbandry, the Parliament will
give more readily, and the People pay more cheerfully; this will render his
Majesty the Terror of his Enemies, and the delight of his Friends, who will
then strive to outdo each other in their forwardness to serve him with their
Lives and Fortunes; especially when they shall see that due Care is also taken
to secure their Trade, which must enable them to pay their Taxes.

Conclusion*
And thus I have given my thoughts of these three Subjects; I shall only add,
that what I have done has not proceeded from an Itch of Writing, but purely
from the Love I bear to my Native Country, whose Good and Welfare I delight in,
and should be glad to see it flourish and though perhaps I may be thought
mistaken in some particulars of this Discourse, yet I believe few will disagree
with me in the Foundation, that the Interest of England does consist in
Improving its Trade, Product, and Manufactures; What I have imperfectly treated
on I should be well pleased to see a better Pen undertake, great things have
often risen from small Beginnings, perhaps this may stir up some abler Head
(without Reflections) to handle the Subject ^uller, which, as it may be useful
to the (...), so I should read it with great De^^^^^ for if the Trade of
England thrives, it answers my end, and I care not who proposes the Methods.

FINIS.

