WONDERFUL PRODIGIES OF Judgment and Mercy: Discovered in Above Three Hundred
Memorable Histories, CONTAINING I. Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists, Perjured
Wretches, Blasphemers, Swearers, Cursers and Scoffers. II. The Miserable Ends
of diverse Magicians, Witches, Conjurers, etc. with several strange Apparitions.
III. Remarkable Presages of Approaching Death, and of Appeals to Divine
Justice. IV. The Wicked Lives, and Woeful Deaths of Wretched Popes, Apostates,
and Desperate Persecutors. V. Fearful Judgments upon Cruel Tyrants, Murderers,
etc. with the Wonderful Discovery of Murders. VI. Admirable Deliverances from
Imminent Dangers and Deplorable Distresses at Sea and Land. VII. Divine
Goodness to Penitents, with the Dying Thoughts of several Famous Men concerning
a Future State after this Life.


Impartially Collected from Ancient and Modern Authors, of undoubted Authority
and Credit, and Imbellished with diverse Curious Pictures, of several Remarkable
Passages therein.

By R. B. Author of the History of the Wars of England, and the Remarks of
London, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell, next to Kemp's Coffee-house in
Exchange-Alley, over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1682.

Wonderful PRODIGIES Discovered in above: Three Hundred Memorable Historys By
R. B.

Devils of several Shapes in a Noblemans house in Germany pa. 20.

London Printed for (...) Crouch.



TO THE READER.
THIS small Treatise cannot be thought unseasonable in this Age, wherein
Atheism and Impiety does so much ahound. And as the Holy Scriptures (which we
ought first and principally to study and regard) do sufficiently discover the
Wonderful Judgments of the Almighty upon Profane and Impenitent Sinners in
former Ages; so the Divine Justice has not left it self without Witness in all
Times since, of the like severe Vengeance against them; and since Examples
commonly prevail upon Men more than Precepts, this little Collection may, by
the Blessing of Heaven, prevail upon some profligate Offenders, to forsake
their evil ways, lest they themselves be likewise made Examples (...)
Monuments of God's Wrath and Displeasure: And as the Judgments, so likewise the
Mercy and Goodness of God has appeared in all Times and Places, toward those
that put their Trust in him. or have returned (...) s^rious and hearty
Repentance; of which (...) have abundant Instances both in Scripture an^
History; and whereof I have likewise transcribed some few out of very Approved
an^ Credible Historians, both Ancient and Modern whose Names are added to every
particula^ Relation, that they may thereby obtain the more Credit with the
Reader; who may her find in a small Manual, and for a small Price what has been
dispersed in several large Volumes; and therefore I hope will not be
unacceptable to the World: Which is the hearty desire of

R. B.

CHAP. I.
Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists, Scoffers, Blasphemers, Swearers, Cursers,
and Perjured Persons; in several Terrible Examples.

NEver yet were any Nation or People so Barbarous, who by the Instinct of
Nature have not always believed a certain Deity; and the denying thereof was
accounted so detestable, absurd, and contrary to Humane Reason, even among the
Ancient Heathen, that they reckoned it to be horrible Blasphemy. The Athenians
banished Protagoras both from their City and Country, and caused his Books to
be openly burnt because in one of them he seemed to doubt of a Deity: 'Neither
were they less severe toward Diagoras, surnamed The Atheist, who being accused
of Atheism, fled for fear of punishment; upon which they proclaimed, That
whosoever did kill him, should have a Talent of Silver in Recompense, which is
as much as six hundred Crowns: How much more then is the State of Christendom
to be lamented, which is generally infected with this Contagious Pestilence?
And how many bold and impudent Atheists are there in these Times, who daringly
and confidently deny the Providence of God! believe not the Immortality of the
Soul! think there is no such thing as a Life to come! and consequently they
live like Swine and brute Beasts in the world, wallowing in all manner of Lusts
and Sensuality! But let such mad, and brutish Wretches know, that they shall
one day be convinced of their folly, when it is too late: And they may likewise
find by the following Instances, which are of undoubted truth and certainty,
that the Divine Justice does sometimes execute his severe Judgments upon them
in this world, and makes them Monuments of Vengeance, for deterring others,
That they may hear, and fear, and do no more so wickedly.

I. A certain Blasphemous Wretch being drinking and merry at a Common Inn,
among his Companions, asked them, Whether they thought a man was possessed with
a Soul, or no? To which some replied, That the Souls of Men were Immortal, and
that some of them after their release from the Body, lived in Heaven, and
others were condemned to Hell, as we are taught from the Writings of the
Prophets and Apostles; but he replied, and swore, He did not believe the Soul
did survive the Body, but that Heaven and Hell were mere Fables, invented by
the Priests to get money; and as for his part, he would sell his Soul to any
who would buy it. Then one of his Companions took up the Cup, and said, Sell me
thy Soul for this Cup of Wine, which he consented to, and drank it off: Now the
Devil himself was there in the shape of a man (as he is commonly not far from
such Debauchees) who bought it again of the other man at the same price; and
soon after peremptorily demanded his Soul; the whole company affirming it was
fit he should have it, since he bought it, not knowing who it was that asked
it: But on a sudden this Infernal Merchant laid hold of this wretched
Soul-Seller, and carried him into the Air before them all, toward his own
Habitation, to the great astonishment and amazement of the Spectactors, and was
never after heard of; but no question found to his cost that men had Souls, and
that Hell was no Fable, contrary to his profane and senseless Opinion.
Discipul. de temp. Sermon. 132.

II. Not inferior to the former was the Impiety of one not many years since in
this Nation, called Marlin, a Scholar by Profession, brought up from his Youth
in the University of Cambridge, and afterward a scurrilous Poet, and
Play-maker, who giving the Reins to his Wit and Fancy, ran into such Extremes,
that he denied God, and Jesus Christ, and blasphemed the Trinity, not only in
words, but as it is credibly reported, writ Books against it, affirming our
Savior to be a Deceiver, and Moses a Seducer of the People, and the holy
Scriptures to be but vain and idle Stories, and all Religion to be only a
Politic Cheat and Device: But Heaven, by an eminent Judgment, stopped the mouth
of this Blasphemer; for it happened, that as he intended to have stabbed a
person, whom he had malice against, the other perceiving it, avoided the
stroke; and withal catching hold of his wrist, he stabbed in his own Dagger
into his own head, which wounded him in such a terrible manner, that
notwithstanding all the help of Surgery, he died soon after, and that in a
very sad condition; for he cursed and blasphemed to the last gasp; and his last
breath passed out of his body with an horrid Oath, to the terror of all that
beheld him; and herein did the Divine Justice remarkably appear, in that his
own hand which had written those Blasphemies, was made an Instrument to punish
that head and brain, which had wickedly devised them. Beards Theater.

III. In the year 1527. A young Italian, esteemed a man very brave, and valiant
in Arms, was to fight with another young man, who (because he was melancholy,
and spoke very little) was called Forchebene; they went together with a great
company to the Place appointed, which was without the Port of St. Gall; whither
being come, a friend to the former went to him, and said, God give you the
Victory; the proud young man adding blasphemy to his Temerity, answered, How
shall he choose but give it me: They came to use their weapons, and after many
blows given and taken both by the one and the other; Forchebene being become as
the Minister and Instrument of God, gave him a thrust in the mouth, with such
force, that having fastened his Tongue to the Poll of his Neck (where the Sword
went through, above the length of a Span) he made him (...), the Sword remaining
in his Mouth, to the end that the Tongue which had so grievously offended,
might even in this world endure punishment for so horrible a sin. L. Remys
Consid. c. 59.

IV. Another of our own Nation is not to be overpassed, who for Atheism may be
compared to the former, and for God's severe Judgment upon him, may give place
to none: It was a Gentleman in Bark-shire, whose Name I forbear to mention;
This man had a great Estate, but was an open Scoffer, and Contemner of all
Religion; a professed Atheist, and a Scorner of the Word and Sacraments, insomuch
that I have heard it very credibly reported, that being Witness to the
Baptizing of a Child, he would needs have it named Beelzebub. He was likewise
given to all manner of Debauchery, keeping several notorious Strumpets openly
in his House, without shame: He was so accustomed to Swearing, that he could
scarce speak without an Oath. This miserable Man (or rather Brute) having
continued long in this damnable course of life, at last Divine Vengeance found
him out, for going one day a hunting with one of his Companions: As they were
discoursing of diverse Idle Stories, it pleased Almighty God to strike him with
sudden death; for falling suddenly on the Crupper of his Horse, backward, he
was taken off stark dead, with his Tongue hanging out of his Mouth, in a very
fearful manner, and became a terrible Example of God's Justice against all
wicked Atheists. Beards Theater.

V. Cluverius, an Author worthy of credit, who professes that he had this
Relation, not only by hearsay, but from Eyewitnesses, who saw it, gives this
wonderful Account, That in the Month of March, 1632, there lived in the Borders
of Muscovia a Nobleman, by Office a gatherer of Tribute, or Taxes, by name
Albertus Peri^scius; his manner was, when poor men could not presently pay
their Taxes, to distrain upon their Cattle, and drive them to his own home: Now
it came to pass, that this Nobleman being from home, lost all his unjust gains
in one (...) for all his Cattle, both those he had taken by Violence, and what
he had bought with his Money, suddenly dyed: This wretched man coming home, was
told ^ his Wife and Servants what a fearful Judgment from God was befallen him,
whereat he began to rage and rave extremely; and taking his Musket, shot it up
against Heaven, breaking forth into these blasphemous speeches, Let him that
killed my attle devour them; If thou would not let me eat them, eat them thy
self: Upon these furious barkings against God, there fell some drops of blood,
and this wicked man was turned into a black Dog, and howling, he ra^ to the
dead Cattle, and began to feed upon them; and for ought I know (says mine
Author, who wrote this story presently after) is yet feeding upon them. His
Wife great with Child, being astonished, and terrified with the strangeness of
God's Judgments, shortly after died. Clark's Exam. 1 Part.

VI. Simon Churmay in 1201. having most subtly and acutely disputed about the
Trinity, some of his familiar friends persuaded him to put it into writing,
that so the memorial of such excellent things might not be lost; whereupon he
proudly brake forth into this Atheistical speech, O Jesule, Jesule, etc. O
little Jesus, little Jesus, how much have I confirmed and advanced thy Law in
this Question! but if I had a mind to deal crosly, I know how with stronger
Reasons and Arguments to weaken and disprove the same: Which was no sooner
spoken, but he was stricken dumb; and not only so, but he became an Idiot, and
ridiculously foolish, and was made a common hissing and mocking-stock to all
that saw him. Mat. Paris. Not much unlike this, is that of Michael, a
blasphemous Jew, who as he was banqueting with his Companions, fell to
blaspheming Christ, and his Mother, boasting, That he had gotten the Victory
over the Christians God; but as he went down Stairs out of the Room, he fell
down, and brake his Neck. Fincelius. Miserable was the end of Perieres, who
writ a blasphemous Book, wherein he openly mocked at God, and all Religion; for
he fell into most desperate despair; and notwithstanding strict watch was kept
about him, yet he killed himself (...) the year 1502. there lived one Hermanus
Biswick, a Grand Atheist, and a notable Instrument of the Devil, who affirmed,
That the World never had a beginning, as foolish Moses dreamed; and that there
were neither Angels, nor Devils, nor Hell, nor future a Life, but that the
Souls of Men perished with their Bodies; and that Jesus Christ was nothing else
but a Seducer of the People; and that the Faith of Christians, and whatever
else was contained in the Holy Scriptures, was mere vanity. These Opinions full
of Atheism and Impiety he was so hardened in, that he constantly avouched them
to the death, and was for the same, together with his Books, deservedly burnt
in Holland. Theat. Hist.

VII. A certain Rich man at Halterstadt in Germany, abounding with all manner
of worldly happiness, he gave up his whole Soul in delighting therein; so that
he had no sense of Heaven or Religion; yea, he was so Atheistical as to say,
That if he might lead such a life continually upon the Earth, he would not envy
those that enjoyed Heaven, ner desire to exchange his condition with them: But
soon after it pleased God, contrary to his expectation, to cut him off by
death, and so the pleasures which he doated on came to an end. But after his
death there were seen such Diabolical Apparitions in his House, that no man
durst inhabit it, so that it became desolate: For every day there appeared the
Form of this Epicure, sitting with a great many Guests, drinking, carousing,
and making good Cheer; the Table being furnished seemingly with all manner of
Delicacies, and attended on by many Persons, together with Fiddlers, Trumpeters,
and the like; so that whatever he delighted in while he was alive, was there
daily to be seen; God permitting Satan to deceive men's sight by such
Appearances, to deter others from living in such a course of Atheism and
Impiety. Theat. Hist.

VIII. At a Village called Benarides in Spain, two young men (one whereof was
noted to be an outrageous Swearer, and Blasphemer of God's Holy Name) being
together in the Fields, on a sudden there arose a terrible Tempest of Rain and
Wind, accompanied with so impetuous a Whirlwind, that it amazed all that beheld
it; the two young men seeing it furiously coming toward them, to avoid the
danger ran away as fast as they could possible; but notwithstanding their
haste, it overtook them, and for fear it should carry them up into the Air,
they fell flat down upon the ground, where the Whirlwind whilked about them for
some time, and then passed forward; one of them arose so affrighted, and in
such an Agony, that he was scarce able to stand on his feet; the other lying
still without motion, some that stood under an hedge hard by, came to see how
he did, and found him to be stark dead, not without some wonderful symptoms of
Divine Justice; for all his bones were so crushed, that the Joints of his Legs
and Arms were to be turned every way, as though his whole Body had been made of
Moss; and besides, his Tongue was plucked out by the roots, and could not by any
means be found, though it was diligently sought for; and this was the miserable
end of this wretched youth, who was made an Example to the World, of God's
Vengeance against Swearers and Blasphemers. Beards Theater.

IX. Mirtiques, Governor of Brittany in France, in the War against the
Protestants, persuaded them to yield to the King, since their strong God had
now forsaken them, and scoffingly said, It was time for them to sing, Help us
now O Lord, for it is time, but he soon found that their strong God was able to
defend them, and to confound the Proud; he himself being presently after slain
in the Siege. Acts and Mon. Remarkable is the Relation of one Libanius, who was
a Sophistical Atheist; he being at Antioch, demanded blasphemously of a Learned
and Religious Shoolmaster, What the Carpenters Son did, and how he employed
himself? To whom the Schoolmaster, full of the Divine Spirit, replied, The
Creator of the World, whom thou disdainfully call the Carpenters Son, is
making a Coffin for thee, to carry thee to thy Grave; at which the Sophister
laughing, went away, and within few days after died, and was buried in a
Coffin, according to the Prophecy of that Holy Man. Beards Theater. In the
(...) an Arrian Bishop, called Olympius, being in the Baths of Carthage, openly
scoffed, and blasphemed the Holy and Sacred Trinity; but Lightning fell down
from Heaven upon him three times, wherewith he was burnt and consumed to Ashes.
There was also in the time of Alphonsus, King of Arragon and Sicily, in an Isle
toward Africa, a certain profane Hermit, called Antonius, who impudently and
impiously belched out blasphemous speeches against our Blessed Savior, and the
Virgin Mary his Mother, but he was struck with a most grievous and tormenting
Disease, so that he was eaten and gnawn to pieces with Worms till he died,
Aeneas Sylvius.

X. Neither has Divine Vengeance left itself without witness against Cursers,
and those who by denying God give themselves to the Devil; as may plainly
appear ^y the following dreadful Examples. A Soldier traveling through
Marcia, a Country of Almaign, and finding himself not well, went to an Inn,
where he lay, to recover his health, and delivered to his Hostess a certain sum
of money, which he had about him: A while after being recovered of his
Sickness, he demanded his money again, but the Woman, upon consultation with
her Husband, denied the receipt of any, and accused him of wronging her, in
demanding what she never received: On the other side, the Soldier was much
enraged, accusing her of cheating him; when the Man of the House heard the
noise, though he was privy to all before, yet he dissembling the matter, took
his Wife's part, and thrust the Soldier out of doors; who seeing himself thus
abused, drew his Sword, and ran against the door with the point thereof,
whereat the Host began to cry out, Thieves, Thieves, affirming, that he would
have entered his House by force, and have robbed him; whereupon the poor
Soldier was taken, and cast into Prison, and by process of Law, was ready to
be condemned to death; but the very day wherein this heavy Sentence was to be
pronounced, and Executed, the Devil entered into the Prison, and told the
Soldier, That he was condemned (...) dye; nevertheless, if he would give
himself, Body and Soul to him, he would promise to deliver him out of their
hands: The Prisoner replied, That he had rather dye, being innocent, and
without cause, than to be delivered upon that account. The Devil then
represented to him the great danger of death wherein he was, and used all
manner of craft to delude him; but finding all his Arguments uneffectual, he at
length left his suit, but yet promised him both assistance, and revenge upon
his Enemies for nothing; advising him when he came to his Trial, he should
plead not guilty, and declare his innocence, and the wrong which he suffered,
and to entreat the Judge to grant him the favor, That one in a Blew Cap, who
was in the Court, might make his Defense for him; (now this one in the Blew
Cap, was the Devil himself.) The Soldier accepted his offer, and being called
to the Bar, and Indicted of Felony, he presently desired to have his Attorney,
who was there present, to plead his Cause; which being granted him, this witty
crafty Lawyer began very cunningly to defend his Client, affirming him, To have
been falsely accused, and consequently would be unjustly condemned, and that his
Host did withhold the money, and had offered him violence; and to demonstrate
the Truth of what he asserted, he reckoned up every Circumstance of the whole
Action; yea the very place where they had hid they money. The Host on the other
side very impudently denied all, wishing withal, That the Devil might take him
Body and Soul if he had: This subtle Attorney in the Blew Cap, finding now the
advantage which he had hitherto looked for, left off his pleading, and
immediately seizing upon the Host, carried him out of the Sessions House, and
hoisted him into the Air so high, that he was never after seen nor heard of.
And thus was the Soldier wonderfully delivered from death, to the astonishment
of all the Beholders, who were Eyewitnesses of this terrible Judgment upon
this perjured, cursing Host. Wierus of Spirits, lib. 3.

XI. Luther in his Exposition upon the Corinthians, gives this Relation; That a
certain debauched Person, of a very wicked Life, and of such evil Education,
that at every word he spoke almost, the Devil was in his mouth; for which
practice, though he was often reproved by his Neighbors, and exhorted to
correct and amend so vile and detestable a Custom, yet it was all to no
purpose: Continuing therefore in this damnable practice, it happened, that as
he was one time passing over a Bridge, he fell down, and in his fall, he cried
out, Hoist up with an hundred Devils, which he had no sooner uttered, but the
Devil, whom he had called for so often, was at his Elbow, who presently strangled
him, and carried him away with him.

John Wierus gives an Account also to this purpose, That in the year 1551. at
Megalopole, near Voildstat, it happened, that the People being drinking and
carousing at Whitsuntide, a Woman in the company commonly named the Devil in
her Oaths, till he that had been called upon so often, came on a sudden, and
carried her through the Gate aloft into the Air, before all the company, who ran
out in great astonishment, to see whether he would transport her, and observed
her hanging in the Air without the Town; and then falling down on the ground,
they found her stark dead. Wierus.

XII. The same Author affirms, That about this time there dwelt in a City of
Savoy, a man who was of a very vicious conversation, and likewise a monstrous
Swearer, who put many good men to much fruitless pains in admonishing and
reproving him for his wicked behavior; for he would give no ear to them, nor
in the least reform his ways; now it happened that the Plague was in the City,
and he was infected therewith; and therefore himself, his wife and kinswoman
withdrew themselves apart into a Garden-house that he had; yet in this his
Extremity did not the Ministers forsake him, but continually exhorted him to
Repentance, and to discover to him his grievous Offenses; but he was so far
from being moved with these Religious Admonitions, that he seemed daily more
and more to harden himself in his ill course of life; therefore hastening his
own destruction, it happened one day as he was swearing, denying God, and
giving himself to the Devil, and calling for him with horrid vehemence; behold
the Devil appeared, and suddenly snatching him up, carried him into the Air;
his wife and kinswoman looking on, and seeing him fly over their heads: In this
his swift transportation, his Cap fell off his Head, and was found at Rosne,
but himself was never after seen, nor heard of. The Magistrate being advertised
hereof, came to the place where he was taken up, to be better informed of the
Truth, and took the Depositions of the two Women upon Oath, of what they had
seen. By this we may see the terrible, yet just Vengeance of God upon such
Wretches; and it may be a warning to those who are so inspired by Satan, that
they cannot speak but they must name him, who is both an Enemy to God and Man,
instead of commending themselves to God, and praying for his Grace and
Assistance. John Wierus de Spirit.

XIII. Martin Luther in his Table-talk mentions this Remarkable History: There
was a Popish Priest, who had formerly been a Protestant, and Apostatized to
Popery, as Adam Budissina testifies: This Priest thundered out most bitter
curses against Luther in the Pulpit, Preaching at a Town called Ruthnerwald;
and among the rest he wished, That if Luther's Doctrine were true, a
Thunderbolt might strike him to death: Now about three days after there arose
a mighty Tempest with Thunder and Lightning, whereat this cursed Priest was
extremely afraid, his guilty conscience accusing him, that he had spoken falsely
and maliciously against the Truth, and thereupon he ran with all speed into the
Church, and there fell to his Prayers before the Altar; but the Vengeance of
Heaven found out his Hypocrisy; for he was there struck with Lightning; and
though they with much difficulty recovered life in him, yet as he was led
homeward through the Churchyard, another flash fell upon him in such a manner,
that he was burnt from the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot, as black
as a Shoe, dying with a manifest mark of Divine Justice upon him. Luthers Col.
Men.

XIV. Theodorus Beza gives an Account of two (...) ^ble Instances of the
severity of God's Judgment upon a Curser, and a Perjured Person, of his own
knowledge. I knew, said he, a man in France, of good understanding, well
instructed in Religion, and a Master of a Family, who in his anger cursing, and
bidding the Devil take one of his Children, had presently his wish answered;
for his Child was immediately possessed with an Evil Spirit, from which, though
by the fervent and continual Prayers of good Christians, he was at length
released, yet ere he had fully recovered himself, he died. The like we read to
have happened to a Woman, whom her Husband in great rage devoted with bitter
Curses to the Devil, upon which Satan immediately assaulted her, and robbed her
of her Wits, so that she could never be recovered. Another Example, says he,
happened not far from hence, even in this Country, upon a Perjurer, who
forswore himself, intending thereby to prejudice, and deceive another; but he
had no sooner made an end of his false Oath, ere a grievous Apoplexy seized
upon him; so that without ever speaking one word more, he soon after miserably
died. Beza, Homiliae.

XV. Strange and terrible is that which happened at Noeburg in Germany, to a
Son who was cursed by his Mother in her Anger, wishing, and praying to God that
she might never see him return alive; which accordingly happened; for the same
day the young man bathing himself in the Water, was drowned, and never returned
to his Mother alive, according to her ungodly wish. Theat. Hist. Henry Earl of
Schwartzenburg, through a corrupt custom, used commonly to wish he might be
drowned in a Privy; and as he wished, so it happened to him; for in the year
1148. he being in St. Peter's Cloister, in the City of Erford, with Frederick
Emperor of Germany; the Emperor had occasion to go to the Privy, whither he
was followed by some of his Nobles, and Schwartzenbourg, among the rest, when
suddenly the floor that was under them began to sink, the Emperor immediately
took hold of the Iron Grates of a window, whereat he hung by the hands till
some came and succored him; some of the Gentlemen fell to the bottom, and were
drowned; and amongst others, this Henry, Earl of Schwartzenburg. Wanley Hist.
Man. A young Courtier at Mansfield used upon any earnest asseveration to say,
The Devil take me if it be not so; and the Devil indeed took him while he
slept, and threw him out of an high window, where, through by God's good
Providence, be escaped with his life; yet he learnt by experience to bridle his
Tongue from all such cursed speeches; this being but a taste of God's Divine
Wrath, which has happened upon such Wretches as he. Cyria^ Spangen.

XVI. In the year 1557. the day before Good Friday, at Forchenum in Germany,
there was a certain Priest who was crooked in body and mind, through Age, and
ill nature; and likewise so infirm, that he could not go but upon Crutches, yet
he would needs be carried up into the Pulpit to Preach a Sermon; his Text was
in the Eleventh Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, from whence he
took occasion to defend the Mass and other Errors of the Papists; and then
breaking forth into a rage, he uttered these or the like blasphemous speeches;
Oh Paul, Paul! If thy Doctrine touching the Receiving of the Sacrament in both
kinds be true; and if it be a wicked thing to Receive it otherwise, then would,
the Devil might take me; and then turning to the People, he said, If the Pope's
Doctrine concerning this Point be not true, then am I the Devil's Bondslave;
neither do I fear to pawn my Soul upon it: These, and many other horrible words
he used, till the Devil came indeed tran^formed into the shape of a tall black
man, terrible of countenance, and before him there was such a fearful noise and
wind, that the People were afraid the Church would have fallen on their heads;
but without doing the least hurt to any of the rest, he only took away the Old
Priest, his Devoted Bondslave, and carried him so far, that he was never heard
of. The Bishop of Rugenstine's Brother hardly escaped his hands; for he came to
fetch him, but he defending himself with his Sword, wounded his own body, and
very narrowly saved his life. After this, there were many Visions se^n about
the City, as Armies of Men seeming ready to enter and surprise them, so that
happy was he who could secure himself in a corner. At another time the like
noise was heard in the Church, while they were Baptizing a Child, and all this
for the abominable cursing and blasphemy of the profane Priest. Beards Theater.

XVII. At Oster, a Village in Germany, there happened a most strange and
fearful Judgment upon a Woman who gave her self to the Devil, both Body and
Soul, and used horrible Cursings and Oaths both against her self and others,
which detestable Custom she practiced upon all occasions, but more especially
at a Marriage in that Village upon St. John Baptist's day; and though the whole
company exhorted her to leave off that monstrous Villainy, yet she would not be
persuaded, but continued therein till all the People were set at Dinner, and
very merry; when the Devil having got full possession of her, suddenly
appeared, and taking her away before them all, transported her into the Air
with most horrible outcries and roarings; and in that manner he carried her
round about the Town, so that the Inhabitants were ready to die for fear; and
soon after tore her body into four pieces, leaving a quarter of her in the four
several highways, that all who came by might be witnesses of her punishment;
and then returning to the Marriage, he threw her bowels upon the Table before
the Mayor of the Town, with these words; Behold these Dishes of Meat belong to
thee, whom the like destruction awaiteth, if thou do not amend thy wicked
life. The Reporters of this History were John Herman, the Minister of that
Town, with the Mayor himself, and all the Inhabitants, they being desirous to
have it known for Examples sake. Beards Theater.

XVIII. Most dreadful is that Relation of Johannes Fincelius; That in 1553.
near Bellisina, a City in Helvetia, there were three profane Wretches that
played at Dice upon the Lord's Day, without the Walls of the City, one of whom
called Vlrick Schaeterus, having lost much Money, and offended God by many
cursed speeches; at last expecting a good cast, he brake forth into this
horrible and blasphemous speech, If fortune deceive me now, I will thrust my
Dagger into the very Body of God as far as I can; and the cast miscarrying, he
immediately drew his Dagger, and threw it up against Heaven with all his
strength, when behold the Dagger vanished out of sight, and five drops of blood
fell upon the Table in the midst before them, and immediately the Devil came,
and carried away this blasphemous Wretch, with such a fury and noise, that the
whole City was amazed, and astonished thereat; the other two half distracted
with fear, strove with all their might to wipe away the drops of blood from the
Table, but all in vain; for the more they wiped them, the more clearly they
appeared. The rumor of this dreadful Accident soon flew into the City, and
multitudes flocked to the place, where they found the two other Gamesters
washing the Board, whom by Order of the Senate they bound in Chains, and
carried toward the Prison; but by the way; as they were going through the Gate
of the City, one of them was suddenly struck dead, with such a number of Lice,
and Worms creeping out of him, as was wonderful and loathsome to behold: The
Third, to avert the Divine Indignation which seemed to hang over their heads,
the Citizens, without any further Inquisition or Trial, put presently to death:
The Table, with the spots of blood thereon, was taken, and reserved as a
Monument of this fearful Judgment of the Almighty. Clarks Examples. 1 p.

XIX. It is notoriously known at Oundle in Northamptonshire, that one William
Hacket, used upon occasion in earnest discourse, to curse himself in this
manner; If it be not true, then let a visible confusion come upon me; and he
wanted not his wish, as appears by the following Relation. In the year 2591.
and the 33. of Queen Eliz. Edmand Coppinger, and Henry Arthington, two
Gentlemen associating themselves with this Hacket, who had formerly been a
profane and lewd Person, but now pretended great Reformation; these three ran
into very strange and dangerous Opinions, and at last came to think, that this
Hacket was anointed to be Judge of the World; and coming to his Lodging one day
in London, Hacket told them, that he had been anointed with the Holy Ghost;
then Coppinger asked what his pleasure was to command them; Go, says he, and
proclaim in the City, that Jesus Christ is come with his Fan in his hand, to
judge the Earth; and if they will not believe you, let them come and kill me if
they can: Coppinger answered, That it should be done; and thereupon he and
Arthington ran immediately into the Streets, and proclaimed their Message; and
when by reason of the confluence of People, they could go no further, they got
up into two empty Carts in Cheapside, crying, Repent, Repent, for Jesus Christ
is come to Judge the World: And so pulling a Paper out of their bosoms, they
read out of it many things touching the Calling and Office of Hacket; as how he
represented Christ, by taking part of his glorified Body, etc. They likewise
called themselves the Prophets, one of Justice, and the other of Mercy. The
Citizens being amazed at them, took Hacket, and carried him before a Justice of
Peace, who after Examination, committed him to Prison; and at the Sessions
being found guilty of Sedition, and speaking Traitorous words against the
Queen, he was condemned, and hanged on a Gibbet in Cheapside, uttering horrible
Blasphemy against the Majesty of God. Coppinger, died the next day in
Bridewell; and Arthington afterward made a public Recantation. Thus the Curse
of Hacket happened to him; for a visible confusion came upon him, according to
his wish. Beards Theater.

XX. In the City of Astorga, a Mother in her rage cursed one of her own Sons
with detestable Maledictions, wishing The Devils in Hell to take him; and that
they would fetch him out of her presence; with many other horrible Execrations:
This was about Ten a Clock at night, and very dark; the Boy at last, for fear
of her, went into a little Court behind the House, from whence he was suddenly
hoisted up into the Air, by Men, in appearance, with grim countenances, of
large stature, lothsom and horrible, and were indeed evil Spirits of Hell, who
carried him away with such swiftness (as he himself after confessed) that it
was impossible for any Bird in the World to fly so fast; and falling down
amongst certain Mountains of Bushes and Briars, he was drawn through the
thickest of them; and being all over torn and rent, both in his clothes, face
and body, he began to call upon God, and to beseech him for his help and
assistance; upon which these cruel Feinds were forced to bring him back again
through the Air, and put him through a little window, into a Chamber in his
Fathers House, where after much search and grief for him, he was found in this
pitiful condition, and almost distracted with fear: And thus, though they had
not power to to deprive him of his life, as they have done to others; yet God
suffered them to afflict the Parents in the Son, to warn them to forbear such
horrid wickedness. But above all, that is most remarkable which happened in a
the Town of Misina in the year 1552. Sept. 11. where a passionate Father
observing his Son to be slack in his business, wished He might never stir from
the place; which he had no sooner spoken, but his Son stuck fast indeed; nor
could by any means possible be removed, no not so much as to sit or bend his
Body, till by the Prayers of good Christians his pains were mitigated, though
not remitted; three years he continued standing, with a post at his back, for
his ease; and four years sitting; at the end whereof he died; nothing weakened
in his understanding, but professing the Faith, and not doubting of his
Salvation through Jesus Christ: When he was demanded at any time how he did,
his Answer usually was, That he was fastened of God, and that it was not in Man
but the Mercy of God only must release him. Clarks Exampl. 1 Vol.

XXI. John Peter, Son-in-law to Alexander the cruel Keeper of Newgate, being a
most horrible Swearer and Blasphemer, used commonly to say, If it be not true,
I pray God I may rot ere I die, which happened to him; for he rotted away
indeed, and so died in misery. To this may be added a notable Example of a
certain young Gallant, that was a monstrous Swearer, who riding in the company
of diverse Gentlemen out of Cornwall, in the days of King Edward the Sixth; he
began to curse and blaspheme most horribly, whom one Mr. Hains a Minister, with
mild words reproved, telling him, He should one day answer for it; whereat the
Gentleman being in a fume, bid him, Take no thought for him, but prepare for
his own winding sheet; Well (says the Minister) Amend, for Death gives no
warning; as soon comes the Lambs Skin to the Market, as an old Sheeps; Gods
wounds! (said he) care not thou for me, still raging worse and worse, till at
length going on their Journey, they came to a great Bridge, which was made over
an Arm of the Sea; in passing of which this swearing Gallant spurred his Horse
with such fury, that he leaped clear over the Bridge, with the Man on his back,
who as he was falling, cried out, Horse, and Man, and all to the Devil. This
terrible Story Bishop Ridly preached and delivered in a Sermon at Paul's Cross,
and Mr. Hains himself reported the Truth thereof to Mr. Fox, from whence this
is taken. Acts and Monuments.

XXII. At a Town called St. Gallus, in Helvetia, a certain Man that earned his
Living by making clean foul Linen; going into a Tavern, tasted so much of the
Grape, that in his Drunkenness he used horrible Cursings, wishing, That if ever
he went into the Fields again to his old Trade, the Devil might break his Neck;
but when sleep had conquered Drink, and Sobriety had restored his Senses, he
went to his business as formerly, remembering indeed his late words, but not
regarding them; howbeit the Devil, to show his double diligence, attended him
in the likeness of a big swarthy Man, alking him, If he had not forgot his
promise and vow which he had made the day before; and likewise demanding
whether it were not lawful to break his Neck? and withal struck the poor Man,
trembling with fear, over the shoulders, that his feet and hands presently
dried up, and there he ^ay, not able to stir till he was carried home; the
Almighty not giving Satan so much power over him, as he himself wished, but yet
permitting him to punish him in this manner, for his amendment, and our
Example. Beards Theater.

XXIII. A Man in Lincolnshire, for every trifle used to swear by God's Precious
Blood, and would not take warning from his Friends, till at length falling into
a grievous Sickness, he was again much persuaded by his Friends to Repent,
whose counsel he still rejected; and hearing the Bell Toll, in the very pains
of death he started up, swearing, God's Wounds! the Bell Tolls for me, but he
shall not have me yet; whereupon the Blood issued but in a most fearful manner
from all the joints and parts of his Body, as Mouth, Nose, Wrists, Knees,
Heels, Toes, and every where else; and so he miserably ended his wretched life.
Mr. Perkins. Another, for many years together, had a wicked custom of Swearing
by God's Arms; in the end his own Arm being hurt with a Knife, could not by any
means be cured, but rankled, and festered daily more and more, and at last
rotted so much, that it fell away piecemeal, and himself through anguish and
pain thereof died. Mr. Philip Stubs. At Tabinga in Germany, a desperate Boy
used to invent such New Oaths, as were not common; but it pleased God to send a
Canker, or some worse Disease, which eat out his Tongue, that Instrument
wherewith he blasphemed, German. Hist. There was a certain wretch, who in his
lifetime was dreadfully inclined to the horrid sin of Swearing; and when he
came upon his Deathbed, his heart was so set on fire of Hell, and so
exceedingly filled with enraged madness against Heaven, that he desperately
desired the standers by to help him with Oaths, and to Swear for him, though he
himself in the mean ^ime swore as fast and furiously as he could. Mr. Robert
Bolton.

XXIV. One hearing Perjury condemned by a Minister, and how it seldom or never
escaped unpunished, he in a bravery said, I have often forsworn my self, and
yet my Right Hand is no shorter than my Left; which words he had scarce
uttered, when such an Inflammation arose in that Hand, that he was forced to
have it immediately cut off, lest it should have infected the whole Body,
whereby it soon became shorter than the other. Clarks Examples, 1 p. A young
Lady of a considerable Estate in Saxony, promised Marriage to a handsome Young
Man, but of a mean Fortune; he foreseeing that Wealth and Inconstancy might
alter her mind, freely discovered his thoughts to her, whereupon she made a
thousand Protestations of her Constancy to him, and as many Imprecations upon
her self, wishing, That if ever she Married another, the Devil might take her
away on the Wedding day; yet afterward a Person of more Wealth making his
Addresses to her, she was contracted, and Married to him; a great
Marriage Feast was provided, but while they were at Dinner, two Men on
Horseback came to the House, and as Strangers, were invited to the Feast; after
Dinner one of them desired to lead the Bride a Dance; and taking her by the
Hand, led her a turn or two, and then in the presence of her Bridegroom, and
all her Friends, he caught her up in his Arms, crying in vain for help; and
going out of the Gate, he hoisted her up into the Air, and vanished away
together with his companions and Horses, so that she was never seen more. Sword
for Swearers.

XXV. A Nobleman in Silesia having invited many Guests to Dinner, and prepared
a Costly and Libera^ Feast for them, it happened that instead of his Friends,
he only received their Excuses for not coming, at which the Nobleman in great
rage broke out into these words Since all these People have thus sailed me, I
wish so many Devils of Hell would feast with me to day, and eat up m^ Provision
made for them; and so in fury left his House and went to Church, where there
was a Sermon: H^^ had not been long there, when a great Troop of Horse A
Blasphemer turned into a black Dog pa. 4.

A Woman torn in pieces by the Devil. pa. 14.

men arrived at his House; they were all black, of extraordinary Aspect and
Stature, who alighting in the Court, called a Groom to take their Horses, and
bid another of the Servants to run presently to his Master, and tell him his
Guests were come: The servant amazed, runs to the Church, and with short
breath, and the little sense he had left, gave his Master an Account of what
had fallen out; the Nobleman calls to the Preacher, and desires him to break
off his Sermon, and to help him with his Spiritual Counsel and Advice; who
persuades him to order all his Servants, with what speed they could, to depart
the House. In the mean time the Nobleman with the whole Congregation, came
within view of the House, which the Servants in great Affright had forsaken,
but for haste had forgot, and left behind a young Child, who was the Nobleman's
Son, sleeping in the Cradle. By this time the Devils were revelling in the
Dining Room, making a great noise, as if they had saluted and welcomed one
another; they looked through the Casements, one with the Head of a Wolf;
another of a Bear, a Cat, a Tiger, etc. taking Bowels, and quaffing, as if they
had drank to the Master of the House? By this time the Nobleman seeing his
Servants safe, remembered his Son, and asked, What was become of the Child;
These words were scarce spoke, when one of the Devils had him in his Arms, and
showed him out of the Window. The Father at this sight, being almost without
life, spying an Old Servant of his fetched a deep sigh, and said, Ah Me! What
shall become of the Infant? The Servant seeing his Master in that Ecstasy
replied, Sir, by Gods help I will enter the House, and fetch the Child out of
the power of that Devil, or perish with him; To whom his Lord said, God prosper
thy Attempt, and strengthen thee in thy Purpose: The Minister then likewise
blessing him, he goes into the House; and coming into the next Room where the
Devils were then rioting he fell upon his knees, and commended himself to the
Protection of Heaven: Then pressing in among them, he beheld them in their
horrible shapes; some sitting; some standing; some walking; then they all came
about him at once, and asked him, What business he had there; He in a great
Sweat and Agony, yet resolved in his purpose, came to the Spirit which held the
Infant, and said, In the Name of God deliver this Child to me; who answered,
No, But let thy Master come and fetch him, who has most Interest in him; The
Servant replied, I am now come to do that Office and Service to which God has
called me; by virtue of which, and by his power, lo I seize upon the Innocent;
and so snatching him from the Devil, took him in his Arms, and carried him out
of the Room; at which they clamoured, and called aloud after him, Ho thou Knave
Ho thou Knave, leave the Child to us, or we will tear thee in pieces; but he
unterrified with their Diabolical Threatenings, brought away the Infant, and
delivered it to the Father. After some few days the Spirits left the House,
and the Nobleman returned to his Ancient Possession. Now, though the Devils had
no power to hurt any body, but only destroyed the Victuals; yet it may be a
warning to prevent wicked and rash Wishes and Curses. This History, though it
may seem very strange, yet is related by Beard in his Theater, Heywood of
Angels, and several other very credible Authors, for an undoubted Truth.

XXVI. Godwin Earl of Kent, in the Reign of Edward the Confessor, 1055. sitting
at Table with the King, it happened that one of the Cup-bearers stumbled, but
did not fall, whereat Godwin laughing, said, That if one Brother had not helped
another (meaning his Legs) all the wine had been spilt; With which words the
King calling to mind his Brothers death, who was slain by Godwin, answered, So
should my Brother Alfred have helped me, had it not been for Godwin; whereat
Godwin fearing the King's new kindled displeasure, excused himself by many
words, and at last said, If I be any way guilty of Alfred 's Death, I pray God
I may never six allow down a morsel of bread more; but he swore falsely, as the
Judgment of God declared; for he was immediately choked in the presence of the
King, before he stirred one foot from the place. Beards Theater. In the days
of Queen Mary John Cooper, an honest Religious Man, was falsely accused by one
Grimwood, for Treason, in speaking some words against the Queen, and was
accordingly put to Death; but this Perjured Villain did not long escape divine
Vengeance; for being shortly after about his Labor in the Harvest, and in good
health, his bowels suddenly fell out of his Body and so he miserably died.
Acts. and Monuments.

XXVII. In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Thomas Lovelace, by forged Letters,
sought to have three of his Cousin Germans brought into question for their
Lives, about Matters of High Treason; but the Malice and Forgery, of this
wicked business being found out, the false Accuser had Judgment to be carried
on Horseback about Westminster Hall, with his Face to the Horse Tail, and a
Paper on his Back containing his Offense; from thence to be carried in the same
manner, and set on the Pillory in the Palace Yard, and there to have one of
his Ears cut off; also to be set on the Pillory on a Market day in Cheapside
with the like paper, after that to be carried into Kent, and at the next
Assizes there to be set on the Pillory with the like Paper, and his other Ear
to be there cut off; also to stand in the Pillory one Market day at Canterbury,
and another at Rochester; and in all these Places his Offense to be openly
Read; which Sentence was accordingly Executed, and may be rather thought too
mild against such Villains, as by Forgery, Perjury, and False Swearing shall
endeavor to destroy Innocent Persons, Stows Annals.

XXVIII. Narcissus, Bishop of Jerusalem, though a man famous for his Virtues
and Faithfulness in the Reproof and Correction of Vice, was yet maliciously and
falsely accused of Incontinency: There were three of these wicked and Suborned
Varlets, who bound their Accusations with Oaths and fearful Imprecations upon
themselves: The first of these, at the close of his Testimony, added, If I say
not the Truth, I pray God I may perish by Fire: The second said, If I speak any
thing of falsehood, I pray God I may be consumed by some filthy and cruel
Disease; And said the third, If I accuse him falsely, I pray God I may lose my
sight, and become blind: This wicked charge, although it was not believed by
such as knew the gre^ Integrity of the Bishop; yet the good man, partly for
grief to lie under such a scandal, and partly to reti^^ himself from worldly
Affairs, left his Bishopric, an^ lived privately: But his forsworn Accusers
escaped no^ the All-seeing Justice of Heaven; for the first, according to his
Imprecation, had his House set on fire (it (...) unknown how) and was therein
himself, together with his Family, burnt to Ashes: The second languished away
under a soul and loathsome Disease: The third seeing the woeful ends of his
Companions, confessed all the complotted Villainy; and lamenting his case and
crime, be continued weeping so long, till he utterly lost his sight; and thus
God said Amen to all that they had wickedly and presumptuously wished upon
themselves. Eusebius lib. 6.

XXIX. Vladislaus, King of Poland and Hungary, had fortunatey sought against
the Turks at the Mountain Hamus, and taken Carambey, the General of their Army;
by means of which Victory, he occasioned Amurath, Emp. o^ the Turks, to sue for
Peace, which was agreed to upon honorable and advantageous Terms, and was
solemnly sworn to by the King of Poland, upon the Holy Evangelists, and by
Amuraths Ambassadors in behalf of their Master, upon the Turkish Alcoran. This
being known to the Pope, and other Christian Princes, they said, it was
unseasonable, unprofitable, and dishonorable; whereupon the Cardinal Julian is
s^nt by the Pope as his Legate, to break the Peace, and to absolve the King
from his Oath: The young King therefore by their persuasion, breaks the League,
and undertakes the War, with greater preparations and vigor than sormerly,
advancing with his Army to Varna, a City upon the Pontick Shore, doing all the
mischief he was able to the Enemies Country; which as soon as the Great Turk
understood, he returns out of Cilicia, and enters Battle with the Christians;
where at the first the Turks were beaten, and retired with great Slaughter,
being almost ready to fly: Amurath seeing all brought into extreme danger,
beholding the Picture of Christ Crucified in the displayed Ensigns of the
Christians, he plucked the Writing out of his bosom, wherein the late League was
comprised, and holding it in his hand with his Eyes cast up to Heaven, he said;
Behold thou Crucified Christ, this is the League thy Christians in thy Name
made with me, which they have without cause broken; now if thou be a God, as
they say thou art, and as we dream, revenge the wrong now done unto thy Name,
and Me, and show thy Power upon the perjured People, who in their deeds deny
thee their God; It was not long after this, but the fortune of the Battle was
quite changed, for King Vladislaus was slain, his head cut off by a Janizary,
and fastened to the end of a Lance; Proclamation was made that it was the head
of the Christian Ring, by which the rest were so daunted, that they fled;
Julian the Legate also, who exhorted to this War, was slain, and his dead body
exposed to the scorn and contempt of the common Soldiers, for that being a
Priest, he had contrary to the Law of Nations advised, and persuaded to break
the Peace. This battle was sought 1444. Turkish History.

XXX. In the year 1070, or thereabout, there arose so great a difference
between the Emperor, Henry the 4th. and Pope Gregory the 5th, that the Pope
excommunicated him, and depriving him of his Imperial dignity, caused Rodulphus
Duke of Swtvia to be made Emperor in his stead, after which, there happened a
great Battle between them at the River Ellester, where the Emperor Henry had
the victory; Rodulphus by a terrible blow, had his right Arm struck off from
his Body, ^^t which he cried out, Behold O ye Nobles, that right hand of mine
which I gave to my Lord Henry, inconfirmation of the fidelity I had sworn to
him; which Oath notwithstanding, contrary to all Justice ad Equity I have
violated, and am now thus justly punished. Zuing. Theat. vol. 2. lib. 7.

Burghard, Archbishop of Magdeburgh, though in regard of his place and
profession he ought to have given good example, and to have punished Perjury in
others, yet he thrice broke his Promise, and Oath to his own Citizens, the
Senate and People of Magdeburgh; for first he besieged them with a great Army,
and though they redeemed their liberty with a sum of Money, he swearing not to
be siege them any more, yet without any regard to Faith or Honesty he returned
afresh to the Siege, but his per^^diousnes did not prosper for he was taken
Prisoner at the next assault; yet he so appeased them with his humble carriage
and demeanor, together with h^^ repeated Oaths never to trouble them any more,
but to continue their steadfast friend for the future, that they not only freed
hi^ from his Imprisonment, but restored him to all his dignities with great
solemnity. Nevertheless the Traitorous Archbishop returning to his old vomit,
procured a dispensation for his Oath from Pope John the 23. and began again to
molest, vex, and murder the Citizens, whom he had vowed to protect; but
vengeance at last overtook him, for being catched once again, and Imprisoned,
while his Friends were treating for his liberty, the Jailer beat him to death
with the bar of a door, or as some say with an Iron rod o^^ of a window, and so
at last his Perjury found its desert. Beards Thea.

XXXI. In the Reigh of Queen Elizabeth, there was one Am Avery a Widow, who
forswore her self for a little Money which she should have paid for six pound
of Flax at a shop in Woodstreet, upon which she was suddenly surprised by the
Justice of God, and fell down immediately speechless, casting up at her mouth
what nature had ordained to pass another way, and in this agony dyed. Clarks
Examples. About the beginning of April, 1661. A Woman in Derbyshire having
couzened a Boy of some Money, was charged with it, but she stiffly denied it,
and being further urged to confess the truth, she in a fearful manner prayed
God, That the Earth might open, and swallow her up quick if she had it, and
immediately the Earth under her opened, and she sank into it, and being
afterward dug for, they found her nine foot within the Earth, and that very
Money was found in her pocket. Clarks Examples, 2 vol.

XXXII. In the Year 1551. Five drunken men quaffing together in the Kingdom of
Bohemia, profaned the name of God with horrible Blasphemies, and the Picture
of the Devil being painted upon the wall, they caroused healths to him, which
the Devil pledged soon after, for the next morning all five were found dead,
their necks being broken, and quashed to pieces, as though a wheel had gone
over them, blood running out of their mouths, nostrils, and ears, to the great
astonishment of the spectators. Johan Fincel. Not many years since, two men
contended together, who should pour forth most blasphemies against God, but
whilst they were exercising this devilish contention, one of them was stricken
with madness, and so continued to his lives end. In the same manner several
young men at Rome agreed together that he should have the victory, who could
swear most, but as soon as they entered into this wicked strife, one of them was
deprived of the use of his tongue, another of his reason and understanding, and
the rest remained for some time as dead men, God reserving them alive for
Repentance. Beards. Thea.

XXXIII. At Eslinga in Germany, a certain Nobleman having lost much Money at
play; fell into horrible Execrations and Blasphemies, and commanded his man to
bring him his Horse, that he might ride home in a very dark night; his Servant
diffuaded him from his Journey, affirming how dangerous the way was, by reason
of the waters, and Fens that lay in the midst, whereat he began to rage and
swear the more, and resolved to go; but as he was riding along, he was
encountered by the way with an Army of Infernal Soldiers, or Evil Spirits, who
beset the Nobleman on every side, and threw him from his Horse; now there was
in his Company a virtuous, and valiant Gentleman, whoset him again on his
Horse, and held him on one side, whom when the Spirits durst not attempt, by
reason of his Innocence, they vanished out of sight; the Nobleman was carried
into a Monastery hard by, where he lay three days and died, such many times is
the end of horrible, and fearful Blasphemers. Lonicerus. A Vintner who
accustomed himself to Blaspheming, Swearing, and drunkenness, and delighted to
entertain such as were like himself to swallow his Wine; upon the Lords Day
standing at the door with a Pot in his hand, to call in more guests, there came
suddenly a violent Whirlwind, and carried him up into the Air, in the sight of
all men, and he was never seen more Beards Theater.

XXXIV. Lamentable is, the Relation of what happened in Holland in June last
1681. as it is written by Theodorus Paludamus, a Protestant Minister at
Lewarden in Freizland, which may serve for a Terror to all wretched Swearers
and Drunkards; A Person named Dowee Sitses, a Mason in that Country, being
reported to be in a desperate condition, I accompanied a Gentleman, who was
sent to him by Order from the Lords of the Provincial, where we found two
Master Chirurgions, and their two Servants busy in making Plasters, and
dressing the Patient, and he in such a lamentable condition, as we could not
behold but with amazement, his Hair was burnt off his Head to his Ears; his
whole Face burnt except his Eyes, his Arms burnt in several Places, his Hands
to the ends of his fingers were burnt like a roasted Fowl, but could move all
his fingers, his Breast and Back burnt in several places, and yet his shirt
whole, his Belly under the Navel, for about the breadth of an hand was as black
as a stock, in which place the Surgeons made several incisions, and he felt
it not, his Privities, Hip Thighs, and Legs were terribly burnt, yet not his
stockins, his feets were also burnt, and indeed no part was free, so that he
was a woeful sight; after the Patient was dressed, and had got a little breath,
both he and his Wife gave a full account of the following passages upon Oath;
Upon the 15 of June last at Evening, this Dowee Sitses came drunk into a
Tavern, where he with the Man of the House, and another drank three Quarts of
Wine, and coming home at ten at night, he lay down to sleep upon Cushions in
the Kitchen, and fell into a dream about a Story he had read in a book of Simon
de Vries, of a certain Company that danced in Masquerade, with every one a
lighted Torch in their hand, wherewith they burnt one another; whereupon he
waked, and stood up, thinking to go into the yard to make water, and of a
sudden he found himself of a light flame in the midst of the room, which burnt
him thus dreadfully, and some part of his Clothes; upon which he cried out for
help, but none came; then he began to faint, and in his distress cried out; O
God be gracious unto me a poor Sinner; and thereupon the flame ceased in the
twinkling of an Eye, but he growing faint, laid his head upon a Cushion in the
room; about two in the morning his Wife came down and found him in this sad
condition, and felt something under her feet, which was like a parcel of red
ashes and burnt rags, and taking hold of her Husband, had only a burnt piece of
his Sleeve in her hand, whereopen she cries out, O Lord! Dowee, Thou art
grievously burnt: He answered, The Devil has brought me in this Case; upon
which she called in the Neighbors, and Chirurgions; his Wife said he had been
much given to Drunkenness, and often reproved in vain by the Ministers, that he
drank much Brandy, and other strong Liquors, though he had often sworn against
it, and usually cursed himself, Wishing that if he were drunk again, the Devil
might tear him Limb from Limb, so that God made use of the Devil as an
Executioner of his Judgment to bring the miserable man's own curse upon him, not
one Limb or Member being left upon him. Drunkard forewarned.

XXXV. Remarkable is the Relation, of undoubted credit, (and with which we
shall conclude this Chapter) of the Dreadful Judgment that happened upon one
John Duncalf, of Kings-Swinferd in Staffordshire, who in January 1677. coming
to the House of Humphrey Baby at Grangewell, about three miles from
Wolverhampton, He begged of the Woman Victuals and Drink, who formerly knowing
him, and compassionating his condition, freely gave it him; but while she was
stooping to draw him some Drink, he stole her Bible, and sold it afterward for
three Shillings, to a Maid not far off, whereby the Woman came to hear of it,
and paying her the Money, received it again, but could not hear what was become
of the Man; but a while after John Duncalf hearing it discoursed that he stole
a Bible, grew very angry, and gave out threathning words against a young Man
that Reported it; but being severely charged with it, he did not only deny it
with some fierceness, but execrated, and cursed himself, wishing, his Hands
might not off if it were true; which words he had no sooner uttered, but by his
own confession to diverse that came to see him in his miserable condition, he
said, That immediately thereupon he had an inward horror and trembling upon
him, a dread and fear of the Divine Majesty and Justice of God; which fear and
working of his Conscience, continued many days after; and being asked upon
this ingenuoas acknowledgment, Why he did not confess his wickedness, and
endeavor that the Bible might be restored to the owner; he answered, The Devil
and his own heart would not suffer him, but acknowledged, That withia a few
days after his cursing himself, his slesh began to look black at the wrists of
his hands, and so continued diverse weeks before it did sensibly rot; when he
finding himself weak and faint, and fearing an Ague, was going to his
acquaintance, but not being able to go further, he laid himself down in a Barn,
and there continued two days and nights before he was found, from whence he
was removed to another Barn near Wolverhampton, and had a Keeper appointed him:
His flesh began first to rise in great knots and lumps at his wrists and knees,
and to break and run, and after to shrink from the Bones; at which time white
putrid matter came out abundantly, causing exquisite pain and torment; and the
smell was so offensive for several weeks together, that those who came to visit
him (who were many thousands) were not able to abide the place, nor stand near
without door, except they had herbs, or other things to smell to: After this
many little Worms came out of his rotten flesh, and soon after both his Legs
fell off at his knees, and then both his Hands; he constantly acknowledging it
to be the just Judgment of God for this fearful cursing of himself, and for all
his other sins; desiring the Prayers of some Reverend Divines, who came to vint
him in his misery, That God would give him Repentance, and pardon his sins of
Idleness, Stealing, Lying, Cursing, Swearing, Drunkenness, Unclean Thoughts,
and constant Profaneness; and that he would save him for Christ's sake, and
give him patience in the mean time. Thus he continued a dreadful Spectacle of
Divine Justice for some weeks, and then died, and may be looked upon as a
Monument of God's severity; and that although Sentence against every evil work
is not always Executed speedily, yet God leaves not himself without Witness in
this, as well as in former Ages against Atheism and Impiety; and particularly
against Blasphemers, Scoffers, Swearers, Cursers, and Perjured Persons, as
manifestly appears by the foregoing dreadful Examples.

CHAP. II.
The miserable ends of Magicians, Conjurors, and Witches, with an account of
Apparitions, Possessions, and other strange, and wonderful Feats and Illusions
of the Devil.

THat there are really Magicians, Conjurers, and Witches, who have commerce,
and familiarity with evil Spirits, is so clear, and plain, both from holy
Scripture, Councils, Canon and Civil Laws in all Nations, that none but those
Atheists who would endeavor to persuade themselves there are no Spirits, and
consequently no other Life after this, ever denied it, but since the reality of
this converse with Demons, and their appearances, and Possessions has been so
clearly demonstrated in former Ages, but especially in this, by persons of most
acute judgment and Learning, wherein they have fully answered all Objections to
the contrary, I shall not now engage in the least in the controversy, but shall
only give an account of the miserable deaths of some Persons mentioned in
History, who were concerned in these cursed Arts, and likewise of some
remarkable Apparitions, and actions of evil Spirits, and their taking
possession of the Bodies of several Persons, and tormenting them; with several
other strange Feats, and illusions of Satan, as I have collected them from very
credible and approved Authors; together with the danger of those who are so
vainly curious in knowing future events, as to enquire, or ask Counsel of any
of these Sorcerers, which is so strictly forbid in the Law of Moses.

I. Saul, the first King of Israel, being much disturbed in mind for fear of
the Army of the Philistines, which came against him, would by all means know
aforehand the issue of this doubtful War; now whereas before whilst he
performed the duty of a good King, and obeyed the Commandments of God, he had
cleansed his Realm of Witches and Inchanters; yet he is now so senseless, as in
his extremity to ask Counsel of them, adding this wickedness to all the rest of
his Sins, that the measure thereof might be full; he went therefore to a Witch
to know his Fate, who caused a Devil to appear to him in the shape of Samuel,
and foretell him of Gods just Judgment upon him in the final ruin and
destruction of himself and his Family. An example not much unlike this in the
Event we find recorded of Natholicus the 31 King of the Scots, who after he had
unjustly usurped the Crown and Scepter, and by much bloodshed had obtained the
Throne of that Kingdom without any legal Right or Title thereunto, he
endeavored by the same means to confirm and establish the Government to
himself, and therefore, as guilt is always accompanied with suspicion and sear,
he sent one of his trustiest Servants to a Witch, to enquire of things to come,
both how long he should enjoy the Crown, and how many years he should live; the
Witch answered, That he should not live long, but should shortly be murdered,
not by his Enemy, but by his familiar Friend; and when the Messenger was very
earnest to know who should kill him, she answered, He himself should do it; the
man at first heard this with detestation, abhorring the thought of any such
Villainy, yet at length considering that it was not safe to discover the Witches
answer, and on the other side that it could not be long concealed, he resolved
for his own security, rather to kill the Tyrant with the favor of many, than
to save him alive with the hazard of his own head; therefore as soon as he was
returned home, he desired the King that he might speak with him in private
about the Witches answer, and there he suddenly slew him, and gave him his just
desert, both for his horrible cruelty, and wicked Sorcery; let all those that
make no conscience of running to Witches, either for lost goods, reconvery of
their own or Friends health, or upon any other occasion, remember this example,
either for their instruction to amend, or for their terror if they continue
that devilish practice, Buchan. Hist. Scot. lib. 4.

II. As diverse very worthy Authors have credibly related several wicked actions
committed by Magicians, and Witches, so some of them have recorded the manner
of their entering themselves into that cursed profession, and the Ceremonies
thereof, as they have been discovered by those who have renounced those
detestable practices, which it may not be improper here briefly to relate. The
Wizards and Witches being met at a place and time appointed, the Devil there
appears to them in human shape, admonishing them to be faithful, and promising
them success and length of Life; then those that are present, recommend the
Person who is to be entered; the Devil then requires him to renounce the
Christian Faith, and Sacraments, and giving him his hand, tells him that this
alone is not sufficient, but that he must worship him likewise, and give
himself to him Body and Soul for ever, and bring as many as possibly he can
into the same Society, and that he must prepare himself certain Ointments, and
then be confirmed therein. Manlius writes, that in the Year 1553, Two Witches
stole a Neighbors Child, and murdering it, cut it in pieces, and put it into a
Kettle to boil, when the sorrowful Mother looking for her Infant, came by
chance into the house, and found the Limbs thereof horribly consumed; for which
abominable Fact the Authors of it were burnt, having confessed this their
villainy. Another Author says, two other Witches are reported to have killed
abundance of Children, and that in Germany Eight Witches were taken, who
confessed they had murdered an hundred forty and five Children in making their
Ointments; they are also reported to have each of them a Spirit or Imp
attending on them, who are to assist and obey them in all things, and to give
them notice of their solemn Meetings, or appointments, at which time it is
said, they separate themselves from all company, and night being come, they
strip themselves naked, ane anoint themselves with their Ointments; then are
they carried out of the house, either by the window, door, or Chimney, mounted
on their Imps, to their meeting place, which is sometimes many hundred miles
from their dwellings, where they find great numbers of Wizards and witches
arrived by the same means, who all make their accustomed reverence to Lucifer
in his Throne, adoring him, proclaiming him their Lord and rendering him all
honor, as their King; this Solemnity being finished, they fit at Table, where
no delicate meats are wanting to please their appetites, after which they
dance, and the Incubusses in the shape of proper men satisfy the lusts of the
Witches, and the Succubusses serve for Whores to the Wizards; sometimes at
their solemn Assemblies the Devil commands each to tell what wickedness he has
done, and according to the detestableness thereof, he is honored and
applauded; these, and many other such wonderful things are mentioned by Authors
of good credit, and several Persons have made Confession, and given an account
thereof.

III. In the year 1645. One Rebecca Jones, being suspected for a Witch, was
brought before Sir Harbottle Grimstone, and Sir Thomas Bows, Justices of the
Peace for Essex, to whom she voluntarily confessed, That about 25 years before,
living with one John Bishop in that County, there came one morning to the door
a very handsome young Man, as she then thought, but now she thinks it was the
Devil, who asked her how she did, and desired to see her left wrist, and then
he took a pin from her sleeve, and pricked it twice, and there came out a drop
of blood, which he took upon his finger and departed; and going a while after
to St. Osyths, she met a Man in a ragged Suit, with such great Eyes, as much
affrighted her, who came to her, and gave her three things like to Moles,
having four feet apiece, but no tails, and black, and bid her nurse them till
he desired them again, she asked what she must give them, he answered Milk, and
that they would not hurt her, but would avenge her on her Enemies, and bid her
murder some, but not too many, and he would forgive her, and then went away;
after which she said, She sent one of these Imps to kill a Sow of one Benjamin
Hows, which was done accordingly; she then with one Joyce Boanes, did send each
of them an Imp^ to kill one Thomas Brunstead of S^ Osyths, who dyed about three
weeks after, and she believes the two Imps killed him; she confessed likewise
that she sent another of her Imps to Brunsteads house to kill his Wife, and
that the reason of her offense against them, was because they beat a Son of
hers upon a small occasion; for these and other villainies this woman was
arraigned at Chelmsford, and upon her own confession condemned and hanged.
Inform of Witches.

IV. There was a Conjurer at Saltzburg in Germany, who boasted that he could
gather together all the Serpents within half a mile round about, into a Ditch,
and feed them, and bring them up there; and being about the Experiment, behold
the Old and Grand Serpent came in the while, which whilst he thought by the
force of his Charms to make enter into the Ditch among the rest, he set upon
him, and enclosed him round about like a Girdle; so strongly, that he drew him
by force into the Ditch with him, where he miserably died; and so this Jugler
was couzened by the Devil, who was more cunning than himself. Beards Theater.
Lamentable was the Death of the Governor of Mascon, a Magician, whom the Devil
snatched up while he was at Dinner, and carried into the Air, three times round
about the Town of Mascon, in the sight of many Spectators, to whom he cried
out, Help, Help my Friends: so that the whole Town stood amazed thereat; yea
the remembrance of this strange Accident continued in the minds of the
Inhabitants in and about that Country long after with horror: It was Reported,
That this wretch had given himself to the Devil, and had provided store of Holy
Bread (as they called it) which he always carried about with him, thinking
thereby to secure himself from him; but it served to little purpose, as the
sequel declared. About the year 1437. Charles the Seventh, being King of
France, Sir Gyles of Britain, High Constable of France, was accused for having
murdered above an hundred and threescore Infants, and Women with Child, with
whose blood he writ, or caused to be written books full of Conjuration, hoping
by such abominable practices, to obtain great perferment; but it happened quite
contrary to his Expectation; for being convicted of these horrible crimes, (it
being the Divine Will that such gross and horrid iniquities should not go
unpunished) he was condemned to be hanged and burnt to death, which was
accordingly executed upon him at Nants by the Authority of the Duke of
Britain, Beards Theater. Johan. Mirandula says, That there was in his Time a
Conjurer, who promised to present to a curious but no very wise Prince, the
Siege of Troy, and Hector and Achilles fighting together as if they were alive
upon a Stage, but he could not be so good as his word; for while he was
practicing his Hellish Arts to this purpose, he was carried away alive by the
Devil, and never after heard of. It is not long since that there was a man
called Coulen, living in Lorrain, who was given over to this cursed Art of
Necromancy; and amongst other wonderful feats, he would suffer Muskets and
Pistols to be shot at him, and would catch the Bullets in his hands without
receiving any hurt; but one time it happened, that one of his Servants being
angry with him, struck him such a blow with a Pistol, that notwithstanding all
his cunning, he was killed therewith. Beards Theater.

V. There was within the memory of our-Fathers (says Camerarius) John Faustus
of Cundligon, a German, who had learned the Black Art at Cracovia in Poland; he
meeting one day at the Table with some who had heard much of his Magical
Tricks, was earnestly entreated by the Company to show them some sport; and
being overcome in the end by the Importunity of his Pot-Companions, who were
also well armed in the head promised to show them whatsoever they would have;
they with a general consent require him to bring into the place a Vine laden
with ripe Grapes, ready to be gathered; for they thought because it was in the
month of December, Faustus could not show them that which was not; yet he
condescended to them, saying, That immediately before they stirred from the
Table, they should see the Vine they desired; but upon this condition, that
they should not speak a word, nor offer to rise from their places, but should
all tarry till he did them cut the Grapes; and that whosoever should do
otherwise, was in danger to lose his life: They having all promised to obey him
Fanstus so charmed the Eyes of these drunken Revellers, that they saw, as it
seemed to them, a mavelous goodly Vine, and upon the same so many bunches of
Ripe Grapes, extraordinary fair, as there were men sitting at the Table, who
being inflamed with such rare Dainties, and very dry with much drinking, every
man takes his Knife in his hand, looking when Faustus would give the word, and
bid them cut the Cluster; but he having held them a while in suspense about
this vain piece of Witchcraft, behold all the Vine and the Bunches of Grapes
were in the turn of a hand quite vanished away; and every one of these drunken
Companions, thinking he had a Cluster of Grapes in his hand, ready to lop off,
was seen to hold his own Nose with one hand, and the sharp Knife with the
other, ready to cut it off; so that if any of them had forgot the Conjurers
Lesson, and had been never so little too forward, instead of cutting a Bunch of
Grapes, he had whipped off his own Nose: This wicked wretch is reported to have
led about with him an Evil Spirit, in the likeness of a Dog; and being at
Wittenburg, an Order was sent from the Emperor to seize him, but by his
Magical Delusions, he made his escape; and afterward being at Diner at
Noremburge, he was secretly sensible by an extraordinary Sweat which came upon
him, that he was beset; whereupon he suddenly paid his Reckoning, and went
away, but was hardly out of the City Walls ere the Sergeants and other Officers
came to apprehend him; yet Divine Vengeance followed him; for coming into an
Inn, in a Village of the Dukedom of Wittenburg, he sat very sad, and his Host
demanding the cause thereof, he answered, That he would not have him
saffrighted if he heard great noise and shaking of the House that night, which
happened according to his own prediction; for in the morning he was found dead
by his Bedside, with his Neck wrung behind him, and the House wherein he lay
was beaten down to the ground. Wanly Hist. Man.

VI. Fazelus writes, that a certain Sicilian called Lyodor, a most notorious
Magician, got himself great repute in the City of Catania, by his wonderful
Illusions, for he seemed by the Extraordinary working of his Charms and Spells,
to transform Men into brute Beasts, and to bestow upon all things else such
form and likeness as himself pleased; and by general Report he drew to him as
soon and as easily Persons that were distant from thence many days Journey, as
those that were in the same Place; he did also many injuries and shameful
outrages to the Citizens of Catania; so that the common People bewitched with a
fearful and false Opinion fell to worshipping of him; and when for his wicked
deeds he was condemned to die, he by virtue of his Charms escaped out of the
Hangmans hands, causing himself to be carried in the Air by Devils from Catania
to Constantinople, and after that brought back again from thence into Sicilia:
This made him admired of all the People, who imagining the Divine Power was
laid up in him, they ran into an horrible Error, offering him Divine Honor:
But at last Leo, Bishop of Catania, inspired with a sudden Zeal, laid hands on
this Devilish Magician in an open place before all the People, and caused him
to be cast alive into an hot burning Furnace, where he was consumed to Ashes.
Schotus Phil. Curios.

VII. In the year 1558. in a Village near to Ihena in Germany, a certain
Magician being instructed by the Devil, in the Composition of diverse Herbs,
restored many to their Healths: he had daily commerce with Evil Spirits, and
used their Counsels in the curing of Discases; but it happened that there was
some difference betwixt him, and a Neighbor of his a Carpenter, who so
exasperated him by some urging words, that in few days after he caused the
poor Carpenter by his Magical Arts, to fall into a grievous Disease: The poor
Carpenter sent for this Magician, and entreated him to help him in his
extremity; the Magician under pretense of friendship, though with inward design
of revenge gave him a Potion composed of such venomous Herbs and Roots, that
the man by taking it, soon after died; whereupon the Carpenters Wife accused
the Magician of murdering her Husband, and the cause is heard before the Senate
of Ihena, who upon examination of all circumstances caused him to confess the
murder, and many other villainies; for which he was fastened to a stake, and
burnt to death. Beards Theater.

VIII. Delrio in his Magicaldiscourses gives this Relation. Two Magicians met
together in the Queen of Englands Court, as I have it from unquestioned
witnesses; these two agreed, that in any one thing they should infallibly obey
one another; the one therefore commands the other to thrust his head out of the
Casem. of a Window which he had no sooner done, but a large pair of Stags
Horns, were seen planted on his forehead, to the great pleasure of the
Spectators, who joked upon him with a thousand abuses, and mocks; he resenting
the disgrace, and thirsting after revenge, when his turn came to be obeyed, he
with a Charcoal drew the Lineaments of a man upon the wall, and then commanded
the same Magician to stand under that Picture, that the wall should immediately
give place to receive him; the other apprehensive of the extreme danger he was
in, began to beseech him that he would excuse him, but the other absolutely
refused, being therefore compelled, he stands under it, and then the wall
seemed to open, and he being entered therein, was never afterward seen more. The
same Authors sets down another Relation as a matter of undoubted truth; a
notable Conjurer, for a trial of his great skill, had cut off the head of the
Innkeepers Servant, where he lodged, and when he was about to set it on again,
he perceived he was hindered by the presence of another Magician, that chanced
to be by at that time; he therefore besought him that he would not oppose him;
but the other not regarding his request, the first Magician caused a Lily to
spring out upon the top of the Table, and when he had chopped off the head of
it, together with its Flowers, upon the sudden down falls the Magician that had
hindered him, headless to the ground; that done, he sets on the head of the
Servant again, and speedily conveys himself away, lest he should be questioned
for the murder of his Rival. Delrio, Disquis. Magic.

IX. There was a young man at Friburg in Germany, who by the help of a
Magician, hoped to enjoy a young woman whom he earnestly loved; the Devil
appeared to him in the likeness of the same Maid, and the young man putting
forth his hand without the enchanted Circle to embrace her, was presently
grasped of the wicked Spirit, who crushed him against a wall, and made the
pieces of him fly every way round about, and cast the remainder of the dead
body so torn in pieces at the Conjurer, who therewith fell down in the place
much bruised, and not able to stir from thence, till some hearing a cry and
noise ran to him, took him up, and carried him away half dead. Camerarius Ox.
Sul Bladud the Son of Lud, King of Britain (now called England) who as our
late Histories report, built the City of Bath and likewise made the Baths
therein; this King addicted himself so much to the devilish Art of Necromancy,
that he wrought wonders thereby, insomuch that he made himself wings, and
attempted to fly (as it is related of Dedalus) but the Devil, who was always a
deceiver forsook him in his flight, so that he fell down, and broke his neck.
Beards Theater. Philip Melancthon reports that he had an account from twomen
of good credit, and repute, that a certain young Woman of Bottonia, two years
after her death, returned again in humane shape, and went up and down the
House, and sat at meat with them, but eat little; this young Woman being one
time in company among other Virgins, a Magician came into the place, who being
skilful in Diabolical Arts, he told the People about her, That that Woman was
but a dead Carcass, carried about by the Devil and presently he took from under
her right Arm-pit the charm; which he had no sooner done, but she fell down a
dead Carcass. Phil. Melanct.

X. Not long since at Stetin, an University of Pomerania, there was a young
Student, who upon some discontent, gave himself to the Devil, and made a Bond
upon the Contract; which that it might not come to the knowledge of any, he
laid up in one of his Books; but it pleased God some time after, that another
Student wanting that Book upon some occasion, knew not where to get it, at last
he remembered that such an one had it, and thereupon went to him, and borrowed
it of him; the young men having forgotten that he had put his Bond into it: The
other, when he came home, began to turn over the Book, and there met with the
Bond; and reading of it, was much affrighted; and not knowing what to do, he
went to Doctor Cramerus, Professor of Divinity in that University, to ask his
Advice; who wished him to keep the Bond; the other replied, he durst not; then
said the Doctor, Bring it to me, and I well keep it. Some few nights after, as
the Doctor was in his Study, the Devil came rapping at his Study door, saying,
Cramer, Cramer, Give me my Bond for it belongs to me, and thou have nothing to
do with it: To whom the Doctor answered, Satan, Satan, Thou shall not have the
Bond; thou have nothing to do with it; I have put it where thou can not fetch
it; for it is in my Bible, at the third Chapter of Genesis, where these words
are, The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents Head: Upon which the Devil
went his way, taking the Chamber window with him, and the young man never heard
of him afterward. Beards Theater.

XI. A young man at Wittenburg in Saxony, being kept short of Money by his
Father, was tempted by the Devil to yield himself Body and Soul to him, upon
condition to have his wishes satisfied, and his necessities supplied; which he
being pinched with want, consented to, and confirmed it by a Bond, written with
his own Blood: But presently after he began to decay in his bodily health; and
being thereupon brought to Martin Luther, and by him examined, he at length
confessed the whole matter to him; which when Luther heard, he Assembled the
whole Congregation together; and all of them joined together, and prayed for
him, whereby the Devil at last was forced to bring the Bond, and to throw it
into the window amongst them, bidding the young man to take it to him again. On
a time as Luther was walking in his Garden, the Devil appeared to him in the
likeness of a black Boar; but he slighting him, and not regarding him, he
vanished away. Luther likewise tells us, That when he was lodged in the
Castle of Warteburg, in a Chamber far from any Company, he was many times
molested by noises made by the Devil in his Chamber, and on the Stairs, But I
(says he) Encountered him with that sentence, Omnia subjectisti pedibus ejus,
Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet; and so I laid me down
and slept in safety. Another of the German Divines in Luther's Time, as he was
sitting at his Book in his Study, the Devil appeared looking over his shoulder,
which the Minister perceiving, took a piece of Paper, and writ in it, The Son
of God came to destroy the works of the Devil; and so holding up that Paper, he
immediately vanished Luther, Colloq. Mensal.

XII. In the Life of Mr. Richard Rothwell (a famous Preacher at Mansfield, in
the County of Nottingham, about the year 1627.) we have this remarkable
Account, as it was drawn up by Mr. Stanly Gower of Dorchester: There was one
John Fox, living about Nottingham, who had no more Learning than enabled him to
Write and Read; this Man was possessed with a Devil, who would violently throw
him down, and take away the use of every Member of his Body, which was changed
as black as Pitch, while those Fits were upon him; and then spoke with an
audible voice within him, which seemed sometimes to sound out of his Belly,
sometimes out of his Throat, and sometimes out of his Mouth, his Lips not
moving; and thus he continued for a considerable time; many prayers were put up
to God for him, and great resort was made to him, especially by several famous
Ministers; as Mr. Bernard of Batcomb, Mr. Langly of Truswell, and others,
betwixt whom and John Fox there passed many Papers in Writing, he discovering
his Temptations, and they writing him Answers, because he was struck dumb, as
ye shall find afterward. Among the rest Mr. Rothwell went to see him and
before he came, the Devil told all that were in the House of it, saying, Yonder
comes Rothwell, but I will make a fool of him before he goes; whereupon the
People looked out, and saw him coming about a quarter of a mile from the House:
As soon as he entered the Room, the Devil said, Now Rothwell is come, and as
some say added, Thou say there is no Possession; What think thou now?
Here is a man opens not his lips, and yet he speaks: And after a while he
said, Say nothing to me of this man, for I tell thee he is damned; and he added
thereto many fearful Blasphemies.

Rothwell; Thou art a Liar, and the Father of Lies; nor art thou so well
acquainted with the mind of God concerning this man, which makes thee thus to
torment him; therefore I believe thee not; I believe he shall be saved by Jesus
Christ.

Devil; He is a Murderer, and thou know, no Murderer, must come into Heaven.

Rothwell; Thou lie again; for David murdered, and is in Heaven; and the Jews
with wicked hands crucified the Lord of Glory; yet Christ prayed for them: And
St. Peter exhorted them to Repentance, that their sins may be hlotted out.

Devil; But this man has not, cannot, shall not Repent.

Rothwell; If he had not Repented, thou would not have told him so: but if
he have not, I believe God' will give him Repentance, and thou shall not be
able to hinder it.

Devil; Thou art a Murderer thy self' and yet talkest thou thus?

Rothwell; Thou lie again; I have fought the Lords Battles against his known
Enemies, the Idolatrous and bloody Papists in Ireland, Rebels to Queen
Elizabeth my Sovtreign, by whose Authority I bore Arms against them, otherwise
I have killed no man.

nehT the Devil swore, and Blasphemed, saying, thou ^^dst murder one this day
as thou came hither, and ^here is one behind thee that will justify it; upon
which Mr. Rothwell looking over his shoulder, the Devil set up ^n hideous
laughter, that nothing could be heard for a great while, and then said, look
you now, did not I tell ^ou I would make Rothwell, a Fool? and yet it is true
^hou did murder one this day; for as thou came o^ver such a Bridge (which
he named) there I would have ^illed thee, and there thy Horse trod upon a Fly,
and ^illed it. It seems Mr. Rothwells Horse stumbled at that ^lace, the Devil
having power to cause it, though without ^urt either to Horse or Man.

Mr. Rothwell then said, Thou have often beguiled me, I hope God will in time
give me wisdom to discern, and power to withstand all thy delusions, and he it
is that has delivered me ^ut of thy hands, and I doubt not will also deliver
this poor Man; The Devil then blasphemed fearfully, and quoted many Scriptures
out of the Old and New Testament, ^oth in Hebrew, and Greek, cavilling and
playing the ^ritick therewith, and backing his allegations with sayings ^ut of
the Fathers, and Poets in there own Language, which he quoted very readily, so
that the Company ^rembled to hear such things from one that understood ^o
learning, and neither moved tongue nor lip all the ^while; but Mr, Rothwell was
wonderfully enabled by Divine Power to detect the Devils Sophistry, upon which
^he Devil said, What stand I talking with thee, all Men know thou art bold
Rothwell, and fear no body, nor carest, ^or words, therefore I will talk to
thee no more; This name ^e carried to his Grave, for the People would say, This
^s he whom the Devil called bold Rothwell.

Mr. Rothwell turning to the People, said, Good People you ^ee the goodness of
our God, and his great power, though the ^Devil made a fool of me even now
through my weakness, God has ^ade the Devil dumb now, do but observe how the
Man lies; therefore let us go to Prayer, and that God who has made him ^umb,
will I doubt not drive him out of this poor man.

The Devil hereupon raged, blasphemed, and said, and will thou go to Prayer, if
thou do, I will make such a noise, that thy Prayer shall be distracted, and
the know God will not hear a distracted Prayer; b^ thou have got a device,
because thou will not be distracted, thou shuttest thy Eyes in Prayer, (for so
he alway^ did) but if thou pray, I will pull out thy Eyes.

Rothwell. I look to find thee as great an Enemy in this d^ty now, as I have
done heretofore, but I fear not thy threats, ^ know thou art limited, God
hears the Prayers of the uprigh^ and has promised to give his Spirit to
supply infirmities, the^ fore in confidence of his promise, and powerful
assistance of b^ Spirit, and in the name and intercession of his Son Jesus
Chri^ we will go to Prayer; and accordingly they did so, M^ Rothwell kneeling
by the Bedside where the poor M^ lay; the Devil for above a quarter of an hour
made^ most horrible noise: however Mr. Rothwells voice w^ louder then his, and
a while after the Devil roared ev^ at the very face of Mr. Rothwell wherewith
the Body (...) the man moved, and the hand was held up, which was the first
time he stirred; Mr. Rothwell took the hand, and held (...) down with much
ease, two men being scarce able to ho^ the other hand; yet Prayers were still
continued, and length the Devil lay silent in the Man and soon after d^ parted
out of him, the Man then fetched several de^ sighs, in so much that they thought
he had been d^ing, but his color suddenly returned to him, and the (...) of
all his Members, Senses, and understanding, and at (...) next Petition, to the
Glory of God, and amazement, b^ comfort of all the company, he said Amen; and
so continued to repeat Amen to every Petition: Prayers a^ hereupon now turned
into Thanksgivings, wherewi^^ the Company concluded.

After which, John Fox said, good Mr, Rothwell le^^ me not, I shall not live
long, for the Devil tells me he will cho^ me with the first bit of meat that
Ieat, Mr. Rothwell answ^red, Will thou believe the Devil that seeks thy
destruction, ^^fore thou will trust in God through Jesus Christ, that seeks t^
Salvation; has not God by his, Almighty Power dispossess^ him, had he had his
will, thou had been in Hell before now? ^ he is Liar, and as he is not able
to hinder thy Souls life, so neit^ shall he be able to destroy the life of thy
Body, wherefore get me something (says he) ready for him, and I will see him
eat before I go, and will beg a blessing upon it.

When it was brought, tat (says Mr. Rothwell) and fear not the Devil, and
urged him to eat, as being a means appointed by God to preserve life, and
quoted the example of Jairus's Daughter, whom our Savior after he had restored
her to life, Commanded to give her meat, St. Luke 8.55. With much ado, and
great trembling, at last he took and eat; look you (says Mr, Rothwell) you all
see that the Devil is a Liar, the first bit has not choked him, nor shall the
rest; Mr. Rothwell then left him; after which he was struck dumb for three
years together, and continued to be tempted, though no longer possessed; at
length by Prayer likewise, which was instantly put up to God for him, his mouth
was opened, and his speech restored to him at that very instant, when a
Minister praying for him in the Congregation, where he was present, used this
expression, Lord open thou his mouth, that his lips may show forth thy praise;
to which he presently answered Amen, and so continued to speak, and lived
religiously and virtuously to his dying day, Clarks Martyrol. 2 p. 1.

XIII. In the year 1323, Frederick, D. of Austria, who was chosen Emp. against
Lewis, was overcome by Lewis in a great Battle, and sent to be kept Prisoner in
a strong Castle; it fell out afterward that a Magician coming into Austria, to
Leopold his Brother, promised that by his Art and the assistance of his
Spirits, he would free Frederick, and within the space of an hour, bring him
into his presence, if he would give him a good reward; the Duke replied, That
if he performed his promise, he would worthily reward him. The Magician placed
himself together with Leopold in a Circle, and by Conjurations called up that
Spirit that was wont to obey him, who appearing in the shape of a man, he
commanded that he should speedily go and free Frederick and bring him to him
into Austria without hurt; the Spirit answered, I shall willingly obey thy
Commands, if the Captive Prince will come with me; this said, the Spirit flew
into Bavaria, and in the form of a stranger came to the Prince, to whom he
said, If thou will be freed from thy captivity, mount this Horse, and I will
carry thee safe into Austria, to Leopold thy Brother; who art thou said the
Prince? Ask me not (said the Spirit) who I am, for that is nothing to the
purpose; but do as I desire, and I will perform what I say: Which heard, a
certain horror seized upon the Prince, though otherwise a man of a bold
Spirit; so that blessing himself, the Horse disappeared and returned to the
Conjurer, by whom he was chid for not bringing with him the Prisoner; he told
him all that had passed: At last Frederick was freed out of Prison, and
confessed, that upon the same day the same thing had happened to him: But
Leopold (says Camerarius) was so affrighted with the Spirit he had seen, that
within a while after he died. Camerarius Hor. Subses.

XIV. In a Treatise called Speculum Historiae, we have this strange Relation;
An old Witch who had been very famous in her time for her Enchantments, kept a
Jackdaw, which at a certain time spoke; at which the Woman let fall her Knife
as she was at Dinner, and grew extreme pale, and at length after many sighs and
groans, she broke forth into these words, This day my Plough is come to its
last period, and I shall certainly suffer some great evil: Whilst she thus
spoke. a Messenger brought word that her Son was dead; upon which news she fell
immediately sick; and sending for her other two Children, who were a Monk, and a
Nun, she with abundance of tears spoke thus to them; I have by my wretched Fate
followed Wit^^^raft these many years, and have given my Self Body and Soul to
the Devil; who, as he was the Author of this my wickedness, by persuading me to
it; so he will likewise be the punisher thereof; I desire you therefore that
you would not cease to pray for me while I am alive; for I doubt the
destruction of my Soul is irrevocable: You shall also sow up my Body in a
Buck-Skin, and put it into a stone Coffia, making fast the top with Lead, and
besides, you shall bind it with three great Chains; and if I lie securely three
days, the fourth you shall bury me: Moreover, let there be sung and said for
me Psaims and Prayers, for fifty nights. All these things her two Children
performed; but it prevailed nothing; for the first two nights when the Monks
began to sing Hymns about the Body, the Devils opened the Church doors, which
were shut with a great Bar, and broke two Chains; but the middlemost remained
whole; the third night the noise of those Demons, who came to fetch the Body,
was so great, that the very Foundation of the Church was shaken: But one Devil
more terrible in shape than the rest, broke open the door, and went toward the
Coffin, commanding the Body to arise, which answered It could not for the
Chain; Thou shall be delivered (replied he) from that hinderance; and going to
the Coffin, he broke the Chain, and with his foot thrust off the covering; then
taking the Woman by the hand, he led her out of the Church, in the presence of
them all, to the door, where stood a black Horse ready, and proudly neighing,
upon which the Woman was placed, and all the Company of Devils went away with
her through the Air; their noise being so great, that the Inhabitants
thereabouts were no less astonished than the beholders. Spe. Hist. lib. 26.

XV. About the year 1644, the Lord Grandison, a Scottish Nobleman, took up his
Habitation for some time at Berwick upon Tweed and brought his Family with him;
in which, among others, was the Steward of his House, who was a very Religious
man, But was then very much afflicted in mind: Among others, Mr. Robert Balsom,
a very zealous Minister in those parts, came to visit him, and for the present
somewhat satisfied him; but two or three days after, being againg sorely
afflicted, Mr. Balsom was sent for, who finding him Very much weakened by the
violence of this Destemper of mind, began to speak comfortably to him; but
perceiving he could fasten nothing upon him, he whispered to him in his Ear to
this purpose, I doubt there is something within, which you would do well to
discover: Hereupon the Man's Tongue swelled immediately, and came out of his
mouth, so that he was not able to speak; Mr. Balsom continued to discourse with
him, till at length, to the astonishment of all that were in the Room (who were
many, and some of them Persons of good Quality) a shrill voice was heard, as
coming out of his Throat, without any motion of his Tongue, saying, What do
thou talk to him of Promises, and Free Grace? He is mine; Mr. Balsom
apprehending it to be the voice of the Devil, replied, No Satan, thou do not
know any man to be thine while there is life in him.

Satan; But this is a notorious wicked wretch, and therefore he is mine.

Balsom; Yet the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin.

Satan; If God would let me loose upon you, I should find enough in the best of
you to make you all mine.

Balsom; But thou art bound Satan; and so turning himself to the standers by,
he said with a cheerful countenance, What a gracious God have we that suffers
not Satan to have his will upon us! The Devil hereupon began to curse, swear,
and to blaspheme the Blessed Trinity in a most searful and horrible manner; to
whom Mr. Balsom said, The Lord rebuke thee Satan.

Satan; But this Man is mine, for he has given himself to me, and sealed it
with his own Blood.

Balsom; I do not believe that the Father of Lies speaks Truth; and I do
believ e, how consident soever thou art, that thou will lose thy hold before to
morrow morning: The Devil then continued to curse and swear abominably, and
said, How can thou endure to hear thy God thus blasphemed? I will never give
over blaspheming as long as thou stayest in the Room.

Balsom; I will pray for the Man.

Satan; Will thou pray for a Man that is damned?

Balsom; I will go home and pray for him, and get all the force I can in the
Town to join with me. After this there being no voice any more heard, Mr.
Balsom went home about Eleven of the Clock at night, where he found in his
House diverse Christian Friends, which he intended to have sent for, waiting for
him; and upon the fight of them, he spoke to this purpose, Friends, I wonder at
the Brovidence of God in bringing you hither at this time; for otherwise I must
have sent for you; and so declaring to them what had befallen the afflicted
Person, he desired them to join their Prayers with his on his behalf; which
they continued for some part of the night: And the next morning Mr. Balsom
going to visit him again, found him in a very comfortable condition; and asking
him how he did, he answered; Through the Goodness of God I have overcome Satan,
and am now as full of Comfort as I was before of Trouble: Thus he continued
cheerful (though very weak) all that day, and the next morning died, no Disease
being apparent on him. Clarks Martyr.

XVI. Strange is the Relation of the Devil of Mascon in France, as it is
translated by Dr. Peter du Moulin, at the Request of the Honorable Robert
Boil Esquire, who was fully satisfied of the certainty and reality thereof;
that in the year 1612 one Monsieur Perreaud, a Protestant Minister, being from
his own House one night, his Wife being in Bed, and in her first slee^, was
awakened by the noise of her Curtains, which were drawn violently; her Maid
lying in the same Room, arose, and weat to see what was the matter, but could
discern nothing: The night following the Maid lying with her Mistress,
presently after they were in Bed, they felt something that palled off their
Blankers; hereupon the Maid a rose, intending to go into the Kitchen, but found
the Chamber door bolted on the outside; so that she could not get out till she
had called a Boy that lay near, to unbolt the door; coming into the Kitchen,
and lighting a Candle, she found the Pewter and Brass thrown all about the
Room, which both that, and the night following, made a very great and confused
noise: Mr. Perreaud coming home, was told of all this; and before he would go
to Bed, he carefully searched every corner of the House, and set Bolts and
Barricadoes to all the Doors and Windows, stopping every Cat-hole in the Doors,
and left nothing that might cause suspicion of Imposture, and so went to Bed;
scarce was he in his Bed when he heard a great noise in the Kitchen, as the
rolling of a Billet, thrown with great strength; and also a knocking against a
Partition of Wainscot, and things thrown against the Wainscot; and Music was
made with a Brass Cullen der; upon this Mr. Perreaud rose, took his Sword, and
went into the room where the noise was, but found nothing. Next morning Mr.
Perreaud made it known to the Elders of the Church, and also to Mr. Francis
Tornus, a Roy al Notary, after which the Notary, and some others sat up with
him every night till midnight, during that affliction. The first night they
came, and several others, all was quiet, but September. 20. about nine a clock,
in the presence of them all the Devil began to whistle three or four tunes with
a loud, and shrill tone, and presently spoke (though somewhat hoarse) which
seemed to be about three or four steps from them; singing a little tune of five
notes, which Birds are taught to whistle, and after he often repeated this word
Minister, Minister; then said Mr. Perreaud, get thee from me Satan, the Lord
rebuke thee; but continuing to repeat the word Minister, Mr. Perreaud said, Yes
indeed I am a Minister, a Servant of the living God, before whose Majesty thou
tremblest; the Devil replied, I say nothing to the contrary: Mr. Perreaud said,
I have no need of thy testimony; yet did he continue to repeat the same; then
he endeavored to transform himself into an Angel of Light, saying over very
loud the Lords Prayer, the Creed, the Morning and Evening Prayers, and the 10
Commandments, but he always clipped, and left out some part of them, he also sung
with a loud and audible voice the 81 Psalm; then he related many things
concerning Mr. Perreauds Family, as that his Father was poisoned, naming the
man that did it, and the reasons why, and the place and manner of it; he
further said, That very night he came from Pais de Vaux, and had passed through
the Village of Allancogne, that at the door of Mr. Perreauds elder Brothers
House, he had seen him with Mr. de Pau, Minister of Thoiry, who were ready to
go to supper together, and that they were Neighbors, and dear Friends, that he
had saluted them, and asked them whether they would command him any service to
M. Perreaud, because he was going to Mascon; that they were very kind to him,
and desired him to remember their love to Mr. Perreaud, and invited him to
drink with them; to this Mr. Perreaud replied, Thou wicked feind, if thy had
known thee, they would not have been so kind to thee; Mr. du Pau afterward told
Mr. Perreaud that he remembered very well that at that very time, a man of a
strange shape came riding on a very lean Horse, that hung down his head, and
spoke to them to that purpose.

the Devil told them also of another Brother of Mr. Perreauds, living in the
vale of the Lake de Joux, who one day, when some of their Kindred came to visit
him, to give them some divertisement, carried them upon the Lake, upon a float
of Wood, and that presently a storm arose, which overturned the float, and
almost drowned them all; which stor^^ he affirmed to be of his own raising; he
then told them also that the Man and his Wife, who had lived formerly in Mr.
Perreauds house being fallen out, the Wife took her time, when her Husband was
going down into his Shop, and pushed him with such violence, that her Husband
fell down stairs stark dead, and that she going down a back pair of Stairs
presently called her Servants, who finding their Master, judged him to die of
some sudden disease; Another time the Devil told one that was present, of such
private and secret things, that the Man affirmed never to have told to any one,
and thereupon he judged that the Devil knew his thonghts; then he began to mock
God, and all Religion, and said Gloria Patri, but skipped over the Second
Person, and made a foul, horrible, and detestable equivocation upon the Third
Person of the Blessed Trinity; he also desired them earnestly to send for Mr.
Du Chassin, the Popish Priest of St. Stephens Parish, to whom he would confess
himself, and to desire him that he would not fail to bring Holy Water along
with him, for that (said he) would send me packing presently; and there being a
fierce Dog in the House, the Devil said, You wonder that the Dog barks not at
me, when I make all this noise; it is because I made the sign of the Cross upon
his head.

Then he fell a scoffing and jearing, saying, That he was one of those who
scaled the walls of Geneva, and that the Ladder breaking, he fell from the wall
into the Ditch, where he was like to be eaten up with the Frogs, and then he
imitated their croaking; he said also, that Father Alexander, a Jesuit, stood
at the foot of the Ladder, encouraging the Savoyards to go up boldly, assuring
them that they should take the City, and thereby win Paradise, and that when
the thirteen that were got upon the wall, and were taken by them of Geneva,
were led to the Gallows, the Women of the City said to the Hangman, Courage
Tabasou; thou shall have money to drink. Then speaking of Pais du Vaux, he said
it was a Country where they made goodly Carbonadoes of Withes, and at that he
laughed very loud.

He jested much with one Michael Repay, and told him he should go with him, and
be a Soldier under the Marquess of St. Martins; what (said Repay) should I go
to war with such a Coward as thy self, who confessest that thou did fly at
the Scalado of Geneva; the Devil answered, And do you think that I would go to
be hanged with my Comerades, no, I was no such fool; At another time he told
them in a faint, and mournful tone that he had a mind to make his will, for he
musts needs go presently to Chamberey, where he had a Lawsuit, and that he
might dye by the way, and therefore he bid the Maid to go for Mr. Tornus, the
Notary, and declared to him what legacies he would leave, and to one present he
said, he would bequeath five hundred pound, but he answered, I will have none
of thy Money, thy Money perish with thee; he named another to be his HeirGeneral,
who also answered, That he would not accept of the Inheritance; whereupon the
Devil replied, I will free thee from it for six pence, and a piece of Bread. As
he was once speaking, a man who used to be present, rushed into the place,
whence the voice seemed to come, and searched it strictly, as many had done
before him, but found nothing, except several odd things which he brought
forth, and among them a small bottle, at which the Devil fell a laughing and
said to him, I was told long since that thou wast a Fool, and I see now thou
art one indeed, to believe that I am in the bottle; I should be a Fool my self
to get into it, for so I might be catched by stopping the bottle with ones
finger; He was once very angry, because Mr. Perreaud said to him, Go thou
cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels; whereupon
he replied, Thou lie, I am not cursed, I hope yet for Salvation, by the Death
and Passion of Jesus Christ.

He threatened Mr. Perreaud, what he would do to him, as that when he was in
bed, he would pluck off the the blankets, and pull him out of the bed by the
feet; Mr. Perreaud answered, I will lay me down, and sleep, for the Lord makes
me to dwell in safety, thou can have no power over me, but what is given thee
from above; whereupon he said, it is well for thee, it is well for thee; the
Devil at last confessed, That he could not prevail against them, because they
did too much call upon the name of God, and indeed it was observed that as
often as they kneeled down to Prayer, the Devil left talking, and often said,
While you are at your Prayers, I Will go take a turn in the Street; but no sooner
was Prayer ended, but he used to begin as before, urging them to talk with him,
which course he continued till the 25th of November, at which time he spoke
these his last words, Alas, Alas, I shall speak no more; after which he was
never heard to utter any word.

Mr. Perreaud told Mr. Du Moulin, that a grave Divine once coming to his house,
and hearing the Devil speak profanely, rebuked him sharply for it, whereupon
the Devil answered, Minister, you are very holy and zealous in this Company,
but you were not so, when you were singing such a baudy song, in such a Tavern,
and then the Devil sung the same song before them all; the Divine said, It Is
true Satan, I have been licentious in my younger years, but God of his Mercy
has given me repentance, and pardon for it, but for thy part thou art hardened
in sin, and shall never have repentance and pardon; he spoke also of those
that: professed the Reformed Religion in France, saying, O poor Hugonots, you
shall have much to suffer within a few years, O what mischief is intended
against you.

An Officer, who was a Papist, belonging to a Court of Justice came out of
curiosity to Mr. Perreauds house, and hearing that the Devil foretold future
things, and some secrets, he would needs question him about many matters; but
Mr. Perreaud desired him to forbear, representing to him both the sin and
danger of it; the Lawyer rejected his Council with scorn, bidding him Teach his
own Flock, and let him have the Government of himself, and so proceeded to
propound several questions to the Devil, as about absent Friends, private
business, News, and State Affairs, unto all which the Devil answered him, and
then added, Now Sir I have told you all that you have demanded of me, I must
tell you next what you demanded not, that at this very time you are propounding
these questions to the Devil, such a man (whom he named) is doing your business
with your Wise; and then he further discovered many secret, and foul practices
of the Lawyer, which showed his dishonesty; neither was this all; for in
conclusion the Devil told him, Now Sir let me correct you for being so bold as
to question with the Devil, you should have taken the Ministers safe Counsel;
then upon a sudden the whole Company saw the Lawyer drawn by the Arm into the
midst of the Room, where the Devil whirled him about, and gave him many turns
with great swiftness, touching the ground only with his Toe, and then threw him
down upon the floor with great violence, and being taken up, and carried to his
house, he lay sick and distracted a long time after.

It seems at this time Satan was let loose in France; for about the same time
the Devil appeared at Lions in the shape of a fine Gentlewoman, to the
Lieutenant of the Knight of the Watch, called La Jacquiere, and to two others
of his Companions, which three had carnal knowledge of her, and thereby came to
a most Tragical and fearful end. At the same time a Person of Quality at Paris,
had Cohabitation with the Devil in the shape of a beautiful Lady, who being
visited by some Justices and Physicians, was found to be the Body of a Woman
hanged some few days before: And at this time the Prisons in Mascon were
filled with a great number of Men and Women, young and old, all Indicted of
Witchcraft, who appealed to the Parliament at Paris; and as they went thither
under a Guard, a Coach met them, and in it one like a judge, who asked the
Captain what Prisoners he conducted; the Captain having satisfied him, he
called to one of them by name, saying, How now! Art thou one of them too? Fear
nothing; for neither thou, nor any of thy Company shall suffer: And these words
proved true; for soon after they were all released.

Likewise about the same time a Girl at Mascon, of about thirteen years old,
who was Daughter to one of the Chief Citizens, lying with the Maid, perceived
that she absented her self many times in the night, and therefore asked her
whence she came? the Maid answered, That she came from a place where there was
good Company, gallant Dancing, and all kind of Sport and Merriment: The Girl
desired the Maid to bring her also to that place, and accordingly she anointed
her, and made her do the Ordinary Ceremonies prescribed by the Devil to
Witches; after which the Girl was carried up into the Air; but seeing her self
above the Convent of the Capuchin Friars, she called upon God for help, who
caused the Devil to lay her down in the Friars Garden about midnight: The
Capuchins hearing her lamenting voice went to her, to whom she related these
Passages, whereupon two of them secretly conducted her to her Fathers House. At
the same time also the Devil haunted the house of a Woman-Baker in Mascon, in
the shape of a Man with a Red Cap on his head, and would often look out of the
Window by Moonlight, and was seen by many. Also the Devil kept a great stir in
St. Stephens Church in Mascon, overturning diverse Graves, which many resorted
to see. He did the like also in the Church of St. Alban, at the same time: And
in a Widows House not far from Mascon, he did much hurt, for three months
together letting out the Wine in the Cellar, and beating several Persons
outragiously: And among others a Lock-Smith, who coming drunk into the House,
gave many ill and threatening words to the Devil, who presently took one of the
Andirons, and therewith grievously beat him, till in great have he run away out
of the House.

The ten or twelve last days the Devil threw stones about Mr. Perreauds House
continually, from morning to evening, and in great quantity some of them of two
or three pounds weight: One of those last days Mr. Tornus went to Mr.
Perreauds House, to know whether the Devil was there still; and whistling
several tunes, the Devil still answered him in the same; then the Devil threw a
stone at him, which falling at his feet, he took up, marked it with a Coal, and
threw it into the backside of the House, and presently the Devil threw it at
him again; when he took it, up, he sound it very hot, whereupon he said, That
he believed it had been in Hell since he handled it first. The 22th of December
the Devil went quite away; and the next day a great Viper was seen going out of
Mr. Perreaud's House; which being discovered by some Nailors that lived by,
they seized it with long Pincers, and carried it all over the Town crying, Here
is the Devil that came out of the Ministers House, and then lift it with one
Mr. Clark, an Apothecary, and it was found to be a True und Natural Viper; a
Serpent rarely seen in those Countries. All the while the Devil haunted Mr.
Perreauds House, God suffered him not to do the least hurt either to their
Persons or Goods.

This is a brief Account of some particulars, the Narrative whereof was drawn
up more at large by Mr. Perreaud himself, a Reverend and Religious Divine, and
is attested by so many, and those such credible Witnesses, as the Truth of it
cannot rationally be questioned by any.

Considering therefore the notable Pranks played by the Devil and his
Disciples, it might seem strange that there is no more hurt done in the world,
did we not remember that their Power, and that of their Black Master himself
also is so limited and restrained by a Superior hand of Goodness, that he
cannot perform what his ma^^ce would prompt him to commit; and for those who
are resolved not to believe (or at least pretend not to believe) that there are
Spirits, or any such Apparitions or Possessions as we have before related,
because they have neither seen, nor been sensible of any such matter, I shall
conclude with this short but True Account.

XVII. In the year 1599, there lived at Loim, in the Duchy of Gulick, a
certain Damsel called Helena, that was possessed by the Devil, whom the Popish
Curate of the Place undertook to eject; but when he had used many Charms to
cast him out, and all to no purpose, being in a great rage, he spoke to the
Devil in Latin saying, If thou have any Power to enter into a Christians Body,
depart out of the Damsel, and enter into me: To whom the Devil answered, Quid
mihi opus est eum tentare quem novissimo die jure optimo possessurus sum; What
need I tempt him whom by good right Ishall be sure to enjoy at the last day?
Chasson. Loci Commun.

CHAP. III.
Remarkable Predictions and Presages of Approaching Death; and how the Event
has been answerable: With an Account of some Appeals to heaven in case of
Injustice from Men, and what has followed thereupon.

HIstorians have made observation, that there have seldom been any remarkable
Revolutions in the Fortunes of considerable Places or Persons, but that there
were certain Previous Presages, and Presignifications thereof: And though some
of them may seem to be only casual and accidental, and afterward adapted to
the occasion by the Ingenuity of others; yet there want not many notable
Instances of such as may seem to be sent on purpose from Heaven with no obscure
intimations of what Divine Providence was about to bring to pass in the Places,
or upon the Persons where they happened.

It is likewise very observable, that when men who sit in the Place of God,
shall through corruption or malice wilfully prevaricate, and knowingly and
presumptuously oppress the Innocent, in such cases the supreme Judge oftentimes
reserves the decision of the cause to be made at his own Bar; and thereupon
has inspired the injured Persons to give their Oppressors a summons of
Appearance, which they have not been able to avoid, though they have sometimes
been told of the Affixed days wherein their Destiny should happen: Of both
these kinds we shall briefly recite several very wonderful Examples from
Authors of undoubted Reputation.

I. Josephus sets down this as a Prodigy presaging the Destruction of the Jews;
There was, says he, one Jesus the Son of Ananias, a Countryman of mean Birth,
who four years before the Siege of Jerusalem (at a time when all was in deep
Peace and Security) coming up according to the Custom, to the Feast of the
Tabernacles. began upon a sudden to cry out and say, A Voice from the East, a
Voice from the West, a Voice from the four Winds, a Voice against Jerusalem,
and the Temple, a Voice against Bridegrooms and Brides, a Voice against all the
People: Thus he went about all the narrow Lanes, crying night and day; and
being apprehended and scourged, he still continued the same Language, even
under the very strokes, without any other word; whereupon they supposing it
some Divine Motion (as in deed it was) brought him before the Roman Prefect;
and being by his command again wounded with whips, and his flesh torn to the
bones, he neither shed one tear, nor entreated for mercy; but to every blow in
a most lamentable, mournful tone cried out, Woe, Woe to Jerusalem: This he
continued to do till the time of the Siege, even for seven years together; and
at last to this common saying of, Woe to the City, the People, the Temple etc.
he added. Woe likewise to myself; and immediately a stone from the Battlements
fell down upon him, and killed him. Josephus Hist. Jews, lib. 7.

II. I have spent some inquiry, says Sir Henry Wotton, whether the Duke of
Buckingham had any ominous presagement before his end, wherein though ancient
and modern Stories have been infected with much vanity, yet often times things
fall out of that kind, which may bear a sober construction, whereof I will
glean two or three in the Dukes case. Being to take his leave of the Bishop of
Canterbury (then of London) after courtesies of course had passed between them,
My Lord (says the Duke) I know your Lordship has worthily good access to the
King our Sovereign, let me pray you to put His Majesty in mind to be good (as I
no ways distrust) unto my poor Wife and Children; at which words, or at his
countenance in the delivery, or at both, the Bishop being somewhat troubled,
took the liberty to ask him whether he had ever any secret abodement or presage
in his mind; No (said the Duke) But I think some adventure may kill me as well
as another man. The very day before he was slain, feeling some indisposition of
body, the King was pleased to give him the honor of a visit, and found him in
his bed, where after much serious and private conference, the Duke at His
Majesty's departing, embraced him a very unusual, and passionate manner, and in
like sort his Friend the Earl of Holland, as if his Soul had divined he should
see them no more; which infusions toward fatal ends, have been observed by some
Authors of no light Authority. On the very day of his death the Countess of
Denbigh his Sister, received a letter from him, whereunto all the while she was
writing her answer, she bedewed the Paper with her tears; and after a bitter
passion (whereof she could yield no reason, but that her dearest Brother was to
be gone) she fell down in a swound; her said letter ended thus, I will pray for
your happy return which I look at with a great Cloud over my head, too heavy
for my poor heart to bear without torment but I hope the great God of Heaven
will bless you; The day after his murder the Bishop of Ely (her devoted Friend)
who was thought the fittest preparer of her mind to receive such a doleful
accident, came to visit her, but hearing she was at rest, he attended till she
should awake of her self, which she did with the affrightment of a dream; her
Brother seeming to pass through a Field with her in her Coach, where hearing a
sudden shout of the People, and asking the reason, it was answered, to have
been for joy that the Duke of Buckingham was sick; which natural impression she
had scarce related to her Gentlewoman, before the Bishop was entered into her
Bedchamber, for a chosen Messenger of the Dukes most sudden Death. Wottons
Remains. The Continuator of Bakers Chronicle, mentions several other Presages
of this Dukes untimely end; as that his Picture fell down in the High
Commission Chamber, at Lambeth, on the same day that Doctor Lamb, his great
Favorite, was slain in the City of London for a Conjurer; also that the Lady
Davis, who was reputed a great Prophetess, had in June foretold that the Dukes
fatal time would not come till August; and lastly, that one Mr. Towerson, an
Officer of the Custom-house, was charged by a Phantasme, or Spirit like the
Dukes Father, to tell him, That if he changed not his Courses, he would shortly
become a great Fairing to the City of London; which afterward was thought
accomplished by his death, which happened Aug. 23. 1628. and the day before
Bartholomew Fair which was occasioned by the treachery of John Felton, who
waiting upon the Duke at Portsmouth, gave him with a back blow, a deep wound in
his left side, which the Duke himself pulling out, sunk under the Table in the
room, and immediately expired; one thing in this enormous accident (says Sir
Henry Wotton) is I must confess to me beyond all wonder, as I received it from
a Gentleman of judicious, and diligent observation, and one whom the Duke much
favored; That within the space of not many minutes after the Dukes fall, and
removal of the body into the first room, there was not a living creature in
either of the Chambers near the Body, no more than if it had lain in the Sands
of Ehiopia, whereas commonly in such cases, you shall note every where a sudden
conflux of People to the place to hearken and see; but it seems the horror of
the fact stupefied all Curiosity. Reliquiae Wottonianae.

III. In the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, there was one Mr. Gresham, a
Merchant of London, who was sailing homeward from Palermo, a City in Sicily,
wherein was dwelling at that time one Antonio, surnamed The Rich, who had at
one time two Kingdoms morgaged to him by the King of Spain; Mr. Gresham crossed
by contrary winds, was constrained to anchor under the Lee of the Island of
Strombulo, where was a burning Mountain: Now about the Midday, when for a
certain space the Mountain used to forbear sending forth flames; he with Eight
of the Sailors ascended the Mountain, approaching as near the Vent as they
durst; where amongst other Noises, they heard a voice cry aloud, Dispatch,
Dispatch, the Rich Antonio is coming; terrified herewith, they hasted their
return, and the Mountain presently vomited out fire; and from so dismal a
place, they made all the haste they could; but desiring to know more of this
matter (since the Winds still thwarted their course) they returned to Palermo,
and forthwith inquiring for Antonio, they found that he died about that very
Instant (so near as they could compute) when that voice was heard by them; Mr.
Gresham at his return into England, reported this to the King; and the Mariners
being called before him, confirmed the same on their Oaths: This wrought so
deep an impression upon Mr. Gresham, that he gave over all Merchandising, and
distributed his Estate, partly to his kindred, and partly to good uses,
retaining only a Competency for himself and so spent the rest of his days in a
solitary Devotion. Sandys Travels, lib 4.

IV. It is a very memorable thing which (from the mouth of a very credible
Person, who saw it) George Buchanan relates concerning James the Fourth King of
Scotland who intending to make a War with England, a certain Old Man, of a very
venerable Aspect, and clad in a long Blew Garment, came to him at the Church of
St. Michaels at Linlithgow, while he was at his Devotion, and leaning over the
Canons Seat where the King sat, said, I am sent unto thee, O King! to give
thee warning that thou proceed not the War thou art about, for if thou do, it
will be thy Ruin: And having so said, he withdrew himself back among the
multitude: The King after Service was ended, enquired earnestly for him, but he
could no where be found, neither could any of the standers by feel or perceive
how, when, or where he passed from them, having as it were vanished in their
hands; but no warning could divert his destiny, which had not been destiny if
it could have been diverted. His Queen also had acquainted him with the Visions
and Affrightments of her sleep, that her Chains and Armlets appeared to be
turned into Pearl; that she had seen him fall from a great Precipice; that she
had lost one of her Eyes: But he answered, These were but Dreams arising from
the many thoughts and cares of the day; and therefore marched on and fought
with the English, and was slain in Flodden Field, with a great number of his
Nobility, and common Soldiers, upon Sept. 9. 1513. Bakers Chronicle.

V. The Lord Hastings was arrested by Richard the Third (called Crook-back)
because he would not join with him against the young King Edward the Fifth, and
in making Richard King, who was already Protector: And being charged with High
Treason; Richard wished him to make haste to be confessed; for he swore, by St.
Paul (his usual Oath) That he would not touch Bread or Drink till his head was
off; whereupon he was led forth unto the Green before the Chapel within the
Tower, where his Head was laid upon a log of Timber, and there stricken off. In
this man's death we may observe how inevitable the blows of Destiny are; for
the very night before his death, the Lord Stanly sent a secret Messenger to him
at midnight, in all haste, to acquaint him with a Dream he had, in which he
thought that a Bore with his Tushes so goared them both in the heads, that the
blood ran about their shoulders: And because Richard Protector, gave the Bore
for his cognizance in his Arms, the dream made so fearful an impression upon
his heart, that he was thoroughly resolved to stay no longer, and had made his
Horse ready, desiring the Lord Hastings, by all means, to go with him presently
thereby to be out of the danger before daylight: But the Lord Hastings
answered the Messenger, Good Lord! does your Master lean so much to such
Trifles, to put such faith in Dreams, which either his own Fear fancieth, or
else do rise in the nights rest by reason of the days thoughts; Go back
therefore to thy Master, and commend me to him, and pray him to be merry, and
have no fear; for I assure him, I am as sure of the man be thinks of, as of
mine own head: The man he meant was one Catesby, who deceived him, and was
himself the first mover to rid him out of the way: Another warning he had the
same morning, in which he was beheaded; his Horse twice or thrice stumbled with
him, almost to falling, which though it often happen to such to whom no
mischance is toward, yet has it of old been observed to be many times a
foregoing token of some great misfortune. Bakers Chronicle.

VI. There was an Italian called David Risio, who had followed the Ambassador
of Savoy into Scotland; and in hope of bettering his Fortune, gave himself to
attend the Queen, Mary, at first in the Quality of a Musician, afterward
growing into more favor, he was admitted to write her French Letters, and in
the end was preferred to be Principal Secretary of State, had only the Queens
Ear, and Governed all Affairs at Court: Yea to that excess of Pride and
Arrogance was he grown, that he would out-brave the King in his Apparel, in his
Houshold-furniture, in the number and forts of his Horses; and in deed in every
thing else, This man had warning given him more than once by Joh. Damiot a
French Priest, who was thought to have some skill in Magic, to do his
business, and be gone, for that he could not make good his part, nor stand
against those that opposed him; to whom he answered disdainfully, The Scots are
given more to brag than fight. Some few days before his death, being warned by
the same Priest, to take heed of the Bastard, he replied, That whilst be lived,
he should not have credit, nor Power enough in Scotland to do him hurt; for he
thought the Earl of Murray to be the man of whom he was advertised to take
heed; but being found one day in the Queens Bedchamber, the first stroke was
given him by George Douglas, base Son to the Earl of Anges, after whom every
man inflicted his wound till he was dispatched; this was in the year 1565.
Sp^^swoods Hist. of Scotland.

VII. Dr. H^ylin in the Life of William Laud, Arch. Bishop of Canterbury,
mentions these as the strange Presages of his fall and death. On Friday night
the 27th of Decemh. 1639. there happened such a violent Tempest, that many of
the Boats which were drawn to Land at Lambeth, were dashed one against another,
and broke to pleces; the Shafts of two Chimneys were blown down upon the Roof
of his Chamber, and beat down both the Lead and Rafters upon his Bed, in which
Ruin he must needs have perished, if the roughness of the Water had not forced
him to keep his Chamber at Whitehall. The same night at Croydon (a retiring
place belonging to the Archbishop of Canterbury) one of the Pinnacles fell from
the Steeple, beating down the head and roof of the Church above twenty foot
square. The same night too at the Cathedral Church in Canterbury, one of the
Pinnacles upon the Belfry Tower, which carried a Vane with this Archbishops
Arms upon it, was violently struc^ down (but carried a great distance from the
Steeple) and fell upon the roof of the Cloister, under which the Arms of the
Archbishops See it self were engraven in stone; which Arms being broken in
pieces by the former, gave occasion to one that loved him not, to collect this
Inference, That the Arms of the present Archbi hop of Canterbury, breaking down
the Arms of the Sea of Canterbury, not only presaged his own fall, but the
Ruin of the Metropolitical Dignity by the weight thereof. But of these he took
not so much notice as he did of an Accident which happened on St. Simon and
Judes Eve, not above a week before the beginning of the Long Parliament 1640.
which drew him to his fatal Ruin: On which day going to his upper Study, to
send some Manuscripts to Oxford, he found his Picture (which was at full
length, and taken as near the Life, as the Pencil could express it) to be
fallen on the floor, annd lying flat on its sace, the string being broke by
which it was hanged against the Wall yet the sight whereof he took such a
sudden apprehension, that he began to fear it as an Omen of that Ruin which
was coming toward him, and which every day began to be threatened to him as the
Parliament grew nearer and nearer, to consult about it: These things occasioned
him to look back on a former misfortune which chanced September. 19. 1633. being
the very day of his Translation to the Sea of Canterbury, when the Ferry Boat
transporting his Coach and Horses, with many of his Servants in it, sunk to the
bottom of the Thames. Heylins Life, A.B. Land.

VIII. Duncan, King of Scots, had two principal Men, whom he employed in all
matters of Importance called Mackbeth and Banquo; these two traveling together
through a Forest, were met by three Witches, or Wizards, as the Scots call
them, whereof the first Witch making obeisance to Mackbeth, saluted him by the
name of Thane, or Earl of Glammis; the second Witch saluted him Thane or Earl
of Cauder, the third saluted him King of Scotland. This is unequal dealing said
Banquo, to give my Friend Mackbeth all the honors, and none to me; to which
one of the Witches answered, That he indeed should not be King, but out of his
Loins should come a Race of Kings that should overruled the Scots; and having
thus said, they all vanished; upon their arrival at Court, Mackbeth was
immediately created Earl of Glammis, and not long after some new service
requiring some new recompense, he was honored with the Title of Earl of
Cander; seeing then how happily the prediction of the three Wizards fell out in
the two former, he resolved not to be wanting to himself in fulfilling the
third; he therefore first killed the King, and after by reason of his Command
among the Soldiers, he succeeded in this Throne. Being scarce warm in his
Seat, he called to mind the prediction given to his Companion Banquo, whom
hereupon suspecting as his Supplanter, he caused to be killed, together with
his whole posterity, only Fleance, one of his Sons escaped with much difficulty
into Wales, Mackbeth thus freed, as he thought of all fear of Banquo, and his
Issue, he built Dunsinan Castle, and made it his ordinary residence; afterward
on some new fears, consulting with his Wizards, concerning his future State, he
was told by one of them, That he should never be overcome till Bernane Wood
(which was some miles distant) came to Dunsinan Castle, and by another, That he
should never be slain by any Man that was born of a Woman; secure then as he
thought from all future dangers, he gave himself up to all manner of
debauchery, lasciviousness, and cruelty for the space of eighteen years, for so
long he Tyrannized over Scotland; but having then made up the measure of his
iniquities, Mackduff, the Governor of Fife, with some other good Patriots of
their Country, met privately one evening at Bernane Wood, and taking every one
of them a bough in his hand, the better to keep them from discovery, they
marched early in the morning toward Dunsinan Castle, which they took by storm;
Mackbeth escaping, was pursued by Mackduff, who having overtaken him, urged him
to the Combat, to whom the Tyrant half in scorn returned answer; That he in
vain attempted to kill him, it being his destiny never to be slain by any Man
that was born of a Woman; now then (said Mackduff) is thy fatal end drawing
fast upon thee, for I was never born of a Woman; but violently cut out of my
Mothers belly; which so daunted the Tyrant (though otherwise a valiant Man)
that he was easily slain. In the mean time Fleance so prospered in Wales, that
he gained the affection of the Princes Daughter of the Country, and by her had
a Son called Walter, who flying out of Wales, returned into Scotland, where his
descent being known, he was restored to the Honors, and Lands of his House,
and preferred to be Steward to the House of Edgar (the Son of Malcolm the
Third, firnamed Conmer) King of Scotland, the name of Stewart growing hence
hereditary unto his posterity; from this Walter descended that Robert Stewart,
who succeeded David Bruce in the Kingdom of Scotland, the Progenitor of nine
Kings of the name of Stewart, which have reigned successively in that Kingdom,
Heylins Cosmography. p. 336

IX. The D. of Biron, a great Peer of France, when he was only Baron of Biron,
being in some trouble, by reason of the death of the Lord Gerency, and others
slain in a quarrel, is said to have gone disguised like a Carrier of Letters to
one La Brosse, a great Mathematician, who was held to be skilful in Nativities,
to whom he showed his Nativity drawn by some other, and pretended it was not
his, but a Gentleman's whom he served, and that he desired to know what end that
Man should have; La Brosse having rectified this Figure, said to him that he
was of a good house, and no elder than you are, said he to the Baron, asking
him if it were his; the Baron answered, I will not tell you, but pray let me
know what his life, and means, and end shall be; The old Man who was, then in a
little Garret, which served him for a Study said unto him, My Son, I see that
he whose Nativity this is shall come to great honor by his Industry, and
Military Valor, and may be a King, but thut there is a Caput Argol which
hinders it; and what is that said the Barron; ask me not (said La Brosse) what
it is; I must know it, (replied he;) in the end he answered, My Son it is this,
that he will commit such things, as will make him lose his head; whereupon the
Earon beat him cruelly; and leaving him half dead, went down, and carried the
Key of the Garret door with him, as he bragged afterward. Biron had conference
likewise with one Caesar, who was a Magician at Paris, who old him, That only a
back-blow of a Burgonian, would hin^er him from being King; he remembered this
prediction, being a Prisoner in the Bastile, and entreated one that went to
visit him, to inquire if the Hangman of Paris were a Burgonian, and having
found it so, he said, I am a dead Man; and soon after he was beheaded for his
conspiring against the King. De Serres Hist. France, p. 1051.

X. In the year 1279. There lived in Scotland one Thomas Lermouth, a Man very
much admired; he may justly be wondered at, for foretelling so many Ages before,
the Union of England and Scotland, in the ninth degree of the Bruces blood,
with the succession of Bruce himself to the Crown, being yet a Child; and many
other things, which the event has made good; the day before the death of King
Alexander, he told the Earl of March, that before the next day at noon, such a
Tempest should blow, as Scotland had not felt many years before, the next
morning proving a clear day, the Earl challenged Thomas as an Imposter, he
replied, That noon was not yet past; about which time a Post came to inform the
Earl of the Kings sudden death, and then said Thom as, This is the Tempest I
foretold, and so it shall prove to Scotland, as indeed it did, Spotswoods Hist.
Scotland.

XI. Two Gentlemen, who were intimate acquaintance, traveled together to the
City of Megara where when they were arrived, the one went to lodge with a
Friend of his, and the other betakes himself to an Inn; he that was at his
Friends House, saw in his sleep his Companion, beseeching him to assist him,
for he was set upon by his Host, and that by his speedy coming to him, he might
deliver him from a very imminent danger; being awakened with what he had seen,
he leaps from his bed, and intends to go to the Inn, but by an unhappy fate he
desists from his compassionate purpose, and believing that his dream had
nothing in it; he returns both to his bed and sleep; when the same Person
appears to him the second time all bloody, and requested him earnestly, That
seeing he had neglected him as to the preservation of his life, yet at least ^e
would not be wanting to him in the revenge of his death, declaring That he was
murdered by his Host. and that at this very time he was carried out in a Cart
toward the Gate of the City, covered over with Dung; The Man overcome with
these entreaties of his Friend, immediately runs out to the Gate, where he
finds the Cart he had seen in his dream, which he seizes, and searching it,
finds there the body of his Friend, and drags the Innkeeper to his deserved
punishment. Dr. More, Immortal. Soul.

XII. Mr. Morison, an English Gentleman, in his Travels, gives this Relation;
whilst I lived at Prague, and had sat up very late one night drinking at a
Feast, early in the morning the Sunbeams glancing on my Face, as I lay in my
Bed, I dreamed that a shadow passing by me, told me That my Father was dead; at
which awaking all in a sweat, and affected with this dream, I arose, and wrote
the day and hour, and all circumstances thereof in a paper book, which book
with many other things, I put into a barrel, and sent it from Prague to Stood,
thence to be conveyed into England. And now being at Newemburgh, a Merchant of
a Noble Family, well acquainted with me and my Relations, arrived there, who
told me that my Father dyed some months past; I design not to write any lies,
but that which I write is as true as strange; when I returned into England some
four years after, I would not open the Barrel I sent from Prague, nor look into
the paper book, in which I had written this dream, till I had called my
Sisters, and some other Friends to be witnesses, where my self and they were
astonished to see my written dream answer the very day of my Fathers death.
Morisons Travels. p. 1.

XIII. The night before Heury the Second, King of France was slain, Queen
Margret his Wife dreamed, That she saw her Husbands Eye put out; there were
Justs and Tournaments at that time, into which the Queen besought her Husband
nor to enter, because of her dream; but he was resolved, and there did great
things; when all was almost now done, he would needs run a tilt with a Knight
who refused him, his name was Montgomery, but the King was bent upon it,
whereupon they broke their Lances to Shivers in the encounter, and a splinter
of one of them struck the King so full into the Eye, that he thereby received
his deadly wound. It is observed of this King, That one Ann du Bourg, a Noble
Councellor, and a man of singular understanding and knowledge, making a Speech
before him a little before his Death, in defense of the Protestant Religion,
and against persecuting the Professors thereof, he therein rendered thanks to
Almighty God for moving the King's heart to be present at the decision of so
weighty a Cause as that of Religion was, and humbly entreated him to consider
thereof; it being the Cause of Christ himself, which of good Right ought to be
maintained by Princes, etc. But the King, instead of harkening to his good
Advice, was so far incensed against him, that he caused him to be apprehended
by the Count of Montgomery, Constable of France, and to be carried to Prison,
protesting to him in these words; These Eyes of mine shall see thee burnt; and
presently after he sent a Commission to the Judges to make his Process: In the
mean time great Feasts were preparing in the Court for Joy of the Marriages
that should be, of the King's Daughter and Sister: The day whereof being come,
the King employed all the Morning in examining the President, and other
Counselors of the Parliament against Du Bourg (and other of his Companions who
were charged with the same Doctrins) intending to glut his Eyes in seeing his
Execution; but that very Afternoon he received that fatal blow in his Right
Eye, which so pierced his head, that his brains were perished; which wound
dispising all means of cure, killed him within eleven days, whereby his hope
of seeing Du Bourg burned, was frustrated, Clarks Martyr. P. 231.

XIV. There was one who dreamed that he was bitten to death by a Lion of
Marble, that was set at the entrance of the Temple; and being the next morning
to go to that Temple, and beholding the Marble Statue of the Lion, he
jeastingly told his dream to those that went with him; and putting his hand
into the Lions mouth, he said laughing. Bite now my valiant Enemy, and if thou
can, kill me: He had scarce spoke the words when he was stung to death with a
Scorpion that there lay hid, and thereby unexpectedly found the Truth of his
dream. Crescentius the Popes Legate at the Council of Trent 1552 was busy
writing Letters to the Pope, till it was late in the night; whence arising to
refresh himself, he saw a black Dog of a vast bigness, flaming Eyes, and Ears
which hung down almost to the ground, enter the room, which came directly
toward him, and laid himself down under the Table; frighted at the sight, he
called his Servants in the Antichamber, and commanded them to look for the Dog,
but they could find none: The Cardinal hereupon fell Melancholy, and afterward
sick, dying in a short time at Verona, crying out on his deathbed, Drive away
the Dog that leaps upon the Bed, Wanly Hist. Man.

XV. In the year 1154. Frederick Aenobardus being Emperor of Germany, Henry
Archbishop of Mentz, a pious and peaceable man, but not able to endure the
dissolute Manners of the Clergy under him, determined to subject them to sharp
censure: but while he thought of this, he himself was by them beforehand
accused to Pope Eugenius the Fourth. The Archbishop sent Arnoldus, his
Chamberlain to Rome, to make proof of his Innocence; but the Traitor deserted
his Lord, and instead of defending him, traduced him there himself. The Pope
sent two Cardinals as his Legates to Mentz, to determine the cause; who being
bribed by the Canons and Arnoldus, deprived Henry of his Bishopric, with great
scorn and ignominy, and substituted Arnoldus in his stead, Henry bore all
patiently, without appealing to the Pope, which he knew would be to no purpose;
but openly declared, That from their unjust Judgment he made Appeal to Christ
the Just Judge; there (said he) will I put in my Answer, and thither I cite
you: The Cardinals jeastingly replied, When thou art gone before, we will
follow thee. About a year and an half after, the Archbishop Henry died; upon
the hearing of his death, both the Cardinals said, Lo, he is gone before, and
we shall follow after: But their Jest proved in earnest; for both of them died
in one and the same day; one in an House of Office, and the other gnawing off
his own Fingers in the madness of his Distemper. Arnoldus likewise, who was
accessory hereunto, was assaulted in a Monastery, butchered, and his Carcass
thrown into the Town-Ditch. Chetwind. Hist. Collect. 1 part, p. 21.

XVI. One Philibert Hamlin, a Popish Priest in France, was in the year 1557.
Converted to the Protestant Religion, and thereupon went to Geneva, where he
exercised the Art of Printing, and published many Books: After which he was
made a Minister of the Reformed Religion, and Preached with good success at the
Town of Aleuart, and other places: At last he with his Host, a Priest whom he
had Instructed in the Protestant Profession, were apprehended, and cast into
Prison at Bordeaux; and whilst they lay there, in came a Priest with all his
Accoutrements, to say Mass: But Philibert inflamed with Zeal against such
ridiculous Fopperies, went and plucked the Garments from his back, and overthrew
the Chalice and Candlesticks, saying, Is it not enough for you to blaspheme God
in the Churches, but you must also pollute the Prison with your Idolatry: The
Jailer seeing this, fell upon him, and beat him with his Staff, and also
removed him into a Dungeon, loading him with Irons, which made his Legs to
swell, where he lay eight days. The Priest his Host terrified with the Prison,
and fear of Death, renounced his Profession, and was set at Liberty, whereupon
Philibert said to him, O unhappy, and more than miserable man! is it possible
that you should be so foolish, as for to save your life a few days, you should
so start away from, and deny the Truth? know you therefore, that although you
have hereby avoided the Corporal Fire, yet your life shall be never the longer;
for you shall die before me, and yet shall not have the honor to die for the
Cause of God; and you shall be an Example to all Apostates. Having ended his
Speech, and the Priest going out of Prison, he was presently slain by two
Gentlemen, who formerly had a quarrel against him. Philibert hearing of it,
protested seriously, That he knew ^f no such thing before, but spoke as it
pleased God to guide (...) Tongue: Philibert being condemned, and carried to
(...), they endeavored to drown his voice, by sounding of Trumpets; and so in
the midst of the Flames, praying and exhorting the People to Constancy in the
Truth, he rendered up his Soul unto God. Clarks Martyrol. p. 228.

XVII. When by the counsel and persuasion of Philip the Fair King of France,
Pope Clement the Fifth had condemned the whole Order of the Knights Templars,
and in diverse places had put many of them to death: there was a Neopolitan
Knight brought to suffer in like manner, who espying the Pope, and the K. of
France looking out at a window, he with a loud voice spoke to them as
follows; Clement, Thou cruel Tyrant, seeing there is none now left among
Mortals unto whom I may make my Appeal as to that grievous Death whereunto thou
have most unjustly condemned me, I do therefore appeal unto the Just Judge,
Christ our Redeemer, unto whose Tribunal I cite thee, together with King
Philip, that you both may make your Appearance there within a year and a day,
where I will then open and defend my cause. Pope Clement died within the time,
and King Philip soon after him, in 1214. Lipsius Mon. l. 2.

XVIII. A Master of the T^^tonick Order, whose name (says our Author) I
forbear to mention, proposed a Match between a young Merchant, and a Woman of a
doubtful Fame in respect of her Chastity, the young Man refused the overture,
and the rather, because he that persuaded the Marriage, was supposed to be no
hater of the Woman; the Master resented this refusal so ill, that he determined
the life of the refuser should pay for it; he therefore contrived that the
young Man should be accused of Theft, for which being condemned, he commanded
he should be hanged; prayers, and tears were of no avail, and therefore the
innocent had recourse to the safest Sanctuary of innocence, and as he was led
to Execution, said with a loud voice, I suffer unjustly, and therefore appeal
to the supreme Lord of Life, and Death, to whom he that has so unjustly
condemned me, shall render an account thirteen days after this very day; The
Master scoffed at this, but upon that same thirteenth day, being taken with a
sudden sickness, he cried out, Miserable Man that I am, behold I must dye, and
this day must I appear before the All-seeing Judge; and so died presently
after. Wanly. Hist. Man.

XIX. A poor Labourer at Calice, who had been an hearer of Mr. Adam Damlip (a
famous Protestant Preacher at Calice, when it was in the hands of the English)
said among some Company, That he would never believe the Priest could make the
Lords Body at his pleasure; whereupon he was accused, and condemned by one
Harvey, a Commissary there, who also with opprobrious, and abusive words railed
upon him, calling him Heretic, and saying He should die a vile death, the poor
Man answered, That he was no Heretic, but one that held the True Faith of
Christ, and whereas thou say (said he) that I shall die a vile death, thou
thy self shall die a vile death, and that shortly; The poor Man was burnt, and
Harvey within half an year after was hanged, drawn, and quartered for Treason.
Clarks Martyr. p. 427.

XX. In Sweden, Johannes Turso gave Sentence upon a certain Man, that he should
lose his head, who when all other defense was denied him, fell down on his
knees, and with great earnestness spoke as follows, Behold I die unjustly,
and I cite thee, unjust Judge, to Gods Tribunal, there to answer for my head
within this hour; These were looked upon as frivolous words, but scarce was the
Man beheaded by the Executioner, when the Judge himself fell down dead from his
Horse. Delrio, Disquisit. l. 4. Otho the first Emperor of Rome, being freely
reprehended by his Son William (who was then Bishop of Mentz) for his Marriage
with Adelaida, the Emperor was so offended, that he sent his Son to Prison;
whereupon the Bishop cited his Father Otho to the Tribunal of Christ, And (said
he) upon Whitsunday both of us shall appear before the Lord Christ, where by
Divine Judgment it shall appear who has transgressed the limits of his duty;
In pursuance of this appeal, the Emperor Otho died upon Whitsunday suddenly in
Saxony, his Son the Bishop deceasing some short time before. Drevel. Op.

XXI. Rodulphus, Duke of Ausiria, being grievously offended with a certain
Knight, caused him to be apprehended, and being bound hand and foot, and thrust
into a Sack to be thrown into the River; the Knight being in the Sack, and it
as yet not sown up, espying the Duke looking out at a Window (where he stood to
behold that spectacle) cried out to him with a loud voice; Duke Rodulph, I
summon thee to appear at the dreadful Tribunal of Almighty God, within the
compass of one year, there to show cause wherefore thou have undeservedly put
me to this bitter and unworthy death. The Duke received this Summons with
laughter, and unappalled and unconcerned, made answer; Well go thou before, and
I will then present my self; the year being almost spent, the Duke fell in to a
light Fever, and remembering the appeal, said to the standers by The time of my
death does now appreach, and I must go to Judgment; and so it happened, for he
died soon after. Dinoth. lib. 8.

XXII. Ferdinand, the fourth King of Spain, was a great Man, both in Peace, and
War, but somewhat rash and rigid in pronouncing Judgment, so that he seemed to
incline to cruelty. About the year 1312. he commanded two Brothers, Peter and
John of the Noble Family of Carvialii to be thrown headlong from an high Tower,
as being suspected guilty of the death of Benavidius, a noble Person of the
first rank; and though they with great constancy denied they were guilty of any
such crime, yet it was to small purpose; when therefore they perceived that the
Kings Ear was shut against them, they openly cried out they died innocently,
and since, they found the King had no regard to any Plea, or defense they could
make, they did appeal to the Divine Tribunal, and turning themselves to the
King, bid him Remember to make his Appearance there within the space of thirty
days at the furthest; Ferdinand at that time made no reckoning of their words,
but upon the thirtieth day after, his servants supposing he was asleep, found
him dead in his Bed, in the flower of his Age, for he was but twenty four
years, and nine months old, Wanly. Hist. Man.

34. Lambertus Schasnaburgenss, an excellent writer as most in these times
tells, that Buchardus Bishop of ^a^berstadt, in the year 1059 had an unjust
controversy with the Abbot of Helverdense, about some Lands in Saxony, which
the Bishop by force without Law sought to make his own; it was to small purpose
to make any resistance against so powerful an Adversary; but the injured Abbot
some few days before his death sent to Frederick Count Palatine, and entreated
him to bear these his last words to the Prelate, That being too weak to contend
(though the Law was on his side) he gave place, and was also departing this
life, but that God would be the Judge, unto whom he made his Appeal; that
therefore both of them should prepare to order their cause before his Tribunal,
where favor and power set aside, only Justice should prevail; In a short time
the Abbot died of a Fever, and not long after him the Bishop also, for as he
was one time mounting his Horse, he fell down, as one stricken with a
Thunderbolt, and his last words were, That he was hurried away to the Judgment
Seat of God there to be Judged. Delrio. Disquisit. l. 4.

XXV. Francis, Duke of Britain, cast his Brother Aegidius into Prison, who was
one of his Council, and falsely accused him of Treason, where when Aegidius was
almost famished, perceiving that his fatal hour approached, he spied a
Franciscan out of the window of the Prison, and calling him to confer with him,
he made him promise, That he would tell his Brother, that within fourteen days
he should stand before the Judgment Seat of God; The Franciscan having found
out the Duke in the Confines of Normandy, where he then was, told him of his
Brothers death; and of his Appeal to the high Tribunal of God; the Duke
terrified with this message, immediately grew ill, and his distemper
increasing, he expired upon the very day appointed, Drixelius Oper. The
Genoways sent out their Galleys against the Pirates, and in the way took a
small Ship of Sicily, together with the Mr. of it, whom in contempt of the
Sicilians they hanged up; the poor man pleaded he suffered unjustly, since he
had never done any the least injury to them, but perceiving all his plaints to
be in vain, he appealed unto God for Justice, and cited the Admiral of the
Genoese to make his Appearance at his Bar within six months, within which time
he that was thus cited, died. Wanly. Hist. Man.

XXVI. Master Patrick Hamilton, of an Ancient, and Honorable Family in
Scotland, left his own Country, and went into Germany, where he became
acquainted with those worthy Men, Martin Luther, and Philip Melancthon, then at
the famous University of Wittenburg, from thence he went to the University of
Marpurg, which was then newly erected, where he was intimate with other learned
Men, and by reason of his Learning, and Integrity of life, he was had in
admiration of many; however he could not rest till he had returned into his own
Country, where the Doctrine of the Reformation began then to break forth, as
well in public, as in private; which so disturbed the Popish-Clergy, that
James Beaton, Archbishop of St. Andrews sent for Mr. Patrick Hamilton to St.
Andrews, where after diverse days conference he had his Freedom, and Liberty,
the Bishop seeming to approve his Doctrine, acknowledging that in many things
there needed a Reformation in the Church; but withal searing that their Kingdom
of Darkness should be endamaged, they persuaded the King, who was then young,
and much led by them, to go on Pilgrimage to St. Dothess, in Ross, that so by
reason of his absence no application might be made to him for the saving the
life of this innocent Gentleman, who not suspecting their malice, remained like
a Lamb among Wolves; the King being gone, one night Mr. Hamilton was seized
upon by the Bishops Officers, and carried to the Castle, and the next day was
brought forth into Judgment, and Condemned to be burnt upon several Articles
about Pilgrimages, Purgatory, Prayers to Saints, etc. After Dinner the fire was
prepared, and being tied to the Stake, he cried out with a loud voice, Lord
Jesus receive my Spirit; how long shall darkness overwhelm this Realm, and how
long will thou suffer the Tyranny of these Men? The fire was slow, and
therefore put him to the greater torment; but that which most troubled him, was
the clamor of some wicked Men, set on by the Friars, who continually cried,
Turn thou Heretic, call upon our Lady, say, Salve Regina, etc. To whom he
answered, Depart from me, and trouble me not, thou Messenger of Satan; and
speaking to one Alexander Campbell, a Friar, with whom he had conferred about
matters of Religion, and who had informed against him, and was now the
Ringleader who roared against him, to recant; Mr. Patrick with great vehemence
said to him, Wicked Man, thou know the contrary, and have confessed the
contrary to me, I appeal thee before the Tribunal of Jesus Christ, After which
words he resigned up his Spirit unto God in the year 1527. Campbell was
troubled at these words, and from that very day was never in his right mind,
but soon after died mad. Clarks Martyr.

Thus, Though the Fool has said in his heart there is no God, and because
Justice is not presently inflicted upon Sinners, men harden themselves in
Rebellion, and Wickedness against Heaven, yet we find that many times, The Lord
is known by the Judgments which he executes upon Impenitent, Unjust, and
Profligate Wretches, as by the foregoing examples does sufficiently appear.

CHAP. IV.
The Wicked Lives, and Woeful Deaths of several Popes, and likewise of
Apostates, and Desperate Persecutors.

AFter the Bishops of Rome had tasted the sweetness of Power, Wealth and
Prosperity, they at once lost their Humility and Purity of Religion, and
assumed Politic and Tyrannical Principles, laying aside the Sword of the
Spirit, and defiling their hands in the blood of Emperors, Kings, Princes, and
all sorts of People; and hereby Apostatizing from Christianity; the Popes their
Successors wallowed in all kinds of wickedness, as Usurpation, Sodomy,
Conjuration, and all manner of Oppressions, and thereby from being poor
persecuted Bishops, they became Persecutors of others: But Divine Justice has
oftentimes inflicted severe Vengeance both upon them, and their Instruments;
since Apostasy is thought to be the sin of the Holy Ghost, the Apostle says,
It is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly Gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the
good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come, if they shall fall away,
to renew them again to Repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves the Son
of God afresh, and put him to an open shame, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. therefore God has
not left himself without witness against them, but has made them Examples of
his Severity in this world, as the following Instances plainly demonstrate,
both as to wicked Popes, Apostates and Persecutors.

I. Pope John the Thirteenth was accused of Witchcraft, and Using Magic, and
was given to all manner of Debauchery, Perjury and Villainy; he dismembered
diverse of his Cardinals for taking part with Otho against him, plucking out the
Eyes of some, cutting off the Hands, and gelding others: He made Deacons in his
Stables among his Horses, and for Money made Boys Bishops; he lay with Reynora
a Widow, his Fathers Concubine, and Anna another, with her Neice; put out the
Eyes of his Ghostly Father Benedict, brake windows in the night, set houses on
Fire, drank an health to the Devil, would say Mass, and not communicate; for
which and other intolerable Rogueries, he was deposed by Otho, in a Council,
and Leo the Eighth put into his place; but his Whores and other Friends, (as
soon as Otho had turned his back) soon got him in again: From this Gallant our
St. Dunstan with a round sum of Money, purchased a Prohibition of Priests
Marriages, which caused no small disturbance in England at that time: At last
being taken in the Act of Adultery, with a resolute man's Wife, he received such
a deadly gash from the Husband, as in eight days sent him packing into another
world, Prideaux Introduct.

II. Pope Alexander the Sixth, was a cruel Tyrant, and a scourge of God to all
Italy, and plagued especially that corrupt College of Cardinals, who had
chosen him not for his Virtues, but for the heaps of Gold which he had
distributed among them; he was void of Sincerity, Faith, Truth, or Religion,
unquenchably covetous, unreasonably ambitious, and more than barbarously cruel,
and had a burning desire to advance his Bastards, whereof he had many: He set
Benefices and Promotions to sale: He poisoned John Michael, Cardinal of Venice,
that he might obtain his Gold and Treasures: In Magic he was very learned, and
therefore very wicked: He poisoned his own Father: And likewise Zemes, Brother
to the great Turk (being hired thereto for two hundred Ducats) after he had
sworn to him that he would secure him; he procured Aid of the Turk against the
French King: He caused the Tongue and Hands of Anthony Manrivil, a learned and
wise Man, to be cut off, for making an Oration in reproof of his wickedness: In
Adulteries he was most filthy and abominable, and committed Incest with his own
Daughter Lucretia, the Wife to three Prin^es, upon whom these Verses are extant.

Hic jacet in Tumulo Lucretia nomine, sed re
Thais, Alexandri filia, sponsa, nurus.
Ergone te semper rapiet Lucretia Sextus?
Heufatum dici nominis! hic Pater est,
Sextus Tarquinius, Sextus Nero, Sextus and iste,
Semper sub Sextis Perdita Roma fuit.
Lucrece by name here lies, but Thais in life,
Pope Alexander's Child, Spouse, and Sons Wife,
And must a Sextus Lucrece always ravish?
Cursed name! but here is a Father that is most knavish.
Tarquinius, Nero, this a Sextus too,
Sextus was ever born Rome to undo.
This Pope never attempted any thing, but he first consulted the Devil, to whom
he gave himself, and who at length fetched him, for being accustomed to poison
any whom he disliked; he had prepared some poisoned Wine to dispatch some of
his Cardinals, which his Butler through a mistake, put into his own hand, and
he drinking it off, with horrible cries and groans immediately died; his Son
Caesar Borgia as murdering a Villain as himself, drinking of it likewise,
whereby he fell into a sharp and dangerous disease. Symson Hist. Church.

III. Sylvester the Second, was a French man born, and bred up a Conjuring
Friar, in the Abbey of Floriack, were Necromancy at that time was held an
eminent piece of Learning; to perfect his skill that way, he goes to a Saracens
in Sivil, and couzens him of his chief Conjuring Book, by being inward with the
Magicians Daughter; then he contracts with the Devil to be wholly his, upon
condition he would conduct him back to France, and fit him with promotions in
order to his advancement to the Popedom: Upon his return to France he became
admirable for his deep Learning, and (amongst others of great State (had
several Scholars in the Black Art; by the help of whom and his other Arts, he
became first Bishop of Rheims, then Archbishop of Ravenna, and thence to be
Pope; in which Seat he concealed, yet always privately practiced his Devilish
Mystery, having in secret a Brazen Head, which he consulted instead of a
Delphick Oracle; consulting with whom on a time when he should die, answer was
given him, he should live until he said Mass in Jerusalem; this made him
confident of a long continuance, but he was couzened by the Devil's
Equivocation, though he dreamed of immortality, and that he should never die.
For it happened on a time, that as he was singing Mass at Rome in a Temple
called St. Gross, otherwise Jerusalem (which was the place assigned him to die
in, and not Jerusalem in Palestine, as he imagined) he heard a great noise of
Devils, who came to fetch him away even in the very time of Mass; he being very
much terrified and tormented therewith, is said to have repented, and in token
thereof, to have requested that his Hands, Tongue, and secret Members, might be
cut off, wherewith he had offended God, and his Body to be cut in four pieces,
and laid on a Cart, and the Beasts to draw it whither they would; which being
accordingly performed, they of their own accord drew him to the Lateran Church,
and (as some Authors write) the Body was immediately carried out of the Church
by the Devil. Beards Theater.

IV. Gregory the Seventh, without any Election of Emperor or Clergy, but only
by his own Intrusion, got into the Chair, having poisoned six or seven Popes
before he could get the Popedom himself: He had a trick to shake out sparks of
fire from his sleeve, and by some other ways brought it about, that the voice
of the People was, Peter the Apostle has made choice of Hildebrand to be Pope,
which was his own name before he changed it to Gregory: He set himself with all
his might against the Emperor Henry the Fourth, and had plotted his death; so
that when he went to prayers at St. Marys in Aventine Hill, a Villain was set
with a stone to roll down from the Roof to beat out the Emperors brains; but
it fell out to the ruin and quashing of the Executioner, who fell down, and
was killed therewith: He threw the Sacrament into the fire, because it did not
answer his demands (as the Heathen Gods did) concerning his success against the
Emperor, whom he Excommunicated, and sent a Crown to Rodulphus, Duke of Suevia,
with this verse upon it.

Petra dedit Petro, Petrus Diadema Rodolpho.
That Crown the Rock did give to Peter,
Peter on Ralph bestows in Meeter.
This Crown was sent to cause Rodulphus to Rebel against his Master, wherein he
received an utter defeat, and dyed miserably by the hand of a Woman, tumbling
down a Stone upon him, as he was besieging a certain Castle in Germany; at last
he got the Emperor at such an advantage, that he was fain to come to his Castle
at Canusium, with his Empress and Son bare footed in the cold of Winter, and
there to wait three days fasting, till he might have Audience, which at length
he obtained by the mediation of Madam Matilda, one of the Popes Wenches, or St
Peter's Daughter, (as they called her) who left her Husband to live with this
Holy Father; when he pronounced Sentence of Excommunication against the
Emperor, the new Seat whereon he sat, unexpectedly rent in pieces; he
condemned Berengarius, his opinion against the corporal Presence, and was
against Priests Marriages; he Sainted Liberius the Arrian Heretic, exercised
what cruelty he pleased, especially against a Widows Son, whose Foot he cut
off; but at last vengeance overtook him; for in a Synod at Brixia he was
deposed, and died miserably in banishment. Symson, Hist. Church.

V. Pope Paul the Third prostituted his Sister Julia Farnesia to Alexander the
Sixth, that he might be made Cardinal, committed Incest with his own Daughter
Constantia, and poisoned her Husband to enjoy her more freely; he likewise
poisoned his own Sister, upon suspicion she played false with him; Peter
Aloysius, his Bastard Son, practiced all manner of horrible Villainies,
Robberies, Murders, Adulteries Incest, and Sodomy, thinking that because his
Father was Pope, therefore no wickedness was unlawful for him to commit; he was
by the report of Authors, one of the most notorious villains the world ever
saw; he forced the Bishop of Favence to his unnatural lust, so that the poor
Bishop with mere anger and grief, that he should be so abused dyed immediately.
Being afterward made Duke of Plaisence and Parma, he exercised most cruel
Tyranny over many of his Subjects, insomuch that several Gentlem. resolved no
longer to endure it, and therefore hired diverse Ruffians to kill him, they
themselves likewise joining with them; the Pope his Father by the Art of
Magic, which he practiced, warned him carefully to look to himself upon the
tenth day of September, in which, notwithstanding he was slain, for as he
returned toward his Castle in the evening in an Horse-litter, with a great
retinue about him, having been to see some Fortifications which he had made,
the Conspirators to the number of 36, marched before him, as if to do him
honor, but as soon as he was entered the Castle, they drew up the Drawbridge,
for fear of his retinue that were without, and coming to him with their naked
Swords, charged him with his Cruelties and Tyrannies, and then presently slew
him in his Horse-litter, together with a Priest, the Master of his Horse, and
five Almaigns that were his Guard; his dead Body they hung by a chain over the
walls, and shaking it to and fro in the view of the People, threw it down
headlong at last into the Ditch, where the People to show their detestation of
him wounded the Carcass with daggers, and trampled it under their feet; this
happened September. 10. 1547. When Pope Paul was Legate at Ancona, he couzened
the Mother of this Aloysius, by persuading her to yield to his Lust under the
pretense of Marriage, who upon the discovery that he was a Priest, fell almost
distracted, yet brought him this hopeful Son aformentioned, This Pope
maintained forty five thousand Whores, He was a great Conjurer, and conferred
daily with Gauricus Servita, and others of that damned crew of Necromancers,
who were always at his Elbow; from this Popes piety we had the Council of
Trent, and he confirmed the Order of Jesuits, who have since proved the
Firebrands of the world; he likewise Excommunicated, and Cursed King Henry the
Eighth, and gave away his Kingdom; but at last endeavoring to debauch his
Neice Laura Farnesia, Nicholas Quercen, her Husband taking him in the Act, gave
him a mark, that he carried with him to the grave. Beards Theater.

VI. Pope Innocent the Fourth was a Genoese, he Excommunicated and Cursed the
Emperor Frederick, who had been his greatest Friend, and holding a Council at
Lions, deposed him, and set up Henry of Thuring in his Place, and after him
William of Holland, who was assisted by a great company of Crusadoes or persons
designed for the recovery of the Holy Land, whom the Pope had marked for his
own Beasts, they wearing a Cross upon their Garments, but the Emperor crossed
their Crowns as he met with them, and nobly defended himself until he was
poisoned at length by the Popes means, and then smothered by his Bastard
Manfred. This Pope was the only Patron of the four Orders of begging Locusts,
Dominicans, Franciscans, Carmelites, and Augustines, who hatched under him
those addle Eggs of Summaries, Sophisms, Exorcisms, Breviaries, and the like;
he offered to sell the Kingdom of Sicily at a reasonable rate, being none of
his own, to Henry the Third, and quarrelled with our Robert Grostead, Bishop of
Lincoln, who withstood him stoutly, and contemned his Excommunication; and
after his death is said to have appeared to the Pope, and that he struck him
with his staff on his side, and said, Surge Miser, and veni in Judicium; Arise
wretched Man, and come to Judgment, after which the Pope in a few days ended
his life, and so the world was eased of this Tyrant. Prideaux. Introduct.

VII. It was said of Pope Boniface the Eighth, that he entered like a Fox,
reigned like a Lion, and dyed like a Dog, he sent an Embassage to Philip the
fair King of France, to command him to take upon him an expedition against the
Saracens in the Holy Land, upon pain of forfeiting his Kingdom into his hands,
and having his Sword by his side, he had the Impudence to say, That he alone,
and none else was Emperor, and Lord of all the world; and to make this good,
he bestowed the Empire of Germany, and the Crown of France, upon Duke Albert,
though none of his to give; and not content herewith, he was so insolent, as to
charge Philip the Fair, to acknowledge him to be his Subject in all Causes, as
well Temporal, as Spiritual, requiring him likewise to levy a Subsidy upon the
Clergy for his Holinesses use, and denying his Authority in bestowing Church
livings, which were vacant, as being a Prerogative challenged by the Holy See,
and in the conclusion of this Bull, or Decree were these words, Aliud credentes
fatuos reputamus; We count him a fool who is of another mind; whereunto the
King returned this Answer, Philippus Dei Gratia, etc. Philip, by the Grace of
God, King of France, to Boniface calling himself Pope, little or no health, be
it known to the exceeding great Foolishness, that we in Temporal Affairs are
subject to none, and that the bestowing of Benefices belongs to us as our Royal
Right, and ^f there be any that think otherwise, we judge them to be erroneous,
and doting Fools; an answer will beseeming a Prince, who in pursuance thereof,
immediately assembled a National Council of all the Barons, and Prelates,
within his Dominions, at Paris, wherein Pope Boniface was Condemned as an
Heretic, a Simonist, a Manslayer, and it was generally concluded, That the
King should show no obedience to him, nor take the least notice of whatever he
should impose for the future, whereupon the King to pull down his Pride and
Arrogance, dispatched two hundred Soldiers privately into the Kingdom of
Naples, (whither the Pope was fled for fear of diverse Gentlemen who were
resolved to be revenged on him, for causing their Houses, and Castles to be
plucked down) who by a stratagem surprised him, and carried him to Rome, where
he dyed miserably; some Authors affirming, that the Extremity of his Torment
brought him into such a terrible Frenzy, that he gnawed off his own hands for
pain; and that at the hour of his death there were horrible Thunders,
Lightnings and Tempests about the place where he died. Beards Theater.

VIII. Adrian the Fourth was an Englishman, whose name was Nicholas Brakespear
before he was Pope: He would not suffer the Consuls of Rome to have any power,
and condemned Arnold of Brixia for an Heretic in upholding their Rights: He
quarrelled with the Emperor Frederick, for not holding, (Hostler like) his
Stirrup, and afterward excommunicated him for claiming his Rights, and writing
his name before the Popes: He conspired with his Cardinals to ruin the
Emperor, and had sent a counterfeit Villain to stab him, and an Arabian to
poison him; but while this proud Prelate designed the murdering of others, he
lost his own Life by a very despicable and inconsiderable creature; for he was
choakt with a Fly, which got into his Throat in drinking a glass of Wine, which
verified what he was often wont to repeat, That there is no kind of life upon
Earth more wretched than to be a Pope. Symson. Hist. church.

IX. Alexander the Third succeeded him, who likewise opposed his Sovereign the
Emperor, for being chosen among strong Factions, wherein three or four more
besides claimed the place; the Emperor comes to Pavia to appease this
disorder, and sends for Alexander, who instead of obeying him, excommunicates
the Emperor, and his other Opposites, and by his own favor, and the French
King's Purse, settles himself at Rome; the Emperor hereupon comes with an Army
to correct his Insolency; but Hartman Bishop of Brixia, by effectual
persuasions, turns him, and his Arms from the Pope against the Saracens, where
being victorious, and returning homeward, he was surprised by the Popes
Treachery who had sent his Picture exactly drawn to the Life, to the Emperor
of the Saracens, that he might not miss in laying wait for him; being hereby
apprehended, with his Chaplain, as they went to bathe themselves in a River of
Armenia, and brought before the Emperor, the Picture discovered him to be the
man: The Emperor used him nobly, appoints his Ransom, and then guards him home
as far as Brixia. The Princes of the Empire, to revenge this prodigious
Treason, join together; the Pope flies to Venice, where Duke Sebastian protects
him: Otho the Emperors Son, is sent with an Army to compass him in, with
positive order not to fight till his Fathers coming; which the Young Man,
ambitious of Glory, neglects, whereby he is overthrown and taken Prisoner: The
good Father, to preserve his Son, is forced to submit: And in St. Mark's Church
in Venice, he prostrates himself before the Pope, who setting his foot on his
Neck, he repeated that of the Psalmist, Thou shall tread upon Lions and Adders,
the young Lion and the Dragon shall thou trample under foot; which the Pope
applied to the Emperor, who replying, Not to thee, but to Peter this power is
given: The Beast answered, Et mihi and Petro, as well to me as to Peter: This
end after much trouble had this remarkable business; the Pope, as he had
reason, gratified the Venetians, and making what conditions he pleased with the
Emperor, returned to Rome: Henry the Second our King, was much vexed by this
Pope for the death of Thomas Becket, whom the Pope made St. Thomas for opposing
his Sovereign, who being killed by some Persons at the Stairs of the Altar, in
the Cathedral at Canterbury, the Murder was charged upon the King by the Popes
Legate; and though he swore that he was no way concerned in his Death, yet he
was forced to kiss the Legates knee, and submit to such penance as should
appoint him; one part whereof was, That he should absolutely submit to the Pope
in Spiritual matters. And we read, that when King Henry came out of France, he
went to Canterbury; and as soon as he was in sight of the Cathedral, he put off
his Shoes and Stockins, and went barefoot to Beckets Tomb; the ways being so
sharp and stony that his feet bled as he passed along; and when he came there,
every Monk in the Cloister whipped the King's back with a Rod; yet a Popish Emp:
Germany 3 days at the Popes Gate pa. 83.

An Oivl in the Popes Council, pa. 39

Historian says of this Becket, That he was worthy of death and damnation for
being so obstinate against God's Minister his King: Upon this Penance the Pope
granted to the King and his Heirs the Title of Kings of England. Hence it is
observed (says Platina) that all Kings of England must acknowledge the Pope
for their Landlord. In this proud Popes time, the poor Waldenses stood up for
the Truth, and increased, notwithstanding all manner of Cruelty and Persecution
was exercised upon them. To this Pope Nicholas Maniacutius wrote mad verses
extant in Onuphrius, where he concludes,

Scimus Alexandrum per secula commemorandum.
As long as there is Goose or Gander,
We must remember Alexander.
This Pope plagued the World about one and twenty years, and was then suddenly
hurried out of it in the midst of his wretched and ambitious Contrivances.
Symson Hist. Church.

X. Pope John the Twenty Third called a Council at Rome against the Protestants
in Bohemia; when the Council was set, the Mass of the Holy Ghost sung, and the
Pope placed in his Chair, there came flying in among them an ugly Owl, with an
ill-favored hooting, and set her self upon a cross Beam, just over against the
Pope, casting her staring Eyes upon him, whereupon the whole company began to
marvel; and whispering each to other, said, Behold the Spirit is come in the
likeness of an Owl: The Pope himself blushed at the matter, and began to sweat
fret and fume; and being in great distraction, as looking upon it to be
ominous, he dissolved the Council for that time; yet afterward calling another
Session; when they were met, in came the Owl as before, still looking
steadfastly upon the Pope; whereupon he was more ashamed, saying, That he could
no longer abide the sight of her; and commanded her to be driven away; but with
all the shouts and hollowings they could make, she would not be forced from her
place, till with Clubs and Sticks thrown at her she fell down dead among them
all. After this a Council was by his Consent Assembled at Constance 1414. in
which this Pope for diverse Intolerable Villainies, was deposed, and afterward
died miserably. Acts and Monum.

XI. Pope Julius the Second was more addicted to War than Writing, or Teaching
his Flock: He excommunicated Lewis the French King, but he did not value it in
the least; for he Coined Money with this Inscription, Perdam Babylonem, I will
destroy Babylon. He is said to have thrown St. Peter's Keys into the River
Tyber, of whom this Epigram was written,

Cum contra Gallos Bellum Papa Julius esset
Gesturus; sicut fama vetusta docet, etc.
When Julius Pope against the French
Determined to make War,
As fame reports, he gathered up
Great Troops of Men from far.
And to the Bridge of Tyber then
Marching as he were or mad.
wood;
His Holy Keys he took, and cast
Them down into the Flood:
And afterward into his hand
He took his naked Sword,
And shaking it, broke forth into
This fierce and warlike word:
This Sword of Paul, quoth he, shall now
Defend us from our Foe,
Since that this Key of Peter does
Nothing avail thereto.
This Pope breaking his Oath in not celebrating a Council, the Cardinals
Assemble a Council at Pisa, to depose him, but he easily avoided that by a
Counter Council at Lateran: He dispensed with our King Henry the Eighth, to
Marry his Brother Arthur's Wife: He horribly abused two Ingenious Youths, who
were sent by the Queen of France, to be bred in Italy, of which one wrote, To
Rome a German came, of fair aspect,
But he returned a Woman in effect.


And this was written of the Pope himself.

Genoa cui Patrem, genetricem Graecia, etc.
He that from Greece and Genua had his blood,
And on the waves his Birth, can be prove good?
The Genoese Cheats, the Greeks men Liars call,
The Sea Perfidious, Julius has these all.
He Sainted one Mother Francis, a Roman Matron, for preserving her Chastity by
melted Lard, etc. In his time (...) Cistertian Monk preached at Mantua, that
our Savior was not conceived in the Virgins Womb, but in a place hear her
heart, of three drops of blood: Of these Times Maximilian the Emperor used to
say, Deus eterne nisi ^igilares, etc. O Eternal God! if thou did not watch
over ^s, how ill would it go with the World which we govern, I being a
miserable Hunter, and wicked Pope Jusus, a beastly Drunkard? It is credibly
reported of this Julius, that partly with his Wars, and partly with his
Cursings and Excommunications, he destroyed Two hundred Thousand Christians
within the space of Seven ^ears: He was hurried away in the midst of all his
De^aucheries. Prideaux Introd.

XII. Pope Julius the Third was Chosen not without ^ome disturbance; as soon as
he was Elected, he gave ^is Cardinals Hat to a Sodomitical Boy, whom he had
^bused, called Innocentius, at which the Cardinals repi^ing, and asking him the
reason of it, What reason had ^u (said he) to Choose me Pope? Fortune favors
whom she leaseth. John Casa, Archbishop of Beneventum, and Dean ^f the
Apostolical Chamber, in this Pope's Time Printed Book at Venice, in defense of
Sodomy, by whom also Francis Spira was seduced to revolt to Popery, and died
desperately. This Pope being sick, desired to have some Pork, which being
forbidden by his Physicians, he said. He would have in despite of God; and
having appointed a cold Peacock to be reserved for him; when he missed it the
next Meal, he grew into a great rage; and being requested not to be so angry
for such a trifle, he blasphemously answered, That if God was so angry with
Adam's eating an Apple, why might not he be as angry for his Peacock? From this
Pope we had the Reconciliation, and Blessing of the Mother Church, so
submissively taken from the hands of Cardinal Pool, in Queen Mary's days,
which cost the Lives of so many Innocents, by various Executions; whereupon
Walterius describes the Sea o^ Rome under him in these verses:

Roma quid est? quod te docuit praeposterus ordo;
Quid docuit? jungas versa elementa scies;
Roma Amor est, Amor est? qualis, praeposterus? unde hat^
Roma Mares, noli dicere plura scio.
What Is Rome? even that preposterousness does show,
What Is that spelt backward, then thou soon may know
Backward it is Amor, Love, what Love? nay hold,
It is Male Love, most odious to be told.
And Beza plays upon three evacuating Basins, which this Pope was wont to have
in his filthiness; and thu^ by letting fly at both ends, his Life went after
it. Clark Examples.

XIII. John the Eighth, otherwise called Pope Joa^ was a Lass of Mentz in
Germany, that ran away with a^ English Monk of Hulda, in Man's Apparel, and
studie^ with him at Athens till he died there; thence this Virago came to Rome,
and so learnedly trussed her Point^ that after Leo's death, she was advanced to
St. Peter Chair, where for two years and an half she celebrate Mass, gave
Orders, frees the Emperor Lewis from h^ Oath to Aldegisus, Crowns Charles the
Bald, takes up the Controversies between the two Hincmares, establishe^ the
Learned Photius, in the Patriarchship of Constantinople writ a Learned Letter
to the Prince of Moravia, and wanted nothing requisite for a complete Pope but
the Right Gender; the defect of which discovered it self in her going to the
Lateran, between Colosses and St. Clements, where, without a Midwife, she was
delivered of a Bastard, and her Life together; for which her Successors have
never since gone that unlucky way; and have provided a hollow Seat of Porphyry,
to search the Popes, and prevent After-claps, This Story of Dame Joan, some of
the Popish Writers would decry by all means possible; but we have fifty at
least of their own Authors against them. Prideaux Introduct.

XIV. Pope Vrbane the Sixth was a most cruel and bloody man; at his first
Election he was much graced by Jane Queen of Naples, and Otto of Brunswick her
Husband, but the rude Beast soon forgot it: and afterward was the cause of both
their deaths; to make good that saying,

Asperius nihil est humili cum surgit in altum,
Cord stat inflato, pauper honor dato.
None looks to be accounted
More than a Beggar mounted?
He struts with heart full blown,
When Honor's on him thrown.
In the beginning of his Popedom he was much for Charles King of Naples, having
an Eye to the making of his Roguish Nephew Francis Batillus a Prince; but this
Friendship was soon turned into spite; and Batillus, after his Uncles death,
was stripped of what he had heaped together, according to that Epigram,

Cum moritur Praesul Cognatio tot a fit exul.
When once the Prelate fails,
His Kin may pare their Nails-
The brutish Tyranny of this Pope to some of his Cardinals, whom he suspected,
was very horrible; he caused one to be slain, five others of them to be sowed
up in sacks, and thrown into the Sea, three others to be knocked on the head
before all the People, and their Bodies to be dried in an Oven, and carried in
Chests about with him, with their red Hars upon the same; but shortly after as
he was with great greediness gathering Money, he fell from his Mule, and so
bruised himself, that he languished thereof for twenty seven days, dying by
degrees, and so suffering the pains which he caused the Cardinals to endure.
Symsons Hist.

XV. Pope Sixtus the Fourth most unjustly vexed all Italy with Wars, and
Dissentions; one of their own Writers says, That amongst all the Pimps of
these latter days, that built Baudy Houses, this Pope surmounted them, all, for
he erected Stews at Rome of double Abomination, one for Women, and another for
Boys; he allowed the whole Family of the Cardinal of St. Lucia the use of
unnatural Lusts and Sodomy for the three hot months in the year, June, July,
and August; he caused every Whore to pay him a certain rate, which amounted to
the Sum of forty thousand Ducats a year, he provided Shoes for his Concubine
Tyresia, covered all over with Pearls, and dyed suddenly in the midst of his
Filthiness, Symsons Hist.

XVI. It would be too long to insist upon every particular Pope, who after the
first six hundred years were for the most part Monsters, rather than Men, and
are therefore numbered by an ingenious Person under the several following heads,
that is, Usurping Nimrods, L^xurious Sodomites, Egyptian Magicians, Devouring
Abaddons, and Incurable Babylonians, many of whom by the just Judgment of
Heaven were cut off by strange, and prodigious Deaths, as Poison, Stabbing,
Plagues, Wars etc. It happened that one Popes name was Bocco de Porco, Hogs, or
Swines Face, which he being ashamed of, he changed it into Sergias, and ever
since all Popes have taken up their name by the rule of contraries, the most
Cruel being called Clement, or Merciful; the most Wicked Innocent, the most
cursed Popes Benedict, or Blessed, the greatest Clowns, Vrbane, or Courteous,
and the vilest Wretches Pius. Neither has Divine Justice less appeared against
Apostates and Persecutors, as by the following fearful examples it is evident,

XVII. Judas Iscariot, that wicked, and accursed wretch, was guilty of this
horrid Sin, for he being a Disciple, nay an Apostle of Jesus Christ, moved with
Covetousness, after he had conspired with the Enemy, Traitorously sold his Lord
and Master, the Savior of the World, into the hands of Thieves and Murderers,
for thirty pieces of Silver, who sought only his destruction; after this vile
creature had perpetrated this execrable deed, for which he was called the Son
of Perdition, he could find no rest nor peace in his guilty conscience, being
horribly tormented with remorse for his wickedness, judging himself worthy of a
thousand deaths, for betraying that Innocent and Guiltless Blood; if he looked
up, he saw the vengeance of God ready to fall upon him, and destroy him, if he
looked down, he saw nothing but Hell gaping for him, to swallow him up; the
light of the Sun was dreadful to him, and he was even weary of his own life; so
that being plunged into the bottomless pit of despair, he at last hanged
himself, and burst in two in the midst, so that all his bowels gushed out, and
his memory is abhorred to this day, as a dreadful Apostate from Christianity.

XVIII. There are two memorable examples of Apostates; the one of Lucian, who
having professed the Christian Religion for some time under Trajan the Emperor,
fell afterward away, and became so Profane and Impious, as to mock at
Religion, and the Divinity, so tha he was firnamed the Atheist; this wretch,
who like a foul mouthed Dog, barked, and belched out bitter Jears, and Scof^s
against the Religion of Christ, seeking to make it ridiculous, and thereby
destroy it, was himself in Gods vengeance torn to pieces, and devoured by Dogs.
The other is Porphyrie, who after he had received the knowledge of true
Religion, out of despite and anger, because he was reproved for his faults by
the Christians, set himself against them, and published Books full of horrible
Blasphemies, to discredit and overthrow the Christian Faith; but when he
observed how fully, and clearly all his wretched Arguments were answered, and
consuted, and that he was accounted a villainous Atheist for his labor, in
terrible despair, and anguish of Soul, he died. Beards T^eatre.

XIX. Julian the Emperor, notoriously known by the name of Apostate, fell into
the same dreadful gulf; for having been brought up, and instructed from his
Childhood in the Christian Religion, and afterward for some time a professed
Reader thereof to others in the Church, as soon as he had obtained the Empire,
he maliciously revolted from his Profession, and resisted with all his power
the Faith, and Church of Christ; endeavoring by all means possible, either by
force to ruinate and destroy it, or by craft and subtilty to undermine it; and
because he designed to do what mischief he could to the Christians, he
therefore endeavored by all means, to please, and oblige the Pagans their
Enemies; and therefore he first ordered their Heathen Temples to be opened,
which Constantine his Predecessor had caused to be shut up; then he took from
the Christian Churches, and their Ministers those Liberties, Privileges and
Immunities, which Constantine had bestowed upon them; and not content herewith,
he confiscated the Church Revenues, and imposed great Taxes, and Tributes upon
all that professed the name of Christ, and forbid them to have any Schools of
Learning to teach their Children; and used many of the Customs, and Orders of
the Christian Religion in his Heathen Worship; after he had thus by all means
labored to beat down the Scepter of Christ's Kingdom, it happened quite
contrary to his expectation, for instead thereof, the Scepter of his own
Kingdom was destroyed, and broken; for, making War against the Persians, he
furnished himself with such Gallantry of Armor, Apparel, Soldiers, and all
things else, that he thought of no less than to have overcome the whole world,
continually belching out threatenings against the poor Christians, whom he had
determined at his return out of Persia to have utterly destroyed, and to have
left none alive, as was afterward discovered by one of his Council; the number
of his Army was so great, and his strength (as he thought) so impregnable, that
he doubted not in the least, but to have conquered all Persia in a short time;
but behold how God overturneth the contrivances and Plots of his Enemies! this
great Army, (as St. Chrysostom writing against the Heathen observes) in which
he put so much confidence, seemed in a little space to be rather a vast, and
weak multitude of Women and Children, than an Army of Warriors; for by the ill
management, and conduct thereof, there arose so great a Famine amongst them,
that their Horses which were provided for the Battle, were fain to be killed to
save them from starving, yea and for want of that too, many hundreds dyed of
hunger, and Thirst: so that when they had any skirmish with their Enemies, they
were always put to the rout, doing more mischief to themselves than their Foes;
and lastly, they were led so indiscreetly, that they could not by any means
escape but were constrained after he was slain, to beseech the Persians to
suffer them to retire, whereby as many as could, escaped, and fled away to save
their lives; and thus this gallant Army was miserably discomfited, and
destroyed, to the everlasting shame and infamy of that cursed Apostate, who was
struck with an Arrow in the Battle, that was never known from whence it came,
which pierced through his Armor, and wounded him, very deep in his side; and
feeling his strength fail, by reason of his wound, he took some of his own
Blood in his own hands, and throwing it up in great pride and malice, cried
out, O Galilean, thou have overcome me; (meaning thereby our Blessed Savior,
whom he in scorn termed so) and soon after wretchedly gave up the Ghost. One of
the Treasurers of this wicked Emperor who, to please his Master, forsook
likewise the Religion of Christ, being on a time mocking and deriding the
Ministry of Gods holy Word, died miserably on a sudden, with vomiting blood out
of his mouth, his privy parts, (as St. Chrysostom says) being likewise so
rotten, putrified, and consumed with lice, that he could find no remedy for the
same, and so died. Symsons Chapter Hist.

XX. Arnold Bonelius, a Student in the University of Lovain, a Man much
commended for an excellent wit, ripeness of Learning, and for favoring the
Protestant Religion, but afterward Apostatizing to Popery, he began to be much
troubled in mind, and thence fell into despair, against which he wrestled a
great while, but at length being wholly overcome by it, as he was drawn to walk
in the Fields with some Scholars, his familiar Friends, he pretended himself
weary, and so sat down by a Springs side, and his Friends being gone a little
before, he drew out a dagger, and stabbed himself into the breast; his Friends
observing him to shrink down, and the water discolored with his blood, ran to
him, took him up, carried him to the next house, and searched his wound; but
whilst they were busy about him, he espied a knife by one of their sides,
whereupon he plucked it forth, and suddenly stabbed himself into the heart,
whereby he miserably died. Acts and Monuments.

XXI. The Chancellor Oliver, having against his Conscience renounced the
Protestant Religion in France, was restored to his former Estate, and afterward
became a very violent Persecutor, shedding much innocent blood, but such a
fearful Judgment was denounced against him by those innocent Souls whom he
condemned, as struck him into so great dread, and terror, that he presently
fell sick, and was surprised with such extreme melancholy, that sobbing out
deep sighs, and murmurings continually against God, he so afflicted his half
dead body, that he was like a distracted Person, yea his fits were so vehement,
that he would shake the Bed as if he had been young and strong; and when a
certain Cardinal came to visit him in his extremity, he could not abide his
sight, his pains increasing thereby, but cried out, That it was the Cardinal
who brought them all to damnation; When he had been long tormented in this
manner, at last in extreme anguish and terror he gave up the Ghost. Beards
Theater.

XXII. King Henry the Fourth of France, who had all his life time before been a
Protestant, yet after he came to the Crown of France, when he had almost
subdued all his Enemies which opposed him therein, suddenly turned Papist; not
long after as he was taking his leave of his Nobles, to begin his progress, one
John Castile, influenced by the Jesuits, intended to have stabbed him into the
Body with a Knife; but the King at the same instant stooping down to take up
one of his Lords, who was on his knees before him, the blow happened upon his
upper Jaw, cutting out one of his Teeth, and somewhat wounding his Tongue; it
is reported that in his Progress, a Protestant Minister in private conference
said unto him, Sir, you have denied God with your Tongue already, and have now
received a wound in the same; take heed of denying him with your heart, lest
you receive a wound in that also; which afterward proved a true Prophecy; for
riding abroad in his Coach to refresh himself, as he passed through a narrow
Street, one Ravillack watched (...) portunity, and with a Dagger stabbed him
first into the left Pap, and with a second blow struck him between the fifth
and sixth Rib, cutting asunder the vein which leads to the heart, of which
wound he immediately dyed. De Serres Fr. Hist.

XXIII. Among those who were most cruel in persecuting the poor Protestants at
Valence in France, at the same time when two Ministers of that City suffered
Martyrdom, there was one Lambespine a Councillor of the Parliament at Grenoble;
and one Porsennas, the Kings Attorney, who had formerly been Protestants, but
were now very active against them; but they were both made dreadful Examples of
Divine Vengeance; for Lambespine falling in Love with a young Woman, was so
extremely passionate therein, that he left his Estate, and Employment to follow
her up and down whithersoever she went; and still seeing his love and labor
despised, and slighted, he pined away with grief, and grew so neglectful and
careless of himself, that multitudes of Lice bred, and fed upon him, so that he
could no way be freed from them, for they continually increased, and issued out
from all parts of his Body, in such great numbers, as Worms upon a rotten
Carcass; so that seeing his own misery, and feeling Gods heavy vengeance upon
him, he began to despair of mercy, and was therefore desperately resolved to
starve himself to death; which purpose the Lice seemed to further, for they
clustered so thick in his Throat, as if they would have choked him every
moment, neither could he suffer any sustenance to pass down, by reason of them;
and when some of his Friends being moved with compassion, were resolved to
force him to eat, providing broths to that purpose, he refused and strove
against them, so that they were forced to bind his Arms, and put a Gag into his
Mouth, to keep it open, while they poured in the food; and being thus Gagged,
he died like a mad Beast, the abundance of Lice that went down his throat
choking him; which was so terrible an example, that the very Papists
themselves said, As he had caused the Ministers of Valence, to have Gags thrust
into their mouths, and so to be put to death, so likewise he himself died with
a Gag in his mouth. Hist. Fr. Persecut.

XXIV. As for Porsennas, (commonly called Bourreel) who was indeed a very
Butcher to the poor Protestants: After he had sold his own Estate, and likewise
his Wives and Friends, to raise money to buy his Place, hoping soon to get a
great deal more by his accursed Office, he found himself mightily disappointed,
whereby he shortly after fell into despair of God's Mercy; and likewise into a
strange and unknown Disease; neither could those whom he had put to death
depart out of his mind, but he still imagined they presented themselves before
him; so that as one deprived of his reason, he denied and defied the Almighty,
and called upon the Devil in a most horrible manner; which his Clerk hearing,
he discoursed to him of the Mercies of God, out of several places of Scripture,
to comfort and restore his decayed senses; but instead of Returning to God by
Repentance and Prayer, he continued more obstinate, and called to his Clerk,
saying, Stephen, Stephen, Thou art black; so I am and it please you, quoth he,
but I am neither Turk nor Moor, but a Gascoigne, with red Hair; No, no, said
he, not so, but thou art black with sin; That is true, quoth he, but I hope in
the bountiful mercy of God, that for the Love of Christ who died for me, my
black sins shall not be imputed to me: Upon which he being more enraged, called
his Clerk Lutheran, Hugonot, Villain. etc. desiring his Friends, who rushed in
at the noise, that Stephen should presently have bolts clapped on his Legs; and
be burnt for an Heretic: In brief, his Rage and Fury increased so much, that
in a short time he died a fearful death, with horrible howlings and outcryes;
his Creditors scarce giving time to draw his Carcass out of his Bed before they
seized upon all his Goods, not leaving his poor Wife and Children so much as a
Bed of Straw to lie on; so grievous was the Curse of God upon him and his House
Hist. Persecut.

XXV. A Smith in King Edward the Sixth's Time called Richard Denson, was a
zealous Professor of Religion, and by his Christian Instructions, the happy
Instrument of converting a Young Man to the Faith: Afterward in the Reign of
Queen Mary this Young Man was cast into Prison for his Religion, who remembering
his old Friend the Smith, to whom he always carried a Reverend Respect for the
good that he had received by him, sent to know whether he was not imprisoned
also; and finding that he was not, desired to speak with him; and when he came,
asked his Advice, whether he thought it comfortable for him to remain in
Prison? and whether he would encourage him to burn at a Stake for his Religion?
To whom the Smith answered, That his Can (...) was good, and he might with
comfort suffer for it; but for my part (says he) I cannot burn: But he that
could not burn for his Religion, by God's Just Judgment was burned for his
Apostasy; for shortly after, his Shop and House being set on fire, whilst he
over-earnestly endeavored to save his Goods, himself was burnt. Acts and Monum.

XXVI. In the year 1617. Marcus Antonius De Dominis, Archbishop of Spalato
(though he was old and corpulent, and thereby unfit for Travel, being almost at
his Journeys end by nature,) came into England, leaving Italy his own Country,
as he pretended, for Religion and writ several Reasons thereof; whereupon being
entertained, he preached and writ against Rome, extolling the Protestant
Religion. so that he became Dean of Windsor, and Master of the Savoy, which he
enjoyed for some time; but whether he had higher hopes at home, or the humor
and fancy altering, after five years stay here, he retracted all that he had
said and written, which so incensed King James, that he commanded him within
three days, at his peril, to depart the Realm; who thereupon went to Rome, and
there inveighed as bitterly against the Protestants, as he had done in England
against the Papists, hoping at least for Pardon, if not for preferment: But
notwithstanding his Recantation, according to the Law of the Inquisition,
having once revolted, though now returned, he suffered the death of an
Heretic, and an Apostate, though not the shame; and had the punishment of a
Martyr, though not the Honor, being publicly Burnt at Rome, yet not Burnt
alive; for dying in Prison, and then buried, it is said, his Body was afterward
taken up and burnt. Bakers Coronicle.

XXVII. One James Latomus, a Divine of Lovain, sometimes a Professor of the
Gospel, but afterward an Apostate, being one time got into the Pulpit to
Preach before the Emperor Charles the Fifth, at Brussels, was at that very
instant so amazed and astonished, that no body could understand him; so that he
was laughed to scorn by the Courtiers; seeing himself thus disgraced, he
returned to Lovain where in his public Lecture he fell into such grief and
sorrow of mind for the dishonor he had got, that at length it turned into an
open frenzy and madness, uttering such words of Desperation, and blasphemous
Impiety, that by other Divines present, he was carried away raving, and shut up
in a close Chamber; from which time to his last breath he cried out, That he
was damned, and rejected of God; and that there was no hope of Salvation for
him, because that wittingly, and against his knowledge, and of mere malice, he
had resisted and withstood the manifest Truth of the Word of God; and soon
after died in this miserable condition. Beards Theater.

XXVIII. It is recorded of Trebellius, the First King of the Bulgarians, that
he, with his People, being converted to the Christian Faith, that he might more
quietly apply his mind and Soul to the Exercises of Religion he resigned up his
Kingdom to his Eldest Son, who when he was King, renounced the Christian
Religion, and worshipped the Gods of the Heathen; whereupon the Father not only
deprived him of his Royal Dignity, but likewise caused his Eyes to be put out
fora punishment of his Apostasy, and bestowed the Kingdom upon his other Son,
showing thereby. That he who abandoneth and forsakes the True Light of
Salvation, is not worthy to enjoy the comfortable Light of the World. Beards
Theater.

XXIX. Peter Castellon, Bishop of Maston, having attained great Riches and
Renown by means of the Gospel, yet notwithstanding, he afterward turned his
back upon the Protestant Faith, and mightily inveighed against the Profession
of that Religion, in his Sermons at Orleance, endeavoring to demonstrate that
he had not only abjured and denied it; but likewise that he was a professed
Adversary thereunto: This Man sitting one time in his Chair, fell into a
strange Disease, which no Physician had ever seen, or could find the cause or
remedy thereof; for one half of his Body was extreme hot, and burned like Fire,
the other extraordinary cold, and frozen like Ice; and in this Torment, with
horrible cries and groans he ended his Life. Cardinal Pool, an Englishman, had
sometimes professed himself a Protestant, yet afterward was a zealous Papist,
and a cruel Persecutor in Queen Mary's days; but he died within two or three
days after the Queen, in horrible grief and terror of Conscience, without any
visible token of Repentance. Beards Theater.

XXX. But among all the Examples we read of, there is none more terrible than
that of Francis Spira, a Lawyer of Cittadella, in the Territories of Venice, a
man of great Credit and Authority in his Country, who embraced the True
Religion with extraordinary Zeal, and made open profession of the same,
teaching the Doctrines thereof first to his Family, and then to his Friends and
Familiar Acquaintance, which he continued to do about six years, whereby he
stirred up the malice of the Popish Clergy against him; so that they complained
to the Pope's Legate thereof; which when Spira understood, and foresaw the
danger wherein he was like to fall, after he had long debated and disputed the
matter in his own Conscience, the Counsel of the Flesh and worldly Wisdom
prevailing, he resolved at last to go to the Legate, and by doing whatever he
should command him, to appease his Anger; and coming accordingly to Venice,
being overruled with immoderate fear, he subscribes to a Catalogue of all the
pretended Errors which the Legate had drawn up; together with his Confession
annexed, which he promised to declare in his own Town, and to acknowledge the
whole Doctrine of the Church of Rome to be True, and Holy, and to abjure the
Opinions of Luther, and all such Heretics: As he was going home, to this
purpose, he began to consider how wickedly he had denied Christ, and his Gospel
at Venice, and what he had promised to do in his own Country; whereupon being
confounded with fear and shame, he thought he heard a voice thus speaking to
him; Spira, what do thou here? Whither go thou? Have thou unhappy man,
given thy Handwriting to the Legate? yet see thou do not seal it in thy own
Country; Do thou think Eternal Life so mean a thing, as to prefer the
present life before it? Remember Man, that the sufferings of this present Life
are not comparable to the Glory that shall be revealed: If thou suffer with
him, thou shall also Reign with him: Thou can not answer what thou have
already done; yet the Gate of Mercy is not quite shut; heap not sin upon sin,
lest thou repentest when it is too late. Now was Spira in a Maze, not knowing
which way to turn; and when he came home, he acquainted his Friends with what
he had done at Venice, and what he had promised to do there, and how the
terrors of God on the one side, and the terrors of the World on the other,
did continually torment him; they without more ado advised, and by diverse
Arguments persuaded him to do what he had promised; whereupon going to the
Mayor, he offered to do what was enjoined him by the Legate; but all that night
the miserable Man was vexed with restless cares, without a minute of sleep; yet
the next morning he gets up, and desperately went into the public
Congregation, and in the presence of the whole Assembly, he recited his
infamous abjuration of the Protestant Profession; after which he was fined
thirty pieces of Gold, and so restored to his Dignities, Goods, Wife and
Children: As soon as he was departed, he thought he heard this dreadful
Sentence; Thou wicked wretch, thou have denied me; thou have renounced the
Covenant of thine Obedience; thou have broken thy Vow; hence Apostate bear with
thee the Sentence of thine Eternal Damnation: Spira trembling and quaking,
afflicted in body and mind fell down in a swound, and from that time forward he
never found any ease or peace in his mind, but professed, That he was
captivated under the revenging hand of the Almighty God, that he continually
heard the Sentence of Christ the just Judge against him; when his Friends
brought him able Physicians, he said, Alas poor men, how far are you wide! it
is neither Plaster nor Drugs that can cure a wounded Soul, cast down with the
sense of Sin, and the Wrath of God, it is Christ only that must be the
Physician, and the Gospel the sole Antidote; he was about fifty years of Age,
his understanding active, quick of apprehension, witty in discourse above his
ordinary manner; he refused nourishment, which his Friends forcing upon him, he
was very angry, crying out, You strive to make me tire out this misery, I would
fain be at an end; O that I were gone from hence, that some body would let out
this weary Soul. One asked what he conceived to be the cause of his disease;
upon which he brake out into a lamentable discourse of the passages formerly
related, and that with such passionate expressions as made many weep, and most
tremble; his Friends minded him of several promises out of the Scripture, and
of many examples of Gods Mercy; My Sins, says he, are greater than the Mercy
of God, for I am one of those damned Reprobates whom God would not have to be
saved, since I willingly, and against my knowledge denied Christ, and I feel
that he hardens me, and will not suffer me to hope; one time seeing a knife on
the Table, he snatched it up to have mischieved himself, had not his Friends
prevented it, whereupon he said, I would I were above God, for I know that he
will have no mercy upon me; in this condition he lay about eight weeks in a
continual burning, neither desiring, nor receiving any thing, but by force, and
that without digestion, and was like an Anatomy vehemently raging for drink,
ever pining, and yet fearful to live long, dreadful of Hell, yet coveting
Death, in a continual Torment, yet his own Tormentor; and thus consuming
himself with Grief and Horror, Impatience, and Despair, like a living Man in
Hell, he represented an extraordinary example of Gods Justice and Power, and
thus he ended his miserable life. Clarks Mirror.

XXXI. It is observable that most, or all of those Roman Emperors who raised
those ten horrid Persecutions against the Christians, came to very untimely
ends; neither has Divine Justice spared others since, who have set themselves
to destroy poor innocent Christians, merely upon the account of their Religion,
of which Histories give many remarkable instances, and among the rest these
that follow. A Councillor of the Parliament of Provence in France, was so
furious against the poor Protestants, that the sooner to dispatch them to the
fire, he usually staid in the Judgment Hall from morning till night, causing
his meat and drink to be brought him thither; but whilst he was thus wickedly
industrious in these Affairs, there began a little sore to rise upon his Foot,
which at first was no more than if a Wasp had stung the place, yet increased so
extremely the first day with redness, and pain, that his whole foot was
inflamed therewith, so that it was judged incurable, unless he would cut off
his foot, and thereby save the rest of his Body, which he not yielding to, the
next day his whole leg was infected, the third day his thigh, and the fourth
his whole body was inflamed, of which he presently died, his Corpse being all
parched, as if roasted by a Fire; thus he that was so hot in burning poor
Christians was himself by the secret flame of Gods Wrath, burnt and consumed to
death, as if it had been by a fierce and tormenting fire. Hist France, lib. 2.

XXXII. John Mesnier, Lord of Oppede, was another chief instrument against the
Protestants in France, and led his murdering Army against them, where they
committed such horrid Cruelties, and Barbarities, as the most outrageous
Heathens in the world would have blushed at; insomuch that abundance of
complaints were made against him, and he accordingly summoned to appear
personally before the Parliament at Paris, there to answer those Murders,
Extortions, Robberies, and other Villainies laid to his Charge; but being
Convicted, and found Guilty thereof, he was not only released, but restored to
his former Estate; but though he escaped the hands of Men, yet he was overtaken
by the hand of God; for when he was in the height of worldly prosperity and
busier than ever in persecuting the distressed Protestants, even then a flux of
blood came through his privy parts, which engendered a carnosity, and thickness
of flesh therein, and thereby hindered his Urine, so that with horrible
outcries; and raving speeches, he gave up the Ghost; feeling as it were a
burning fire, broyling his Intrails, from his Navil upwards, and an extreme
infection putrefying his lower parts, and beginning to taste even in this life,
as it were, that vengeance of Eternal Fire both in Soul, and Body, which is
prepared for the Devil and his Angels Hist. France.

XXXIII. The Cardinal of Lorrain, a Principal Pillar of the House of Guise, in
France, and a crafty and cruel Persecutor of the Protestants, as he was coming
from Rome, with a design to stir up the Kings of France, and Poland utterly to
root them out of their Dominions, it pleased God, for the deliverance of the
Christians, to strike him stark mad at Avignion by the way, where he died in
the flower of his youth; at the instant of whose death, there happened such an
horrible Tempest, that all the People stood amazed thereat. Acts and Monu.

XXXIV. Felix, Earl of Wurtemburg, one of the Captains of the Emperor Charles
the Fifth, being at Supper at Ausburg, with many of his Companions, they
breathed out horrible threatenings of what Cruelty they intended to exercise
upon the poor Protestants, and the Earl swore before them all, That before he
died, he would ride up to his Spurs in the blood of the Lutherans; but it
happened the same night that vengeance overtook him, for he was strangled, and
choked in his own blood before morning, and so he did not ride, yet bathed
himself, not up to the Spurs, but up to the throat, not in the Blood of the
Lutherans, but his own blood, and so miserably ended his life. Flaccius
Illyricus. John Martin of Piedmont, continually boasted how he would root out
the Protestants, and in much Gallantry cut off a Ministers Nose of Angrogne;
but immediately after, he himself was set upon by a Wolf, which bit off his
Nose, as he had abused the Minister, whereupon he grew mad, and died miserably;
which strange Judgment was much discoursed of by all the Country round about,
because it was never known that this Wolf had done any hurt to any Man before.
Acts and Monu.

XXXV. The Lord of Revest, who was President of the Parliament at Provence, and
by whose means many innocent Protestants were Martyred, was a while after put
out of his Office, and returning to his own house, he was visited with so
dreadful a sickness, accompanied with such mad, and furious fits, that his Wife
nor Friends durst never venture to come near him, and so like a furious
Madman, he in a solitary enraged humor ended his wrerched Life. About the same
time there happened a very strange Judgment upon one John Cranequin, an Ancient
Lawyer of Bruges, who was so violent and furious in the Popish way, that he
turned Promoter against the Protestants, informing Ovy, one of the cursed
Inquisitors against them, whereby many were taken and martyred: But Divine
Justice struck him with a very strange Phrensy, insomuch that whatsoever his
Eyes beheld, seemed in his Judgment to be crawling Serpents; and though all
manner of means and Medicines were used for curing him; yea, though they used
the help of wicked Conjuration and Sorcery, yet his Senses were quite benumbed,
and he was bereaved of his Reason, and so miserably died. Beards Theater.

XXXVI. John Morin, a cruel Enemy to the Professors of the Truth, who busied
himself continually at Paris, in apprehending and accusing the Protestants,
whereby he caused multitudes daily to be sent to the High-Court of the Palace:
This Man himself soon after died in most grievous and horrible torture; and the
Chancellor Prat, who gave out the first Commissions to destroy them, died
swearing and blaspheming the Name of God, his stomach being most strangely
gnawn in pieces, and consumed with Worms. Poncher, Archbishop of Tours,
pursuing with all violence the burning of the Protestants, was himself
surprised with a Fire from Heaven; which beginning at his heel, could never be
quenched, till one Member after another was cut off, whereby he miserably died.
Gaspard of Renialine, one of the Magistrates of the City of Anvers in France
having condemned certain poor faithful Souls to be burned, received ere he
moved out of the place, the terrible Sentence of God's Judgment against
himself, falling immediately into desperation, and was led home to his house
half distracted, where roaring out, That he had condemned and destroyed the
blood of the Innocent, he presently died. French Hist.

XXXVII. Lambert, a Friar in Liege, a very cruel Persecutor, and one of the
bloody Inquisitors for Religion, whilst he was one day bitterly inveighing
against the Protestants, he was on a sudden, in the midst of his Sermon, struck
speechless, so that he was fain to be carried out of the Pulpit to his Cloister
in a Chair, and was shortly after found drowned in a Ditch. Albertus Pighius (a
great Enemy to the Gospel, insomuch that he was called The Lutherans Scourge)
being at Bulloigne, at the Coronation of the Emperor, to behold the Pomp and
Glory thereof, it happened that the Scaffold whereon he stood, fell down with
the weight of the People, and Pighius came tumbling headlong amongst the Guard
that stood below, and fell upon the points of their Halberds, which ran quite
through his Body; the rest of the Company escaping without any great hurt.
French Hist.

XXXVIII. In the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, one Adam Damlip, a very worthy
Protestant Preacher, was condemned to be Executed as a Traitor, pretendedly,
though in truth for nothing but defending the Christian Religion against Popish
Superstitions: Now there was one Sir Ralph Ellaker Knight Marshal of Calice,
who was to see him Executed there, and was a very great Enemy to him, so that
he would not permit him to make any Confession of his Faith, nor the Cause for
which he died, but still cried out to the Hangman, Dispatch the Knave; make an
end; not sufering him to speak a word in his own defense, nor clear himself
from the Treason with which he was charged, but not proved against him; yea
this bloody wretch swore, That he would not stir till he saw the Traitors heart
out. A while after there happened a skirmish between the English and French, at
Bulloigne, where this Sir Ralph was slain, with diverse others, whose death only
sufficed not his Enemies; for after they had stripped him stark naked, they cut
off his Privy Members, and plucked the heart out of his body, and so left him a
terrible Example to all merciless and bloody Men; for there was no cause ever
known, why they should use him so, more than the rest, but only to discover the
Just Judgment of Heaven upon him. Beards Theater.

XXXIX. James the Fifth King of Scotland, by the Instigation of the Popish
Bishops, was a great Persecutor of the Protestants, (the Light of the Gospel
breaking forth in his time) and gave Commission to Sir James Hamilton his
Treasurer, to prosecute all Persons which should be found guilty of Heresy,
and to inflict punishments upon them, the King being also heard to say, That
none of that sort should expect any favor at his hands; nay, not his own Sons,
if they should be found guilty: But this continued not long; for Sir James
Hamilton was accused of a Design against the King's Life, for which he was
shortly after Executed: And a War afterward breaking out with England, the King
found his Nobility very averse in assisting him therein, which much
discontented him: These thoughts, with some fearful Visions which he had by
night, much terrified him, and altered his Mind from those Extremities which
the Clergy had put him upon: For one night as he lay at Linlithgow, it seemed
to him that Thomas Scot, Justice Clerk, came to him a with Company of Devils,
crying, Woe worth the day that ever I knew thee, or thy service; for serving
thee against God, and against his Servants, I am now Judged to Hell Torments:
Hereupon awaking, he called for Lights, and causing his Servants to arise, he
told them what he had heard and seen: The next morning by break of day, word
was brought him, that the Justice Clerk was dead, which fell out just at the
same time, when the King found himself so troubled, and almost in the same
manner; for he died in great terror of mind, often repeating these words; By
the Righteous Judgment of God I am condemned; and the manner of his death
answering the King's Dream so exactly, made it yet more terrible to him.
Another Vision he had in the same place, not many nights after, which did more
affright him; for whilst he lay sleeping, he thought that Sir James Hamilton,
whom he had caused to be Executed, came to him with a drawn Sword in his hand,
and therewith cut off both his Arms, threatening also within a short time to
return, and to deprive him of his Life; with which he awaked and as he lay
musing what this Dream should signify, news was brought him of the Death of
his Two Sons, James and Arthur; the one dying at St. Andrews, and the other at
Sterling, at one and the same hour. The next year, which was 1542. being
overwhelmed with grief, he died at Faulkland, in the Thirty second year of his
Age; a little before he died, he had word brought him that his Queen was
delivered of a Daughter, whereupon he burst forth into a passion, saying, It
came with a Lass (meaning the Crown) and will go with a Lass; Fie upon it.
Spotswoods History of Scotland.

XL. Drahomira Queen of Bohemia, was an implacable Enemy to the Christians, and
caused many of them to be slain; but as she happened to pass over a place,
where the Bones of some godly Ministers (who had been martyred) lay unburied,
the Earth opened its mouth, and swallowed her up alive, together with the
Chariot wherein she was, and all that were in it: which place is to be seen
before the Castle of Prague to this day. About the year 1488, some Popish
Bishops in Bohemia, stirred up the Queen, who was then great with Child, to
move King Vladislaus her Husband, severely to punish the Piccards, as the
Protestants were then called; and the Queen much pleased her self in thinking
what grateful Spectacles she should have, when she should see some of them
burnt, some beheaded, and others drowned in the River: But it pleased God,
before she could see it effected, she fell in Travel, and could by no means be
delivered of her burden; whereupon the Physicians advised, that the Child
should be cut out of her Womb; which being done accordingly, the Child lived,
but the Mother died. Two years after the Bishops by their Importunity prevailed
with the King to use sharp Remedies against this growing Religion: whereupon an
Edict was drawn up, That all the Piccards, or Protestants, without distinction
of Age, Sex K. Hen. 2. whipped by the Popes Order pa. 88

Q: Bohemia swallowed up alive. pa. 112

or Quality, should be murdered. This Edict was brought ^o the Assembly of the
States at Prague, to be confirmed by them; Many of the Nobles opposed it, but
by sub^ilty of the Chancellor, and his bloody Associates, it was at last
carried by the Major part. The Chancellor, as ^he returned from the Parliament,
visited a Nobleman of his Acquaintance, and there with great rejoicing told him
what was concluded against the Protestants: The Nobleman having a Servant by,
who was a great favourer of them, asked him how, he liked this Decree? The
Servant answered; That all Parties were not agreed: the Chancellor suspecting
some Conspiracy, asked him, who durst oppose the States of the Kingdom? The
Servant said, There is one in Heaven, who if he were not present at your
Councils, you have but consulted in vain: The Chancellor replied, Thou Knave,
thou shall find that, as well as the rest of you; and so rising up in a fury,
immediately a Carbuncle arose upon his foot, which turned to a Disease called
Ignis Sacer, of which he died soon after in much misery. Clarks Martyr.

XLI. Another who was very forward in promoting this Decree, in his return
homeward, as he was alighting out of his Chariot to make water, struck his
Privy Member on a sharp Nail that was in the Boot, whereby, as he fell forward,
he drew out his Guts and Entrails along with him, and not long after gave up
the Ghost, Another Nobleman who promoted this cruel Decree, as he was Hunting,
his Horse threw him, and one of his Arrows ran into his Thigh, and came out at
his Loins, whereby he died a very painful death. The year after, two German
Tradesmen were apprehended at Prague, and by the Monks accused of Lutheranism,
for which they were condemned, and burnt: One of their Chief Persecutors was so
violent against the Protestants, that he wished they were all hanged, burnt or
beheaded by his hands, but it pleased God in his Just Judgment, that shortly
after all these evils fell upon himself; for being exceedingly in debt, for
very trouble and vexation he went and hanged himself; and when his Friends had
privately buried him; the common people hearing of it, dug up his Carcass,
and threw it out, and by the Magistrates command, it was ordered to be burnt;
but when the wood was consumed, and the Body only scorched, one came and cut
off his head, Clerks Martyr.

XLII. Neither has Almighty God failed to show his displeasure against wicked
Persecutors in our own Country; especially those in bloody Queen Mary's Reign;
of which we shall only collect some few. Alexander the Keeper of Newgate, was a
cruel Enemy to those that lay there for Religion and used to go to bloody
Bonner, Story, Cholmly, and the rest, crying out, Rid my Prison, Rid my Prison;
I am too much pestered with these Heretics: the wretch dyed a miserable death,
his Body being so swollen that he was rather like a Monster than a Man, his
Intrails also were so rotten, that none could abide the stink of them; his Son
James, to whom he left a great Estate soon wasted it all, saying in a jeer, Ill
gotten, ill spent; and as he went through Newgate-Market he fell down dead,
John Peter, Son in Law to this Alexander, an horrible Blasphemer, who used upon
every occasion to say, If it be not so, I pray God I may rot before I die; he
was likewise very cruel to the poor Christians in Prison, but Divine Justice
met with him for all; for his Body rotted away by peicemeal, and so he died
miserably. Robert Baulding, as he was apprehending William Seaman the Martyr,
was stricken with Lightning, and thereupon pined away, and died. Ralph Lardin,
the Betrayer of George Eagles, was afterward Arraigned and hanged; as he stood
at the Bar, he said publicly, This is justly fallen upon me, because I
betrayed the Innocent blood of that good and just man, George Eagles, who was
condemned by my means, and I sold his blood for a little money; The like
vengeance of God fell upon Richard Petto, and Justice Brown, both cruel
Persecutors of George Eagles; one Dale, a Promoter, and Persecutor, was eaten
up of Lice, and dyed. Dr. Dunning, Chancellor of Norwich, a bloody Persecutor
in Queen Mary's days, was suddenly taken sitting in his Chair, and dyed. Dr
Berry, Commissary of Norfolk, another bloody Persecutor, as he was walking with
one of his Concubines, fell down suddenly with an heavy groan, and never
stirred after. A Persecuting suffragan of Dover having been with Cardinal Pool
for his blessing, coming out of the Cardinals Chamber, fell down stairs, and
broke his Neck. Acts and Monu.

XLIII. Bishop Thornton, a cruel Persecutor, as he was looking upon his Men at
Bowls, fell suddenly into a Palsy, and being carried to his bed, and bid to
remember the Lord; yea so I do, said he, and my Lord Cardinal too, and so he
dyed. Dr. Jefferies, Chancellor of Salisbury., a wretched Persecutor, having
appointed to call before him 90 Persons to examine them by Inquisition, the day
before looking upon his Buildings, fell down dead. Sir Thomas More, Lord
Chancellor of England, was a sworn Enemy to the Gospel, and a professed
Persecutor by Fire, and Sword, of the Protestants, and as if he designed
thereby to grow famous, and get renown, he caused a Sumptuous Tomb to be
erected, whereon to eternize the memory of his Cruelty, he caused among other
worthy deeds, this principally, to be Engraven thereon, That with all his might
he had persecuted the Lutherans, but it fell out contrary to his expectation,
for being Accused, Condemned, and Executed for High Treason, his Head was taken
off, and his Body found no other burial, but the Gibbet. Beards Theater. These
and many more such examples are recorded by Mr. Fox in his Acts and Monuments,
which makes good that of the Psalmist, God has prepared for the Wicked the
Instruments of Death, he ordains his Arrows against the Persecutors, Psalm.
7.13.

If the Reader desire to know more of the Cruelties of the Papists in all
Countries for above six hundred years past, and Gods judgments upon them, he
may find it at large in a little book, called the Protestant Schoolmaster, of a
shilliog price, and sold where this Book is to be had.

CHAP. V.
Fearful Judgments upon Cruel Tyrants, Murderers, and other notorious and
debauched Persons, with the wonderful discovery of several Murders, etc.

IT appears in History that there have been a multitude of proud, cruel, and
vicious Princes, and Governors in former Ages, who have thought that their
Will ought to be their Law, and have gloried in Tyrannizing over their poor
Subjects, however it has pleased the Divine Majesty many times to discover his
abhorrence and detestation of such practices, by his severe Judgments upon the
Actors thereof: It is likewise as plain that God Almighty, as well to declare
his detestation of that crimson sin of Murder, as to beget and retain in us a
horror thereof, has most vigorously employed his Providence by strange, and
miraculous ways, to bring to light deeds of darkness, and to drag the bloody
Authors of them out of their greatest privacies, and concealment, to condign
punishment; it were an infinite Labor to trace the several footsteps of Divine
Providence in this matter; neither has Lust, Revenge, and other notorious
enormities, escaped Gods Justice many times in this world, as by the following
relations it does remarkably appear.

I. Ptolomeus Pisco, one of the Kings of Egypt, caused his own Son Memphites
(whom he had begot of his Wife and Sister Cleopatra) to be slain, and then
commanded his Head, Hands, and Feet to be cut off, and to be shut up in a
curious Casket, made for that purpose, and sent them to his Mother, as a
present upon his Birthday; and when afterward he perceived that by his
barbarous Tyranny he was grown odious to all his Subjects, to prevent the
danger thereof, he caused a School where most of the Children of the Nobility,
and others were educated, to be beset, and encompassed round with fire, and men
with drawn Swords, and then suddenly assaulted them, whereby they were all
destroyed, not one of them escaping; but that which he thought to be his
refuge, proved his ruin, for the People were so extremely incensed with this
cruel Act, that with an unanimous consent they fell upon him, and tore him to
pieces. The like, if not greater Cruelty was practiced by a Woman, one Cycenis,
the Daughter of Diogerides, King of Thrace, who took great delight in beholding
living men cut in the middle, and invited Parents to feast upon their own
murdered Children, cookt and dressed several ways, but she was afterward deposed
from her Government, and her Inhumanities were so hateful, that none of her
Subjects would relieve her, whereby she was famisht to death, and dyed of
hunger. Vitaldus, Prince of Lithuania, studied diverse sorts of Tortures and
Torments for men, whom upon every slight occasion he condemned to death; among
the rest he would command them to be sowed up in Bear-skins, and then made it
his sport to behold them torn in pieces with fierce Mastives; in all his
warlike expeditions, he carried continually a Steel-bow, ready bent, and if any
Soldier happened but to step out of his Rank, he instantly stroke him dead
with an Arrow, glorying to himself that he was so good a marksman; but after
these, and abundance of other Cruelties, he that delighted to see men die like
Bears, was himself in the end torn in pieces with wild Wolves, being requited
much in the same manner as he had exercised Barbarities upon others. Beards
Theater.

II. The Tyrant Periander usurped the Government over Corinth; after he had
murdered the Principal men of the City, he put to death his own Wife, to
content and please his Concubine; nay, he was so execrable, as to lie with his
own Mother; he banished his Natural Son, and caused many Children of his
Subjects to be guelded. Finally, he committed all manner of Villainies, which he
was sensible had made him abhorred of his People; and therefore fearing that
some miserable and monstrous death would be inflicted on him, and that he
should not be buried: He gave Order to two of his stoutest Soldiers, that they
should strictly guard a place by him appointed, and not to fail to kill the
first that came in their way, and to bury his body, being slain: Now the first
that met them was himself, who offered himself to them without speaking a word,
and was therefore immediately killed, and afterward buried by them: These two
were soon after encountered by four others, whom he had likewise appointed to
kill them, as they had done him, which they performed accordingly. Sabellici
opera.

III. In the year 830. Popiel the Second King of Poland, careless of matters of
State, gave himself over to all manner of Dissoluteness and Debauchery, so that
his Lords and People scorned and despised him: He fearing therefore that they
would set up one of his Kinsmen in his stead, by the advice of his Wife, whom
he furiously loved, seigned himself sick, and sent for all his Uncles Princes
of Pomerania (being twenty in number) to come and see him; whom lying in his
Bed, he earnestly desired, That if he chanced to die, they would make choice of
one of his Sons to be King; which they willingly promised, in case the Lords of
the Kingdom would consent thereunto. The Queen enticed them all, one by one, to
drink a Health to the King; which as soon as they had done, they took their
leaves: But they were scarce got out of the King's Chamber, before they were
seized with intolerable pains, by the corroding of the Poison wherewith the
Queen had intermingled their Drink; and in a short time they all died. The
Queen gave it out as a Judgment of God upon them, for having conspired the
death of the King, and prosecuting this Accusation, caused their bodies to be
taken out of their Graves, and cast into the Lake Goplo, over a City called
Crusphitz: But by a miraculous Transformation, an innumerable company of Rats
and Mice did rush out of those Bodies, which gathering together in crowds, went
and assaulted the King, as he was with great Jollity feasting in his Palace:
The Guards endeavored to drive them away with Weapons and Fire, but all in
vain: The King perplexed with this extraordinary danger, fled with his Wife and
Children into a Fortress, that is yet to be seen in that Lake of Goplo, whither
he was pursued with such a number of these creatures, that the Land and the
Waters were covered with them, and they cried, and hissed most fearfully; they
entered in at the Window of the Fortress, having scaled the Walls, and there
they devoured the King, his Wife and Children alive, and left nothing of them
remaining; by which means all the Race of the Polonian Princes was utterly
extinguished; and Pyast a Husbandman at the last was elected King. Heylins
Cosmography.

IV. Hatto the Second Duke of Franconia (Surnamed Bonosus) Abbot of Fulden, was
Chosen Archbishop of Mentz in 968. at which time was a grievous Dearth, and the
Poor being ready to starve for want of food, he caused great companies of them
to be gathered together, and put into Barns, pretending that they should
receive Corn, and other Relief; but he caused the Barns unmercifully to be set
on fire, and the Poor People to be miserably burnt therein, saying withal, That
the Poor were like the Rats and Vermin, who did eat up the fruits of the Land:
But not long after an Army of Rats gathered themselves together; no man can
tell from whence, and set upon him so furiously, that into what place soever he
retired himself, they would come and fall upon him; if he climbed on high into
Chambers, they would ascend the Wall, and enter at the Windows, and other small
chinks and crevises; the moremen attempted to destroy them, the more outrageous
they seemed, and the more to increase in number. The wretched Prelate seeing he
could find no place by Land safe for him, resolved to seek some resuge on the
Waters, and got into a Boat to convey himself to a Tower in the midst of the
Rhine, near a little City called Bingen; but the Rats threw themselves by
innumerable heaps into the Rhine, and swum to the foot of the Tower, and
clambering up the Wall, entered therein, and fell upon him, gnawing and biting,
and throtling, and tearing, and tugging him most miserably, till he died. This
Tower is yet to be seen, and at this day called Rats Tower. It is also
remarkable, that whiles the Archbishop was yet alive, and in perfect health,
the Rats gnawed and razed out his Name written, and painted upon many Walls.
Heylins Cosmog.

V. Clearchus, after he had put to death the greatest part of the Nobility, and
men of chiefest Account in the City of Heraclea, usurped a Tyrannical Authority
over them; and amongst other horrid Cruelties and Enormities, he constrained
the Widows of those whom he had murdered, to marry those Villains his
followers, whom he allotted to them; insomuch that many with grief and anger
killed themselves. Now there were two Persons of a stout and courageous Temper,
who pitying the miserable condition of their Country, were resolved to venture
their Lives to deliver the miserable People out of his wretched hands;
whereupon they came accompanied with fifty others of the same mind and
resolution, pretending as if they would have him decide a private Quarrel
between them; but as soon as they had opportunity, they all jointly fell upon
the Tyrant, and with their Swords hewed him to pieces, even in the very midst
of his Guards. Beards Theater.

VI. Andronicus was one of the most cruel Tyrants that ever lived; for he
exceeded in all kind of wickedness, as Ambition, Murder, Adultery, Incest, and
the like. He was so treacherous and disloyal, that he traitorously murdered the
Son and Heir of Emanuel the Emperor, causing him to be tied up in a Sack, and
so drowned in the Sea: After which he by violence took possession of the Empire
of Constantinople, and like a strong Thief, seized upon that which was none of
his own: Having thus attained his desire, he began to rage and rave, committing
all manner of Villainies and Debaucheries; ravishing Women, and Virgins, and
afterward giving them to his Pimps and Ruffians, to be abused; yea he committed
a Rape upon one of his own Sisters; and to secure himself in this Tyrannical
Estate, he murdered most of his Nobility, and all others that had any show of
Civility or Honesty, living altogether by Robbery and Extortion; whereupon his
Subjects, tired out by the multitude of Evils which he daily committed, were no
longer able to endure his vile Outrages and Indignities, and therefore rise up
against him, and after besieging him for some time, they at last got him into
their hands, whom they used with as much cruelty as he had exercised upon them:
For having degraded him, and despoyled him of all his Imperial Ornaments they
plucked out one of his E^es, and then set him upon an Ass with his face to the
Tail, which he held in his hand, instead of a Scepter; and a Rope about his
Neek, instead of a Crown; in this attire and order they led him through all the
Streets of Constantinople, the people shouting, and reviling him on all sides,
some throwing dung, others dirt and spittle upon him, and Women their
Chamberpots upon his Head; lastly he was carried to the Gallows, and there
hanged. Beards Theater.

VII. Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, was a restless Tyrant, his whole delight was in
Murder and Bloodshed, but at last having cunningly gotten into the City of
Argos, whilst the Citizens made head against him, he was hurt with a Pike;
whereupon he fell upon him that hurt him, who was a Person of a mean condition,
whose Mother a poor old Woman, was at that time got upon the top of a House to
see the Fight, and perceiving that it was her Son whom Pyrrhus assaulted, she
was so affrighted to see him in that danger, that she took a Tyle, and with
both her hands threw it at Pyrrhus, which glancing upon his Helmet, break his
Neek bone, and slew him, Plutarchs Lives.

VIII. Aristippus a Tyrant of Argos, left not an Enemy alive in the City, and
had Antigonus, a Potent Prince for his Friend, yet was he so fearful, that he
kept a great guard of Soldiers continually about him, causing them to watch
night and day, and to lie about his Palace in the Cloisters and Galleries
adjacent; after Supper he used to turn all his Men out of doors, and then
shutting his Court Gates to him, he locked himself up only with his Concubine
in a little high Chamber, with a Trap door, setting his bed every night over
the door, as one that was continually afraid of his life; and when he was got
up into his Chamber, his Concubines Mother used to take away the Ladder, and to
look it up in another Chamber till the next morning, yet notwithstanding all
this extraordinary care and cautiousness, his Enemies broke in upon him, and
slew him. Plutarchs Lives.

IX. Alexander a Tyrant in Thessaly, was of so cruel a disposition, that he
neither regarded Reason, nor Justice toward any; for he caused some to be
buried alive, others he put into the skins of Bears, and wild Boars, and then
set his Hounds upon them, and one day as the Inhabitants of a certain City in
League with him, were assembled together in Council, he caused his Guard to
enclose them round suddenly, and to kill them all, not sparing the very
Infants; he consecrated the Dart, wherewith he had slain his Uncle, and crowned
it with Garlands, calling it the Happy Killer. Being one time at a Tragedy,
where the miseries of Hecuba, and Andromache were represented, he could not
forbear weeping, and therefore went out of the place, lest it should be
observed by the People that he pitied these feigned sorrows, who never had any
compassion for the multitude of Citizens whom he had cruelly murdered; now
though this Tiger was continually guarded with Troops of Soldiers, who kept
watch about his Body night and day, and had also a most furious Dog constantly
waiting on him, who was unacquainted with any but himself, his Wife, and one
Servant who gave him his meat, and was tied to his Chamber door every night;
yet vengeance found him out, for by his Wises means he was killed, who taking
away the Stairs of his Chamber, let in three or four of her own Brethren, with
whom she had conspired to murder him; who finding him fast asleep, one took
him by the heels, and another by the hair of the head, and wrung his neck
behind, the third thrust him through with a Sword, she all this while giving
them light to dispatch their business; the Citizens of Pheres having notice
hereof, got the dead body, which they drew about the Streets, and having
kicked, abused, trampled upon it, and drawn it through the mire and dirt, they
threw it out to be devoured of the Dogs; so odious was the remembrance of his
Tyranny among them. Plut. Lives.

X. Nero, that Monster of Men was well educated under Burrhus, and Seneca, and
for the first five years behaved himself very well, so that Trajan used to say,
That all the Emperors came short of Nero's first five years; but afterward he
fell into all manner of Wickedness and Debauchery; his manner was to come into
the public Theaters, and there to spend some days in singing, and he scarce
took delight in any thing so much as the applause of the Vulgar, and the Crowns
which they gave him for his s^nging, and playing on the Harp. At other times he
would have them come and see his skill and dexterity in driving of Chariots; at
Naples he came with his Harp into the public Theater, afterward he used
publicly to sing at Rome, and Athens, and would not suffer any to depart out
of the Theater, whilst he was singing, what necessary occasion soever they
had, insomuch that Women with Child were sometimes delivered in the Theater;
and others being tired with hearing, and commending him, the doors being shut,
would get over the walls, or seem to be dead, that they might be carried out;
he caused his Statue to be made in the habit of an Harper, and all his Coin
with the like; he exercised his Lust, Luxury, Covetousness, and Cruelty at
first privately, but soon after more openly; when it began to be dark, he would
go to the Taverns, and Victualling-Houses, and run about the Streets, doing
mischief to many, by beating and abusing them, and sometimes if they resisted,
throwing them into Privies; sometimes he would break open Shops, and rob them,
and in his quarrels often endangered his life; he was once beaten to death
almost by a man, whose Wife he had abused, after which he had Tribunes
following him at a little distance; he used to lengthen out his Feasts from the
midst of the day, to the midst of the night, and would oftentimes sup in
public, being attended with the most famous Whores, and Women Pipers about the
City: He was given to Sodomy, and caused the Genitals of a Boy called Sporus,
to be cut off, and endeavored to have made him a Woman, causing him to be
dressed, and brought to him like a Bride; whereupon one merrily said, That it
had been well for the world if Nero's Father had had such a Wife: He committed
Incest with his own Mother Agrippina: He caused one Pythagoras to marry him, as
he himself had married Sporus: He invented such Bestialities to be committed by
Men and Women, as are not fit to be named: He murdered his Wife Octavia, by
whom he had the Empire, and soon after married Poppaea Sabina (whom he took
from her Husband a Roman Knight) and loved her dearly; yet when she was great
with Child, he coming home late one night from his Chariot-driving, and she
blaming him for it, he so kicked her on the Belly, that he killed her: He was
of a most cruel and bloody disposition; he hastened the death of Claudius by
Poison, which he would often boast of afterward, and exceedingly rail against
him, though he received the Empire from him; before which Agrippina his Mother
went to an Astrologer, to know the fortune of her Son Nero, who told her, He
should be Emperor, but he should be the death of her; to which she replied,
Let him kill me, so he does but Reign: The first part of the Prognostication
she saw accomplished, and the last now followed; for having attempted by
Poison, and diverse other ways, to take away her life which did not succeed, he
sent a Centurion to murder her; Agrippina seeing him coming toward her with
his drawn Sword, took up her cloths, and exposed her naked Belly to him,
bidding him strike that, since her womb had brought forth such a Monster into
the world. After she was slain, Nero came to view her naked Body and her
wounds, and without any concernment, villanously said, I did not think I had
been born of so beautiful a Mother: He then caused her womb to be ripped up, that
he might see the place wherein himself had lain: After which horrid fact he was
continually tormented with the sting of his own conscience, and protested, That
his Mother often appeared to him with burning Torches, lashing him for that
cruel Murder; yet he still continued his cursed Butcheries: He murdered his
Aunt Domitia; and because Antonia the Daughter of Claudius, refused to marry
him, he caused her to be slain, pretending that she went about to make some
Innovations in the State. He hired Conjurers to lay the Ghost of his Mother: He
caused Crisoinus his Son-in-law by Poppaea, to be drowned as he was fishing: He
slew many others who by blood and affinity were near to him: He murdered Aulus
Plancus a young man, after he had by violence committed Sodomy with him: He
forced his Master Seneca to murder himself, though he had often sworn to him
he would not do it; and that he would sooner perish himself, than do him any
hurt; and he sent Poison to his other Master Burrhus. Diverse of his Rich Freed
men, and other Old men, who had helped him to the Empire, and favored him
therein, he murdered, by mixing Poison either in their meat or drink: Neither
was he less cruel to others, especially after two Conspiracies were discovered
against him; and some of the Conspirators confessed the Fact, saying, That they
knew not how otherwise than by his death, to free him from all that wickedness
wherewith he had d^filed himself. And Nero asking Sulp^tius Aper a Centurion,
why he conspired against him, he answered, Because I knew not how by any other
means to do thee a kindness: After this he raged more extre^mly against all
sorts of Persons, setting no bounds to his Cruelty, but murdering whom he
pleased: He gave not above an hours space to any of those whom he commanded to
ki^^ themselves to prepare for death, and had Chirurgions ready to cut all
their veins, if they made any delay; His Profuseness and Prodigality ans^ered
his Cruel^y: for it was without all measure, saying often, That those who
proportioned their Expenses to their Incomes, were sordid and covetous, and
that they only who most profusely and prodigally wasted their Estates, were
magnificent and praiseworthy: He never put on the same Apparel twice; He was
very extravagant in costly Buildings, and when his Treasury was exhausted, he
endeavored by Rapine and Forgeries to enrich himself. He never conferred an
Office upon any man, but he would say to him, Thou know what I want, let us
make it our business that none may have any thing but our selves. He took the
curious and costly Images of the Heathen Gods of Gold and Silver out of the
Temple, and sold them; and as he spared not men, so neither did he spare the
City of Rome; for being displeased with the Building, narrowness, and
crookedness of the Streets, he sent some Villains, who made it their business
to run up and down, and set the City on fire, and whilst it was all in a flame,
he went up to the top of Moecenas his Tower, to feed his Eyes with that
pleasant sight, and in a Players Habit tuned his Harp and sung a song of the
burning of Troy; and when he afterward heard how ill he was spoken of for this
Act, he raised a Report, that it was done by the Christians, and thereupon used
all manner of Cruelty toward them, and exposed them to the fury of the People,
who horridly tormented them, as if they had been common Burners and Destroyers
of Cities, and the deadly Enemies of Humane Society: Yea, Nero himself caused
some of them to be clothed in wild Beasts skins, and torn to pieces with Dogs;
others were crucified, some he made Bonfires of to light him in his night
sports: In brief, such exquisite Torments he put them, to as caused their
Enemies themselves to pity them; and whereas Tiberius used to say, After my
death let the World be destroyed by Fire, Pestilence, Famine, etc. Yea, (said
Nero) let it be destroyed in my Life time, that I may be a spectator of it. But
Almighty Justice at last overtook him; for being adjudged by the Senate to be
an Enemy to Mankind, it was condemned to be whipped to death through the streets
of Rome, and all his Armies and Forces forsaking him, to avoid this shameful,
and ignominious death, he fled and hid himself among Briers and Thorns, and
being weary of his life, desired some of his Attendants to kill him, which they
refusing, he cried out, I have neither a Friend, nor an Enemy, miserable man
that I am, and thereupon threw himself into a Pit four foot deep, and there
desperately slew himself, Sueton.

XI. Tigellinus, one of the Captains of Nero's Guard, had been a principal
abettor, and encourager of him in his Tyrannies, and the chief cause of the
death of many great Personages in Rome, enriching himself with their spoils,
and the Robberies he committed; After the death of Nero, (whom in his extremity
he forsook) he plunged himself, and wallowed in all manner of filthiness and
debauchery; now though he was worthy of a thousand deaths for his Cruelties
toward many worthy Citizens, yet by bribing some of the chief Favorites of the
succeeding Emperor Galba, he escaped being questioned; but as soon as Otho was
installed in the Empire, his destruction soon followed, for to gratify the
Romans, Otho sent to apprehend him, who was then in his Banqueting Houses in
the Fields, rioting and sporting with his Harlots, and finding himself thus
surprised, and that he had no way to make his escape, though he had prepared
Boats on purpose to carry him away in any danger; and not being able to bribe
the Messenger sent to take him, though he offered him great rewards, he
entreated only the favor to shave his beard before he went, which being
granted, he took a rasor, and instead of shaving, cut his own throat, Beards
Theater.

XII. Antonius Heliogabalus, Emperor of Rome was infamous for Cruelty,
Gluttony, Lust, and all manner of wickedness, and his death was answerable to
his life; he had his name from an Idol of the Sun, whose Priest he had been in
Syria, and being exceeding rich, by his profuse gifts to his Soldiers, he
procured himself to be chosen Emperor, and sending Messengers thereof to Rome,
he was by the Senate accepted; such was the luxurious pomp of this Beastly
Emperor, that he used Balm in his Lamps, and filled his Fishponds with
Rosewater; his Garments were of the finest Gold, and the most costly ^^lk, his
Shoes glistered with precious stones, curiously engraven, he was never two days
served with one kind of meat, nor wore one Garment twice, he doted exceedingly
upon his Mother, with whom he committed Incest, and did all by her appointment,
and was the first that brought a Woman into the Senate, causing his Mother to
sit in one of the Consuls Seats; he erected a Senate of Women, wherein many
ridiculous Laws were made; he exercised all manner of filthiness in his
Palace, and exceeded all that went before him in Lust and Uncleanness, and
being unapt by nature for the act of Generation, he would turn himself into a
Woman, and sought through the world for those who were most prodigious for
Debauchery, that they might exercise their Lust upon him; he had some days at
Dinner the Brains of Estriches, another time the Tongues of Popinjays, and
other singing Birds; when he was near the Sea, he would never eat Fish, but in
places far distant from the Sea, his House was served with the most delicate
Fish, his Table was furnished with seven thousand Fishes, and five thousand
Fowls at one Supper; in his progress he was usually attended with six hundred
Chariots; he cruelly Sacrificed young Children, and conferred the best Offices
upon the most debauched Persons, as Bawds, Fiddlers, Players, and the like, in a
word he was an utter Enemy to all honesty and Sobriety; and when he was
foretold by his Astrologers, and Sorcerers, that he should die a violent death,
he provided Ropes of Silk to hang himself, swords of Gold to stab himself, and
strong Poisons in Jacinths, and Emeraulds to poison himself, if he should on a
sudden be forced thereto; he likewise made an high Tower, and covered the floor
with Plates of Gold inlaid with precious Stones, and underneath the window the
ground was covered with Sands of Gold, from whence he might throw himself down,
if he were persued of his Enemies; but notwithstanding all this Provision,
Divine Vengeance would not suffer him to dye as he desired, for his Soldiers
abhorring his filthy carriage, they went to seize on him, upon which he fled
into an house of Office, where they slew him, and because the Privy was not big
enough to receive his body, they dragged him through the Streets of Rome,
crying out, Behold a Whelp of Cruel, and Insatiable Lust, and then threw him
into the River of Tyber, fastening a great stone to him, that he might be seen
no more. Suetonius Hist.

XIII. Caligula, another Roman Emperor, began to show his Cruelty to his own
kindred as soon as he was settled in the Empire; di^inheriting, and then flaying
Tiberius, who was Coheir with him; he compelled his Father in Law to murder
himself, envying his Nobility, Virtues, and Affinity to him; his Adulteries
were most abominable; abusing betrothed Virgins, and Married Wives, whom after
he had defiled he hated, and abhorred, he abstained not from the most
Illustrious, and Noble Women; he caused his Grandmother to kill her self for
reproving him for his wickedness, and accused his two Sisters, with whom he had
committed Incest for Adulteresses, and Conspirators against him, and therefore
banished them; he caused the head of the Image of Jupiter to be taken off, and
his own put in the place; he built his Palace as far as the Market place, and
set up the Images of Pollux and Castor at his door, and often standing between
them, would cause all that passed by, to worship him as a God, and some of his
flatterers called him Jupiter; he caused a Temple to be built for his Godhead,
and had Priests and Sacrifices; he used all sorts of Magistrates scornfully,
and irreverently, he would reach forth his Hands, and his Feet to the Senators
to be Worshipped, and those who had this favor, must publicly thank him for
it in the Senate; some of the Senators he privately murdered, and yet would
have them called for, as if they had been living, and a few days after would
declare that they had murdered themselves; many Persons of good quality he
would stigmatize, or dismember, and then condemn them, some to the
Mettal-mines, others to mend Highways, some to be cast to wild Beasts, and
others to be sawn asunder; he used to compel Parents to be present at the
torments of their Sons, and one excusing himself by reason of his sickness, he
sent his Litter for him; another asking whether he might not shut his Eyes,
whilst his Children were tormented, he caused him to be slain for it; another
Father he brought home with him from seeing the miserable death of his Son, and
would force him to laugh, jest, and be merry. A Roman Knight being cast to the
wild Beasts, declared that he was Innocent, upon which he caused him to be
brought back, and to have his tongue cut out, and then to be cast to them
again. If he wanted Condemned Persons to be thrown to the wild Beasts, he would
cause his Officers to seize any that stood near, and throw them to be torn to
pieces, having first cut out their Tongues, that they might tell no tales; when
he designed to destroy any one of the Senators, he suborned some Person to go
into the Senate house, and there proclaim him a public Enemy, and so presently
murder him, neither would he be satisfied till his Members, Joints, and Bowels
were drawn about the Streets, and then brought, and laid on an heap before him;
he would not suffer any to be slain presently, but commanded the Hangman so to
strike, that they might feel themselves die; he had a Horse which he named
Swift, whom he invited to Supper, and gave him Provender in a Golden Manger,
and drank Wine to him in golden Bowls; he swore by his Horses health and
Fortune, and promised to make him a Consul, as before he had made him a Priest;
he caused a Marble Stable to be built for him, and a Manger of Ivory, with
Horsecloaths of Purple, and a chain of precious Stones; he gave him likewise a
House furnished with costly Household Stuff, and Servants, that he might the
more splendidly entertain those who in his name were invited to be his Guests;
having by such mad profuseness, and prodigality exhausted his Treasury, he
sought by all unjust and oppressive means to supply his wants; he disannulled
many Men's Wills, because they had not made him their Heir; he slew many rich
Men, and seized upon their Estates, and confiscated the Estates of others, so
that it was a Crime to be rich; he levied unheard of Taxes and Tributes; he
proclaimed, that at New-years-tide he would receive New-years-gifts, and
himself stood at the door to receive all that were brought him, even by the
Common People; he set up likewise a Bawdy house, or Stews in his own Palace,
and therein prostituted the chiefest Women, and the most noble Boys to the
Lusts of all, and made gain, and advantage to himself thereby; he was so
enamoured with a desire of handling Money, that he caused huge heaps of Gold to
be spread over a large Room, and would walk barefoot upon it, and sometimes
would strip himself naked, and roll himself upon it; he was an horrid Atheist,
and desperate Blasphemer of the Deity, and yet when it thundered, he would wrap
his head and face in his Garments; and if the Thunder were great, he would run
under his Bed to hide himself, and yet he had caused an Engine to be made,
wherewith to Thunder against Heaven, when it Thundered, and to Lighten against
the Lightning, and when a Thunderbolt fell, he would throw up a Stone toward
Heaven, saying, Either do thou destroy me, or I will destroy thee; and it was
not long ere he met with his just reward; he designed a Progress into
Alexandria, resolving before he went to murder all the chiefest Men in and
about Rome, wishing, That all the People of Rome had but one Neck, that he
might cut them off at one blow; beiing fretted that no terrible Calamities had
happened in his days, whereas there could hardly be a greater than himself; but
in the midst of his rage and wickedness, two of the Tribunes conspired against
him, and one asking him some question about his Office, received a very harsh
Answer, whereupon he gave the Emperor such a stroke between the head and
shoulders, that with it, and the blows of the Accomplices who rushed in upon
him, he was slain amongst them, no man stirring in his defense, though many
looked on, and might have aided him if they would; he was no sooner killed, but
the Conspirators likewise slew his best beloved Wife Coesonia, a Woman of
prodigious lust and filthiness; they took his younger Daughter, and dashed out
her Brains against the Walls. After his death there were found in his Closet
two Books, one called his Sword, the other his Dagger, wherein were contained
the names of all those whom he had designed to slaughter; there was found also
a great Chest stuffed with all sorts of the most deadly Poisons, which being
thrown into the Sea, poisoned a multitude of Fishes. Sueton. Hist.

XIV. Commodus another Emperor of Rome, was a most wicked Son of a good Father,
he exceeded if possible Nero, and Caligula in Lust, Cruelty, and Rapine; he had
three hundred Concubines, whom he chose out of the most beautiful Marrons, and
Whores of Rome, among whom he spent his time in his Palace in Feasting and
Drunkenness; he killed his Sister Lucilla, and ravished his other Sisters; he
used to fight among the Sword-players, and often in soort killed some of them;
he likewise fought with wild Beasts, of whom he slew many thousands with his
own hands; he was so impudent, that he came into the Senate in Women's Apparel,
where he sat publicly, and drank unmeasurably; he endeavored to scrape Money
together by selling Honors and Offices in all the Provinces; he rejected his
own name, and would be called Hercules the Son of Jupiter, and despising the
Roman Habit, he went clothed in a Lions skin, carrying a Club in his hand, and
so publicly fought with wild Beasts, and Men, whereof he killed some with
Darts, others Giant like with his Club; yet would this wretch be called a
Pious, and Happy God: he commanded the City of Rome to be burnt down, and sent
his Soldiers, who slew multitudes of People that were met together in the
Amphitheatre, and without any cause given, would slay all those of his
Bedchamber; thus growing odious to all, some of his own Domestics, and among
them one of his Concubines, named Matria, (whom he loved above all the rest,
and called ^er his Amazon) conspired against him, and poisoned him. Clarks
Mirror.

XV. Bassianus Caracalla in his Childhood was merry and pleasant, and of a mild
nature, so that it was hoped he would have proved an excellent Prince; but when
he grew up he was strangely altered, and became fierce and cruel, that he did
not seem the same person: His Father Severus left him such a large Roman
Empire, as none before him had possessed, with a great and valiant Army to
defend it; whereupon he began presently to discover his cruel and bloody
disposition: For first, he slew his Physicians, because they had not obeyed his
Command in killing his Brother-in-law soon enough: Then he murdered those who
had educated him and his Brethren, because they endeavored to make peace
between him and his Brother Geta: He endeavored to persuade his Captains to
choose him sole Emperor; whereas his Father had divided the Empire between
them; and when he could not prevail with them, he goes to his Mother, and
pretends great love to her, and her Son Geta, yet watches his opportunity, and
breaks into Geta's Chamber, and murders him in his Mothers Arms, defiling her
all over with his blood, and then runs down into his Palace, crying out, That
he had escaped a every great danger from his Brother Geta: From thence he runs
into the Camp, and tells the Soldiers, What a Conspiracy Geta had made to take
away his life, and how hardly he had escaped them by slaying him in his own
defense; whereby and with large gifts, and larger promises, he won them to
choose him sole Emperor, and to declare his Brother an Enemy. Then began he to
exercise cruelty without pity, upon every trifling occasion: He caused all his
Brothers Houshold-servants, and Friends to be slain, not sparing their very
Infants, whether they were Noble or Ignoble: He caused the Rich Citizens to be
slain, and then seized their Estates; and among others, he murdered Papinian, a
famous Lawyer, because he would not defend the murdering of his Brother, but
saying, That it was easier to commit Parricide, than to excuse it: He used
publicly to commend Sylla and Tyberius, two as bad as himself, and sought
wholly to root out all that were a kin to the Imperial Family, or eminent among
the Senators, and at length raged against the Common People, causing multitudes
of them without cause to be slain when they were met together at Public Plays:
And being conscious of his own wickedness, and the Peoples hatred to him, he
left Rome, and went into Germany, where he provided Guards, and clothed himself
like them; from thence he went to Macedonia, and at Alexandria caused the
Schools of Aristotle to be destroyed, and his Books to be burnt, because he
said Aristotle was of Counsel in sending Poison to kill Alexander; from thence
he went to Troy, and sought out the Tomb of Achilles; then he went to Antioch,
to behold Alexanders Tomb, which two he pretended to imitate; and then was
revenged of the Alexandrians, for some Scoffs and Jeers they had cast upon him,
for having married Julia his Mother-in-law, whose Son Geta he had slain in her
Arms, which happened upon this occasion: Julia, who was very fair, being one
time in his company, as it were by negligence, discovered a great part of her
naked body, whereupon Bassianus said, I would it were lawful; Julia replied, It
is lawful if tho^ please; know thou not thy self to be an Emperor, and t^
give, not to receive Laws. Hereupon he publicly married her, upon which the
Alexandrians called him Oedipus, and her Jocasta; to be revenged on them for
this Affront, he pretended that he would choose a Legion of Alexandrians; and
when multitudes of them were met together unarmed, he caused his Soldiers to
incompass them, and cut them all to pieces, so that the River Nilus overflowed
with their blood: From hence he went to the East, and pretending to affect the
Parthian name, he sent Ambassadors to Artabanus King of Parthia, to give him
his Daughter in Marriage; Artabanus willingly embracing the motion, came to him
as to his Son-in-law, bringing the Bride, and a multitude of unarmed followers,
crowned with Flowers; and whilst they were offering Sacrifice to their Gods,
giving the watchword to his Army, he slew them all, the King himself hardly
escaping by flight: At length the People being wearied, by his Ravages and
cruelties, as he was easing nature, Marcinus, Prefect of the Pretorian
Soldiers stabbed him with a Dagger into his bowels, and slew him. Sue^onius
Hist.

XVI. Aulus Vitellius being chosen Emperor by the Army in Germany, hastened
toward Rome: He used no Government either in his Family, or among his
Soldiers; so that all places were filled with violence and rapine, which he
turned into sport and joking: When he came into a Field where a late Battle had
been fought, and all his followers were offended with the stench of the dead
bodies, he uttered this detestable speech, That of all smells, he liked best
the smell of a slain Enemy, but much more of a slain Citizen. When he entered
Rome, he sacrificed to the Ghost of Nero in Mars his Field, to show what an
excellent Pattern he would follow, and there prepared a Solemn Feast, sending
for Musicians to sing Nero's Verses, which himself first of all much applauded:
For the most part he governed the Commonwealth by the advice of the basest
Players, and Chariot-Drivers, and was ready upon every small occasion, to
deliver men over to death and punishment: He spared not Usurers, who had
formerly called to him for their Debts; nor Publicans, who ^ad exacted Tribute
from him: One of them coming to salute him when he came to the Empire, he
caused him to be slain in his presence, saying, That he would ^eed his Eyes
with his death. Two Sons of another coming to intercede for their Father, he
caused to be killed: He ^anisht all Mathematicians out of Rome, because they
had given out that he was born under unhappy Planets: He was suspected to be
guilty of his own Mothers death: Neither was he only thus cruel, but likewise
extremely given to Luxury and Excess: He feasted at least thrice, and often
four times a day, after each of them, disburthening his stomach by vomiting: He
used the most curious and costly delicates, which could not be had from remote
parts atex cessive charges both from Land and Sea, insomuch that it was
commonly said, That if he had lived longer, he would have undone the Roman
Empire with his Luxury and costly Table: He was so extrean^ly given to
Gluttony, that he could not forbear eating while ^e was sacrificing, or in a
Journey: His whole life was spent in Gluttony, Drunkenness and Cruelty, whereby
he grew so hateful, that the Army chose Vespasian then in Judea, for their
Emperor, whereupon Vitellius forced Flavius Sabinus, Vespasians Brother, and
the rest of his Family and Kindred, to fly into the Capitol for shelter, which
Vitellius caused to be set on fire, and so burned them in it; and himself being
at a Feast, fed his Eyes with that pleasing spectacle; for he was resolved to
eat and drink well, that he might not die without his Dinner, and that he might
not be afraid of death nor disgrace: The day after, when news was brought him
that Vespasian his Enemey drew near, he sought out all private corners wherein
to hide himself; all men forsaking him, but only his Baker and his Cook: When
his Enemies entered the City, they sought for him, and some of the Soldiers
that knew him not, finding him, he denied his own name; and when others that
knew him came, he pretended he had something to reveal to Vespasian, that
concerned his safety; but this prevailed not; for casting a Halter about his
neck, they dragged him half naked into the Marketplace, where he received many
scorns and reproaches; they then set a Dagger under his chin, that he might not
hang down his head to hide his face: Some threw dirt and dung at him: Some
reproaching him with one thing, and some with another; at last carrying him to
Tyber, they there cut him in pieces; and then fastening a hook to his Trunk,
they threw it into the River. Suet. Hist.

XVII. Domitian was the younger Son of Vespasian; he behaved himself very
wickedly in his Childhood, and Youth; and when he came to be Emperor, he
retired himself every day for an hour in secret, as if it were to meditate upon
some secret Affairs, but he spent that time in catching of flies, and pricking
out their Eyes with a Bodkin, so that one asking his Chamberlain whether any
body was with the Emperor, he wittily answered, No, not so much as a fly; he
daily entertained the People with sumptuous, and costly Shows, wherein himself
sat as chief in the habit of one of the Heathen Gods, and like Caligula,
commanded himself to be called Lord, and God, and in his public Edicts he used
this Phrase, Our Lord and God commands this to be done; one while he set
himself to reform abuses, and enacted some good Laws, but quickly returned to
his former Cruelty, causing many Senators, and such as had been Consuls to be
slain, and among them one, because he had a Map of the world in his Chamber,
and because he read the Orations of Kings and Princes, recorded by Titus
Livius; he banished all Philosophers, and Mathematicians out of Italy, and
sought out new ways to enrich his Coffers; his Cruelty was not only great, but
crafty, and unexpected, for he would send some away merrily, and with assurance
of safety, and presently send men to murder them; and that he might the more
abuse men's patience, he would never pass any hard, and unjust Sentence, without
a Preface to set forth his Clemency; his Treasury being exhausted, he contrived
to recruit it by Rapine, and Oppression, suborning some to accuse both the
living and the dead, that he might seize upon their Estates; he was extreme
cruel against the Christians, because they would not Worship him as a God, or
his Idols at least, pretending that he was Brother to the Sun and Moon; and
adorning his Shoes with Gold, and precious Stones, he commanded the People to
kiss his feet; he ordered all the Churches of the Christians to be pulled down,
and destroyed, and the Book of the Holy Scriptures to be burnt, which was
executed with all the rigor and contempt that could be; he then sent forth
Edicts for displacing all Christian Magistrates, and put all others out of
their Offices, imprisoning such of the common People, as would not abjure
Christianity, and subscribe to the Heathen Idolatries; then were cruel Edicts
sent abroad for Imprisoning the Elders and Bishops, and constraining them by
diverse torments to Sacrifice to Idols, upon which there followed all manner of
Cruelty against the Christians, by all kind of tortures; among the rest
Galerius his General was sent to invade Antioch, and to force all the
Christians to renounce Christ, at which time they were assembled together;
whereupon one Romanus a Nobleman ran to them, declaring, That the Wolves wen^
at hand, which would devour them, yet he exhorted them not to fear, by reason
of the danger; and through Divine Grace the Christians were greatly encouraged
by him, so that old Men and Matrons, Fathers and Mothers were all of one mind
and resolution to shed their dearest blood in the ^rofession of the Christian
Faith, and unanimously offered their naked throats to the Soldiers; whereupon
they sent their Captain word, That they could not enforce the Christians to
deny their Faith, by reason of one Romanus, who did mightily encourage them; The
Captain commanded he should be brought before him, to whom he said, What, art
thou the Author of this Sedition? Art thou the cause that so many lose their
lives? By the Gods I swear, thou shall answer for them all, and shall suffer
those torments that thou encouragest them to undergo, Romanus answered, Thy
Sentence O Emperor I jo^fully embrace, I am most willing to be Sacrificed for
my Brethren, although I should suffer the greatest torments that thou can
invent, the Captain being much enraged with this his stout answer, commanded
him to be halled up, and his bowels to be plucked out, whereupon the Hangman
more pitiful, and tenderhearted than he, said, Not so Sir, this man is of
Noble Parentage, and therefore may not be put to so ignoble a death scourge him
then (quoth the Captain) with whips, having knots of Lead at the ends, which
was done accordingly, but Romanus instead of Sighs and Tears, and Groans, sung
Psalms during his suffering, desiring the tormentors not to favor him for the
sake of his Nobility, for it is not (said he) the blood of my Progenitors, but
the Christian Religion which makes me noble; then did he earnestly reprove the
Cruelty, and Idolatry of the Captain, and derided his Idol Gods; which so ^uch
enraged him, that he commanded his sides to be ^unced with knives, till the
bones were laid open, yet still ^id the Holy Martyr Preach the living God, and
the lord Jesus Christ to him, upon which the Tyrant com^anded to strike out his
Teeth, that his Speech might ^e hindered, his order was obeyed, his face was
also buffe^ed, his Eyelids torn off, his cheeks cut and gasht with ^nives, the
skin of his beard by degrees plucked off, and ^is comely countenance wholly
defaced, and deformed, ^et for all this the meek, and patient Martyr said only
^us, I thank thee O Captain that thou have opened to me so ma^^ mouths to
Preach my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, for as ^any wounds as I have, so many
mouths I have to bless, and praise ^^y God, and Jesus Christ my Redeemer; the
Captain astoni^^ed at his constancy, bid them give over tormen^ng him, yet
threatens more cruel Tortures, and in the mean time Blasphemed God and christ,
saying, Thy Crucified Savior is but a God of yester^ay; The Gods of the
Gentiles are of great Antiquity: But Romanus taking occasion from hence,
declared unto him ^^e Eternity of Jesus Christ, etc. and withal said, Captain,
^^ing me a Christian Child of seven years old, and you shall hear that he will
say: Hereupon a little Boy was called out of ^^e multitude, to whom Romanus
said, Tell me my Child, ^hether thou think it reasonable that we worship one
Christ, ^^d in him one Father; or that we worship many Gods? To whom the Child
answered, That surely what we affirm to (...) God, must needs be one; and since
this Christ is one, in whom ^^e worship one God the Father, he must needs be
the true God; ^^r that there be many Gods, we children cannot believe: The
^aptain amazed at this, said, Thou young Villain and Trai^^r, where, and of
whom learned thou this Lesson? Of my ^other (said the Child) with whose Milk
I sucked in this ^esson, that I must believe in Christ. The Mother was cal^d,
and appeared, being glad to see the courage of her ^hild: The cruel Captain
commanded the Child to be ^alled up, and severely whipped; at which cruelty the
pi^ful spectators could not forbear tears; only the joyful ^other stood by, and
looked on with dry eyes; yea, she reproved her sweet Child for desiring but a
little cold Water, charging ^t to thirst after the Cup that the Bab^^ of
Bethlehem once drank of; and bid him remember litt^^ Isaac, who seeing the
Sword over his head, and the Altar upon which he was to be sacrificed,
willingly offered his tender ne^^ to be cut off by his Father: Upon this the
cruel Tormento^ of a sudden plucked the shin off the Child's head, hair and all;
whereupon the Moth^^ cried out, Endure and suff^^ it patiently, my Dear Child,
and in a little time thou shall g^ to Jesus Christ, who will adorn thy naked
he^d with a Crow^ of Eternal Glory: Thus the Mother coun^ess her Son, and the
Child is inccu^aged, and receives the stripes and scourges with a ^^^ling
countenance: The Captain perceiving the constancy of the Child to be
invincible, and himself to be overcome, commands this precious soul* this
Blessed Babe, this little Martyr, to be put into a filthy and stinking Dungeon:
Then was Roman^ brought forth again to receive new wounds upon his ol^ sores;
and the Captain raged against the Tormento for dealing so mildly with him, and
then said, It is painful for thee Romants, to be so long a dying; I do assure
the^ in a short time the floming fire shall dispatch thee, wherei^ thou, and
that Boy thy Fellow Rebel and Traitor, shall be bur^ to Ashes. As they were
going to Execution, Roman^^ turned back upon the Captain. and said, I appeal
from this thy Tyranny, Ch unjust Judge! to the Righteeus Thro^^ and Judgment of
Jesus Christ the up ^^lit Judge, where i^ will appear that thou an a (...) and
b^^edy T^rant* to inflict such horrid Tortures (...) Innocent h^is^ians. When
they were come to the (...) of Execution, the Torn ento^ required the Child
(...) Mother, who had carried him in her Arms from (...) Prison, whom she
freely and joyfully delivered to them, saying, Farewell my swe^ Babe; and when
the Hargr^^^ put his Sword to the Child's neck, she sang cheerfully in this
manner;

All laud and praise, with heart and voice,
O Lord I yield to thee,
To whom the death of all thy Saints
We know most dear to be.
The head of this blessed Innocent being cut off, the Mother wrapped in her
Garment, laid it to her breast, and so departed: Then there was a mighty fire
made, into which Romanus was cast; which being quenched with a great Storm of
Rain, the Tyrant commanded his Tongue to be cut out, therefore the Executioner
pulled it far out of his mouth, and cut it off by the roots, and yet for all
this it is recorded (but with what credit I know not) that Romanus spoke,
saying, He that speaks for Christ shall never want a Tongue; do not think
that the voice which Preaches Christ, must always have a Tongue to be the
Minister: The Captain at this grew even distracted, suspecting that the Hangman
had deceived him by some slight of hand, and had not cut his Tongue off; If you
suppose so, (says the Executioner) open his mouth, and you may see the Roots
of his Tongue: Whereupon the Captain being even confounded at the courage and
constancy of the Martyr, commanded him to be brought back to Prison, and to be
strangled, where his sorrowful life and pains ended together, and he received
the Crown of Martyrdom. Acts and Monuments. 1 Part.

About this time one Gordius a Centurion, upon professing himself to be a
Christian, was apprehended, and boldly acknowledged, That he believed in
Christ, and valued not what they could inflict on him for this his Profession,
then did the Sheriff call for Scourges, Gibbets, and all manner of Torments; to
whom Gordius said, That it would be a loss and damage to him, if he did not
suffer diverse torments and punishments for Christ, and his Cause; The Sheriff
more incensed hereby, commanded all those torments to be inflicted on him, with
which Gordius was nothing disturbed, but sung, The Lord is my helper, I will
not fear what Man can do unto me, I will fear no evil, because thou Lord art
with me; Then he blamed the Tormentors for favoring of him, provoking them to
do their utmost; the Sheriff not prevailing that way, sought by flattery to
seduce him, promising him Preferment, Riches, and Honor, if he would deny
Christ; but Gordius derided him as foolishly mad, saying, That he looked for
greater preferment in Heaven, than he could give him here on Earth: He was then
condemned, and carried out of the City to be burnt; multitudes followed him;
and some kissing him, entreated him with Tears to pity himself; to whom he
answered; Weep not, I pray you, for me, but weep for the Enemies of God, who
fight against the Christians; weep, I say, for them, who prepare a fire for us,
purchasing Hell fire thereby for themselves in the day of vengeance; and cease,
I pray you, thus to molest my settled and quiet mind; for truly, for the name of
Christ, I am ready to suffer a thousand deaths. Others persuaded him to deny
Christ with his mouth, and to keep his conscience to himself: My Tongue (says
he) which by God's goodness I have, cannot be brought to deny the Author and
giver of the same; for with the heart we believe unto Righteousness, and with
the Tongue we confess unto Salvation. And thus persuading and encouraging the
People to be willing to die in the like Cause, with an unappaled countenance,
he gave up his body to the Flames. Acts and Monuments. 1. P.

Menas also, a Soldier by profession, forsook all, and went into a Desert,
where he gave himself to Fasting, Prayer, Meditation, and Reading of the
Scriptures; at last returning into the City of Cotis, when the People were at
their pastimes, he with a loud voice proclaimed himself to be a Christian, and
thereupon was carried before the President; and being demanded concerning his
Faith, he said, It is convenient that I confess God, in whom is light, and no
darkness; For with the heart we believe to Righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto Salvation: Then he was tormented with diverse Tortures,
which he regarded not, saying, There is nothing in my mind that can be compared
to the Kingdom of Heaven; neither is all the world, if it were we^ghed in a
balance, comparable to the price of one soul: And farther said, Who can
separate us from the Love of Christ? Can Tribulation? or Auguish, etc. And
again, I have learned of my Lord Christ, not to fear them that can kill the
Body, and have no power to kill the Soul. Having endured a multitude of
Torments, he received Sentence of Death; and at the place of Execution he said,
I give thee thanks my Lord God, who have aceepted me to be a partaker of thy
precious Death, and have not suffered me to be devoured of my fierce Enemies,
but have made me constant in thy True Faith unto the end: And so he lost his
Head, but found a Crown of Glory. Acts and Monuments. 1. P.

Amongst others, forty young Gentlemen that were Soldiers, freely confessed
themselves to be Christians, declaring to the Marshal their names, who being
amazed at their boldness, was in doubt what to do; he endeavored with
flatteries, and promises of preferment, to win them, persuading them to
consider their youth, and not to change a pleasant life for a painful and
untimely death: But they courageously replied, They neither desired money,
honor, nor life, but only the Celestial Kingdom of Christ, for the love of
which they were ready to endure the Wheel, Cross, Fire, or any other Torment:
The Marshal being much offended herewith, devised a new Torment; for espying a
Pond in the Street, that lay open to the North Wind, it being in the cold
Winter time, he caused them to be put into it all night; but they being joyful,
comforted one another as they put off their Clothes, saying, We put not off now
our Old Clothes, but our Old Man (corrupted with the deceits of concupiscence)
for which we bless and praise God; for by means of the Serpent we once put on
the Old Man, but by the means of Jesus Christ we now put him off. Then were
they brought naked, and put into the vehement cold water, where they were kept
till the morning; so that all their Members were stark and stiff therewith; and
as soon as it was day, they, having breath yet remaining in them, were brought
to the fire, wherein they were consumed to Ashes, which were thrown into the
Flood. It happened that one of the company being more lively, and not so near
death as the rest, the Executioners pitied him, and delivered him to his
Mother, who stood by, to save his life; but she led him to the piles of Wood,
where the other starved creatures lay ready to be burnt, admonishing, and
exhorting him to accomplish the Blessed Journey he had taken in hand, which
accordingly he did, and was burnt with his Companions, Acts and Monu.

A noble Virgin also named Eulalia, suffered about this time, she was not above
twelve years of Age, and had great offers of Marriage made to her, but she
observing the courage of the Christians, was very desirous to join her self
with them; for which end she prayed fervently to God for strength, and faith to
enable her thereunto; but her Religious Parents fearing that her zeal might
make her guilty of her own death, kept her close at their Country house, a
great way from the City, where she continued for a while; but at last detesting
any delay, she went from her Fathers house by night, and traveled all alone
through by-ways with much danger, and weariness toward the City, whither she
came in the morning, and going before the Judge, with a loud voice she said,
What ashame is it for you thus wickedly to take away men's lives, by dashing
their Bodies to pieces against the Rocks, and all manner of Cruelties, and also
to endeavor to destroy their Souls, by compelling them to deny the Omnipotent
God! would you know (O you ignorant Souls) what I am, behold I am a Christian,
and an Enemy to your devilish Sacrifices, I scorn and despise your Idols, and
tread them under my feet, and acknowledge only God Almighty, the Creator of
Heaven and Earth, and Jesus Christ his only Son, and the Savior of the World;
but what are your Gods, but dead Idols, and the works of Men's hands, etc. Come
on therefore, and let the Hangman burn, cut, and mangle this poor mortal
Carcass; It Is very easy to break and destroy a weak, brittle, perishing body,
but the mind and soul you cannot touch with all that you can do; the Judge
enraged herewith, said to the Executioner, Take her, and pull her out by the
hair of the head to torments, let her feel the power of our Gods, and know what
we can do, but yet O sturdy Girl, I would fain have thee before thou die, to
recant this thy wickedness, and to save thy self from a wretched death;
consider what pleasures thou may enjoy in the House of thy Honorable
Parents, consider the Lamentations and Tears of thy miserable Family and
Relations, which by thy perverseness will be brought to ruin; consider that
thou art now in thy Youth, in the very flower of thine Age, in the way to
Honor, and Preferment by an Honorable Marriage agreeable to thy Quality, and
Estate; do not these glistering Glories, and the delights of the Marriage Bed
move thee, does not the sorrow, and extreme grief of thy dear Parents incline
thee to pity thy self and them? Yea, who is there almost that does nonlament
thy madness and folly? If this does not prevail, yet consider the terrible
death that thou art like to suffer, consider what variety of torments are
prepared for thee, for thou shall either be beheaded by this Sword, or thou
shall be torn in pieces by the teeth of wild Beasts, or else thou shall be
thrown alive into the burning flames, and there only attended with the
lamentable bewailings of thy friends, and kindred, shall be consumed to ashes;
Now, how easy, and small a matter is required of thee to avoid all this
punishment! for if thou will but take a little Salt, and Incense between thy
fingers, and put it into the Censer, in honor of our Gods, thou shall be set
free, and dilivered from all further danger and trouble; When Eulalia heard him
thus speak, being extremely moved, she spit in the Tyrants face, and presently
threw down the Idols to the ground, and kicked about the Incense prepared for
Sacrifice; whereupon without further delay the Hangmen took her, and with all
their strength plucked her Limbs out of joint, and then with the Claws of wild
Beasts tore off her flesh to the bones, while she all the while not in the
least daunted with their cruel Torments, fell a singing, and praising in this
manner, O Lord I will never forget thy goodness and mercy, what a pleasure is
it O Jesus to remember thy Triumphant victories, who by suffering have attained
to the height of Glory; Thus with great constancy, and courage she continued
joyfully, and cheerfully to sing praises to God, even when she was all over
stained, and imbrued in her own blood, and cruelly tormented in all parts of
her Body; they then proceeded to the last and final torture, which was the
tearing, and rending of her Body with the Iron Grate, and Hurdle, and burning
her Breasts and Sides with flaming Torches; but her Hair (which all this while
hung down so low, that it covered her Modesty) at last took fire, and she being
no longer willing to live, opened her mouth, and swallowed the flame, upon
which she immediately gave up the Ghost; and is now one of those Souls under
the Altar, who cry, how long, etc. Acts and Monu. 1. P.

Also Agnes an Honorable young Virgin being accused for a Christian, was
brought before the Judge, who endeavored first by flatteries, and then by
threatening her with cruel torments to draw her to the denial of her Faith, but
she valiantly answered; That she feared not his Tortures, as being willing to
suffer all manner of Torments, yea, death itself for the sake of Christ; well,
said the Judge, though thou valuest pain and torment so little, yet I suppose
thou have a great esteem for thy Virginity and Chastity, therefore I am fully
determined, unless thou Sacrifice to our Gods, thou shall immediately be put
into the Common Stews, and Brothel-houses; Agnes hereupon inveighs vehemently
against Minerva, and her Worshippers; upon which the loose and debauched Youths
desired earnestly of the Judge, that they might have Agnes as a Prey to their
lust and filthiness; then said Agnes, Jesus Christ is not forgetful of those
that are his, neither will he leave me destitute of his help nor assistance,
but is always ready to protect and defend modest, and chaste Virgins, and
therefore O Tyrant thou may freely bath thy Sword in my blood, but thou shall
never defile my Body with filthy Lust with all that thou can do. She had no
sooner spoke these words, but the Tyrant commanded her to be tied stark naked
at the corner of a Street, where Strumpets commonly used to haunt; upon which
the greatest part of the People being both sorry, and ashamed to see so
shameless, and unseemly a sight, some turning their heads, and some hiding
their faces passed by; but one young Man among the rest with lascivious Eyes,
and lustful thoughts beholding her, immediately a flash of Lightning struck out
both his Eyes, and he falling down, wallowed in the Street; whereupon Agnes
sung Praises to God; the ^^uel Tyrant enraged hereby, commanded the Executioner
to draw out his Sword, and dispatch her, she seeing sturdy Soldier coming
toward her with his drawn Sword, rejoiced, saying, This, O this is he that I
love, I will make have to meet him, and no longer protract my longing desires,
I will willingly receive his Sword in my Breast; O Eternal Father vouchfafe to
open the Gates of Heaven to my Soul, that seeks thee; and so kneeling down in
the midst of her Ejaculations, he at one blow cut off her head. Acts and Monum.

Domitian by his Cruelties grew terrible and hateful to his very Friends and
Servants, yea to his own Wife; a certain Astrologer boasted to him, that by his
Art he could foretell what should come to pass; Domitian asked him if he foresaw
what his own end should be; he answered, That he should be torn in pieces of
Dogs: Domitian to prove him a Liar, commanded him presently to be slain, and
his Body to be burnt to ashes; but as they were about to do it, so violent a
shower happened, as quenched the fire, and immediately Dogs came, and tore him
in pieces; this much increased the fear of Domitian, who had been told by a
Chaldean when, and how he should die, which soon after happened, and the
vengeance of Heaven fell upon him for all his Tyranny, and Cruelty; for
Stephanus, one of his Officers, desiring to speak with him in private,
presented him with a writing, which whilst he was looking upon, he stabbed him
with a Dagger into the lower part of his Belly; but not being quite dead, seven
of his own freed men came about him, and dispatched him; it is said that a
while before his death, a Chough spoke Greek from the Tarpeian Rock, which was
in English, All shall be well; which could not be till the Tyrants Death; and
Apollonius Tyaneus being at Ephesus in Asia, reading a Lecture in a Grove
there, many hundred miles from Rome, he on a sudden began to speak low, and
more slowly, and straight looked pale, and stood silent; at last stepping
hastily some paces, he cried out as one transported, O brave Stephanus, strike
the Tyrant, kill the Murderer; thou have struck him, thou have wounded him,
thou have slain him; this being spoke in public, it was carefully taken notice
of, and the time when it was spoken, diligently observed, and it was afterward
found, and well known, that Domitian was stabbed in Rome that day, and the same
hour of the day, by Stephanus, who was of his Bedchamber, Lipsius Monit. lib. 1.

XVIII. Maximinus the Emperor was born in Thracia; his Parents were
Barbarians; but being of a vast body, and huge strength, so that he could lift
a Cart laden, he applied himself to the Wars, under the Emperor Severus, who
observing his Strength, Activity and Industry, preferred him to diverse Offices
in the Army, insomuch that when Severus was slain, the Army made him Emperor:
Having thus attained to this high Dignity, he slew all those that knew any
thing of the baseness of his Birth; yea many of his friends, who in his low
condition had often relieved him: He would not suffer any Nobleman to be about
him: He cruelly murdered all the Servants of Severus his Predecessor, and
executed many of the Soldiers, hanging some, knocking others on the head, and
throwing others to wild Beasts: He hired and suborned some Villains at Rome to
accuse diverse of the Senators of Treason, whom he presently commanded to be
slain: By which means he became so feared, and consequently hated, and
abhorred, that the Senate, yea the Women daily in their Temples, made solemn
Prayers and Supplications against him. He slew diverse of his Captains; which so
provoked the Soldiers, that one day as he with his Son, whom he had made
partner with him in the Empire, were refreshing themselves in his Tent, they
rushed in upon them, and slew them both, declaring publicly, That of a Dog of
so base a breed, the Whelp ought not to be spared, but to be destroyed
likewise. Sueton. Hist.

XIX. Charles King of Navar, was a cruel Oppressor and Tyrant over his
Subjects, for he imposed upon them grievous Taxes and Tributes; and when many
of the chief of them came to complain of their Poverty, and that they were not
able to bear them, he caused them all to be put to death for their boldness; He
was the kindler of many great mischiefs in France, and also of Fires, wherewith
diverse Places of Strength, and famous Buildings, were burnt down: He counseled
the Son of the Earl of Foix to poison his Father, and gave him the Poison to
effect the Villainy with his own hand: His Lechery likewise and Adulteries
besotted his Soul even in his Old Age; for at threescore years of Age he had a
Whore, upon whom he extremely doted, and was hardly ever out of her company,
who at length was the cause of his death: For returning from her, as he daily
did, and entering into his Chamber, he went to Bed all quaking, and half frozen
with cold; neither could he by any means recover his heat, until by Art they
endeavored to revive Nature, which was by blowing upon him with brazen
Bellows, Aquavitae, and hot blasts of Air, but it happened that a spark of the
fire by chance flew between the sheets, and inflamed the dry linen, and the
Aquavitae in an instant, so that e're it was quenched, his late quivering bones
were now half burnt; he lived in great grief, and torment for fifteen days
after, finding no help nor asswagement of his Torture, by Physic or
Surgery, and then miserably dyed; and thus, as while he lived, his mind
constantly burned in Lust, and his defires were hot upon mischief, and
oppression, so his days were finished with cruel heat and burning. Beards
Theater.

XX. Luctack, King of Scotland, succeeded his Father Galdus in that Kingdom,
but was so wretched and mischievous a Tyrant, that his Subjects hated him no
less for his Vices, than they loved his Father for his Virtues; he murdered
many Rich, and Noble Persons for no cause but only to enrich himself with their
Estates; he committed the Government of the Realm to debauched and wretched
Persons, in whose Company he chiefly delighted, he was so impudent as to
deflour his own Aunts, Sisters, and Daughters, and to forsake his own Wife, and
scorned the Advice and Council of his wife and grave Counselors, calling them
Old doting Fools, all which monstrous Villainies with a thousand more, so
incensed his Nobility, that they slew him after he had reigned three years; but
as the Proverb says, Seldom comes a better, for another Tyrant as bad, if not
worse, succeeded him, called Mogallus, Cosen German to Luctack, a Man
notoriously infected with all manner of wickedness, for though at first he gave
himself to follow the wisdom, and good Government of his Uncle Galdus, yet in
his old Age, his vices abundantly discovered themselves, but chiefly in
Oppression, Lechery, and Cruelty; this King Licensed Theives and Robbers to
take the Goods of their Neighbors without punishment, and he first ordained
that the Goods of condemned Persons should be confiscate to the Kings use
without respect either to their Wives, Children, or Creditors; but he also like
his Predecessor was slain by his Nobles. There was likewise another King of
Scots, called Athirco, in the year 240. who showed himself a most abominable
wretch, for he wallowed in all manner of unclean, and effeminate Lusts, and was
not ashamed to go along the Streets in sight of the People, playing upon a
Flu^e, rejoicing more to be accounted a good Fiddler, than a good Prince; from
this he proceeded at length to the deflouring, and ravishing of Women and
Virgins, insomuch that the Noblemens Daughters could not be secure from his
unsatiable, and intolerable lust; whereupon being pursued by the Nobility, when
he saw no means to escape, he desperately slew himself. Beards Theater.

XXI. Theodorick, King of France, for his negligence, and sluggishness in his
Government, was Deposed, and of a King was made a Friar, being put into a
Monastery, and Childerick succeeded him, who exercised Barbarous, and Inhumane
Cruelty upon his Subjects; for he spared neither Noble, nor Ignoble, but sent
them to their Graves without Justice, or Reason; among others, he caused a
Nobleman to be fas^ned to a Stake, and beaten almost to death with Clubs; which
monstrous Cruelty so incensed the People against him, that there wanted not
hands to take part with this abused Nobleman against this Tyrant his Enemy,
whereupon they laid wait for him as he came one day from hunting, and killed
him, together with his Wife great with Child, no man either daring, or being
willing to defend him. Beards Theater.

XXII. John Cameron, Bishop of Glasgow, was much given to violence and
oppression, and committed many deeds full of Cruelty, and Covetousness,
especially upon his own Tenants and Vassals, and is reported to have made a
fearful, and unhappy end; for in the year 1446. the night before Christmas day,
as he lay asleep in his House, about seven miles from the City of Glasgow, he
seemed to hear a voice summoning him to appear before the Tribunal of Christ;
thereupon he awaked, and being greatly terrified called to his Servants to
bring lights, and fit by him; he himself took a Book in his hand, and began to
read, but the voice being again heard, struck all the Servants with amazement;
the same voice calling the third time far louder, and more fearfully, the
Bishop after an heavy groan, was found dead in the Bed, his Tongue hanging out
of his mouth; this is reported by Buchanan almost in the same words, which I
thought good to remember, as a notable example of Gods Judgment against the
crying sin of Oppression. Spotswoods Chapter Hist.

XXIII. To conclude, Diomedes the Thracian King fed his Horses with Man's flesh,
as with provender, but was made at last provender himself for his own Horses by
Hercules. Clephes the Second King of the Lumbards, for his savage Cruelties
toward his Subjects, was slaughtered by one of his Friends. Damasippus, that
Massacred so many Citizens of Rome, was cut off by Scylla. Ecelinus, that
played the Tyrant at Taurisium, gelding Boys, deflouring Virgins, cutting off
Women's Breasts, ripping Children out of their Mothers Wombs, and killing twelve
hundred Patavians at once, who were his Friends, was himself at last killed in
a Battle; in a word if we read, and consult the Histories of all Countries and
times, we shall feldom or never find any notorious Tyrant, or Oppressor of his
Subjects that came to any good end, but generally some notable, and fearful
Judgment fell upon them. Beards T^eatre.

XXIV. In the aforementioned examples, we have given an Account of the
flagitious actions, and ends of Murderers and Tyrants by wholesale, as being
Persons of great power, and without restraint, whereby they had opportunity to
do the greater mischief to mankind; but Divine Justice has not spared those of
meaner quality, but has both wonderfully discovered, and revenged those crying
sins of Murder, and Cruelty, as the following instances do fully demonstrate.

XXV. Bothwell, who was the chief contriver, and actor of the Murder of King
Henry of Scotland, Father to our King James, fled into Denmark, where being
discovered, he was apprehended, and imprisoned by the King, and disparing of
recovering his liberty, he fell mad, and ended his life most miserably; the
Archbishop of St. Andrews also, who had a hand in the murder of that King,
being taken in the Castle of Dumbarton, was carried to Sterling, and hanged
publicly on a Gibbet erected for that purpose. In the year 1584. Whilst our
King James was in Scotland, there were two Gentlemen of good credit, the one
called John Cuningham, and the other Malcolm Douglas, who was much feared for
his valor and manhood; these two were falsely accused by some about the King,
and one Robert Hamilton was suborned to swear against them, when the Indictment
of Douglas was read, he denied all, and fully cleared himself by the
unlikelyhood of the accusation, so that all that heard him, did in their minds
believe him innocent; yet were they both condemned and hanged at Edinburgh;
these Gentlemen were much pitied, especially Douglas; Hamilton the false
Accuser, lived ever after this in continual fear, and abhorred of all men, but
at last he was slain by one James Johnston, who had vowed to revenge the death
of Douglas. Spotswoods Hist. Scotland.

XXVI. Sir James Tyrril, John Dighton, and Miles Forest, who were procured by
Richard the Third, called Crack-back, to murder King Edward the Fifth, and his
Brother in the Tower, by entering their Chamber about midnight, and wrapping
them up in the cloths, keeping down the Feather-beds and Pillows hard upon
their mouths, till they were smothered. These three Murderers did not long
escape the Vengeance of God; for Miles Forest rotted away by piecemeal.
Dighton lived at Calais so disdained and hated of all men, that he died there
in much misery: And Sir James Tyrril was beheaded on Tower Hill for Treason
Act. and Mo. The Cardinal of Winch. commonly called the Rich Cardinal) who
procured the death of the good Duke of Gloucester, in King Henry the Sixth's
Time,) was shortly after struck with an incurable Disease; who understanding by
his Physicians that he could not live, murmuring and repining thereat, he cried
out, Fie, Will not Death be hired? Will Money do nothing? Must I die that have
so great Riches? If the whole Realm would save my life, I am able either by
Policy to get it, or by Riches to buy it: But all would not prevail; for he
died miserably soon after. Speeds Chron.

XXVII. The Duke of Suffolk also did not long escape unpunished; for in a
Parliament holden soon after, he was accused as a Traitor to the Kingdom, a
Murderer of the Duke of Gloucester, and a Robber of the King's Treasury, for all
which he was banished for five years; he took Shipping in Suffolk, intending
for France, but by the way, being encountered by a Man of War, that belonged to
the Tower, he was taken and carried into Dover Road, where on the side of a
Ship-boat one cut off his head 1450. Speeds Chron.

XXVIII. In 1618. there lived a man at Perin, in Cornwall, who was blessed with
ample Possessions, and a fruitful Issue, unhappy only in a younger Son, who
growing Extravagant, went to Sea in a small Vessel, with several like himself,
where they made Prize of all that they could master; and at last venturing into
the Streights, they set upon a Turks Man of War, which they took, and got great
booty; but their Powder by chance taking fire, blew up the Ship; and our
Gallant being a skilful Swimmer, got to shore upon the Isle of Rhodes, with the
best of his Jewels, where offering some to sale to a Jew, he knew them to be
the Governors of Algiers, whereupon he was seized, and condemned to the Gallys
for a Pyrate, among other Christians, whose miserable Slavery made them use
their wits to recover their Liberty; and watching their opportunity, they
effected it by killing some of their Officers: After which this Young Man got
aboard an English Ship, and came safe to London, where his former misery, and
some skill he had gotten in that Art, preferred him to be a Servant to a
Surgeon, who after a while sent him to the East Indies; there by his
diligence and industry he got money, with which he returned home; and longing
to see his native Country Cornwall, he sailed in a small Ship from London
Westward; but ere he attained to his Port, he was cast away upon that Coast,
where once more his excellent skill in Swimming brought him safe to Shore: But
having been fifteen years absent, he understood his Father was much decayed in
his Estate, and had tetired himself to a place not far off, being indeed in
debt and danger: His Sister he finds married to a Mercer, to whom he at first
appears as a poor stranger; but after a while privately reveals himself to her,
showing her what Gold and Jewels he had concealed in a Bow-case about him; and
they concluded that the next day he should appear to his Parents; yet to keep
himself unknown to them till his Sister and her Husband should come thither to
him, to make their common Joy complete; accordingly he goes alone to his
Fathers house, where his humble behavior, suitable to his poor cloths, melted
the old couple into so much compassion, as to give him shelter from the cold
weather, under their outward roof, and by degrees his Relations of his Travels
and sufferings told with so much passion to the Aged People, made him stay so
long by the Kitchen fire, that the Husband bid them Good Night, and went to
Bed; and soon after his true Stories moving compassion in the Woman, she wept,
and so did he: But taking pity on her tears, he comforted her with a piece of
Gold, which gave her assurance that he deserved a Lodging; to which she brought
him, and being in Bed, he showed her his wealth, which was girded about him,
which he told her was sufficient to relieve her Husbands wants, and to spare
for himself; and so being weary, sell asleep: The Old Woman being tempted with
the golden bait which she had received, and greedily thirsting after the
enjoyment of the rest, went to her Hushand, and awaking him, told him this
news, and what further she intended to do; and though with horrid apprehensions
he often refused, yet her puling Elequence (Eves Enchantments) moved him at
last to consent to be Master of all that wealth, by murdering the owner
thereof; which accordingly they effected, and afterward covered the Corpse with
cloths, till they had opportunity to convey it away. The early morning hastens
the Sister to her Fathers house, where, with signs of great Joy, she enquires
for a Sailor that should lodge there the last night: The Old People at first
denied that they had seen any such, till she told them, that he was her
Brother, her lost Brother, whom she certainly knew to be so, by a scar upon his
Arm, cut with a Sword in his youth, and that they had resolved to meet there
the next morning, and be merry: The Father hearing this, hastily runs up into
the Room, and finding the mark aforesaid, with the horrid regret of this
monstrous Murder of his own Son, cuts his throat with the same knife wherewith
he had committed that execrable deed: A while after the Mother going up to
consult with her Husband what to do; and being confounded to see him weltring
in his own blood, she takes the same knife, and therewith rips up her own
belly, so that the guts tumbled out. The Daughter wondering at their delay in
coming down, goes up to them, and found too soon this bloody Tragedy; the
Mother having time only to relate the forementioned particulars, gave up the
Ghost: The Daughter was struck with such a sudden horror and amazement at this
deluge of destruction, that she prefently sunk down and died. The truth of
these things was frequently known, and the fatal end of that Family quickly
flew to the Court of K. James, clad with these circumstances; but the Printed
Relation conceals their names, out of respect to some Neighbor of repute, of
kin to the Family. Sandersons Hist. K. James.

XXIX. A Noble Gentleman lived very happily and lovingly with his Wife, who had
a Chambermaid of very sweet and beautiful features, yet not taxed with the
least incivility or wantonness; however, her Lady was jealous of her, and
therefore when her Husband was gone some days from home, she raised a quarrel
with Maid, for letting a Child slip out of her Arms; which, though it were with
little or no hurt, yet she pretended it was lame, past recovery; and being
implacable against her, she committed her to Prison in a deep, dark, and
desolate Dungeon in the bottom of the Castle, which for many years had been
shut up with an Iron Grate, and wherein there were abundance of Snakes, Toads,
Adders, and other Serpents, into which the worst Malesactor whatsoever, within
the memory of man, had not been committed; yet into this noisome, stinking,
dreadful place, the poor Innocent Virgin was forced to enter, and the doors
were fast shut upon her: She was no sooner in, but these venomous vermin came
from all corners of the Vault about her, with horrible hissings, and seized
upon all parts of her body, which with loud and doleful cries and shrieks, she
endeavored to strike off, but all in vain: At noon one of the Servants, who
had a kindness for her, goes to his Lady, and desired her, as she was a
Christian, to have some pity upon the lamentable cries of the poor creature,
but to no purpose; for she reviled him with boldness and sawciness, and gave
him blows to boot: At length evening came, and her woeful clamours still
continued, able to have softened Flint or Marble; when the Young Man,
notwithstanding his former ill success, was resolved to try once again, and
falling upon his knees before his Lady, was more importunate with her than
before; but the more he strived to pacify her, the more furious she was, and
kicked him out of her presence: Night came on, and they went to bed, but the
Young Man could A bloody Villain murders 3 Children. pa. 160

A Virgin destroyed by venomous Serpents. pa. 156

not sleep; but rising at midnight, went to the Dangeon door, where, hearing no
noise, nor so much as a sigh or groan, he thought she was dead, and therefore
called boldly at the Ladies Chamber door; and awakening her, ^old her, That she
had now executed her cruel revenge; for ^e doubted not but the poor Virgin was
dead, since all was ^lent: At which words, being startled; she presently ^ose,
and calling for store of Lights, she caused the Dungeon door to be opened,
where she beheld a terrible spectacle; the Maid fallen flat on the ground, and
four great Serpents wrapped about her; one of an extraordinary bigness about her
neck; another had twined ^t self round both her legs; a third like a Girdle had
^mbraced her wast; and a fourth stuck upon her Jaws, ^retching its self to its
utmost length; which was no ^oner taken off, but it died, having so gorged it
self with her blood, that it swelled, and burst in sunder, at which dreadful
sight the Lady was struck with such a ^udden horror, that she in a short time
grew into a deep ^elancholy, which afterward turned into absolute mad^ess, and
in a raging fit she quickly after died. Beards ^heatre.

XXX. In the time of Queen Elizabeth of Blessed Memory, there dwelt an old man
and woman in Honey^ne, near Cheapside, the least of them 70 years of Age, who
lived privately without any Servants, and having early means coming in, were
thought by the Neighbors ^o be rich, their house being likewise very neat, and
well ^urnished for People of their condition, which some ^illains having notice
of, they procured a false Key to their House, and entering at midnight,
murdered the two ^ld People asleep in their Beds, and then broke open their
Chests, and carried away what they were able, and ^fterwards shut the doors
upon the dead bodies; the ^ext day neither of them being seen by their
Neigh^ours, as they daily were, they began to suspect a little, ^ut the second
day when they found the door to con^nue shut, neither heard any noise in the
house, they ^eat at the door, and receiving no answer, sent for an Officer, who
broke open the door, and found in the first Room all things out of order, and
going up stairs, the Trunks and Chests were broke open; but looking toward the
Bed, they discovered the Man and his Wife miserably murdered; upon which great
search was made, and many taken upon suspicion, but nothing could be proved
against them; at length a poor Vagabond wretch was seized on, who being
examined, could give no good account of himself, and being observed to haunt
thereabout two or three days before, he was upon those presumptions committed
to Newgate, and the next Sessions arraigned, and for want of making a discreet
defense, was condemned, and hanged for this supposed murder; but the
Malefactor indeed, after that horrid Fact, escaped in the Low Countries, where
he set up a Trade, and got a great deal of money, so that he was very
considerable in the place where he lived; but after about twelve years
continuance there, being grown out of knowledge in his own Country, he could
not rest, nor be quiet, but he must needs visit England, and came hither for no
other business but to see London, and buy a piece of plate in Cheapside to
carry over with him; to a Goldsmith he comes, and in a shop near the Standard,
cheapens a Bowl, and whilst he was bargaining, it happened that a Gentleman was
arrested just over against Bow-Church, who drawing his Sword, ran up Cheapside,
the Sergeants and People crying, Stop him, stop him, all looking that way, the
murderer not knowing the cause of the tumult, thought they looked at him, and
that he was discovered, and so begins to run away; the People seeing him run,
they ran after him, and stopped him, asking the cause of his flight; who in great
affright, and terror of conscience said, He was the Man; they asked him what
man? He answered, The same Man that committed such a bloody murder so many
years since; Upon which he was apprehended, and committed to Newgate, arraigned
by his own Confession, condemned and hanged first on a Gibbet, and after at
Milend in Chains. Thus we see the Devil seldom, or never leaves his Ministers,
and Servants, especially in this horrid case of Murder, without shame and
vengeance. Beards Theater.

XXXI. Another strange, but true Relation, I shall instance of a young
Gentleman of a good Estate and Parentage; whose name for the sake of his worthy
Relations I shall conceal. This Gentleman being a Cambridge Scholar, and of a
great Spirit, and very stout body; could not contain himself within his
allowance, but being a Fellow Commoner, he spent much above it, so that to
preserve his credit in the Town, he having a good Horse, would many times ride
out, and take a Purse on the Highway, in which course he continued about a year
without the least suspicion; at length his quarterage not being come from his
Father, and wanting money to supply his ordinary Riots, he puts himself, into a
disguise, and riding over Newmarket Heath, he discovers a Prize, that is a
Serving man with a Cloakbag behind him, and seeing him single, he made up, and
bid him stand and deliver; the other unacquainted with that Language, answered,
He had but little money, which he was loath to part with; Then thou must fight
for it (said the Scholar;) content, says the other; they both drew, and fought
stoutly, but the honest Servingman was unhappily slain; the other being only
slightly wounded, took away his Cloakbag, and binding it behind his own Horse,
rid toward the University, and having set up his Horse in the Town, carried
the Portmantle to his Chamber, which he had no sooner opened, but he found a
Letter directed to him from his Father, signifying that he had sent him his
quarterly allowance by his own faithful Servant, whom he had lately entertained
upon the commendation of a dear Friend, wishing his Son to entertain him kindly
for his sake; which when he had read, and considered all the wicked
circumstances of this adventure, he was strangely altered, and fell into a deep
melancholy; in short the Robbery and Murder were both discovered, and the Lord
Chief Justice Popham then riding that Circuit (whose near Kinsman he was) he
was arraigned, and condemned at Cambridge Assizes, and though great
Intercession was made for his Pardon, yet none could prevail; for the Judge
forgetting all manner of Alliance, would neither commiserate his Youth, nor
want of discretion, but caused him without any respect of Persons, to be hanged
among the common Malefactors. Beards Theater.

XXXII. Johannes Pontanus, and Johannes Budeus, give a very strange account of
a malicious Servant, whom the Devil had possessed with his own cursed Spirit of
Cruelty; this Person having taken a virulent spleen against his Master for some
rough usage, was resolved to be revenged, and therefore watching his
opportunity, when the Master, and the rest of the Family were abroad, he shut
and barricado'd all the doors about the House, and then broke open the Chamber
upon his Mistress, and after he had abused, and affronted her, he bound her
hand and foot, and so left her grovelling upon the ground; then this limb of the
Devil took her three Children, the eldest not being seven years old, and
carried them up to the battlements, and when he espied his Master coming home,
he called to him, and first threw down one Child, and then another, from the
top of the House to the pavement, whereby their bodies were miserably
shattered, and dashed to pieces; and then held up the other in his arms to do
the like; at which sight the miserable Father being extremely stupefied (as
well he might) fell upon his Knees, and humbly besought the bloody Villain, To
spare the life of the third, and he would pardon him the death of the 2 former;
to which the barbarous wretch replied, There was but one way in the world for
him to redeem its life; the indulgent Father with Tears, and entreaties,
desired to know what that way was, who presently replied, That he should
instantly with his knife cut off his Nose, for there was no other ransom for
the Child: The passionate Father, who dearly tendered the safety of his Child,
having now no more left, agrees to the condition, and disfigured, and
dishonored his face according to the Covenant made betwixt them, which was no
sooner done, but this inhumane Imp of Hell fell into a loud, and scornful
laughter, at which while the Father stood amazed, he flung the Child which he
held in his Arms after the rest, and then most desperately cast himself after,
preventing a worse death, and such was the end of this arch limb of Satan, and
the fruits of malice, and revenge. Beards Theater.

XXXIII. Joanes Gygas gives this following dreadful Relation: A Noble and
Virtuous Lady had a Chambermaid of an idle and passionate disposition, and a
very ill Tongue; it happened upon some great provocation her Mistress struck
her a box on the Ear, at which she fell down, as if she had been slain, and
using many despiteful words against her Lady, told her, That blow should never
be forgot nor forgiven,; and the Devil took occasion from hence to tempt her to
accuse her Lady of Adultery; thereupon taking a fit opportunity when her Lord
was in private; she abruptly began thus, Noble Sir, Pray pardon my boldness, I
have a great secret to acquaint you with, were I assured you would not reveal
it, and thereby that punishment should fall upon me which is deserved by
others; wherewith this Crocodile wept; and her Lord being very desirous to know
what it was, vowed secrecy; I know Sir (said she) that you are satisfied, and
confident of the Modesty and Chastity of your Lady, but to my great sorrow I
speak it, she violates your Bed, and that not with a Gentleman of any fashion
or quality, but with one of the Grooms of your Stable; but I most humbly
beseech your Honor to keep it private till I make you an Eyewitness thereof:
And here she broke off abruptly, as if tears had prevented her discourse. The
Nobleman was herewith very strangely surprised, having observed nothing but
tenderness, and affectionate kindness in his Lady toward him; nor could he ever
tax her with the least wanton carriage, or lascivious glance; yet he remembered
when he went out early to Hunt, or Hauk, or survey his Parks and Grounds, he
found her many times hardly up, or ready to go to Breakfast when he came back,
and his jealousy suggested to him, that in this time this wickedness might be
committed; and growing full of thoughts, he left her. The Wench, or Devils
Agent, let slip no occasion to prosecute the mischief she had begun, and
therefore seeing her Lord coming toward his house from his sports early one
morning, and knowing her Lady was then in Bed, she ran presently to the Stable,
and told one of the Grooms, That he must run immediately into his Ladies
Chamber, for She had extraordinary business with him; the Groom hereupon runs
up, as if it had been for life and death, as indeed it proved; and finding his
Ladies door open, rushes into it, wherewith she was so extremely offended, that
she flung the Bedstaves at him, and would not let him speak: In the mean time
this wicked Woman calls her Lord, and tells him, now he may find them together;
who thereupon runs up to the Room, with his Sword drawn, and met the Groom just
coming out of the door, and with his Sword ran him through, so that without a
word he fell down dead in the place: He then enters the Chamber, and without
asking one question, or receiving any answer, ran his Sword through his Ladies
heart, as she lay in her Bed, and sent her chaste Soul into a better place: Now
as he stood leaning on his Sword, so late imbrued in the blood of two
Innocents, the Author of all this Villainy seeing the horrible slaughter, she
could keep her own devilish counsel no longer, but presently burst out into
these words; Alas! my Lord, what have I done? never was Lady more chaste or
constant to the Bed and Embraces of her Husband, than She who lies here
weltring in her own Innocent Blood; whatsoever I spoke of her was false and
untrue, and merely suggested by the Devil, in revenge of a blow She deservedly
gave me; I therefore, and only I, am the only cursed Author of these lamentable
disasters, which have been more bloody than I expected. These words being so
mournfully and passionately spoken, filled his Soul with distraction, so that
sometimes casting his Eye upon his honest and faithful Servant; and then upon
his virtuous and chaste Wife, it possessed him with a world of disturbance at
once; so that having first dispatched this wretched creature, he then fell upon
his own Sword, making up the fourth in this dismal Tragedy. Beards Theater.

XXXIV. If you would hear further of Judgments upon this crying Sin of Murder,
every Assizes and Sessions produce too too many such Presidents; I shall
therefore add a few Instances more of the wonderful Discovery of Murders,
though committed never so secretly: In the Reign of Christian the Second King
of Denmark, when about twelve of his Courtiers were making merry in a Parlour,
of a sudden there happened a quarrel amongst them (one of whom was Postmaster
to the King) and all the Lights being put out, one of them was slain with a
Dagger; when Lights were brought in, and the Body found murdered, and
breathless, the King required an Account for his dead Subject; the Nobles lay
all the guilt upon the Postmaster, who was then a great Favorite: But the
King thinking they spoke out of envy, would not believe him guilty; on the
contrary they allege, That he was the cause of that Meeting, and that there
had been a former grudge and malice between them, and that when the Lights were
brought in, he was found next to the dead body; so that they desired the dead
Corpse might be laid upon the Table, and every one singly to lay his hand upon
the naked Breast of the Person murdered, with a deep protestation that they
were innocent of the Fact; which was done accordingly in the Kings presence,
and all in course laid their hands, but no change or alteration was found in
the body: At last the Postmaster came, and first embracing his feet, kissed
them with many tears, thinking thereby, if possible, to pacify his angry
Spirit; at length coming to lay his hand upon the Breast of the dead Body, a
double Flux of Blood issued from his Wound and Nostrils, by which, finding
himself discovered, he confessed his malicious Act, and was by the ^ing
deservedly committed to the hand of the Hangman. Beards Theater.

XXXV. Another like this we find in Doctor Otho Melander, who relates of a man
that through rancour and ^atred, had for some time watched his neighbor, till
at ^st he found him in the Woods and Thickets, which he ^udging a place
convenient for such a mischief, laid vio^ent hands upon him, and murdered him,
and afterward ^scaped, without being in the least suspected; but the ^ody being
afterward brought before the Senate, and ^he Murderer not to be heard of, they
commanded one ^f his hands to be cut off, and hanged up over the Dining Table,
in the common Gaol of the Town: It happened that the Malefactor some ten years
after, was commit^ed for some small matter to that Prison, and brought unto the
same Room, and by accident, as he sat at Meat, was placed just under the Hand;
which though it was withered and dried by hanging so many years, yet now ^led
afresh, and dropped upon his Trencher; at which all ^he company being amazed, the
Jailer went presently ^o inform the Senate thereof, who sent for him, and
ex^mined him; and he being startled in his Conscience by that Divine Prodigy,
soon acknowledged himself guilty ^f that horrid Murder; and according to the
Custom of those Countries, was broke on the Wheel for the same. Beards Theater.

XXXVI. In the year 1656. A Woman in Westphalia ^eing near the time of her
Travel, went to the next Vil^age to confess her self; in her Confession she
told the Popish Priest she had newly found a Purse full of Mo^ey, and therefore
desired him that he would speak of (...) publicly, that it might be again
restored to the right ^wner; the Priest told her it was sent to her from
Heaven, and what she should reserve it to her self, and enjoy ^t; the Woman
thus informed, kept the Purse to her ^elf; in her return home she was to pass
through a Grove, unto which she was no sooner entered, but the pains of Travel
came upon her; in the mean time a Noble Person who had lost the Purse, rid up
to her, and demanded if she had not found one; she beseeches him, for the love
of God to ride to the next Village for some Women to assist her in her labor,
and that she would restor^ him the Purse he sought for; The Nobleman rid as
fast as he could to call some Women; in which time of his absence came the
wicked Priest, cuts off the Woman's head, and seizes upon the Purse; the
Nobleman returning with the Women, are witnesses of this Tragical Spectacle,
but who had done it was unknown; it was a time when the Snow lay thick upon the
ground, and finding some footsteps, he pursued them till he overtook the
Priest, whom he seized, and found the Purse about him, he tied him therefore to
the tail of his Horse, and so dragged him to the Magistrate to be punished; his
Sentence was to be thrown into a Caldron of boiling Oil, which was accordingly
executed on him. Jan. 20. 1656 Wanlys Hist. Man.

XXXVII. Luther gives a Relation of a certain Almaig^ who in traveling fell
among Thieves, who being about to cut his Throat, the poor Man espied a flight
of Crows, and said, O Crows, I take you for my witnesses, and revengers (...)
my death; about 2 or 3 days after, these murdering Thieves drinking in an Inn,
a company of Crows came, and lighted upon the top of the House, whereupon the
Thieves began to laugh, and one of them said, Look yonder are they which must
revenge his death, whom we lately slew; the Tapster over-hearing their
discourse, relates it to the Magistrate, who caused them to be apprehended, and
upon their disagreeing Speeches, and contrary Answers, urged them so far, that
they confessed the Truth, and received their deserved punishment. Wanly, Hist.
Man.

XXXVIII. Ibycus the Poet was set upon by Thieves in hope of prey, and seeing
their knives at his throat, he called to some Cranes, which he then saw flying
over his head, that they would revenge his death; these Murderers afterward
sitting in the Market place, a flock of Cranes again flew over them, upon which
one of them said, Behold the revengers (...) Ivycus;; this saying was catched
up by some present, upon which they were suspected of his murder, examined by
torture, confessed the Fact, and were executed Fitzherbert Rel. and Policies.

XLII. In the second year of King James, a strange accident happened to the
Terror of all bloody murderers; John Waters of Lower Darwen, in the County of
Lancaster, Gardner, was by reason of his Trade much absent from his Family. In
which his absence, his Wife, not without cause, was suspected of incontinency
with one Giles Haworth, of the same Town: This Giles Haworth, and Water's Wife
conspired, and contrived the Death of Waters, in this manner, they contracted
with one Ribchester, a poor man, to kill Waters, and as soon as Waters came
home, and went to bed, Giles Haworth and Water's Wife conducted the hired
Executioner to the said Waters, who seeing him so innocently laid between his
two small Children, (Twins about half an year old in bed,) repented of his
Enterprise, and totally refused to kill him, Giles Haworth, displeased at the
raint hartedness of Ribchester, takes the Ax into his own hands, and dashed out
his Brains; The murderer buried him in a Cow-house; Waters being long missing,
the Neighborhoud asked his wife for him, she denied that she knew where he was:
Thereupon, public search was made for him in all Pits round about, least he
should casually have fallen into any of them. It happened that Thomas Haworth
of that Town, was for many nights together much troubled with broken sleeps,
and dreams of the Murder, he revealed his dreams to his Wife, but she labored
to conceal them a long time: This Thomas Haworth had occasion to pass by the
house every day, where the Murder was done, and did call, and inquire for
Waters, as often as he went near the house: One day he went into the house to
ask for him, and there was a Neighbor, who said to him, It Is said Waters lies
under this Stone pointing to the Hearth-stone, to which, Tho. Haworth replied,
And I have dreamed that he is under a Stone not far distant. The Constable of
the Town being by accident there, urged Haworth to discover at large what he
had dreamed, which he accordingly did; I have (quoth he) many a time within
this eight weeks (for so long it was since the Murder) dreamed very restlesly,
that Waters was murdered, and buried under a broad stone in the Cow-house; I
have told my troubled dreams to my Wife alone, but she refuses to let me make
it known, but I am not able to conceal my dreams any longer, my sleep departs
from me, I am pressed and troubled with fearful dreams, which I cannot bear
any longer, and they increase upon me; The Constable hearing this, made search
immediately upon it, and found, as he had dreamed, the murdered body eight
weeks buried under a flat stone in the Cow-house; Ribchester, and Giles Haworth
fled, and never came again; Anne Waters the Wife being apprehended, confessed
the murder, and the former Circumstances, and was burned for the same. Webster
of Witchcraft. 296.

XLIII. About the year 1623. One Fletcher of Rascal, a Town in the North Riding
of Yorkshire, a Yeoman of a good Estate married a lusty young Woman from
Thornton Brigs, who had formerly been kind with one Ralph Raynard, who kept an
Inn, within half a mile from Rascal, in the high Road betwixt York and Thuske,
his Sister living with him; This Raynard continued in unlawful Lust with
Fletchers Wife, and not content therewith, conspired the Death of Fletcher, one
Mark Dunn being made privy, and hired to assist in the murder; which Raynard
and Dunn accomplished upon May Day, by drowning him, as they were traveling
all three together, from a Town called Huby, and acquainting the Wife with the
deed, she gave them a Sack, therein to convey his body, which they did, and
buried it in Raynards Backside, or Croft, where an old Oak had been stubbed up,
and sowed Mustardseed in the place, thereby to hide it; They then continued
their wicked course of Lust and Drunkenness, and the Neighbors did much wonder
at Fletchers absence, but his wife excused it, and said, he was only gone
aside, for fear of some writs being served upon him, and so it continued till
about July 7. after, when Raynard going to Topcliff-Fair, and setting up his
Horse in the Stable, the Spirit of Fletcher in his usual shape and habit, did
appear unto him, and said, Oh Ralph, repent, repent, for my revenge is at hand;
and ever after, until he was put in the Goal, the spirit seemed continually to
stand before him, whereby he became sad and restless, and his own Sister
over-hearing his Confession, and Relation of it to another Person, did through
fear of losing her own life, immediately reveal it to Sir William Sheffeild,
who lived in Rascal, whereupon Raynard, Dunn, and the Wife, were all three
apprehended, and sent to the Goal at York, where they were Condemned, and
Executed, near the place where Raynard lived; and Fletcher was buried; the two
men being hung up in Chains, and the woman burned under the Gallows. I have
recited this story punctually, as a thing that has been very much fixed in my
memory (being then but young) and a certain Truth, I being (with many more) an
Ear-witness of their Cofessions, and an Eyewitness of their Executions, and
likewise saw Fletcher, when he was taken up, where they had buried him in his
clothes, which were a green sustain Doublet pinkt upon white, gray Breeches,
and his walking Boots, and brass Spurs, without rowels. Webster of Witchcraft.
298.

XLIV. About the year 1632. There lived one Walker, near Chester, in the
street, who was a Yeoman of a good Estate, and a Widower; He had a young
Kinswoman to keep his house, who was by the Neighbors suspected to be with
Child, and was sent away one Evening in the dark, with one Mark Sharp a
Collier, and was not heard of nor little notice taken of her, till a long time
after, one James Graham a Miller, who lived two miles from Walkers house, being
one night alone very late in his Mill, grinding Corn, about twelve a Clock at
night the doors being shut, there stood a Woman in the midst of the floor, with
her hair hanging down all bloody, and sive large wounds in her head; he was
very much afrighted yet had the courage to ask her (after blessing himself who
she was, and what she wanted, to whom she said, I am the Spirit of such a
Woman, who lived with Walker, and being got with Child by him, he promised to
send me to a private place, where I should be well look too, till I was brought
a Bed, and well, and then should come again and keep his House, and accordingly
(said the Apparition) I was one night late sent away with on^ Mark Sharp, who
upon a Moor, (naming a place which the Miller knew ( slew me with a Pick (such
as me^ dig coals withal ( and gave me these five wounds, an^ after threw my
Body into a Coal-pit hard by, and hi^ the Pick under the bank. and his Shoes
and Stocking being bloody, he endeavored to wash them, but seein^ the blood
would not wash off, he left them there; and the Apparition) further told the
Miller, That he must be the man to reveal it, or else she must still appear,
and hau^ him. The Miller returned home very sad, and heavy, but spoke not one
word of what he had see^ yet eschew'd as much as he could to stay in the Mill
i^ the night without Company, thinking thereby t^ escape the seeing this
dreadful Apparition; But no^ withstanding, one night when it began to be dark
the Apparition met him again, and seemed very fierc^ and cruel, threatening him
that if he did not reve^ the murder, she would continually pursue and hau^ him;
Yet for all this, he still concealed it, un^^ St. Thomas Eve before Christmas;
when being soo^ after Sunset walking in his Garden, she appeare^ again, and
then so threatened and afrighted him, tha^ he promised faithfully to reveal it
the next morning. In the morning he went to a Magistrate, and discovered the
whole matter, with all the Circumstance and diligent search being made, the
Body was fou^ in a Cole-pit, with five Wounds in the Head, an^ the Pick, and
Shoes, and Stockings yet bloody, and i^ every Circumstance, as the Apparition
had related t^ the Miller: Whereupon Walker, and Mark Sha^ were both
apprehended, but would confess nothing: At the Assizes following (I think it
was at Durhan) they were arraigned, found guilty, and hanged; but I could never
hear that they confessed the Fact; It was reported, that the Apparition did
appear to the Judge, or the Foreman of the Jury, but of that I know no
certainty, There are many persons yet alive that can remember this strange
Murder, and I saw, and read the Letter that was sent to Sergeant Hutton about
it, from the Judge before whom they were tried, which makes me relate it with
the greater confidence. Webster of Witchcraft. p. 300.

XLV. A Merchant of Lucea traveling to Roan in France, was in the way murdered
by a French man, his Servant, and thrown among the Vines: As the Fact was
doing, a blind man comes by, led with a dog, as is usual, and hearing one
groan, asked who it was? The Murderer answered, That it was a sick man easing
himself: The blind man thus deluded, the Villain, with his Masters money, and
Bills of Exchange, sets up shop at Roan, in the mean time, the Merchant was
expected at Lucca, and when he came not, a Messenger was dispacht to seek him,
who after much inquiry, heard at an Inn, that six Months before, a Luquois
Merchant lodged there, and was going toward Paris; But the Messenger hearing
nothing of him there, began to suspect that he was murdered, and made his
complaint to the Parliament of Roan, who caused Inquiry to be made, if any
about that time had set up a new shop, and finding that the person aforesaid
had, they caused him to be arrested, but he upon Examination denied the Fact,
till the dead Corpse was heard of; and the blind man also hearing of this
inquiry, informed what he had heard about that place where the Corpse was found,
and what the Murderer answered, saying withal, That he knew that voice from any
others; many Prisoners therefore were ordered to speak the same words to the
blind man, together with the Murderer, but amongst them all he owned his voice;
whereupon the Villain possessed with abundance of horror confessed the Fact,
and was deservedly executed. Beards Theater.

XLVI. In Metz, a City of Lorrain, the Common Hangman in the Night, and in the
absence of the Master, got privately into the Celler of a Merchants house,
where he first slew the Maid, who was sent by her Mistress to fetch some Wine,
and then killed the Mistress likewise, who wondering at her Maids stay, came to
see the reason; This done, he fell to rifling Chests and Cabinets; The Merchant
upon his return finding the horrible Murders, and plunder of his house, with a
soul full of troubles and grief, he complains to the Senate, and when there
were diverse discourses about the Murder, the Hangman also was got among the
crowd, and muttered out such words as these, That seeing there had been
frequent brawls, and quarrels between the Merchant and his wife, there was no
doubt but he was the Author of that Tragedy in his house, and said he, were he
in my hands, I would soon make him confess it; By these, and the like words, it
came to pass, that the Merchant was cast into Prison, and being tortured in a
most cruel manner, by this wretched Hangman, he though Innocent, confessed
himself the Murderer, and so was condemned to an horrible Death, which he
suffered accordingly; Now was the Executioner secure, and seemed to be free
from all danger: When the wakeful Justice of Heaven discovered the Villainy, for
he wanting Money, had pawned a Silver Bowl to a Jew, who finding upon it the
Coat of Arms of the Merchant newly executed, sent it to the Magistrate, with
notice thereof; whereupon the Hangman was immediately cast into Prison, and
being examined how he came by the Cup, he there confessed all, as it had been
done by him, and that he was the only Murderer: Thus the Innocence of the
Merchant was discovered, and the Executioner had the due punishment of his
wickedness, Wauly Hist. Mau. p. 92.

XLVII. In 1551. A young Woman at Paris had her Brains beaten out by a Man with
a Hammer, near a Church, whither she was going to Mass at Midnight, and all her
Rings and Jewels taken from her; The Hamme being left with the Corpse, was known
to be a poor Smiths hard by; who thereupon being suspected of the Murder, was
put to such Torture, as utter^y deprived him of the use of his Limbs, whereby
to get his living, so that reduced to extreme poverty; ^he ended his life in
great misery; All this while, which was the space of twenty years, the Murderer
remained unknown, and the memory of the Murder seemed to be buried with the
dead Woman in her Grave, but mark the Justice of God. One John Fleming being in
a Village at Supper, chanced to say ^he had left his Wife at home sick, and no
body with her but a little boy; there was an old man then present, named
Monstier, and a Son in law of his, who both went immediately away that night,
and at ten in the Morning came to Flemings house, with each of them a Basket of
Cherries, and a green Goose, as if presents from the Husband; they were let in
by the boy, whom they presently murdered; yet not so, but the Woman heard his
cry, and therefore locked fast the Chamber door, and cried for help out at the
window; the Neighbors ran in, and took these two Villains, one in the Funnel
of a Chimney, and the other in a Well in the Cellar, with nothing but his Nose
above Water; These two being condemned; and brought to the place of Execution,
Monstier desired to speak with the Smiths Widow, of whom he asked forgiveness,
confessing that he had stolen his Hammer from him, wherewith he had murdered
the young Woman aforementioned: Thus the Smiths innocence was cleared up, and
the Murderer justly punished twenty years after the Commitment. Beards Theater.
p. 300.

XLVIII. At Tiguri a certain Vagabond Rogue had killed his Companion, that lay
with him in the night in a Barn, and having first removed the dead Corpse out of
sight, fled away betimes in the morning, but the Master of the Barn seeing
signs of a Murder, soon after found the dead Body; In the mean time the
Murderer was got far away, yet by the noise of Crows and Jays which followed,
and assaulted him, he was taken notice of by some Reapers then in the Field,
who were somewhat terrified at the novelty of so unusual a thing, The Murderer
for all this holds on his way, and now might he seem to be almost out of
danger, when their came such as were ordered to make pursuit after him, who
inquired of the Reapers, if any man had passed that way? who tell him, they had
seen none besides one only fellow, who as he passed, was ever and anon molested
with the Crows and Jays, that they thence did conjecture he was some Villain,
and that if they made have, they might undoubtedly take him. The Wretch was
soon after seized by them and broken upon the wheel; At his Execution, with
Sighs and Prayers, I heard him acknowledge the Providence of God, as a clear
instance of which he had recieved in so unusual a discovery of his Murder,
Montanus de Provid.

XLIX. Parthenius Treasurer to Theodobert, King of France, had traitorously
slain an especial Friend of his, called Ausanius, together with his Wife
Papianilla, and when no man suspected him thereof, he discovered himself in
this manner; as he slept in his Bed, he suddenly roared out, crying for help,
or else he perished; and being demanded what he ailed, he half asleep answered,
That his Friend Ausanius, and his Wife, whom he had murdered long before, did
now summon him to answer it before the Tribunal of God, upon this Confession he
was apprehended, and after due Examination, stoned to Death; Thus though all
Witnesses fail, the Murderers own Conscience is sufficient to betray him.
Beards Theater. p. 285.

L. Plutarch reports, that a Soldier belonging to King Pyrrhus being slain,
his Dog discovered him, for when the Dog could by no means be brought from the
dead body, but fawned upon the King, as it were, desiring his assistance; the
King commanded all his Army to pass by in good order, by two, and two, till at
length the Murderers came, and then the Dog flew upon them so fiercely, as if
he would have torn them in pieces, and turning to the King, ran again upon the
Murderers; Whereupon being apprehended, and examined, they soon confessed the
Fact, and received condign Punishment as they deserved; this we must apprehend
to be the mighty power of God, who to deter men from shedding innocent blood,
does stir up the dumb Creatures to discover this bloody sin. The same Author
reports the like, concerning the death of the Poet Hesiod, who being secretly
slain, the Murderers, though unknown to all the world, save God, and their own
Consciences, were likewise discovered by means of the Poets Dog. Beards Theater.

LI. The like we read of, two French Merchants, who traveling together through
a Wood, one of them slew the other, to get his money and buried him, but the
Dog of the murdered Merchant would not depart from the place, but filled the
Woods with howling and cries; The murderer went forward on his Journey, and the
Inhabitants near the Wood found out the dead Corpse, and also the Dog; whom they
kept, and fed, till the Fair to which people were going, was over, and the
Merchants returned again; at which time they watched the Highways, having the
Dog with them; who seeing the Murderer pass by presently fell upon him without
any provocation, as against his mortal Enemy, whereupon he was apprehended,
confessed the Fact, and was justly executed for the same. Beards Theater.

LII. The same Author mentions yet a more strange discovery of murder, as
follows; There was (says he) a young Woman near Paris, who was beloved of
two young men, one of whom, as he was going to visit his Mistress, was murdered
by the way, and buried, and having a Dog with him, he would not depart from the
Grave of his Master; At length the young man being mist by his Father and
Brethren, they diligently sought him, and at last found his Dog lying on his
Grave, who howled pitifully as soon as he saw his Masters Brother; the Grave
was opened, and the murdered body found, which was brought from thence, and
buried in another place, but the Murderer could not be found: It happened some
time after, that the Dog (in the presence of his Brethren) espied him, and
presently assaulted him with great fierceness: Upon which, the young man was
apprehended and examined, and when by no means, nor policy he could be
persuaded to confess, the Magistrate commanded that the Young man, and the Dog
should fight together; the Dog was covered with a dry skin, instead of Armor,
and the Murderer with a Spear, and a thin Linen Garment about him, and so they
both came out to fight, but behold the hand of Divine Vengeance, the Man
offering to strike at the Dog with his Spear, the Dog presently leapt at his
Face, and caught him fast by the Throat, and threw him down, whereat the wretch
amazed, cried out to the Spectators, Take pity on me, and pull off the Dog from
my Throat, and I will confess all; which being done, he confessed the cause and
manner of the murder, for which he received deserved punishment. Beards
Theater, p. 210.

LIII. Manlius in his common places says, That at Winsheim in Germany, there
was a man, who had committed diverse Murders some years before, who about Easter
bought three Calves heads, and putting them in a Net, carried them along the
Streets; As many as saw them, judged them to be men's heads, all bloody; for so
they seemed to them: Some that saw them, went, and informed the Senate, who
immediately sent Officers to apprehend him, when he was brought to the
Guild Hall, and asked where he had those men's heads, He answered, That he
bought them in the Shambles; The Butcher being sent for, said, He sold him
Calves, not Men's heads; The Senate being amassed at the thing, sent him to
Prison, where being strictly examined, he confessed the former Murders, whereof
he was guilty; and suffered for the same; When the Heads were taken out of the
Net; they were then seen to be but Calves heads. Clarks Mirror, 2 Part p. 460.

LIVE. A murderer at Tubing was betrayed by his own sighs, which were so deep
and incessant for grief not of the Fact, but of the small booty, and being
asked the question, readily acknowledged his Crime, and was Executed. Another
Murderer in Spain was discovered by the trembling of his heart, for when many
were suspected of the Murder, and denied it, the Judge caused all their Breasts
to be opened and him, in whom he felt most trembling of his heart he was
condemned, who could not deny the Fact, but presently confessed the same, and
suffered Death accordingly. Beards Theater.

LV. At Isenacum, A Young man being in love with a Maid, and not having
wherewith to maintain her used this unlawful means to accomplish his desire;
One night he killed his Landlord, and throwing his body into a Celler, took
away all his money, and then made have away, but he had not gone many steps,
when the Terror of his Concience, and the Judgment of God so stupefied him,
that he could not stir a foot further, till he was apprehended, Martin Luther,
and Melanchton were eye witnesses of this miraculous Judgment, who likewise
brought the murder to confession of his sins, and repentance for the same.
Beards Theater. p. 214.

By these Examples we see how hard it is for a Murderer to escape the Justice
of God, though the Justice of man be not sometimes able to find them out,
neither have lustful, nor lascivious Persons gone unpunished, as examples in
all Ages testify; and therefore we shall conclude this Chapter with a few
Instances among many of the dreadful Effects which Lust has produced upon
those who have been overcome thereby.

LVI. Novellus Carrarius, Lord of Pavia, of great renown for his valor, but of
great infamy for his wickedness; This Man, after many cruel murders, and bloody
Practices which he exercised in every place where he came, fell at last into
this crime, for lying at Vincentia, he fell in love with a Virgin of excellent
beauty, but more excellent Chastity, an honest Citizens Daughter, whom he
commanded her Parents to send to him, that he might have his pleasure of her,
but they more regarding the credit and modesty of their Daughter, than the
Tyrants command, refused to send her, whereupon he took her violently out of
their house, and forced her to his Lust; after which, to add cruelty to his
Villainy: he chopped her into small pieces, and sent them to her Parents in a
Basket for a present, wherewith her poor Father astonished, carried it to the
Senate, who sent it to Venice, desiring them to consider of the fact, and
revenge the cruelty; The Venetians undertaking their defense, made War upon the
Tyrant, and besieging him in his own City, took him at last Prisoner: and
hanged him with his two Sons. Beards Theater.

LVII. One principal motive of the Danes first arrival here in England, (who
afterward conquered the whole Land, and exercised horrible cruelties on the
Inhabitants) was by occasion of Lust; For Osbright a Deputy King, under the
King of the West Saxons, as he was one time traveling, went into the House of
one of his Nobles, who having a Wife of great beauty, the King dined with her,
in the absence of her Husband, and after dinner being allured by her beauty,
took her into a private Chamber, where he forcibly ravished her; the Lady was
extrearly concerned, and made woeful complaint of this outrage to her Husband at
his return; The Nobleman forthwith studies revenge, and going first to the
King, and resigned all his Lands and Offices into his hands, and then sailed
into Denmark, where he had been brought up, and had great Friends and their
making complaint to Codrinus the King, who was ready enough to entertain any
occasion of quarrel against his Land: The King presently raises a mighty Army
and sends it under the command of his two Brothers, into England, who landing
first at Holdernes in Yorkshire, burnt up the Country, and slew Men, Women,
and Children without Mercy; then marching toward York they met with wicked
Osbright himself, where he, with the most part of his Army were slain, and
destroyed; a just reward for his Villainous Act; and also one of the main causes
of the Conquest of the whole Land by the Danes. Beards Theater. P. 251.

LVIII. In the year 955. Edwin succeeded his Uncle Eldred, King of England,
this man was so shameless, and impudent, that on the very day of his
Coronation, he suddenly withdrew himself from among his Nobility, and in the
sight of several persons, openly ravished his own Kinswoman, the Wife of a
Noblemani of his Realm, for which Fact he became so odious to his Subjects and
Nobles, that they jointly rose against him, and deprived him of his Crown, when
he had reigned only four years. Lanquets Chorn.

LIX. A Nobleman of Piedmont married a Wife of mean birth and fortune, yet
notwithstanding the Honor she received by him, she shamelesly abused her Lords
Bed, by continual Adulteries with a Gentleman his Neighbor, which he having
notice of, and designing to take them in the Act, caused a Packet of Letters to
be brought him as from his Prince calling him to Court, and as if sending him
in Embassage to a Foreign Country; Having imparted these Letters to his Wife,
and providing all things necessary for his Journey, he departed with all his
Train; but at night he stays at a Castle of his own, to the Governor whereof
he discovers his misfortune and design, and being only followed by him and a
Groom of his Chamber in a dark night, they came to the Chamber where his
Adulterous Wife was in Bed with her Gallant; The Governor called at the Gate,
and told the Porter he had Letters from his Lord, which he must presently
deliver to his Lady. The Porter opens the Gate, and they all suddenly enter;
The Lord forbids the Porter to make any noise, but commanding him to light a
Torch, he presently got to his Ladies Chamber, where the governor knocking,
told an old Woman her Baud, That he had Letters from his Lord, which his Lady
must speedily answer; The Lady drunk with Lust, commanded the old Woman to open
the door, and receive the Letters; The Lord, with the two others suddenly
rushed in and presently siezed on the two Adulterers naked together; and after
some furious words he commanded his Wife, with the help of the old Baud, to
bind the Gentleman hand and foot, and afterward to hang him up upon a great
Hook, fastened into a Beam to that purpose; Then he caused the Bed to be burnt,
and commanded all the others movables to be carried away, leaving only a
little straw for this Whore and Baud to lie upon, and ordered the dead body
should remain there shut up with them, until the stink thereof had choked them,
and thus having past some few days in this miserable condition, they wrechedly
ended their lives together. Beards Theater.

LX. A Nobleman in Burgundy having in War taken a Gentleman Captive, his Wife
being a beautiful Lady, came to redeem her Husband; The Nobleman promised to
free him, if she would let him lie with her, which by the persuasion of her
Husband, she consented to; But the Adulterous Nobleman the next day cut of the
Prisoners head, and so delivered his Body to his Wife, which horrible Fact
being complained of by her to the Duke of Burgundy, he caused this Nobleman to
marry her, but before night he cut off his head, and gave her all his
Possessions. Clarks Mirror. P. 9.

LXI. In the year 1056. An Advocate of Constance extremely lusted after the
Wife of the Kings Procurator, and often enjoyed her, which the Procurator
understanding, surprising them sporting together in a Bath, and afterward
retiring to an Old Woman's house hard by, he got a sharp curry comb, and leaving
three men at the door, that none might come in, he so curried the Advocate,
that he tore out his eyes, and so miserable rent his whole body, that he dyed
within three days after. Clarks Martyr.

LXII. A Nobleman in Thuringia, being taken in Adultery with another man's Wife,
the Husband of the Adulteress laid hold of him, and bound him hand and Foot,
and then cast him into Prison, and to quench his Lust, he kept him fasting, and
the more to increase his misery, he daily set hot dishes of meat before him,
that the sight and smell might the more provoke his Appetite, In this Torment
the Letcher continued, till he gnawed off the Flesh from his own Shoulders, and
so the eleventh day after his imprisonment, he ended his wretched Life. Euther.

LXIII. It was unnatural Lust which brought down Vengeance upon Sodom and
Gomorrah, who burning with Fire from Hell, the Almighty burnt them up with
Brimstone and Fire from Heaven; and even in this last Age we find dreadful
Instances of Gods Wrath for that horrid Abomination; For in a little Treatise
lately published, called The Adventurers of Mr. T. S. an English Merchant,
taken Prisoner by the Turks of Algiers, and carried into the inland Countries
of Africa, we find this wonderful Relation, That near Tezrim, a Town in that
Country in a Meadow, where excellent Grass grows: This Gentleman saw the
perfect Stature of a man, buggering his Ass, which was so lively, that at a
little distance he thought it to be real, but when he came near, he saw they
were of perfect Stone; he inquired why the Moors or Arabs that naturally hate
all sorts of Representations, should show their skill, by making such beastly
Figures, odious to Nature, but was informed that this was never made by man,
but that some Person formerly had been turned into that Image with the Ass, in
the very moment of the Act, by the Mighty Power of God; the fleshly substance
of the Man and the Ass being changed into firm Stone, as an eternal Reproach to
Mankind, and Justification of his severe Judgments against us. he did further
search into the appearances of this Report, and found the Stone to represent,
not only the perfect shape, but also the color of every part of the Man, and
of the Beast, with the Sinews, Veins, Eyes, Mouth, in such a lively manner,
that no Artist with all his colors could express it better; so that he was
convinced of the truth of it; He endeavored to move it, but was forbid by some
of the Company, who said, some that had labored to carry from thence that
Monument of man's shameful Lust could never do it; but either their Persons or
Cattle were struck dead in the attempt upon the place; Divine Justice not
suffering that to be hid or destroyed, which was placed there for an Example;
it being necessary that the Moors should have such signal Testimonies of Gods
displeasure always before their Eyes, who are enraged to commit such filthy
Actions more frequently than other Nations; This Gentleman was likewise
informed by some of his Acquaintance who had been at Tripoly, that there is a
Prodigy of Divine Wrath and Justice, about five days Journey from that Town,
toward the South-East, amongst the Mountains called Gubel, far more remarkable
than this, an account of which was printed about Twenty Four years since, under
the Name of Sir Kenelm Digby; and many of our English protest they have seen
some pieces of it brought by the Moors to Tripoly, and heard it confidently
reported in that Town, as an undeniable Truth; Yea some of our English
Merchants have had the curiosity to go thither, and they also protest it to be
true; That in the place aforesaid, there is a whole Town full of those
Representations, that is, Stones in the shape of all manner of Creatures
belonging to a City, with the houses, Inhabitants, Beasts, Trees, Walls, and
Rooms very distinctly formed: Our People have entered into the Houses, and have
there found a Child in a Cradle of Stone, a Woman in a Bed of Stone, a man at
the door, looking lice of Stone; Camels in several Postures of Stone; Cats,
Dogs, Mice, and all that belonged to the place, of such perfect Stone, and so
well expressing the several Shapes, Postures, and Passions, in which the
Inhabitants were at that time, that no Ingraver could do the like; Some may
judge this Relation fabulous, but let them inquire of our Merchants and Traders,
who have been in Tripoly, or that Country, and they will all agree in the
Confirmation thereof; the report given by the Moors is, That this Town was once
very populous, and fruitful, as may appear by the Trees of Stone, of several
sorts of Fruits planted round about it, and in the places that retain the forms
of Gardens and Orchards, but the Inhabitants giving themselves over to all
manner of Vice, beastly Lust, and Debauchery, to the great scandal of humane
Nature, God Almighty in a moment stopped all their Actions, and turned their
Bodies into firm Stone, that future Ages might see and learn to dread his
power. At Athens there is another such like Figure; A Stone representing two
men buggering one another; I know no reason why we should doubt of the
possibility of these Relations, if we consider the Almighty power of God, by
whose influence all things subsist; and who can easily alter and change them,
as it seems good to his Divine Wisdom; Or, if we consider the necessity of such
notable Examples of Gods Justice to be perpetuated to posterity, by expressing
his displeasure in this dreadful manner to future ages, especially in this
Country, where the people are addicted to such like Villainies, which Nature it
self abhors, any one may fully satisfy himself of the Truth of these
prodigious Judgments from such as have Traveled in those places, they being
like that of Lots wife, turned into a Pillar of Salt, which some ancient
Historians do affirm to have seen remaining in their days many Hundred years
after. Adventures of T. Sp. 238.

To Conclude, innumerable are the Examples in all Ages of Divine Vengeance
against those crying sins of Cruelty, Murder, and Lust; which if men would
seriously consider, it might cause them to fear the Lord, because of the
Judgments which he executes upon those that continue in disobedience and
Rebellion against his Holy Laws, and Commandments.

CHAP VI.
Admirable Deliverances from Eminent Dangers, and deplorable Distresses both by
Sea and Land.

NOtwithstanding all these Judgments upon notorious, and impenitent Sinners;
yet it sufficiently appears, that God is always good to Isreal, even to those
of an upright heart, for as he executes his severity upon the one, so he
defends those that call upon him, in truth, and put their whole Trust and
Confidence in him, of which we may find many wonderful Instances in all Ages,
and especially at Sea; so that they have real experience of what the Psalmist
says, They that go down to the Sea in Ships, that do business in great waters,
these see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep, for he
commands, and raises the stormy wind, which lifts up the waves thereof;
They mount to the Heavens, they go down again to the depths, their Soul is
melted because of Trouble, they reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken
man, and are at their wits end, then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble,
and he brings them out of their distresses: He makes the storm a calm, so
that the waves thereof are still, then are they glad because they be quiet, so
he brings them to their desired Haven; Oh that men would praise the Lord for
his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the Children of men. Psam 107.23,
etc. And of the truth of this, I shall collect some few remarkable Relations,
as I find them in History.

I. In the year 1640, Four Christian Slaves being in a Ship of an Algier
Pirate, resolved to make their escape in a Boat, which one of them, who was a
Carpenter undertook to build, the Carpenter set himself on work, making wooden
pins, and other pieces necessary for the fastening of the Boards, whereof the
Boat was to consist; Having appointed a time for the Execution of their Design,
they took off five Boards from the Room where the Provision was kept, whereof
they used two for the bottom, two others for the sides, and the third for the
Prow or Poop, and so made up somewhat that was more like a Trough than a Boat,
their quilt served them for Tow, and having pitched the Boat well, they set it
into the water, but when they would have got into it, they found that two men
loaded it so, that being in danger of sinking, two of the four desisted from
that Enterprise, so that only two, an Englishman, and a Dutchman adventured
in it; all the tackling they had, was two Oars, and a little Sail, all their
provision, a little Bread, and fresh Water, and so they put to Sea, without
either compass, or Astrolabe; The first day, a Tempest at every wave filled
their Boat, and they were forced to go as the wind drove, they were continually
employed in casting out the water, the Sea had spoiled their bread, and they
were almost quite spent, when they were cast upon the Coasts of Barbary; There
they found a little Wood, wherewith they somewhat enlarged their Boat, but
narrowly escaping Death by the Moors, they got to Sea again: Thirst troubled
them most, for which they made some shift by the blood of some Tortoises which
they took; at last, after ten days floating up and down, they arrived upon the
Coast of Spain, at the Cape of St. Martin, betwixt Alicant, and Valentia. Those
of the Country seeing them at a distance, sent a Boat to meet them, carried
them Bread, and Wine, treated them very civilly, and found them passage for
England. Mandeslo's Travels. p. 202.

II. Horrible was that Tragedy which the Western Indies beheld in the Persons
of seven Englishmen, the Relation of it take as follows. The forementioned
seven being in St. Christophers Island, had prepared themselves for a Voyage of
one night, and had taken with them Provisions for no longer a time, but a
Tempest intercepted their return, and carried them so far off into the Sea,
that they could not return home in less than seventeen days, in which time they
were so sparing of their one nights provisions, that they made it serve them to
the fifth day, that past, they must wrestle with mere Famine, which was so much
the more grievous to them, in regard the Sun was extreme hot, and that dried up
their parched Throats, exhaling the saltness from the troubled Sea; they had
now little hope of retrieving themselves from destruction, and were therefore
forced by cruel necessity to cast Lots amongst themselves, to see whose Flesh
and Blood should satisfy the hunger and thirst of the rest, the lot fell upon
him, who first gave the Council, who was not only unafrighted at his hard hap,
but encouraged the rest, who had a kind of horror, as to what they went about;
he told them that there was no possibility of escape, unless they immediately
stayed their flying life by Humane Flesh, that for his part he was well
content, and that be thought himself happy he could serve his Friends, K:
Poland his wife and children devoured by Rats pa 118

Seamen in great distress eat one another: pa. 184

when he was dead; with such words as these he so persuaded them, that one
drawn out by Lot also, cut his Throat, of whose Carcass (I tremble to relate
it) each of them was so desirous of a piece, that it could scarcely be divided
quick enough; They fell to the flesh with eager Teeth, and sucked out the blood
into their thirsty Stomachs; One only was found amongst them, who being nearly
related to the dead person, resolved to endure all things, rather than to
pollute himself with the blood of his Friend, but the next day his famine drove
him into such a madness, that he threw himself overboard into the Sea: His
Associates would not suffer so delicate a repast as his Carcass to be so
unseasonably snatched from them; but his madness had already so vitiated his
blood, and the flesh all about the Veins, that in the whole body, there was
scarce any thing fit to eat, save only his bowels: At last it pleased God to
show them mercy in their wandering and distress, and brought their small Ship to
the Island of St. Martin, in which they were kindly received by the Dutch
Garrison, and sent back to the rest of their Friends, where they had scarce set
foot on shore, but they were accused of Murder, but inevitable necessity
pleading on their behalf, they were set free by the Magistrate. Wauly Hist.
Man. p. 638.

III. It is a story altogether lamentable, and a calamity full of astonishment
which happened about the Cape de Bona Esperanza to Manuel Sousa Governor of Diu
for the King of Portugal, and it is this. Having long enjoyed great honor and
happiness in the East Indies, he came to Cochin, not far from Calicut, where he
imbarqued himself in January 1553. in a great Ship, laden with Riches, and
about six hundred persons with him, amongst whom were his Wife, his Children,
his Servants, and Slaves, and a great Retinue to come into Portugal, but the
Ship being cast away upon the Coasts of Ethiopia, and the Sea having swallowed
up almost all within it, except the Persons who saved themselves ashore half
naked destitute of all hope to recover their losses again, having relied upon
the words of the crafty, and cruel Barbarians; they fell at last (so many of
them as yet remained alive, for the greatest part were now dead, what with
fear, famine, and other miseries) into the hands of a petty King of Ethiop, who
caused them to be disarmed, stripped, and left stark naked upon the Sands,
deprived of all necessaries, and succor; so that they that were left alive,
were half dead with hunger and thirst, overwhelmed with fear and shame, casting
their Eyes upon the ground, as Persons transformed into so many Images;
Elianor, the Wife of Garcius, an Honorable Lady, seeing the Barbarians busied
about stripping, and snatching away the clothes from her Husband, her self, her
Children, and the rest, forgetting her Dignity, and her Sex, fell upon these
Filchers with her Fist, provoking them to kill her, but in vain; They left her
stark naked upon the shore; The chaste Lady seeing her self in such a case, and
the daylight ministering to her more horror and sorrow than Death it self, she
covered her self with sand, casting abroad her hair confusedly upon her
shoulders, and over her Breasts that were naked and bare, which done, she
commanded the men that survived of her miserable company, to be gone, and shift
for themselves as they could, her self remaining in that case without stirring,
or speaking a word; if at sometimes she beheld her dear Children, the tears
would flow from her Eyes like Rivers and she sent out deep sighs and sobs: As
for Manual the Father and Husband, such an extreme sadness and grief had closed
up his heart, and his mouth, that he held his eyes along time fixed on the
Earth, as one struck with a Tunderbolt; yet at last, the care of his little
ones upon a sudden awaked him; he goes to a Forest hard by, to seek for some
food; at his return, he finds the youngest of his Chidren departed, and his
Wife, (who had been three days without eating any thing) overcome with sorrow
and tears; His child he burys with his own hands, and the next day returns to
seek again, and coming back, he finds his Wife, and his other Son dead, and
some women Servants lamenting with great cries over their poor Bodies: Having
put by the Servants, he lays himself down upon the Ground, and stretching out
the right hand of his deceased wife, he leans a while with his head upon the
some, and then calling his Servants again he hides his Wife and Child within
the Sand, without uttering a word, That done, he returns into the Forest,
where it is conjectured he was devoured by wild Beasts, for there was never any
news heard of him afterward; About six score of these miserable Travelers
having escaped diverse incredible difficulties; did at last recover a Port of
the Sea, where they found opportunity to return into Portugal, who there
declared the particular of this History, as it is here set down. Causins Holy
Court. p. 111.

IV. Admirable is the Relation of Dr. William Johnson, written by himself
concerning a deliverance at Sea, which I shall briefly epitomize in his own
words. We went aboard from Harwich, on Michaelmas day, Sept. 29. 1648. in the
William and John of Ipswich, Daniel Morgan, Master, and having a fair wind, we
set sail; I being Sea-sick, went to bed, but about four a Clock in the
afternoon, the Master of the Ship came into our Cabin with more have than he
was wont, which made me ask him whither all was well, who like a tenderhearted
man, who is loath to tell his dying Friend, that he is so near his end, replied,
all is well; yet when I saw him shift himself with such have, I rose from my
Bed, and crawled upon the Deck, where I saw a sad spectacle, the Ship having
sprung a leak, or rather a plank, was ready to sink, upon which, every man was
affrighted, one was at his Prayers, another wringing his hands, a third his
eyes shedding of tears, when he had n^ need of more salt water; but after this,
they fell to work, but were busy in doing nothing: The Masters Mate who went
to search the Leak, told (...) with a sad countenance, trembling hands,
gnashing of Teeth, a quivering Tongue, and words half spoken, That the Leak
could not be stopped, and the wate^ came in so fast upon us, that we must perish
in this moment; Upon which we presently cast out our Long boat, and shot off
eight or nine Guns to another ship, who came out with us, to come to our
relief, the with some difficulty we all got into the Boat, and Go^ be thanked,
came clear of the Ship, whose sails now lay flat upon the water, and now we
were roving we knew not whither, for the other ship came no^ to our relief,
which made us have hard thoughts o^ them without cause, for we understood that
both the Ship, and all the men perished in the same hou^ Now were we without
all hope, for it blew half storm, and we were in a small Vessel, many League
from the shore, without Compass, or provision to sustain us, being starved
likewise with cold, as well a for want of Victuals, having nothing in our Boa^
but a small Kettle which served to cast out the wate^ and three bags of pieces
of eight of three hundre^ pound Sterling, which would neither feed us, nor ke^
us warm; In this distress we went to Prayers, and it pleased God to hear us,
and sent a Ship to us, even in the moment of death, which we endeavored to
come t^ and he likewise to us, but the storm was so great, w^ could not reach
one another, though when it w^^ dark, he hung out a light, and we to let him
kno^ we were alive, ordered that when a wave took us u^ we should give a great
shout, which we did so lou^ that I believe our cry was heard to Heaven, for
(...) Gods miraculous assistance we got near the Ship, a^ soon after, all safe
into it; The next day it blew fa^ for Norway, whither we were bound, and abo^
twelve at noon we saw the Coast, which being rageing ragged, and full of Rocks,
we resolved to stay till next morning before we went in, and then sat down to
meat, and eat every heartily, being kindly entertained by the honest Norwegian;
About ten a clock at night, we laid us down to rest, after having prayed, and
set our watch, but immediately this our second Ship ran with full Sails upon a
Rock, and gave so great a Crack, as was able to awake the Most dead-asleep
among us, and the Mariners cried out, Mercy, Mercy; it pleased God, that the
Ship struck it self so fast in the cleft of a Rock, with her bow over the main
Rock, that the former part of her stood firm, but breaking in the stren, one of
the Seamen leaped from the bow of the Ship upon the Rock, with a Rope in his
hand, which was festened to one of our Masts, and held it with so stiff a hand,
that another slipped down by it, and so all our Company that escaped being Twenty
Eight in number, came safe to the Rock; I was the last that came down the Ship
that way, for in that very moment she gave way; which the Master percieving,
who was still aboard, made lamentable moan to us, to help him, which we
endeavored to the utmost, but the Ship brake, and sunk immediately; there was
this good man, and four of the Marrinners drowned; I saw the Master, with a
light in his hand fall into the Sea, the saddest sight that I ever yet beheld
in this world, and that which pierced my very Soul, to see him, that saved our
Lives, lose his own: Now were we in the dark, upon the Rock, but knew not
where, our feet being cut upon the sharp stones, at length, we happened in a
hole in the Rock, which was a warm shelter against the wind; and when morning
came, we could see no Land, only had a glimpse of the Coast of Norway at a
great distance; We grew hungry, but had nothing to fish with, but our Arms,
with which, we drew up some small Muscles, and they we eat heartily, but we
burnt with thirst, and I would have given all I had for a draught of
fresh water, which would have been more welcome, than the Gold of Ophir, though
nothing is so mean in our esteem; but we were forced to drink Salt Water which
increased our thirst; we now saw a Ship coming toward us with full sails, and
we waved our hats to them, but they went off, and never came near us; we betook
our selves to our old Remedy, Prayers, the Danes first singing one of Luthers
Psalms, fell to their Prayers, and I prayed as long as I was able to speak, and
then laid my self down on the Rock, thinking I should rise no more in this
world, But I overheard one of the Seamen say, Let us make a Raft, and venture
to Sea, I had rather be drowned, than lie here and be starved; They all
presently concluded of it though dangerous, and the Sea having fallen from the
Rock, had left our Sails, Mast, and Anchors, with part of the Ship thereon,
wherewith thy soon made a slight boat, and it being a great calm, the Raft pas^
through the Breakers with four men in it, and had it touched only on them, they
would have rent it in pieces, however through Gods goodness, they arrived safe
in Norway, and returned with several Boats so that we came all of us once more
to Land; and were entertained at an honest Lutheran Parsons house, where after
we had continued for some days, with little money and much thanks as we parted,
and came to Frederic^ Stadt, where the People run after us in the Street and
with compassionate Eyes gave us what we wanted without asking, from thence we
went to Ostersontd^ and there went abroad an English Ship, we had no^ been
above two, or three hours at Sea, but there was a sad destraction, the
Mariners again crying for Mercy, Mercy, for we had almost fallen foul on a
Rock under Water, which we did not spy till we were upon it, but by the mercy
of God, we sailed close by it^ and yet escaped it, the least touch of it had
been ou^ ruin; about noon we came clear of all the Rocks on the Coast of
Norway, and were sailing for England with a fair Gale of Wind, but in this
prosperity another sad accident befell us, this third Ship sprang a leak, and
began to swim within, as well as without, and we had no way to relieve our
selves, but by, pumping (for the leak could not be found) which we did day and
night, for four or five days together, when it pleased God, we came safe,
though in a great fleal of danger, because of our rotten Ship, into Yarmouth
Road, for the wind being very high, had like to have driven us upon a Scotch
Vessel, who cried out as well as we, but we happily mist him, and so safely
arrived in Yarmouth Town, through the wonderful mercy of God. Deus Nobiscum.

V. Two Ships were bound for Newfound-Land, from the west of England, but by
stress of weather were parted; some few days after, one of the Ships in fair
weather sprung a leak, and foundred in the Sea, where every Soul perished,
except one Old man, who having lasht himself on the main hatch, committed
himself to the mercy of God, and the Sea, where he floated three days, and
three nights, in which time about the middle of the second day, the Devil in
the shape of a Mermaid starts up before him, and bid him be of good heart, for
if he would but make a contract with him, he would promise to deliver him in
twenty Four hours: The Old man being sensible it was the Devil, looking him in
the face, said, Ah Satan! if thou can Prophecy deliverance for me, know, my
God, in whom I trust, will deliver me without thy help, but however know, I
will not comply with thy wiles, therefore avoid Satan, avoid, upon which, he
^mmediately vanished, and appeared no more to him; It happened that the other
Ships being at the same time in the same latitude and danger, the Cabin boy
dreamed that night, that such a Ship was cast away thereabout, and all the men
lost, except this Old Man (which he named) who was saved upon a piece of the
Ship, and floating in the Sea; which dream the Boy in the moming confidently
tells to his Master, and the Company, and affirmed that it must needs be true,
and was so impatient, that he recieved some checks from his Master, yet he
continued restless, running up sometimes to the fore to^ Mast head, and then to
the main top Mast head looking abroad; and at last cried out aloud. Alo^^
there, I see him, I see him under our Lee-bow; He thu^ confidently affirming
it, some of the men stepped up and espied some thing, at a distance no bigger
than a Crow in appearance, floating, and advised the Master thereof, who
presently commanded the helm to be borne up, and stood away to it, and when
they came near, found it to be the Old man, as the Boy had said and hoisting
out their Boat, they took him in, who was then speechless, and almost spent,
but by the care of the Master and Surgeon, he with God blessing recovered,
and gave this Account of his misfortune, and wonderful deliverance by word of
Mouth^ and the Ship wherein he was, landed him safe in Newfound-Land,
Remarkable Sea Deliverances.

VI. Richard Clark of weymouth in Dorset-shire, a skilful Pilot, was Master of
the ship, called the Delight, which in 1583, went with Sir Humphrey Gilbert for
the discovery of Norembega; It happened that without any neglect or fault of
his, the Ship struck on the ground, and was cast away Aug 29. the same year. Of
those that escaped Shipwreck, sixteen got into a small Boat of a Tun and a
half, and had but one Oar to work withal: They were seventy Leagues from Land,
and the weather so foul, that is was not possible for a Ship to brook half a
course o^ Sail. The Boat being overburdened, one of them Mr. Hadley made a
motion to cast Lots, that those four who drew the shortest, should be cast
overboard, provided if one Lot fell on the Master, h^ notwithstanding should be
preserved, in whom a^^ their safety was concerned: The Master disavowed the
acceptance of any such Privilege, replying, The would live and die together: On
the fifth day, M^ Hadley (who first motioned Lot-drawing) and another. Person
dyed, whereby our Boat was somewhat alighted; Five days and nights together
they saw the Sun and Stars but once, so that they only kept up their Boat with
their single Oar, as the Sea did drive ^t; They continued four days without
sustenance, save what the Weeds which swam in the Sea, and the Salt Water did
afford: on the Seventh day, about Eleven a Clock, they had sight of New
found-Land, and about Three, they came to the Southbart thereof: All the time
of their being at Sea, the wind kept continually South, if it had shifted to
any other point, they had never come to Land, but it turned to the North within
half an hour after their Landing. Being all come to shore, they kneeled down,
and gave God praise for their Miraculous De^iverance; There they remained Three
days, and Three nights, making a plentiful repast upon Ber^les, and wild Pease;
After five days rowing along ^he shore, they happened of a Spanish Ship of St.
John de Luz, who courteously brought them home to Biscay, where the Visitors of
the Spanish Inquisition ^ame aboard the Ship and put them upon Examina^ion, but
by the Masters favor, and some general ^nswers, they escaped for the present,
but fearing a ^econd search, they shifted for themselves, and going Twelve
miles by night, got into France, and so safely ^rrived in England, Hackluits
Voyages. Vol. 3.

VII. The Admiral of St. Jago set out of Portugal (...) 1585. with a good
speedy wind, she came Sailing ^etwixt the Island of St. Lawrence, and the firm
Land, that runs by the Coast of Mosambique, in which ^assage there are certain
shallows, called the India, which are of coral, very sharp, black, white and
^reen, and very dangerous; The Pilot took the ^eight, and made his account they
were past the ^hallows, and though many of the Sailors, and others a the Ship
were against him, yet he commanded the Master to make all the Sail he could to
Mosambique, without any let, or stay; They Sailed in that man^er till
Midnight, and then fell upon the Shallows, being of clear white Coral, and so
sharp, that with the force of wind and water, that drove the ship upon them,
the Ship was cut in two pieces, as if it had been sawn asunder, so that the
Keel, and two Oarlops lay still upon the ground, and the upper part being
driven somewhat further, at the last stuck fast the Mast being also broken;
whereupon there was a mighty, and lamentable cry, for there were no less than
Five Hundred Persons in the Ship; The Admiral Ferdinando de Mendoza, the
Master, the Pilot and Ten or Twelve more presently entered into the small Boat,
defending it with their drawn swords that no more should enter, saying, They
would go see i^ there were any dry place in the Shallows, whereon they might
work to make a Boat of the pieces of the broken Ship^ therein to sail unto the
shore, and so to save their lives which put them that were left behind in some
small comfort; But when they had rowed about, and found no dry place, they
durst not return again to the Ship, least their Boat should have been
overladen; they therefore rowed toward Land, having about Twelve boxes of
Marmalade, with a Pipe of Wine and some Biskets which in haste they had thrown
into the Boat, After they had been seventeen days at Sea, and had endured great
hunger, thirst, and labour^ they got to Land, and saved themselves; the rest
who stayed in the Ship, seeing the Boat not come again, it may be supposed in
what trouble they were* At last, one side of the upper part of the Ship,
between both the upper Oar-lops, where the Boat lay, burst out, and the Boat
being half burst, began to come forth; but because there was small hope, no man
laid hand thereon, but every man sat looking one upon another; At last, an
Italian called Cyprian Cantarido rose up, and taking courage, said, Why are you
thus discouraged; let us seek to help our selves, and try, if there be any
remedy to save our lives; wherewith he presently leaped into the Boat, with an
Instrument in his hand, and began to make it clean, wherea^ others took heart,
so that there leapt at least Fourscore and Ten Persons into it, and many hung
by the hands upon the Boat, swimming after it, but to prevent their sinking the
Boat, those in it were forced to cut off the Fingers, Hands, and Arms of such
as held thereon, and let them fall into the Sea, and many others they threw
overboard, which done, they set forward, committing themselves to God, being
followed with the most doleful and lamentable noise, from those they left in
the Ship; In this manner having rowed certain days, and having but small store
of Victuals, because there were so many in the Boat, which was likewise very
leaky, and ready to sink, and not likely to hold out long; They hereupon agreed
to chose a Captain, and that they would absolutely obey his commands; they
chose a Gentleman, a Mesticho of India, who presently commanded to throw some
of them overboard, as the Lot directed, amongst these was a Carpenter, who not
long before had helped to dress the Boat, who desired them to give him a piece
of marmalade, and a Cup of Wine, after which, he willingly suffered himself to
be thrown into the Sea, and was drowned; In this misery and distress they
continued Twenty days, and then got to Land, where they found the Admiral, and
those that were in the other Boat; but having escaped this danger, those in the
Boat fell into another, for they had no sooner set foot on shore, but they were
robbed by the Moors of all their Clothes, so that they left not so much as a
rag upon their Bodies: In the end, having endured great hunger, and others
miseries, they came to a place, where they found a Factor of the Captain of
Soffola, and Mosambique, and from thence they went to India, where (says
Linschoten) I knew many of them, though some dy^ed before they got to
Mosambique; Of those that staid in the Ship, some took boards, and pieces of
wood, and bound together every Man what he could catch, all hoping to save
their lives, but there came only two men of them all ashore, so that of all the
Five Hundred, there were but Threescore Persons saved, all the rest, (among
whom were Fifty Women, some Jesuits and Friars) were all drowned in the Ship,
and all this through the wilfulness and pride of a Pilot, Linschotens Voyages.

VIII. One Gregory Crow, who dwelt at Malden in Essex, was going in (...) Boat
with his man and boy to fetch Fullers Earth, but by the way meeting with a
storm, his Boat was driven upon a bank of Sand, and there sunk; the men were
glad to hang upon the Mast, but poor Crow seeing his New Testament in the
water, which he highly prized, caught it up, and put it into his Bosom: The
Tide being gone, they were left upon the Sand, at least Ten miles from Land: In
this great distress they beseeched God to find out a way for their deliverance,
for within half an hour it would be flood, but in this little time before, they
found a Chest, wherein was Five Pounds, Six Shillings, Eight Pence; which
honest Crow cast it into the Sea again, saying, if God will please to save our
lives, he will provide us a little food, and so they went again up to the Mast,
where they to Admiration, hung by the Arms and Legs for Ten hours together,
only the Boy was weary, that beaten with the Waves, he fell off, and was
drowned; Now their fears increase upon them, and they know not what to do; but
Crow advises his Man to cut down the Mast, and when the flood came again, to
sit upon it, and so says he, it may please God to drive us to some Ship; This
Counsel was taken, they commit themselves to God upon this Mast, and thus
continued Tuesday night, Wednesday, and Wednesday night, in which time the Man
was so tired with Hunger, Watching, and Cold, that he died: Now was Crow left
alone in this sad and deplorable condition, who prayed more earnestly for
succor and relief, but durst not sleep, least the Sea should beat him off the
Mast, and when this distressed Creature was almost spent, his flesh sodden with
Seawater, and his Eyes almost closed up with Salt: In this Extremity,
Providence presents a Ship going for Antwerp, and the Wind not being
favorable, they were driven out of the way thither, and espying something afar
off in the Sea, they supposed it to be a Fisher-boy, and steered from it; Crow
seeing this, held up his Cap, and shaked it over his head, whereby at lenght
they were moved to go to him, and so they took him in; when he came into the
Ship, though he was half dead, yet being careful of his New Testament, he
plucked it out of his Bosom, and gave it to some to dry; They in the Ship were
careful of him, and with great difficulty recovered him, and carried him with
them to Antwerp, where the fame of his being so miraculously preserved, drew
many to see him, and relieve him with necessarys, Acts and Monuments.

IX. In the year 1630. May 1. The Moscovy Merchants of London sent a Ship,
called the Salutation for Greenland, which arrived there in safety, June 11.
following, together with two other Ships, all which were commanded by Captain
William Goodler: The Captains Ship stayed at Belsound, The Salutation at the
Foreland, the Captain having killed store of Whales, made a quick Voyage, and
sent for the Salutation to take in part of her Train-Oyl; in the way meeting
with cross winds, the Master sent Eight of his Men ashore to kill some Venison,
who taking with them a brace of Dogs, a Firelock, two Lances, and a Tinder-box
went on shore, and killed fourteen good Dear; night coming on, being weary,
they went to rest, intending next day to end their hunting, and return to their
Ship; But the next day proved foggy, and much Ice being betwixt the shore and
the Ship, the Ship was fain to stand so far off into the Sea, that they lost
sight of her; They hunted on to Green Harbor, and there they found that the
Ship was departed; they made all speed possible with their Shallop to Belsound
to their Captain, and for fear of delay, heaved their Venison overboard, but
having no compass, they wandered up and down so long, till the Ships were
departed; This filled them with fear and astonishment, knowing that neither
Christian nor Heathen had ever Inhabited those desolate Climates, and they had
heard, that the Moscovy Merchants had once procured the reprieve of several
Malefactors condemned to Death here in England, to whom they promised pardon,
with rewards, and Provision of all things necessary, if they would stay one
winter there, but when they came thither and took a view of the desolatness of
the place, they chose rather to return for England, and satifie the Law with
the loss of their Lives, than to stay in so desolate and darksome a Country;
They remembered also a more terrible instance of Nine able men left there
formerly by the same Master, who now left them, that all dyed miserably upon
the place, and whose Bodies were wretchedly disfigured by the Bears and Foxes;
All which made them stand like men amazed, looking one upon another; and that
which increased their horror was, their want of all necessary provisions, no
Clothes for Shift, or Warmth; no Food, no House for Shelter; After a while,
considering the danger of delay in Extremity, they advised upon the most likely
course for their Preservation; and resolved to go to Green Harbor, to hunt for
Venison, where in their going, stay, and return, they killed nineteen Deer, and
four Bears, with which they laded their Shallop, and finding another old
Shallop left there, they laded it with the Greaves and Fritters of Whales that
had been boiled there that year, and so took their way to Belsound to their
Tent, where they intended to winter; In the way of their Passage, they had like
to have lost all their Provision, but saved it by a desperate Remedy, running
into the high-wrought Sea, and by force drawing their Shallops to the shore;
This done, they arrived at Belsound, where they took out their Provision,
considered their Tent, and with part of the Materials of a Tent thereby; pieces
of old Caske, and old Shallops (as'tis usual) they made up their House and
Cabin, where they lodged two, and two; and with Mavelous Industry, provided
themselves with Fire, Wood, and Shelter against the Extremity of the cold,
their Beds were the Deer-skins dried; Having thus fitted every thing in the
best manner they could, on the Twelfth of September looking out into the Sound,
they espied two Sea-Horses lying asleep on a piece of Ice, whereupon hasting to
them, with an old Harping Iron they slew them both, then flead, roasted, and
eat them, not long after they killed another, but darkness and cold increasing
upon them, and they viewing their Provision, found it too small by half,
whereupon they agreed to eat one reasonable meal a day, and to fast Wednesdays
and Fridays, except from the Greaves of the Whale, a loathsome meat, at which
Diet they continued three Months; To repair their clothes and shoes, they made
thread of Rope-yearn, and needles of Whalebone; Oct. 10. the night being grown
very long, all the Sea was frozen over, and then grief and fear began to work
upon them, but they prayed to God for strenght, and patience in their miseries,
and by his assistance cheered up themselves to use the best means for their
Preservation; Then for keeping their Venison, and saving their firing, they
thought best to roast every day half a Deer, which they stowed in Hogsheads,
leaving as much ^aw as would serve every Lord's Day a quarter: Here another
Trial of their Patience befell them; their Whale-Fritters, which had been
drenched in the Salt-waters, and lay close together, were grown moldy, and
spoiled, and again surveying their Bear and Venison, they found it would not
afford them Five Meals a week, so they were fain to out off one meal more, and
for Three Months after, they fed four days each week upon the moldy Fritters,
and the other Three they feasted on Bear, and Venison; Besides the want of
Meat, they began to want Light, no Sun appearing from the Fourteenth Fourteenth
of October, till the Third of February, but the Moon shined as here in England;
against this trouble, having found a sheet of Lead in the Coopers Tent; with
Rope-yarn and Oil they made a Lamp, which they kept continually burning to
their great comfort: In the beginning of January, as the days began to
lengthen, the Cold strengthened to that Extremity, that it raised Blisters on
their Flesh; and if at any time they touched Iron, it would stick to their
Fingers like Bird-lime; if they went out to fetch water, it would so pinch
them, that they were sore, as if they had been beaten? They drank nothing but
Snow-water from the Tenth of January, till the Twentieth of May, which they
melted with hot Irons; The latter end of January they found their food would
last but six weeks longer, but they had recourse to God for supply, and looking
out on a bright day, they saw a great She Bear with her Cub, coming toward the
Tent, her they slew with their Lances, the Cub escaped, they drew her into the
Tent, and this Bear served them Twenty days: In March the days so lengthened,
that the Fowl and Foxes came abroad, of which Foxes, they by Traps caught
fifty, and sixty Fowls as big as Pigeons, and killed Seven more Bears, so that
now eating two, or three meals a day, their strength was much increased; The
first of May the Weather grew Warmer, so that they went out to seek Provision;
In this Month there came two Ships from Hull into the Sound, who knowing some
men had been left there the year before, and being desirous to be satisfied
whither they were dead, or a live, the Master manned a Shalop to go as near the
shore as they could, and so over the Ice to the Tent, when these men came near
the Tent, they halled them with the usual word of the Sea, crying Hey, To
which, one of them in the Tent answered again, Ho, which sudden answer almost
amazed them all, but percieving them to be the very men left there, with joyful
hearts they embraced one another; The men left their Tent, and went with them
to their Ship, where they stayed till the London Fleet came, which was Three
days after; They went aboard the Admiral, Captain Goodler, who made them very
welcome, gave them Apparel, to the value of Twenty Pounds, and after Fourteen
days refreshment, they grew all perfectly well, thus they continued in the
Fleet till the Twentieth of August, when they set Sail, and at last came safe
into the River of Thames, and the Moscovy Merchants dealt well by them. The
names of these Eight men were William Fakely Gunner, Edward Pelham Gunners
Mate, that wrote this story; John Wise, and Robert Goodfellow Seamen; Thomas
Airs Whale-cutter, Henry Bett Cooper, John Daws, and Richard Kellet Land-men,
Stows Chronicle. p, 1017.

X. In the year 1636. A Ship being at New found-Land a fishing somewhat late in
the year, the Ice came upon them in great pieces, and being ready to hoise Sail
to return home, they sent out Six men in the Boat to weigh their Anchor, which
whilst they were doing, a great flake of Ice comes between them and their Ship,
and carries them a drift, so that by all the means they and the Vessel could
use, they could not recover their Ship again, whereby they were exposed to
inevitable ruin, having neither Food, nor any accommodation to keep them warm;
after they had continued thus three days and three nights, they began to be
hunger-starved, and accounting themselves all dead men, they consulted one with
another what course to take, at last, though with great regret and grief, they
resolve one of them must die, to become food for the rest, each Person desired
to die first, to be freed from that Torment they were in, so that they were
forced to determine it by Lot; He upon whom the Lot fell, desired to go to end
of the Boat, there to recommend his Soul to God by Prayer, before he dyed; the
rest being in a deep Agony, upon apprehension of shedding the Blood of one of
their Comrades; But while they were sitting together, lamenting, and imploring
Gods favor to prevent such a Fact; even as they wished and desired it
happened; for the Person separated by Lot to be killed, dyed upon the place
where he was praying, which occasioned great Joy to them in this their
deplorable condition, that hereby they were prevented from taking away his
Life, which they so much dreaded; And judging this a good Omen, they proceeded
to satisfy their hungers upon the dead Body; the Boat was still adrift, not
frozen up, so that by the time their food was spent, they were brought ashore
many. Leagues to the Northward of New England, where the Five landed alive, and
the poor Barbarians pitying their Condition, helped them all they could, three
of them dyed soon after, with the misery they had sufferred, the other two made
a shift to get to New England, and so at last by Gods mercy came to their
Habitations in the West of England, having both lost their Heels, with the
Extremity of the cold in the Boat. Remark. Sea Deliverances.

XI. Great were the Dangers, and Wonderful the Deliverances of William Okeley
and his Company, the Relation of which from his own Book (says Mr. Wanly) I
have thus contracted; In the Year 1639. We took Ship at Gravesend, in the Mary
of London, Mr. Boarder Master, bound for the Isle of Providence, in the
West Indies, Five Weeks we lay in the Downs, waiting for a wind, and then we
set Sail, and came to Anchor near the Isle of Wight, but by this time all the
Beer in our Ship stunk, and we were forced to throw it overboard, and so take
in Vinegar to mix with water for our Voyage; The next Lords day we set Sail
again, and coming betvveen the Island, and the main Land, we stuck fast in
the Sands, but the Tide coming in, heaved us off: The Sixth day after our
setting Sail from the Isle of Wight, we discovered Three Turks men of War,
who chased us, and at break of day boarded, and took us; having kept us close
Prisoners a Sea, at the end of five or six Weeks, they brought us to Algiers,
where I was sold for a Slave the first Market day, to a Patron, who told me, I
must allow him two Dollars a Month, and live ashore where I would, and get it
where I could; though I knew not where to levy the least Mite of it: Wandering
up and down, I met with an Englishman in his little Shop, who traded with
Tobacco, and a few other things; I became his Partner with a little money I had
reserved, and a small Modicum my Patron had allowed me for my stock: Here I got
Money, and hired a Cellar, were I laid up some other of my Goods; when weary of
my Slavery, I formed a design for my Liberty, and communicated it to John
Anthony Carpenter, William Adams Brick-layer, John Jephs Seaman John a
Carpenter, and two others, men of able Bodies, and useful in the intended
project, which was to contrive the Model of a Boat, which being formed in
parcels, and afterward put together, might be the means of our escape: They
approved the Proposal, and in my Cellar we began our work; we provided first a
piece of Timber of Twelve foot long to make the Keel, but because it was
impossible to convey it of that length out of the City, but it must be seen and
suspected; we therefore cut it in two pieces, and fitted it for jointing just
at the middle, and then we provided Ribs, after which we made the Boat
water-tite, and because Boards would require much hammering, and that noise was
like to betray us, we bought as much strong Canvas as would cover our Boat
twice over upon the Unequal of the Carine; We provided also as much Pitch, Tar,
and Tallow, as would serve to make it a kind of Tarpawling Cerecloth to swaddle
the Naked Body of our Infant Boat; of two Pipestaves sawed at the Corners, we
made two things to serve for Oars, and for our provision, we had a little
Bread, and two Leather Bottles full of fresh water, we also remembered to buy as
much Canwas was as would serve for a sail; we carried out these in parts and
parcels fitted them together in the Valley about half a mile from the Sea,
whither Four of our Company carried the Boat on their Shoulders, and the rest
followed them, at the Seaside we stripped, put our clothes into the Boat, and
carried it and them as far into the Sea as we could wade, and then all seven
got into the Boat, but finding she was overladen, two of the Seamen were
content to stay on shore; Having bid them farewell, we anched out June 30. 1644.
The Bill of Lading was John Anthony, William Adams, John Jephs, John the
Carpenter, and William Okeley; Four of us wrought continually at the Oar, the
Fifth was to free the Boat of that water, which by degrees leaked through our
Canvas; our bread was soon spoiled with soaking in the Saltwater; our
Fresh Water stunck of the Tanned Skins and Owze, yet we complained not; Three
days with good Husbandry our bread lasted us, but then pale famine stared us in
the face, water indeed we might have, but it must be Salt, out of the Sea, or
that which had been strained through our own Bodies, and that we chose of the
two; but we must not have that after a while, unless we would accept of the
other first; and the misery was, that did not assuage our thirst, but increase
it; The Wind too for sometime was full against us, but God rebuked it, and made
it our Friend; a second inconvenience was, that our Labor was without
intermission; and a third, the Extremity of the heat by day, the season raging
hot, the beginning of July, and we wanted Fresh Water to cool the heat; our
labor made it insupportable to our Bodies, and our little hope made it as
grievous to our Souls, one help we had, a poor one, he that emptied the Boat,
threw the water on the Bodies of the other to cool them, but our Bodies thus
scorched and cooled, rose up in Blisters all over; Great pain we felt, great
dangers we were in, great miseries we endured, great wants we were under, and
had nothing but a little hope, food, and strength; If any ask by what
directions we steered our course to Mayorck, whither we designed to go; for the
day a Pocket Dial did supply the place of a Compass, by night the Stars when
they appeared, and when not, we guessed our way by the Motions of the Clouds;
Four days and nights were we in this woeful plight, on the fifth all hope, that
we should be saved, was perished, so that we let off our Labor, because we had
no strenght left, only we emptied the Boat of water; But then God sent us some
relief, for as we lay hulling up and down, we dicovered a Tortoise, not far
from us asleep in the Sea, had Drake discovered the Spanish Fleet, he could not
have more rejoiced, we took up our Oars, silently rowed to our prey, took it
into the Boat with great Triumph, we cut off her head, and let her bleed into a
pot, we drank the Blood, eat the Liver, and sucked the Flesh: It wonderfully
refreshed our Spirits, and we picked up some crumbs of hope: About Noon we
thought we discovered Land, it is impossible to express the joy of our raised
Souls at this apprehension, we wrought hard, and after further labor were
fully satisfied that it was Land, and proved to be Mayorck, which we kept
within sight of all day: July 6. about 10 at night we came under the Island,
and crept as near the shore as we could, and durst, till we found a convenient
place, where we might thrust in our Weather-beaten Boat; when we were come to
Land, we were not insensible of our deliverance; but, though we had escaped the
Sea, we might die at Land; we had no food since we eat the Liver, and drank the
blood of the Tortoise; therefore John Anthony and my self were sent out to
scout abroad for fresh water, because we spak some Spanish; we came to a
Watchtower of the Spaniards, spoke to them on the Watch, told them our
condition, earnestly begged some fresh water, and some Bread, he threw us down
an old moldy Cake; but so long as it was a Cake, hunger did not consider its
mouldiness; then he directed us to fresh water which was hard by; we stood not
telling of storys, we remembered our Brethern left with our Boat, and observing
the Sentinels Directions, came to a Well, where there was a Pot with strings to
draw with, we drank a little water, and eat a bit of our Cake, but the Passage
was so disused, that we had much ado to force our Throats to relieve our
clamorous Stomachs; we return to our Boat, acquaint them with the good sucsess
of our Embassy, and all prepare to make to the Well; so tying our Boat as fast
as we could to the shore, we left her to Mercy: Now we are at the well, which
has water therein, and we have something to draw, but God must give us a
Throat to swallow; for William Adams attempting to drink, after many Essays,
was not able to swallow it, but still the water returned, so that he sunk down
to the ground faintly saying I am a dead Man, but after much striving he took a
little, So refreshed with our Cake and water, we lay by the Well side, till the
morning; When it was clear day, we again went to the Watchman, entreating him
to direct us the ready way to the next House or Town, where we might find
relief; He civily pointed us to one about two miles off, and long it was, e're
our blistring feet could overcome the tediousness of that little way; when we
came thither, the honest Farmer moved with our Relation, sent us Bread, and
Water, and Olives, and seeing us thankful Beggars, enlarged his civility to us,
called us into his house, and gave us good warm Bean pottage, which seemed to
me the most pleasant food that ever I eat in my life; Thence we advanced to the
City of Mayork, about Ten miles from that place, that night we lay by a Well
side, and in the morning we entered the Suburbs; The Vice Roy was informed of
us, and we were commanded to appear before him, who after he had examined us,
and heard our Story, ordered we should be maintained at his own Cost, till we
could have passage to our own Country; But our English Ships seldom trading
thither, we petitioned the Vice Roy for Passage in the King of Spains Galleys,
which were in the Road bound for Alicant, which he graciously granted us; After
some other troubles, we met with contrary winds, and it was five weeks e're we
could reach the Downs, where we arrived in Sept. 1644. The Commander of the
Ship was Captain Smith of Rotherhith, Mr. Tho. Saunders, my Wives Brother being
in Mayork, not long after we came from thence, saw our Boat hung up for a
Monument upon the side of the great Church there; and Mr. Robert Hales was
there 1671, and assures me, that he saw the naked Ribs and Skeleton of it then
hanging in the same place. Wanly Hist. Man. p. 642.

XII. A Ship of New England going from Boston, to some other parts of America,
was through the continuance of contrary winds kept long at Sea, so that they
were in very great straights for want of Provision, and seeing they could not
hope for any relief from the Earth, nor the Sea, they apply themselves to
Heaven in humble and hearty Prayers, but no calm ensuing, one of them made this
sorrowful Motion, that they should cast Lots which of them should die first, to
satisfy the ravenous Hunger of the rest; after many a sad debate, they came to
a result, the Lot is cast, and one of the Company is taken, but where is the
Executioner to be found to act this Office upon a poor innocent? It is Death
now to them to think who shall act this bloody part in the Tragedy; But before
they fall upon this involuntary Execution, they once more went unto their
Prayers, and while they were calling upon God, he answered them, for there
leapt a mighty Fish into the Boat, which was a double joy to them, not only in
relieving their miserable hunger, which no doubt made them quick Cooks, but
because they looked upon it to be sent from God, and was a Token of their
deliverance; But alas the Fish is soon eaten, and their former Exigencies come
upon them, which sunk their Spirits in despair, for they know not of another
Morsel: To Lots they go again the second time, which falls upon another Person,
but still none can be found to sacrifice him; they again send their Prayers to
Heaven, with all manner of fervency, when behold a second answer from above; A
great Bird lights, and fixes it self upon the Mast, which one of the Company
espies, and up he goes, and there she stands, till he took her with his hand by
the Wing; this was Life from the Dead a second time, and they feasted
themselves herewith, as hoping this second Providence was a forerunner of
their complete deliverance; but they have still the same disappointments, they
can see no Land, they know not where they are, hunger again increases upon
them, and they have no hopes to be saved, but by a third miracle; they are
reduced the third time to the former course and straight to cast Lots, and when
they were going to the heartbreaking work to put him to Death upon whom it
fell, they go to God their old Friend in Adversity, by humble and hearty
Prayers; and now they look, and look again, but there is nothing; their Prayers
are concluded, and nothing appears, yet still they hoped and stayed, till at
last one of them espies a Ship, which puts new Life into all their Spirits,
they bear up with the Vessel, they man their Boat, they desire, and beg like
perishing humble Suppliants to be taken in, which they are admitted, and the
Commander being acquainted with one of them, relieves them plentifully, and
sets them all safe ashore, to the great rejoicing of their Souls, Sea
Deliverances.

XIII. In the year 1616. One Pikman a Fleming coming from Droutheim in Norway,
with a Vessel laden with Boards was overtaken with a calm, during which, the
current of the Sea carried him upon a Rock, or little Island toward the
Extremities of Scotland, to avoid a wreck, he commanded some of his men to go
into the Shallop, and to tow off the Ship; coming near the Island, they saw
something which was more like a Ghost, than a living Creature; a Body stark
naked, black and hairy, a meager and deformed countenance, and hollow and
distorted eyes; he fell on his knees, and joining his hands together, begged
relief; which raised such compassion in them, that they took him into the Boat:
There was in all the Island no Grass, nor Tree, nor ought whence a man could
derive either sustenance or shelter, besides the ruins of a Boat wherewith he
had made a kind of Hut to lie down under; The man gave this Relation of
himself; That he was an English man, and that about a year before being to go
in the Passage Boat from England to Dublin, they were taken by a French Pyrate,
who being forced by a Tempest that immediately arose to let go the Passage
Boat, left us to the mercy of the Waves, which carried us into the main Sea,
and at last split the Boat upon the Rock, where you took me in; I escaped with
one more into the Island, where we endured the greatest Extremities. Of some of
the boards of the Boat we made the Hut you saw, we took some Sea-mews which
dried in the Wind and Sun, we eat raw; In the Crevices of the Rocks on the
Seaside we found some Eggs, and thus we had as much as served to keep us from
starving; But our thirst was most insupportable, for having no fresh water but
what fell from the Sky, and was left in certain pits which time had worn in the
Rocks, we could not have it at all seasons, for the Rock lying low, was washed
over with the Waves of the Sea; we lived in this condition six weeks,
comforting one another in our common misfortune, till being left alone, it
began to grow in supportable to me; for awaking one morning, and missing my
Companion, I fell into such deep despair, that I had thoughts of casting my
self headlong into the Sea, I know not what became of him, whither despair
forced him to that extremity, or that looking for eggs on the steepy side of
the Rock, he might fall into the Sea; I lost with my comrade the Knife
wherewith we killed Sea Dogs, and the Mews upon which we lived, so that not
able to kill any more, I was reduced to this Extremity, to get out of the
Boards of my Hut a great Nail, which I made shift so to sharpen upon the Rock,
that it served me for a Knife: The same necessity put me upon another
Invention, which kept me last winter, during which, I endured the greatest
misery imaginable, for finding the Lock and my Hut so covered with Snow, that
it was impossible for me to get any thing abroad, I put out a little stick at
the Crevice of my Hut, and baiting it with a little Sea Dogs fat, I by that
means got some Sea-mews, which I took with my hand from under the Snow, and so
I made a shift to keep my self from starving; I lived in this condition and
solitude above Eleven Months, and was resolved to end my days in it, when God
sent you hither to deliver me out of the greatest misery that ever man was in;
The Sea man having ended his discourse, the Master of the Ship treated him so
well, that within a few days, he was quite another Creature, he set him a shore
at Derry in Ireland, and afterward saw him at Dublin, where such as had heard
what had happened to him, gave him wherewithal to return into England.
Mandelsloes Travels. P. 280.

XIV. A Ship of Holland being driven against her Will came to a place called
Nova Zembla, where the Pole is elevated seventy six degrees, among many delays
and great dangers scarce reached the Orange Islands; where they were set fast
in a consolidated body of continued Ice, which threatened them every moment; at
last being reduced to their ultimate hope, they resolve to return the same way
they came, but now they find the Ship quite frozen up, not far from the shore,
and thereupon they were forced to winter in Zembla, and wait for a better
Season, therefore taking our Boards and Plankes, they built a poor shelter for
themselves and their stuff, and by good providence the Tide had thrown up a
good quantity of Timber, they not knowing from whence it came, which proved of
great advantage to them, during their abode; Here they had continual Fights
with Bears, who sometimes were driven away by making great outcryes, other
times with shooting of them, but they found their Flesh unwolsome meat; for in
that Country the wild Beasts, or Fishes of the Sea are food to the wild Beasts
of the Land, the fat of the Bears they made use of to burn for lights in the
night; At last to increase their misery, the Sun left them, which was the chief
humane benefit they had; Thus were they in a barren Country in darkness, and
having no company but the wild Beasts; Vast mountains of Snow they with great
difficulty were forced to remove, least their Habitation should be overwhelmed,
and if at any time they went forth, their jaws were so benumbed, they could
scarce recover their former heat; The Bears being in the dark, and dull of
sight, did not venture much abroad to disturb them; but there were a multitude
of Foxes, which they caught in Traps, and made of them food and Raiment, yet
after all this the Almighty preserved them, for in the Spring the Ice breaking,
they got their Ship again, and sailed safe to Amsterdam. Grotius Annals.

XV. And the same Providence that has appeared so wonderfully for the
protection and diliverance of poor distressed Creatures at Sea, has likewise
been very merciful in preservation from most eminent dangers at Land, as among
many Thousand others (recorded in the Holy Scriptures, and others Histories) it
is exceeding manifest from the following Instances; In 1539, not far from
Sitten in Germany, in the time of great Dearth and Famine, a certain Religious
Matron having two Sons, and destitute of all manner of sustenance, went with
her Children to a Fountain hard by; praying to Almighty God, That he would ^^
his infinite goodness relieve their hunger; as she was going, a Person unknown
met her by the way, and saluted her very kindly, asking her whither she was
going, who confessed to him That she was walking to that Fountain there, hoping
to have some relief from Almighty God, to whom all things are possible, for
(said she) if he nourished the Children of Israel in the Wilderness forty
years, it will not be difficult for him to besto^ a draught of water upon me,
and my Children, when she had spoken these words, the man (who doubtles^ was an
Angel of God) told her, That seeing her Faith was so constant, she should
return home, and should there find six bushel of meal, for the support of her
self, and her Children; the Woman returning home, found i^ to be according to
his word. Beards Theater p. 442.

XVI. Philip Melancthon reports, that in a Village near Signea, a Woman sent
her Son into the wood to fetch home her Cattle, in the mean while there fell so
great a Snow, that the Boy could not return home again, his Parents being much
troubled went the next day to seek him, and within three days found him in the
midst of the wood, in a place where the Snow had not fallen, They asked him why
he did not make have home, he answered, That he stayed till it was Evening,
being insensible both o^ the time and the cold, They then demanded whither he
had eat any Victuals; the Boy replied, There we^ a man brought him Victuals,
which he did eat, which they supposed to be his good Angel, who had been thus
kind to him, and preserved him from so great ^ danger. Beards Theater. p. 440.

XVII. In the Year 1565. There fell so much rai^ in Islebia, that the waters
bore down all before them and particularly the house of a man, where a Chil^
lay in the Cradle, which the Father, with the haza^^ of his Life brought forth,
and carried into a Neigh^ hours house hard by; he then endeavored to saw two
more of his Children, and took them in his arm^ arms to carry them out of his
house, but the waters were so strong, that one of his Children sitting upon a
beam, was carried away, and himself and the other were carried into the
Orchard, where finding some ground he stood up to the neck in water, with the
Child in his arms, and looking about for his other Child, he saw it sitting
upon the piece of Timber, swimming toward him, which he likewise took into his
arms, and getting upon an high pile of Wood, he continued with them there all
night, none being able to afford him any help; next morning, when the waters
where decreased, he came down, and looked for two other of his Children, whom
he had left in the upper Room of the house, where he found the two Innocents
fast a sleep; he had no sooner taken them from thence but that part of the
house fell also, which was a visible sign of Gods holy protection over them
all. Beards Theater. p. 444.

XVIII. In the horrid and bloody Rebellion in Ireland, a Religious Gentlewoman
(with some others in her Company) was forced to fly for her Life, she having
three Children, whereof one was at her Breast, but alas, these poor trembling
Travelers had not gone far, before they were stripped naked by the Irish, who
to admiration spared their lives but passing on, they came to a River where
more of these bloody Villains met them, and would have drowned them therein;
this virruous Gentlewoman being not in the least discouraged, desired a small
time, to pray, and as she lay naked on the frozen Ground, she began to
consider, and resolve within her self, not to go voluntarily to so injust a
Death; upon which her refusal, these miscreants dragged her by the heels, along
the ground, with the rest of the Company, upon which she turned upon them, and
on her knees said, You should I am sure be Christians, and men I see you are;
in taking away our miserable lives you do us a pleasure; but know as we never
wronged you nor yours, you must dye also your selves, and one day give an
Account of this Cruelty to the Judge of Heaven and Earth: Upon which, says an
Irish Priest, Let us not take their lives, but we will put them into the Island
of Lake; and a Boat being in the River, eight of them who were all then in
Company, are put into the Island naked, and without meat, where after four
days, some of them dyed of hunger and cold, but not this Woman, nor any of her
Children; for the next day the two Boys sound the hide of a Beast which had
been killed, this, they and the Mother endeavored to cast over them, lying
upon the snow; the day after, a Boat goes by them, whom the poor Woman
beseeches for Gods sake to carry her out of that place, but they being Irish,
refused it; she then desires a little bread, but they answer they have none;
then she begs a coal of Fire, for she had some fuel in the Boat, and thus with
some Chips they mad a Fire, and the Boys taking a piece of the Hide, laid it
upon the Coals, and began to gnaw it, but alas, without an extraordinary divine
support, what could this do? thus they lived ten days without any visible
supplys, and that good Woman professed it was by Faith in God she lived; for she
had no Bread, but Ice and Snow, nor any Drink, but Water; but she said, she
thought God put more substance into it, for it seemed as it were clammy. The
next day a Boat carried her out to the side of the Bandwater where yet she had
been lost, but that she could not endure to see her Children dye in her sight,
and therefore though the Two Boys were young, and so famished with hunger, that
they had no strength, she persuaded them to go out of her fight, under pretense
of seeking some Fire; the poor Children had not gone far, but they saw two or
three great Dogs cating a man that had been killed; the Children were afraid of
the Dogs, who needed not to have feared any thing, but to live in such a
Condition; but one of the Dogs came running, and leaped upon one of the
Children, without doing him the least hurt; and would run a little before, and
then tarry till the Children came to him, and so led them to a house where
smoke appeared, which was an Irish man's, protected by the English in Antrum,
where they were courteously received, and the Mother sent for, and were all
thus miraculously preserved, through the great mercy of God. Remarkable
Deliverances. P. 19.

XIX. A terrible Tempest happened at Turin, in 1558. which beat down Houses,
tore up Trees by the Roots, and by a mighty inundation of water drowned above
forty persons, yet in the midst of Judgment God remembered mercy? for a Woman,
who was newly brought to bed was drowned but the Infant she was delivered of,
lying in the Cradle, was carried with the Violence of the water a great way
off, and at last the Cradle stopping at the bough of an Apple Tree, stood there
firm, till the waters decreased, and after several days was sound alive.
Another Child at Friburg in Misnia falling into the River, was violently
carried a great way, till it came to a Mill, where it stopped, and was
miraculously taken up alive, Beards Theater P. 442.

XX. Queen Elizabeth of glorious memory was often in very great dangers, and as
often delivered, but especially in her Sister O, Mary's Reign, for while she
was a Prisoner at Woodstock, a Fire was kindled between the Boards of her
Chamber, which was verily supposed to be done on purpose to have burned her,
but it was happily prevented: Likewise a Rufrian, who was one of her Keepers
was suborned to Murder her, but this was also prevented by Divine Providence;
At another time, Stephen Gardner, Bishop of Winchester sent a Villain to
dispatch her, but could not have admittance, because of the absence of Sir
Henry Beningfield, when had commanded his Brother not to suffer any man
whatsoever, to come to her, till his return: Lastly, while she was a Prisoner
in the Tower a Writ was sent for her Execution, by the procurement of Gardner,
but the Lieutenant going presently to Q. Mary, she disowned the knowledge
thereof, and thereby she was wonderfully delivered Clarks Exam. 2 Part. P. 614.

XXI. in the Reign of Queen Mary, Dr. Sands and Dr. Cox fled both out of
England in the same Ship, and before the Ship was out of sight, two of the
Queens Guard were upon the Seashore to have apprehended Dr. Sands; but they
had so prosperous a passage, that they landed safely at Antwerp, and were
invited to the house of one Mr, Lock to Dinner; as they were at Table, Mr,
George Gilpia the English Secretary came to them, and whispering Dr. Sands,
told him, That King Philip made search for him to apprehend him, whereupon he
immediately rose ftom Dinner, and though it rained very fast, yet he went out
of the Gate, which leads to Cleaveland, and so made his escape to Strasburg,
Clarks Mirror, 2.616.

XXII. In the year 1640. Dr. James Usher, Lord Primate of Ireland came over
into England, being invited thereunto by some eminent Persons, wherein the
special Providence of God did manifest it self for his preservation, it being
the year before the bloody Rebellion broke out in Ireland, as if according to
the Angels speech to Lot, nothing could be done there, till he was come hither
and escaped to this Zoar. Clark's Lives.

To Conclude, innumerable are the Examples of the Almighty's Protection, and
deliverance of the innocent, and those that trust in him in all Ages of the
world, for as he punishes the wicked with most severe Judgments, so he
protecteth those that fear him, by the extraordinary assistance of his Holy
Angels, to fulf^^ the Truth of what the Apostles Write. Heb. 1.14. That they
are ministering Spirits sent forth to minister to them, who shall be Heirs of
Salvation.

CHAP. VII.
Divine Goodness to Penitents, with the dying Thoughts of several Famous Men,
concerning a future State after this Life: Likewise diverse remarkable Instances
to demonstrate the reality, and certainty thereof.

WE read in the Holy Scriptures, that the Almighty resists the proud, but he
gives Grace to the humble; and therefore how passionately, and compassionately
does he exhort, and persuade men to Repentance, and Reformation, declaring that
whosoever comes unto him, he will in no wise cast off; yea, though their Sins
and Transgressions are of a Scarlet and Crimson dye, even of the greatest
magnitude, yet if they will forsake their evil ways, he will have mercy upon
them, and save them; How vain therefore, and foolish are those desperate men in
our Age, who having long continued in wicked and evil courses, endeavor to
encourage themselves therein, by persuading themselves, and their wretched
Companions, that there is no future account to be given in another world; which
wicked attempt is ridiculous, as well as dangerous; since besides the
undeniable evidence of the Holy Scriptures, and the Divine Providence whereby
the whole world was Created, and is Governed; it is also very apparent, that
all sorts of Men, of all Conditions, as Emperors, Kings, Philosophers,
Statesmen, etc. of all Religions, Heathens, Jews, Mahometans, Christians; Of
all Opinions among Christians, and of all Tempers, whether strict and serious,
or loose and debauched, in all Ages of the World, from the Creation, they have
left this great Observation behind them, That upon Experience they have found,
that what vain Thoughts soever men may in the heat of their Youth, and Lust,
entertain of Religion, yet they will sooner, or later f^el a^ Testimony which
God has given into every ones Breast, which will one day make them serious,
either by the inexpressible Fears, Terrors, and Agonies of a Troubled mind, or
by the inconceivable Peace, Joy, and Comfort of a good Conscience; and of this
we have many late, as well as former examples; some of which may be very
necessary to be here inserted, to manifest the Truth thereof.

I. St. Augustine is a famous Instance of Repentance, as we find very lively
discribed in his Confessions; some few of which, I shall repeat in his own
words, In my Youth, I even burnt to be satisfied in these lower pleasures, and
what was it I delighted in, but to love, and be loved? yea, I boiled over in my
Fornications, and thou heldest thy peace, then wandered I still further from
thee, O my Joy, into other, and more fruitless seed-plots of sorrows with a
proud dejectedness, and an untyred weariness, but did thou indeed hold thy
peace to me? No surely, for whose but thine were the words which my Mother, one
of thy faithful Children sang in my Ears? for I will remember, she privately
charged me, and with very much earnestness forewarned me, That I should not
commit simple Fornication, but especially that I should never defile another
man's Wife: These seemed to me no better than Women's advices, which it would be
a shame for me to follow; but they were thy Counsels indeed, and I knew it not;
but ran headlong with such stupid blindness, that I was ashamed amongst my
Equals to be guilty of less impudence, than they were, whom I heard to boast
mightily of their Debaucheries, and glorying the more, the more beastly they
had been; Yea, and I took pleasure in committing of wickedness, not for the
Pleasure of the Act only, but for the praise and credit of it also; What is
worthy of dispraise, if Vice be not? But I made my self worse than indeed I
was, that I might not be dispraised, and when I wanted opportunity to commit
that naughtiness which should make me as bad as the worst, I would pretend I
had done what I never did, that I might not be counted cowardly, in being
innocent, nor faint hearted, in being more chaste than they: Behold with what
Companions I walked the Streets of Babylon, and I wallowed my self in the mire
of it, as if I had reposed in a Bed of Spices, and most precious Ointments, and
my invisible Enemy seduced me to the very center of sin, so that I ran into all
manner of dissoluteness, and practiced whatsoever I affected; a mist in the
mean time depriving my sight, O my God, of the brightness of thy Truth, and
mine Iniquity came from me, as if swelling from fatness. Surely thy Law, O
Lord, punishes Thievery, yea, and this Law is so written in our hearts, that
Iniquity it self cannot blot it out: For what Thief does willingly abide a man
to steal from him? no not a rich Thief, though his follow be driven to steal
upon necessity: Yet had I a desire to commit Thievery, and did it, compelled
neither by hunger, nor poverty, but even through a cloyedness of welldoing, and
a pamperdness of Iniquity; for I stole that, of which I had enough of my own,
and much better; nor when I had done, cared I to enjoy the thing which I had
stolen, but only rejoicing in the Theft, and (...) it self: A Pear Tree there
was in the Orchard next our Vineyard, will laden with Fruit, though not much
tempting, either for color, or taste: To the robbing of this, a Company of
lewd young Fellows of us went late on night, (having according to our idle
custom, continued in our Gaming Houses till that time) from whence we came
laden with Fruit, not for our own liquorishness, but even to throw to the
Hogs; and all this we did, not because we might do it but because we would:
Behold my heart O Lord, behold my heart, which thou have pity upon in the very
bottom of the bottomless Pit: For I most wretched Young Fellow, unhappy that I
was, I was unhappy in the very entrance into my Youth; It is true, I begged
Chastity at thy hands, and said, Give me Chastity, and Continency but do not
give it me yet, for I was afraid that thou would hear me too soon, and too
soon deliver me from my Disease of Incontinency, which my desire was rather to
have satisfied than extinguished; But now was the day come wherein I was to be
set naked before my self, and when mine own Conscience was to convince me, for
I found a vast Tempest in my own Soul which hurried me into a Garden, where I
might be only with my self; at which time, I was most soberly mad, being
sensible enough what piece of misery I at present was, but utterly ignorant how
good I was shortly to grow; I sat me down fretted in Spirit, and angry at my
self with a most Tempestuous Indignation, for that I went not about to make my
Peace and League with thee, my God, which all my bones cried out upon me to do,
extolling it to the very Skies, upon which, giving liberty to my tears, the
floods of mine Eyes gushed out, which was an acceptable Sacrifice to thee, O
Lord, and then I cried out, How long? How long? O Lord, will thou be angry for
ever, still to morrow, to morrow, why not now? Wherefore in this very hour is
there not an end put to my uncleanness; Thus much I uttered weeping in the
bitter contrition of my heart, when behold I heard a voice, as of a Boy or
Child that seemed to come from some Neighboring house, which said in a singing
Tune, Take up and read, Take up and read, which was often repeated; Instantly
hereupon, I changed my Countenance, and began to consider whether Children were
used to sing any such words, but I could not remember to have ever heard the
like, whereupon drying up the violent Torrent of my Tears, I got me up,
interpreting it no other way, but that I was from God himself commanded to open
the book, and to read that Chapter which I should first light upon; Hastily
therefore I went, where I had left the Apostles Book, and snatching it up
opened it, and in silence read that Chapter which I first cast mine eyes upon;
Not in riating and drunkenness, not in chambring and wantonness, not in strife
and envying, but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for
the flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof; No further would I read, nor needed I,
for instantly, with the end of this sentence, a Divine beam of Light, Comfort
and Peace darted into my heart, and all the darkness of doubting vanished away,
and thou, O my dear Lord, did thereby so thoroughly convert me to thy self, as
that I have no other hopes, nor thoughts in this world but of thee; for which,
let my heart praise thee, and my Tongue, yea, let all my Bones say, O Lord, who
is like unto thee, and do thou answer me, and say unto my Soul, I am thy
Salvation. St. Austins Confessions.

II. Wonderful is the Account which we find in Mr. Baxters Crucifying of the
world, in these words; Sophronius, Bishop of Jerusalem delivers the following
History as a most certain, and Infallible Truth to Posterity; That Leontius
Apamipusis, a most famous and Religious man, who lived many years at Cyrene
assured them, that Synesius, who of a Philosopher became a Bishop, found at
Cyrene one Evagrius a Philosopher, who had been his old Acquaintance, Fellow
Student, and Intimate Friend, but an obstinate Heathen: Synesius was earnest
with him, (but in vain) to become a Christian, yet following his Arguments for
Christianity very close, Evagrius discourses with him to this purpose, That to
him it s^^^d but a mere Fable and deceit, that the Christian Religion ^acheth
men that this world shall have an end, and that all men shall rise again in
these B^lies, and their Flesh be made immortal and incorruptible, and that they
shall so live for ever, and shall receive the reward of all that they have done
in the Body, and that he that has pity on the poor, lends to the Lord, and
he that gives to the poor and needy, shall have Treasure in Heaven, and shall
receive an hundred fold from Christ, together with eternal Life; Synesius
assured him, and proved to him by very cogent Arguments, that these things were
most true, and certain, insomuch that being converted thereby, he and his
Family were baptized, Evagrius soon after brought Three Hundred Pound in Gold
to Synesius, to be distributed among the poor, upon condition that he would
give him a Bill under his hand, that Jesus Christ would repay him in another
World, which he did accordingly; Evagrius fell sick not long after, and
thinking he should die, ordered his Sons, to put Synesius his Bill into his
Hand, which was done, after which he died, and was buried: About Three days
after the Philosopher seemed to appear to Synesius in the Night, and to say to
him, Come to my Sepulcher where I lie, and take the Bill, for I have received
the Debts, and am satisfied, and for thy assurance, I have written a discharge
with my own hand. The Bishop told Evagrius his Sons what he had seen, though he
knew nothing of the Bill put into his hand; whereupon they all go to the
Sepulcher, and opening it, found the Bill in the Dead man's hand, thus
subscribed, Ego Evagrius, etc. in English, I Evagrius the Philosopher, To the
Holy Bishop Syn^^^us Greeting, I have received the Debt which in this Paper is
written with thy hand, and am satisfied, neither have I any Action against th^e
for the Gold that I gave thee, and by thee to Christ our Savior: They that saw
the thing, admired, and glorified God, who gave such wonderful Evidences of his
fulfilling his Promises to his Servants; And says Leontius, this Bill thus
subscribed by the Philosopher, is kept at Cyrene most carefully in the Church
to this day, to be seen of as many as desire it: And though (says Mr. Baxter)
we have a sure word of Promise sufficient to build our hope upon, yet I thought
it not wholly unprofitable to cite this History, from so credible Antiquity,
that the Works of God may be had in remembrance. Baxter Crucifying the World,
Preface.

III. C^^sar Baronius tells, that there was an entire Friendship between
Michael Mercatus the Elder, and Marsilius Ficinus; and this Friendship was the
stronger between them, by reason of a mutual agreement in their studies; It
happened that these two discoursed together usually of the State of man after
Death, and when they could not agree in some particulars, they concluded with
this firm agreement, That which soever of them two should first depart out of
this Life, should (if possible) give an account to the Survivor, of the State
of the other Life, and whether the Soul be immortal, or not; This agreement
being made, and mutually sworn to, they departed: In a short time after, it
fell our, that while Michael Mercatus was one morning early at his study, upon
a sudden, he heard the noise of a Horse opon the Gallop; and then stopping at
the door, and immediately he heard the voice of his Friend Marsilius, crying
out to him, O Michael, Micheal, those things are true, they are true; Michael
wondering to hear his Friends voice, rose up, and opened his Casement, where he
saw the back part of him, whom he had heard speak, in white, and galloping away
upon a white Horse; He called after him, Marsilius, Marsilius, and followed him
with his eye, but he soon vanished out of sight; Michael amazed at this
extraordinary accident, very strictly inquired if any thing had happened to
Marsilius, (who then lived at Florence, some distance from thence, where he
likewise breathed his last;) and he found upon strict, inquiry, that he dyed at
that very time, when he was thus seen and heard by him. Wanly Hist. Man. P. 88.

IV. About the year 1060. There was a great Doctor buried at Paris, at the
enterring of whom, when the Priest in the form then used, came to the words,
Responde mihi, Answer me, the Corpse sat upright on the Bier, and to the
amazement of all that were there, cried out, Justo Dei judicio accusatus sum;
At the just Tribunal of God I am accused, lying presently down again; The
attendants being astonished, deferred the Funeral till the next day, to see the
Issue of this strange accident, at which time a multitude met to observe the
event; when at the same words again repeated, the disturbed Body rises again,
and with the like hideous noise cried out, Justo Dei Judicio Judicatus sum: By
the just Judgment of God I am judged; The People being yet more amazed,
deferred the Interment one day longer, when almost the whole City thronged to
this strange Burial, and in the presence of them all, at the reciting of the
same words, he rose up the third time, and cried out Justo Dei Judicio
condemnatus sum, by the just Judgment of God I am condemned, whereat as the
whole City were affrighted, so Bruno, an eminent Doctor in that University, was
seriously affected, and told them, That as they had formerly heard, so now they
saw, the Judgments of the Lord were unsearchable, and past finding out, for
this Person whom we honored for the strictness of his Life, the modesty, and
unblamableness of his Conversation, cries out now, that he is damned by the
just Judgment of God: This dreadful Example he enforced upon the minds of the
Auditors, with so many prevailing Arguments, that by the Blessing of God,
several of them retired themselves from the world, and spent the rest of their
days wholly in the service of God, and preparing their Souls for an Eternal
State in the world to come. Dying Men's words. p. 196.

V. Charles the 5th. Emperor of Germany, King of Spain, and Lord of the
Netherlands, after Three and Twenty Pitched Battles, six Triumphs, Four Kingdoms
won, and Eight Principalities added to his Dominions, which he ruled over
Fourteen years, yet, at last resigned all these, retired to his Devotion in a
Monastery, had his own Funeral celebrated before his face, and left this
Testimony of Christian Religion, That the sincere profession thereof had in it
those sweets and Joys that Courts were Strangers to. And Philip the Third of
Spain lying on his Death Bed in 1621, sent thrice at Midnight for Florentius
his Confessor, who with the Provincial of Castile discoursed to him of
approaching Death, exhorting him to submit to Gods will, so gravely, that the
King himself could not choose but weep, and after some intermission from his
tears, and thanks for his wholesome admonition, the King spoke thus to him, Do
you not remember that in your Sermon on Ash Wednesday, you said that some of
your Auditors might dye that Lent; this concerns me, for lo my fatal hour is
now at hand but shall I obtain eternal felicity? which words he uttered with
great grief and trouble, adding likewise to his Confessor, You have not hit
upon the right way of healing, is there no other Remedy? Which when he observed
the Confessor thought he meant of his Body, the King added, Ah, I am not
solicitous of my Body, nor of my temporary Disease, but of my Soul; The
Confessor mournfully answered, I have done what I could, I must commit the rest
to Gods providence; Florentius then discoursed at large of Gods mercy,
remembering His Majesty what he had done for the Honor and Worship of that God,
to which the King replied, Ah how happy were I, had I spent these Twenty three
years, wherein I have held my Kingdom, in a retirement. Florentius answered,
That it would be very acceptable to God, if he would lay his Kingdom, his
Majesty, his Life, and his Salvation at the feet of his Crucified Savior,
Jesus Christ, and submit himself to his Will; Willingly, willingly will I do
this (said the Heart-sick King) and from this moment do I lay all that God has
given me, my Dominions, Power, and my Life at the Feet of Jesus Christ my
Savior, who was crucified for me, and then among his last words he said to
Florentius, Now really you have suggested to me very great comfort. Fair
Warning P. 160.

VI. Prince Henry, Eldest Son to King James, and Queen Anne, was most zealous
in his love to Religion and Piety, and his heart was bent, if he had lived, to
have endeavored to compound those unkind Jars and differences that were among
Religious men; He told the Dean of Rochester, That he thought, that wherea^ he,
and others like him, did as usual look him in the face when they came first
into the Pulpit, their Countenance did as it were, say to him, Sir, you must
hear m^ diligently, you must have a care to observe what I say He used to say,
he knew no sport worth an Oath, and that he knew not what they called Puritan
Preaching (...) but he loved that Preaching which went next his heart, and
spoke, as if they knew the mind of God; His last words were; O Christ, thou art
my Redeemer, and (...) know that thou have Redeemed me, I wholly depend upon
thy Providence, and Mercy from the very bottom of my heart; I commend my soul
into thy hand: A Person o^ Quality waiting on the Prince in his sickness, who
had been his constant Companion at Tennis, and asking how he did, he answered,
Ah Tom, I in vain wish for that time I lost with thee and others in vain
Recreation, He then added, Now my Soul be glad, for at all parts of this
Prison, the Lord has set his aid to loose thee, Head, F^et, Milt, and Liver
are failing; Arise therefore, and shake off thy Fetters, mount from thy Body,
and go thy way O^^ of his Life, p.

VII. H^^o Grotius, the greatest Scholar that his Age boasted of, after so
many Embassys happily performed abroad, and as many Transactions well managed
at home; After an exact survey of all the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin Learning,
after an unanswerable Treatise of the Truth of the Christian Religion, and many
other Elaborate Discourses in Divinity, and other parts of Learning, concluded
his Life with this Protestation, That he would give all his Learning, and
Honor for the plain Integrity, and harmless innocence of John Urick; who was a
devout poor man, that spent Eight hours of his time in Prayer, Eight in Labor,
and but Eight in Sleep, and other necessaries, He also made this complant to
another, who admired his astonishing Industry, Ah! Vitam perdidi, operose nihil
agendo; Ah! I have lost my Life in doing nothing industriously, and gave this
direction only to another, who desired it, as knowing his great Wisdom and
Learning, Be serious. When he was on his Deathbed, he sent for a Minister,
professing himself to be the poor Publican, saying, That he had nothing to
trust to, but the Mercy of God in Jesus Christ, and wishing that all the world
saw as much reason in Religion as he did. Dying Men's words. p. 162.

VIII. Salmasius, that Excellent French Scholar (whom the Learned men of his
time never mention without such Expressions as these, vir nunquam satis
laudatus, etc. A man never enough to be praised, nor to be mentioned without
admiration) went out of the World with these words in his mouth, Oh, I have
lost a world of Time! Time that most precious thing in the world, whereof had I
but one year longer, it should be spent in David's Psalms, and St. Paul's
Epistles; Oh Sirs (said he to these about him,) mind the World less, and God
more: all the Learning in the world, without true Piety, and the Fear of God,
is nothing worth; The fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom, and to depart from
Evil, that is understanding. Ibid^m. p. 161.

IX. Sir Francis Walsingham, Secretary of State in Queen Elizabeth's Reign,
toward the latter end of his Life writ to the Lord Chancellor Burleigh to this
purpose, We have lived enough to our Country, to our Fortunes, and to our
Sovereign; it is high time we begin to live to our selves, and to our God; in
the multitude of Assairs that passed through our hands, there must be some
miscarriages, for which a whole Kingdom cannot make our peace: And being
observed to be more melancholy than usual, some Court Humorists were sent to
divert him, Ah (said Sir Francis) while we laugh, all things are serious round
about us; God is serious, when he preserves us, and has patience toward us;
Christ is serious when he dies for us; the Holy Ghost is serious when he
striveth with us; the Holy Scripture is serious when it is read before us;
Sacraments are serious when they are administered to us; The whole Creation is
serious in serving God and us; those that are in Heaven and Hell are serious,
and shall a man that has one foot in the grave, jest and laugh? Wanly Hist.
Man. p. 646.

X. Sir Tho. Smith, after he had many years served Q. Elizabeth, also as
Secretary of State, and done many considerable Services to the Kingdom; A
quarter of a year before he dyed, laid aside all public Employment, and
discharging all his worldly Affairs, and Attendants, sent to two Reverend
Divines, his singular good Friends, entreating them to draw him out of the word
of God, the plainest, and axactest way of making his peace with God, and living
Godly in this present world, adding, That it was great pity men knew not, (or
at least did not seriously consider) to what end they were born into this
world, till they were ready to go out of it. Fair warning. p. 168.

XI. Doctor Done, a Person of as great Parts and Spirit as any this Nation
ever beheld, when he was upon his Deathbed, took his solemn farewell of his
most considerable Friends, leaving this with them, I repent of all my Life, but
that part of it which I spent in communion with God, and doing good: That
Person in a dying hour shall wish himself not a man, who has not been a good
Christian. Idem. p. 164.

XI. Archbishop Usher, that Famous, Learned, and most pious Divine, after his
indefatigable pains, as a Christian, a Scholar, a Bishop and a Preacher, went
out of the world with this Prayer, Lord forgive me my sins of Omission; and
desired to dye as Mr. Perkins did, imploring the mercy and favor of God. Idem.
p. 164.

XIII. Sir Philip Sydney, a Subject indeed of England but they say chosen King
of Poland, whom Q. Elizabeth called Her Philip, and the Prince of Orange called
his Master, whose Friendship the Lord Brooks was so proud of, that he would
have this to be part of his Epitaph, Here lies Sir Philip Sidneys Friend;
whose Death was lamented in Verse by the then Kings of France and Scotland, and
the two Universities of England, This great man lamented so much at his Death,
the innocent vanity of his Life in writing his Arcadia, that to prevent the
unlawful kindling of heats in others, he would have committed it to the Flames
himself, and left this farewell among his Friends; Love my Memory, cherish my
Friends, their Faith to me may ^ssure you they are honest, but above all,
govern your Will and Affections by the Will and Word of your Creator, and in me
behold the end of this world, and all its vanities. Ibidem. p. 136.

XIV. Sir Henry Wotton, after his many years study, with great proficiency and
applause in the University, his near Relation to the great Favorite, the E. of
Essex, his intimacy with the Duke of Tuscany, and James the 6th. King of
Scotland, his Embassyes to Holland, Germany, Venice, etc. was only ambitious of
the Provostship of Eaton, being exceeding desirous to retire thither, to enjoy
his beloved Study and Devotion, saying often, That this was the happiest time
of his life, it being the utmost happiness which a man could attain to, to be
at leisure to be, and to do good; never reflecting on the spending of his
former years without tears, and would often say, How much time have I to repent
of, and how little to do it in. Idem. p. 154.

XV. Sir John Mason, Privy Councellor to King Hen. 8. and K. Edw. 6. upon his
Deathbed called for his Clerk and Steward, to whom he spoke to this purpose, I
have seen five Princes, and been Privy Councellor to four; I have seen the most
observable matters in Foreign parts, and been present at most Transactions for
30 years together, and I have learned this after many years experience, that
Seriousness is the greatest wisdom, Temperance the best Physic, and a good
Conscience is the best Estate, and were I to live again, I would change the
Court for a Church, my Privy Councellers business, and bustle for an Hermits
retirement, and the whole life I lived in the Palace for one hours enjoyment
of God in the Chapel, all things else forsake me beside my God, my duty, and
my prayer. Idem p. 153.

XVI. Mr. Howard, (afterward the learned E. o^ Northampton) being disturbed
with Atheistical suggestions, put them all off this way,, If I could give any
account how my self or any thing else had a being without God, how there came
so uniform, and so constant a consent of mankind of all ages, tempers, and
educations, (differing so much otherwise in their apprehensions) about the
being of a God, the Immortality of the Soul, and Religion, in which they could
not likely either deceive so many, or being so many, could not be deceived, I
could then be a^ Atheist. And when it was urged, that Religion was only a State
Policy to keep men in awe; he replved, he could not believe it, since he was
sensible that the greatest Politicians have sooner or later felt the power of
Religion in the grievous la^hes of their Consciences, and the dre^dfulness of
their apprehensions about that state wherein they must live for ever. Idem p.
151.

XVII. Galeacius Carraciolus Marquess of Vico, a Noble Person of a great
Estate, powerful Relations, both in the Emperor of Germany and the Popes
Court, (the last of which was his near Relation) notwithstanding the great
promises, and most endearing Letters of his kindred the bitter cries and tears
of his Parents, his wife and children, the loss both of his honor and estate;
yet this worthy Person broke through all these temporal^ engagements, forsook
his Country and all that was dear to him, to go to Geneva, and embrace a
reproached despised, and persecuted Gospel, choosing rather with Moses (to whom
he is compared) to suffer Afflictions with the People of God than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches
than the treasures of this world, because he had a respect to the recompense of
reward, and endured, as seeking him who is invisible; He used to say, That he
should not look upon himself to be worthy ^o see the face of God, if he did not
prefer one hours communion with Christ before all the riches and pleasures of
the world. Galeacius's Life.

XVIII. Famous and remarkable is the instance of the late Earl of R^chester,
who though he spent a great part of his life in the height of At^^i^^ne, and
all manner of profaneness and debauchery, yet upon his dying bed God was
graciously pleased to hear the prayers of his nearest Relations, and true
friends, so that he became a most admirable Penitent, of which I shall instance
some few particulars, as they are published by two Reverend Divines; He was the
Son of the famous Lord W^mot, and was a great proficient in learning; in the
year One thousand six hundred and sixty he went to the University, at which
time the general joy which overrun the whole Nation upon h^s Majesty's
Restoration, was not regulated wi^^ that ^o^^^i^ry and t^mperance which became
a serious gratitude to God for such a ^lessing, which had some ill effects in
him, so that he ^^ga^ to love those disorders too much: for after having
travell^d ^^r some time, he returned back to the Court, where falling into
company who loved those excesses, he was at length entirely subdued by
intemp^rance, so that he confessed for five years together he was continually
drunk, not all the while under the vi^ible effects of it, but his blood was so
inflamed, that he was not in all that time cool enough to be perfectly master
of himself, which led him to do many wild and unaccountable things, and being a
Person of extraordinary parts, his sins were like them, so that he seemed to
affect something singular in his Impieties, as well as writings, above the
reach of other men, taking all manner of pains to pervert others to wickedness,
nay so confirmed was he in sin, that he lived, and almost oftentimes dyed a
Martyr to it: The licenciousness of his temper, with the briskn^ss of his wit,
disposed him to love the conversation of those who divided their time between
lewd actions, and irregular mirth, and so he came to bend his wit, and direct
his studies, and endeavors, to support, and strengthen these ill principles of
Atheism and irreligion in himself and others; An accident fell out about this
time which confirmed him more in these courses, for going to Sea in the year
1665 there happened to be in the same ship with him Mr Montague, and another
Gentleman of Quality, these two, but especially the last, seemed p^rswaded,
That they should never return into England, and Mr. Montague said, he was sure
of it, upon which the E. of Rochester entered into an engagement with the other
Gentleman, not without Ceremonies of Religion, (Mr. Montague refusing it) That
if either of them died ^e should appear, and give the other notice of the
future state, if there were any; After which in a fight with the Dutch, toward
the latter end of the Action, the Gentleman aforementioned fell on a sudden
into such a trembling, that he could scarce stand, and Mr. Montague going to
hold him up, as they were in each others arms, a Canon Bulle^ killed him
outright, and carried away Mr. Montagues Belly, so that he died in an hour
after; but this Gentleman never appeared to the E. of Rochester afterward,
which was a great snare to him during the rest of his life; after which he went
on to commit all iniquity with greediness, and yet even this desperate Tinner,
that one would think had made a Covenant with death, and was at an agreement
with ^ell, and just upon the brink of them born, yet even now God to magnify
the riches of his Grace and Mercy, was pleased to snatch him out of the fire;
so that falling into a great fit of sickness, he labored under strange trouble
and conflicts of mind, his spirit being wounded, and his Conscience full of
Terror, and saying, If that God who dyed for great as well as lesser sinners,
did not speedily apply his infinite mercies to his poor soul, his wound was
such as no man could conceive or bear, crying out, That he was the vilest
wretch and Dog that the Sun shined upon, or the Earth bore, that he now saw his
error in not living up to that reason which God endued him with, and which he
unworthily vilified and contemned, wishing he had been a starving Leper
crawling in a Ditch, that he had been a Link boy or a beggar, or for his whole
life time confined to a Dungeon, rather than to have sinned against his God,
and acknowledged, that all the seeming absurdities of Religion, and the Holy
Scriptures, and the contradictions thereof, framed by men of corrupt and
reprobate Judgments were now vanished, and the excellency and beauty thereof
appeared, he being now come to receive the truth in the love of it; And upon
his death bed gave command to his Reverend Chaplain, to preach abroad, and to
let all men know how severely God had disciplined him for his sins by his
afflicting hand, that his sufferings were most just, tho he had laid ten
thousand times more upon him; and how God had laid on him one stripe upon
another, because of his grievous provocations, till he had brought him home to
himself, and declaring, that from the bottom of his soul he did detest and
abher the whole course of his former wicked life, and admired the goodness of
God who had given him a true sense of his pernicious opinions and vile
practices, warning all men in the name of God, and as they regard the welfare
of their souls no more to deny his Being, or his providence, or despise his
goodness, no more to make a mock of sin, or contemn the pure and excellent
Religion of the ever Blessed Redeemer, through whose Merits alone he who was
one of the greatest of Sinners, did yet hope for mercy and forgiveness; and in
this Penitent and Religious temper, and frame of Spirit, he sometime after gave
up the Ghost. Rechesters Life and Sermon.

XIX. I shall conclude all with some brief remarks out of the Life of that
Excellent and Worthy Person, the late Lord Chief Justice Hales, as lately
published by a Reverend Divine. This Gentle^an was descended rather from a
good, than a Noble Family, and about the Seventeenth year of his Age went to
Oxford, where he was placed under an able Tutor, and was an extraordinary
proficient; but the Stage Plays coming thither, he was so much corrupted by
seeing many Plays, that he almost wholly forsook his Studies, of which mischief
being sensible, he at his coming to London, resolved ^ver to see a Play again,
to which he constantly adhered; but one ^rruption of the mind draws on another,
so that he fell into many ^uthful vanities, and kept too much ill Company with
some vain people, till a sad accident drove him from it, for he, with some
other ^oung Persons being invited out of Town to be merry, one of the ^ompany
called for so much Wine, and went on in such excess, that though Mr. Hale would
have prevented it) he fell down as dead before them, so that all that were
present, were not a little affrighted (...) it, who did what they could to
bring him to himself again; This ^^d Particularly affect Mr. Hale, who
thereupon went into another ^om, and shutting the door, fell on his knees, and
prayed earnestly (...) God both for his Friend, That he might be restored to
life again, and that himself might be forgiven, forgiving such countenance to
so ^uch excess, and he vowed to God, that he would never again keep ^^mpany in
that manner, nor Drink allealth while he lived:

His friend recovered, and he most Religiously kept his vow till his ^ying day,
and though he was afterward pressed to drink healths, ^rticularly the Kings,
which was set up by too many as a distin^uishing mark of Loyalty, and drew many
into great excess after ^is Majesty's happy Restoration; but he would never
dispense with is Vow, though he was roughly treated for this sometimes, which
^^me hot and indiscreet men call obstinacy; This wrought such an ^^tire change
on him, that now he forsook all vain Company, and ^vid^d himself between the
duties of Religion, and the studies of ^s Profession, in the former whereof he
was so regular, that for six ^^d Thirty years time he never once failed going
to Church on the ^^rds day, and though he was acquainted with all sorts of
Learning, ^^t he seemed to have made the study of Divinity the chiefest of all
^hers; He was a very merci^ul and upright Judge, and would hear no ^auses but in
open Court, which a great Peer once complained of (...) the King, But his
Majesty bid him content himself that he was no ^rse used, and said, He verily
believed he would have used himself no ^tt^r if he had gone to sollicit^ him in
any one of his own Causes; He ^ade it as a Rule to himself, That in the
administration of Justice, (...) was entrusted for God, the King and Country,
and therefore ought (...) do it uprightly, deliberately and resolutely, and yet
was much con^rned that though it was his duty to serve in the Office he was
cal^^d to, yet was it a great consumer of that little time we have here, ^^ch
he thought might be better spent in a pi^us Contemplative life, ^^d a due
provision for Eternity J. Hales Life.

To conclude. The most learned, wise, and s^^ious Persons in all a^es, have all
concurred in their Judgments, as to a future State, and ^^ve thought it to be
the greatest wisdom in this world, to be truly ^eligious; and to work out their
Salvation with fear and trembling.

FINIS.
There are lately published Three very useful an^ necessary Books, which are
sold by Nath^ Crouch, at the Bell next door to the Widow Kemp's Coffee-House in
Exchange-Alley, over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.
I. HIstorical Remarques and Observations of the Ancient and Present State of
London and Westminster, showing the Foundation, Walls, Gates Towers, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Schools, Inns o^ Court, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with an
Account of the most Remarkable Accidents, (...) to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and
other occurrences, for above 900 years past, in and about these Cities; and
among other particulars, the Poisoning of K. John by (...) Monk; The Resolution
of K. Henry 3. utterly to destro^ and consume the City of London with Fire, for
joining with the Barons against him, and his seizing their Charters, Liber^^^
and Customs into his hands; The Rebellion of Wa^^^yler, who was slain by the
Lord Mayor i^ Smithfield, and the Speech of Jack Straw at his Execution; the
deposing of R. Rich. 2. and his mournful Speech at his resigning the Crown,
with the manner (...) his being Murdered: The D^ of York's coming into the
Parliament, and claiming the Crown in K. Henry 6. time The Murder of K. Henry
6. and likewise of Edw. (...) and his Brother, by Rich. 3. called Crook-back;
The Execution of Empson and Dudley; the Insurrection i^ London in K. Henry 8.
time, and how 411 Men and Women went through the City in their Shifts, and
Ropes about their necks to Westminster. Hall, where they were pardoned by the King:
The Speeches of Q. Ann Bullen, (...) Lord Protector, and Q. Jane Gray at their
several Dea^^ upon Tower hill.

With several other Remarques in all the Kings an^ Queens Reigns to this Year
1681. And a description (...) ^e manner of the Trial of the late L. Stafford in
West. Hall; ^llustrated with Pictures of the most considerable matters,
^uriously Engraven on Copper Plates, with the Arms of the ^5 Companies of
London, and the time of their Incor^orating, by Rich. Burton, Author of the
History of the Wars of England, etc. Price One Shilling.

II. The Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland; Or

AN Impartial Account of all the Battles, Sieges, and other remarkable
Transactions, Revolutions and Accidents which have happened from the beginning
of ^he Reign of King Charles the First, in 1625. to his Ma^esties happy
Restoration 1660. And among other par^iculars, The Debates and Proceedings in
the Four First Parliaments of King Charles the First, with their Disso^utions.
The Siege of Rochel. The Petition of Right. The Murder of the D. of Buckingham
by Felton The Tunults at Edinborough in Scotland, upon Reading the
Common Prayer. The Et caetera Oath. The Cursed Plots and Designs of the
Jesuits, and other Papists, for imbroiling ^hese Three Kingdoms. The
Insurrection of the Apprentices and Se^men, and their Assaulting of Arch^ishop
Laud'^ House at Lambeth: Remarks on the Try^l of the E. of Strafford, and his
last Speech. The hor^id and bloody Rebellion of the Papists in Ireland, and
their Murdering above Two Hundred Thousand Pro^estants in 1641. The
Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, with the King's Answer thereunto. The
Pro^eedings about the Five Impeached Members. An Ac^ount of the Parliament at
Oxford, January 22. 1643. with their Proceedings and Dissolution. An Abstract
of ^he Fights between the King and Parliament. The Death of A B. Laud Mr.
Chaloner and Tomkins, Sir John Ho^ha^, Sir Ale^ander Carew, Duke Hamilton, Earl
of Hol^and Lord Capel, and others. The Illegal Trial of King Charles the First,
a^ large, with his last Speech at his Suf^ering Jan. 30. 1648. Together with
the most conside^able matters which happened till the Year 1660. Illust^ated
with Pictures of several Remrkable Accidents ^uriously engraven on Copper
Plates. Price One Shilling.

III The Protestant Scool-Mister; Or

THE Protestant Instructed, wherein the most Considerable Errors of the Papists
are discovered and the Protestant Religion is vindicated from Here^^ and
Novelty. 2. The Image of Antichrist, or the Usu^pation of the Pope and Church
of Rome over King and Emperors, in several Examples of the Tyranny (...) the
Pope over several Kings of England, etc. 3. The Cruelties and Persecutions of
the Papists against the Waldenses in Piedmont, Bohemia, Germany, Poland,
Lithuani^^ and France, with an Account of the bloody Massacre a^ Paris, and the
terrible Sieges of Sancerre and Roch^^ 4. The Cruelties of the Papists in
Italy, Spain, Portuga^ and the Low Countries, with a Relation of the Origin^^
Practices, and cruel Tortures of the Spanish Inquisition. 5. The Persecution of
the Protestants in Scotland, and Ir^land; With a Prophecy thereof by Dr. James
Usher, Archbishop of Armagh, forty years before it came to pas^ which exactly
fell out. 6. The Persecution of the Pr^testants in England, for near six
hundred years, with the Plo's and Conspiracies against the Life of Queen
Eliz^beth: Likewise the Spanish Invasion: The Gunpowder-Tre^son; The Burning of
London: The Late Horrid Popish Plo^ and the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey.
7. Pla^^ and easy Directions for Spelling and Reading of Englis^ with all
necessary Rules for reading the English Tongue more useful than any other Book
of this kind. 8. God Judgment, upon Popish Persecutors discovered in some
eminent Examples. 9. A Prayer of King Edward the Sixth, a while before his
Death, against Popery. 10. (...) Speech of Queen Elizabeth to her Army at
Tilbury-Can^ in the Spanish Invasion, 1588. Concluding with Prayer and Graces.
The whole being illustrated with man^ Pictures curiously engraven in Copper,
describing the variety of Torments and Cruelties exercised by the Papists upon
Protestants in most Countries in Europe. Pri^one Shilling.

All three Printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Bell, nex^ to the Widow Kemps
Coffee-House in Exchange-Alle^ over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.


