A Guinean Monarch


A VIEW OF THE English Acquisitions IN GUINEA, AND THE East Indies, WITH An
Account of the Religion, Government, Wars, strange Customs, Beasts, Serpents,
Monsters, and other Observables in those Countries.

Together with A Description of the Isle of St. Helena; And the Bay of
Sculdania, where the English usually refresh in their Voyages to the Indies.

Intermixed with pleasant Relations, and Enlivened with Picture.

By R. B. Author of the English Empire in America, Englands Monarchs, and the
History of Scotland and Ireland, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.
1686.

TO THE READER.
HAving in some late Tracts endeavored to inform my Countrymen of the Grandeur
of the English Monarchy, by giving them an Account of the Kingdoms of England,
Scotland and Ireland, and likewise of His Majesty's Dominions in America: The
Acceptance they have received, has encouraged me briefly to discover to them
what many have only heard of by discourse, that is, the English Acquisitions in
the two other Quarters of the World, Africa and Asia; wherein I have not so
much considered matter of Trade as History, by relating the most pleasant
Passages I have met with concerning these Countries; If I have in some places
seemed to divert from the Design of this small Collection, by adding matters
which may appear foreign thereto, I shall not ask pardon, provided it prove
either delightful or useful to the Reader, my intent being in all things to
please, and not meddle with what may be offensive to any; And if others would
do the like, there is no fear of their falling under such ill Circumstances as
too many have too lately done to their cost, by forgetting that wholesome
Counsel, Study to be quiet.

R. B.

An Account of the English Acquisitions Upon the Coast of Guinea in Africa.
Sect. 1.
THat Tract of Land called Guinea, comprehends seven hundred Leagues from Cap
Verd in fourteen Degrees of North Latitude, and nineteen of East Longitude to
Cape Gonsalvo in the first Degree of Southern Latitude, and thirty of East
Longitude; The Portugals were the first that ranged this Shore, and having some
Intelligence of their Commodities, and the manner of Trading with them; by fair
means and force together, they got footing upon the Sea coasts, building Forts
in some, and placing Garrisons and Factories in other places, which they then
found such a Golden Trade, that they called some Coasts thereof by that name,
and perceiving it so beneficial to themselves and their Country, it was an
inducement (as what will not Gold attract) to their further search on these
Maritine Coasts all along to the Cape of Good Hope, and thereby consequently to
the East Indies; The fair quarter, and courteous usage, which the Inhabitants
received from the Portugals already settled there, encouraged them to exchange
their Commodities with them, which Trade according to the Custom of that
Kingdom was maintained by Factors, upon the King of Portugals particular
account in every Port and Town, as if he intended the profits of Merchandising
should defray the charges of his Conquests and Garrisons, furnishing the
Natives with Salt, Iron, Tin, Copper, Basins, Knives, Cloth, Linen, and other
European Goods, and receiving in exchange, partly Cattle, Corn, Rice, and the
like, but chiefly Gold it self in great abundance, both in Sand and melted
Ingots, which gave Life and Briskness to the further Discovery of those
Countries, and continuance of that Trade to this very day, though not so
considerable as formerly.

The English and other Nations, desirous to share in this Rich Trade, in short
time Sailed thither, and because they had no Forts to Protect their Persons and
Goods from the danger of the Portugals, and treachery of the Inhabitants, they
were compelled to Anchor along the Coasts near the greatest Towns of Concourse,
and signifying to the Negroes what Wares they had brought, by their plausible
demeanor, they at length imboldened them to come aboard their Ships, and bring
their Gold, the manner of which Trade was very different from that of any other
Country; For be^imes in the Morning, the wind being then generally off the
Shore, and the weather calm, the Natives came aboard in their Canoes and Scutes
to Traffic some for themselves, and some as Factors for others, carrying at
their Girdles a Purse, wherein were several small Clouts or Papers, containing
the Gold belonging sometimes to ten several Men, which though all of the same
weight and goodness, yet they readily distinguished, and having made their
bargains for Cloth, Linen, or the like, at Noon they returned with the
Seabrize again to the Shore; but beside the agreement, these Factors have some
small thing for themselves, in reward for their Brokage, but in process of
time, the Hollanders frequenting these Coasts, and being well acquainted with
the manner of the English Traffic, and coming into the same places where the
English Traded and were known, they soon spoiled this Golden Trade, by their
sinister and indirect dealing, for Anchoring with the English, whom they found
to have a better Trade than themselves, they secretly bribed those Factors
aforementioned to carry their Passengers and Merchants aboard their own Ships,
and not the English, obliging them to Trade only with the Dutch; Which Craft
the English perceiving, used the same Arts to engage the Factors to themselves,
so that out-trying each other, these Brokers commonly gained to themselves six
or seven per Cent. to the vast prejudice of all Trade upon these Coasts, for
the future, since this ill Custom must be kept up by all Succeeding European
Merchants;

It was observed that many Negro Merchants who dwelt up in the Country coming
to buy Wares of the Dutch, with great quantities of Gold, and diverse Slaves,
thirty or more according to their Quality, to carry back the Goods they should
purchase, and taking their Lodgings in the Houses of these Brokers, whom they
acquainted with their full Commissions and Intentions, and to whom they
delivered their Gold, these Factors would go aboard the Flemish Ships with them
to Trade and Barter, and if the Negro Merchants were not skilled in the
Portugal Tongue, these Brokers would bid the Hollanders not to speak the
Morisco Language to them, because they Inhabited far within the Land, thereby
giving the Dutch the watchword, that they meant to deceive their Countrymen,
and afterward divide the Spoil, so that the knavish Factor connived at the
extravagant prizes of the Hollanders to draw the more Gold from the Merchant,
whom he likewise cheated, sometimes by putting some of his Gold into his Mouth,
Ears, or otherwise, which the Merchant Negro finding wanting in the Scale, adds
to the Cheat himself by blowing into the Christians Balance to make it weight;
The bargain being finished, and the Negro again landed, the Factor returns back
to the Ship, to share his ill got gains with the Flemings; This way of
proceeding was very detrimental to the English, and other Christians that Trade
upon these Coasts, so that unless they likewise connive with these Factors,
their Voyage will be lost, and their Commodities unsold.

In 1553. Thomas Windam, and Anthony Pintado a Portugal, in two English Ships
Traded along these Coasts as far as Benin, where they presented themselves to
the King who sat in a great Hall, the Walls whereof were made of Earth without
Windows, the Roof of thin Boards, open in diverse places; his Nobles never look
him in the Face, but sit with their Buttocks on the ground, and their hands
before their Faces, not looking up till the King commands them; when they
depart they go backward, turning their Faces still toward him. The next year
Captain John Lock Sailed into these Parts to Trade for Gold and Elephants
Teeth; And after him Captain Towerson made several Voyages thither, who at the
River St. Vincent, observed a kind of Pease growing on the Shore like Trees,
with stalks twenty seven paces long; At Cape Tres Puntas, they made him Swear
by the Water of the Sea, that he would not hurt them, before they would Trade
with him; Aban a Negro King treated them kindly with a Pot of Palm or
Coco-Wine, which they draw out of Trees.

The People are handsome and well proportioned, having nothing disagreeable in
their Countenances, but the blackness of their Complexion, some of them have
flattish Noses, all little Ears, my Dutch Author who writ some years since
relates, that the People go all Naked till they are married, and then are
clothed from the middle to the knees; At the Marriage of their Daughters, they
give half an Ounce of Gold to buy Wine for the Wedding, the Bride in the
presence of her Friends swears to be true to her Husband, which the man does
not, for they have as many Wives as they can maintain, yet the first has this
pre-eminence, that he can never take another but by her permission, but because
the multitude of Wives and Children are counted the greatest honor and riches
in that Country, they often persuade their Husbands to take more, and glory
therein, the first Wife likewise has the privilege to lie with her Husband
three Nights successively, whilst the rest must be content only with one, so
that they live very quietly together, a Merchant or Captain will have thirty or
forty, the King of Benin had six hundred, wherewith he went in Solemn
Procession every year; The King of Fetu's Son had fourteen Sons and twelve
Daughters, and kept an hundred Slaves to wait upon them; At Cape Gonsalvo they
pink and color their bodies, and offer their Wives to Strangers; The King uses
his own Daughters when grown up as Wives, and the Queens with the like
incestuous abomination make use of their own Sons.

Their Women (says my Author) are unfaithful Discoverers of Natures most
hidden secrets, not being ashamed to be delivered publicly in the sight of
Men, Boys and Girls. They circumcise both Sexes, after Travel they accompany
not their Husbands in three months after; as soon as she is delivered they gave
her a drink made of Rice, Mays, Water, Wine, and Mallaguette like our Pepper,
after which she lies warm three or four hours, and then rises, washes her self
and Child, and so falls to her work as before; Next they give it a name,
usually of some Christian they are obliged to, then wrapping it in a kind of
Blanket or Skin, they lay it upon Rushes where it continues about five weeks,
then the Mother ties it to a board and carries it on her back with the Legs
under her armpits, and the hands tied about her neck, where it hangs all day,
and never comes off till it goes to bed, and yet few or none of them prove lame
or deformed, notwithstanding the shaking of their bodies, they give them the
breast over their shoulders, and this may be the reason of the flatness of
their Noses by their knocking them continually against the Back and Shoulders
of the Mother while she is walking or at work; for it is observed that the
Children of their Gentry whose Mothers do not labor, nor carry their Infants
about them, have very comely Noses; they wash and rub them every morning with
Oil of Palms.

When they are seven or eight years old, they hang a Net about their Necks,
made of the Bark of a Tree, full of Fetiches or little Gods to secure them from
the Devil, who they believe would else carry them away; They hang their Hair
full of Shells, and Coral, about the Arms and Legs, with several Feticho's of
different qualities, one being an Antidote against Vomiting, a second against
dangerous Falls, a third prevents Bleeding, a fourth causes Sleep, a fifth
secures them against Wild Beasts, and the like, giving to each Fetisso a
different name: They soon learn to speak, go, and swim: When they are born,
they are not black, but red: About seven year old they learn them to spin
Thread, make Nets, and go a Fishing with their Fathers, and feed as they do,
picking up any nasty thing in the Streets, which they eat with good Appetites:
The Boys and Girls are all naked together, which makes them have no sense of
shame or modesty, they being neither reproved nor corrected by their Parents:
They are excellent at Swimming, even at this Age, so that if their Canoe
overset at Sea, they are very little concerned, all of them swimming back again
to the place from whence they came, and consequently they can Dive with great
dexterity and fetch up any thing from the bottom: About twelve their Fathers
instruct them how to make a Canoe, and catch Fish; The Merchants bring their
Sons acquainted with Europeans, and with the Mystery of Trade: At eighteen they
begin to set up for themselves, two or three together hiring a House and
purchasing a Canoe; they then cover their Nudities, grow amorous, and their
Fathers look out Wives for them: The Girls clean the Houses, pick the Rice,
beat the Mays, make the Bread, clean the Kitchen, buy and sell at Market, make
Baskets of Rushes and Matts which they weave extreme curiously, but their chief
care is to provide Meat and Drink for their Parents, secure their Goods, and
all other kinds of good Huswifry; when grown up, they are vary lascivious, and
boast of their Gallantries, especially with Strangers, whom they seem to affect
above their own Men: They are very careful to keep their Teeth white, have Wit
enough, but are very wanton with the Young Fellows stark naked, to please whom
they wash, comb, and plait their hair with great curiosity, some paint their
Foreheads and Eyebrows red and white, and hang Pendants in their Ears, all love
Ribbons especially red, they have Necklaces of Coral, and Bracelets upon their
Wrists, Arms and Legs, when they go abroad they were a piece of Silk, Taffaty
or other Stuff wrapped about them from the breast to the midleg, and have always
a great bunch of Keys, though never a Coffer nor Trunk to open, the Virgins
make it their whole business to appear acceptable especially to white men, and
are seldom barren before, though not very fruitful after Marriage.

For many years the English frequenting these Coasts, made little benefit
thereby, for the Inhabitants grew so subtle, that perceiving their Gold was so
earnestly desired by all Nations, they began to know its true value, and set
such a rate thereon, that having been formerly often beguiled by others, they
grew more wary and circumspect in their bargaining, and to look more narrowly
to the measure and goodness of their Commodities, and though at first they knew
no distinction of Christians, but thought the Portugals, and all other white
men to be of the same Nation, yet they have since learned the particular
manners and dealing of each Country, and have found the fairest and squarest
Trade from the English, who are therefore most welcome to them, and speed best
of any other Nation whatsoever; Especially since his late Majesty's happy
Restoration, by whose gracious favor the Traders into these parts were
Incorporated, and by their Charter dated Jan. 20. 1662. are entitled, the
Company of Royal Adventurers of England Trading into Africa, or the Guinea
Company; The Limits of their Trade, being from Sally in South Barbary, to Cape
de bona Esperanza, or the Cape of Good Hope, within which Limits all English
Ships are prohibited to Trade unless Authorized by them. The Commodities
exported by this Royal Company to Africa are Iron, Copper, Slesias, Sheets,
Says, Perpetuana's, Cowries, Welsh Plains, Manillos, Boysades, Chints,
Rombergers, Coral, Callico's, Nicanies, Clouts, Amber, Powder, Muskets,
Batteries of all forts, Turkey Carpets, Brandy, Strong Waters, Spirits,
Gingharus Taffeties, Beads of all sorts, Buckshaws, Knives and Sheaths, Swords,
Tallow, etc. For which they import from thence to England, Gold, Elephants
Teeth, Hides, Malagueta, or Ginny Pepper, Red Wood, Ambergreece, with several
other good Commodities, besides numbers of Negroes for supplying his Majesty's
American Plantations to their great advantage; They have likewise diverse Forts
and Factories established upon those Coasts, for the security and defense of
their Merchandise and Commerce in Africa, for the names of some of which I must
be obliged to a Gentleman, who has lately traveled thither, of which I shall
give a brief account, and touch upon the manners of the Natives and other
observables as I pass along.

The first place he mentions is Gambo, where the English have a Fort, with
eight pieces of Cannon, and the Government worth about two Thousand Pound a
year; It is Situate near Cape Verde, so called from its continual greenness,
which makes it a most delectable place, being a Promontory, which throws it
self into the Sea, covered with green Trees, and causing a very beautiful
Prospect by reason of their evenness, seeming as if planted by a line; we have
already described the Natives, only may add, that they have generally small
Bellies, long Legs, broad Feet, long Toes, sharp Sight, quick Wits, are
Envious, curiously Neat, Thieves, Letcherous, subject to the Pox, of which as
well as their Pudenda they are not the least ashamed, yet hold breaking wind
backward a great incivility, and wondered at the Hollanders for offering them
such contempt; Lastly, they have Stomachs like Estridges, as appears by their
strange and usual repasts, of which I shall next give an account.

When they go to Market, they wash from Head to Foot, and put on other Cloths;
They buy only for one day; Their Bread is made by stamping their Millet as we
do Spice in a wooden dish, steeping it over night with a little Maiz, and in
the morning laying it on a stone, they grind it with another stone, as Painters
do their Colors, till it be dough, which they then temper with fresh Water and
Salt, and make Rolls thereof twice so big as a man's Fist, baking them a little
on the Hearth, and then eat it; Their Viands are raw flesh, handfuls of Corn,
large draughts of Aqua Vitae, Dogs, Catts, Buffles, Elephants, though stinking
like Carrion, and a thousand Magots crawling on them; They have little Birds
like Bullfinches which hang their Nests on the small ends of branches of Trees
for fear of Snakes, these they eat alive Feathers and all; The Negro's say that
up in the Country, they eat dried Snakes, and the guts of Dogs raw, which our
Author has seen, and a Boy who was left on Shipboard in pawn for Money, would
privately kill the Hens, that he might eat the raw Guts; They likewise eat raw
stinking Fish dried in the Sun, yet can dispense with dainties when they have
them; They make a kind of Ale of Mays and Water boiled together, and putting it
into a Vessel as large as a Kilderkin, four or five place themselves round, and
drink it off, each sending a little Pot full to his best beloved Wife; They lay
their hands upon the Head of him that drinks, and cry aloud Tautosi, Tautosi;
He must not drink off all, but leaves a little to throw on the ground to his
Fetisso, saying I, ou, spouting out some on the Arms and Legs of their
Fetisso's, supposing that otherwise they should not drink in quiet; They are
great drinkers, and feed as unmannerly as Swine, sitting on the ground, and
cramming it in, not swallowing one Morsel after another, but tear their meat to
pieces, and throw it into their Mouths, which stand gaping to receive it, they
are always hungry, and would eat all day long; Yea the Europeans have great
Appetites while they are there; He that gets most, drinks most of their strong
Liquors, for they lay up but little.

The next place belonging to the English on these Coasts is in the River of
Sierra Leona, where our Author says, an Englishman dwelt a long time in one of
the Isles, having a fair House, guarded with four pieces of Cannon, and was
well beloved and protected by the Kings of that Country. In the first War with
Holland 1666. our Author being aboard a Dutch Man of War, this English Factor
writ to them diverse times to desire he might come and Trade with them, they
told him he might do it with safety, and upon their Parole, the Englishman
called Abraham came aboard them in his Shallop, rowed by three Slaves,
accompanied by a Hollander and two others which belonged to him, and was kindly
treated, but afterward the Captain contrary to the advice of the rest,
treacherously made him a Prisoner; and the three Moors with him, to their
great surprizal; And Jan. 1. 1667. their great Shallop was manned out with
thirty Men, and one Piece of Ordnance to Besiege and plunder his House, which
was built of Brick and Freestone, defended with four great Guns, encompassed
with a fair Wood of Palmtrees, which supplied him with Wine; On one side were
about twenty Cabines for the Natives, and on the other a Spring of good Water,
it being the most beautiful Island upon the River.

Being about to land, they discovered 200 Moors got together about the House
with Firelocks, and a greater number farther up in the Woods, which obliged the
Hollanders to make a show of going up higher, as being weaker, and therefore
had more occasion for the wind, but the Negroes thought they had been gone to
Bower, and dispatch a Canoe to give the King of Boulom the Alarm, which was
persued by the Enemy, who fired into their Boat, and at length took them, they
were two young Slaves belonging to the Portugals, who lived with the English
Factor, but would confess nothing of their Message; The English in the House
observing what passed, fired at them with their Cannon, and three of their
Bullets fell within ten paces of the Boat; The Hollanders put themselves out of
the reach of their Guns for the present, and came to an Anchor to wait the
Tide; About an hour after two Moors belonging to one of the Neighbor Islands
made up directly to them in a Canoe, and came within Pistol-shot, but would not
be persuaded aboard, the Dutch firing on them, they fled, and stooping for fear
of their fire, seemed no higher than Catts; the English in the interim played
upon them, though they saw they were out of their reach, to show the Natives
they had undertaken their Defense, and desired their Friendship.

The Tide coming in, the Dutch retreated to their Ship, wherein they found
several Moors and Portugals, and among them the King of Bouloms Son called
Bembo, about 35 years old, well proportioned, and abating his Blackness, a very
handsome Man, he was a very great Friend of Abraham's the English Factor, and
when he understood he was a Prisoner, he instantly interceded for his Ransom,
and on Monday noon came on board again with an hundred Elephants Teeth,
weighing nine hundred pound weight, and two Civet Catts alive, upon the
delivery whereof Abraham was dismissed, the Hollanders giving him a little Barrel
of Strong Water, a Roll of Tobacco, a Cheese and a Salvo of three Guns.

In the River of Madre-Bomba the English have likewise a House or Factory not
inferior to that of Siorra-Leone. The Kingdom of Boulom, wherein it seated, is
principally inclined to the English and Portugals, of which last there are
several that inhabit there. Let us now consider the Religion of the Negro's, if
we may so call it, which is generally Paganism, they greet the New Moon with
horrible roarings, and strange gestures of Adoration; they offer their
Sacrifices in the Woods before great hollow Trees wherein their Idols are
placed, yet this they do rather out of Custom than Zeal, using neither Form nor
Method in their Devotions, every one making a God after his own fancy; some
seeming to incline to Mahumatism, others to Judaism, and many of them are Roman
Catholics, yet diverse affirm, that God who gives all things, and can do what
he pleases, and causes Thunders, Lightning, Rain and Wind, is Omnipotent, and
needs neither praying to, nor to be set forth in so mysterious a way as that of
the Trinity. They believe that when People die they go into another World, and
will have occasion for many of the same things they use here, and therefore put
part of their Housholdstuff into the Grave with the dead Corpse; and if they
lose any thing, imagine their Friends in the other World had need of it, and
have taken it away:

They have no Letters nor Books, yet keep Tuesday for a Sabbath, forbearing
then their Fishing and Husbandry, and the Palm Wine which is gotten that day
must not be sold, but is offered to the King, who bestows it on his Courtiers
to drink at night. On this Day in the midst of the Marketplace they place a
Table on four Pillars about three yards high, whose flat cover is made of Straw
and Reeds woven together, upon which they place many Straw Rings called
Fetisso's or Gods, and within them set Wheat, Water and Oil for their God whom
they imagine devours it; Their Priest they call Fetissero, who every
Festival-day places a Seat upon that Table, and sitting thereon, preaches to
the People, but what his Doctrine is, the Europeans cannot understand: After
this the Women offer him their Infants, whom he sprinkles with Water, wherein a
live Snake swims, wherewith he likewise besprinkles the Table, and then
uttering certain words very loud, and stroking the Children with some kind of
Colors, as if giving them his Blessing; he himself drinks of that Water, the
People clapping their hands and crying, I ou, I ou, and so he dismisseth this
devout Assembly.

Many wear such Rings next their Bodies, to preserve them from the mischiefs
their angry God might inflict upon them, in honor of whom they daub themselves
with a kind of Chalky Earth, which is their Morning Mattens; At their eating,
the first bit, and the first draught is consecrated to their Fetisso, wherewith
they besprinkle it: If Fishermen have not a good Draught, they present a piece
of Gold to the Priest to reconcile them to their frowning Saint, who with his
Wives makes a kind of Procession through the Streets, smiting his Breast, and
clapping his Hands with a mighty noise, till he come to the Shore, where they
cut down boughs from certain Trees, and hang them on their Necks, playing on a
Timbrel; Then the Priest turns to his Wives, and expostulates with them, and
throws Wheat and other things into the Sea as an Offering to appease the
Fetisso's displeasure against the Fishermen; When the King Sacrifices to his
Fetisso, he commands the Priest or Fitessero to inquire of a Tree, whereunto he
ascribes Divinity, what he will demand; The Priest comes to the Tree, and in a
heap of Ashes there provided, sticks the Branch of a Tree, and drinking water
out of a Basin, spouts it upon the Branch, and then daubeth his Face with the
Ashes, after which the Devil out of the Tree gives answer to the Kings
questions; The Nobility likewise adore certain Trees, esteeming them Oracles,
and they report the Devil sometimes appears to them like a black Dog, and
otherwhile answers them without any visible apparition. Some worship a Bird
called Pittoie, spotted and painted as it were with Stars, and resembles the
voice of a Bull; To hear this Bird low in their Journey, is reckoned a good
Omen, they saying, their Fetisso promises them good Fortune, and therefore they
set a Vessel of Water and Wheat in the place where they hear it; And as the
Earth and Air yield them Deities, so the Sea is not illiberal to them, but
yields certain Fishes whom they Canonize, upon this account, they never take
the Tunny Fish, the Swordfish they take and eat, but dry the Sword on his back,
which is held in great Veneration: Yea the Mountains are not without honor,
and if they did not pacify their Anger by setting daily Presents of Meat and
Drink thereon, they believe they would bend their sullen Brows, and as their
High Tops threaten to scale Heaven, would overwhelm the Earth, and destroy them
all.

Neither has Nature alone this privilege, but Art likewise is concerned in
this making of Gods, which are composed sometimes of very filthy things, as of
a piece of putrified Earth anointed over with Suet, Grease and Oil of Palms,
with five or six Parrot Feathers bolt upright in the middle, to which morning
and night they pay their constant Devotions; when it Thunders, Rains hard, or
the wind blows very strong, there is not one of them to be seen in the Streets,
all hide themselves in their Houses and cry, The Gods of the Whites are angry.
The Devil is so dreadful to them, they tremble at naming him, and say he beats
them, and makes them do evil things for their Fetisso, which every one carries
about him, some Monstrous Serpents in Africa
are made of the end of Horns filled up with Dung, others of little figures, as
the heads of some Creature and the like, which their Priests sell them at their
own price, and pretend they found them under the Fetiche Tree, when any one
Dies they make a new Fetisso or Ring of Straw, and conjure it to keep company
and protect the dead in their Journey to the other World; They lay the Corpse on
a Matt upon the ground, wrapped in Woollen, with a Stool covered with a Goat-skin
under the head, the body is then strowed with Ashes, the Arms laid by its side,
and the Eyes opened, this continues half a day, the best beloved Wife sitting
by the Husband (as the Husband does by his first Wife) crying Aury, and wiping
her Face with a wisp of Straw; Other Women go round the House and Corpse,
singing and beating on Basins; The Eldest Morini or Gentleman goes from House
to House with a Basin, into which every one puts the value of Twelve Pence in
Gold, with this they buy a Cow, with whose Blood the Fittessero or Priest
appeaseth the Fetisso. The Friends and Kindred assembling, prepare a Hen, and
then seating themselves in a corner of the dead man's House, they place all his
Fetisso's or Gods on a row, the greatest in the midst, adorning the same with
Garlands of Pease and Beans, and then sprinkle them with the Blood of the Hen,
and hang a Chain or Garland of Herbs about their Necks, after this the Hen
being boiled, the Women set it in the midst of his Fetisso's, and the Priest
taking water into his Mouth, amidst his Charms, spits it out on the Fetisso's,
and plucking the Herbs from his Neck, he makes a Ball of them, wherewith he
besmears his Face, which Ball hereby is made a Fetisso, and the Party deceased
is now at rest.

In the mean time, the dearest of his Wives fills all the House with Mourning,
the Neighbors and Friends assisting with Songs and Dances; At length they take
up the Corpse and carry it to the Grave, which is about four foot deep, and
covered with Stakes that nothing may fall therein; The Women come about the
Sepulcher, and expostulate thus with him in a pitiful and lamenting voice,
Alas, why did thou dye? Thou had so much Wheat, so much Maiz, thou wast
beloved of thy Family, and they had great care of thy Person, why therefore
would thou dye? what have we deserved, wherein have we offended thee, what
discontent have we ever given thee, to oblige thee to leave us? If he be a man,
they add; Thou were so valiant, so generous, thou have overthrown so many
Enemies; thou have behaved thy self gallantly in so many Fights, who shall now
defend us from our Adversaries? Wherefore then would thou dye? Others cry, He
is dead, that brave Huntsman, that excellent Fisherman, that valiant Warrior,
that great destroyer of Portugals, that generous Defender of our Gountrey, he
is departed this World. Then they throw on a little Earth, but none can get in
to the Corpse, for he has with him his Household Stuff, Armor, and whatsoever
he used in his life time, and Wine too, if he loved it, to drink in the other
World. Lastly, they cover the Sepulcher with a Roof to defend all from Rain; If
the King dies, greater Solemnity is used, yea his Nobles thinking so great a
Personage ought to have Attendants, one offers to him a Servant, another a
Wife, a third his Son or Daughter, even many of both Sexes to wait upon him,
all whom are suddenly slain, and their Bloody Carcasses buried with him, yea
the Kings Wives who loved him best, refuse not this last and everlasting
Service, but are willing to dye, that they may again live with him. The Heads
of the Slain are set upon Poles round about the Sepulcher; Meat, Drink, Cloths,
Arms, and other Utensils are buried with them; After the Funeral, they go to
the Sea, and there use other Ceremonies, some washing, while others play on
Basins and Instruments, where the Widow or Widdower is laid backward on the
water with diverse words of complaint, at last they return back to the dead Man's
House, where they are very merry, drinking themselves drunk, and washing away
all further sorrow.

Near Cape Miserado, the English have another Ware house or Factory, being in
great favor with the Natives, who have no kindness for any other Nation that
are Enemies to them; It was called Miserado by the Portugals, either because it
is encompassed with Rocks that lie under water, and would inevitably destroy
any Vessel which should come nearer than half a League, or because the French
who were formerly Massacred here, cried out Misericorde, Misericorde, Mercy,
Mercy; Besides the Natives of this place being very cruel, they have
denominated the River, and called it Duro, as being hard and fatal to the
Europeans. The Government of this Country is absolute and unlimited Monarchy,
so that the King is the only and sole Judge in all Causes, and though he admit
his Counselors sometimes to give their Opinions, yet he follows his own single
resolved determinations; This absolute Power makes him jealous of his Honor,
of which he will not endure the least diminution; His Highest Pomp consists in
sitting upon a Shield, whereby he signifies that he is the Protection and
Defense of his Country, and the Manager of all Wars, pacifying Civil
Insurrections, and other weighty matters belonging to him alone; His Title is
Dondagh, which is as much as Monarch. When any Nobleman is Disobedient, and
will not appear upon Summons, he sends this Koredo or Shield, as if he would
upbraidingly say, Be you Lord your self, and bear the burden of the Country.
This peremptory command by the Shield is sent by two Drummers, who as soon as
they come near the Offenders Habitation, begin to beat their Drums, and so
continue without ceasing till they have delivered the Shield, upon receipt
whereof, he must speed away to Court without delay, carrying the Shield with
him, which he presents to the King, begging forgiveness for his miscarriages,
and so taking up the Earth before the King, humbles himself.

Those that Address to the King for any favor, make their way with Presents of
Ribbons, Elephants Teeth, or such things, which he must deliver at the House of
the Kings chiefest Wife, who carries it to the King, requesting that the Person
may be admitted into his presence; If the King accept it, the Person has leave
to enter, otherwise if any complaints be brought against him, he sends it back,
yet so as the Presenter dares not receive and carry it away, but continues his
Suit by Friends without intermission, by whose frequent and renewed Mediations,
the King at last seeming a little pacified, remits his severity, takes the
Present, and calls for the Suppliant, who entering the Royal Presence, goes
bowing all along toward the King, who sits on the ground upon a Mat, leaning on
a Stool, when he approaches within two steps, he bows himself to the Earth,
kneeling down upon one Knee with his his right Elbow on the ground, and names
the Kings Title, Dondagh, whereupon the King if pleased Answers, Namady, I
thank you, if not he sits silent. If it be a Person of Quality and his Subject,
the King perhaps causes a Mat to be spread on the ground, upon which sitting at
some distance, he moves his request; But if a Forreigner, who comes only to
salute the King, he is conducted to him without any further Ceremony, and
receives an immediate dispatch; If the Person have any Proposition, Petition,
or Complaint to make, an Interpreter is called, who coming with his Bow in his
hand, opens the whole matter to the King, sentence by sentence, where to
according to the quality of the Affair he receives Answer, with promise, if
upon complaint, that when he has heard the other party, he will forthwith give
Judgment according to Right.

If any man come to thank the King for doing Exemplary Justice in a difficult
Cause, after his Presents received, he divests himself of all his Cloths and
Ornaments, saving a little Cloth to cover his Virilities, and so casts himself
backward upon the groudn, and instantly turning again, rises upon one knee,
takes up Earth with his hand, and lays it upon his head, then leaning with one
Elbow upon the Earth, he says three times Dondagh, whereupon the King answers
sometimes Namady, I thank you, and sometimes otherwise as he thinks fit: The
first Address is usually performed in his own House in the presence of his
chiefest Wife, but such as concern Justice, or the State of the Country he
hears in the Council House in the presence of his Lords. When some Eminent
Person sent from a Neighbor King, desires Audience, one of the Kings Wives
goes with a Present, and tells him who sent it, whereupon the Person appears
before the King and takes up Earth.

When an Ambassador sent from another Great Prince approaches the Borders, he
gives notice of his coming, whereupon he is ordered to remain in the next Town
till all be made ready which is requisite in the Kings Town; There he is
received with great Triumphs, which consist in exercising with Bows, Arrows,
Lances and Shields, as if they were fighting against Enemies, with great
Drummings and Songs of War; The Sport ended, the King retires to the
Council-House, where after a little stay, inquiry is made if the King may be
saluted; whereupon having permission, the Ambassador enters, and kneeling down
with his back to the King, and his Bow in his hand bent to the utmost, he
allusively implys, that he will set himself to the utmost against his Enemies:
Mean time the Ambassadors followers chant forth his praises, as before the
Kings Servants sung Elogiums to his Honor: These Encomiums they always begin
with Polo, Polo Sammach, and then add, His handiwork is not to be equalled by
another man, and then, I will stick as close as Pitch to him that opposes me.
The Council-House is open on all sides, with great Attendance round about,
where he receives this first Address; After which the Ambassador desires leave
to relate his Embassy, but is put off till next day, so retiring, he diverts
himself till the appointed time in Feasts and Sportive Recreations. The
Ambassador receives Answer by the Kings directions from an Interpreter, and
then is showed the Apartment for him and his Retinue, where the Kings Slaves
bring them Water to wash, and the Kings Women being very neatly dressed, in
Dishes set on their heads bring Rice and Flesh, after which the King sends for
his Welcome, Wine and other Presents, as a Kettle, Basin or the like. If any
European Merchant bring the King a Present, he is invited to eat with him, but
with no Black of what Quality soever will he eat out of the same Dish, but
sends their Meat to them by his Women.

Once a year he makes a Great Feast for the Common People, buying up for that
purpose all the Palm Wine, and Herds of Cattle, the Heads of which are painted
and hung up in the Kings Chamber, in testimony of his Bounty: He inviteth also
his Neighbor Kings, Caprains and Gentlemen, and then prays and sacrifices to
his Fetisso, which is the highest Tree in the Town. The King comes little
abroad, morning and evening, his Slaves blow Trumpets made of Elephansts Teeth
while his Wives anoint and wash his Body: He sits in state holding in his hand
the Tail of an Horse to drive away Flies, being gallantly adorned with Rings of
Gold on his Arms, Neck and Legs, and Coral Beads where with he sets off his
Beard. The Kings Children must maintain themselves when of Age, the People not
liking to maintain them idle; the King only bestows on them a Marriage-Gift and
a Slave; when he dies, his eldest Brother succeeds in the Throne, and enjoys
his Rice, Fields, Slaves and Women. These People believe that the Almighty whom
they call Kanuo, will punish all their misdeeds, and reward well-doers, and
therefore when oppressed, call for his Aid to do them Justice, continually
inculcating. That there shall a time come when all ill men shall receive their
deserts. They imagine that their Friends after death become Spirits, whom they
call Jannanen, and know all Transactions here below, with whom therefore they
hold familiar Colloquies, acquainting them with all their troubles and
adversities; When they go into the Woods to hunt Elephants, Buffles, or any
other dangerous Enterprise, they go first and offer to the Spirit of their
deceased Parents, either a Cow, Wine or Rice, which they leave on the Grave;
They suppose them to reside in the Woods, to whom therefore they address
themselves with great complaints and lamentations when in affliction; where
likewise there most Solemn Acts of Devotion are performed, when no Women nor
Children are permited to come; The King calls upon the Souls of his Father and
Mother almost in every matter of difficulty.

If a Woman be suspected of Adultery, the complaining Husband desires his Wife
may be delivered up to Jannanen, or the Spirits of his Ancestors, and brings
her in the Evening before the Council Assembled to that purpose, where after
there calling the Spirits to her, she is blindfolded, admonished to forsake her
evil Life, and not to go to any but her own Husband, and prosently a great
noise or murmur is raised, as if Spirits did appear, with some unintelligible
(though articulate) sounds, which are interpreted abloud to the whole
Congregation, with threathings, that if ever she commit the like offense again,
she shall be punished according to her demerits, and together with her
Paramour, shall be carried away by Jannanen, to whom yet none are delivered up
but upon clear evidence of their Guilt, to which end they have a Water of
Cursing or Divination wherewith they extort the Truth in all doubtful matters,
compounded of Barks and Herbs boiled together, which when it is enough, the
Priest repeats secretly the names of the suspected persons, or other matters to
which the Witchcraft must be applied, and then washes the Legs and Arms of
those accused with fair Water, after this he puts his Divining Staff, which is
bruised and tufted at the end, into the Pot, and drops or presses the Water
out of it upon the Arm of Leg of the suspected Person, muttering these words
over it, If he be guilty of this or that, then let this Water scald or burn him
till the very Skin come off. If the Party remain unhurt, they judge him
innocent, and proceed to the Trial of another till they have discovered the
Criminal, who being found, the Executioner instantly leads him bound and
blindfold into an open Field or Wood, and placing him on his Knees with his
Head bowed down, he first runs him through the Body with a Scimetar, and then
chops off his Head with an Ax, for they do not believe he is dead till his Head
is off; The Carcass cut into four quarters after great lamentations, they leave
in the Field as a Prey to the Beasts and Fowls, but the Friends take away the
Head as a great Present, and boiling it in a Kettle, drink up the Broth,
hanging the Scull by their Fetisso or Idol. The like Trial is also made of
other offenses among the Blacks, so that every one had need be very careful to
prevent suspicion.

Some years since Mendino the King of Manou died, whose Subjects and Favorites
made strict inquiry according to Custom, how he came by his end, but the
narrowest of their serutinies not being able to make any discovery, they were
forced to acquiesce, yet had such an inveterate hatred against Manimassah,
Brother of the deceased Mendino, that they forced him to the Trial, which
seeing no other Remedy, he underwent without any hurt, as a remarkable sign of
his Innocence, whereupon he demanded to be restored to his former Honor and
Credit, but instead thereof, the Tryers told him, The King in his Life time was
our Common Father, and should not we after his death endeavor to find out what
did befall him, or caused him to dye it were a great shame for us, we have
examined and tried you, but it shall not remain so, we will look farther into
the business, and make the Southsayers acquainted with it; Manimassah mad at
these inhumane usages, burst forth at last into these words; This shame is not
to be suffered from my own Subjects in my own Country, I will go under the
Conduct of the Spirits of my deceased Friends, and seek a dwelling place. In
this manner leaving his Native Country, he traveled Northward into Gala,
inhabited by a mean and simple People, and won so upon them by his endearing
behavior, that they unanimously besought him to be their Prince, to which he
consented upon condition, That they should give him some of their Plants and
Venison for an acknowledgement of their subjection. This they yielded to, but
such was their brutish Barbarism, that though they owned him their Lord, they
used him as their Companion, for being wholly unacquainted with Civility, when
any of them brought him Wine, Rice or Flesh, they came again to him to require
their Callibashes or Basquets, which unmannerly clownish behavior, Manimassah
so resented, that he withdrew from them, to require assistance from Flansire
King of Folgia, whose Daughter he had Married to reduce the Gala's to his
Authority.

The King hearing the request of his Son in Law, lent him many Soldiers under
the Conduct of Flonikerry his General, who unexpectedly fell into Gala, and
subdued the People, settling Manimassah in an absolute Dominion, who has ever
since continned their Prince, and taught them with sorrow more respective
qualities; after this, Flonikerry returned to Folgia, where he was received and
welcomed with great applause, and the King willing to gratify him for his
honest performances, he according to Flonikerrys Petition, gave him leave to go
and Conquer, and settle himself and his People in Cabo Monte an adjacent
Country, expressing his kindness in saying, I shall do the desire of his
Heart, and sending a considerable force to help him, that he might not be
repulsed; Marching toward this place, the Inhabitants being numerous and
courageous, were not soon subdued, but at length tired with the continual
onsets of their Enemies, who shot poisoned Arrows; which made all wounds though
never so slight prove Mortal, a fatal Invention unknown to these People, they
went with their Hoods upon their Heads as usual, to ask favor, which
Flonikerry naturally inclined to pity, easily granted, bidding them go lie down
with their Faces upon the ground according to the manner of that Country in
such cases, then coming out of his Fort he trod upon them with his Feet; He
then made an agreement with them, which was confirmed as follows, first some
Hens were killed in the presence of them all, of whose Blood the Conquered
swallowed a little, as a token of Friendship. Afterward the Hens were boiled,
and the Flesh eaten among them, only the Legs were kept for a perpetual
Remembrance, for if any Man after that time transgressed or broke his promise,
to him were the Legs shown, who upon sight thereof soon recanted for fear of
the punishment that would assuredly follow.

Flonikerry overjoyed at his success, gave free scope to his thoughts to range
farther, but for assuring his new Dominion, he first sought to win the minds of
the vanquished to him, and then to contract a firm League of Friendship and
correspondence with the Lords of his own Country. But wavering Fortune who
minds nothing less than contribuance of her favor, will blemish his new gotten
glory with a dire and unexpected mishap, for scarce were the minds of the
Nobility united, when there came out of Gala, Miminique Son of the
aforementioned Manimassah, with a great Army of Gala's, and others make War
upon him, of whose design his Father was not ignorant, having already forgot
the kindness received from Flonikerrys Arms in settling him in his new acquired
Dominions; Flonikerry upon the first Intelligence drew together his Forces, to
whom the Nobles joining theirs, he formed a considerable Army, wherewith
marching toward the Enemy, they soon met and came to a Battle, wherein by the
multitude of their Enemies, they were at first put to a disorderly retreat,
which Flonikerry who was of an undaunted Spirit perceiving, and not used to
shrink in Fight, dug with his hand a hole in the ground, and put his Knees
in it, with a resolution either to die there, or to remain Conqueror, and
indeed in one he had his desire, for after a long and sharp contest at length
being even covered with Arrows, he was slain on the spot. However his men
gathering new courage to revenge their Princes death, rallied and gave a fresh
charge with such fury, that they turned the Fortune of the day, and became sole
Masters of the Field.

The death of Flonikerry, whose body they privately buried, was sometime kept
secret till they sent for his Brother Zillimanque to take his charge, who
immediately accepting the same, pursued the Victory, and drew near the Enemies
Camp, which he soon surprised, and gave as a spoil to his Soldiers; After
which he marched farther, the People all along yielding subjection without
blows, whereby they soon became Masters of the whole Country, and gained the
reputation of a Mighty People; After which he was poisoned, as was thought,
leaving behind him several Sons who were young, and not capable to manage their
Fathers Conquests. However, Flansire his eldest was admitted Successor, during
whose Minority his Uncle Jemmah undertook the Government, but Flansire growing
to years, took the Royal Authority into his own hands, and to show that he
inherited as well his Fathers Valor as Countries, resolves to enlarge his
bounds yet farther, and to that end marched with his Forces over the River
Galinas or Hens, taking all the adjacent places as far as Sierra Liona, and
placing Garrisons therein: Having settled his new Conquests, he returned to his
own Native Principality, where he spent a good part of his Life in peace and
quietness, when on a sudden there came News from Sierra Liona that Kandaqualla
his Governor was driven out thence, and forced to fly with all his People to
the Islands of Bananeo, not being able to withstand, Falma of Dogo, who with a
mighty Force inveded them; Flansire startled at this intelligence, and knowing
nothing more necessary than expedition, sent to the Lords, his Substitutes, to
raise an Army and meet him at an appointed Randezvouz; but they having made a
private Confederacy with Gamina their Master Flansires Brother, by his
instigation they neglected and slighted his Commands. Flansire, ignorant of
this Combination, leaving the Government of his Kingdom, Wives and Children to
his treacherous Brother Gamina, marched with his eldest Son Flambore the
present King of Quoia, not doubting in the least the Fidelity of his
Provincials: He went first by Land to the River of Hens, and from thence in
Canoes to the Isles of Bananes, to take with him his People who were driven
from Sierra Liona, and so bringing them back thither, he began a sharp War with
Falma.

This Falma had been formerly in great favor with the King of Dogo, or Hondo,
but having debauched one of his Wives, the King was thereat so much offended,
that not content the offense should, as usual, be bought off with Gifts or
Slaves, he caused his Ears to be cut off, and banished him his presence, but
length of time so wore out the Kings Fury, that Falma was again admitted to
Court, where he had not been long, but he began to show his Insolence, and at
length addressed the King in these Terms; Sir King, considering the wickedness
committed against you my Lord and Master, I am obliged to thank you for your
gracious Sentence by which I am punished, whereby every one that looks upon me
derides and scorns me, and the rather because the punishment is unusual, and
the like offense customarily bought off with Goods and Slaves: Now as you were
pleased to punish me, so I desire the like offense in others may be punished in
the same manner. It may happen that some of the Kings Servants or Subjects may
fall into the same Lapse, but if this Sentence be either denied, or not
performed, I shall complain against my Lord the King in the Ways and in the
Woods to the Jananen and Belli, that is, to all the Spirits and Demons. The
King having heard this audacious Speech, took counsel upon it, and
notwithstanding this seeming Threat, determined that the punishment inflicted
on him should not follow upon all: But yet to pacify him in some measure, he
made him General of an Army to recover Sierra Liona out of the hands of
Kandaqualla, who presided there for Flansire.

To repel this Invader Flansire as we said coming to Sierra Liona with an Army,
and making sharp War, at length by the help of some Europeans he fell upon the
Town of Falmaha, and with Axes cutting down the Treewall, at last they forced
an entrance, and set the Houses on fire, whose fury soon increased to an
impossibility of being quenched, whereupon Falma unable to resist, fled, whom
young Flambore pursued, and though he mist him, yet got great Reputation, the
People stiling him, The Pursuen of Falma. Flansire having thus reconquered
these Countries, and settled Kandaqualla in his Lieutenantship, retreated with
his Forces, intending to return to his Wife and Children; But on the way he had
notice, that his Brother Gamana had usurped his Kingdom, killed all his Sons he
could meet with, taken his Wives for himself, and had set up his Residence at a
convenient place near the River of Hens, to intercept and hinder his Brothers
approach; and as commonly one Trouble falls in the neck of another, this
Rebellion of his Brother was attended with the Invasion of Monou, who dwelt
near Cape Miserado, and fell into his Country at Cape de Monto, where they
burnt the Town, and led away all they met with for Slaves. Flansire
understanding these mischiefs, marched toward the River Maqualbary with all
speedy, but complaining to the Kanou and Jananies (that is, to God and the
Angels) of his distress in these words, To you only it is known, that my Father
left me rightful Heir to his Kingdom, which falls to me by the Laws of the
Land, seeing I was the eldest: You likewise know that my Brother has rebelled
against me, and has set himself up to be Lord, be you Judges between him and
me in this intended Fight, and if the Cause be unjust that he manages against
me, let the mischief fall upon his own head.

Thereupon he passed with all his Soldiers over the River, where the Armies
suddenly met, and his Brother with great numbers of men being slain, he
obtained a complete Victory, but still kept the Field, though no other
opposition appeared against him. While the King encamped in the Field to be
more ready against any other appearing Rebels, his Son Flambore went with a
Squadron of Soldiers into the Woods to hunt Civit Cats, and being by his
sports got far into them, they discovered some of the Rebels busy in burying
the dead body of Gamana the Usurper, who perceiving Flambore and his Followers,
immediately fled, imagining he had come purposely with those Forces to search
them out, and left the Corpse behind them, with three Slaves in Chains, whom
they intended to have dispatched at his Grave according to Custom: Being by this
means assured of Gamana's death, when they least expected it, they brought the
three Slaves to Flansire, who having from them understood all Circumstances,
and how all things stood in the Country, he sent them to their Fellow-Rebels
to admonish them to come and ask his pardon; and to ascertain them he would
utterly forget their misdeeds; which goodness of the Kings, though presented by
the mouth of these Slaves, wrought the desired Effect, for the Rebels
immediately submitted, and received their Pardon. This Rebellion thus suppressed,
King Flansire with all his Power marched to Cape Miserado to reduce Monou,
which he did with great slaughter and spoil of the Country, and then retired
home with his Forces, till Monou made a New Insurrection to revenge the Losses
of Falma, but in short time he was again in a manner totally subdued by
Flansires People.

In the Principality of Anten near Tekorari, the Hollanders some years since
built a Fort, which in 1664. was attaqued by Sir Robert Holms in behalf of the
Royal African Company, with two of the Kings Men of War, six Frigates, and some
other Ships, and by them with no great difficulty won, but regained the next
year by Admiral De Ruyter, being at that time only manned by four or five in
health, and about as many more sick Englishmen, leaving in it seven Iron Guns,
and six or eight Pounders. Upon the retaking, the Guns being drawn off to the
Ship, De Ruyter caused it, as not being tenable, without many People and great
Charges, to be blown up into the Air, and totally dismantled with twelve
hundred pound of Powder. In the mean time the Negro's of the Mine plundered the
Village of Tekorari, and laid it waste with Fire and Sword, out of malice to
the Blacks of that place, exercising great Cruelty upon the Prisoners, cutting
off their Heads, wherewith they went dancing and leaping up and down, and at
last carried them home in token of Victory; they were well Armed according to
the Country fashion, some having Caps like Helmets, adorned with Feathers and
Horns of Beasts, and Swords hanging on their Bellies, whereon instead of
Handles they put the Bones of Lions, Tigers, and other Beasts, their Faces are
generally painted with Red and Yellow, which make a very strange and terrible
sight.

In the Kingdom of Fetu the Hollanders have a Fort called Cape Corso,
strengthened with a convenient number of great Guns, and manned with a strong
Garrison of Slaves, but in 1664 this with the Forts of Tekorari aforementioned
Adia, and Anemabo were taken by Sir Robert Holmes for the Royal African
Company, but when De Ruyter in 1665. with the Dutch Fleet had forced the
English Fort Cormantyn, he spared neither diligence nor cost to regain Cape
Corse then in the English possession, and the rather because John Valkenberge
the Dutch Commander in chief there, judged it very dangerous that any place in
that Conntrey should be left in the hands of the English, alleging that if
during the Wars in Europe they were expelled thence, by consequence they might
easily be kept out, whereas by the holding of this place, they had an
opportunity to settle their Jurisdiction in the Country again, and in defiance
of their Power might defend it against them: But finding the Natives sided with
the English, threatening nothing but Fire and Sword, having also possessed
themselves of a place, where a hundred men might beat off a thousand, it was
judged not feasible to be undertaken, without the greatest danger in the World,
and therefore at present the design was laid aside.

In the Kingdom of Fantyn, the chief Town upon the Seacoasts called Cormantyn
is the principal place of Trade, for the English, situate upon a very high
Mountain; It is the fairest and most delightful prospect upon the whole Coast,
near which the English have a Castle fortified with four Bulwarks. In 1665.
Feb. 8. This Cormantyn was surreptitiously attaqued by the Dutch, the manner
thus; The Holland Fleet coming to Anchor Feb. 6. westward of Cormantyn, the
next day they got four or five hundred Canoes with Negro's from the Castle Del
Mine, with which well manned they departed from the Fleet, intending to land at
Anemabo, but were upon their approach near the Shore, saluted by the Negro's of
Cormantyn, who lay behind the clifts and bushes with Muskets and great
Ordnance, playing from the Fort with such fury and violence that they were
beaten back, and forced to retreat without doing any thing. This Enterprise was
afterward twice reattempted upon hopes of having brought the Negro's to side
with them, but without success, however resolving not to quit it, they came at
last to a more strict alliance with the Negro's, who for security of their
Faith delivered several Hostages into their hands; and the design was to be
executed with the first opportunity; Having pitched on a time, at Night a Negro
called Antonio, came in a Canoe sent by the Inhabitants of Fantyn, declaring
that the People about Anemabo, and Adja could not be ready at the appointed
hour, but in the Morning they would not fail them of their promised assistance,
adding that early in the Morning at the new cast up Fort of Adja the Princes
flag should be set up, upon which sign the Dutch might land with their whole
Force. This concluded, the chief Commanders of the Fleet resolved the following
Morning to make the onset, yet beforehand sent a Letter to the English
Commander in chief, requiring the surrender of the Fort without opposition.
Accordingly at eight a Clock in the Morning, the Princes Flag being raised upon
the new erected Fort of Adja, they lanched through with much hazard near the
same Fort, and marched in order along the Shore with three thousand Negro's,
every one with a Linen Cloth about his Neck to distinguish them from other
Blacks, and came about Noon to Anemabo, drawing forth about a Musket shot
westward of Cormantyn, to a Hill planted with three Pieces of Ordnance, where
they found stout opposition, but at length overpowered they fled, and then the
Hollanders entered the Town, and set it on Fire, the Flame and Smoke whereof
suddenly surprised the Garrison in the Castle, insomuch that as soon as they
saw the Soldiers with scaling Ladders, hand Grenades, and other Utensils of
War under their Walls, they took down the red Flag from the Tower, and
immediately as it were without a stroke delivered it up. Into this Castle were
Soldiers out of the Castle of Mine instantly put to secure it; To the subduing
this Fort, the Hollanders were not a little animated by the promise of
assistance from the Natives of Fantyn, which they purchased of them as we
hinted before, for fifty two Bars of Gold, to the value of two thousand five
hundred Pound English Money.

Half a mile West from Cormantyn stands Anemabo, one half whereof is inhabited
by the Fishermen of the Mine, and the other by those of Fantyn; At Cannon shot
distance West from this lies Adja, where the Dutch had a Fort taken by the
English in 1664. and by them kept till the attempt upon Cormantyn, when they
blew it up with Gunpowder by Stratagem, for having laid an heap of Earth at the
Mine, they intended when any came thereon with hopes of plunder, to have blown
them up by Springing the Mine, but little harm was done, however the English in
the mean time left the place and retreated to Cormantyn. Between Adja and
Anemabo lies a Town called Janasia, where the English have a Fort. The
principal places of Trade lying near the Sea, and frequented by the Whites are
Cormantyn and Ademabo, the former having been the chief place of the English
upon this Coast for some years, where they got the best sort of Goods, and
enjoyed most Friendship, for the support whereof, they built that Fort planted
with forty two Pieces of Ordnance, and fortified with four Bulwarks. The King
keeps his residence in the Town of Fantyn, and extends his Jurisdiction about
ten or twelve Miles round, being able in time of War to bring eight or ten
thousand men into the Field.

These Countries produce variety of Creatures, and among others Tigers and
Leopards, who bear great enmity to each other, though generally the Tiger is
the Conqueror, therefore when the Leopard is pursued by the Tiger, he with his
Tail wipes out his footsteps that so he may not be traced. Some of the Ancients
knowing the fierceness of the Tiger, attributed to him the command of the
Woods, but in these Parts, because he hurts no man but only Beasts, they make
the Leopard King of the Forest, for which ravening temper they are hunted and
killed by all Men, even for their own safety. When a Leopard is killed they
bring him dead to the Kings Town, there to be cut up and eaten, being flayed
they present his Skin and Teeth to the King, and the People assembled, eat the
Flesh boiled as a dainty, spending the remainder of the day in Revelling and
Dancing, as at their most Solemn Festivals. There is likewise a monstrous
Creature which the Portugals call Salvage, that is a Satyr, it has a great
head, a heavy body, fleshy and strong arms, no tail, and goes sometimes
upright, and otherwhile upon all four like an Ape. The Blacks affirm it is of
Humane Race, but by the alteration and change of the Woods and Wilderness it is
become half a Beast, they sustain themselves in the Woods with Fruit and wild
Honey, which they get out of the Trees, and as they are numerous, so upon
meeting, they fight continually with each other. The Negro's relate strange
things of them, and aver for certain, that they not only overpower feeble Women
and Virgins, but dare also set upon armed Men. There is another strange Beast,
like a Crocodile six or seven Foot long, very slender, and the Tongue of an
extraordinary length. It is a Beast of Prey, and very strong, close set with
gaudy Quills over the whole body, wherewith it offends Men, and defends it self
against other Creatures, for when the Leopard attempts to seize it, it converts
into a round Ball, setting up the points of its Quills that no hold can be
fixed, their Food is generally Pismires, which with their Tongues they lick up
at a great distance.

Both on the Sea coasts, and the upland Country many Civet Cats are found, it
more resembles a Wolf than a Cat, for it has a long Head, small Nose, flat
Mouth, and short Ears, Teeth like a Dog, the Body part white, part ashcolour'd,
speckled with black spots, the Legs and Feet of a middle size, with black
Hairs, having four Claws forward and one backward, with black short flat Nails,
the Tail long, bushy and speckled hanging to the ground; The Civet lies between
the Privities and the Cods, and is taken thence with a Spoon or some other fit
Instrument. The Giraffa or Camelo-pard is a Beast not often seen, yet very
tame, strangely compounded of a Libard, Heart, Buffle and Camel, and by reason
of his long legs before and shorter behind, is not able to graze without
difficulty, but with his high Head, which he can stretch forth half a Pikes
length in height, feeds on the leaves and boughs of Trees. The Camels in Africa
are more hardy than in other places, and will not only carry great burdens,
but travel fifty days together without any Corn, only turn them out at night to
feed on Thistles, Boughs, and the like, and no less patient are they of Thirst,
being able to endure fifteen days without Drink. The Lions in cold places are
gentler, in hotter more fierce, and will not fly the approach of two hundred
Armed Horsemen; in time of their coupling eight or ten will follow one Female,
with terrible and bloody Battles among themselves: They report that Lions spare
those who kneel to them, and prey rather on Men than Women, and not at all on
Infants, unless compelled by hunger. The Africans believe he has
understanding, and tell of a Getulian Woman, who lying at the mercy of a Lion,
besought him, that being so noble a Beast, he would not dishonor himself with
so ignoble a Prey, as she a weak Woman was, whereupon he went away and left
her: His Tail seems to be his Scepter, whereby he expresses his Passion; he
shrinks at no danger, unless the covert of the Woods shroud him from Witnesses,
and then he will take the benefit of flight, which otherwise he seems to
disdain. Mento a Man of Syracuse was encountered with a Lion, who instead of
rending, fawned upon him, and with his dumb eloquence, seemed to implore his
Aid, showing his Foot, wherein Mentor perceived a Thorn to stick, which he
plucked out. The like is reported by Gellius of a Fugitive Servant, who having
performed the same kind Office to a Lion, was by him gratified for a long time
by giving him a daily portion of his Prey: It happened that afterward this Man
was taken, and presented to his Master a Roman Senator, who exhibited Games to
the People, wherein Slaves and condemned Persons were exposed to the fury of
Beasts, among whom he put this Servant, and by a wonderful fate this Lion was
soon after taken, and brought to execute these horrid Spectacles. The Beasts
running with violence to their bloody Encounter, suddenly this Lion stayed, and
taking a strict view of him, fawned upon this his Guest, and defended him from
the Assaults of the other Beasts, whereupon at the Peoples Intercession, who
understood the Passages from him, he was freed, and the Lion given him, who
followed him with a string through the Streets, the Spectators crying, This is
the Man who was the Lions Physician; This is the Lion who was this Man's Host.

The Hyaena is another strange Beast which some have thought to be Male one
year, and Female another, it has no Joint in the Neck, and therefore stirs not
his Head, but the whole Body at once; He is said to imitate the Voice of Men,
and drawing near the Sheepfolds, having heard the name of some of the
Shepherds, will call him, and when he comes devour him: They say his Eyes are
of various Colors, and that his shadow prevents the barking of a Dog: By
ingendring with this Beast, the Lioness brings forth a Corcuta of like
qualities with the Hyaena, he has one continued Tooth without division
throughout his Mouth. The Lybard is not hurtful to Men except they disturb him.
The Dabu is said to be a foolish Creature, in shape like a Wolf, only his Legs
and Feet are like a Man's; they that know his haunts, sing and fiddle before his
Den, his Ears being so captivated with the Music, that he is not aware his
Legs are captivated with a Rope, whereby he is taken. The Zebra of all
Creatures for beauty and comeliness is admirable, resembling an excellently
proportioned Horse, but not so swift, all overlaid with curious party-colours,
from Head to Tail, they live in great Herds, and when one is shot, the rest
stand still, gazing till they see three or four fall down before them.

The Rivers breed Water-Elephants, about the bigness of a large Horse, but much
thicker and rounder, seeming as if they were blown up; Likewise Sea-Cats, and
many other monstrous Creatures. There are variety of Fowls of diverse kinds, as
Eagles, Parrots, Cranes, and many more, and among others a Bird no bigger than
a Thrush, by whose chirping they guess at their good or ill Fortune in their
Journey. Crocodiles are here so large, that they will swallow an Ox whole; but
above all things the monstrous Serpents produced in these Countries are
remarkable, among which the most poisonous are of a Grass green: Some are so
curiously spotted with lively Colors as are scarce to be found in any other
Creatures. The King of Bena, whom the Inhabitants call King of Serpents, keeps
commonly one of them in his Arms, which he strokes and fosters as it were a
young Child, and so highly esteems, that none dare hurt or kill it. The Negro's
roast and eat some of them as great Dainties. Africa has been famous in all
Ages for prodigious Serpents and Monsters. One called Minia attains such
largeness, that it can swallow a whole Deer without chewing or tearing to
pieces, devouring Boars and many other Beasts and Cattle; It lurks for Prey
within some bush, which coming within reach, it suddenly seizes, winding two or
three times about the body and loins, till it falls down and dies, of which
thus glutted he lies, not able to stir till his gorged Paunch has digested his
Meal: Of this kind was that which the Roman Historians mention, which Attilius
Regulus the Roman Consul in the first Punick War at the River Bagrada
encountered, and planted his Engines and Artillery against it, whose Skin sent
to Rome for a Monument, was in length an hundred and twenty Foot: The Scales
defended it from all hurt by Darts or Arrows, and with the Breath it killed
many, and had eat diverse of the Soldiers, till at last with a Stone out of an
Engine this Destroyer was destroyed. Hear how the elegant Lucan, as eloquently
translated describes it, when Julius Caesar in pursuit of Cato into Africa came
to the place which was formerly the habitation of this dreadful Serpent, and
had this account given him by an African.

Caesar within a shady Grove espies
A dismal Cave in which no chearing light
At all ere peeped: but sad and doleful Night
A squalid filth, and mouldiness had made.
From whence exhaled steams and fumes invade
The upper Air; Whilst Caesar in amaze
Does nearly view the horror of the place
His longing thoughts an African there by
(Taught by Tradition) thus does satisfy.
This Den O Caesar which for many a year
Has empty stood and freed the Land from fear,
A monstrous Serpent by Heavens Vengeance bred
The Plague of Africa, once uninhabited.
The Earth a greater Monster never bare
Not Hydra might with this dire Snake compare,
Nor though the Sun the mighty Python slew,
Did ere the Sun a greater Serpent view.
The several Snakes that out of Africks slime
Are bred, might all have been in him combined,
An hundred Feet in length was his extent;
When he upon this side the River went
With his long Neck stretched out, what ere he spied
With case he seized from the other side.
With Lions here he filled his hungry maw,
That came to drink the Streams of Bagrada,
And fiercest Tigers all besmeared with Blood
Of Cattle slain, became themselves his Food.
When first the Roman Armies Sailing over,
And theatning Carthage on the Africa Shore
Were led by Regulus, whose Tragic fall
Sadly renowned the Spartan General,
Here then this hideous Monster did remain;
The Army marching on you spacious Plain,
Three Roman Soldiers by ill Fate drew near
To quench their fiery thirst in the River here,
And tempted by these shady Trees, to shun
A while the scorching fury of the Sun
Entering the Wood, down to the Stream they stoop
And in their Helmets take the Water up,
When suddenly surpised with chilling fear
A horrid hissing through the Air they hear
And from the Den the Serpents Head appears
At once amazing both their Eyes and Ears
What should they do? For help they could not call
The Serpents hissing loud had filled all
The Wood; Nor Strength nor Hearts had they to fight
Nor scarce did any hope appear by flight,
Nor could their trembling hands the Helmets hold,
When straight the Serpent from his scaly fold
Shot forth, and seized one, who calling on
His Fellows names in vain, was swallowed down
And buried in the Monsters hungry maw.
His horrid destiny when the others saw
They leapt into the Stream to save their lives,
But that alas to them no safety gives.
For forth his long twined Neck the Serpent stretched,
And swimming Havens in the River reached
Who though too late, he strived to be drowned
In Bagrada, a Fate more cruel found.
Marus at last, while Havens death did stay
The Monsters speed, had time to escape away,
And to the amazed General relates
The Serpents greatness, and his Fellows Fates.
But ere his faltring Tongue had fully told
The Tragic story, they from far behold
The scaly Monster rouling on the Sands
In spacious windings; Regulus commands,
The Army straight their Piles and Spears prepare
To charge and march against it as a War,
And ready all their Battering Engines make
That strongest Walls and Bulwarks used to shake;
The Trumpets then as to a Battle sound;
Which noise the Serpent hearing, from the ground,
Where he in spacious Rings infolded lay,
Aloft his Head advances to survey
The Champion round, and to their Eyes appears
Large as the Dragon 'twixt the Heavenly Bears,
Fire from his threatening Eyes like lightning shot,
And hellish blasts exhaled from his wide Throat
While he advanced, you would suppose from far
A moving Castle made Offensive War
And shooting forth, he in a moment flew
Upon far distant Faces; At whose view
The startling Horses could no more be held
By Bits, but snorting flew about the Field,
Whilst this dread Serpent sad Massacres makes
Amongst the men; Some 'twixt his Jaws he takes
And crushes there; Some into the Air he flings
Who falling dye; And while his spacious Rings
He does unfold with fury, sweeping round
The Sand, he beats whole Cohorts to the ground,
The Army now gave ground, and 'gan retire
When Noble Regulus inflamed with Ire
To see this shame, cries out, Oh stand the Field,
To Africa Monsters shall Romes Virtue yield?
If so, I singly will the Combat try,
And expiating Romes dishonor dye.
Then all alone, devoyd of fear he goes,
And his strong Pile against the Serpent throws
With skilful Aim, whom not in vain he struck
In his tough Forehead the steeled Javelin stuck,
The hideous Monster whose long Age before
Had nere felt steel, sent out a yelling rore,
And darting forth, impatient of the Wound
With his long Tail he lasht the suffering ground,
A shout the Soldiers raise, encouraged now
And altogether Storms of Javelins throw,
Some harmless lighting on his Scaly Back
Such noise as Hail on tiled Houses make,
Some pierce his Breast, and softer Belly Wound,
Those Parts alone they penetrable found,
Black gore from thence distains the swarthy Sands,
At last two Javelins sent from lucky Hands
In both his fiery threatening Eyes did light,
Depriving him, though not of strength, of sight;
Whose yet blind rage draws many a ruin on,
Until at last a huge and massy Stone,
Shot from a Bulwark-battering Engine stroke
His bowed Back with such great force, it broke
That many jointed Bone; Nor then could he
Lift as before his speckled Crest on high;
But as he struggling lay upon the Plain,
Another Stone dash't out his poisonous Brain,
The Sands discolored with black filth appear,
And that so lately feared Serpent, there
Stretched out at length, his dismal Life expires,
His vast extent the General admires.
Some parts of Africa produce great numbers of Dragons, of vast bulk, slow
motion, and their stinging incurably venomous; Some are said to be as big as
Rams with Wings, long Tails, and diverse rows of Teeth in his Mouth, his Scales
seem painted with Blue and Green, has two Feet, and feeds upon raw Flesh,
Another Serpent has a rundle in his Tail like a Bell, that makes a noise as he
goes, somewhat of the nature, I suppose, of the Rattle-Snake. There are a
multitude of deadly Serpents in those Countries, as the Cer^stes which has a
little Coronet of four horns, whereby he lureth the Birds to him, hiding all
but his Head in the Sands, and then devoureth them: The Jaculi so called
because they dart themselves from Trees on such Creatures as pass by. The
Amphisvena has two Heads which causes it to crawl round. The Scytale is
admirable for variety of Colors. The Dipsas kills those she stings with
Thirst. The Hypanale causes them to Sleep to death, as happened to Cleopatra
Queen of Egypt. The Hemorrhois makes them bleed to death. The Prester occasions
them to swell till they burst; And not to poison you with more names of
venomous Creatures, the Basilisk is said to kill with her sight or hissing, as
Galen and Solinus affirm, it is not half a Foot long, having on the Head three
pointels like a Crown or Bishops Miter, it blasteth the ground, Herbs and
Trees, and so infecteth the Air, that Birds flying over fall down dead, it
affrights all other Serpents with the hissing, going upright from the Belly, if
it kill any thing that is also venomous to such as touch it, only a Weasil
kills it; The Bergameni bought the Carcass of one at an incredible price, which
they hung up in their Temple, that was curiously painted by Apelles, in a Net
of Gold, to preserve it from being defiled by Birds or Spiders; Lemnius affirms
that from an Egg laid by an old Cock after he is past treading of Hens, is
produced a Basilisk or Cockatrice. The various kinds of Serpents in Africa, and
the tremendous effects of them upon Mankind are excellently described by the
Famous Lucan, lib. 9. relating the march of Cato's Army over the burning Sands
of Libia.

The venomous Asp with swelling Head,
Which in no Serpent is compacted more.
In Scaly folds the great Hemorrhus lies
Whose bite from all Parts draws the flowing Blood.
The Pareas whose way his Tail does guide
The greedy Prester too, distending wide
His Venom foaming Mouth. The Seps whose bite
Consumes the Bones, dissolves the Body quite.
The Basilisk whose hiss all Snakes does scare
(Hurtful before the Venom touch) who far
All Vulgar Serpents from his sight commands
Reigning alone upon the emptied Sands,
You Dragons too, glistring in Golden Pride,
Who hurtless wander in all Lands beside.
You, Africa mortal makes; Aloft you fly.
Through the Air on Wings, and follow speedily,
The Herds; your strokes the mightiest Bulls destroy,
Great Elephants escape you not; For you all kill,
Nor need you Poisons help to work your will.
This thirsty way among these venomed Snakes
Cato amidst his hardy Soldiers takes,
Where many losses of his Men he found,
And deaths unlook't for, from a little Wound.
A trodden Dipsas turning back his Head
Did sting young Aulus Ensign bearer, bred
Of Tyrrhene Race, no grief no pain ensued,
His Wound no pity found, no danger showed,
But in alas, did fiery Venom deep
Into his Marrow and scorch't entrails creep,
Which quite drunk up all Moisture that should flow
Into his vital Parts, his Palate now
And Tongue is scorch't and dry, no sweat could go
To his tired Joints, from's Eyes no Teers could now
His place, nor his sad Generals command
Could stay this thirsty Man; Out of his Hand
He throws his Ensign, Water runs to have
Which the dry Venom in his Heart did crave,
Though he in midst of Tanais did lie
Padus or Rodanus, he would be dry,
Or drink the Strdams wherever Nilits flows.
The Soil adds to his drowth, the Worm does lose
His Venoms fame helped by so hot a Land.
He digs and seeks each Vein in all the Sand.
Now to the Syrts he goes, and in his Mouth
Salt water takes; which could not quench his drowth
Although it pleased; He did not know what kind
Of death he died, nor his disease could find
But thinks it thirst; And now full fain he would
Rip open all his Veins, and drink his Blood.
Cato commands them (loath his men should stay
To know what thirst was,) straight to march away,
But a more woeful death before his Eye
Appeared; A Seps on poor Sabellus Thigh
Hung by the Teeth, which he straight with his Hands
Cast off, and with his Pile nailed to the Sands.
A little Snake, but none more full than she
Of horrid death, the Flesh falls off that nigh
The Wound did grow; The Bones are bared round,
Without the Body naked shows the Wound,
His Shanks fall off, matter each member fills,
His Knees are barred, his groin black filth distills,
And every muscle of his Thighs dissolves,
The Skin that all his natural Parts involves,
Breaking lets fall his Bowels, nor does all
That should remain of a dead Body fall,
The cruel Venom eating all the Parts,
All to a little poysnous filth converts.
The Poison breaks his Nerves, his Ribs does part,
Opens his hollow Breast, there shows his Heart,
His Vitals all, yea all that man composes
And his whole nature this foul death discloses,
His Head, Neck, Shoulders, and strong Arms do flow
In venomous filth; Not sooner melts the Snow
By hot South winds, nor Wax against the Sun.
This is but small I speak; Burnt Bodies run
Melted by Fire in filth; But what Fire ere
Dissolved the Bones? No Bones of his appear,
Following their putrid Juice, they leave no sign
Of this swift death; The Palm is only thine
Of all the Africa Snakes; The Soul take they,
But thou alone the Carcass take away.
But lo a death quite contrary to it
Marsian Nafidius an hot Praester bit
Whose Face and Cheeks a sudden Fire did Roast
His Flesh and Skin was stretched, his shape was lost
His swelling Body is distended far
Past humane growth, and undistinguisht are
His Limbs; All Parts the Poison does confound,
And he lies hid in his own Body drowned,
Nor can his Armor keep his swollen growth in,
Not more does boiling Water rise within
A Brazen Caldron, nor are Sails more swelled
With Western Winds; No Limb he now can weil'd.
A Globe deformed he is, an heap confused,
Which ravening Beasts did scare, which Birds refused,
To which his Friends durst do no Obsequy
Nor touch; But from the growing Carcass fly.
These Serpents yet present more horrid fights
A fierce Hemorrhus Noble Tullus bites,
A brave young man that studied Cato's worth.
And as in pouncing of a Picture, forth
Through every hole the pressed Saffron goes
So from his every Part red poison flows
For Blood; His Tears were Blood, from every pore
Where Nature vented moisture heretofore,
His Mouth, his Nose flows Blood; His Sweat is red,
His running Veins; All Parts are bloodied,
And his whole Body's but one Wound become.
An Aspes sharp sting did Levus Heart benum,
No pain he felt; Supriz'd with sudden sleep
He died, descending to the Stygian deep.
On an old stump a dartlike Snake did lie
Which as from thence her self she nimbly threw
Through Paulus Head, and wounded Temples flew,
'T was not the Poison brought his Fate, the blow
It self caused death; To her compared slow
Fly stones from Slings, and not so swift as she
From Parthian Bows do winged Arrows flee.
What helped it wretched Murrus that he did
Kill a fierce Basilisk? The Poison slid
Along his Spear, and fastened on his Hand
Which he cut off, and then did safely stand
With that Hands loss, viewing securely there
The sad example of his death so near, etc.
Ostriches in Africa keep in great Companies, and appear afar off like Troops
of Horsemen, putting a ridiculous terror into the Caravans of Merchants, it
seems to be a foolish Bird that forgets her Nest, and leaves her Eggs for
the Sun and Sand to hatch, she eats any thing even the hardest Iron, and is
said to be Deaf. Another Bird bigger than a Crane soars so high in the Air that
his great Body is invisible, yet from thence espieth his Prey and falls down
directly upon it, he lives so long that all his Feathers fall away by Age, and
then is fed by his young ones. Locusts or Grasshoppers do here often renew the
Egyptian Plague, coming in such vast numbers that like a Cloud they intercept
the shining of the Sun, and having eaten the Fruits and Leaves, they leave
their Spawn behind, who are worse than themselves, devouring the very Barks of
the naked Trees. Orosius says, that one time after they had done all this
mischief, they did worse by their deaths, for being carried by a strong Wind
into the Sea, and again cast up dead on the Shore, their putrified Carcases
caused such a Pestilence, that in Numidia only there died eight hundred
thousand, and on the Sea coast near Utica and Carthage two hundred thousand. In
some places they forced the People to leave the Country, it being so desert
and destroyed that they left nothing to sustain them, and looked as if it had
snowed by reason of the Trees without Barks; The Fields of Maiz were as if
trodden down; After a Tempest of Rain and Thunder they lay above two yards
thick upon the Rivers Bank. In the River Nilus in the time of Mauricius the
Emperor, at the place where Grand Cario now stands, a Giant-like Monster was
seen, from the bottom of his Belly upward he appeared like a Man, with Flaxen
Hair, Frowning Countenance and Strong Limbs; After he had continued in the view
of multitudes three hours, there came out of the Water another like a Woman
with a comely Face, part of her black Hair hanging down, and part gathered into
a knot, her Face was fair, rosy Lips, Fingers and Breasts well composed, the
rest of her Body hid under Water, from Morning to Sunset they fed their greedy
Eyes with this spectacle, which then sunk down into the Waters and was never
seen more.

At Eniacham the English have a Fort upon a little eminence about six hundred
Paces within the Land, as also several other Factories at Rio Nuno, Rio Grande,
Sierra Liona, Serbro, Cestos, Achin, Auta, Comenda, Acara, Ardra, Benin, with
old and new Calabar, of which little more can be said than of those already
mentioned, only of the last I have met with this notable Relation. That in
1668. an English Ship bound for Guinea, Sailing to old Calabar, they entered a
River called the Cross-River into Pirats-Island; after they had taken in their
Negro's, and were ready to Sail, the Master called up the Boatswain and three
Men more commanding them to look out the Copper Bars that were left, and carry
them on Shore to try if they could sell them; The Boatswain with his small
Company desired they might have Arms with them, not believing they were so
harmless a People as reported, they took with them three Muskets and a Pistol,
and so rowed toward the Shore, but not far from it their Match unhappily fell
into the Water, and the Ship being fallen down lower toward the Sea quite out
of sight, and they ashamed to go back without dispatching their business, one
of them went ashore to the first House to light the match, but before he was
twenty Rods from the Waterside, he was seized on by two Blacks or rather
Tawny-Moores, and by them haled above half a Mile up into the Country, and
thrown with great violence upon his Belly, and so compelled to lie till they
stripped him, and more Company coming to them, they were so eager for his poor
Canvas Apparel, that some they tore off, others they cut off, and with that
several pieces of his Flesh to his intolerable pain; With these Rags they made
little Aprons to cover their Privities, clothing being very scarce there; The
Boatswain finding this J. W. was thus carried away, was resolved with his other
two Companions to venture their Lives to have him again, and arming themselves,
they were suddenly beset with about a dosen men in several Canoes, but they
valiantly maintained their Boat about three hours, for after two or there three
Muskets were discharged, they defended themselves with their Oars and Boat
hooks; The Boatswain received a mortal wound in his Groin, and fell down in the
Boat, the other two adventured into the River, endeavoring by swimming to
escape the Hands of these cruel Infidels, but the Negro's with their swift
Canoes soon overtook them, and brought them on Shore to the other; They took
the Boatswain out of the Boat, and instead of endeavoring to preserve what
Life remained in him, one of them with a keen Weapon instantly cut off his
Head; And while he was yet reeking in his Blood, they in a barbarous manner cut
off pieces of Flesh from his Buttocks, Thighs, Arms, and Shoulders, and broiled
them on the Coals, and with much impatience eat it before his Companions Faces
to their great astonishment.

About a Fortnight after one of the Company fell sick; And instead of being his
Physicians to cure him, they were his Butchers to Murder him, cutting off his
Head, and broiling and eating his Flesh, rejoicing exceedingly at this rich
Banquet. Ten days after the other fell sick, whom they used in the very same
manner. J.W. continued still in Health though the Natives daily expected such
another Banquet, because it seems it is not their Custom to kill those that are
well, and therefore they resolved to sell him; his Master was free to
discourse, especially since he had before learned the Tata Language in the
West Indies, which is easily attained, being compreheneded in few words, and
all the Negro's speak it. He began to discourse his Master of the reason of
their cruelty, who told him, he should be content, for if he were not sick, he
should not have his Head cut off; In the Boat which they took there was one
Musket saved that was not discharged, which his Master some time after brought
to him to know the use of; J. W. endeavored as much as possible to keep him in
ignorance, but being threatened if he refused, at length he was forced to shoot
it off, but the Negroes who expected some delightful thing were frustrated, and
at the sudden noise and flash of Fire, which they very much dread, ran from him
extremely affrighted, but hearing no more noise came up to him again, and
commanded him to do the like, he told them he had no Powder which caused the
noise, but this would not satisfy these Barbarians, who were about to murder
him for refusal, had not his Master prevented it; Afterward in discourse his
Master told him, that the People were naturally civil, and simply honest, but
if provoked full of Revenge, and that this cruelty toward him and his Friends
was occasioned by the unhandsome carrying away some Native, without their leave
about a year before, they resolving if any came ashore they should never go off
alive; He had not been above seven Weeks in the Country but his Master
presented him to the King, whose name was Esme King of the Buckamores, who
immediately gave him to his Daughter Onijah; When the King went abroad, he
attended him as his Page throughout the whole Circuit of his Dominions, which
was not above twelve miles, yet boasting exceedingly of his Power and Strength,
and glorying extremely that he had a White to attend him, whom he employed to
carry his Bow and Arrows. At several places remote from the Seaside, some of
the People would run away from him for fear, others fell down and seemed to
worship him, using those Actions they do to their Gods. Their Progress was
never so long, but they could return home at Night, yet never without a full
Dose of the Creature.

During all the time J. W. was a Slave with him, he never knew him go abroad
and come home sober. They drink of the best Palm-wine, and of another Liquor
called Peurore; The Englishman knew how to humor this profound Prince, and if
any of the Natives abused him upon his complaint he had Redress, as once by
striving with a Negro, his Arm was broke, which by providence more than skill
was set again; After some months, the King of Calanach called Mancha, hearing
of this beautiful White, courted his Neighbor Prince to sell him, and at
length he was sold for a Cow and a Goat; This King was very sober, free from
the Treacheries and Mischiefs the other was subject to, and would often inquire
of him concerning his King and Country, and whether his Kingdoms were bigger
than his own, whose whole Dominions were not above twenty five miles in length,
and fifteen in breadth; The Englishman told as much as he thought convenient,
keeping within the bounds of modesty, yet relating as much as possible to the
hononr and dignity of his Sovereign, first informing him of the greatness of
one of his Kingdoms, the several Shires and Counties it contained, with the
number of its Cities, Towns and Castles, and the strength of each; the infinite
Inhabitants and valor of his Subjects; One of these sufficiently amazed this
petty Governor, that he need mention no more of His Majesty's Glory and
Dignity; It put him into such a profound Consternation, that he resolved to
find out some way to tender his respects to this Mighty Prince, and could study
none more convenient, than that if he could find a passage he would let him go
to England, to inform His Majesty of the great favor and respect he had for
him; This did not a little rejoice our Englishman; He also told him that he
would send him a Present, which should be two Cabareets or Goats, which they
there value at a very high rate, this King having himself not above seventeen
or eighteen. He tells the King, that the King of England had many thousand
Subjects under the degree of Gentlemen, who had a thousand Sheep apiece, the
Flesh of which they valued at a much higher rate than Goats.

Though our Captive lived very happily with this King, yet his desires and
hopes were still to return to his Native Country, at length he promised him,
that the first English Ship which came into the Road, should have liberty to
release or purchase him; This very much rejoiced his Heart, now he thought
every day a year, till he could hear of, or see some English Ship arrived. Often
did he walk down to the Seaside, earnestly expecting the winds of Providence
would blow some in thither, which being observed by one Jaga the chiefest
Wizard in those parts, and much admired by the People (though they have a
multitude of others) this man came to him one day, and inquired why he went so
often to the Seashore, he told him, to see if he could discover any English
Vessel come in there, and knowing he was a Wizard, though not acquainted with
his great Fame, nor willing to credit his Divinations, yet to please him, asked
when he did believe there would one come in; Jaga instantly told him; That the
fifteenth day after, an English Ship would come into the Road. He then demanded
whether that Ship should carry him away, to this he answered doubtfully, but
told him, he should be offered to the Master of the Ship, and if they should
not agree, but that he should come ashore again, and not be sold, he would soon
after dye of grief. These fifteen days seemed very long, many a look did he
cast on the Sea with an aching Heart, the fourteenth day he went to the highest
hill thereabout, but to no purpose, he could discover nothing, next Morning he
went again two or three times but saw none, about two or three hours after,
some of the Moors came running to the King, telling him there was a Canoe
coming, so they call our Ships, at which our Englishman heartily rejoiced,
hoping to be suddenly releast, yet durst not show it for fear of punishment or
death, for though he lived better now than with his first Master, yet his
Service was far worse than the Slaves in Turkey, and their Diet worse than Dogs
meat, and therefore he had just cause of joy; The Ship came immediately in, and
he runs prosently to Jaga to know if it were an English Ship, who assured him
it was, and so it happened; one Captain Royden being Commander; who hastened to
dispatch his business, took in his Negroes, and was ready to Sail, our Captive
not hearing a word what should become of him, the King never offering to sell
him; This made him resolve to endeavor an escape, to which end he had prepared
a piece of Timber, and drawn it toward the waterside, on which he intended to
paddle to the Ship, which-lay about a League from the Shore.

Just by the Seaside as he was about to lanch his floating stick, he espied a
great Alligator, which will devour a man at a mouthful, this altered his mind,
resolving rather to live with Infidels, than to be accessory to his own death;
But the next day it pleased God to move the Kings Heart to let him go, sending
him in a Canoe placed between a Negro's Legs, with some others to guide this
small Vessel for fear he should leap overboard, and swim to the Ship. At a
distance he haled her in English to the great surprizal of those within her,
the Negro's gave him leave to stand up and show himself to the Captain, to whom
he gave an Account, how four were left there, and he only remained alive. It
was some time before they bargained, though the Captain was resolved not to
leave him behind. Several times the Negro's padled away with their Canoe,
resolving not to part with him, but what with his entreaties and promises, he
persuaded them to the Ship again, and at last they delivered him on board for
forty five Copper and Iron Bars about the bigness of a man's Finger; When he
came on board, his Hair was very long, and his Skin tawny like a Mulatto,
having gone naked all the time he was there, and usually anointed himself with
Palm-Oyl, the Seamen very charitably apparalel'd him, and in short time after
he arrived safely in England with a thickful Heart for so happy a deliverance.
And here I shall conclude the view of Guinea.

Sect. II. A View of the Island OF St. HELENA, With the Product thereof.
BEfore I come to relate the Acquisitions of the English in the East Indies, I
will make an halt at the Island of St. Helena, This Isle is now by His
Majesty's Grace and Favor in the possession of the Honorable East India
Company, as a place for watering and refreshment in their long Voyages to the
Indies; It was formerly seized by the Dutch, but retaken May 6. 1673. by
Captain Monday, with some other English Ships, and three rich Dutch East India
Prizes taken in the Harbor, since which the English have fortified and secured
it against any future Invasion; It was so called by the Portuguess, because
first discovered by them on St. Hellens day, being April 21. It lies in sixteen
degrees, and fifteen minutes of South Latitude in the main Ocean, about fifteen
hundred Miles from the Cape of Good Hope, three hundred and fifty from Angola,
and five hundred and ten from Brasile, the circumference is about seven miles,
lying high out of the Water, and surrounded on the Seacoasts with steep Rocks,
having within many Cliffs, Mountains and Valleys, of which one is named
Church-Valley, where behind a small Church they climb up to the Mountains. To
the South is Apple-Dale, so called from the abundance of Oranges, Lemons and
Pomegranats enough to furnish five or six Ships. On the West side of the
Church, Ships have good Anchorage close under the Shore, to prevent the Winds
which blow fiercely from the adjacent high Mountains.

The Air seems very temperate and healthful, insomuch that sick men brought
ashore there, in a short time recover; Yet the heat in the Valleys is as
intolerable as the eager cold upon the Mountains; It commonly rains there five
or six times a day, so that the bareness of the Hills is not occasioned for
want of Water, of which it has two or three good Springs beside, for
furnishing Ships with fresh Water; The ground of its own accord brings forth
wild Pease and Beans, also whole Woods of Orange, Lemon, and Pomegranat Trees
all the year long laden both with Blossoms and Fruit, good Figs, abundance of
Ebony and Rose-trees, Parsley, Mustard Seed, Purslain, Sorrel, and the like; The
Woods and Mountains are full of Goats, very large Rams, and wild Swine, but
difficult to be taken. When the Portuguess first discovered it, they found
neither four-footed Beasts nor Fruit Trees, but only fresh Water; They
afterward planted Fruit Trees, which so increased since, that at present all
the Valleys stand full of them; Partridges, Pigeons, Moor-hens, and Peacocks
breed here very numerously, whereof a good Marksman may soon provide a Dinner
for his Friends. On the Cliff-Islands, on the South are thousands of gray and
black Mews, or Sea-Pies, and also white and colored Birds, some with long,
others with short Necks, who lay their Eggs on the Rocks, and are so
unaccustomed to fear, that they suffer themselves to be taken with the Hand,
and gaze at their surprizers, till they are knocked on the Head with sticks.

From the Salt Water beating against the Cliffs a Froth or Scum remains in some
places, which the heat of the Sun so purifies, that it becomes white and good
Salt; some of the Mountains yield Bole Armoniack, and a fat Earth like Terra
Lemnia. The Sea will answer the pains of a patient Fisherman, who must use an
Angle, not a Net, because of the foul ground and beating of the waves, the
chief are Mackrel, Roach, Carp, but differing in color from those among us;
Eels as big as a man's Arm, and well tasted Crabs, Lobsters, Oysters and Mussels
as good as English.

It is in this Island that the Scene of that notable fancy, called. The Man in
the Moon, or a discourse of a Voyage thither, by Domingo Gonsales is laid,
written by a late Reverend and Learned Bishop, says the Excellent and
ingenious Bishop Wilkins, who calls it a pleasant and well contrived fancy, in
his own Book entitled, A Discourse of the New World, tending to prove that it
is possible there may be another habitable World in the Moon; Wherein among
many other curious arguments he affirms, that this has been the direct opinion
of diverse ancient, and some Modern Mathematicians, and may probably be deduced
from the Tenants of others, neither does it contradict any principle of reason
nor Faith; And that as their World is our Moon, so our World is theirs.

Now this small Tract having so worthy a Person to vouch for the credit of it,
and many of our English Historians having published for Truth, what is
altogether as improbable as this, as Sr. John Mandevil in his Travels and
others, and this having what they are utterly destitute of, that is Invention
mixed with Judgment, and was judged worthy to be Licensed 50 years ago, and not
since reprinted, whereby it would be utterly lost. I have not thought it amiss
to republish the Substance thereof, wherein the Author says he does not design
to discourse his Readers into a belief of each particular circumstance, but
expects that his new discovery of a New World may find little better
entertainment than Columbus had in his first discovery of America, though yet
that poor espial betrayed so much knowledge as has since increast to vast
Improvements, and the then Unknown is now found to be of as large extent as all
the other known World; That there should be Antipodes was once thought as great
a Paradox as now that the Moon should be habitable. But the knowledge of this
it may be is reserved for this our discovering Age, wherein our Virtuosi can by
their Telescopes gaze the Sun into Spots, and descry Mountains in the Moon, but
this and much more must be left to the Critics, as well as the following
faithful Relation of our little Eye witness and great Discoverer, which you
shall have in his own Spanish Style, and delivered with that Grandeur and
thirst of Glory, which is generally imputed to that Nation.

It is sufficiently known to all the Countries of Audaluzia, that I Domingo
Gonsales was born of a Noble Family in the renowned City of Sevil in 1552. my
Fathers name being Therando Gonsales near kinsman on the Mothers side to Don
Pedro Sanches the worthy Count of Almenara, My Mother was the Daughter of the
Reverend and famous Lawyer Otho Perez de Sallaveda Governor of Barcellona, and
Corrigidor of Biscay; I being the youngest of seventeen Children they had, was
put to School, and designed by them to the Church; But Heaven purposing to use
my Service in matters of far another Nature and quality, inspired me with
spending some time in the Wars; It was at the time that Don Ferrands, the Noble
and thrice renowned Duke D' Alva was sent into the Low Countries in 1568. I
then following the current of my desire leaving the University of Salamanca,
whither my Parents had sent me, without giving notice to any of my dearest
Friends, got through France to Antwerp, where in June 1569 I arrived but in a
mean condition, for having sold my Books, Bedding and other things which
yielded me about 30 Ducats, and borrowed twenty more of my Fathers Friends, I
bought a little Nag, wherewith I traveled more thriftily than usually young
Gentlemen do, till arriving within a League of Antwerp, some of the cursed
Geses set upon me, and bereaved me of my Horse Money, and all, whereupon I was
forc' through want and necessity to enter into the Service of Marshal Cossey a
French Nobleman, whom I served truly in a very honorable employ, though mine
Enemies to my disgrace, affirm I was his Horse-keepers Boy; But fot that
matter, I refer my self to Count Mansfield, Monsieur Tavier, and other Persons
of Quality and condition, who have often testified to many worthy men now
living, the very truth of the business, which indeed was this, Monsieur Cossey
being about this time sent Ambassador to the Duke D' Alva Governor of the Low
Countries, he understanding the Nobility of my Birth, and my late misfortune,
judging it would be no small honor to him to have a Spaniard of that Quality
about him, furnished me with a Horse, Armor, and whatever I wanted, using my
Service in nothing so much, after I had learned French, as writing his Letters,
because my Hand was then very fair. In time of War if upon necessity, I
sometime dressed my own Horse, I ought not to be reproacht therewith, since I
count it the part of a Gentleman to submit to the vilest Office for the Service
of his Prince.

The first expedition I was in, was when the Marshal my Friend met the Prince
of Orange making a Road into France, and forced him to fly even to the Walls of
Cambray; It was my good Fortune to defeat a Trooper by killing his Horse with
my Pistol, who falling upon his Leg could not stir, but yielded to my mercy; I
knowing my own weakness of Body, and seeing him a lusty tall Fellow, thought it
the surest way to dispatch him, which having done, I plundered him of a Chain,
Money, and other things to the value of 200 Ducats, This Money was no sooner in
my Pockets, but I began to resume the remembrance of my Nobility, and taking my
audience of leave from Monsieur Cossey, I instantly repaired to the Duke D'
Alva's Court, where diverse of my Kindred seeing my Pocket full of good Crowns,
were ready enough to acknowledge me; By their means I was received into pay,
and in time obtained a good degree of favor with the Duke, who would sometimes
jest a little more severely at my Personage than I could well bear, for though
I must acknowledge my Stature is so little, as I think no man living is less,
yet since it is the work of Heaven, and not my own, he ought not to have
upbraided a Gentleman therewith; And those glorious things that have happened
to me may evince, that great and wonderful matters may be performed by very
unlikely Bodies, if the mind be good, and Fortune second our endeavors;

Though the Dukes joques a little disgusted ^^e, yet I endeavored to conceal
my resentments, and accommodating my self to some other of his humors, I was so
far interested in his favor, that at his going into Spain in 1573. whither I
attended him, by his kindness, and some other accidents, wherein by my Industry
I was seldom wanting to my self, I was able to carry home 3000 Crowns in my
Pocket.

At my return my Parents, who were extremely disturbed at my departure,
received me with great joy, which was increased because they found I had
brought wherewith to maintain my self without being chargable to them, so that
they need not lessen the Portions of my Brothers and Sisters to provide for me.
But doubting I would spend it as lightly as I got it, they continually
solicited me to marry the Daughter of John Figueres a considerable Merchant of
Lisbon, to which I complied, and putting my Marriage Money, and good part of my
own into the hands of my Father, or such as he advised me to, I lived in good
fashion, and much like a Gentleman for many years very happily; At length some
quarrels arising between me and one Pedro Delgades a Gentleman and Kinsman of
mine, the causes whereof are needless to relate, this difference grew to such a
height, that when no mediation of Friends could prevail, we two went alone with
our Swords into the Field, where it was my chance to kill him, though a stout
proper man, but what I wanted in strength I supplied in courage, and my agility
countervailed for his Stature. This being acted in Carmona, I fled with all
speed to Lisbon, thinking to conceal my self with some Friends of my Father in
Law, till the business might be accommodated, and I acquitted by consent of the
Prosecutors. This happened in 1596 at which time, a famous Spanish Count coming
from the West Indies, published Triumphant Declarations in Print, of a great
Victory he had obtained against the English near the Isle of Pines, whereas in
reality he got nothing at all in that Voyage but blows, and a considerable
loss. It had been well if vanity and lying had been his only crimes; His
covetousness had like to have been my utter ruin, though since it has proved
the occasion of Eternizing my name I verily believe to all Posterity, and to
the unspeakable benefit of all Mortals for ever hereafter, at least if it
please Heaven that I return home safe to my Country, and give perfect
Instructions how those almost incredible and impossible Acquirements may be
imparted to the World. You shall then see men flying in the Air from one place
to another, you shall then be able to send Messages many hundred miles in an
instant, and receive answers thereto immediately, without the help of any
Creature upon Earth; You shall then presently impart your mind to your Friend
though in the most remote and obscure place of a populous City, and a multitude
of other notable Experiments; But what exceeds all, you shall then have the
discovery of a New World, and abundance of rare and incredible secrets of
Nature, which the Philosophers of former Ages never so much as dreamt of; But I
must be cautious in publishing these wonderful mysteries, till our Statesmen
have considered how they may consist with the Policy and good Government of our
Country, and likewise, whether the Fathers of the Church may not judge the
divulging them prejudicial to the Affairs of the Catholic Faith and Religion,
which (by those wonders I have seen above any mortal man before me) I am
instructed to advance with my utmost endeavors, without respect to any
temporal advantage whatsoever.

But to proceed with my Narrative, this huffing Captain aforenamed, pretended
much discontent for the death of the said Delgades, who was indeed some Kin to
him, however he was willing to be quiet if I would have given him a thousand
Ducats; I had now, besides a Wife, two Sons, whom I was not willing to beggar,
only to satisfy the avaritious humor of this Boaster, and was therefore
necessitated to take some other course; I imbarkt in a stout Carrick bound for
the East Indies, carrying the value of two thousand Ducats to Trade with,
leaving as much more for the support of my Wife and Children behind me,
whatever misfortune might happen to me; In the Indies I thrived exceedingly,
laying out my Stock in Diamonds, Emeralds and Pearls, which I bought at such
easy rates, that my Stock safely arriving in Spain (as I understood it did)
must needs yield ten for one. But for my self having doubled Cape buona
Esperanca in my way home, I fell dangerously sick, expecting nothing but death,
which had then undoubtedly happened, but that we just then recovered the
Blessed Isle of St. Hellens, the only Paradise I believe on Earth, for
healthfulness of Air, and fruitfulness of Soil, producing all necessaries for
the Life of man; It is about three Leagues in compass, and has no firm Land or
Continent within 300 Leagues, nay not so much as an Island within an hundred
Leagues of it, so that it may seem a Miracle of Nature, that out of so vast and
tempestuous an Ocean, such a small Rock or piece of ground should arise and
discover it self. On the South is a good Harbor, and near it diverse small
Houses built by the Portuguess to accommodate Strangers, with a pretty Chapel
handsomely beautified with a Tower, and a fair Bell therein. Near it is a
Stream of excellent fresh water, diverse handsome walks planted on both sides
with Orange, Lemmod, Pomegranate, Almond-trees and the like, which are Fruit
all the year, as do also diverse others; There are store of Garden Herbs, with
Wheat, Pease, Barley, and most kinds of Pulse, but it chiefly abounds with
Cattle and Fowl, as Goats, Swine, Sheep, Partridges, wild Hens, Pheasants,
Pigeons, and wild Fowl beyond credit; But especially about February and March
are to be seen huge Flocks of a kind of Wild Swans, (whereof I shall have
occasion to speak more hereafter) who like our Cuckoes and Nightingales, go
away at a certain Season, and are no more seen that year.

On this happy Island did they set me ashore with a Negro to attend me, where
praised be Heaven, I recovered my health, and continued there a whole year,
solacing my self for want of Humane Society with Birds and bruit Beasts; Diego
my Black-moor was forced to live in a Cave at the West End of the Isle, for had
we dwelt together, Victuals would not have been so plenty with us; But now if
one succeeded well in Hunting or Fowling, the other would find means to invite
and treat him, and if both mist, we were then fain to look out sharply, but
this very seldom happened, since no Creature there fears a man more than they
do a Goat or Cow, whereby I easily tamed diverse kinds of Birds and Beasts in a
short time by only muzling them, so that till they came either to me or Diego
they could not seed; At first I much delighted in a kind of Patridges, and a
tame Fax, whereof I made good use; For if I had occasion to confer with Diego,
I would take one of them muzled and hungry, and tying a note about his Neck,
beat him from me, whereupon he would straight away to Diego's Cave, and if he
were not there, would beat about till they found him, yet this conveyance being
not without some inconvenience needless to be mentioned, after a while I
persuaded Diego, (who though a Fellow of good Parts, was content to be ruled by
me) to remove to a Promontory or Cape on the north-west part of the Island,
being though a League off, yet within sight of my House and Chapel, and then
when the weather was fair, we could at all times by signals declare our minds
each to other in an instant either by Night or Day, wherein we took much
pleasure. If in the Night I would signify any thing to him, I used to set up a
light in the Bell Tower, which was a pretty large Room with a fair Window well
glased, and the Walls within being plaistered were exceeding white, by reason
whereof, though the light were but small, it made a great show, and would have
done much farther off, if there had been need. After this light had stood half
an hour I covered it, and then if I saw any signal of light again from my
Companion at the Cape, I knew he waited for my notice, and so by hiding and
showing my light according to a certain Rule or Agreement betwixt us, I
certified him of what I pleased. In the day I advertised him by Smoke, Dust,
and sometimes by a more refined and effactual way. This Art contains many
Mysteries, and may be very useful if well employed.

Notwithstanding after a while I grew weary of it as too painful, and again
used my Winged Messengers; Upon the Shore, especially about the Mouth of our
River, I found great store of a certain kind of Wild Swans aforementioned,
feeding usually upon prey, and that both of Fish and Birds, and which is more
strange having one Claw like an Eagle, and the other like a Swan, These Birds
commonly breeding here in infinite numbers, I took thirty or forty of them
young, and bred them up by hand for recreation, yet not without some thoughts
of that Experiment which I after put in practice. These being strong and able
to continue a great flight, I taught them first to come at call afar off, not
using any noise, but only showing them a White Cloth, and here I found it true
what Plutarch affirms, That Creatures which eat Flesh are more decible than
others. It Is wonderful to think what Tricks I taught them ere they were a
quarter old, amongst others I used them by degrees to fly with Burdens, wherein
I found them able beyond belief, and brought them so forward, that a White
Sheet being displayed to them by Diego upon the side of a Hill, they would
carry from me to him Bread, Flesh, or whatever I pleased, and upon the like
call come to me again. Having proceeded thus far, I began to consult how I
might join a number of them together, so as to carry a heavier weight, which if
I could compass, I might thereby enable a man to fly and be carried safely in
the Air from one place to another. I puzzled my Wits extremely with this
thought, and upon Trial found that if many were put to the bearing of one great
Burden, by reason it was impossible all of them should rise together just at
one instant, the first that raised himself upon his Wings finding himself
stayed by a weight heavier than he could move or stir, would soon give over,
and so the second, third, and all the rest. I contrived at last a way whereby
each might rise with only his own proportion of weight, I fastened about each
Gansa a little Pulley of Cork, and putting a string of a just length through
it, I fastened one end to a block of almost eight pound weight, and tied a two
pound weight to the other end of the String, and then causing the signal to be
Erected, they presently all rose together, being four in number, and carried
away my Block to the place appointed. This hitting so luckily, I added two or
three Birds more, and made Trial of their carrying a Lamb, whose happiness I
much envied that he should be the first living creature to partake of such an
excellent device.



At length after diverse Trials, I was surprised with a great longing to cause
my self to be carried in the same manner, Diego my Moor was likewise possessed
with the same desire, and had I not loved him well, and wanted his Service, I
should have resented this his ambitious thought; For I count it greater honor
to have been the first Flying Man, than to be another Neptune who first
adventured to Sail on the Sea. Yet seeming not to understand his intention, I
only told him that all my Gausa's were not strong enough to carry him, being a
man though of no great Bulk, yet twice heavier than my self; Having prepared
all necessaries, I one time placed my self and all my Utensils on the top of a
Rock at the Rivers Mouth, and putting my self upon my Engine at full Sea, I
caused Diego to advance the signal, whereupon my Birds, 25 in number presently
rose all at once, and carried me over lustily to the Rock on the other side,
being about a quarter of a League; I chose this time and place, because if any
thing had fallen out contrary to expectation, the worst that could happen was
my only falling into the Water, and being able to swim well, I hoped to receive
little hurt in my fall; When I was once safe over, O how did my heart even
swell with Joy and admiration at my own Invention; How often did I wish my self
in the midst of Spain, that I might speedily fill the World with the fame of my
Glory and Renown? Every hour I had a longing desire for the coming of the
Indian Fleet to take me home with them, but they stayed, by what mischance I
know not, three Months beyond their usual time; At length they arrived being
three Carricks much weather-beaten, the men generally exceeding Sick and Weak,
and were therefore constrained to refresh themselves in our Island a whole
Month; The Admiral was called Alphonso de Xima, a Vallant Wise Man, desirous of
Glory, and worthy better Fortune than afterward befell him; To him I discovered
my device of the Gansa's, being satisfied, that it was absolutely impossible
otherwise to persuade him to take so many Birds into his Ship, who for the
niceness of their provision, would be more troublesome than so many men; Yet I
adjured him by all manner of Oaths and Persuasions to deal ingeniously with me,
and to be secret in the business, though of the last I did not much doubt,
assuring my self he durst not impart the Experiment to any before our King were
acquainted therewith. Of the first I had more apprehension, lest Ambition and
the desire of gaining to himself the honor of so admirable an Invention,
should tempt him to dispatch me. However I was forced to run the Risque of it
unless I would adventure the loss of my Birds, the like whereof for my purpose
were not to be had in Christendom, nor was I sure ever to bring others to serve
my turn.

It happened all these doubts were causless, the man I believe was honest, yet
if he had designed otherwise, I laid a Plot to discover him, but the
misfortune we met with prevented all these thoughts, Thursday June 21. 1599. we
set Sail for Spain, I having allowed me a very convenient Cabin for my Birds,
and Room for my Engine, which the Captain would have persuaded me to have le^t
behind me, and it was a wonder I did not, but my good fortune therein saved my
life, for after two Months Sail it happened we met with an English Fleet about
10 Leagues from the Island of Teneriff, one of the Canaries famous throughout
the World for a Hill therein called Pico, which is kenned at Sea above an
hundred Leagues off. We had aboard five times their number of men, all in good
health, and were well provided with Ammunition, yet finding them resolved to
fight, and knowing what infinite riches we carried, concluded it better if
possible to escape, than by encountering a crew of desperate Fellows, to hazard
not only our own Lives, which a man of courage in this case does not value, but
the Estates of many poor Merchants, who I am afraid were undone by the
miscarriage of this business. Our Fleet consisted of five Sail, that is, three
Carricks, a Bark, and a Caravel, who coming from St. Thomas Isle, had in an ill
hour overtaken us some few days before. The English had three Ships well
provided, who no sooner spied but presently engaged us, and changing their
course, endeavored to bring us under their Lee, which they might easily do as
the Wind then stood, they being light nimble Vessels, as English Ships
generally are, ours heavy, deep laden, and foul with the Sea. Our Captain
therefore resolved, wisely enough it may be, but neither valiantly nor
fortunately, to fly, commanding us to disperse our selves. The Caravel by too
much have fell upon one of the Carricks and bruised her so, that one of the
English who undertook her easily fetched her up and entered her, the Caravel
sinking immediately before our eyes. The Bark for ought I could perceive
escaped unpursued, and another of our Carricks after some chase was given over
by the Enemy, who expecting a sufficient Booty of us, and getting us between
them, fell upon us with much fury, our Captain hereupon gave direction to run
ashore upon Tenariff, the Port whereof we could not recover, saying, That he
hoped to save part of the Goods, and some of our Lives, and he had rather the
rest should be lost, than all fall into the mercy of our foes.

When I heard this Resolution, observing the Sea to work high, and knowing all
the Coast to be so full of Rocks and Shoals, that it was impossible our Ship
should come near the Land unless broken into a thousand pieces, I represented
to the Captain the desperateness of the attempt, wishing him rather to try the
kindness of the Enemy, than throw away himself and so many brave men; But he
would by no Remonstrances be removed in the least from his Resolution,
therefore finding it high time to shift for my self, I locked up my little
Casket of Jewels, which putting into my sleeve, I then betook me to my Gansa's,
and having harnassed them to my Engine, and put my self thereon, supposing, as
indeed it happened, that when the Ship should split, my Birds though they
wanted their signal, yet for saving their own lives, which nature has taught
all Creatures to preserve to the utmost, would make toward Land, which fell
out, thanks be to Heaven, according to my expectation; The People in the Ship
wondered what I was doing, none being acquainted with the use of my Birds but
the Captain, Diego being in the other Ship which fled away unpursued; We were
about half a League from Land, when our Carrick struck upon a Rock, and split
instantly to pieces, upon which I let loose the reins to my Birds, having first
placed my self upon the top of the Deck, and with the Shock they all arose
carrying me fortunately to the Land, of which you need not doubt but I was very
joyful, though it was a miserable sight to behold my Friends and acquaintance
in that woeful distress, of whom yet many escaped better than they expected, for
the English lanching out their Cock-boats, discovered more noble and generous
tempers than we are pleased to allow them, taking compassion of their calamity,
and endeavoring with all diligence to save them from the fury of the Waves
though with much danger to themselves, among others they took up our Captain,
who, as Father Pacio since told me, having put himself with twelve others into
the Cock-boat, was forced to yield to one Captain Raymundo, who carried him
together with our Pilot along with them in their Voyage toward the East Indies
whither they were bound, but it was their hard fate by a breach of the Sea near
Cape Buona Esperanca to be swallowed of the Merciless Waves, whose Rage they a
while before had so hardly escaped; The rest as I likewise heard, who where in
all about twenty six Persons that they took into their Ship, they set them a
land soon after at Cape Verde.

As for my self being now ashore in an Island inhabited generally by Spaniards,
I reckoned I was safe, but I soon found my self much mistaken, for it was my
hap to pitch upon that part of the Isle where the Pike aforementioned begins to
rise, which is inhabited by a Savage kind of People who live upon the sides of
that Hill, the top whereof is for the most part covered with Snow, and formerly
accounted, for its monstrous height and Steepness inaccessible either for man
or Beast, yet these Salvages fearing the Spaniards, keep themselves as near the
top as they can, where they had diverse places of good strength, never coming
down into the fruitful valleys but to seek for Booty, a crew of those Outlaws
happened to spy me soon after I landed, and thinking they had got a prize,
approacht me with all speed, yet not so privately but I guest their design
before they came within half a Mile, when perceiving them to come hastily down
the Hill directly toward me, with long staves and other Weapons, which at that
distance I could not discern, I thought it necessary immediately to secure my
self from the hands of these Villains, who had they taken me, out of hatred to
us Spaniards, would have certainly cut me to pieces; The Country in that place
was Sandy, but the Pike beginning even there to lift up it self, I espied in
the side thereof a white Cliff, which I hoped my Ganza's would take for a Mark,
and being put up, would make all that way, whereby I might quickly be carried
so far that those Barbarous Raskals should (...) be able to overtake me, before
I had got to some Spaniards House, or might at least gain time to hide my self
from them, till by the covert of the night I might travel to Laguna the chief
City of the Island, and not above three Miles off, with all celerity therefore
I settled my self upon my Engine, and let loose the Reins to my Gansa's, by good
fortune they took all one course, though not just the way I aimed at. But what
of that! O Reader prick up thy Ears and prepare thy self to hear the strangest
chance that ever happened to any Mortal Man, and which I know thou will not
have the grace to believe till thou see the like Experiment, which I doubt
not in a short time may be performed. My Gansa's like so many Horses that had
gotten the bit between their Teeth, made not their flight, as I said toward the
Cliff I intended, though I used my wonted means to direct the Leader of the
Flock that way, but with might and main took up toward the top of the Pike, and
never stoot till they came there, a place where they say never man came before,
being in vulgar estimation (though since experimentally contradicted) at least
fifteen Miles in height above the ordinary Level of the Land and Sea; What kind
of place I found this I would gladly relate, but that I hasten to matters of
far greater Importance; When I was there set down my poor Gansa's fell to
panting, blowing, and gaping for breath as if they would all presently have
died, therefore I thought good not to trouble them a while, forbearing to drawn
them in, which they never use to endure without struggling, but little did I
expect what followed.

It was now the season that these Birds were wont to take their flight away, as
our Cucko's and Swallows do in Spain toward Autumn, and as I afterward found,
being mindful of their usual Voyage just when I began to settle my self to take
them in they as it were with one consent rose up, and having no other higher
place to make toward, to my unspeakable fear and amazement, struck bolt
upright, and never left towering upward, still higher and higher, for the space
as I guest, of an Hour, after which I thought they labored less than before,
till at length, ah most wonderful! they forbore moving any thing at all, and
yet remained immovable as steadily as if they had sat upon so many perches,
the lines slacked, neither I, nor the Engine moved at all, but continued still,
as having no manner of weight. I found then by Experience what no Philosopher
ever dreamed of, namely, that those things which we call heavy do not fall
toward the center of the Earth as their natural place, but are drawn by a
secret property of the Globe of the Earth, or rather something within it, even
as the Lodestone draws Iron which is within the Compass of its attractive
Beams. For though in this place my Gansa's could continue unmoved without being
sustained by any thing whatsoever but the Air as easily and quietly as a Fish
in the middle of the Water, yet if they forced themselves never so little it is
impossible to imagine with what swiftness they were carried, either upward,
downward or side ways; I must ingeniously confess my horror and amazement in
this place was such, that had I not been armed with a true Spanish Courage and
Resolution I should certainly have died for fear.

But the next thing that disturbed me was the swiftness of the motion, which
was so extraordinary that it even almost stopped my breath if I should liken it
to an Arrow out of a Bow, or a Stone thrown down from the top of an high Tower,
it would come vastly short of it; Another thing was exceeding troublesome to me,
that is the Illusions of Devils and Wicked Spirits, who the first day of my
arrival came about me in great numbers in the shapes and likeness of Men and
Women, wondering at me like so many Birds about an Owl, and speaking several
Languages which I understood not, till at last I met with some that spoke very
good Spanish, some Dutch, and others Italian, all which I understood; And here
I had only a touch of the Suns absence once for a short time, having him ever
after in my sight. Now though my Gansa's were entangled in my lines, yet had
they means easily to seize upon diverse kinds of Flies and Birds, especially
Swallows and Cuckoes whereof there were multitudes even like Motes in the Sun,
though to say truth I never saw them eat any thing at all. As for my self I was
I Will assure you very much obliged to those, whether Men or Devils I know not,
who among diverse discourses which I will forbear a while to repeat, told me, If
I would follow their Directions, I should not only be carried safe home, but be
assured to command at all times all the pleasures of that place. To which
motion not daring to give a flat denial, I desired time to consider, and withal
entreated them, (though I felt no hunger at all, which may seem strange) to
help me to some Victuals least I should starve in my Journey; Whereupon they
readily brought me very good Flesh and Fish of several sorts and well dressed,
but that it was extreme fresh without any relish of Salt; Wine likewise I
tasted of diverse kinds as good as any in Spain, and Beer no better in all
Antwerp. They advised me that while I had opportunity I should make my
Provisions, telling me that till the next Thursday they could help me to no
more, if happily then, at which time they would find means to carry me back,
and set me safe in Spain in any place I would desire, provided I would become
one of their Fraternity, and enter into such Covenants as they had made to
their Captain and Master whom they would not name, I answered civilly, telling
them, I saw little reason to rejoice in such an offer, desiring them to be
mindful of me as occasion served; So for that time I was rid of them, having
first furnished my Pockets with as much Victuals as I could thrust in, among
which I would be sure to find a place for a small Bottle of good Canary.

I shall now declare the quality of the place wherein I then was; The Clouds I
perceived to be all under between me and the Earth. The Stars, because it was
always day, I saw at all times alike, not shining bright as we see in the night
upon Earth, but of a whitish color like the Moon with us in the day time,
those that were seen, which were not many, showed far greater than with us, yea
as I guest no less than ten times bigger; As for the Moon, being then within 2
days of the change, she appeared of an huge and dreadful greatness. It is not
to be forgot that no Stars appeared but on that part of the Hemisphere next the
Moon, and the nearer to her, the larger they appeared. Again, whether I lay
quiet and rested, or were carried in the Air, I perceived my self to be always
directly between the Moon and the Earth, whereby it is plain that my Gansa's
took their way directly toward the Moon, and also that when we rested, as we
did at first for many hours, either we were insensibly carried round about the
Globe of the Earth, though I perceived no such motion, or else that according
to the opinion of Copernicus, the Earth is carried about, and turns round
perpetually from West to East, leaving to the Planets only that motion which
the Astronomers call natural, and is not upon the Poles of the Equinoctial,
commonly called the Poles of the World, but upon those of the Zodiac; The Air
in that place I found quiet without any motion of wind, and exceeding
temperate, neither hot nor cold, as where neither the Sun beams had any Subject
to reflect upon, nor the Earth and Water so near to affect the Air with their
natural Quality of coldness; As for that imagination of the Philosophers
attributing heat and moisture to the Air, I always esteemed it a fancy;
Lastly, I remember that after my departure from the Earth, I never felt either
hunger or thirst, whether the purity of the Air, freed from the Vapors of the
Earth and Water, might yield nature sufficient nourishment, or what else might
be the cause I cannot determine, but so I found it, though I was perfectly in
health both of body and mind, even above my usual Vigor. Let us now proceed,
which we shall do fast enough for the future.

Some hours after the departure of that Devilish Company my Gansa's began to
bestir themselves, still directing their course toward the Globe or body of the
Moon, making their way with such incredible swiftness, that I conceive they
advanced little less than fifty Leagues in an hour, in which passage I observed
three things very Remarkable, one that the farther we went the less the Globe
of the Earth appeared to us, and that of the Moon still larger and more
monstrous; Again the Earth, which I had ever in mine eye, seemed to mask it
self with a kind of brightness like another Moon, and as we discern certain
Spots or Clouds as it were in the Moon, so did I then see the like in the
Earth, but whereas the form of those Spots in the Moon are always the same,
these on the Earth seemed by degrees to change every hour, the reason whereof
seems to be, that whereas the Earth according to his natural motion (for such a
motion I am now satisfied she has according to the opinion of Copernicus)
turns round upon her own Axis every four and twenty hours from West to East) I
should at first see in the middle of the Body of this New Star the Earth, a
Spot like a Pear with a Morsel bit out on one side, in some hours I should
observe this Spot move away toward the East; This no doubt was the main Land of
Africa; Then might I perceive a great shining brightness in that place which
continued about the same time, and was questionless the vast Atlantic Ocean;
After this succeeded a Spot almost Oval, just as we see America described in
our Maps, then another immense cleerness representing Mare del Zur or the South
Sea, and lastly a number of Spots like the Countries and Islands in the
East Indies, so that it seemed to me no other than an huge Mathematical Globe
turned round leisurely before me, wherein successively all the Countries of our
earthly World were within twenty four hours represented to my view, and this
was all the means I now had to number the days, and reckon the time.

I could now wish that Philosophers and Mathematicians would confess their own
blindness, who have hitherto made the World believe that the Earth has no
motion, and to confirm it are forced to attribute to every one of the celestial
Bodies two Motions directly contrary to each other, one from the East to the
West to be performed in twenty four hours with an impetuous rapid motion, the
other from West to East in several proportions; O incredible supposition! That
those huge Bodies of the fixed Stars in the highest Orb, whereof they confess
diverse are above an hundred times bigger than the whole Earth, should like so
many Nails in a Cart wheel be whirled about in so short a time, whereas it is
many thousand years, no less (say they) than thirty thousand, before that Orb
finishes his course from West to East, which they call his natural motion; Now
whereas they allow their natural course from West to East to every one of them,
therein they do well; The Moon performs it in seven and twenty days, the Sun,
Venus and Mercury in a year or thereabout, Mars in three year, Jupiter in
twelve, and Saturn in thirty. But to attribute to these celestial Bodies
contrary motions at once, is a very absurd conceit, and much more to imagine
the same Orb wherein the fixed Stars are, whose natural course takes up so many
thousands of years, should be turned about every twenty four hours. I will not
go so far as Copernicus who makes the Sun the center of the Earth and
immovable, neither will I be positive in any thing, only this I say, allow the
Earth its motion, which these eyes of mine can testify to be true, and all
those absurdities are removed, every one having only his own single and proper
motion.

But where am I? I promised an history, and am unawares turned disputer. One
Accident more befell worth mention, that during my stay I saw a kind of a
reddish Cloud coming toward me, and continually approaching nearer, which at
last I perceived was nothing but a huge swarm of Locusts. He that reads the
discourses of learned men concerning them, as John Leo of Africa and others who
relate that they are seen in the Air several days before they fall on the
Earth, and add thereto this experience of mine, will easily conclude that they
can come from no other place than the Globe of the Moon. But now give me leave
to go on quietly in my Journey for eleven or twelve days, during all which time
I was carried directly toward the Globe or Body of the Moon, with such a
violent Whirling as is inexpressible, for I cannot imagine a Bullet out of a
Cannon could make way through the vaporous and muddy Air near the Earth with
half that celerity, which is the more strange since my Gansa's moved their
Wings but now and then, and sometimes for a quarter of an hour not at all, only
holding them stretched out, as we see Kites, and Eagles sometimes do for a short
space, during which pauses I suppose they took their Naps, and times of
Sleeping, for other time I could perceive they never had any; For my self I was
so fastened to mine Engine that I durst slumber enough to serve my turn, which
I took with as great ease, though it may seem incredible, as if I had lain on
the best Down-Bed in all Antwerp.

After eleven days passage in this violent flight, I perceived we began to
approach to another Earth (if I may so call it) being the Globe or very Body of
that Star which we call the Moon. The first difference I found between this and
our Earth was, that it appeared in its natural colors as soon as ever I was
free from the attraction of the Earth; Whereas with us, a thing a League or two
from us puts on that deadly color of Blew. I then perceived also that this
World was the greatest part covered with a huge mighty Sea, those parts only
being dry Land which are unto us somewhat darker than the rest of her Body, I
mean, what the Country people call, The Man in the Moon, and that part which
shines so bright is another. Ocean besprinkled with Islands, which for their
smalness we cannot discern so far off; So that the Splendour which appears to us
in the Night, is nothing but the reflection of the Sun beams returned to us out
of the Water as from a Lookinglass. How much this disagrees with what our
Philosophers teach in the Schools is very evident; But alas how many of their
Errors has time and experience refuted in this our Age, and among other vain
conjectures, who has not hitherto believed the upper Region of the Air to be
very hot, as being next, forsooth, to the natural place of the Element of Fire;
Mere Vanities, Fancies and Dreams; For after I was once free from the
attractive Beams of that Tyranous Lodestone the Earth, I found the Air
altogether serene, without Winds, Rain, Mists or Clouds, neither hot nor cold,
but constantly pleasant, calm and comfortable till my arrival in that New World
of the Moon; As for that Region of fire our Philosophers talk of, I heard no
news of it, mine eyes have sufficiently informed me there is no such thing.

The Earth had now by turning about showed me all her parts twelve times when I
finished my course; For when by my reckoning it seemed to be (as indeed it was)
Tuesday September 11. at which time the Moon being two days old was in the
twentieth degree of Libra) my Gansa's seemed by one consent to stay their
course, and rested for certain hours, after which they took their flight, and
in less than an hour set me on the top of an high Hill in that Other World,
where many most strange and wonderful things were immediately presented to my
sight, for I observed first, that though the Globe of the Earth appeared much
greater there than the Moon does to us, even three times bigger, yet all things
there were ten, twenty, yea thirty times larger than ours; Their Trees were
thrice as high, and above five times broader and thicker; So were there Herbs,
Birds, and Beasts, though I cannot well compare them to ours, because I found
not any kind of Beast or Bird there which any way resembled ours, except
Swallows, Nightingals, Cuckoes, Woodcocks, Batts, and some kind of Wild Fowl;
And likewise such Birds as my Gansa's, all which as I now perceived, spend
their time in their absence from us, in that World, neither do they differ in
any thing from ours, but are the very same kind.

No sooner was I upon the ground, but I found my self extreme hungry, stepping
then to the next Tree I fastened my Engine and Gansa's thereto, and in great
have fell to examining my Pockets for the Victuals I had reserved there, but to
my great surprise and vexation, instead of Partridges and Capons, which I
thought I had hoarded there, I found nothing but a medley of dry leaves, Goats
Hair, Sheep or Goats Dung, Moss, and the like, my Canary-wine was turned, and
stunk like Horse-piss; Oh the villainy and cheats of these cursed Spirits, whose
assistance if I had depended on, in what a condition had I been! while I stood
musing and wondering at this strange Metamorphosis, on a sudden I heard my
Gansa's fluttering behind me, and looking back, I spied them falling greedily
upon a Shrub within the reach of their lines, whose leaves they fed earnestly
upon, whereas before I had never seen them eat any green thing whatever,
therefore stepping to the Shrub, I put a leaf to my Mouth, the taste whereof was
so excellent, that I cannot express it, and certainly if I had not with great
discretion moderated my Appetite, I should have surfeited thereon, yet it
happened to be a good bait both for me and my Birds, when we had most need of
refreshment.

Scarce had we ended our Banquet, when I suddenly saw my self surrounded with a
strange kind of People both in feature, manners, and apparel, their Stature was
very different, but they were generally twice as high as ours, their shape and
countenance pleasant, and their habit hardly to be described, for I never saw
either Cloth, Silk, nor other Stuff, like that whereof their Cloths were made,
neither, which is yet more strange, can I possibly relate their color, they
being in a manner all clothed alike; it was neither Black, White, Yellow, Red
nor Blue, nor any color composed of these; If you ask what was is then, I must
tell you, it was a color never seen in our Earthly World, and therefore
neither to be described nor conceived by us, for as it is hard to make a man
born blind understand the difference between Green and Blue, so neither can I
decipher this Moon color, as having no affinity with any I ever beheld, I can
only say it was the most glorious and delightful that can be imagined, neither
was any thing more pleasant to me during my stay there.

Being surprised at the appearance of these People so suddenly and in such
accoutrements, I crossed my self and cried out, Jesus Maria; No sooner was the
word Jesus pronounced, but young and old fell all on their knees (whereat I not
a little rejoiced) holding up both their hands on high, and repeating certain
words which I understood not; And presently rising again, one much taller than
the rest came and kindly embraced me, and ordering as I perceived, some of the
rest to attend my Birds, he took me by the hand, and led me to his dwelling
down toward the foot of the Hill, which was a building so great and beautiful,
as nothing in our World is comparable thereto; Yet afterward I saw such as this
seemed but a Cottage in respect of them; There was no Door about the House less
than thirty Foot high, and twelve broad, the Rooms were forty or fifty Foot in
height, and answerable in proportion, neither could they be much less, the
Master thereof being full twenty eight high, and I suppose his Body would weigh
twenty five or thirty of ours; After I had rested with him about one of our
days, he led me five Leagues off to the Palace of the Prince of the Country,
the stateliness whereof I have not now leisure to describe; This Prince was
much taller than the former, and called (as near as I can by letters declare
it, for their sounds are not perfectly to be expressed by our Characters,)
Pylonas which in their Language is First or Chief, if it does not rather denote
his Authority and Dignity, as being the principal man in all those parts;
Though yet there is one Supreme Monarch amongst them, much greater of stature
than he, commanding over all that whole World, having under him twenty nine
other Princes of very great Power, and every one of these has twenty four
Inferior Governors, whereof this Pylonas was one. The first Ancestor of this
great Monarch came out of the Earth, as they relate, and by marrying the
Heiress of that vast Monarchy obtaining the government, left it to his
Posterity, who have enjoyed it ever since, even forty thousand Moons, which is
3077 years; His name was Irdonozur whose Heirs to this day assume the same
name, he, they say, having continued there about four hundred Moons, and begot
diverse Children, returned (though by what means they know not) to the Earth
again. I doubt they have their fables as well as we, since our Historians never
mention any Earthly Man to have been in that World before my self, and much
less to have returned again, I cannot therefore but condemn this tradition as
false and Romantic, though I found Learning was in great esteem among them,
and they seem to detest Lying and Falsehood which is there severely punished,
and which may yield some credit to their Historical Narrations. Many of them
live wonderful long, even beyond belief, affirming to me that some survived
thirty thousand Moons, which is above a thousand years, so that the Ages of
three or four men might easily reach to the time of the first Irdonozur, and
this is generally noted that the taller people are of Stature, the more
excellent are their endowments of mind, and the longer time they live; for
their stature is very different, great numbers not much exceeding ours, who
seldom live above a thousand Moons, which is fourscore of our years, these they
account very base, unworthy creatures, but one degree above brute Beasts, and
accordingly employ in the most mean and Servile Offices, calling them Bastards,
Counterfeits or Changlings; Those whom they account true Natural Lunars or Moon
Men, exceed ours generally thirty times, both in quantity of Body, and length
of life, proportionable to the quality of the day in both Worlds, theirs
containing almost thirty of our days.

The manner of our travel to the Palace of Pylonas was more strange and
incredible than any thing we have related, for at our first setting forth there
were delivered to each of us two Feather Fans like those our Ladies in Spain
cool themselves with in Summer; You must understand that the Globe or the Moon
has likewise an attractive power, yet so much weaker than the Earth, that if a
man do but spring upward with all his strength, as Dancers do in showing their
Tricks, he will be able to mount fifty or sixty foot high, and being then above
all attraction from the Moons Earth, he falls down no more, but by the help of
these Fans as with Wings, they convey themselves in the Air in a short space,
(though not quite so swift as Birds) whither they please. In two hours time (as
I could guess) by the help of these Fans we were carried through the Air those
five Leagues, in all about sixty Persons. Being arrived at the Palace of
Pylonas, after our Conductor had got Audience, and declared what manner of
Present he had brought, I was immediately called in to him by his Attendants;
By the Stateliness of his Palace and the reverence done him, I soon perceived
his greatness, and therefore managed my affairs in order to procure his favor
accordingly, and having, as you may remember, a certain little Box or Casket of
Jewels, the remainder of those I brought from the East Indies, before I was
introduced I secretly took them out of my pocket, and choosing some of each
sort, I made them ready to be presented as I should think convenient.

I found him sitting in a most magnificent Chair of State with his Wife or
Queen on one hand, and his Eldest Son on the other, one attended by a Troop of
Ladies, and the other of young men, and all along the side of the Room stood a
great number of handsome Personages, whereof scarce one was lower of Stature
than Pylonas, whose Age they report is now one and twenty thousand Moons. At my
entrance I fell on my knees, and though fit to address to him with these words
in Latin, Propitius sit tibi Princeps Illustrissime Dominus Noster Jesus
Christus, etc. As the former People, so these hearing the holy name of our
Savior, the King, Queen, and all the rest kneeled, pronouncing a word or two,
I understood not, being rise again, I proceeded. Et Maria, Salvatoris Genetrix
Petrus and Paulus, etc. And so reckoning up a number of Saints to find if they
honored any of them as their Patron, at last naming among many other St.
Martinus they all bowed their heads and held up their hands in sign of great
reverence, the reason whereof I found was, that Martin in their Language
signifies God. Then taking out my Jewels, I presented to the King seven Stones
of several sorts, a Diamond, a Ruby, an Emerald, a Sapphire, a Topaz and an
Opal, which he accepted with great Joy and admiration, as having seldom seen
the like; Then I offered the Queen and Prince some others, and designed to have
bestowed diverse more upon his Attendants, but Pylonas forbid them to accept
any, supposing, as I heard, they were all I had, which he would have me reserve
for Irdonozur his Sovereign; He then embraced me with much indearedness, and
inquired diverse things by signs, which I answered in the same manner to the
best of my Skill, which not contenting him, he delivered me to the guard of 100
of his Giants as I may well call them, strictly charging them that I should
want nothing fit for me; That they should suffer none of the Dwarf Lunars or
little Moon Men, if I may so term them, to come near me. That I should with all
diligence be instructed in their Language, and lastly that they should by no
means impart to me the knowledge of several things by him Specified, what they
were I could never understand. It may be you long to know what Pylonas inquired
of me; Why what should it be but, whence I came, how I arrived there, what was
my name and business, with the like, to all which I answered as near the truth
as possible.

Being dismissed I was provided with all necessaries as my heart could wish, so
that I seemed to be in a Paradise, the pleasures whereof did not yet so
transport me, but I was much concerned with the thoughts of my Wife and
Children, and therefore still retaining some Sparks of Hope that I might again
return to them I tended my Gansa's daily with much care, which yet had
signified little if other men had not done more than I could; For now the time
came when of necessity all people of our Stature, and my self likewise, must
needs sleep thirteen or fourteen whole days together, for by a secret and
irresistible decree of nature when the day begins to appear, and the Moon to be
enlightened by the Sun Beams which is in the first Quarter of the Moon, all
people of our stature inhabiting these parts fall into a dead sleep, and are
not possibly to be wakened till the Sun set, and is withdrawn, for as Owls and
Bats with us cannot endure the light, so at the first approach of day we begin
to be amazed therewith, and fall immediately into a slumber, which grows by
degrees into a dead sleep till the light be gone, which is in fourteen or
fifteen days, that is till the last Quarter.

Some will be apt to wonder what light there is in that World during the Suns
absence, to them I declare that there is a two fold light, one of the Sun which
I could not endure to behold, and another of the Earth; Now that of the Earth
was at the height, for when the Moon is at the change, then is the Earth a full
Moon to them, and as the Moon increases with us, so the light of the Earth
decreaseth with them. I then found the light there, though the Sun was absent,
equal to that with us in the day when the Sun is clouded, but toward the
quarter it daily diminishes, yet leaving still a competent light, which seems
very strange, though not so remarkable as what they there report, that in the
other Hemisphere of the Moon, contrary to that I fell upon, where during half
the Moon they see not the Sun, and the Earth never appears to them, they have
notwithstanding a kind of light not unlike our Moon light, which it seems the
neerness of the Stars and other Planets that are at a far less distance than
from us, affords them.

You must understand that of the true Lunars of Moon men there are three kinds,
some a little taller than we, as perhaps ten or twelve Foot high, these can
endure the day of the Moon, when the Earth shines but little, but not the Beams
of both, and therefore must then be laid asleep; Others are twenty Foot high or
above, who can suffer all the light both of the Earth and Sun. There are in a
certain Island (the mysteries where of are carefully concealed) men whose
Stature is at least twenty seven Foot high of the measure of Spain; If any
other come a land there in the Moons day time, they instantly fall asleep; This
is called Insula Martini, or Gods Island, and has a particular Governor, who
as they report is sixty five thousand Moons old, which makes five thousand of
our years, his name is said to be Hiruch, and he in a manner commands Irdonozur
himself, especially in that Island out of which he never removes; There is
another likewise comes often thither, who they say is not above half his Age,
that is about thirty three thousand Moons, or two thousand six hundred of our
years, and he orders all things throughout the whole Globe of the Moon in
matters of Religion and the Service of God, as absolutely as our holy Father
the Pope does in any part of Italy, I would fain have seen this man, but was
not permitted to come near him, his name is Imazes.

Now let me settle my self to a long nights sleep, to which end my Attendants
take charge of my Birds, prepare my lodging, and signify to me by signs how I
must order my self. It was then about the middle of September, when I perceived
the Air more clear than ordinary, and with the increase of the light I began to
feel my self first dull and then heavy to sleep, though I had not been lately
disturbed of my rest; At length I delivered my self into the custody of this
Sister of Death, whose Prisoner I was for almost a Fortnight after, and then
awaking, it is not to be believed how fresh, brisk and vigorous I found the
faculties both of my Body and Mind; I then immediately applied my self to
learning the Language, which is the very same throughout all the Regions of the
Moon, yet not so wonderful, since I believe all the Earth of Moon does not
amount to the fortieth part of our inhabited Earth, partly because the Globe of
the Moon is far less than that of the Earth, and besides the Sea or Ocean
covers very nigh three parts of four, whereas the Land and Sea in out World may
be judged of an equal measure. Their Language is very difficult, since it has
no Affinity with any other I ever heard, and consists not so much of Words and
Letters as Tunes and strange sounds which no Letters can express, for there are
few words but signify diverse and several things, and are distinguished only by
their Sounds, which are sung as it were in uttering yea many words consist of
tunes only without words; By occasion whereof I find a Language may be framed,
and easily learned, as copious as any other in the World only of Tunes which is
an Experiment worth searching after; Notwithstanding these difficulties within
two months I attained to such knowledge therein that I understood most
Questions demanded of me, and with signs and words made reasonable shift to
utter my mind, which Pylonas having notice of, he oftimes sent for me, and was
pleased to inform me of many things my Guardians durst not disclose, though I
must needs say I never found they abused me with an untruth, but if I asked a
question they were unwilling to resolve, they would shake their heads, and with
a Spanish shrug divert to some other discourse.

After seven Months time it happened the great Irdonozur making his Progress to
a place about two hundred Leagues from the Palace of Pylonas, sent for me, yet
would not admit me into his presence but discourst me through a Window where I
might hear him, and he hear and see me at pleasure. I presented him the
remainder of my Jewels which he very thankfully accepted, saying he would
requited them with gifts of a far more considerable value. I stayed there not
above a quarter of a Moon when I was again sent back to Pylonas, for if we had
stayed a day or two longer the Sun would have overtaken us before we could have
recovered our home. The gifts he bestowed on me were such that a man would part
with Mountains of Gold to purchase, they were all Stones nine only in number,
of three sorts, one called Poleastis, another Machrus, and the third Ebelus, of
each sort 3. the first are about the bigness of an Hazel-nut very like Jet,
which among many other incredible Virtues has this property, that being once
put in the Fire they ever after retain their heat, though without any outward
appearance, till quenched with some kind of liquor which no way endamages them
though heated and cooled therein a thousand times; Their heat is so vehement
that it will make any Metal within a foot of it red hot, and being in a Chimney
warms the Room as if a great fire were kindled therein. The Machrus is yet more
precious, in color like a Topaz, so clear and resplendent as though not above
the bigness of a Bean, yet being placed in the night in the midst of a large
Church it makes all as light as if an hundred Lamps were hanged round; can any
man wish for more useful properties in a Stone than these? Yet my Ebelus is so
excellent that it may be much preferred before them, yea prized above all the
Diamonds, Saphires, Rubies, and Emeralds that our World can afford. The Lunar
color is so exceeding beautiful that a man would travel a thousand Leagues to
behold it, the Shape is somewhat flat, of the breadth of a piece of Eight, and
twice the thickness, one side is of a more Orient color than the other, which
being clapped to a man's bare Skin, takes away all the weight and ponderousness of
his Body, but turning the other side, it adds force to the attractive beams of
the Earth either in this World or that, and makes the body half as heavy again;
Do you wonder now why I should so overprize this stone? before you see me on
Earth again, you will find I have reason to value this invaluable Jewel. I
inquired whether they had not any kind of Jem, or other means to make a man
invisible, which I judged a thing of admirable use, and could mention diverse of
our learned men who had written to this purpose; They answered, that if it were
possible, yet they were sure Heaven would not suffer it to be revealed to us
creatures subject to so many imperfections, and which might be easily abused to
ill purposes, and this was all I could get of them.

Now after it was know that Irdonozur the great Monarch had done me this
honor, it is strange how much all respected me more than before; my Guardians
who had been hitherto cautious in relating any thing of the Government of that
World, grew now more open, so that from them and Pylonas together I understood
many notable particulars; As that in a thousand years there is found neither
Thief nor Whore-Monger, for first there is no want of any thing necessary for
the use of man, food growing every where without labor of all sorts that can
be desired. As for Cloths, Houses or whatever else a man may be supposed to
want, it is provided by their Superiors, though not without some labor, but
yet so easy as if they did it for pleasure; Again their Females are all
absolute Beauties, and by a secret disposition of nature, a man there having
once known a Woman never desires any other; Murder was never heard of amongst
them, neither is it hardly possible to be committed, for there can be no wound
made but what is cureable, yea they assured me, and for my part I believe it,
that though a man's head be cut off, yet if within three Moons it be joined to
the Carcass again, and the Juice of a certain Herb there growing applied, it
will be so consolidated as the wounded party shall in a few hours be perfectly
cured. But the chief cause of their good government is an excellent disposition
in the nature of the People, so that all both Old and Young hate all manner of
vice and live in such love, peace, and amity as it seems to be another
Paradise; Though it is true likewise that some are of a better disposition than
others, which they discern immediately at their Birth; And because it is an
inviolable Law amongst them that none shall be put to death, therefore
perceiving by their Stature or some other signs who are like to be of a wicked
and debauched humor, they send them, I know not by what means, into the Earth,
and change them for other Children, before they have either opportunity or
ability to do amiss among them, but first, they say, they are fain to keep them
there for some time till the Air of the Earth alters their color like ours.
Their ordinary vent for them is a certain high Hill in the North of America,
whose people, I am apt to believe, are wholly descended from them, both in
regard of their color, and their continual use of Tobacco, which the Lunars or
Moon Men smoke exceedingly, the place abounding much with moisture, together
with the pleasure they take therein, and some other respects too long to
rehearse: Sometimes, though but seldom, they mistake their aim and fall upon
Europe, Asia, or Africa. I remember some years since I read certain stories
tending to confirm what is related by these Lunars, and especiaily one Chapter
of Neubrigensis, de rebus Angl. It is toward the end of the first book, the
Chapter I have forgot: Inigo Mondejar in his description of Nova Granata Book
2. Also Joseph Defia de Carana in his History of Mexico if my memory fail not,
recount what will make my report much more credible; but I value not
testimonies.

If you inquire farther of the government of the Lunars, and how Justice is
executed, alas what need is there of exemplary punishment where no offenses are
committed, neither need they any Lawyers, for there is no contention, the seeds
whereof when they begin to sprout are instantly by the wisdom of the next
Superior plucked up by the Roots. And as little want is there of Physicians,
they never surfeit themselves, the Air is always pure and temperate, neither is
there any cause at all of sickness, I could never hear of any that were
distempered. But the time assigned them by nature being spent, they dye without
the least pain, or as I should rather say, they cease to live, as a Candle does
to give light when what nourishes it is consumed. I was once at the departure
of one of them, and was much surprised that notwithstanding the happy life he
lived, and the multitude of Friends and Children he should forsake, yet as soon
as he certainly understood his end to approach, he prepared a great Feast, and
inviting all whom he especially esteemed, he exhorts them, To be merry and
rejoice with him, since the time was come he should now leave the counterfeit
Pleasures of that World, and be made partaker of all true Joy and perfect
happiness; I did not so much admire his own constancy as the behavior of his
Friends; With us in the like case all seem to mourn, when many of them do often
but laugh in their Sleeves, or under a Vizard. But here all both young and old
did, in my conscience, not pretendedly but really rejoice thereat, and if any
dissembled, it was only grief for their own particular loss. Being dead their
Bodies putrify not, and therefore are not buried, but kept in certain Rooms
appointed to that purpose, so that most of them can show their Ancestors Bodies
incorrupt for many Generations; There is never any Rain, Wind, or change of
Weather, never either Summer or Winter, but as it were a perpetual Spring,
yielding all pleasure and content, free from the least trouble or annoyance; O
my Wife and Children what wrong have you done me to bereave me of the happiness
of that place! But it is no great matter, for by this Voyage I am sufficiently
assured, that when the race of my mortal life is run I shall attain a greater
and everlasting happiness elsewhere.

It was the ninth of September that I began to ascend from the Pike of
Tenariff, twelve days I was upon my Voyage and Arrived in that Province of the
Moon called Simiri Sept. 21. following Friday May the twelft we came to the
Court of the great Irdonozur and returned back the seventeenth to the Palace of
Pylonas where I continued till March 1601. When I earnestly requested Pylonas,
as I had often done before to give me leave to depart, though with never so great
hazard of my life, back into the Earth again. He much dissuaded me, insisting
on the danger of the Voyage, the misery of that place from whence I came, and
the abundant happiness I now enjoyed, but the remembrance of my Wife and
Children outweigh'd all these reasons, and to say the truth, I was so elated
with a desire of the deserved glory I should purchase at my return, as
methought I deserved not the name of a Spaniard if I would not hazard twenty
lives rather than lose the least particle thereof. I therefore replied, that I
had so strong a desire to see my Children as I found I could not possibly live
any longer without going to them; He then requested me to stay one year longer,
I told him, I must needs depart now or never, my Birds began to droop for want
of their usual Voyage, three were already dead, and if a few more failed I was
forever destitute of all possibility of return. At length with much soliciting
I prevailed, having first acquainted the great Irdonozur with my Intentions,
and perceiving by the often baying of my Birds a great longing in them to be
gone, I trimmed up my Engine, and took my leave of Pylonas, who for all the
kindness he had shown me required but one thing of me which was to promise him
faithfully that if ever I had opportunity I would salute from him Elizabeth
whom he termed, The great Queen of England, calling her the most glorious of
all Women living, and indeed he would often question me about her, wherein he
so much delighted that he seemed never satisfied with talking of her, he
likewise delivered me a Present for her of no small value, and though I account
her an Enemy to Spain, yet will I not fail in performing this promise as soon
as I am able

Thursday March 29. Three days after my waking from the last Moons light I
fastened my self to my Engine, not forgetting to take the Jewels Irdonozur had
given me, with the Virtues and use whereof Pylonas had aaquainted me at large,
together with a small quantity of Victuals whereof afterward I had great
occasion. A vast multitude of People being present and among them Pylonas
himself, after I had given them all the last Farewell, I let loose the reins to
my Birds, who with much greediness taking wing, quickly carried me out of
sight, it happened to me as in my first Passage, for I never felt either hunger
or thirst till I fell upon an high Mountain in China about five Leagues from
the High and Mighty City of Pequin. This Voyage was performed in less then nine
days, neither heard I any news of these Airy men I met with in my ascending,
nothing stayed me in the least in my Journey, whether because of the earnest
desire of my Birds to return to the Earth, having already missed their season,
or that the attraction of the Earth was so much stronger than that of the Moon,
and so made it easier, yet so it was though I had three Birds less than before.
For the first eight days my Birds flew before me, and I on the Engine was as it
were drawn after, but the ninth day, when I began to approach the Clouds, I
perceived my self and Engine to sink toward the Earth, and go before them. I
was then horribly afraid least my Birds unable to bear our weight, being so
few, should be constrained to precipitate both me and themselves headlong to
the Earth, and therefore thought it very necessary to make use of my stone
Ebelus which I clapped to my bare Skin within my Cloths, and instantly I
perceived my Birds made way with greater ease than before, as seeming freed
from a great burden, neither do I think they could possibly have let me down
safely to the Earth without that help.

China is a Country so populous that I think there is scarce a piece of ground
thrice a man's length which is not carefully manured; I being yet in the Air
some of the Country people spying me came running by Troops, and seizing me
would needs carry me before a Magistrate, and seeing no other remedy I yielded
to them. But when I tried to go I found my self so light that one foot being on
the ground I had much ado to set down the other, which was by reason my Ebelus
so applied took all weight away from my Body, therefore considering what to do,
I pretended a desire of performing the necessities of nature, which being made
known to them by signs, for they understood not a word of any Language I could
speak, they permitted me to go aside among a few bushes, assuring themselves it
was impossible I should escape from them; being there, I remembered Pylonas his
directions about the use of my stones, and knit them up, (together with a few
remaining Jewels I brought from Judea) into an handkerchief, all except the
least and worst Ebelus, which I found means to apply in such manner to my body
that but the half of its side touched my Skin, this done I drew toward my
Guardians, till coming so near that they could not cross my way, I showed them
a fair pair of heels, that I might have time to hide my Jewels which I knew
they would have robbed me of if not prevented. Being thus lightened I led them
such a dance, that had they been all upon the backs of so many Race Horses they
could never have overtaken me; I directed my Course to a thick Wood, wherein I
entered about a quarter of a League and there finding a fine Spring, which I
took for my mark, I thurst my Jewels into a hole made by a Mole hard by.

I then took my Victuals out of my pocket, to which till now in all my Voyage I
had not the least appetite, and refreshed my self therewith, till the people
who persued overtook me, into whose hands I quietly surrendered my self; They
led me to an inferior Officer, who understanding that I escaped from those who
first apprehended me, caused an enclosure of boards to be made, wherein they
put me, so that only my head was at liberty, and then carried me upon the
Shoulders of four slaves, like some notorious Malefactor, before a Person of
great Authority, who in their Language I learnt, was called a Mandarin, and
resided a League off the famous City of Pequin. I could not understand them,
but found I was accused for something with much vehemence, the substance of
this accusation it seems was, that I was a Magician as appeared by my being so
strangely carried in the Air, and that being a stranger as both my Language and
habit did declare, I contrary to the Laws of China had entered the Kingdom
without a Warrant, and probably for no good intent. The Mandarin heard them
with a great deal of composed gravity, and being a man of quick apprehension,
and studious of Novelties, he told them he would take such order as the case
required, and my bold attempt should not go unpunished; Having dismissed them he
ordered his Servants I should be kept in a remote part of his vast Palace, be
strictly guarded, and kindly used; This I conjecture by my treatment and what
followed, for my accommodation was much better than I could expect, I lodged
well, eat well, was well attended, and could complain of nothing but my
restraint; Thus continued I many months, afflicted more with the thoughts of my
Gansa's than any thing else, who I knew must be irrecoverably lost, as indeed
they were.

In this time by my own Industry, and the assistance of those who accompanied
me, I learnt to speak indifferently the ordinary Language of that Province,
(for almost every Province in China has its proper Tongue) whereat I perceived
they were much pleased; At length I was permitted to take the Air, and brought
into the spacious Garden of that Palace, a place of extraordinary pleasure and
delight, adorned with Herbs and Flowers of admirable sweetness and beauty, with
almost infinite variety of Fruits, European and others, all composed with that
rare curiosity as even ravished my senses in the contemplation of such
delightful objects; I had not long recreated my self here, when the Mandarin
entered the Garden on that side I was walking, of which having notice by his
Servants, and that I ought to kneel to him (a usual reverence I found toward
great Officers) I did so, and humbly entreated his favor toward a poor
stranger who arrived in these parts not designedly but by the secret disposal
of the Heavens; He answered in a different Language which I hear all the
Mandarins use, and like that of the Lunars consisting chiefly of tunes, which
was interpreted by one of his attendants, wishing me to be of good comfort
since he intended no harm to me, and so passed on. Next day I was ordered to
come before him, and being conducted into a Noble dining Room exquisitely
painted and imbellished, the Mandarin commanding all to avoid, vouchsafed to
confer with me in the Vulgar Langaage, inquiring into the state of my Country,
the Power of my Prince, and the Religion and Manners of the People, wherein
having satisfied him, he descended to ask me about my education and studies,
and what brought me into this remote Country; I then at large declared to him
the Adventures of my Life, only omitting what particulars I thought convenient,
and especially forbearing to mention the Stones given me by Irdonozur,

The strangeness of my story did much amaze him, and finding in all my
discourse nothing tending to Magic, wherein he hoped by my means to be
instructed, he began to admire the excellency of my Wit, applauding me for the
happiest man that this World ever saw, and wishing me to repose my self after
my long Narration, he for that time dismissed me. After which the Mandarin took
so much delight in me, that no day passed wherein he did not send for me; At
length he advised me to cloth my self in the habit of that Country, which I
willingly did, and gave me not only the liberty of his House, but took me also
with him when he went to Pequin, whereby I had opportunity by degrees to learn
the disposition of the People, and the Policy of the Country, neither did I by
my attendance on him, gain only the knowledge of these things, but the
possibility likewise of being restored to my native Soil, and to those dear
Pledges which I value above the World, even my Wife and Children; For by often
frequenting Pequin, I at length heard of some Fathers of the Society of Jesus,
who were become famous for the extraordinary favor afforded them by the King,
to whom they had presented some European Rarities, as Clocks, Watches, Dials,
and the like, which by them were accounted exquisite Curiosities. To these by
the Mandarins leave I repaired, and was welcomed by them, they much wondering to
see a Lay Spaniard there, whither they had with so much difficulty obtained
leave to arrive. There did I relate to Father Pantoja and others of the Society
the forementioned adventures, by whose directions I put them in writing, and
sent this story of my Fortunes to Macao, from thence to be conveyed to Spain as
a forerunner of my return; And the Mandarin being very indulgent to me, I came
often to the Fathers with whom I consulted about many secrets, and with them
also laid the Foundation of my return, the blessed hour whereof I do with
patience expect, that by enriching my Country with the knowledge of these
hidden mysteries, I may at last reap the Glory of my Forrunate Misfortunes.

Mention being made in the preceding discourse of the Pike of Teneriff one of
the Canary Islands, which is thought not to have its equal in the World for
height, its top being so much above the Clouds, that in clear weather it may be
seen sixty Dutch Leagues at Sea, I cannot think it altogether unpleasant to
give an account of some English men who a few years since ascended to the top
thereof, and Published the fellowing relation.

It cannot be ascended but in July and August, lying all the other months
covered with Snow, though upon this and the near adjacent Islands none is to be
seen; It requires three days travel to come to the top; The Merchants and other
worthy Persons who undertook this Journey proceed thus. Having furnished our
selves with a Guide, Servants, and Horses to carry our Wine and Provision, we
set forth from Oratava a Port Town in the Island of Teneriff, situate on the
north side, two mile distant from the main Sea, and traveled from twelve at
night till eight in the morning, by which time we got to the top of the first
Mountain toward the Pico de Terraira, there under a very large and conspicuous
Pinetree we took our Breakfast, Dined, and refresht our selves till two in the
Asternoon. Then we passed through many sandy ways, over many lofty Mountains,
but naked and bare, and not covered with Pine Trees as our first nights passage
was; this exposed us to excessive heat, till we arrived to the foot of the
Pico, where we found diverse huge Stones which seemed to have fallen from some
upper part; About six in the evening we began to ascend up the Pice, but were
scarce advanced a mile, and the way being no more passible for Horses, we left
them with our Servants. In the ascent of one mile, some of our Company grew
very faint and sick, disordered by Fluxes, Vomitings, and Aguish Distempers,
our Horses hair standing up like Bristles, and calling for some of our Wine
carried in small Barrels on an Horse, we found it so wonderfully cold, that we
could not drink it till we had made a Fire to warm it, notwithstanding the Air
was very calm and moderate, but when the Sun was set, it began to blow with
such violence, and grow so cold, that taking up our lodging among the hollow
Rocks, we were necessitated to keep Fires in the mouths of them all night.

About four in the morning we began to mount again, and being come another mile
up, one of our Company failed and was able to proceed no further; Here began
the black Rocks, the rest of us pursued our Journey till we came to the Sugar
Loaf, where we began to travel again in a white Sand, being fitted with Shoes,
whose single Soles are made a Finger broader than the upper Leathers, to
encounter this difficult passage; Having ascended as far as the black Rocks,
which lay all flat like a plain Floor, we climbed within a mile of the very top
of the Pico, and at last we attained the Summit, where we found no such smoke
as appeared a little below, but a continual perspiration of a hot and
sulphurous vapor that made our Faces extremely sore, all this way we found no
considerable alteration of the Air, and very little Wind, but on the top it was
so impetuous that we had much ado to stand against it whilst we drank the Kings
Health, and fired each of us a Piece. Here also we took our Dinner, but found
that our strong Waters had lost their virtue, and were almost insipid, while
our Wine was more Brisk and Spirituous than before; The top on which we stood
being not above a yard broad is the Brink of a Pit called the Caldera which we
judged to be a Musket shot over, and near fourscore yards deep in form of a
Cone, hollow within like a Kettel, and covered over with small loose stones
mixed with Sulphur and Sand, from among which issued diverse Spiracles of Smaok
and Heat, which being stirred with any thing puffs and makes a noise, and so
offensive, that we were even suffocated with the sudden rising of Vapors upon
removing one of these Stones, which were so hot as not easily to be handled; We
descended not above four or five yards into the Caldera or Caldron because of
the Slipperiness under foot, and the difficulty, but some have adventured to
the bottom; Other matters observable we discovered none besides a clear sort of
Sulphur which lay like Salt upon the Stones; From this renowned Pico we could
see the Grand Canaries fourteen Leagues distant, Palma eighteen, and Gomera
seven, which interval of Sea seemed not much wider than the Thames about
London; We discerned also the Herro being distant about twenty Leagues, and so
to the outmost limits of the Sea much farther; As soon as the Sun appeared the
shadow of the Pico seemed to cover not only the whole Island and the Grand
Canaries but the Sea to the very Horizon, where the top of the Sugar Loaf or
Pico visibly appeared to turn up, and cast its shade into the Air it self, at
which we were much surprised;

But the Sun was not far ascended when the Clouds began to rise so fast, as
intercepted our Prospect both of the Sea and the whole Island, except the tops
only of the Subjacent Mountains which seemed to pierce them through, whether
these Clouds do ever surmount the Pico we cannot say, but to such as are far
below they seem sometimes to hang above it, or rather wrap themselves about it,
as constantly when the West Winds blow, this they call the Cap, and is an
infallible prognostic of ensuing Storms; One of our Company who made this
Journey again two years after, arriving at the top of the Pico before day, and
creeping under a great stone to Shroud himself from the cold Air; after a
little space found himself all wet, and perceived it to come from a perpetual
trickling of the Water from the Rocks above him; Many excellent and exuberant
Springs we found issuing from the tops of most of the other mountains, gushing
out in great Spouts almost as far as the huge Pine Tree we mentioned before;
Having stayed a while at the top, we all descended the Sandy way till we came
to the foot of the Sugar Loaf, which being steep even almost to a perpendicular
we soon passed, and here we met with a Cave about ten yards deep and fifteen
broad, being in shape like an Oven or Cupola, having a hole at the top near
eight yards over; This we descended by a Rope that our Servants held fast on
the top, while with the other end being fastened about our middles we swung our
selves till being over a Bank of Snow, we slid down, lighting upon it, we were
forced to swing thus in the descent, because in the midst of the bottom of this
Cave opposite to the overture at the top is a round pit of Water like a Well,
the surface whereof is about a yard lower, but as wide as the Mouth at top, and
about six Fathom deep, we supposed this Water not a Spring, but dissolved Snow
blown in, or Water trickling through the Rocks; about the sides of the Grott
for some height there is Ice and Isicles hanging down to the Snow.

But being quickly weary of this excessive cold place, and drawn up again, we
continued our descent from the Mountains by the same Passage we went up the day
before, and so about five in the Evening arrived at Oratava from whence we set
forth, our faces so red and sore that to cool them we were forced to wash and
bath them in Whites of Eggs; The whole height of the Pico in perpendicular is
vulgarly esteemed to be two miles and an half. No Trees, Herbs nor Shrubs did
we find in all the Passage, but Pines, and among the whiter Sands a kind of
Broom being a bushy Plant; It is the opinion of some Ingenious Persons who have
lived twenty years upon the place, that the whole Island being a Soil mightily
impregnated with Brimstone did in former times take fire and blow up all or
near all at the same time, and that many Mountains of huge Stones calcined and
burnt, which appears all over this Island, especially in the South-West part of
it, were cast up and raised out of the Bowels of the Earth at the time of that
general conflragation, and that the greatest quantity of this Sulphur lying
about the center of the Island raised up the Pico to that height at which it
now is seen, which appears by the situation of those Rocks that lie three or
sour Miles round the bottom of the Pico, and in such order one above another
almost to the Sugar Loaf as it is called, as if the whole ground swelling and
rising up together by the ascension of the Brimstone, the Torrents and Rivers
of it did with a sudden eruption Roll and Tumble them down from the rest of the
Rocks, especially to the South-West where from the top of the Pico to the
Seacoast lie huge heaps of these burnt Rocks one under another, and there
still remain the very tracks of the Brimstone Rivers as they ran over this
Quarter of the Island which has so wasted the ground, beyond recovery, that
nothing can be made to grow there but Broom.

Sect. III. A View of the Bay OF SOULDANIA, Near the Coast of Good Hope, on the
Coast of AFRICA.
BEfore we arrive at the East Indies, I cannot but divert once more to the Bay
of Souldania lying in thirty four degrees and an half of South Latitude, about
twelve Leagues short of the Cape of goods hope, in a sweet Climate full of
fragrant Herbs, which the Soil produces of it self, pleasing to the sense;
Where the honorable East India Companies ships used formerly to refresh, and
arriving there very weak and feeble with that Sea disease the Scurvey have
often found very great relief, and it is observable if any be not too much
overgone with this malady, as soon as they come to enjoy the fresh Air on any
shore with fresh Water and fresh Victuals, they presently recover, but if the
Scurvey has overmuch prevailed, they instantly dye as soon as they set their
foot on Shore. Here is a most delicious Brook of sweet Water arising out of a
mighty Hill hard by, called for its form, The Table, near which is another Hill
exceeding high like a Pyramid, and called by Europeans the Sugar Loaf here are
great store of Cattle as little Cows, called by the barbarous Inhabitants Boos,
and Sheep which they name Baas, who bear a short, course, hairy Wool, and seem
to have been never shorn. These Boos and Baas as they term them, were formerly
bought in great plenty for small quantities of Kettle-brass, and Iron Hoops
taken off our empty Cask, which for this long Voyage to the Indies are hoop't
with Iron. These Salvages had the Cattle we bought of them at very great
Command, for with a call they would presently run to them, and when they had
sold a Bullock to us for a little piece of Brass, if we did not presently knock
him down, they would by the same call make the poor Strange Creatures in India
creature break from us, and run to them again, and then there was no getting
them out of their hands, but by giving more Brass; By this trick they sometimes
sell the same beast two or three times, whereby we may perceive the
covetousness and deceit of this brutish People. Of all Metals they love Brass
best, it may be for the rankness of the smell wearing great Rings thereof about
their Arms, yea are so in love therewith, that if you lay before them a piece
of Gold worth two pound sterling, and a piece of Brass worth two pence, they
will leave the Gold and take the Brass; On this shore are excellent small Roots
for Sallards, and in the head of the Bay great store of large fat Mullets.

This remotest part of Africa is very mountainous, and overun with wild Beasts,
as Lions, Tigers, Wolves, and many other Beasts of Prey, which in the silent
night discover themselves by their noise and roaring; To the Teeth and Jaws of
which cruel creatures the Natives do here expose their old people if death
prevent not, when once they grow decrepit and troublesome, laying them forth in
some open place in the dark night, when the Wild Beasts creep forth, and the
young Lions roar after their Prey. One miserable poor Old wretch was thus
exposed when some English Ships were there, who by his pitiful cries was
discovered by our Court of Guard that were there ashore not far from him by
whom he was relieved and delivered for that present out of the Jaws of Death,
and they asking Cooree one of the Natives (of whom hereafter) why they did so,
he replied, It was their Custom when their People had lived so long that they
knew not what to do with them thus to be rid of them; They saw in this Bay of
Souldania many Whales, and about the Shore diverse party-colored Fowls and
Ostriches; The Soil about the Bay seems very good, but the Sun shines not upon
a People in the whole World more Barbarous than those which possess it, being
rather Beasts in the Skins of men, than Men in the Skins of Beasts, as appears
by their Ignorance, Habit, Language, Diet and other things wherein they appear
absolutely brutish.

For as to Religion, generally all the People in the World as well Heathen as
Christian do acknowledge the great God of Heaven and Earth, but they, as Cooree
told us, own no God at all; Their speech seems rather an inarticulate noise
than a Language, sounding like the clucking of Hens, or Gabling of Turkies,
wherewith as they walk about, they make a very strange confused noise, if there
be two, three, five, ten, twenty or more in company it is their manner to walk
in rank one after another in small paths they have made by there going thus, as
Cows in Summer do many times when they come home to the pail, or as Wild Geese
who fly in Ranks, and as they fly make a noise, so these walking together
gabble from the first to the last in company as if all spoke and none answered;
Their Habits are their Sheepskins undrest thonged together, which cover their
bodies to the middle, with a little flap of the same Skin tied before them,
being naked downward, when it is cold they put the Woolley, and when hot the
Fleshy side of those Skins next their Body. Their Ornaments and Jewels are
Bullocks or Sheepsguts full of Excrements about their Necks, and therefore when
we bought their Cattle they would take, and we were content they should, their
Skins, Guts, and Garbage, which plentifully furnished them with that stinking
attire; When they are hungry they sit down upon some hillock, first shaking
some of that filthy pudding out of the Guts about their Neck, then bowing down
their Mouths to their hands almost as low as their knees, like hungry Dogs they
gnaw and eat the Raw Guts, which you may conceive fills their Mouths full of
sweet Green Sauce.

The Women are adorned, habited and dieted in the same manner, only they wear
more about their lower parts than the men, they carry their sucking Infants
under their Skins upon their backs, and their Breasts hanging down like
Bagpipes, they put up with their hands to their Children that they may suck
them over their Shoulders; Both Sexes make coverings for their heads of
Cow Dung and such like silth, mingled with a little stinking Grease they
besmear their Faces with, which makes their Company insufferable if they get
the Wind of you; I observed (says my Author) that some of the rest of their
Diet was agreeable to the former, for they would not refuse any thing, as
rotten and moldy Biskets which we have given them, fit for nothing but the
dunghill, yea they will devour what a hungry Dog in England would refuse. I
once observed a couple of them, who had found on the Neighbor Shore a large
piece of a dead Fish the Sea had cast up, which stunk intolerably, they made a
little fire with dry Cow Dung wherewith they warmed and then eat it, with as
much appetite as an hungry man with us would feed upon a very choice and
Savoury Dish, which makes me apt to believe that these wretched creatures have
but three senses, wanting the benefit both of smelling and tasting. These
Brutes devote themselves to Idleness, for they neither spin nor dig; They are
very straight and well limbed, though not very Tall, their Faces very ill
favored, most of their Noses flat, have little or no beard, the hair on their
heads short, black and curled, their Skins very tawny, swift they are of foot,
and will throw Darts and shoot Arrows (which are their Weapons) very
dangerously.

I shall here insert a true Relation (says my Author) about three years before
I went to India which was in 1615 one of the East India Companies Ships
returning thence and arriving at this Harbor, after a little stay when she was
ready to Sail, and having then two of these Salvages aboard, the Commander
resolved to bring them both home with him, imagining that having learnt English
here, they might discover something of their Country yet unknown to us; These
poor wretches thus surprised and carried away against their wills were much
disturbed; One of them merely out of sullenness, though he was very well used,
died soon after they put to Sea; The other who called himself Cooree a
forenamed, was brought to London, and there kept Six Months in Sir Thomas
Smiths House then Governor of the East India Company, where he had good Diet,
good Cloths, good Lodging, and all other fitting Accommodations; One would have
thought that this wretch might have conceived his present, compared with his
former Condition a Heaven upon Earth.

But all these things gave him no content, though to his good Entertainment he
had gallantry added, having a Chain of Bright Brass, with Breast, Back and
Headpeice of the same, and a Buckler all of Brass his beloved Metal, yet all
this did not now please him, for never did any man seem more weary of ill
Usage, than he was of Courtesies, none being ever more desirous of returning to
his Country than he; For when he had learned a little of our Language he would
daily lie on the ground and cry out very often in broken English, Cooree home
go, Souldania go, home go. And not long after when he had his desire, and was
returned home, he had no sooner set footing on his own shore but he presently
threw away his Cloths, his Linen, with all his other covering, and instantly
got his Sheepskins upon his back, guts about his Neck, and a persum'd Cap of
Cow Dung on his Head, and so returned like a Dog to his vomit, and a Swine to
his wallowing in the Mire, without a Metaphor; After this Fellow was returned,
it made the Natives very shy of us when we arrived there, for though they would
come about us in great Companies when we first arrived, yet three or four days
before they thought we would depart thence there was not one of them to be
seen, fearing we would have dealt with them as formerly with Cooree. But it had
been well he had never seen England, for as he discovered nothing to us, so
certainly when he came home he told his Countrymen, having doubtless observed
it here, that Brass was but a base and cheap commodity in England, and it may
be we had so well stored them with that Metal before, that we had never after
such a free exchange of our Brass and Iron for their Cattle. It was here that I
asked Cooree, who was their God, He lifting up his hands answered in bad
English, England God, Great God; Souldania no God.

In 1614. Ten Englishmen being condemned to dye for their several Crimes at the
Sessions in the Old Bailey London, had their Execution respited by the entreaty
of the East India Merchants, upon condition they should be all banished to this
place, that so if they could find any peaceble abode here, they might discover
somewhat advantageous to Trade, this was done accordingly, but two of them when
they came thither were taken thence, and carried on the Voyage to the Indies;
One named Daffeld was that year redeemed from this sad banishment by Sir Thomas
Row who was sent Ambassador to the Great Mogol, and afterward brought back to
England by that Noble Gentleman, and being then entrusted by him, this
ungrateful Villain stole some of his Plate and ran away; Another was likewise
on the Voyage, but what became of him I know not. So that there remained only
eight, which were here left with Ammunition and Victual, and a small Boat to
carry them to and from a very little uninhabited Island, lying in the very
Mouth of the Bay of Souldania, as a place for their retreat and safety from the
Natives on the Main; It is called Penguin Island, probably so named by some
Welshman, in whose Language Penguin signifies a white head, there being many
great large Fowls upon and about this Island with great Cole-Black Bodies and
White Heads called Penguins.

The Chief Person left here was one Cross, who called himself Captain; He was
before one of the Yeomen of the Guard to King James the first, but having twice
or thrice had his hand in the blood of men slain in Duels, and being now
condemned to dye with the rest, upon very great suit made for him he was
banished hither with them, whither yet Divine Justice seemed to pursue him, for
being a very stout resolute man and abusing the Natives, he was soon after his
arrival surprised by them who shot his Body so full of Arrows that he looked
like the man in the Almanac, and seemed to be all one wound; The other seven
recovered their Boat, and got off the Continent rowing toward the Island
without much damage, but the Water running very high, as soon as they were
ashore their Boat was split in pieces, so that they were then forced to
continue in that miserable place where never a Tree grew either for Sustenance,
Shelter or Shade, nor any thing else to sustain their lives, having no fresh
Water but what the Showers left in the holes of the Rocks; And which added to
their misery, it abounded so with venomous Serpents that it was very dangerous
treading in the long Grass for fear of them; They had but a small quantity of
dry Biscuit, their Bellies were hungry, and their sleep unsafe, so that nothing
could render their condition more unhappy, and yet these seven vile Wretches
all lived to be made examples of Divine Justice, for after they had continued
in this desolate place five or six months, and were all grown almost mad with
Famine, it pleased God that an English Ship came into that Road bound for
England; Four of these seven grew so impatient of an hours stay there, that
immediately after the Ship came in they made a float of the Ruins of their
split Boat, and other Wood, and with ravell'd and untwisted Boat Ropes fastening
as well as they could, all together, extremity instructing them, they got
thereon poizing it to the best advantage, hoping by the benefit of their Oars,
and strength of the Tide which ran quick toward the Ship to recover her; But
their expectation failed them, for it being toward Evening when they made this
attempt, and not being discovered by the Ship which then rid a good way up in
their Bay, before they could come near her, the Tide returned and carried them
back into the main Sea, where they all were cast away.

The day following the Ship sent a Boat to the Island, which took these three
yet surviving into her, as the other four might have been had their patience
held out but one night longer, who gave this account of their Fellows
misfortune; But notwithstanding all the sufferings of these miscreants, yet
they behaved themselves so lewdly in the Ship in their return homeward, that
they were very often put in the Bilbows; At length the Ship arriving safely in
the Downs she had not been at Anchor three hours, when these Villains got
ashore, where they had not been above three hours but they committed a Robbery,
and a very few hours after were all apprehended for the Fact, and suddenly
after that, their irreclaimable humor being related to the Lord Chief Justice,
they were by his special Warrant Executed as incorrigible Wretches upon their
former Sentence, near Sandwich in Kent, where they committed their Crime. The
year following three other condemned Persons were carried to be left in this
place, but hearing of the ill success of their Predecessors, and that they were
unlike to be safe here when the Ships were ready to depart and leave them on
shore, they all came and presented themselves on their Knees with tears in
their Eyes before our Captain Joseph, humbly beseeching him to order them to be
Hanged in that place before they went, which they chose much rather than to be
left there; It was a very sad sight to behold three men in such a condition
that they should esteem Hanging to be a mercy; Our Commander told them he had
no Commission to Execute them, but to leave them there, and so he must do, and
probably had done, but our fifth Ship the Swan staying in this place a day or
two after took these poor men in. And so much for the Bay of Souldania.

Sect. IV. THE English Acquisitions in the EAST INDIES.
HAving cleared our way let us now Sail merrily toward the Indies, doubling
first the Cape of Good Hope, and then passing by Madagascar called also St.
Lawrence, one of the greatest Islands in the World, stored with all manner of
Provisions, but inhabited by a barbarous and Heathenish People, yet stout,
warlike and very numerous. Over against which on the Continent of Africa are
Zefala and Mozambique, where the Portugals have got footing, and may be
strongly supposed to be the places whither Solomon sent his Navy of Ships built
at Eziongebar which stood on the Banks of the Red Sea in Arabia the Happy, the
Country of that famous Queen of the South, who hearing of his Wisdom and
Renown, took her Journey thence to visit the Court of King Solomon; From that
place Solomon sent his Ships for Gold, and Silver, and Ivory, coasting all
along the African shore, the Art of Navigation being then unknown; And the
Mariners steering without Chart or Compass, were necessitated to keep the
Neighboring Lands always in sight, as doubtless they did, these places being
stored with those rich Commodities above other parts of Africa.

The Portugals, Dutch and English, discovered these Countries of India in the
last Age; and have since settled themselves by Forts, and Castles there; The
Portugals first brake the Ice, who in 1494. failing from Lisbon under Vasco de
Gama, doubled the Cape of Good Hope, and succeeded so well afterward as to
Conquer and Fortify several places in many Countries of Asia, and the Islands
thereof; In 1595. the Dutch set out our a Fleet from Amsterdam to India,
wherein they used such extraordinary dexterity with then Cannon Law and Steel
Arguments, that they made themselves Masters of 28 Forts and Castles, and of
forty four or forty five Factories in a short time, for preserving their Trade.
In 1600. the English began their Discoveries under Sir James Lancaster with
four Ships, whose endeavors were so blessed, and the good Government of the
Honorable East India Company prospered so well, that they settled their
Residence and Factories in twenty four several places of note, as at Ormus and
Jasques in the entrance of the Persian Gulf under the Persian Monarch; At
Cambaja, Surat, Agria, and other places in the Great Mogols Country; At
Maslapatan, Armagon, Petipoly, Pattana, Siam, and other places on the Coast of
Cormandel, and the Continent of Asia; At Achin, Ticko, Jambe, Prianian, on the
Isle of Sumatra; At Bantam, Jacatra and Japarra on the Island of Java; At
Socodana and Beniermasa, on the Island of Borneo; At Macassar in the Isle of
Celebs; At Poleroon on the Isle of Banda; At Firando in Japan; And lastly at
Amboina, Hitto, and other of the Molucco's, which they quietly enjoyed, till
the Dutch by base Circumventions, and treacherous practices, deprived the
English of that Trade, and several of them of their Lives, as has been at large
published to the World.

The honorable East India Company was incorporated in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, and has since been confirmed, with diverse Immunities added to their
Charter by all the succeeding Kings, so that now they have as ample Privileges
as any other Company whatsoever, and are found very beneficial to the Nation by
the great Trade they drive in Importing so many rich Commodities from India,
Persia and Arabia; They export from hence, Pieces of Eight, Dollars, Broad
clothes, Perpetuana's, Gunpowder, Elephants Teeth, Lead, Amber,
Looking-Glasses, Sizars, Knives, Beads, Bracelets, Feathers, Coral,
Quicksilver, Vermillion, Allom, Brimstone, and many others; For which they
import all sorts of Spices, Cotton-yarn, Callicoes, Pintadoes, Tamerinds,
Sanders, Spiknard, Bezoar, Alloes, Mirrhe, Rubarb, Opium, Frankincense, Cassia,
Borax, Calamus, Mirabolans, Green Ginger, Sugars, Sugar Candy, Camphire, Sandal
Wood, Benjamin, Musk, Civet, Ambergreece, Rice, Indico, Silks both Raw and
wrought; Salt Petre, Precious Stones of several sorts, Pearl, Mother of Pearl,
Gold, Silver, Crystal, Cornelian Rings, Agats, Lacquie Furrs, and Skins of
Wild Beasts, Porcelane Copper, China Roots, Tea, Sanguis Draconis, China Wares
of diverse sorts with several other Commodities and Drugs too tedious to relate.

Designing to give some Account of the Countries wherein the aforementioned
Forts and Factories are placed, according to my proposed Method, and the
scantling allowed me, I shall begin with Ormus which is an Island Situate in
the Persian Gulf about twenty Mile in compass, stony and full of Rocks, and in
a manner barren of all necessaries except Salt wherewith the very Rocks are
covered, and of Salt Stone many Houses built; So destitute of all things
fitting for the life of man that the Inhabitants had all their Victuals even
the Water which they drank from the adjoining Countries; The Air so hot in
Summer that the people rest themselves in Caves covered over with Wood, where
they stand or sit in Water up to the Chin, and have Loopholes in the Tops of
their Houses to let in the Wind; Which notwithstanding, in regard of the
Situation, it was of late one of the richest Empories in all the World, the
wealth of Persia and East India being brought thither, and conveyed hence up by
Water to the River Euphrates, and so by Boats or on Camels Backs to Aleppo,
Alexandretta, Tripoly, and from thence dispersed into all the Countries of the
Mediterranean Sea; The chief and only City was of the same name with the Island
founded about seven hundred years ago by one Mahomet Danku descended from the
Kings of Saba in Arabia Faelix; Who with many Families of the Sabeans passed
over the Streights into Carmania, and the Isles adjoining, and liking the
Situation of this Island, built this City in it, which he called Ormus, or
Armuzium, according to the name of the Promontory wherein it lies; It is seated
at one end of the Isle, about 2 Miles in compass, well built and adorned with a
fair Market place, some Churches, and a well fortified Castle, furnished with
all necessaries for a Seige; By reason of its wealth and resort of Merchants,
grown to such esteem that it gave gave occasion to this distich.

Si terrarum Orbis quaequa patet Annulus esset,
Illius Ormusium Gemma decusque foret,
Were all the World a Ring, this Isle alone
Might of that Ring be thought to be the Stone.
It was first under its own King, whose Dominion extended also to some part of
the Continent on either side, and over all the rest of the Islands within the
Gulf; His Revenue of no great yearly value till the coming of the Portugals
thither, by whom it was discovered under the conduct of Albukerque in 1509. Who
having fortified some part of it for their own defense, made it the Staple of
their Trade for the Indian Merchandise, so inricht the same that the Revenues
of those Kings (though Vassals and Tributaries to the Portugals) amounted to an
hundred and Forty Thousand Seriffs yearly; In this flourishing state it stood
till 1622. when Abbas the Sultan of Persia having received some affronts from
the Portuguess, or desirous to remove the Trade from Ormus to some Port of his
own, gave order to Emangoli Chan the Duke of Shiras to besiege it with fifteen
thousand men; Who dispairing of prevailing by his Land Forces only, furnished
himself with Ships and Cannon of some English Merchants, to whom he promised
many things which he never performed; For being once Master of the City, he
utterly destroyed it, removing the Ordnance to Lar, the wealth thereof to his
own Treasury at Shiras, and the Materials of the Houses to Gombroon
beforementioned, the Portuguess and Christian Natives, passing over to Muskahat
in Arabia Faelix; Since which time though the English Captains that ventured in
it were disappointed of the rewards they expected, yet so much honor has been
given by the King of Persia to the English Nation, that the Agent who resides
at Gombroon takes Custom of all Strangers who traffic thither.

The People hereof in their Persons, Habit, and Religion participate somewhat
of the Arabians but most of the Persians; They are Mahometans for the most
part, of the Sophian Sect, the Author of which Religion, has infatuated so
great a part of the World with his Blasphemous dotage was Mahomet that Grand
Impostor born at Jathrip an obscure Village not far from Medina, his Father
called Abdalla was an Idolatrous Pagan, his Mother named Hemina as perverse a
Jewess; Deprived of both his Parents when but two years old, he was left to the
care of an Uncle, who not able to give him Education, nor willing to keep him
any longer, sold him at sixteen years of Age to the Ishmaelites, by whom
exposed to Sale in the open Market he was bought by one Abdal a wealthy
Merchant. By whom employed at first in drudgery and servile Offices, till
noting his great Wit, and fitness for better Services, he at last used him as
his Factor, sending him with his Camels and Loads of Merchandise into Syria,
Persia, Egypt and other places, wherein he behaved himself with such dexterity
that he much increased his Masters wealth, and his own estimation; Of Person he
is said to be low, and withal Scald headed, but otherwise comely and of good
aspect; Much troubled with the falling sickness, which infirmity he made good
use of afterward, affirming those fits were nothing but heavenly raptures in
which he conversed with the Angel Gabriel; He is likewise said to have been
well Skilled in Magic, by which he taught a white Pigeon to feed at his Ear,
which he declared was the Holy Ghost, by whom he was instructed in the Law he
was to publish, but this not till afterward; By Sorceries, comeliness of
Person, and the great knowledge he had in his Masters business, he gained so
far on the Affections of his Mistress that upon the death of Abdal she made him
her Husband.

Possessed of all his Masters Wealth, he affected ease, and being till-then of
no Religion, or at least a Pagan, he began to hearken to Sergius a Nestorian
Monk, who flying out of Syria for fear of punishment (the Heresies of Nestorius
being newly both revived and censured) came into Arabia, where he found
Entertainment in the House of Mahomet; By his persuasions who found him a fit
Instrument for the Devil to work on, he began to entertain thoughts of
hammering out a new Religion which might unite all Parties in some common
Principles, and bring the Christians, Jews and Gentiles, into which the World
was then divided, under one Profession; Resolved on this he retired to a Cave
not far from Mecca as if he there attended only Contemplation; Sergius in the
mean time Trumpetting in the Ears of the People both his Parts and Piety, who
being thus prepared to behold the Pageant, out comes the principal Actor, with
some parts of his Alcoran, pleasing enough to sensual minds which he professed
to have received from the Angel Gabriel; And finding that this edified to his
expectation he next proclaimed Liberty to all Slaves and Servants, as a thing
commanded him by God, by whom the natural Liberty of Mankind was most dearly
tendered, which drew to him such a Rabble of unruly People, that without fear or
opposition he dispersed his Doctrines, reducing them at last to a Book or
Method. The Book of this Religion he calls the Alcoran, or Collection of
Precepts, the original whereof they feign is written on a Table kept in Heaven,
and the Copy brought to Mahomet by the Angel Gabriel. A Book so highly
reverenced by the Mahometans that they write upon the cover of it; Let none
touch this but he that is clean. The Body of it, as it now stands, was
composed by Osman the fourth Caliph or Governor, who seeing the Saracens daily
inclining to diverse Heresies by reason of some false Copies of Mahomets Law,
and that the Empire by the same means was likely to fall into civil dissension,
by the help of his Wife, who was Mahomets Daughter, he got a sight of all
Mahomets Papers, which he reduced into four Volumes, and divided into 124
Chapters, commanding expressly upon pain of death, that that Book, and that only
should be received as Canonical through his Dominions; The whole body of it
being only a Gloss and Exposition on Eight of the Commandments.

First, Every one ought to believe that God is a great God, and one only God,
and Mahomet is his Prophet. They hold Abraham to be the Friend of God, Moses
the Messenger of God, and Christ the Breath of God, whom they deny to be
conceived of the Holy Ghost, affirming that the Virgin Mary grew with Child of
him by smelling to a Rose, and was delivered of him at her Breasts; They deny
the Mystery of the Trinity, but punish such as speak against Christ, whose
Religion was not, say they, taken away but amended by Mahomet, and whoever in
his Pilgrimage to Mecca does not visit the Sepulcher of Christ either going or
coming, is reputed not to have merited or bettered himself by his Journey.

2. Every man must marry to increase the Disciples of Mahomet. Four Wives he
allows to every man, and as many Concubines as he will, between whom the
Husband makes no difference either in Affection or Apparel, but that the first
Wife only enjoys his Sabbath days Benevolence; The Women are not admitted while
alive into their Churches, nor after death into Paradise; And whereas in most
other Countries Fathers give some Portions with their Daughters, the Mahometans
give Money for their Wives, which being once paid, the Contract is Registered in
the Cadies Book, and this is all their formality of Marriage.

3. Every one must give of his Wealth to the Poor. Hence some buy Slaves, and
set them free, others buy Birds and let them fly; They use commonly to release
Prisoners and Bondslaves; To build Caves or Lodgings in the ways for relief of
Passengers; Repair Bridges and mend High ways; But there most ordinary Alms
consists in Sacrifices of Sheep and Oxen, which when the Solemnity is performed
they distribute amongst the Poor, to whom also on the first day of every year
they are bound to give the Tyth or Tenth part of their profits the year past,
so that there are scarce any Beggars among them.

4. Every one must make his Prayers five times a day. When they pray they turn
their Bodies toward Mecca, but their Faces sometimes one way, and sometimes
another, believing that Mahomet shall come behind them while at their
Devotions. The first time is an hour before Sunrising, the second at noonday,
the third at three a Clock Afternoon, the fourth at Sunsetting, the fifth and
last before they go to sleep; At all these times the Cryers bawl in the
Steeples (for the Turks and Saracens have no Bells) for the people to come to
Church, and such as cannot, must when they hear the voice of the Cryers, fall
down in the place where they are, do their Devotions, and kiss the ground
thrice.

5. Every one must keep a Lent one month in a year. This Lent is called
Ramazan, in which they suppose the Alcoran was given to Mahomet by the Angel
Gabriel. This Fast is only in the day time, their Law allowing them to be as
Frolic in the night as they please, so they abstain from Wine and Swines
Flesh, which is prohibited in their Law at all times, but never so strictly
abstained from as in Lent.

6. Be Obedient to thy Parents. Which Law is most neglected of any in all the
Alcoran, never any Children being generally so unnatural as the Turkish.

7. Thou shall not Kill. This they keep inviolate amongst themselves, but the
poor Christians are sure to feel their sury. And as if by this Law the actual
shedding of Blood only were prohibited, they have invented punishments for
their Offenders worse than death it self. As first the Strappado which is
hanging them by the Arms drawn backwark, and then drawn up on high, and letting
down again with a violent swing which unjointeth all their Back and Arms.
Secondly, they sometimes hoise up their Heels, and with a great Cudgel give
them three or four hundred blows on the Soles of their Feet. Thirdly, It is
ordinary to draw them naked up to the top of a Gibbet or Tower full of Hooks,
and cutting the Rope to let them fall down again, and by the way they are
caught by some of the Hooks, where they commonly hang till they die for hunger.

8. Do unto others as thou would be done unto thy self.

To those that keep these Laws he promises Paradise a place of all Delights,
adorned with flowery Fields, watered with Chrystalline Rivers, beautified with
Trees of Gold, under whose cool shade they shall spend their time with amorous
Virgins, whose Mansions shall not be far distant. The men shall never exceed
the Age of thirty, nor the Women of fifteen, and those to have their
Virginities renewed as often as lost. Friday he ordained to be their Sabbath,
partly to distinguish his Followers from the Jews and Christians who solemnize
the days ensuing, but principally because he was on that day proclaimed King or
Emperor, and so accordingly created, Wine an Swines Flesh are the principal
things forbidden by the Alcoran, from the last whereof they all unanimously
refrain, but on the first they are so besotted, that when they come at it they
seldom go home again unled, insomuch that all the Wines in Constantinople have
been thrown about the Streets, and death made the penalty for any who shall
presume to bring any more into the City; Mahomet taught them, that every one
should be saved by his own Religion, except those who revolt from the Alcoran
to another Law; But so that under the Notion of Religion he means only such as
worship the One and only God excluding thereby the Old Gentile Idolaters from
the hope of Salvation. He likewise taught that at the end of the World all men
who professed any such Religion should go into Paradise, the Jews under the
Banner of Moses, the Christians under the Banner of Christ, and the Saracens
under the Banner of Mahomet. They compel no man therefore to abjure the Faith
wherein he was born, but secretly commend and approve such as are zealous in
their own Religion yet counting it a great honor to have daily new Proselites,
they allure them with hopes of freedom and preferment, which with many Cruel
Executions in India
are too prevailing motives to cause them to renounce their Christian
Profession; Hence some infer, it is better for a man that desires his Liberty
to live in these Countries than in some others, since he is never molested if
he meddle not with their Law, their Women, or their Slaves.

Their Opinions of the end of the World are very rediculous, as that at the
Winding of an Horn, not all Flesh only, but the Angels themselves shall dye;
That the Earth with an Earthquake shall be kneaded together like a lump of
Dough; That a second blast of the same Horn shall after forty days restore all
again; That Cain shall be the Captain or Ring leader of the damned who shall
have the Faces of Dogs and Swine; That they shall pass over the Bridge of
Justice laden with their sins in Satchels; That the greater Sinners shall fall
into Hell, the lesser into Purgatory only, with a thousand the like fopperies
needless to relate, which may be found in the Alcoran, a thing so full of
Tautologies, incoherences, and gross absurdities of so impure and carnal
mixture, that whoever is taken with it must abandon his natural reason, if
Force, Ambition, or want of Christian Education, do not induce him to embrace
it. For if we seriously consider the causes of the deplorable increase and long
continuance of this Religion, we shall find them to be chiefly these. 1. The
greatness of the Victories obtained by the Saracens, who easily compelled the
conquered Nations to receive their Law. 2. The great zeal and diligence of the
Arabians themselves, who being a numerous people, and much given to Merchandise
have possessed themselves of all the Seacoasts of Africa from the Streights of
Babel Mandel almost to the Cape of Good Hope; of all the Islands in those Seas,
and many Factories and good Towns on the Coasts of India, in all which they
have settled their Religion also, as a thing inseparable from their Nation. 3. A
peremptory restraint of all disputations in any point of Religion whatsoever.
4. The Suppressing Philosophy and the Study of Humane Sciences, the light
whereof might easily detect the grosness of their Superstitions. 5. The sensual
liberty allowed of having variety of Wives, and as many Concubines as they are
able to keep. 6. The promise of the like sensual pleasures in the other World,
with which a mind not illuminated with the Spirit of God, is generally more
affected, than with the Speculative hope of a future happiness. 7. The
forbidding Printing and Printed Books, whereby people might perceive the truth
and purity of the Christian Faith, with the Falsehood and impurity of the Law of
Mahomet. Yet had not these last been sufficient to induce the belief of such
absurdities if the first had not opened and prepared the way.

For force of Arms was really the most prevailing Argument by which Mahomet
himself confirmed, and his Successors since have propogated and dispersed his
Doctrine; Who being strengthened by that Rascal Rabble which resorted to him, he
assaults Medina pretending a quarrel to the Jews, who had there a Synagogue,
repulsed at first with loss of men and a wound in his face by which some of his
foreteeth were beaten out, and was there likely to have ended his New Religion,
if not recovered by his Soldiers for further mischief. At the next onset he
prevailed, the Battle being sought near a place called Bedez, situate betwixt
Mecca and Medina, frequently mentioned in the Alcoran. After which fight he
took the City, converting the Synagogue to a Temple for his own impieties; The
News hereof so startled the Nobility of Mecca that they armed all their powers
against him and succeeded so well in the beginning of the War that they drove
him forcibly from their Territories, which yet not long after he again subdued
and made his chief Residence at Mecca. From that his flight the Saracens
compute their years, (as we from Christ's Nativity) which they call the Hegira,
and begins about the year of our Lord 617. so termed from an Arabic word that
signifies; The Persecution raised about Religion. It happened about this time
that the Saracens revolting from Heraclius the Eastern Emperor joined
themselves to Mahomet being exasperated by Julian the Apostate whom they served
in his Wars against the Persians for telling them, upon demanding their pay.
That he had greater store of Steel than Gold; But they then wanted a Head to
resort to; Now serving Heraclius in the same War, they were used by his
Officers in the same ill manner, for asking their pay, the Treasurer of the
Army made them this Churlish answer, There is scarce Money enough to pay the
Roman and Grecian Soldiers, and why must those Dogs be so importunate for
their Wages? Provoked herewith, and hearing the fame of Mahomet, they joined
him, who strengthened herewith, and the coming in of the rest of their
Countrymen he soon brought all Arabia under his Subjection, and having
defeated the Emperors forces sent against him he conquered some parts of Syria
and Egypt and returning to Mecca there died frantic and distempered, in the 70
year of his Age, and twenty third of his Impostures, of which he spent thirteen
at Medina and the rest at Mecca. His dead Body being kept four days in
expectation of a Resurrection which he promised to perform at the end of three
grown full of stench and putrefaction, was carried to Medina and there
interred; His Successors out of wicked and Worldly Policy keeping up the
reputation of that Religion after his decease which they scorned and derided in
his life, calling themselves Caliphs and Vicar Generals to him their Prophet.

But to return to Persia, the Government of that Empire is purely Despotick or
Tyranical, for the King has the sole Power of life and death over all his
Subjects, independent from his Council, and without any Trials or Law
Proceedings. He can put to what death he pleases the chief Lords of the
Kingdom, no man daring to dispute the reason; Nor is there any Sovereign in the
World more absolute than he. The King deceasing and leaving Male Issue behind
him,- the Eldest ascends the Throne, while his Brothers are kept in the Haram
or Castle, and their Eyes put out, and if the King have the least jealousy they
are instantly put to death without further Examination, and not only they, but
the Children of the Kings Brothers and Sisters likewise; I remember says my
Author, when I first traveled into Persia they were not so rigorous, but were
contented to move a red hot Iron to and fro before their Eyes; But Sha Sefi the
last Emperor peceiving his command negligently Executed, and that the poor
unhappy Princes had some sight left them, he ordered their Eyes to be dug
out of their Heads; Sha Sefi's cruelty went yet further, for he spared not his
Eldest Son Sha Abbas the lawful Heir of his Throne, ordering one of the Eunuchs
to move an Iron before his Eyes, no man knowing a reason, but the Eunuch
compassionating the young Prince, moved an Iron yet not red hot before his
Eyes, and teaching him to counterfeit himself blind, preserved his sight till
his Father lay upon his Death bed, when being very Penitent for having put out
the Eyes of his Eldest Son to whom the Crown did of right belong, the Eunuch
seeing the King so sadly afflicted, and ready to give up the Ghost, assured him
that he would restore the Prince to his sight, and to comfort him at his death,
brought the Prince with perfect Eyes to his Bedside, the sight of whom
prolonged the Kings life till the next day, and gave him time to command all
the Grandees of the Court to obey Sha Abbas his Eldest Son, as his lawful
Successor and their King.

There are several of these Blind Princes at Ispahan, and I knew one
particularly, says my Author, who is still alive and a Person of excellent
natural Parts; As Blind as he is, he is a great lover of Curiosities, and has
built him a House at Ispahan worth seeing. He is overjoyed when he meets with
any rarities out of Europe, feeling them in his hands, and causing his Eunuchs
who are very apprehensive to tell him the meaning of every thing; He is a great
admirer of Clock-work and Watches, and to know what a Clock it is, he has
little points set up in the Dial Plate, and a half hand that he may not be
deceived which points to the hour; With certain Figures which he makes of soft
Wax, and sets in order upon a Table, he will cast up an account very exactly,
several other good qualities are eminent in him, and it is a miserable
spectacle that a man should be reduced to that deplorable condition only
because he is of the Blood Royal of Persia. This State is distinguished like
most of those in Europe into three bodies, first that of the Sword, which
answers to the Nobility, and consists of the Kings Household, the Kans or
Governors, and all the Soldiery. The second that of the Gown, comprehending
all those that belong to the Law and Courts of Justice. The third is composed
of Merchants, Handicrafts men, and Laborers.

Among other cunning contrivances, which Sha Abbas made use of to know the true
State of his Affairs without trusting too much to his Ministers, he often
disguised himself and went into the City like an ordinary man under pretense of
buying and selling, making it his business to discover whether false Weights
and Measures were used; Going therefore one Evening out of his Palace in the
habit of a Countreyman, he went to a Bakers to buy a Man of Bread, and thence
to a Cooks to buy a Man of Roast-meat, (a Man is six pound sixteen ounces to
the pound) the King having bought his bargains returned to the Court, where he
caused them to be weighed exactly, he found the Bread to want 57 Drams, and the
Meat 43. Upon which he fell into a great rage against the Officers about him
who ought to regulate such abuses, but especially against the Governor of the
City, whose Belly he had caused to have been ripped up but for the intercession
of certain Lords. Besides the reproaches he used toward them for their
negligence, and little affection to the Public good, discoursing of the
injustice of false Weights, and how sadly the cheat fell upon poor men, who
having great Families, and thinking to give them eight hundred Drams of Bread,
by that fraud deprived them of an hundred forty three, then turning to the
Lords present, he demanded what sort of Justice ought to be done to those
People, when none of them daring to open their mouths while he was in that
Passion, he commanded a great Oven to be made in the Market place, together
with a Spit big and long enough to Roast a Man, and that the Oven should be
heated all night, and another Fire to be kindled near the Oven. The next
Morning the King caused the Cook and Baker to be apprehened, and to be led
quite through the City with two men going before them; who proclaimed to the
People; We are going to put the Baker into a red hot Oven in the Piazza to be
Baked alive for selling Bread by false Weights, and the Cook is to be Roasted
alive for having sold Meat by false Weights. Thus these two men served for an
Example not only to Ispahan but to all the Kingdom, where every one dreaded the
severe Justice of Sha Abbas.

Sha Abbas his Successor acted almost such another piece of severity, for
having made one Jafer Kan a generous Lord, who kept a magnificent Train,
Governor of Asterabat; At first he was very mild, but at last he began to exact
such sums from the People, that his violences reached the Kings Ear, who being
one day drinking with his Lords, and seeing the Master of his Music in the
Room, who was a merry Droll, and had always some pleasant news to tell the
King, he was pleased to ask him what the People said of Jafer-Kan, adding that
he had made him Governor of diverse Provinces, and had never heard any complaint
of him, but now he was accused of strangely Tyranizing over the People. The
Music Master being a mere Flatterer, and knowing that Jafer-Kan was extremely
beloved of the King, confidently aver'd, that the Governor was fasly accused,
and that he had always known him apter to give than receive. There was at the
same time in the Room an Agis lately returned from a Pilgrimage at Mecca, him
the King also asked what was his opinion of Jafer-Kan and his Government, being
a Person long acquainted with him, to whom the Agis thinking to please the
King, returned the same answer with the Music Master. Whereupon the King who
had been well informed of the Kans behavior, turning toward the Lords present,
What think you, said he, of these two Flatterers that absolutely know the
contrary to what they speak. And at the same time commanded two of the Music
Masters Teeth to be plucked out of his Mouth, and to be driven into the head of
the Agis, which had like to have cost him his Life, being a very old man; As
for Jafer-Kan he was disgraced for a time, but his excellent Accomplishments
soon restored him again to favor.

Murder is severely punished, nor will Money save the Criminal; When the
Murderer is taken they carry him before the Magistrate who makes quick work,
for he delivers him to the Parents or kindred of the Person slain who carry him
to Execution, and without any Compassion torture him to death. I remember says
my Author, the Governor of Shiras had a Favorite, who falling in love with a
young Persian Gentleman earnestly endeavored to abuse his Body; One day
meeting upon the Road together, and lying at night under the same Tent, the
Favorite about Midnight came to his Bedside, and after many Solicitations
would have forced him; But being violently resisted, the Favorite for Madness
to find himself disappointed, and liable to be discovered, stabbed the young
Gentleman to the heart, and fled to the Mountains. The Murder being divulged,
the Mother, Widow, and Sister of the Young Man repaired to the Governor for
Justice, who willing to save his Favorite offered them Money, which they with
scorn refusing, and threatening to complain to the King, he was thereupon
constrained to pursue his Favorite, at length he took and sent him to Ispahan
saying, he would not judge of the Affair, but refer it to the K. The Mother,
Widow, and Sister immediately followed the Murderer to Ispahan and demanded
Justice of the King with that eagerness, that though the King had an
inclination to save the Favorite for the Governors Sake, he was forced to
abandon him and bid them pay themselves with his blood. Immediately he was
carried to Execution, where the Widow first stabbed him to the heart with a
dagger, then the Mother took her turn, and after that the Sister, and then
holding a Cup to receive his Blood, drank every one a Cup full to quench the
thirst of their Revenge.

Above all things extraordinary care is taken for securing the high ways, for
which purpose Guards are set at convenient distances; As the Caravan was one
day setting out from Tauris to Ispahan, a poor Fellow took an occasion to rob a
Cloak-Bag, and fled cross the Feilds not knowing the way, the Merchant missing
his Goods complained to the Governor who having sought for him in vain, sent
order to the Guards to search strictly for him, and send him as soon as seized.
In a short time the Thief was constrained to forsake his Cloak-bag, and came
cross the Fields for Water, who being seized was carried to the Governor, and
soon convicted and condemned to Death, for Thieves find no mercy in Persia;
Only they are variously put to death, being sometimes tied to a Camels tail by
the feet, and their Bellies ripped open. Sometimes they are buried alive all but
their Heads, and starved to Death, in which torment they will often desire
Passengers to cut off their Heads, though it be a kindness forbidden by the
Law. But the most cruel punishment of all is, when they set the Thief on Horse
back with his extended Arms fastened to a long stick behind; then larding him
with lighted Candels, they suffer them to burn him to the very Bowels; We met
two in this misery who desired us to hasten their Deaths, which we durst not
do, only we gave them a Pipe of Tobacco according to their desire. One day
there was a great Hubbub in a Bawdy House where the Woman had prostituted her
own Daughter, the King informed of it, commanded the Mother to be thrown
Headlong from a Tower, and that the Daughter should be torn in Pieces by his
Dogs, which he keeps on purpose for such Chastizements.

Having given some Account of Persia let us next advance into the Dominions of
the Great Mogol and visit the Bay of Cambaia, and therein Swalley Rond, on the
Banks whereof amongst many more English, lies interred the Body of Mr. Thomas
Coryat, a man in his time sufficiently known; He formerly Writ a Book entitled
Coriats Crudities hastily Gobled up in five Months Travels in France, Savoy,
Italy Rh^tia, Helvetia, or Switzerland some parts of High Germany, and the
Netherlands, newly digested in the hungry Air of Odcomb in the County of
Somerset, Printed in 1611. and then ushered into the World by very many Copies
of Excellent Verses made by the Wits of those times, which did very much
advantage and improve, if not enforce the Sale thereof, doing themselves much
more honor than him whom they undertook to commend in their several
Encomiasticks, though he had not the apprehension to think so. I will give you
a taste in a few short ones, whereby you may guess at the rest.

I Sing the Man, I sing the Woeful Case
The Shirt, the Shoes, the Shanks that served to trace
Seven Countries wide, the greater was his pain
That two to one he ever came again,
Yet two for one he came; O Muse, O Maid
(If Muse or Maid) say what has so beraid
This Silly Soul, and drove him to such labors
As if his Hide were only made for Tabors
Recount my Girl what he did with the French
Before he courted the Venetian Wench
At home much did he suffer, much abroad
Yet never strove (poor Ass) to cast his load
Yet on his parboiled Crudities behoof
This will I say, It is a Book of proof
Wherein himself appears, to all most plain
No Fool in Print, nor yet a Knave in grain.
ANOTHER.
Some write Lascivious Books, and others they write Holy
But Coryats is a Pill against all Melancholy
A worthy work that does all other works out-pace
A Furlong at the least, thou needst not bate an ace
A Book of price twill be if ever there were any
A hundred Souses is thy due, thou shall not bate a penny
Thou tell of Mounts of Founts of Rocks of Stones
Of Boots, of Whores, of Tombs, of dead men's bones,
Of Bowers, of Towers, and many a stately Steeple
Helvetians, Rhetians, and such uncouth people
Nothing escapes thy Note, that is worth due observation
The Gallows cannot pass thee, without just Salutation
Speak thou O Clock of Strasburg, and Stones at Fontainbleiu
If Coriat does forget and not your wonders show
Weep Rhenish drops O Palsgraves Tun, if thou be here forgotten
No No, he has thee hoop't so well thy Ribs will nere be rotten
Then lanch thee forth (thou Man of might) when this thy work is done
And prosecute thy great design as far as shines the Sun
ANOTHER.
OF all the Toms that ever yet were named
Never was Tom, like to Tom Coriat famed
Tom Thumb is dumb until the Pudding creep
Wherein he was entombed then out does peep,
Tom Piper is gone out, and mirth bewails
He never will come in to tell us tales
Tom Fool may go to School but never be taught
Speak, Greek, with which our Tom his Tongue is fraught
Tom Ass may pass, but for all his long ears
He has no such rich Jewel as our Tom wears,
Tom Tell troth is froth, and the truth to tell
Of all Toms this Tom away bears the bell.
Another.
IF the Author had a painted Coat
And Cap of Costly die
And Comb of Cock for Crest thereon
With Whetstone hanging by
Then might he tell of Travelers
And all the huffiing Train
Who proudly prance on Asses backs
T'wixt Italy and Spain
For Thomas is by Travel tried
And truth of him to tell
There Is few that Travel nowadays
Return home half so well
Then buy this Book ye Britains bold,
But read it at your leisure
For It and He, and He and It
Were made to show you pleasure
If Coryat had lived he designed to have Writ his last Travels to, in and out
of East India, for he resolved like another Ulysses to have rambled up and down
the World at least ten yers before his return home, purposing to see Tartary in
all the vast parts thereof, with as much as he could of China and after that to
have visited the Court of Prester John in Ethiopia, who is there called by his
own people Ho Biot, The King, with many other places, which if he had lived to
perform and publish, might have been of good use, since he was both a
particular and faithful Relator of what he saw, ever disclaiming that bold
Liberty which many Travelers assume in Speaking and Writing what they please
of remote parts where they cannot be easily contradicted resolving.

Not only things to do, but O'redo
Speaking, Writing, all, and more too.
Believing him therefore an honest Historian since he had not opportunity
himself, I shall give some Account of his Footsteps and Flittings up and down,
who while he lived was like a perpetual motion, and therefore dead ought not to
be forgotten; In 1612. He shipped himself for Constantinople now called by the
Turks Stambole, where he strictly observed all remarkables and found much
respect and encouragement from St. Paul Pindar then Ambassador there, to whose
House he had always free Access; Here he took opportunity to view several parts
of Greece, and in the Hellespont took special notice of those two Castles
directly opposite to each other called Sestos and Abidos that stand on the
several Banks which bound that very narrow Sea, and is famous by the Story of
Hero and Leander; He much desired to see those seven Churches of Asia, which
lie now in ruins, only Smyrna is still famous for Trade but not Religion, and
Ephesus, with some others, which retain their names still, though they have
lost the profession of their Faith with the rest. He saw what yet remains of
the Ruins of sometimes Great Troy, a place once so populons as if sown with
people but now with standing Corn, the very ruins of which place are almost
gone to ruin, there only remaining part of an exceeding great House, supposed
part of the famous Palace of Great King Priam. From Smyrna he found Passage to
Gran Cairo in Egypt anciently called Memphis where he observed the remains of
the once famed Pyramids; Returning thence back to Alexandria with another
Englishman, they passed by Sea to Joppa where they met some others going to
Jerusalem, with whom joining, they traveled thither through a very Solitary,
Rocky, uncomfortable way full of danger from the Wild Arabs, who Rob and abuse
Travelers; Arriving at Jerusalem they saw and heard all wherewith Pilgrims are
usually treated, of which you have a full Account in a small Book called Two
Journeys to Jerusalem, etc. Here our Traveller had the Arms of Jerusalem made
upon the wrist of his left Arm, and on his Right a single Cross made like that
whereon our Savior suffered on the sides of which were written, Via, Veritas,
Vita, The way, Truth, and Life, and on the foot three Nails to signify those
which fastened our Savior to it, done so artificially and indelibly by a Black
Powder as if drawn by some accurate Pencil upon Parchment. The poor man would
much glory in beholding these Characters, applying the words of St. Paul to
himself, I bear in my Body the Marks of the Lord Jesus, Gal. 6.17.

Hence they went to the Dead, Sea, the River Jordan, Sidon, Alexandretta,
Scanderoon and Al^ppo, where he was kindly received by the English Consul,
staying some time there for the Caravan, which consists of a mixed multitude
from diverse parts who travel together to prevent the incursions of Theives and
Murderers; With these setting forward they came to the City of Nineveh in
Assyria, which in Jonahs time was of three days Journey, but now so very mean
and obscure, that Passengers cannot say, this is Nineveh, having lost its name
and called now Mozel. From thence they journeyed to Babylon in Chaldea Situate
upon the River Euphrates, once for its magnitude called a Country, now much
contracted, and named Bagdat; From hence they proceeded through both the
Armenias, where our Traveller was told, he saw that very mountain of Ararat
whereon the Ark sested after Noah's Flood, they went thence to Ispahan in
Persia, the usual residence of Sha Abbas, and after that to Shushan where King
Ahasuerus kept his Court in Esthers time, from thence they journeyed to
Candahor the first Province North-East under the Great Mogol, and so to Lahore
the second City of this Empire, a place of great Trade, Wealth and Delight,
more temperate from the Suns heat than any other of his great Cities; At length
he arrived at Agra the Mogols Metropolis, from Lahore to Agra is four hundred
English Miles, the Country very rich, even, and pleasant, and the Road way on
both sides all this long distance planted with great Trees, clothed all the
year long with Leaves, of exceeding benefit to Travelers in that hot Clime, it
is called by Travelers, The Long-Walk, very full of Villages and Towns
convenient for the supply of Travelers.

At Agra our Traveller made a halt being kindly entertained by the English
Factory, and there learned the Turkish and Arabian Languages, with some
proficiency in the Persian and Indostan Tongues, in both which he got so much
knowledge as was very advantageous to him in his Travels through the Mogols
Territories, he always wearing the habit, and speaking the Language of that
Nation; He afterward made an Oration to the Great Mogol in the Persian Tongue,
bringing in the Story of the Queen of Sheba. 1 Kings. 10. In which parts of the
Sacred Scripture the Mahometans have some knowledge, and told the King that as
the Queen of Sheba having heard of the Fame of King Solomon came from far to
visit him, and confessed that she had not been told half of what she now saw
concerning the Wisdom, Greatness, Retinue and Riches of Solomon, so said our
Orator, I had heard much of your Majesty before I had the honor of your sight,
when I was very far off in my own Country, but what I now behold exceedingly
surmounts all the reports thereof. Then intermixing other flatteries with his
short Speech, he concluded, and was very well liked by the Mogol, who gave him
an hundred Roupies, about twelve pound ten Shillings in our money, looking on
him as a Dervise Prophet, or Pilgrim as he called him, who in that Country
value not money, which might be the reason he did not reward him more
liberally. He after got a great mastery in the Indostan or Vulgar Language, and
a Woman belonging to the English Ambassador there, having such freedom of
Speech that she would scold and rail from Morning to Night, Coriat one day
undertook her in her own Dialect, and by eight a Clock in the Morning so
silenced her that she had not one word more to speak.

At the four Corners of their Mosquets or Churches in this Country there are
high, round, small Turrets, open with light every way wherein a man may be
easily seen and heard, into the top of these their devout Moola's or Priests
ascend five times every day whence they proclaim as loud as possible these
Arabian words, La alla, illa, alla Mahomet Resul-alla, that is, There is no God
but one God, and Mahomet the Messenger from God, this voice is instead of
Bells, which they use not in their Churches, and puts the most devout in mind
of their Religion; One time Tom Coryat hearing their Priest thus crying, got
upon a high place directly opposite to him, and thus contradicted him, La alla
illa alla, Hasaret Eesa Benalla, that is, No God but one God, and the Lord
Christ the Son of God, and further added, That Mahomet was an Impostor; All
this he uttered in their own Language as loud as possible in the Ears of many
Mahometans present, but it may be questioned whether the judgment or discretion
of our Pilgrim were more to be commended, for if this had been acted in many
other places of Asia it would have cost him his Life with as much torture as
cruelty could have invented, but being here taken for a madman he was let
alone, and happily the rather since every one there has liberty to profess his
own Religion freely, and if he please may argue against theirs without danger;
As Tom Coryat did another time with a Moola; The question was which of them was
the Musselman or true Believer; After much heat on both sides Coryat made this
Learned distinction, That himself was the Orthodox Musselman or True True
Believer, and the Priest the Pseudo Musselman, or False True Believer.

He was a man of a very coveting Eye, who could never be satisfied with seeing,
as Solomon speaks, and took as much pleasure therein as others in enjoying
great and rare things; He had the mastery of many hard Languages, besides Greek
and Latin which he brought from England, and had he had Wisdom to manage them
as he had skill to speak them, he had deserved more Fame in his Generation, but
his Seize made him ignorant of himself, being so ambitious of praise that
he would hear more than he could possibly deserve, being like a Ship with too
much Sail, and too little Ballast, yet had he not fallen into the smart hands
of the Wits of those times he might have passed better.

On a time a Merchant who came from England met Tom Coryat as he was traveling
toward. East India, and told him that when he was in England King James (then
living) inquired after him, and when he had certified him of his meeting him,
the King replied, Is that Fool yet living? Which when our Pilgrim heard, he was
much concerned because the King spoke no more nor better of him, saying, that
Kings would speak of poor men what they pleased; Another time the English
Ambassador gave him a Letter (with a Bill to receive ten pound) to the Consul
of Alappo, wherein were these words, Sir, when you shall hand these Letters, I
desire you to receive the Bearer of them Mr. Thomas Coryat with Courtesy, for
you shall find him a very honest poor Wretch, and further I must entreat you to
furnish him with ten pounds which shall be repaid, etc. Our Pilgrim liked the
gift well but the Language much displeased him, saying, That my Lord Ambassador
had even spoiled his Courtesy in the carriage thereof, so that if he had been a
very Fool indeed he could have said very little less of him than he did to call
him honest poor Wretch, and to say no more of him was to say as much as
nothing, and his favor does rather trouble than please me, when I was at
Venice, said he, a Person of Honor wrote thus on my behalf to Sir Hen. Wotton
then Ambassador there, My Lord good Wine needs no Bush, neither a worthy man
Letters Commendatory, because whithersoever he goes he is his own Epistles,
this, said he, was some Language on my behalf; At length his Letter was phrased
to his mind, but he never lived to receive the money; A little before his death
he seemed apprehensive thereof, for swounding away once, upon his recovery he
declared the occasion was, for fear he should die in the way toward Surat
whither he intended to go, and be buried in obscurity, and none of his Friends
know what became of him, he traveling now as he usually did alone; Upon which
the Ambassador willed him to stay longer, which he thankfully refused, and
presently turned his Face for Surat, which was then about three hundred English
Miles distant, and lived to come safe thither, where being over-kindly treated
by some English who gave him Sack which they had brought from England, he
calling for it as soon as he heard of it, and crying, Sack, Sack, is there such
a thing as Sack, pray give me some Sack, and drinking of it, though not
immoderately (being very temperate) it increased his Flux that he had then upon
him, which caused him in a few days after his tedious and troublesome Travels
(for he went most on foot) to come at this place to his Journeys end, for here
he overtook death, Dec. 1617. and was buried at Swalley under a little Monument
like those in our Churchyards.

Now to return, Cambaia is three Miles from the River Indus and as many in
compass, one of the neatest and best built Cities in all the East, so populous
as judged to contain an hundred and thirty thousand Families. Swalley is more
South and about a Mile from the Sea, but gives name to a darge capacious Bay
where the Ships ride that trade to Surat; About ten Miles from this Bay is
Surat, from whence the River is navigable only for Boats and Shallops,
fortified with a Castle of Stone, and well stored with Ordnance. The Houses are
for the most part built of Sun-dried Bricks very large and lasting, with flat
roofs but battlemented on all sides for fear of falling, and beautified with
curions Gardens of Pomegranats, Melons, Figs and Lemons, interlaced with
Rivulets and Springs; It is a Factory for English Merchants, who have their
President, and a magnificent House for the reception, and Staple of their
Commodities.

The present Emperor or Mogol is called Aureng-zeb, having usurpt the Kingdom
from his Father Cha-jehan upon this occasion. This great King having reigned
forty years with much Clemency and Justice, in his declining Age he fancied a
Young Lady of extraordinary beauty not above thirteen years old, and because
the strength of nature would not permit him to satisfy his passion, he took
certain Provocatives which were so hot, that he fell thereupon into a distemper
which had almost killed him. This obliged him to shut himself up in his Court
or Apartment, together with his Women for two or three Months during which time
he very seldom appeared to his people and that at a great distance too, which
made them believe he was dead. He had six Children four Sons and two Daughters,
whom he loved all alike, making his Sons Governors or Vice Roys of four of the
principal Provinces in his Kingdom; During the false report of his death, the
Eldest Son kept with him, but the other 3 immediately rebelled, and after many
Skirmishes and much bloodshed Aureng-zeb his third Son after the destruction
of his three Brethren, caused himself to be declared King keeping his Father
Prisoner; Some days before he ascended the Throne he sent to his Father for
some of his Jewels, that he might appear before his people with the same
magnificence his Predecessors had done, Cha-jehan taking this request of his
Sons for an affront put upon him in Prison, fell into such a rage that he
continued mad for some days, and had like to have died upon it; In the excess
of this Vexation he called several times for a Mortar and Pestle, threatening to
beat all his Jewels to Powder rather than his Son should have them, but Begum
Saheb his Eldest daughter who never forsook him, throwing her self at his feet,
and by virtue of that Criminal power she had over him as being both his
Daughter and his Wife, kept him from using that extremity more out of design to
preserve, the Jewels for herself than her Brother to whom she was always a
Mortal Enemy; For this reason when Aureng-zeb ascended the Throne he had only
one Jewel on his Bonnet, and as a kind of Penance that he imposed upon himself
for so many Crimes, he for some time would not eat wheaten bread, Flesh nor
Fish, but fed daily upon Barley Bread, Herbs and Sweat Meats; But Chajehan his
Father dying in 1666. Aureng-zeb found himself rid of an object that every hour
reproached his Tyranny, and began to enjoy himself with more delight, receiving
his Sister Begum into favor, and calling her Cha Begum or Princeess Queen, a
Woman of excellent accomplishments, and able to govern an Empire, and had her
Father and Brothers taken her Counsel at the beginning of the War Aureng-zeb
had never been King; He had another Sister called Rauchenara Begum who had
always taken his part having sent him all the Gold and Silver she could procure
when she first heard he had taken Arms, in recompense whereof he promised her
when he came to be King to give her the Title of Cha Begum, and that she should
sit upon a Throne, all which he performed, and they lived lovingly together,
till it happened that the Princess having secretly conveyed a handsome young man
into her Apartment could not let him out so privately, after she had quite
tired him, but the King had notice thereof; Thereupon the Princess to prevent
the shame and reproach ran to the King, and in a pretended fright told him,
there was a man got into the Haram even to her very Chamber who certainly
designed either to have killed or Robbed her, that such an accident was never
before known, and that it concerned the safety of his Royal Person, and he
would therefore do well to punish the Eunuchs who kept the Guard that night.
The King ran instantly in Person with a great number of Eunuchs, so that the
poor Young Man had no way to escape but by leaping out at a Window into the
River that runs by the Palace Walls, whereupon a multitude of people ran out
to seize him, the Kieg commanding they should do him no harm, but to carry him
to the Officer of Justice, yet he happily made his escape, and has not been
since heard of.

It is an Ancient custom among the Indians that the Husband happening to dye
the wife can never marry again, so that when he is dead, she retires to bewail
him, shaves her hair, and lays aside all her ornaments, taking off from her
Arms and Legs the Bracelets her Husband put on when he espoused her in token of
her submission, and her being chained to him, and all her life after she lives
slighted and despised, yea worse than a Slave in the House where she was
formerly Mistress. This unfortunate conditon causes them to hate life and
rather dye with their Husbands than live in such Contempt, the Bramins or
Priests likewise persuading them, that after death they shall meet him again in
the other World with greater honor and advantage; Yet can no Woman burn with
her Husbands Body without leave from the Governor of the Place, who being a
Mehometan and abhoring this execrable custom of self Murder does often deny it
to some Women, who are so offended there at that they spend the rest of their
lives, in works of Charity, some sit on the Road Boiling certain Pulse in Water
and giving the Liquor to Travelers to drink, others hold Fire ready in their
hands to light their Tobacco, others make vows to eat nothing but the
undigested grains, which they find in Cow Dung. But when the Governor finds no
persuasions will alter the Woman's resolutions, and especially if he perceives
by a sign from his Secretary that she has given him Money to that purpose, he
in a surly manner gives her leave, bidding the Devil take her, and all her
kindred; Immediately the Music strikes up, and away they go to the House of the
deceased with Drums beating and Flutes playing before them, in which manner
they accompany the Person who is to be burnt to the place appointed; All her
kindred and Friends come and congratulate her for the happiness she is to enjoy
in the other World, and the honor their Family receives by this her generous
resolution, she then dresses her self as if going to be Married and is
conducted in Triumph to the place of Execution, with aloud noise of Musical
Instruments and Women's voices who follow her, singing Songs in honor of the
miserable creature that is going to dye, the Bramins who accompany her, exhort
her to courage and constancy, and many of our European Spectators are of
opinion, that these Priests give her some stupifying Liquor to take away the
fear of Death, for it is their interest that these miserable wretches should
destroy themselves, their Bracelets as well about their Legs as Arms, Pendants,
Rings, and Jewels all belonging to them who rake for them among the ashes when
she is burnt; They burn them several ways, sometimes a little Hut of Reeds is
erected on the bank of a Pond or River, besmeared with Oil and other Drugs to
increase the flame. The Woman is placed in the middle in a leaning posture with
her head on a kind of Wooden Bolster, and resting her back against a Pillar, to
which the Bramin ties her about the middle, lest she should run away upon
feeling the Fire, in this posture she holds the Body of her deceased Husband
upon her knees, chewing Betele all the while, and when she has continued thus
about half an hour, the Bramin goes out and the Woman bids them fire the Hut,
which is quickly done, her Rindred and Friends throwing several Pots of Oil
into it, the sooner to dispatch her. In some places they only build up a Pile
of Wood upon which the Woman is placed as on a Bed, with her Husbands Body
laid cross her, then some bring her a Letter, others a piece of Calicoe,
another pieces of Silver or Copper desiring her to deliver them to their
Mother, Brother, Kinsman, or Friend in the other World, when she has received
all, she puts them between her Husbands Body and her own tied up in a piece of
Taffety, and then calls to kindle the Pile wherewith she is soon stifled, but
there being scarcity of Wood in Bengale, the bodies of these poor wretches are
many times only grilliaded and then cast into the River Ganges to be devoured
by Crocodiles.

The magnanimity of many of these Women is admirable; The Raja of Velou having
lost his City and his life in a Battle against the King of Visapours General,
he was extremely lamented, and eleven of his Wives no less concerned, who
resolved to be burnt at his Funeral, which the General understanding,
endeavored to divert them by all kind usage, but finding persuasions in vain
he ordered them to be shut up in a Room; He who had this command going to
execute it, the Women in a rage told him, That 'twas to no purpose to keep them
Prisoners, for if they might not have leave to do what they had resolved, in
three hours there would not one of them be alive. The Person entrusted laughed
at this Menace but the keeper of those Women opening the Doors 3 hours after
found them all stretched out dead up the place, without the lest Mark or sign
of any outward violence offered to them. Two of the greatest Lords of India
came in 1642. to do Homage to Cha-jehan, who having offended the Grand Master
of the Household, he told one of them one day in the Kings presence. That they
had not behaved themselves as became them toward so great a Monarch. The Raja,
or Lord looking on himself as a great Prince, he and his Brother having brought
with them a Train of sixteen thousand Horse, being netled at this bold reproof
of the Grand Master, drew out his dagger and slew him on the place before the
King; The Grand Master falling at the feet of his own Brother who stood just by
him, he was going to revenge his Death, but was prevented by the Raja's Brother
who stabbed him likewise, and laid him athwart his Brothers Body; The King
seeing these 2 Murders retired into his Apartment for fear, but the Nobles and
people presently fell upon the Raja's and cut them to pieces; The King incensed
at such an attempt committed in his house and presence, commanded the bodies of
the Raja's to be thrown into the River, which their Troops that they had left
about Agria understanding threatened to enter the City and Pillage it, whereupon
the King was advised for preventing the hazard to deliver them the bodies of
their Princes. When they were to be burned thirteen Women belonging to the two
Raja's Houses came dancing and leaping, and presently got upon the Funeral Pile
holding one another by the hands, and being soon after stifled by the Smoke,
fell together into the Fire, presently the Bramins threw in great heaps of
Wood, Pots of Oil, and other combustible matter to dispatch them. When I was at
Patna, says my Author, a very handsome young Woman of about two and twenty came
to desire leave of the Governor to be burnt with the Body of her dead Husband;
The Governor compassionating her Youth and Beauty, strove to dissuade her, but
finding her resolute, he severely asked her, whether she understood what the
Torment of Fire was, and whether she had ever burnt her Fingers? No, No,
answered she more stoutly than before, I do not fear fire, and (...) let you
know as much send for a lighted Torch hither. The Governor abominating her
answer in great passion bid her go to the Devil. Some young Lords present
desired the Governor to call for a Torch and try her, which with much ado he
did, as soon as the Woman saw it coming she ran to meet it, and held her hand
in the Flame without the least altering her counterance, searing her Arm up to
the very Elbow, that her Flesh looked as if broiled, whereupon the Governor
commanded her out of his sight.

The Government of the Great Mogol is as Arbitrary and Tyrannical as his
Neighbors aforementioned, measuring his power by his Sword and Lance, and
making his will his Law, there being no Laws upon Record in this Constitution
to regulate Governors in the administration of Justice but what are written in
the Breasts of the King and his Substitutes, and therefore they often take the
Liberty to punish the offender rather than the offense, men's persons more than
their Crimes, though they still pretend to proceed by proofs and not
presumptions. In matters of consequence the Mogol himself will sit as Judge,
and no Malefactors lie above one night in Prison and many times not at all, for
if the Offender be apprehended early in the morning, he is instantly brought
before the Judge, by whom he is presently either acquitted or condemned, if it
be Whipping, that is executed usually with much severity in the place of
Justice; If condemned to dye he is presently carried from Sentence to
Execution, commonly in the Marketplace, which quick Judgment keeps the People
in such awe, that there are not many Execution. Murder and Theft they punish
with death of what kind the Judge please to impose, some Malefactors being
hanged, others beheaded, some impaled or put upon sharp Stakes, a death of
extreme cruelty and torture, some are torn to pieces by wild Beasts, some
killed by Elephants, and others Stung to death by Serpents. Those that suffer
by Elephants, who are trained up for Executions, are thus dealt withal; If the
Beast be commanded by his Rider to dispatch the poor trembling Offender
presently, who lies prostrate before him, he with his broad round Foot at one
stamp kills him, but if he be condemned so to die as to feel himself dye, the
Elephant will break his Bones by degrees with his hard trunk, as first his
Legs, then his Thighs, after that the Bones in both his Arms, this done his
wretched Spirit is left to breath its last out of the midst of those broken
Bones.

It is reported that strange kinds of deaths are executed by the command of the
King of Japan upon his Subjects, where some are Crucified or Nailed to a Cross,
others rather Roasted than burnt to death, for there is a Stake set up; and a
Fire made at a distance round about it, the condemned Person being naked is so
fastened to the Stake that he may move round about it, and so does as long as he
is able to stir till his Flesh begins to blister; Then he falls down, and there
lies roaring till the Fire made about him puts him to silence, by taking away
both his Voice and Life; The reason they give for using such exquisite torments
is because they count it dishonorable for any man to die by an Executioner,
and therefore Criminals are usually commanded to rip up their own Bellies, and
those who will not do so are tormented in dying, hence these Condemned Persons
call for their Friends about them, cat and seem to be merry with them, and in
the close of the Banquet, they in their presence commit this sad slaughter upon
themselves, for being stripped to the middle, the wretched selfmurtherer strikes
a sharp Knife into the bottom of his Belly, then rips himself up, and if after
this he can wipe his bloody Knife upon a white Paper or Napkin laid by him, he
is reckoned to dye with much honor, and is persuaded he goes to Fakaman, or
the God of War.

When I was in India, says my Author, one was sentenced by the Mogol himself
for killing his own Father to dye thus, first a small Iron Chain was fastened to
his Heels, which was tied to the hind Leg of a great Ele phant, who dragged him
one whole remove of that King being about ten miles, so that all his Flesh was
torn off his Bones when we met him, and appeared to us rather a Skeleton than a
Body. Another having killed his own Mother, the Emperor was at a stand to
think of a punishment adequate to so horrible a crime, but after a little
pause, he adjudged him to be stung to death by Serpents, accordingly one of
those Mountebanks who keep them to show tricks to the people, brought two
Serpents to do Execution upon this wretched man whom he sound all naked, only a
little covering before, and trembling. Then having angered these venomous
Creatures, he put one of them to his Thigh, which presently twined it self
about that part till it came near his Groin, and there bit him till Blood
followed; The other was fastened to the outside of the other Thigh twisting it
round, and there bit him likewise; Notwithstanding the Wretch kept upon his
Feet near a quarter of an hour, before which the Serpents were taken from him,
but he complained extremely of a Fire that with much torment had possessed all
his Limbs, and his whole Body began to swell exceedingly, like Nafidius bit by
a Lybyan Serpent called a Prester, about half an hour after, the Soul of that
unnatural Monster left his groaning Carcass, and went to his place.

It happened a few years before Sir Thomas Row was Ambassador in this Court in
1618. that a Jugler of Bengala, a place famous for Witches, brought an Ape
before the Mogol, who loved Novelties, that did many strange feats, the King to
try his skill plucked a Ring off his Finger, and gave it one of his Boys to
hide, whom the Ape presently discovered; several other trials he made, wherein
the Ape did his part to admiration; Before he was taken out of his presence,
this strange and unexpected fancy came into the Kings Head; There are many
disputes, said he; about that true Prophet which should come into the World, we
are for Mahomet; The Persians magnify Mortis Ally, the Hindoos or Heathens
extol Bramon, Ram, and others, the Jews are for Moses, and the Christians for
Christ; adding several other names, to the number of twelve in all, who have
all their several followers in that part of the World; He then caused them
twelve names to be written on twelve several Scrolls, and put together to see
if the Ape could draw out the name of the true Prophet, this done the Ape put
his paw amongst them and pulled out the name of Christ; The Mogol a second time
caused these twelve names to be writ again in twelve other Scrolls and
Characters, and put together, when the Ape again plucked forth the name of
Christ as before; Mabomet Chan a great Favorite present, said it was an
Imposture of the Christians, though none were then there, and desired he might
make a third trial, which granted he put but eleven of those names together,
reserving the name of Christ in his hand, the Ape searching as before plucked
forth his empty paw, and so twice or thrice together the King demanding a
reason for this, was answered, that happily the thing he looked for was not
there, the Ape was bid search for it, who putting out those eleven names one
after the other in a seeming indignation rent them, then running to Mahobet
Chan caught him by the hand where the name of Christ was concealed, which he
opened, and held up to the King, but did not tear it as the former. Upon which
the Mogol took the Ape, and gave his Keeper a good Pension to keep him near
about him, calling him the Divining Ape. And this was all which followed upon
this admirable event, except the great wonder and amazement of the people, the
truth whereof, says my Author, I most certainly believe, as being confirmed to
me by several Persons of different Religions, who all agreed in the story and
the several circumstances thereof.

I cannot but here relate a remarkable example of a very gross Flatterer, but a
great Favorite of this King, who was noted above others of that Nation to be a
great neglecter of God, believing it Religion enough to please the Mogol his
Master, though a Soldier of approved valor. This man on a time sitting in
dalliance with one of his Women, she plucked an hair from his Breast about his
Nipple in wantonness, without designing any hurt. This little inconsiderable
wound by an unparalled fate became the occasion of his death, beginning
presently to fester, and in a short time turned to an incurable Canker; When he
found he must needs dye, he spoke these notable words worthy to be recorded,
Who would not have thought but that I who have been so long a Soldier should
have died in the face of an Enemy, either by a Sword, Lance, Arrow, Bullet, or
some such Instrument of death? But now though too late I am forced to confess
that there is a great God above, whose Majesty I have ever despised, who needs
no bigger Lance than an hair to kill an Atheist or a despiser of his Divinity;
and so desiring these his last words might be told the King his Master, he died.

The then Mogol sent a Letter to our King James the first in the Persian
Language, which is here faithfully translated to show the manner and style of
the writing of that Court.

Unto a King rightly descended from his Ancestors, bred in Military Affairs,
clothed with honor and Justice, a Commander worthy of all command, strong and
constant in the Religion which the great Prophet Christ did teach King James;
Whose love has bred such an Impression in my thoughts as shall never be
forgotten, but as the smell of Amber, or as a Garden of fragrant Flowers, whose
beauty and odor is still incereasing; so be assured my love shall still grow
and increase with yours. The Letters you sent me in the behalf of your
Merchants I have received, whereby I rest satisfied of your tender love toward
me, desiring you not to take it ill that I have not writ to yo heretofore; This
present Letter I send to you to renew our loves, and herewith do certify you
that I have sent forth my Firmans or Proclamations throughout all my Countries
to this effect, that if any English Ships or Merchants shall arrive to any of
my Ports, my People shall permit and suffer them to do what they please freely
in their M^chandizing causes, aiding and assisting them in all occasions of
injuries that shall be offered them, that the least cause of discourtesy be not
done unto them, that they may he as free or freer than my own people. And as
now and formerly I have received from you diverse tokens of your love, so I
shall still desire your mindfulness of me by some novelties from your
Countries, as an argument of Friendship betwixt us, for such is the Custom of
Princes here; And for your Merchants I have given express Order through all my
Dominions to suffer them to buy, sell, transport, and carry away at their
pleasure, without the let or hindrance of any Person whatsoever, all such Goods
and Merchandises as they shall desire to buy, and let this my Letter as fully
satisfy you in desired Peace and Love, as if my own Son had been Messenger to
confirm the same. And if any in my Countries not fearing God, nor obeying their
King or any other void of Religion should endeavor to be an instrument to
break this League off Friendship, I would send my Son Sultan Caroom, a Soldier
approved in the Wars to cut him off, that no obstacle may hinder the
continuance and increase of our Affections.

Some years after the Great Mogol sent two other Letters to the same King, one
beginning thus, When your Majesty shall open this Letter, let your Royal Heart
be as fresh as a small Garden, let all people make Reverence at your Gate. Let
your Throne be advanced higher. Amongst the greatness of the Kings of the
Prophet Jesus let your Majesty be the greatest; And all Monarchs derive their
Wisdom and Counsel from your Breast as from a Fountain, that the Law of the
Majesty of Jesus my revive and flourish under your protection. The second
Letter ran thus, How gracious is your Majesty whose greatness God preserve. As
upon a Rose in a Garden so are mine Eyes fixed upon you, God maintain your
Estate that your Monarchy may prosper and be augmented; and that you may obtain
all your desires, worthy the greatness of your Renown, and as the Heart is
Noble and Upright so let God give you a glorious Reign, because you strongly
defend the Law of the Majesty of Jesus which God made yet more flourishing,
because it was confirmed by Miracles, etc. What followed was to testify his
care of and love to the English. All these Letters were writ in the Persian
Tongue, the Court Language there, and Copies sent to the Ambassador Sir Thomas
Row to get them translated. The Originals rolled up somewhat long were covered
with Cloth of Gold sealed up on both ends, according to the fashion of that
Country; wherein we may observe how respectively the King speaks of our
Blessed Savior Christ Jesus; But having already over enlarged concerning this
mighty Empire, we will take our leave of the Great Mogol, who is a Prince of
much Wealth and Power having vast multitudes of Soldiers in constant pay, and
in his ordinary removes which is not usually above ten mile at once, has such
an infinite number of men and other Creatures attending him whose drink is
water, that in a little time, as it was said of the mighty Host of Semacherib
they are able to drink up Rivers.

The Honorable East India Company settled Factories likewise at Mastipatan,
Armagon, Petipoly, Patania, Siam, Fort St. George and other places on the Coast
of Cormandel, and the Continent of Asia; Mastipatan is a great City the Houses
whereof are only wood, built, at a distance from each other, it stands by the
Sea, and is a famous Road for Ships, from whence they Sail to Pegu, Siam, Ormus
Sumatra and other places. Patania is a City South from Siam, and was governed
many years by a Queen. In 1612. some English came hither with a Letter from
Queen Elizabeth, and a Present from the Merchants of six hundred Rials of
Eight, the Letter was delivered in great State being laid in a Basin of Gold
carried on an Elephant adorned with little Flags, Lances and Minstrils, they
then obtained a Grant to Trade upon the same conditions with the Hollanders.
Siam is a Kingdom, the greatest part whereof lies between the Gulf of Siam and
Bengal; The Country is very plentiful in Rice and Fruits, the Forests full of
Hearts, Elephants, Tigers, Rhinocero's and Apes, where also grow abundance of
large Bamboo Canes, under the Knots of these Bamboo's are Emets Nests as big as
a man's Head, which they make there to preserve themselves from the Rain that
continues four or five months together; The King of Siam is accounted one of
the richest Monarchs upon Earth, and styles himself, King of Heaven and Earth,
though he be Tributary to the Kings of China, there are Idols in his Temples
seven Foot high all of massy Gold, when the King appears all the Doors and
Windows of the Houses must be shut, all the People prostrating themselves on
the ground not daring to look up, and because no Person is to be in an higher
place than the King, they that are within Doors are bound to keep their lowest
Rooms; He suffers no Barber to come near him, one of his Wives cutting his Hair
for him; One part of his magnificence consists in his train of two hundred
Elephants, among which there is one that is White which he values so highly as
to style himself King of the White Elephant; He has a passionate kindness for
them, accounting them his Favorites and the Ornaments of his Kingdom, if any of
them fall sick and dye they are buried with the same Funeral pomp as the Nobles
of the Kingdom.

At the Fort St. George an English Factory on the Coast of Cormandel Nov. 3.
1684. About nine at night happened a violent storm which continued till two
next morning. It untiled all the Houses in the Town with such a rattling
terrible noise as if some thousands of Grenades had been thrown on them and
laid all their Gardens, of which they have many pleasant ones, as flat and
level as the smoothest Bowling Greens; Trees of a great and prodigious growth,
some perhaps as ancient as the World, were violently torn up by the Roots, and
their aged Trunks riven in pieces, the noise of the cracking and breaking of
their Boughs and Branches seemed almost equal to that of the Tempest, but what
was most surprising was that a strong Iron-Bar which belonged to a Window was
with the extreme Force of the Wind snapped into three pieces; Had this
Hurricane continued two or three hours longer, it would certainly have levelled
both the Fort and Town, though strongly built and well fortified.

Sumatra is accounted one of the greatest Eastern Islands, in length about
seven hundred, and in breadth above two hundred Miles, where several English
Factories were settled. Our English had first Trade here in the latter end of
Queen Elizabeth, whose name was then famous in those parts for her exploits
against the Spaniards. The Queens Letters to this King were received with much
Pomp, the King entertained the Messenger with a Banquet, presented him with a
Robe, and a piece of Callicoe wrought with Gold, and gave his Passport for the
Generals security, for whom he sent six Elephants, with Drums, Trumpets,
Steamers and many Attendants; The chief Elephant was about thirteen or fourteen
Foot high having a small Castle like a Coach, covered with Velvet on his back,
in the midst whereof was a great Basin of Gold with a rich Covering of Silk,
wherein the Letter was put; The General was mounted on another Elepant, and
being arrived the Dishes wherein he was treated were of Gold, their Wine is of
Rice, wherein the King drank to the General out of his Gallery, about four Foot
higher than where he sat, it was as strong as Aqua Vitae; After the Feast some
young Women danced and played on the Music, the King sent a Letter and a
Present to the Queen, and upon parting asked if they had the Psalms of David,
and caused them to sing one, which he and his Nobles seconded with a Psalm (as
he said) for their Prosperity.

In 1613 Captain Best Anchored in the Road at Achin, and was kindly received,
having an Araacia or Messenger sent riding in a Tent on an Elephants back,
attended with two or three of the Kings Boys, (for he is attended by Boys
abroad and Women within) to receive his Majesty's Letter which was thus carried
in a Basin of Gold, the General following with forty or fifty men; After the
Letter and Present was delivered, the King told them they should see some of
his pastime, which was first Cock-fighting, next that of Rams, then his tame
Elephants, after them his Buffoloes each still exceeding the other in
fierceness, lastly the Antelopes which the General had given him; All this
while the King took Tobacco in a Silver Pipe given him by his Women, who stood
in a close Room behind him. Then was Supper served in by Boys of about
fourteen, in in a Metal of Gold and Copper mixed, continuing from seven a Clock
to almost twelve in which were served in four hundred Dishes, beside hot
Drinks; Next day the King sent the General an Elephant to ride on which none
may do without his leave, and appointed one of his Chief Officers constantly to
attend him, and free access was granted him at all times, and the Articles
agreed on between James Lancaster and his Predecessor were promised to be
ratified, May. 2. All strangers were invited to a Feast kept at the Spring of a
River in the Water, six miles from the City, two Elephants were sent for the
General, the dishes were served in by Boys, swimming with one hand and holding
the Dish, or strong Drink in the other; Of all these drinks they must taste, and
then throw the rest into the Water; This continued from one till five, they had
500 Dishes well dressed; General Best weary of sitting so long in the Water had
leave to depart an hour before the rest; The Captain of the Dutch got his Bane
either by the hot Drinks or cold sitting so long in the Water, and soon after
died. The King gave the General a new Title, calling and charging his Nobles to
call him Arancaia Pule that is, The honorable White Man; June 2. They were
entertained with a fight of four Elephants and a Tiger who was fastened to a
Stake, and yet got such hold on the Legs and Truncks of the Elephants that he
made them roar and bleed extremely. Sometimes Wild Elephants fight before him
who would soon kill each other but that tame ones are fastened to them who draw
them back, fourscore or an hundred men helping them; To tame them they place a
Wild one between two that are tame.

This King sent a Present and Letter to our King James the first, the Letter
was written and painted very curiously, and being translated runs thus,
Pedrucka Sirie Sultan, King of Kings, renowned for his Wars, and sole King of
Sumatra and a King more reverenced than his Predecessors; Feared in his Kingdom
and Honored of all Neighboring Nations in whom there is the true Image of a
King in whom Reigns the true Method of Government, formed as it were of the
most pure Metal, and adorned with the most fine Colors, whose seat is high and
most complete like to a Crystal River, pure and clear as the choicest Glass
from whom flows the pure stream of Bounty and Justice, whose presence is as
the finest Gold, King of Priaman, and of the Mountain of Gold, that is Solida,
and Lord of nine sorts of Stones, king of two Sumbreroes of beaten Gold, having
for his seats Mats of Gold: His furniture for his Horses, and Armor for
himself being likewise of pure Gold; His Elephant with Teeth of Gold, and all
Provisions thereunto belonging; His Lances half Gold, half Silver, his small
shot of the same, a Sadel also for another Elephant of the same Metal; A Tent
of Silver; And all his seats half Gold, half Silver; His Sepulcher of Gold
(whereas, his Predecessors had all these half Gold half Silver) His Services
complete of Gold and Silver; A King under whom there are many Kings, having
taken Oath King of Aurow; All the Country of Priaman; Tecoo, Barouse being
subdued by him, is now under his command; Seventy Elephants and much Provisions
carried by Sea to make his Wars in Aurow, where God gave me greater Victories
than any of my Predecessors;
This great King sends this Letter of Salutation to James King of Great
Britain, that is, England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
to signify the great content. He has received by his Highness Letter
delivered by the hands of Arancaja Pule, Thomas Best, His Majesty's Ambassador,
at the receipt whereof his Eyes were surprised with a Celestial brightness,
and his Spirits ravished with a Divine Joy; The opening thereof rendered a
savor more fragrant than the most odoriferous Flowers or sweetest Persumes in
the World; For which cause I the Great King of Sumatra do profess my self to be
of one Heart, one Mind, and of one Flesh with the most Potent Prince James King
of England, and do earnestly desire that the League begun may be continued to
all Posterities; And herein I reckon my greatest Felicity, there being nothing
in the World more pleasant or delightful to me, and for a Testimony that the
Friendship begun may be preserved betwixt us, I have returned this Letter to
your Majesty, making also my Prayers to the great God to continue the same, and
shall count it my greatest Honor to receive a Memorial from so Mighty a
Potentate, and so remote a Nation, and for an assurance of my Love and Honor,
and the continuance of our League I send your Majesty a Creese (or Dagger)
wrought with Gold, the Hilt thereof being beaten Gold, with a Ring of Stones,
an Assagaya of Swasse, half Copper, half Gold, eight Purslain Dishes small and
great of Camphire, one piece of Sowering Stuff, three pieces of Calicoe Lawn;
Which your Majesty accepting as from a Brother, I shall rest satisfied and much
honored; And so with my Prayers to the great God, Creator of Heaven and Earth
for your Majesty's long life, with Victory over your Enemies and Prosperity in
your Land I conclude.

Given at our Palace at Achi the 1022. year of Mahomet by Accomps of the Moors.



This Letter for the strange boasting form, and because it contains a small
Inventory of that Kings wealth is here inserted; This King was a stout proper
man of about thirty two, strong by Sea and Land, his Country populous, his
Elephants many, the English having there seen near two hundred at a time; His
Frigates and Galleys carried good Ordnance of all kinds; His building stately,
and spacious but not strong; His Court at Achi pleasant, having a fine River
which he cut and brought eight Miles in twenty days while they were there; He
desired the General to present his Respects to the King of England and to
entreat him to send him two White Women; For, said he, if I get one of them
with Child and it prove a Son I will make him K. of Piaman Passaman and of the
Coast from whence you fetch your Pepper, so that you shall not need to come any
more to me, but to your own English King for those Commodities. He was cruel
having plucked out the Eyes of a Nobleman for looking on one of the Kings Women
washing in a River; Another wearing a Shash or Turbant beyond his degree, had
his head cut round, so far as that was two large; Some he boiled in scalding
Oil, others were sawn asunder, Spitted alive, had their Legs cut off, or were
otherwise tortured. The People are tawny and go naked, yet paint their faces,
their Priests in their Sacrifices wear their Garments so close as if they were
sowed to them with horns on their head turning back, and a Tail hanging down
behind, for so they say the Devil appears to them, their Hair and Faces appear
deformed with Green, Black and Yellow Colors.

Another considerable English Factory is at Bantam and other places on the Isle
of Java Major, this is the chief City in the whole Island, situate at the foot
of a Mountain, whence issue three Rivers, two whereof run by the Walls, and the
other through the midst of the City, yet none of them deep enough to admit of
any Ships, the Houses are very mean, consisting of three chief Streets; The
Natives are Heathens, and believe when they dye their Souls enter into some
Bird, Beast or Fish, and therefore they eat neither Flesh nor Fish, yet toward
the South are many who profess the Turkish Religion, and some of them called
Faquirs are desperate Villains, who having been at Mecca to visit Mahomets
Tomb, upon their return they run through the Streets and kill all they meet
with their poisoned Daggers, and think that in so doing they do God and Mahomet
good service and shall be saved thereby; If any of these Madmen are killed
their Followers bury them as Saints, and every one contributes toward erecting
them a fair Tomb, which they visit, and bestow Alms upon the Keeper thereof. I
remember says my Author, that in 1642. a Vessel of the Great Mogols returned
from Mecca to Surat with a great number of these Faquirs or Derviches, and one
of them was no sooner landed and had said his Prayers, but he instantly took
his Dagger and ran among several Dutch Mariners who were unlading goods upon
the Shore, and before they were aware this desperate Wretch had wounded
seventeen of them whereof thirteen died, at length the Sentinel who stood at
the entry of the Tent where the Governor and Merchants were, shot him through
the Body so that he fell down dead; Immediately all the other Faquirs and
Mahometans who were upon the place took up the Body and buried it, and at the
end of fifteen days they had erected him a fair Monument; Every year the
English and Hollanders plucked it down, but when they are gone the Faquirs
rebuild it, and plant Banners over it, nay some perform their Devotions at it;
One time, says my Author, my Brother and I, and a Dutch Chyrurgeon were going
along a narrow way, having the Pales of a Garden on one hand, and a River on
the other, behind the Pales one of these Rascaly Bantamers had hid himself, and
thrust his Pike between the Pales thniking to have stabbed it into one of our
Breasts, the Dutch man being somewhat before, the head of the Pike ran into his
Breeches, whereupon we both laid hold on the Staff, but my Brother being next
the Pales presently leaped over and ran the Faquir through; Whereupon several
Chinese and other Idolaters came and gave my Brother thanks for killing him;
After which we waited on the King, and told him what my Brother had done, who
was so far from being displeased that he gave him a Girdle, for the King and
his Governors are glad when those Rogues are slain, counting them Desperados,
and not fit to live.

In 1682. The Eldest Son of the King of Bantam made an Insurrection, declared
himself King, and by the assistance of the Dutch took the City of Bantam and
the English Factory there, proclaiming the old King his Father a Rebel against
him. About the same time an Ambassador came from the old King to his late
Majesty King Charles the second of Blessed Memory, by whom he was received and
entertained with all manner of kindness and civility, and having continued here
for some time he returned again to his own Country.

At Socodona and Beniermasa in the Isle of Borneo the English settled other
Factories; It is accounted as big as Spain, richly encompassed with other
smaller Islands, and has a City of the same name founded on Piles in the Salt
Water, with Sumptuous buildings of Stone covered with Coco leaves. The people
are generally more white than the rest of the Indians, of good Wits and
approved Integrity, divided betwixt two Kings and two Religions, the King of
Borneo and his Wife being Mahumetans, those of Laus still remaining in their
Ancient Gentelism; These believe the Sun and Moon are Man and Wife, and the
Stars their Children, ascribing to each of them Divine Honors, and to the Sun
especially, whom they salute at his first rising with great reverence,
repeating certain verses; Their public business is usually treated in the
Night at which time the Counselors of State meet and ascend some Tree, viewing
the Heavens till the Moon rise, and then go to the Senate house Their Apparel
is very thin by reason of the extreme heat of the Air, being only a Shirt of
Silk or Calico which they wear more for modesty than warmth.

One of the Isles of Celebs is called Macassar where the English likewise
settled a Factory, being 600 miles from East to West, plentiful of all
necessaries for the use of man, in some parts overgrown with Wood, in which
certain fiery Flies make nightly such shining light as if every Twig or Bough
were a burning Candel, in the midst are very high Mountains, out of which flow
many Navigable Rivers. The Islanders have a Custom to Poison their Arrows, and
the most dangerous Poison they use is the juice of certain Trees in the Island
of Borneo, which they will temper so as to work a swift or slow death at
pleasure. They think the King has only the secret Receipt to take away the force
of it, who boasts that he has the most effectual Poison in the World, which
there is no Remedy can prevent. One time an Englishman in heat of Blood had
killed one of the King of Macassers Subjects, and though the King had pardoned
him, yet both English, Hollanders and Portugals, fearing if the Englishman
should go unpunished the Islanders would revenge it upon some of them, besought
the King to put him to death, which with much ado being granted, the King
unwilling to put him to a lingting death, and desirous to show the effect of
his Poison resolved to dispatch the Criminal himself, whereupon he took a long
Trunk, and shot him exactly in the great Toe of the right Foot, the place he
particularly aimed at; Two Surgeons one an Englishman the other an Hollander
provided on purpose, immediately cut off his Toe, but for all that the Poison
had dispersed it self so speedily that the Englishman died presently; All the
Kings and Princes of the East are very diligent in inquiring after strong
Poisons, and some Europeans having tried several of their Arrows by shooting at
Squirrels, observed they fell down dead as soon as they were touched.

These are the principal Acquisitions of the English in these remote parts of
the World, little or nothing more being to be said of the rest which are not
very considerable, and some of them since quitted by the Honorable East India
Company; Having therefore completed my usual scantling, I shall here conclude.

FINIS.
Licensed, Nov. 19. 1685. To. L'Estrange.

There are newly Published Fifteen very useful, pleasant and necessary Books,
all sold by Nath Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.
I. THE English Empire in America, or a Prospect of his Majesty's Dominions in
the West Indies, namely New Foundland, New Engl. New York, New Jersey,
Pensylvania, Maryland Virginia, Carolina, Bermuda's, Barbuda, Anguilla,
Montserrat, Dominica, St. Vincent, Antego, Mevia or Nevis, St. Christophers,
Barbados and Jamaica; With an Account of their Discovery, Situation, and
Product; The Religion and Manners of the Indians, and other excellencies of
these Countries; To which is prefixed a Relation of the first Discovery of this
New-World, and of the Remarkable Voyages, and Adventures of Sebastian Cabot,
Sir Martin Frobisher, Captain Davies, Captain Weymouth, Captain Hall, Captain
Hudson, Sir Francis Drake, Sir Thomas Cavendish, the Earl of Cumberland, Sir
Walter Rawleigh and other English Worthies to diverse places therein.
Illustrated with Maps and Pictures of the strange Fruits, Birds, Beasts,
Fishes, Insects, Serpents, and Monsters found in these Parts of the World.
Price One Shilling.

II. THE Second Edition of Englands Monarchs, very much enlarged, Or, A
Compendious Relation of the most Remarkable Transactions, and Observable
Passages Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military, which have happened during the
Reigns of the Kings and Queens of England, from the Invasion of the Romans,
under Julius Gaesar, to this present: Adorned with Poems and Pictures of every
Monarch from King William the Conqueror, to our most gracious Sovereign King
James the Second; with his present Majes^ Life, Heroic Actions, late gracious
Declaration, as other Occurrences to this time: The Names of his no Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council; The Gre^ Officers of the Crown: A list of the
Dukes, Marquesse^ Earls, Viscounts, Bishops, Barons and Deans; The Knights of
the most Noble Order of the Garter at Win^sor, and the Principal Officers,
Civil and Military i^ England; The number of the Lords and Common^ who have
Votes in both Houses of Parliament, an^ many other very useful particulars.
Price One Shilling.

III. THE History of the Kingdoms of Scotlan^ and Ireland containing, I. An
Account^ the most Remarkable Transactions and Revolutions i^ Scotland, for
above Twelve hundred years past, durin^ the Reigns of Sixty eight Kings, from
the year of our Lord 424, to the Happy Union of both Kingdoms under King James
the Sixth of Scotland and First of England, of Blessed Memory, in 1602. and
among other particulars: The lamentable Murder of King Duff^ with the strange
Discovery and Punishment thereof: The wonderful History of Mackbeth and the
Witches with the many Notable Occurrenes in his Reign. 2. The History of
Ireland from the Conquest thereof by King Henry the Second to this time; With a
Relation of the Miraculous Persons and Places in that Country: A full Account
of St. Patricks Purgatory, and diverse other memorable Matters. Intermixed with
Variety of of Excellent Speeches, Strange Accidents, Prodigious Appearences,
and other very considerable things both pleasent and profitable: With a List of
the Nobility and Great Officers of State in both Kingdoms. Illustrated with
near Thirty Pictures of several Kings and other extraordinary Observables.
Price One Shilling.

IV. DElights for the Ingenious, In above Fifty Select and choice Emblems
Divine and Moral, Ancient and Modern, Curiously Engraven on Copper Plates; with
Fifty Delightful Poems and Lots, for the ^ore Lively Illustration of each
Emblem; Whereby ^^struction and Good Council may be promoted and ^thered by an
honest and pleasant Recreation. To which is prefixed, an Incomparable Poem
Entitled, Ma^ty in Misery, or an Imploration to the King of Kings, written by
his late Majesty King Charles the First, with ^s own Hand during his Captivity
in Caris-brook Cas^, in the Isle of Wight, 1648. With a curious Em^em.
Collected by R. B. Price half a Crown.

V. Surprising Miracles of Nature and Art, in two parts; containing. I. The
Miracles of Nature or the ^onderful Signs and Prodigious Aspects and
Appearances in ^e Heavens, Earth and Sea; with an account of the most ^^ous
Comets, and other Prodigles, from the Birth of ^^rist to this time. II. The
Miracles of Art, describing ^e most Magnificent Buildings, and other curious
Intutions in all Ages; as, the Seven wonders of the World, ^d many other
excellent Structures and Rarities ^oughout the Earth. Beautified with
Sculptures. ^ice One Shilling.

VI. THE Second Edition of two Journeys to Jerusalem Enlarged. Containing
first, A ^nge and true Account of the Travels of two English ^grims some years
since, and what Admirable Accidents befell them in their Journey to Jerusalem,
Grand ^ire, Alexandria, etc. With the wonderful manner of nothing many Thousand
Chickens at once in Ovens. ^condly, The Travels of Fourteen Englishmen in ^69.
from Scanderoon to Tripoly Joppa, Ramah, Jerusu^ Jericho, the River of Jordan,
the Lake of Sodom ^d Gomorah, and back again to Aleppo. By S. B. ^ith the rare
Antiquites, Monuments, and memora^ places and things mentioned in the Holy
Scripture; ^d an exact Description of the Old and New Jerusalem; (...) which is
added, a Relation of the great Council of (...) Jews assembled in the Plains of
Ajayday in Hungary, ^50. to examine the Scriptures concerning Christ. By ^
B^^an Englishman there present: With the notorious Delusion of the Jews, by a
counterseit Messiah, or false Christ, at Smyrna in 1666. and the Event thereof.
Lastly, The fatal and final Extirpation and Destruction of the Jews, throughout
the Kingdom of Persia, whereby many Thousands of all Qualities and Ages were
cut off in 1666. and the remarkable occasion thereof. The Epistle of King
Agbarus to our Savior, with our Savior's Answer. Beautified with Pictures.
Price One Shiling.

VII. THE Fifth Edition of the Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland, being
near a third part, enlarged with very considerable Additions, containing an
Impartial Account of all the Battles, Sieges, and other remarkable
Transactions, Revolutions and Accidents which have happened from the beginning
of the Reign of King Charles the First, 1625. to his late Majesty's happy
Restoration. The illegal Trial of King Charles I. at large, with his last
Speech at his suffering. And the most considerable matters which happened till
1660. With Pictures of several remarkable Accidents. Price One Shil.

VIII. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and Present State of
London and Westminster, showing the Foundations, Walls, Gates, Towers, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Schools, Inns of Courts, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with an
account of the most remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and other
Occurrences, for above Nine hundred years past, in and about these Cities; to
the Year 1681. Illustrated with Pictures, with the Arms of the 65 Companies of
London, and the time of their Incorporating. Price One Shilling.

IX. ADmirable Curiosities, Rarities, and Wonders in England, Scotland and
Ireland, or an Account of many remarkable persons and places, and likewise of
the Battles, Sieges, Prodigious Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Thunders,
Lightnings, Fires, Murders, and other considerable Occurrences and Accidents
for many hundred years past. Together with the natural and artificial Rarities
in every County in Engl. with several curious Sculptures. Price One Shilling.

X. Unparalleled Varieties, Or the Matchless Actions and Passions of Mankind;
Displayed in near four hundred notable Instances and Examples; Discovering the
transcendent effects; 1. Of Love, Friendship, and Gratitude, 2. Of Magnanimity,
Courage and Fidelity, 3. Of Chastity Temperance, and Humility, and on the
contrary, the Tremendous Consequences, 4. Of Hatred, Revenge and Ingratitude,
5. Of Cowardice, Barbarity and Treachery, 6. Of Unchastity, Intemperance, and
Ambition. Imbelished with proper Figures. Price One Shilling.

XI. EXtraordinary Adventures of several famous Men, with the strange Events,
and signal Mutations and Changes in the Fortunes of diverse Illustrious Places
and Persons in all Ages; Being an Account of a multitude of Stupendous
Revolutions, Accidents and Observable matters in Kingdoms, States and Provinces
throughout the whole World. Price One Shilling.

XII. WOnderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy, discovered in above 33
memorable Histories, containing, 1. Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists,
Blasphemers, and perjured Villains. 2. The miserable ends of many Magicians,
Witches, Conjurers, etc. with diverse Apparitions and Illusions of the Devil. 3.
Remarkable predictions end presages of approaching Death, and how the Event has
been answerable. 4. The lives and deaths of several Popes. 5. Fearful Judgments
upon bloody Tyrants, Murderers, etc. 6. Acmirable Deliverances from Imminent
Dangers, and Deplorable Distresses at Sea and Land. Lastly, Divine Goodness to
Penitents, with the Dying Thoughts of several famous men, concerning a future
state after this Life. Imbellished with diverse Pictures. Price One Shilling.

XIII. THE Young Man's Calling, or the whole Duty of Youth, in a serious and
compassionate Address to all young persons to remember their Creator in in the
days of their Youth. Together with Remarks upon the Lives of several excellent
Young persons of both Sexes, as well ancient as modern, who have been famous
for Virtue and Piety in their Generations; namely, on the Lives of Isaac and
Joseph in their Youth. On the Martyrdom of the seven Sons and their Mother; Of
Romanus a young Nobleman, and of diverse holy Virgins and Martyrs. On the Lives
of K. Edward 6. Q. Jane, Q. Elizabeth in her Youth, P. Henry Eldest Son to K.
James, and the young L. Harrington, etc. with 12 curious Pictures illustrating
the several Histories. Price Eighteen Pence.

XIV. A Guide to Eternal Glory: Or, Brief Directions to all Christians how to
attain to Everlasting Salvation: To which are added several other small Tracts,
As, 1. A short Directory for Self-Examination. 2. A brief Dialogue between a
Learned Divine and a Beggar. 3. Cordial Meditations Or Beams of the Spirit,
Enlivening, Enlightening, and Gladding the Soul. Lastly, Divine Hymns upon the
Lords Supper; with some others, Price Six Pence.

XV. EXcellent Contemplations Divine and Moral, Written by the Magnanimous and
truly Loyal A. L. Capel, Baron of Hadham; Together with some Account of his
Life, and his Affectionate Letters to his Lady, the day before his Death with
his Heroic Behavior and last Speech at his Suffering; Also the Speeches and
Carriages of D. Hamilton and the E. of Holland, who suffered with him: With his
pious Advice to his Son the late E. of Essex. Price One Shilling.

All sold by Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.


