A Journey to Jerusalem: OR, A RELATION OF THE Travels of Fourteen Englishmen,
in the Year, 1669.

From Scanderoon, to Tripoly, Joppa, Ramah, Jerusalem, Bethlem, Jericho, the
River Jordan, the Dead Sea; And back again to Aleppo.

With an Exact Account of all the Remarkable Places and Things in their whole
JOURNEY.

In a Letter from T. B. in Aleppo, to his Friend in London.

Together with a Map, and brief Account of the Ancient and Modern State of
those Countries.

London, Printed by T. M. for N. Crouch in Exchange-Alley over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1672.

A Journey to JERUSALEM in the year 1669
The Temple of the Sepulcher

Jerusalem as it now is

London ^^^^ted for N Crouch in Exchange (...)



To the Reader
THis Relation coming to my Hands, I thought it might be some Diversion, to
Observe what the Ignorant are made to Believe, of those once Famous Places.

And though others have formerly Treated of these Parts, yet we have hardly had
an Exact Account since Mr. Sandys, which being so long since, No doubt some
things are Altered, some Worn out of Memory, and it may be, many more Legends
Added, According as it may stand with the Interest and Profit of the Priests.

If the Style be not so Polite and Curious, as might be Wished, I dare Assure
the Reader that the Author never intended it for Public Veiw, but Writ it only
as a Letter, to satisfy the desire of his Intimate Friends; wherein Men do not
commonly so much Study Elloquence, as plainess and Truth; The last whereof I
Suppose the Author is Guilty of, because he had no Temptation to do Otherwise;
for I think it is not much Material to him, whether it be Believed or not. And
therefore you may Read, and Judge of it as you Please.

A Brief Description of Palestine, with an Account of the Ancient and Modern
State of those Countries.
IN Former Ages, this was One of the most Famousest Provinces of Syria: Called,

First, The Land of Canaan, from Canaan the Son of Cham, who by his often
Chasings was driven to Possess and Inhabit the same.

Secondly, It was called the Land of Promise, because the Lord had Promised it
to the Patriarcks, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and their Seed.

Thirdly, Jsrael, of the Israelites, so called from Jacob, who was Sur-named
Israel.

Fourthly, Judea, from the Jews, or People of the Tribe of Juda.

Fifthly, Palestine, by Ptolomays and others, quasi Philistini: The Land of the
Philistines, a potent Nation that dwelt there.

Sixthly, The Holy Land, so Named by the Christians, because herein was Wrought
by Christ, the Work of our Salvation.

This Country is Situated in the midst of the World, Between the Third and
Fourth Climates, the longest Day being Fourteen Hours and a quarter, between
the Midland Sea and Arabia, from which it is Bulwarked beyond Jordan with a
continual Ridg of Mountains; on the East lies Celosgoia, and Arabia Petrea; on
the South Idumea, the Wilderness of Pharam and Egypt; in the West a part of
Phenicia, and the rest, has the Mediterranean-Sea; and on the North are the
Mountains of Libanus, and a part of Phenicia: It is distant from the
Equinoctial Thirty one Degrees, extending to Thirty Three; so that in length
from Dan unto Bersheba, it contains not more then Four Hundred Miles; and
where it is Broadest, not Fifty.

This Famous Land was once commended above all Countries under the Sun,
especially in regard of the Salubritie and Wholsomeness of the Air, being
Seated under a Temperate Clime, where the Winter is not too Cold, nor the
Summer too Hot; and for Fertility, a Land that Flows with Milk and Honey,
Adorned with Beautified Mountains, and delightful Valleys; the Rock producing
Excellent Waters, and no part empty of Delight or Profit; for the Soil yields
abundance of all Fruits and Increase.

This Land abounds in sweet Springs, and pleasant Pastures; where they feed a
great many Flocks of Sheep, and herds of Cattle and Cowes which give excellent
Milk as is in any Country in the World; There is also brave Hunting and
Hawking; for Dear, Goats, Hares, Partridges, Quails, and other Birds:
Likewise, they have all kind of Foul, also there are great store of Lions,
Bears and Wolves, found in Abundance.

The Land of Canaan was heretofore divided into Thirty Kingdoms, and Kings
when the Israelites Conquered it; the most of the Ancient inhabitants being for
their Sins by God Excluded the Land, and put to the Sword by the Israelites:
The Israelites Ruled this Land, about Four Hundred Years, by Princes and
Judges, till the time of Samuel: These Princes or Judges, were not all of one
Tribe, but the Best, Gravest, and Eldest, were Selected, and Chosen out of
every Tribe. Afterward the Israelites growing weary of this Government, at
their Earnest request, the Lord appointed them a King, and so their Government
was Changed into a Monarchy, which continued many Ages; but in process of
time, the Israelites endured many Miseries, and Afflictions, till at last they
saw the utter Ruin and subvertion of their Kingdom.

What Alteration hapened to this Nation, and with how many several Wars they
were Plagued (either because of their own stifneckedness, that they would not
be Obedient to their own Prince, or brook any foreign Government, or that for
their Rebellion and Sins, the Wrath of God was oftentimes Kindled against them;
or that Foreign Princes were Ambitious to Incorporate this happy Land, Holy
Writ and Historigraphers Witness the same at large; for how many times were
they Subdued and brought into Slavary, and Bondage, because of their Sins, and
that they did not Govern and behave themselves well? for sometimes their Necks
were brought under the Yoakes of their Neighbors, as the Egyptians, Caldeans,
Meads, Persians, Macedonians and Romans, yea, and would never cease by their
Rebellions, Seditions, and Conspiracies, till they had brought their Government
and Country to utter Destruction, by Persecuting and putting to Death, the
Saints and Prophets, sent them from God; yea, and at last Crucifying the Son of
God, the Lord of Glory, and the Savior of Mankind, by their Horrible and
Murderous Hands, and Nailing him to the Cross.

And finally, wishing that his Innocent Blood should be on them and their
Children;

Which accordingly soon after happened to the utter Desolation of their
Country, the Romans laying wast, and levelling to the Ground, the Magnificent
Structures and Buildings thereof, destroying and burning Jerusalem, the Temple,
and all the Ornaments thereof; so that herein was verified the Prophecy of
Christ while he was upon the Earth, that one Stone should not be left upon
Another.

And as for the People, Divine Venegance did continually pursue them till the
most part of them were destroyed, and the rest Dispersed through out the World,
even to this Day.

For First, The Inhabitants of Cesarea slew of the Jews in one Day, about
Twenty Thousand, and such as fled, were taken and Imprisoned by Florus the
Leiutenant of Judea.

To Revenge this Slaughter, the Jews set upon the Syrians; in which Skirmish
Thirteen Thousand of them were Slain. The People of Alexandria put Fifty
Thousand of them to the Sword; They of Damascus ten Thousand of them: and
Antonius a Roman Captain, slew in Ascalon Ten Thousand; and Cestius another
Captain, slew Fourscore Thousand and Forty Persons. And now to come to the Wars
managed here by Vespasian.

This Vespasion, in the Seige of Aphaca, slew and took Prisoners Seventeen
Thousand, One Hundred and Thirty Persons: in Samaria Eleaven Thousand Six
Hundred Persons: and in Josepata Forty two Thousand two Hundred Persons. In
Joppa so many Killed and Drowned themselves, that the Sea threw up again Four
Thousand two Hundred Persons; and the rest so totally perished, that there
remained none to carry tidings to Jerusalem of the loss of the Town.

In the City of Tarichea, were Slain and made Captives, Forty five Thousand
Persons, besides those which were given to the King Agrippa: In Gamala there
perished Ninety Thousand, and none were left alive but only two Women. In
Gascala Five Thousand Men died by the Sword. In the City of Gadara, there were
Slain Thirty two Thousand two Hundred, besides an infinite number of such as
Drowned themselves. In Jerusalem it self, there Died Eleven Hundred Thousand of
them, partly by the Sword, and partly by Famine, the worse Enemy of the two;
there were found two Thousand in Privies and Sinks; and Ninety Seven Thousand
were taken prisoners, insomuch, that thirty Jews were sold for a Penny.

Now that Jerusalem was able to contain such a number of People, is evident, in
that when Cestius was Leiuetenant of Jury, the high Priest did, at his Request,
number the People, which came to Eat of the Paschal Lamb, and found them to be
two Millions, and Seven Hundred Thousand living Souls, all Sound and Purified.

And when Titus laid Seige to the City, it was at the Feast of the Passover,
when most of the People were there Assembled; God as it were thus Imprisoning
them.

All these Massacres, besides diverse others Omitted, and infinite Numbers which
were Slain in the Feilds and Villages, which Drowned themselves, and were
privately made away, Amounting to almost two Millions of People, happened in
the compass of four Years, beginning in the twelse of Nero, and ending in the
second of Vespasian.

Yet was not the whole Nation Rooted out till the Year One Hundred Thirty Six.
For then this Miserable People having stirred two notable Rebellions, First
under Trajan, and asterward under Adrian the Emperors, they were generally
Banished their Native Country, and never again suffered to inhabit it, but as
Strangers.

After this Desolation, the Jews were dispersed all over the World, and
especially in Spain, where Adrian Commanded many of them to dwell; yet they
found every where so little Favor, that having diverse times been put to
grievous Mulcts and Ransomes, they were at last quite t^rust out of Europe also.

The First Christian Prince that expelled the Jews out of his Territories, was
that Heroic King, our Edward the First, who was such a sore Scowrge also to
the Scots; and it is thought, diverse Families of those Banished Jews fled then
to Scotland, where they have propagated since in great Numbers; Witness the
Aversion this Nation has above others to Hogs-Flesh.

Nor was this their Extermination for their Religion, but for their notorious
Crimes; as poisoning of Wells, Counterfeiting of Coins, falsifying of Seals,
and Crucifying of Christian Children; with other Villainies. This happened in
the Year One Thousand Two Hundred Ninety One.

And Sixteen Years after, France followed our Example.

It was near two Hundred Years after, that Ferdinand turned them out of Spain;
and five years after him, Emanual of Portugal did the like.

But the Countries from whence they were Last expelled, were Naples and Sicily,
in the Year One Thousand Five Hundred Thirty Nine. In other parts of
Christendom they reside yet, in great numbers, as in Germany High and Low;
Bohemia, Lituania, Poland and Russia; In Italy also they are found, but in no
Country which is subject to the King of Spain.

They live very quietly at Rome under the Popes nose, and St. Mark makes no
Scruple to entertain them at Venice: In sundry places of the Ottoman Empire
they are found very numerous; so that it is thought Constantinople and
Thessalonica only, have near upon twenty Thousand of them.

Asia is full of them, as Aleppo, Tripoly, Damascus, Rhodes, and indeed all
places of commerce and Traffic; There are numbers of themifound also in
Persia, Arabia, and about Cranganor in India.

And to come to Afric, they have their Synagogues and Lumbards bards, in
Alexandria, the Gran Cairo, as also in Fesse, in Tremiseu, and diverse places in
the Kingdom of Morocco: there are about one hundred Families left in
Jerusalem. But the place where they are most unmingled, is Tiberias, which the
Turks gave to Mendez the Jew, for some signal services; thither they oftentimes
bring or send the bones of their dead friends, who have left large Legacies to
be there interred from other places.

The City of Jerusalem was afterward re-edified by Elius Adrianus, and given to
the Christians, from whom it was taken by Cosroes, and the Presians, in the
Year Six Hundred Fifteen, and from them forcibly wrested by Haumar, and the
Saracens, in the Year Six Hundred Thirty Seven. Next it fell into the power of
Cutlu Moses, and the Turks, in the Year One Thousand Nine; under whose
oppression, when it had long groaned, Peter the Hermit stirred up the Western
Princes to relieve the distressed Christians, whose designs attained their
wished effect, under the Banner of the Victorious Prince, Godfrey of Bullen, in
the Year One Thousand Ninety Nine. This Godfrey, for his merits, was to have
been invested with the Royal Wreath of Majesty, which he denied, thinking it
unfit to wear a Crown of Gold, where his Savior had Worn a Crown of Thorns;
yet for the Common good sake he accepted the Title; after whom reigned these
Christian Princes.

Second, Baldwin. Third, Baldwin the Second. Fourth, Fulk Earl of Anjou. Fifth,
Baldwin the Third. Six, Almerick. Seventh, Baldwin the Fourth. Eight, Baldwin
the fifth. Ninth, Guy of Lusignan, the last King of Jerusalem; during whose
time, Saladine the Sultan of Egypt, won the Kingdom, which his Successors
defended against all invasions, till the Year One Thousand Five Hundred
Seventeen, when Selinus the first Emperor of the Turks, added the Holy Land
together with Egypt to his Empire: And so the whole Country of Palestine, with
the City of Jerusalem, are under the dominion of the Turk to this day, and is
inhabited by some Christians (who make a great benefit of showing the Sepulcher
of Christ) and of late Years also, by Moors, Arabians, Greeks, Latins, Turks,
Jews, nay, I may safely, and probably say, with People of all Nations.

The whole Land contains Four Regions, Idumea, Judea, Samaria, and Gallilee,
Idumea, begins at Mount Cassius; or as some will, at the Lake Sirbon,
reaching to the Eastward of Judea; The Chief Cities are Maresa, Rhinocorura,
Rapha, Antedon, Ascalon, Azotus, and Gaza.

Maresa was the birthplace of the Prophet Micha. Near unto this town, Judas
Machabeus overthrew Gorgius, Rhinocorura, Rapha, and Atedon, are towns of no
great note. Of Ascalon Sir George Sandis writes thus in his travels, That it
is a place now of no great Reckoning, more then that the Turk does keep there a
garrison: Venerable heretofore amongst the heathen for the Temple of Dagon, and
the Birth of Simiramis begotten of the Goddess Decreta, who enflamed with the
love of a certain youth, that Sacrificed unto her, and having by him a
daughter, ashamed of her Incontinency did put him away, and Exposed the Child
to the deserts, and Confounded with sorrow, threw her self into a lake
replenished which fish, adjoining to the City: this Decreta is said to be that
Dagon the Idol of the Agrotonites mentioned in the Scripture, which signifies
the first of sorrow: who had her Temple close by the Lake, with her Image in
the figure of a Fish, excepting the Face, which resembled a woman; But the
Infant nourished by Doves, which brought her Milk from the pailes of the
Pastures: after became the wise of Ninus, and Queen of Assyria; whereupon she
was called Semiramis, which signifies a dove in the Syrian tongue: in memorial
whereof the Babylonians did bear a Dove in their Ensigns, confirmed by the
Prophecy of Jeremiah, who foretelling of the devastation of Judea, Advises
them to flee from the sword of the dove.

Azotes, where was a Sumptuous Temple built to the Lieutenant to Demetrius:
eight miles beyond that stands Acharon or Ekron, where Beelzebub was worshipped,
to whom Ahaziah sent to enquire of his health.

Lastly, Gaza or Aza, one of the five Principal Cities belonging to the
Palastines (called Philistines in Scripture) Gaza signifies Strong, and in the
Persian, language a Treasury; So said to be called by Cambyses, who Invading
Egypt, sent thither the riches Purchased in that War; it was also called
Constantia by the Emperor Constantine, first famous for the acts of Sampson,
who lived about the time of the Trojan Wars, whose force and fortunes are said
to have given to the Poets their invention of Hercules, who lived not long
before him: And it was afterward famous for two Wounds there received by
Alexander the great, and was then counted the Chief of Syria.

Also there lies Joppa now Jafta, a Famous Mart Town, and a good Haven; where
Jonah took Ship to fly to Tarsus, where Peter Raised Dorcas from Death to Life,
and where he lying in the House of one Simon a Tanner, was in a Vision, Taught
the Conversion of the Gentiles. This City they report to have been built before
the Flood. Here Reigned Cepheus the Son of Phoenix, whose Daughter Andromeda was
by Perseus delivered from a Sea Monster, some of whose Bones the people had
wont to show to Strangers, even till the Flourishing of the Romans: Here lies
Gath also, the Country of the huge Giant Goliath.

Judea is the Chiefest part of Palastina, and is of the same extent now, as it
was when it was the Kingdom of Judea, and entertained the two great and
Puissant Tribes of Judea and Benjamin. It lies between the Midland-Sea and
Lacus Asphaltitis, or the Dead-Sea, and betwixt Samaria and Idumea: It took
this name from the Tribe of Juda, in which lies the once famous City Jerusalem.

Besides Jerusalem also, there are in this Country diverse other Towns and
famous Cities; as Jerico, Turris Stratonis, afterward named Cesarea; Hebron
formerly, now Arbea; also Mambre; and Carioth; that is to say, a Town of four
Men, the Birth - place of Judas Iscariot, who betrayed our Savior Jesus
Christ; Emaus, and diverse others; and Beyond Jordan Makherus, a Town with a
strong Castle: here stood also the Towns of Sodom and Gomorah, which for their
Sodomy and Abomination, were utterly destroyed and consumed with Fire from
Heaven; and lies now buried in that Cursed Lake Asphalites; so named of the
Bitumen where it Vomiteth; called also the Dead-Sea, perhaps in that it
nourishes no living Creature, or for his heavy Waters hardly to be moved with
any Wind; so Extreme Salt, that whatsoever is thrown thereinto, not easily
Sinketh: Vaspatian for a trial, causes diverse to be Cast in bound Hand and
Foot, who Floted Aloft, as if Supported by some Spirit. They say, that Birds,
Flying over it fall in as if Enchanted or Suffocated with the Poison of the
Ascending Vapors. Samaria lies in the Midst, between Judea, and Gallilea; the
Land is so called from the Metrapolis Samaria, Built by Amry King of Israel,
and now called Sebasta; which Towns in it, are Sichem, afterward Named
Neapolis, Capernaum, Betzaida and Chorazin.

Galilea lies between Mount Labanus and Samaria, and is divided into upper and
lower Galilea; Upper Galilea bordereth upon Tyrus, called otherwise
Galilea-Gentium, or the Heathenish Galilea; Lower Galilea lies near unto the
Lake of Tyberius, and to Nazareth: In it are the Towns of Naim, Cana, Nazareth
and Gadara. The Holy Land is seated between two Seas, and the River Jordan; it
has within it many Navigable Lakes, and Meers, abounding with Fish; the River
Jordan is called by the Hebrews, Jordan, and runs through the Midst of this
Country, dividing it into two Parts. St. Jerome Writes that this River
Springs out of two Fountains, not far distant one from the other; the one
called Jor, the other Dan, shooting out like two Horns, which meeting together,
make the Great River Jordan. The Chief Mountains in the Holy Land, are Mount
Hermon, lying in the East part thereof, and Mount Tabor in the West, both of
them being very Great and High, so that the other Hills about them, are but
Arms and Branches of them: For the Mountains Eball, Betheron, Mispa or
Maspha, and Bethel, are reckoned under Mount Hermon, Gilboa, Gerezin, Sarona,
and Mount-Carmel by the Sea side, are counted under Mount Tabor.

There are also about Jerusalem, Mount Sion, Moriah, Mount Olivet, Mount
Calvary, and others: Besides there are many Goodly Woods, and Forests, full of
all kind of Deer, and many Wild Beasts.

In this Land, especially in about and Jerusalem, there were many Stately and
Magnificent Buildings, as Namely Mons Domus, and the Castle of the Jebusites,
into which King David brought the Ark of the Lord, where it remained till
Solomon's Temple was Finished. The remainders and Ruins of these Buildings, are
yet to be seen to this Day; yea, it is said, that in the very Place, the Lord
Christ Eat the Pascal Lamb with his Disciples: There are also to be seen, the
Sepulchers of King David, and other Kings of Juda; there stood also the House
of David, which yet retains the Name of David's Tower. Upon Mount Moriah are
yet to be seen some remainders of Mello. Above all, we must call to mind the
most Excellent and Beautiful Temple of King Solomon, upon which One Hundred and
Fifty Thousand Men Wrought Seven Years continually, till it was Finished. The
Glory and Magnificency thereof you may Read in the Scripture. The Temple of the
Sepulcher at the first Building was highly Reverenced by the Christians of
those parts, and even until this Day it is much resorted to, both by Pilgrims
from all parts of the Romish Church, and also by diverse Gentlemen of the
Reformed Churches; partly for Curiosity, and partly for Antiquity of the place.
It is Farmed from the Turk, and kept by the Popes Creatures; whosoever is
admitted to the sight of this Sepulcher, pays Nine Crowns to the Turkish
Officers: so that this Tribute is worth to the Grand Seignior, Eight Thousand
Duccats Yearly.

And thus much briefly for the Description of the Holy Land, or Land of Promise.

A JOURNEY TO JERUSALEM.
Aleppo.
Honored Sir,
THese serve to Accompany an Account of my Journey to the Holy Land, for which
I might refer you to others, who have given a most exact Relation of that
Pilgrimage, yet according to your desires, I present you with this my
Description.

TUesday May 3. 1669. we set Sail from Scanderoon, with a N. E. wind on the
Margaret, Tho. Middleton Commander, being fourteen English Men, (of the Factory
of Aleppo) in Company; but being forced to return three times, by contrary
Winds, by May 10. we arrived at Trippoly, whose Port is guarded with six small
Castles, near the Sea, and one great Castle upon the Land; and is defended from
Tempests, on the West with Islands, and on the East, with a Cape of Land; so
that none but a North wind can be prejudicial to Ships in this Port: the Ground
is stony, which forced the Captains to buoy up their Cables, the ships riding
in six or seven Fathom Water.

The Town is about a mile from the Marine, situated upon the shelf of a Hill,
and has one good Castle for its defense; the Town is ruinate, and there were
few People to be seen, at that time, it being the time of making white Silk,
most of the People being in their Gardens.

May Thirteen, after three days Treatment by the Consul (for English, French
and Dutch) with extraordinary Civility; about four of the clock in the
afternoon, we set forward for Mount Lebanon, and two hours Riding from
Trippoly, we pitched our Tent at the Village Coffersinue; the Inhabitants are
Christians, and live in houses made of Reeds, and Covered with Bushes; and the
Rode to this Village, is very good and pleasant, passing to it, through a
Forest of Olive Trees; and in the Valleys, are Gardens of Mulberries, with
which they feed their Silkworms.

Friday May fourteenth, we departed from Coffersinue, about four of the clock
in the morning, passing in a good Rode, and through Plains sowed with Wheat:
about six of the Clock, we passed over several Mountains resembling Marble, if
not really so; from which we had a very good Prospect of the fruitfulness of
the Valleys: between these Mountains, upon the ascent of an Hill, we came to a
Fountain where we break-fasted; at seven of the clock we rose from the
Fountain, and having passed a very dangerous ragged Mountain, about nine of the
Clock we came to Eden, a small Village, and extraordinary pleasantly seated,
being surrounded with Mulberries, Walnuts, and other sorts of Trees; Walnut
especially we found very common on this Mount: we went to the Bishops House, a
most miserable ruinated Cottage, where the Bishop coming to bid us welcome,
appeared more like a Dunghil-raker then a Bishop. We enquired whence this
Village had its name, the Maronites (which generally inhabit the Mountains)
say, this was the place where Adam committed the sin of Eating the Forbidden
Fruit; but the Bishop told us, it was in Heaven, where there were three Trees,
Adam being forbidden to eat of one of them which wa the Fig Tree: but having
eaten, he fell from Heavan, and fell among the Cedars (which are some two hours
riding from the Bishops house), and there he began to till the Ground. But the
Bishop being very Ignorant of these things, we forbear to enquire farther. The
Bishops have great respect showed them, every one Kissing his Hand on their
Knees bareheaded: in his House he has a ruinate Church, with an Altar in it;
and a little beyond his house, is a little Chapel, near the head of the
Rivolet that feeds his house with water, where we found many men with Frank
names, which had continued there from the Year 1611.

Midday coming, the Bishop made what Preparation his house would afford for
Dinner, killing two Kids, and a Goat, and giving us the best Wine the Mountain
did afford, being a well relished Red and White Wine.

Night coming, after Supper, we kissed his Hand; and next morning, we being now
but twelve in Company, went to take our leave of him, and made him a present of
Livers, besides something to the servants, as is usual for Pilgrims that take
this Voyage; two of our Company waiting our return at Trippoly.

Saturday May the fifteenth, about five a Clock in the morning, we rose from
thence, and about eight of the Clock we came to the Cedars; all that remain of
them, being in a very small compass: We spent some time in cutting sticks, and
setting our Names on the great Trees.

At this place there came to us the Captain of a Village, called Upshara, an
hours riding from the Caedars. In our way, as we returned; he envited us to
Dinner at his Village, which we accepted of, and after dinner made him a
Present; This man is a Maronite, and takes Caffar or Toll of the Turks, which
pass that way with their Sheep and Oxen; he has a hundred Soldiers under his
Command, who are all Christians.

About two a clock we mounted, and after three hours riding, we came to a
mighty deep Descent, winding in and out, which is the way to the Patriark of
the Maronites house, called Caunibone; it is a very good Convent, and lies
under the Rocks, they have a Bell in the Church as in Europe, and go to their
Devotions Morning and Evening: After we had kissed the Patriarks hand, we
demanded what was to be seen, and the Druggerman carried us to see St. Marene's
Grot, of whom they recount this Story.

That a Venetian, in the time that the Franks had the Country, came with his
wife and and one daughter to live there; and after some years, his Wife dying,
he was resolved to go into the Covent and live a religious life, and would
therefore have his Daughter to leave him; but his persuasions could not prevail
with her; but rather than leave her Father, she would put on man's Apparel, and
live a devoted life with him also; which at last (though unwilling) he assented
to (she being young and handsome;) there they lived very strictly for several
years; afterward her Father dyed: And the lay Brothers and Fathers going out,
as usually, to Till the ground; She seldom went with them, the Chief of the
Convent keeping her at home (being much taken with such a handsome young man as
he thought) whereupon they began to grumble, that St. Marrene did not go with
them; so that at last, to satisfy the Fratres, he was sent out to work among
them near the Village Tursa: presently after, one of the young Virgins of that
Village proving with Child, she came to the Convent, and laid it to the charge
of St. Marrena; who was thereupon presently excommunicated, and lived a
Religious life in the Grot near the Convent, for the space of 7 years; and
being then again admitted into the Covent, and still continuing to live a very
strict Life, he at length dyed; and the Fathers coming according to their
Custom, to Anoint the Body, found that he was a Woman; whereupon they began to
Cross themselves, and to beg Pardon for Excommunicating her; and have built an
Altar in the Grot, and call it by the Name of St. Marrena; as they have also in
several Grots thereabouts, in remembrance of the Religious Relics of those
that dwelt therein; and when they carry any body to see them, they presently
fall down to Prayers.

About a League from the Convent, are two Frenchmen that live a Hermits life,
having Bread and Wine allowed them by the Patriark: Night coming on, we went
to Supper with the Patriark, the Bishop of Aleppo, and two other Bishops, they
having provided what the Place afforded; At Supper they brought out a great
Glass, which held near two Quarts, with which the Old Man soon made himself
merry, it being their Custom to drink freely; He telling us, that that Glass
had belonged to the Convent more than one hundred Years, and that the Turks
coming once to Ransack the Convent, seeing this Glass, told one of the Fratres,
if he could drink off that full of pure Wine, he would save the Convent; which
one of them doing, the Turks went away admiring what sort of People they were.

May sixteen, We took our leave of the Patriark, and presented him with some
Livers, as also to the poor Frasres, and other People that belonged to the
Convent, and so took our Journey to Trippoly, having had a fair review of those
Mountains, and the Country adjacent, which is overspread with many fair
Villages, and has many fruitful Vallyes sown with Corn, and great quantity of
Mulberry Gardens; it being the general employment of the Inhabitants to make
Silk.

We Return to Trippoly to the Consuls House that Night, where after two days
repose, and having been extraordinary well Treated, we took our leave of the
Consul.

May, eighteen, about midnight, we set sail for Joppa, with a good Wind; in the
Morning we came in sight of Cape-Blanco, where the wind proving contrary, we
were forced to beat up and down for two days, before we could weather the Cape
the wind coming good, we weatherd the Cape, and came in sight of Cape-Carmel,
which two Capes make the Bay of Aerica, on which there is a Convent of white
Friars, and there they showed us Elishas Tomb. And three or four hours Sail
further, we came in sight of Cesarea, now Ruinate, and inhabited by a Company
of Savage Arabs.

May twenty three, we Arrived at Joppa, which has no harbor to defend Ships
from Storms, but has very good ground to Anchor in, about ten Fathom Water: It
is a poor Town, and has one Castle to defend those ships that come in close to
the Shore; the chief Trade thereof, is Potashes for Soap, and a few Cottons,
and Cotton-Yarn, which the Franks bring from thence.

May twenty four, We Arrived at Ramah, which is a pleasant Village; the great
Trade of the Inhabitants is in Fillado's; the People are poor, and the
livelihood of the Women is to Spin that Commodity: We were Treated there at the
Convent, till a Messenger was dispatched to the Convent at Jerusalem, for our
Admittance to pass thither, because of some extravagant Stories that flew
abroad, of the Plague raging in the place from whence we came: our messenger
returned back that night.

May the twenty fifth, in the morning, we mounted to take our Journey for
Jerusalem, and baited at St. Jeroms Church about twelve of the Clock, to Eat
what small provisions we had with us: and the heat of the Day being passed, we
proceeded on our Journey; and about four of the Clock in the afternoon we
Arrived at Jerusalem, at Joppa Gate; where we tarried till the Druggerman of
the Convent went to the Caddy for License for us to enter the City; which
having obtained, and delivering up our Swords, and what other Arms we had, to
be carried to the Convent; we entered the City on Foot, and were conducted by
the Durggerman to the Latins Convent, with two or three Fathers Accompanying
us; we sound them at their Devotions, and afterward we all went into the
Father Guardians Chamber, who embraced us, and bid us welcome; We were carried
to our Lodgings, and the Father Procurator came to us, and passed a Complement
on us, bringing two or three bottles of the best Wine, and desiring us to call
for what we wanted; this was our first Entertainment.

But I should have given you an Account that our Druggerman, Mallinis Salley by
name, who conducted us from Joppa, through the Mountains up to Jerusalem, was
formerly a Robber himself, and could therefore the better carry us through the
Arabs, who molest those Mountains and live all upon Purchase; he was a Greek
by Nation and Religion.

Now to our further Entertainment at Jerusalem; the next morning Father Tomaso,
a Laybrother, one mighty serious, and Religious in their way, came to our
Chamber with Milk, Wine and Fruit, (with a Blessing in his Mouth) the season
being very hot: and about twelve of the Clock we went to Dinner, two or three
Lay Brothers attending at the Hall door, with a Basin and Ewer for us to wash;
and then entering the Hall, the Fathers stood all on one side near one another,
saying Grace in Latin, and then singing the Lords Prayer altogether; and
afterward bowing toward the Picture of our Savior at Supper with his Apostles,
which is placed over the Guardians Head, adorned with Silver Crosses about it,
etc.

The Guardian has his Table alone in the middle of the Room, and two long
Tables stand of each side, one for the Pilgrims, and the other for the Fathers;
after they had kissed the ground, we all sat down, and had every one his
alotment brought in a little dish, of which we never wanted three or four
Courses of several sorts of Meat: our Wine, Water, and Fruit, was set ready for
us; the Wine was about a Quart, the Water something less, which was the
allowance of two men, and had two Glasses belonging to it: about the middle of
Dinner, the Frater came, and changed our Water, that it might drink the fresher.

Dinner being ended, the Father -- Guardian knocks, and the Fraters rise and
kneel with their Faces toward the Picture of our Savior with his Disciples at
Supper, and mumbling something to themselves, they kiss the ground, and then
begin to take away; one taking away the Dishes, another the Knives, every one
having his appointment, and then give Thanks in the same manner as before
Dinner; then washing at the door, they go into the Church to Prayer, for a
quarter of an hour; this they do daily, rising always early, and in the Night
also, to go to Mass.

At this time there were two or three Christians come from Bethlehem, whose art
is to make the Figure of our Saviors Sepulcher, or what Holy Story you please,
upon your Arm; they make it of a blew color, and it is done by the continual
pricking of your Arm with Needles; they began presently to go to work on some
of us, and having presented us the Patterns of abundance of Prints, every one
took his Fancy.

The next day, May twenty seven, we all agreed to go into the Temple, and
about four a Clock in the afternoon we went: There are about ten or twelve
Fathers that live there continually, and have their Church there: The door is
sealed with the Caddys Seal, and when any man goes in, he pays fourteen Livers;
we being entered the Temple, the Fathers came and Saluted us, and conducted us
to their Lodgings; where after we had been about an hour, they prepared to go
in Procession to all the holy places, presenting us every one a Book of Holy
Songs, for every place in Latin.

And so we set out, the Fathers being dressed in white Surplices; and the Chief
among them with Cloth of Silver over his Surplice, with two more dressed in the
like Garb to lead him: there was a great Silver Cross carried before him, with
the Picture of our Savior Crucified upon it, and two men going on each side of
it, with Incense Pots, to persume every Holy Place, that we came to. And so we
went to these places following:

1 To the Pillar to which our Savior was bound when he was scourged.

2 To the Prison, wherein our Savior was put.

3 To the place where the Soldiers divided our Saviors Garments.

4 The place where St. Hellena found our Saviors Cross.

5 The Pillar to which our Savior was bound when he was Crowned with Thorns.

6 To Mount Galvary, where he was Crucified.

7 The place where our Savior was Nailed to the Cross.

8 To the place where he was Anointed.

9 To the Sepulcher of Christ.

10 To the place where our Savior appeared to Mary Magdalen in the shape of a
Gardener.

11 To the Chapel of the Virgin Mary, where our Savior first appeared to her
after his Resurrection.

I might give you a particular description of the Adornment of these Places;
but to be short, every one have Lamps burning at them; some are paved with
Marble, others are hung with Pictures; the place where our Savior was laid
down to be nailed to the Cross, is paved with Marble; the place where he was
Crucified, is paved with Marble also; but in the exact place where the Cross
stood, the Marble is covered over with Silver, with Silver Lamps, and wax
Candles continually burning; and our Savior Crucified standing on it: the
Sepulcher also is covered with Marble, with Silver Lamps continually burning on
it; so has the Anointing stone: you must go into the sepulcher barefoot, as
also on Mount Calvary.

Here are all sorts of Christians have their Churches: The Greeks have the
best, the Latins, the the Armenians, the Copty's, and the Syrians, have each of
them Churches here.

The Greeks and Latins are the two powerful Religions in the Temple, and with
great Sums of money, and the credit they have at Stambul or Constantinople,
they continually buy these Holy Places out of one another Hands; the other
Parties are Poor, and are therefore squeezed into a small part of the Temple;
The Latins that offered ten thousand Livers, for a piece of the Cross, which
the Greeks bought out of their hands.

These Religious People bear little respect one to another, speaking very
basely each of other.

After our Procession, we went to veiw all the places and Churches again; the
Greeks have a place in the middle of their Church, which they say, is the
middle of the World: they have another place by the Prison of Christ, with two
holes to put the Feet in: there is also a narrow Passage between two Pillars,
which is in imitation of the straightness of the Path to Heaven, which the
Greeks Creep through.

In the Church of the Syrians, is the intended Sepulcher of Joseph of
Arimathea, and Nicodemus: and near the Anointing Stone, is a Tomb, where
Godfrey, and Baldwin, Kings of Jerusalem, are Buried. And in the same place is
the Rent of the Rock, which begins above, near the place where our Savior was
Crucified; and in that Rent, they say Adams Head was found, when our Savior
gave up the Ghost. Thus having seen the Temple, we returned to the Convent.

May the twenty eight, we went out of the City at Damascus Gate, and turning on
the right Hand, we came to one of the Fish Ponds, belonging to the old City and
a quarter of a Mile further, You come to the Grot where Jeremiah Lived, when he
Wrote his Lamentations; on the left Hand in the entrance, is a Ledg in the
Rock, about a Story High, where they say Jeremiah Slept; and below over against
the Door, is a hole intended for his Sepulcher; and passing through a Ruinate
Door, you come into the Yard, where his Well is, being a very good Spring of
sweet Water; there you pay one Liver; afterward passing along the side of a
Mountain, that lies level with the City, a little beyond Jeremiahs Tomb, we
came to the Sepulcher of the Kings; the entrance into the first Room, was so
small and low, that we were forced to creep in, in which there were seven
Sepulchers cut out of the Rock: in the second Room, there were eight Sepulchers
more; and in the third Room twenty six more; and many more in several other
Rooms: One of the Rooms has a Door of Stone, which is Cut out of the Rock, and
shuts and opens as a Door with Hinges; this Door belongs to the Room, wherein
Jehosaphat was Buried, his Coffin is of Stone with a Cover to it, and is very
neatly Wrote on the sides with Flowers, as several of them are also in the
first Room, but they know not what Kings they are; there is also one other
Chamber into which we crept; so that there are in all, forty two Burying-Places
under ground, to which there is but one door to enter, all adorned with
Admirable Workmanship; which I being unskilled in, am unfit to express in
proper Terms: and so we return to the Convent, entering the City at the same
Gate.

May the Twenty-ninth, we reposed, some of our Company being a Marking.

May Thirty, we took Horse to go for Bethlehem, and went out at the West-Gate
called Joppa-Gate, and turning on the left hand, and taking the lower Path, we
passed along the Road that the Virgin Mary brought our Savior, when She came
to offer him at the Temple; and half a mile from the City is the place where
the Tree Tirabintha grew, which the Virgin Mary sat under to give him Suck; but
the Tree being Cut down, the place is encompassed with a Wall.

On the left hand you see David's House, where he was when he spied Bathsheba
Washing her self; on the right Hand a little out of the Road, is old Simeons
House and Elias House; and a quarter of a Mile further you come to a Well,
where the Wise Men first saw the Star; a little further is the ground where the
Reapers were at work, when Habbakuk coming to bring them Meat, the Angel took
him up by the hair of the Head, and carried into Babylon to Daniel in the Lions
Den: afterward we saw Jacobs House; and a hill like a Sugar Loaf: where the
Franks remained forty Years, after they were driven out of Jerusalem; next is a
Monastery of Monks of the order of St. Tavola Paula Romana, who when they dye,
are Buried at the Convent in Bethlehem.

A Mile further is the place where the Angels appeared to the Sheppards, and
said, Gloria in excelsis, etc. when our Savior was Born, where there has been
a Convent; but now there only remains an Arched Vault, where we paid Money to
the Arabs; who when they espy any Franks going thither, Ride post before to
take Possession of the place, and get something from them; A quarter of a Mile
from hence, in the way to Solomon's Cisterns, is the Village of the Shephards,
on the backpart whereof is a Well, of which they say, the Virgin Mary defired
to Drink; but the Inhabitants denying to draw her any Water, it presently
Overflowed for her to Drink: a little way from this Village, is Joseph's House;
and a little after, we came to Solomon's Garden lying shelving: At the bottom of
them is the Road from Gran Cairo, and round the Top passes the Aqueduct, which
feeds Jerusalem with Water; (from thence we saw Tekoa standing on a high Hill)
the water comes from the Fountains which feed Solomon's Cisterns; passing a Mile
along by the Aqueduct, we came to Solomon's Cisterns, which are Three; the first
had no Water in it, and might be about two hundred and fifty Yards long, and
sixty Yards broad, and of a great depth; the second, it had little Water, and
was something less in Compass; the third was full of Water and as big as the
first: they run one into another, and are fed by the spring that feeds the City.

The Fathers say, that they were made to Swim in, they being built with steps
for a Man to go down, but they seem rather to be intended for a reserve of
Water for the City or the Gardens, they having passage to both; near the
Gardens, there is an ill-contrived Castle, where a few Villains inhabit, to
whom we paid one Liver per Man for leave to go into the Grot; where the
Springs are that feed the City, and the Cisterns; the Grot is large, and has
three Springs in it, and a large passage cut through the Rock, toward the
Cisterns, passable by a Man, but we went not to the end of it.

We mounted our Horses to proceed on our Journey, leaving the Castle on the
Right Hand, and at a distance we saw St. Georges Church, where the Fathers say,
the Chains remain wherewith St. George was bound, which will presently cure a
Madman if he bound therewith.

After an hour and a halfes Riding, we came near to Bethlehem, where passing
through a narrow Lane, the Guard consisting of four or five Musketeers,
received five Livers of every one of us, and our Druggerman that went with us,
received three: and arriving at the Convent, we paid one for our entrance; and
after our being welcomed by the Fathers, we took our repose till five of the
Clock in the Evening; and then we prepared to go in Procession to the Holy
Places in the same manner as we did at the Temple in Jerusalem; the Places we
Visited were these:

1 The Place where our Savior was Born.

2 The Tomb of St. Joseph to whom the Virgin Mary was espoused.

3 St. Innocents Tomb.

4 The place where St. Jerome lived, when he translated the Bible into Latin.

5 St. Jeroms Praying place.

6 St Jeroms Tomb.

7 St Paul's Tomb.

8 St. Eustachias her Danghter.

9 The Sepulcher of St. Eusebius, Abbot of Bethlehem.

10 We return to the Chapel of St Catherena, which they say was built by St.
Panla.

Next is the great Church without the Convent, which has forty eight Pillars
of Marble about three Yards long, all in one Piece.

At Evening we went to visit the place of our Saviors Birth, which formerly
belonged to the Latins, till the Greeks bought it out of their Hands; so that
now the Latins, when they go their Procession, Pray at that Door by which they
formerly entered.

The Precipior has two Doors, one exactly over against the other, which are
well Lined with Carved Iron, and strengthed with Iron Spikes: We went in
Barefoot, on the Right hand in the entrance, is the place they say where our
Savior was Born, which is Lined with Marble; and in the middle of the Room
there is a little place covered with Silver, by which they set a Dish to
receive your Charity: On the left Hand is the Manger where the Virgin Mary laid
our Savior; which is Lined with Marble; and at the end of the Manger on the
Right Hand, is the Picture of St. Jerome naturally in the Marble, which the
Fathers esteem as a Miracle.

Over against this Manger, is the place where the three Wise Men stood, when
they came to Worship our Savior: and at the further end of this place in a
corner, is a hole made up up with Marble, wherein they say, the Virgin Mary put
the Water, when she had washed her hands: Over which a Lamp Burns continually:
and there are also a great many Lamps burning in the other Places. Over this
Precipio, in the great Church, is the Altar of Circumcision, where our Savior
was Circumcised.

We having seen what was Rare at Bethlem, May thirty One, early in the Morning,
we Rose to proceed in our Journey, in which we saw these Places following.

1 The Grot where the Virgin Mary hid her self, when she was Warned to Fly into
Egypt, and her Milk running out of her Breasts there, made the Earth turn White;
which Earth the Catholics do very much esteem.

2 David's Cisterns.

3 The Grot wherein the Virgin Mary and Joseph lived, before they could get a
House.

4 The Tomb of Rachel, Jacobs Wife, which the Turks do also much esteem.

5 The Field of Sennacharib, where the Angel of the Lord flew in one Night, One
hundred eighty 5000. of the Syrians; in this place is a Village, which is
called Botechelle, where the Fathers affirm, no Turk can live.

6 The place where the Pillars of the Convent of Ramath were built.

7 The Vinyard from whence the Spies of the Land of Canaan took the Cluster of
Grapes, to show the fruitfulness of the Land; there is also the Fountain, where
Philip Baptized the Queen of Sheba's Eunuch.

9 The Deserts of John Baptist; and after an hours Riding, we came to John
Baptists Fountain, where was his Chamber; and a Rock, wherein there was a place
cut out like a bench for his Bed; to break off any bit of this Rock, is Worthy
excommunication.

10 Zacharias House, where the Virgin Mary came to salute her Cousen Elizabeth;
for the Angel that told her she should conceive, told her also, that her Cousen
was with Child; and upon her Salutation, the Child leaped in the Womb: Near
this House is a Fountain with two Cisterns which is called Elizabeth's Fountain.

11 There is a Stone where John Baptist Preached, which the Fathers say, the
Turks have endeavored to break in pieces but could not.

12 The place where John Baptist was Born, now a Stable; but formerly a Church,
where the Fathers upon John Baptists day carry their Organs thither, and Adorn
the Place for their Prayers.

13 The Tombs of the Maccabees, which we saw at a distance, and being ruinated,
appear as so many Arches.

14 We passed by a Village, where the Men are all Turks, and the Women
Christians; for the People being poor, the Turks were very severe with them for
their Harach; who not being able to pay all at once, turned Turks, etc.

15 We came to the Mountain Crupil, where part of the Wood whereof our Saviors
Cross was made, was cut down, and over the place where they say the Tree stood,
from which it was cut, there is a stately Church, which is in the Possession of
the Greeks; the just place where the Tree grew is inlayd with Silver, by which
they set a Dish for your Charity: the Flore of this Church is well Wrought with
Mosaic Work, and painted with Scripture Stories; and instead of a Bell, they
knock upon a board, that hangs up, which sounds somewhat like a Bell.

And now we go forward to the Convent at Jerusalem, passing by Mount Grhon,
where Solomon was Anointed King; and about night we came to our Lodgings,
having made two days journey to see the Holy Places, and Traverse the Mountains
of Judea; we slept very well that night, but still we have more Pilgrimages.

June 1. We lay still to recover our selves of our Bethlem Journey, but Father
Tomasa out of his Zeal, is very importunate with us to be walking to see other
places, which is very Meritorious in the Roman Church; and had we been of their
Religion, it had been impossible to have mist Heaven; for we had received
indulgences for all our Lives; which fancy I wish does not deceive too many.

June the second, We began to search for the Holy places, which are these
following.

1 The Immolation of Isaac near the Temple, called Mount Morea, which place is
inlay'd with Silver, and a dish set by for your Offering.

Secondly, Peter's Prison, still made a Prison by the Turks: at the further end
of which, is a hole in the Wall, where they say the Chain was fastened, with
which St. Peter was Chained; little remembering, how often Jerusalem has been
destroyed, and the Stones of that Old Wall, are now probably as far under
Ground, as these are above.

Thirdly, The Monastery of the Knights of Malta; a very fair building, one Room
whereof has several Partitions for Beds, with a hole in the middle, that if
any of them are Sick or Fluxitive, they are laid there; to which the Water,
(being Bad) and the Air unwholesome, does very much incline them.

Fourthly, Solomon's Temple; which, if any Christian go into, or but up the
stairs, he must Turn Turk, or be burnt: The Rarity of which I shall give you an
Account of, when I come to a Prospect.

Fifthly, St. Hellena's Hospital, where there are seven great Caldrons, in
which she used to have Provisions dressed for the Poor, where we pay one Liver
for entrance.

Sixthly, the Judgment Gate, at which our Savior was brought in: and some
distance from the Gate, is the place where he was Condemned.

Seventhly, The Dolorous Way, which is the way that Christ went, when he went
to be Crucified; and in the way is the House of St. Veronica, who gave our
Savior a Napkin to wipe his Face, as he passed by: there is also Lazarus's
House, and the House of the Rich Glutton; and the place where our Savior
Fainted as they say, and Simon took up the Cross; and near that, is the Church,
where the Virgin Mary stood to see him pass by, and Swounding with Grief; now
called the Virgin Mary's Church.

Eighthly, Herod's Palace, now ruinated, and is now the Bassha's Seraglio; in one
Room is the place where they Clothed our Savior with Purple.

Ninethly, Pilates House, where they show the place, where our Savior was
Crowned with Thorns, and the Pillar to which he was bound, which was brought
from thence, and put into the Temple: next, we enter the Hall, where Pilate
Washed his Hands, and declared himself Innocent of our Saviors Blood: out of
which place we had a fair Prospect of Solomon's Temple; which is built within
the middle of a spacious Yard very well Paved; there are several Arches, good
Walks, and Buildings about it: the Temple is Wrought with Mosaic Work, and by
the Turks report, is very Rich within, it being one of their Mosques; and
though they have a half Moon upon all their Temples or Mosques, yet this only
has a Cross through the middle: The Fathers reporting it would not stand till
the Cross was made.

Tenthly, The place where Christ was Scourged, which is now a Shop for Linen
Cloth; but the Pillar to which our Savior was bound, is brought from thence,
and put into the Temple.

Eleventhly, The House of Annas, where our Savior being carried along with
great Violence down a steep place, to prevent falling, he laid hold of the
corner of a Wall, where there is a place, in one of the Stones, fit for a Man's
Hand, which the Fathers account a great Miracle.

Twelfthly, Simon the Pharisees House, where there is a Stone, with the print
of a Foot, which they say our Savior made, when he stood to pardon Mary
Magdalen her Sins: The Fathers say, the Turks have endeavored several times to
remove this Stone, but still it comes into the same place again.

Thirteenth, The House of Joakim, and Anna: a fair high Building; and down in
an under Room, cut out of the Rock, is the place where they say, The Virgin
Mary was Born.

Fourteenth, The Pool of Bethesda, where the Sick lay to be healed; the Angel
coming Yearly to Trouble the Water, and he that entered in first, was healed;
but it is now dry, and half filled with Earth.

Fifteenth, St. Stephens Gate, and a little out of the City, is the place where
Stephen was Stoned: and the Fathers would have you to fancy, that there is the
print of his Hands, Face, and Knees, when he fell down.

Sixteenth, The Valley of Jehosophat, which is at the bottom of the Hill,
between the the Mountain on which Jerusalem stands, and Mount Olivet.

Seventeenth, The Place where the Virgin Mary is Buried; where going down a
great many stone steps, you come into a large Vault, where all the Christians
have their Altars apart, all being of several Opinions, and the Turks, and
Christians, do both burn Lamps, over her Grave; here we pay One Liver for
entrance; and Forty eight Stone Steps upward, is Joseph's Tomb; and over against
that, are the Tombs of Joakim and Anna.

Eighteenth, The place where Christ sweat Blood, and the Angel appeared to
Comfort him, is near the bottom of Mount Olivet.

Nineteenth, The Place where our Savior Prayed, that This Cup might pass from
him; and near that place, is the Rock on which his Disciples sat, when he went
to Prayer, between which two places he was taken, it is now bordering on the
Garden of Gethsemena, but might formerly have been part of the Garden, and is
on the Ascent of the Mount of Olivet; where the Multitude going to Carry our
Savior away, Peter smote off Malcus his Ear, in in the way to the City.

Twentyeth, The Place where they say the Virgin Mary Prayed for St. Stephen,
while he was Stoning.

Twenty first, The place where Christ Wept over Jerusalem; it is almost at the
Top of Mount Olivet.

Twenty second, The Place our Savior Ascended into Heaven, having as they say,
left the Print of his Foot on a Stone: it has now a Chapel built over it,
with fourteen Marble Pillars round it, it is at the top of Mount Olivet; and a
little way off, is the Place where the Men of Gallilee stood, when the Angel
asked them, Why stand ye Gazing up?

Twenty third, The Place is showed us, where the Angel told the Virgin, she
should be Raised in three Days.

Twenty fourth, Pelagius his Grot; from whence we saw Bethpage, where the Asses
Colt was tied.

Twenty fifth, The Tree under which our Savior stood, when he Preached the
Judgment Sermon.

Twenty sixth, The place where he made the Lords Prayer.

Twenty seventh, The Place where the Apostles made the Creed; being a Grot of
twelve Arches.

Twenty Eight, The Sepulchers of the Prophets, being Forty seven in Number, cut
out of the Rock; and entering in at a Door, we came into a large Grot, where
there were several places to cut out, fit to contain a Coffin: here we paid one
Liver.

Twenty Nineth, The Tree where Judas Hanged himself.

The Thirtyeth, The Sepulcher which Jehosophat intended for himself; but being
a King, he was buried in the Sepulcher, (...) the Kings.

Thirty One, Absoloms Pillar or Sepulcher, which is cut out of the Rock, and
about the bigness of a small Chamber, with Pillars cut out round about; so that
it stands like a Room built for some single Person: it is of a good Height, and
has some Carving about it.

Thirty Two, They say hereby is the Print of Christ's Feet; for when he was
Carried to Jerusalem, he stopped at the Brook Cedron, and desired to Drink:
This Brook is now but a small Channel, and had no Water in it, when we were
there; but in the Winter time, the Water comes down from the Hills, and makes a
small Current.

Thirty Three, Next is the Place where Saint James hid himself three Days, and
three Nights; it is a place cut out of the Rock, which must needs have been
made for a dwelling place; near this is the Sepulcher of Zacharias the Son of
Barachias, cut out of the Rock.

Thirty four, On the side of the Hill, on which Solomon Worshipped Molock, are
Chambers cut out of the Rock, which they say was the place, wherein the Three
Hundred Wives, and One Thousand Concubines of Solomon were kept.

Thirty Five, The Fountain of the Virgin Mary, which you go down to by Stone
Steps; the Water whereof is so Sweet, that were a Man blindfolded, he could not
think it to be any thing but Milk and Water.

Thirty Six, The Place where the Prophet Isaiah was Sawn Asunder: his Sepulcher
is under a Rock near the same Place.

Thirty Seven, The Fountain of Siloa, by which is a Cistern, wherein formerly
the Pilgrims used to Wash, but it is now Ruined, and filled with Stones and
Mud, yet it is Water still accounted good for the Eyesight; and near this is
Golgotha.

Thirty Eight, And near this Place, in a bottom, is a Well, wherein they say
Nehemiah hid the Holy Fire, when the Children of Jsrael were carried Captive;
and when they returned Forty Years after, they say they found the same Fire in
the Well.

Thirty Nine, Ascending up the Mount, we came to the Tombs of Annas and Caiphas.

Forty, And near it is the Place where the Apostles hid themselves; where
entering a straight passage, we came into a Room under Ground, out of which
there go several holes, wherein they say, the Apostles Lay.

Forty One, We then came to Aceldama, a Grot, which is now held by the
Armenians for a Burying Place: it is said, the Earth thereof, will consume the
Body of a Man, in Forty Eight Hours: there are several Vents on the Top to let
out the smell: We went down under a Rock, to a place where we could look into
it, and we there saw the form of a Man entire, they being only laid in, but not
Covered with Earth.

Forty Second, We came to the Fountain of Bersheba, which is at the bottom of
Mount Sion, in which there is now but little Water, we being forced to tarry a
quarter of an hour for one Draught.

Having now seen all that was Remarkable in these Parts, we made toward the
Convent, having got a great deal of Credit with Father Tomasa; that we should
be such Zealous Pilgrims, as to walk from five a Clock in the Morning till
Midday; but he to encourage us, would still be foremost; and told us always,
there was some place more worth our seeing, then any we had seen before: and
though he was an old man, and the Weather hot, yet at the going up of a Hill,
he would run, that he might be foremost: and gave us all the good Words that
could be, to encourage us Protestants, who never hoped or thought, that we
Merited any thing by it: but at length we came to the Convent again, and being
well weary, every one retired to his Lodings.

June Third, we repose at the Convent; after Dinner, one the Fathers came and
told us, that the Father Guardian would wash our Feet; which Honor we
accounted too great for us, and desired to be excused* but we were forced to
comply with the Orders of the Convent; The Basin, which was as big as a Tub,
was placed by a Chair; there were Rose-Leaves and Herbs put into the Water; the
Fathers all stood in a Row, Singing Godly Hymns; we sat down, and the Father
Guardian wrapped a Towel about our Knees, to keep our Cloths from Water; then
they began to scrub our Legs and Feet, (being Masters of their Art) there were
two Fratres attending, one on one Leg, and another on the other; having first
dried the left Foot, the Frater kisses it, and puts on our Slipper; then he
dryes the Right Foot, and wraps the Towel about the Sole of the Foot, and
setting it on his Knee, and covers the Toes with his Hand, and then come all
the Fratres, and Kisses it; this being done, he gives us a little Candle, in
taking of which, we kiss his Hand, and so rise and stand by, till all our
Company are Washed in like manner. Then went we in Procession, round their
Chapel, they saying several Prayers, at their three Altars, and so we return
to our Chambers.

June the Fourth, After Dinner, we went into the Kitchen, where we found all
the Fathers, with Napkins before them, washing the Dishes, every one taking his
part, even to the Father Guardian himself; some were cleaning some handing
away; but all the while, with one Consent, they say some Prayer; it seeming to
be their endeavor, that all that they do, may be done to the Glory of God;
this being done, they go all to the Chapel to Prayers, and you shall never
see the Chapel, without some of them at Prayers; yea, and two or three times
in the Night they Rise to Prayers.

On Whitsunday, the Chapel was Adorned something Extraordinarily, and there
was a very Rich Canopy, set on the Right Hand of the high Altar, for the Father
Guardian to sit under; when the Prayers began, the Father Guardian came into
the Chapel, and sat under this Canopy: There were three or four Fathers
Dressed in Cloth of Silver, much after the manner of a Herald; two whereof attend
on each side of the Guardian, and two stand over against him.

Then they began to dress the Father Guardian in his Festival Robes, and having
read two or three Lines, they put a piece of Linen laced about this Neck, and
then his Surplice, Reading still between every Robe that was put on. Then they
cover him with a Garment of Rich Satin, and Cloth of Silver; the two that
stand over against him, bowing at some words. His body being thus dressed, the
two Fathers, put a Myter upon his head, doing it with all the Respect
Imaginable; after a short Prayer, they take the Father- Guardian by the hand,
and lead him to the Altar, he standing in the middle of the four Fathers,
adorned as aforesaid; the other Fathers have their Surplices on, and the Organs
go; then making a short Prayer at the Altar, they lead the Guardian to his place
again; and after a little reading, they take off his Myter, and he sits bare
till the Prayer be done: then they put on another Myter; the first was of Cloth
of Silver, and the second was of Cloth of Gold, set full of Rubies, and
Diamonds, and other sorts of Stones; they afterward took off that also, and put
on a third Myter, which was of Cloth of Gold, something differing in shape,
from the others.

The Guardian being led, to and from the Altar, a great while, at length, when
they came to read that place, where the Holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles,
assembled together, there was a Father upon the Terrass, appointed to throw
down a white Pidgeon dressed up with Ribbons, in imitation of the Holy Ghost, but
he met with some difficulty; for the window was so fast shut that he could not
open it a great while, so that we had like to have gone away without their Holy
Ghost: but this difficulty being overcome, he made the Dove descend among us;
which being done, after a Prayer, they began to undress the Father Guardian
again, reading all the while his Robes were taking off; and so that days
service was done.

Now we began to think of going to the Dead Seas, and the River Jordan, we
therefore demanded what our expense would be, the Fathers say, twenty five
Livers, but we all agreed not to give above twenty; The Fathers sent our
resolution to the Bassa, and he returned us this answer, That if we would go,
we should pay twenty two Livers; and if we would not, he would have ten Livers
a man; we thinking our selves under his command, and not willing to embroyl the
Convent, for they are to bare all damages, as they have done for several; but
thanks be to God, none happened in our time.

We all resolved to go, except Mr. T. H. and one Englishman more, and a
Dutchman, not thinking the Bashaw had been in earnest; but because they went
not, they were forced to pay ten Livers for nothing; we then came to Bethany,
now a small Village, where entering into a Grot under ground, we saw a Tomb,
from whence they say our Savior raised Lazarus, after he had been dead so many
days; here we had the Bashaws guard to wait upon us, for fear of the Arabs,
who are on the other side Jordan in the land of Moab; who do often make
incursions, and have sharp disputes, at the end of the Lance, with those that
live on this side, in the land of Promise; The Bashaw pretended, that he must
send fifty men with us, but it proved but fourteen or sixteen,

Having reposed a little on the ground, about nine of the clock at night, we
mounted our Horses, and passing through the turning and winding of the
Mountains, we came in the Morning to the foot of the Quarantine Mountain, where
we dismounted; and making the cold earth our bed, we slept two or three hours,
having our horses made fast to our hands, and the Sun rising, we rose also, and
walked to Elisha's Fountain, a stones throw off; and before the Sun was too
hot, we Mounted our Horses at the foot of the Mountain, and so began to ascend,
it being very steep; having ascended a great height, we came to the place where
they say, our Savior slept, when he Fasted Forty days; and from that the
Mountain received its name; this place is near the height of the Mountain, but
the passage to the top, is Known only to the Arabs; here is a Church over this
place, where some Fathers have lived, till they were Murdered by the Arabs.

Below this place are several Cisterns of water, and several Frontispeices of
Chapels, but the passage to them is cut off; as we were going up, the thoughts
of the danger of descending, enters into our heads, and the Emperor of
Germanies Druggerman for these Country Languages, being extraordinary fearful,
got two Turks to conduct him down, and so we having all had a safe descent, we
rode cheerfully back to Elisha's Fountain, which was formerly bitter; but he
throwing in a handful of salt, the waters became sweet.

Here we lay till Four a clock, and the heat of the Sun being over, we made for
Jericho, where we arrived about five, where there are now, only a few poor
Cottages: we pitched by Zacheus Tree, the Inhabitants are for the most part
Arabians, and some few Greeks: here the Captain of the Village came to welcome
our Bashaw and his people; he was mounted upon a Mare, valued at a Thousand
Livers, Mares being only in esteem among them; here we reposed under a rotten
hedge, till about four of the Clock next mourning; haing little pleasure in our
companions, the Gnats, and other stinging creatures.

We proceed for the River Jordan, where we arrived by daylight, and tarried
about an hour to swim in the River; the stream is strong, and rapid; and the
force of a man, can little more then resist it; it runs into the Dead Sea.

Our Guard were very hasty for us to be gone, being afraid their Enemies should
find them; therefore we all made ready, and set forward for the Dead Sea; about
two hours after in our way to the Sea, we passed through a most cursed barren
place, not having so much as a green herb or grass, and the face of the earth
was covered with Salt, and though it was dry, yet our Horses sunk up to the
Knees.

We come now to the Dead Sea, being about Seventy or Eighty Miles in Breadth,
and about Eighteen Over: There is no place Visible from whence the Water, which
comes into it, runs out again, except it be under the earth; neither does it
seem to Increase with the water of the River Jordan, and of sevaral other
waters that run into it: It was once a fruitful Valley, and compared for
delight, unto Paradise, and was called Pentapolis, of her five Cities, and was
afterward destroyed with fire from Heaven, and turned into this silthy Lake,
and barren desolation which does encompass it: and to try the virtue, that is
reported to be in the water, wherein they say, a man cannot sink; some of our
Company went into the Sea, and found it impossible to get their bodies under
water, yea could hardly keep their legs under; The water is sulphury, and the
extremity of the saltness is not to be expressed; when they came out of the
water, there was a perfect Oil upon their bodies.

Our Eyes being satisfied with Curiosities, and Rarities, we make what have we
can, back to Jerusalem: but I should have given you an Account, that the Ruins
of one of the Cities, that were destoryed for Sodomy, now lies good part out of
the water, and is supposed to be Zeboim.

Now the Sun gets strenght, and grows extraordinary hot, and by reflection on
the ground, makes the heat so violent, that our faces looked as if the skin
were flead off, by riding in the Sun, from Morning till four of the Clock in
the afternoon; but the Fathers being accustomed, to meet with tender-faced
Travelers, soon provided something to mitigate our pain, which was much
increased, by reason of the saltness of the water of the Dead Sea: this night
we took little pleasure in eating, but more in sleeping, having had but little
in this Voyage.

Having now visited all the places in the Holy Land, which Pilgrims usually do,
we prepare our selves for our return. June Ninth, we being resolved to set
forward in our Return; In the Morning the Father Guardian came to us, and gave
us his blessing, and sprinkled us with Holy Water, desiring us to excuse our
Bad Treatment, and that if at any time we had been distasted, we would pass it
over; but we Knew it was but a complement, for we had the Civilest
Entertainment imaginable, and very far from disgusting us; for there were none
of them, but were not only ready to be our servants, but our Slaves, yea, my
honest namesake, Father Tomaso, never ceased from Morning to Night, from
bringing us either Victuals or Drink, or asking us whether we wanted any thing;
and now for this his fourteen days service, we were no ways capable to
recompense him; for they would take no money, but for our Victuals, and for
some other small services; we therefore presented to the Convent, thirty Livers
apeice, and some that had servants presented more. The Father Procurator
receiving it, they entered all our names in a Book, and the sums we gave; the
Book where the names only were written, we had a view of, and took a Copy, of
all the Englishmens names that were in it, from the year One Thousand Five
Hundred Sixty One, to this day, being One Hundred Fifty Eight in number.

Now taking our leaves of the Fathers, they all showed a great deal of
affection to us, weeping, and expressing their desires, to enjoy our company
longer; and our desires were as much to be nearer home, that we might have an
Account of our Friends.

June the Fourth we departed, our Muletters having provided us Horses; and our
intentions were to take Emaus in our way, but night drawing on, we made St.
Jeroms Church our sleeping place; there were formerly Fathers lived in it, but
the Arabs came upon them in the night, and cut all their throats; The Church is
very well built, and has been adorned with Pictures upon the wall, of which
some remain to this day.

About too hours riding from Jerusalem, we passed over the brook, out of which
they say, David gathered the pebble stones, wherewith he slew Goliath.

June Fifth, we arrived at the Convent in Ramath, about ten of the Clock in the
Morning; where we tarried till about midnight, at which time there was a Ship
to depart, and some of us intended to embarque; the rest of us took a little
boat, about the bigness of a Gravesend Barge; we put our provisions of Bread
and Wine aboard, and so we put to Sea, keeping always near the shore, for fear
of a storm.

After three days sail, we arrived at Aerica, formerly called Ptolemais, we
always coming to Anchor at night; this place is famous for nothing but the
ruins, the Road being so bad, that all the Art Captains have, can but keep
their Cables together.

The Commodities in this place, are only Cottons, Potashes, and foam
Filletto's.

Two days after we arrived at Tripoly, where we made bold, at our old House;
the Consul receives us very gladly, and our design was, to depart next day, but
the Plague still raging at Aleppo, the Consul forced us to stay with him Twelve
or Fourteen days; all which time we were treated like Princes, and then by his
leave, we imbarqued on a Dutch Ship for Scanderoon; the rest of our Company
(whom we left at Aerica to go to see the of Gallilee) being arrived.

June Twenty Six, we arrived at Scanderoon, where some were dead, and others
dying, and one flying from another.

We tarried upon the Mount, and aboard the Ship for some time: and July 2d we
arrived at Aleppo, where there dyed at that time, Seventy or Eighty of a day of
the Plague.

And thus ended our Journey.

FINIS
Books Printed for, and Sold by N. Crouch, in Exchang Alley over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil.
THe sound hearted Christian, or a Treatise of soundness of heart, with several
others Sermons, by Will. Greenhil late Minister of Stepney, price 2. s.

The Freeness of the grace and love of God to believers discovered in several
Sermons, by William Bridge, late Minister at Yarmouth. price 1 s. 6. d.

The Penitent Murderer, being an exact Narrative of the life and death of
Nath. Butler, who became a Convert, after he had most cruelly Murdered John
Knight, price 8. d.

The Mystery of the Marriage Song, being an Exposition on the 45. Psalm, by
Willam Troughton Minister at Salisbury. price 2. s.

AIATIASIS, or the true way of Preserving the Blood in its Integrity, and
rectifying it when polluted, and degenerate; discovering the Errors of Dr.
Willis and Dr. Betts, by Georg Thomson. M.D. price 1. s. 6. d.

A Vindication of the Lord Bacon, and the Author, from the Insolent Garrulity
of Henry Stubbs, by Georg Thomson, M.D. price 6. d.

A Letter sent to Hen. Stubbs, wherein the Gallenical Method and Medicaments,
are offered to be proved destructive to Mankind, by G. Thomson, M. D. price 6.
d.

The Ladies Delight, or a rich Closet of choice Experiments and Curiosities;
Containing the Art of Preserving and Candying both Fruits and Flowrs; together
with the Exact Cook, or the Art of Dressing all sorts of Flesh, Fowl, and Fish:
by Hannah Woolley. To which is added; The Ladies Physical Closet, or Excellent
Receipts and rare Waters for beautifying the face and body. price 1. s. 6. d.

The Evil Tongue tried, and found guilty, or the hainousness and sinfulness of
a defaming and back biting Tongue, proving it to be a most prenicious and
grievous Plague to Mankind. By Stephen Ford, Minister of the Gospel in London.
Price 1 s. 6. d.

Jacobs Ladder, or the Devout Souls Ascension to Heaven, in Prayers,
Thanksgivings, and Praises, in four parts, viz.

1. Private Devotions for every Day in the Week.

2. Family Devotions for every day of the Week.

3. Occasional Devotions, for diverse Seasons, and Occasions.

4. Sacred Poems upon Select Subjects. Illustrated with Sculptures. By Joseph
Hall. B. D. Price 1 s.

De Cometis, or a Discourse of the Natures and Effects of Commets as they are
Phlosophically, Historically, and Astrologically considered; with a full
Account of the three last Comets or Blasing Stars, Visible to all Europe, and
what in a natural way of Judicature they portend: together with some
observations on the Nativity of the Grand Seignior; by John Gadbury, price 1 s.

Sighs for the Pitchers, and the Prisoners Plea, by Georg Withers, Price 1 s.

Poems upon diverse Emgerent Occasions, by James Howel, Esquire Price 1 s. 6 d.

Iter Boreale, with other Poems, by Rob. Wild, D. D.

The Knowledge of Christ indispensably required of all men that will be Saved,
proving Jesus Christ to be the true Messiah, by John Davenport. price 1 s.

Comfort for Beleivers against their Sins and Troubles, by Jo. Archer, sometimes
Min. at Alhollows Lumbardstreet, Price 1 s.

map of the Holy Land (near East) A Map of the HOLY LAND with the places
adjacent



