The Battle and Victory of K. William at The River Boyn in Ireland July 1. 1690


THE HISTORY OF THE KINGDOM OF Ireland, Being an Account of all the Battles,
Sieges and other considerable Transactions both Civil and Military, during the
late Wars there, till the entire Reduction of that Country by the Victorious
Arms of our most Gracious Sovereign, King William.

To which is prefixed, A Brief Relation of the Ancient Inhabitants, and first
Conquest of that Nation by King Henry II. and of all the remarkable Passages in
the Reign of every King to this time; Particularly the Horrid Rebellion and
Massacre in 1641. With the Popish and Arbitrary Designs that were carried on
there, in the last Reigns.

By R. B.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultrey, near Cheapside.
1693.

TO THE Reader.
THE Kingdom of Ireland, has for several Ages been an Aceldama, or Field of
Slaughter, watered with the Blood of English Men; occasioned by their Repeated
Rebellions, and inveterate aversion to the English Nation, in pursuance
whereof, they have left no Treacheries, Murders, or Villainies unattempted,
being encouraged thereto by their Ignorant and Superstitious Priests, to whose
Dictates, this Stupid People entirely Submit, and who endeavor to Foment and
Cherish this Inexorable hatred, formerly under pretense of Recovering their
Liberty, but since the Reformation upon account of Difference in Religion,
which made them very Troublesome to the Renowned Queen Elizabeth, and as one
Chief occasion of the Horrid and Bloody Massacre in 1641. In the late Reigns,
they were somewhat quieter, receiving much Favor and Countenance from the
Court; but upon his present Majesty's Glorious Expedition into this Kingdom,
they made an absolute Defection from the Crown of England, and had Totally
Reduced that Country to Popish Idolatry, and French Slavery, if his Majesty's
Victorious Arms, and Admirable Conduct, had not by the Blessing of Heaven,
Reconquered and Reduced this Stubborn Nation to their former Subjection) Of
which the following History gives a brief Account, as well as of the Ancient
Inhabitants thereof, and of all Considerable Matters from its first Conquest,
to this time; which being full of Variety and Delight, I doubt not, will be as
Acceptable to the Reader, as my former Mean Endeavors of this Kind.

R. B.

THE HISTORY Of the Kingdom of IRELAND.
IRELAND has been always accounted a Land of wonders, and many strange
Relations have been made thereof, though the greatest wonder seems to be, that
such incredible stories should be told, and so firmly believed as they are by
the Irish and diverse others, to this very day; To give you a taste of them, we
find it recorded in their Histories that in the North of Munster there are two
Islands, a greater and less; in the first never any Woman or Female Creature
enters but they instantly dye, as has been experimented by Bitches, and She
Cats, brought thither to that purpose. The Cock Birds, Sing, and hop, upon the
Trees, but the Hens, avoid it as a fatal place. The lesser is called the Living
Isle, because none can dye therein, and therefore those that dwell here when
they are even tired with living, by reason of Sickness or Old age, desire to be
conveyed thither, and no sooner arrive, but they give up the Ghost. In the West
part of Connaught say they, there is an Island called Aren to which St. Brendan
does often resort, the Air whereof is so great an enemy to putrefaction, that
they never bury the Bodies of the dead, but are kept above ground without the
least smell or offense, so that a Son may there view his Father, Grandfather
and all his Relations for many Ages past.

In Ulster is a Lake thirty thousand paces long, and fifteen thousand broad,
out of which arises the noble Northern River called Bane wherein there are
abundance of great Fish, so that the Nets are often broken. It is believed by the
Inhabitants that there were very wicked, vicious people formerly living in this
place, and there was an Old Prophecy in every ones mouth, that when ever a Well
which was therein, and was continually covered and locked up carefully, should
be left open, so great a quantity of Water should issue thereout as would
forthwith overflow the whole adjacent Country. It happened that an Old Beldam
coming to fetch Water heard her Child cry, upon which running away in haste she
forgot to cover the Spring, and coming back to do it, the Land was so overrun
that it was past her help, and at length She, her Child, and all in that
Territory were drowned, which caused this Pool that remains to this day. A
strange Spring is likewise discoursed of in Ulster, wherewith if a man wash his
hair or beard they presently turn gray, and another of a contrary quality,
making all gray hair black. I have seen a man, says my Author, who washing
half his beard with this Water it was all White, the other part remaining
Brown. In Connaught is a Well on the Top of a Hill that Ebbs and Flows equally
with the Sea, yet the Water's fresh.

At Castlenock near Dublin is a Window neither glazed nor latticed, yet a
Candle being set there in the greatest wind or storm, burns as quietly as in
the greatest calm, and a Spring, the water whereof is wholesome to humane
Bodies, but poison to Beasts. In Kildare is a curious Field upon an Hill where
the Irish say a great Battle will one time or other be fought between the Irish
and English, with such vast effusion of blood that a Mill in a Valley hard by,
shall be turned Four and twenty hours with the streams thereof. In a Plain in
this County, they relate those stones were formerly placed which are now on
Salisbury Plain, and conveyed thither with sleight of hand by Merlin the Welsh
Prophet, at the request of Aurelius Ambrosius, King of the Britains. In the
South part of Munster is an Island blessed by St. Brendane a famous she Saint in
this Island with this strange quality, That if any Hare, Stag or other wild
Beast be chased thereabout, it makes toward this Islet, swimming over a small
stream into it, whither the Dogs dare not pursue, but standing on this side the
Bank, see their Enemy sit there securely, protected by some invisible Bars from
danger. But the most Remarkable wonder of all is that of St. Patricks Purgatory
thus described by the Superstitious Irish Writers. In Ulster there is a Pool
which incompasseth an Island, in one part whereof stands a Church exceedingly
enlightened by the glorious appearance of Angels, the rest of the Isle is dark
and horrid, seeming only a Den for Devils and Evil Spirits, wherein is a Pit
which by a door leads into a Cave of Stone divided into seven parts, which is
called St. Patricks Purgatory, for when this Irish Saint preached the Gospel to
them, and told them of Joys eternal in another life for the Godly, and
miserable Torments to the Wicked, the People came and spoke thus to him: Sir,
Though we like your preaching yet we are not willing to lose our liberty, you
tell us many strange stories, persuading us to forsake our pleasures and
delights on Earth, for which you promise us a reward in an unknown place in the
other World. You likewise threaten us with a dismal Dungeon appointed for
Offenders, which if we could believe to be true would more effectually prevail
with us to leave our Delights, than any other Motive.

St. Patrick perceiving that the fear of Torment had more influence upon them
than the blessedness of Heaven, prayed earnestly that God would give them some
resemblance of the future misery of sinful Souls, whereupon he was directed to
this place, wherein if any Person would enter, he was to prepare himself by
prayer and fasting 15 days, during which time the Friars represented to him the
horrors of the place, and how the evil Spirits would torture them, so that as
soon as they were in, what for want of Food and Sleep, their fancies have been
much disturbed, and they have dreamed of those terrible things that have been
told them; which indeed was the whole Mystery of all these illusions, as diverse
affirmed, who tried the Experiment in those Superstitious times; however the
Priests made good use of it, by gaining Credit and Money from the poor deluded
People. Neither is that Excellent Blessing procured to this Island by the
Prayers of their Patron St. Patrick to be forgot, namely their Freedom from
Serpents; and all other venomous Creatures, to confirm which, one of their
Authors confidently Relates the following story. A young Man in the North of
England, lying asleep in the Fields, with his Mouth open, an Adder crept into
it, and so down into his Belly, and tormented him with such violent pains, that
he desired his Friends to kill him, it never ceasing to tear and rend his
Bowels, but while he was eating; Medicines, nor Pilgrimages to Saints would do
no good; at length being advised to go to Ireland, he no sooner arrived there,
and had eat and drank upon the Island, but the Serpent was immediately killed
within him, and voiding it downward, was instantly cured, and returned in good
health to England. So that it was a a Proverb formerly, there was nothing
venomous in Ireland, but the Men and Women, which was intended of the Savage
and Brutish manners of the Wild Irish.

Neither was the inhabiting of this Country less miraculous, than the place,
especially as to the Antiquity thereof, for it is recorded in the Irish
Chronicles, that when the Patriarch Noah, threatened the people of the Old
World, that vengeance would follow their wickedness, and thereupon built an Ark
to convince them, that the whole Earth would be overflown in a few years, the
generality disregarded his Admonitions, only Cesarea Noah's Niece believing her
Uncles Prophecy, got a Ship, and accompanied with three Men, and fifty Women,
resolved to find out some Country, never yet Inhabited, but unspotted with
Vice, and thereby free from the Sentence of Gods wrath; After long Sailing, and
many Dangers, they at length arrived in Ireland, but within forty days after
their Landing the Universal Deluge came, and swept away all these new
Inhabitants at once; This they say, happened in the year after the Creation of
the World. 1556. Which was very wonderful, being long before the Art of
Navigation was invented.

But to let this pass with as little credit, as the Reader pleases, it will be
a sufficient Honor to the Antiquity of the Irish to allow that their Country
was first peopled by some of Noah's Kindred, even as soon as any Island in the
World, for their Histories relate, that about two hundred years after the
Flood, upon the confusion of Tongues at Babel, Japhet and his Posterity,
imboldned by Noans Ark, built a Ship, wherein they adventured to make new
Discoveries in the unknown parts of the World; among them was one Bastolenus,
who encouraged by the example of Nimrod, then Monarch of Assyria, resolved to
settle a Kingdom in these Western Islands, where he might Rule without
Control, and at length, Fortune brought him and his People to the Coast of
Ireland, where he settled; and left three Sons behind him. Among his Followers,
were some of the Posterity of Cham, that were Giants, who by the example of
Ninus, Rebelled against their King, and set up another, who contended together
with dubious Success; at length the Giants were utterly subdued, their Enemies
sp^ring neither Man, Woman nor Child, and to satisfy their Revenge to the
full, they would not vouchsafe to bury them; but let them lie like dead Dogs,
the stench whereof caused such a mortal Pestilence, that few of the Victors
escaped with Life; but those who fled away by Sea, to avoid the Infection.

And here our Irish Author tells us, that one of the Giants named Ruanus, who
was preserved, lived above Two Thousand years after (twice the Age of
Methusalem) by whom St. Patrick was thoroughly informed of the state of this
Country, and being Baptized by him, dyed in the year of our Lord 430. Some few
of these Giants, hid themselves in Gaves and Dens after the last Battle, till
Famine forced them to seek for Relief, when creeping out, and finding no
Resistance, they grew Bolder, and having notice how matters had happened,
settled themselves in the best part of the Country; Then Magog, one of the Sons
of Japhet, Inhabiting in Scythia, in process of time, several of his Posterity
desirous to seek adventures, landed in Ireland, but were chased thence by the
Giants, after Wars had continued between them 216. Years. Next, the five Sons
of Dela from Greece came hither, and utterly routed the Giants, being before
weakened by their own Dissension, and then Divided the Country into five
provinces, as they are at this Day, fixing a Stone in the midst of the Country,
to make the Division more equal, but at length ambition prevailing, one of
these Sons named Slanius, subdued his other Brethren, and Reigned alone, but
was interrupted in his new Dominion, by an Army of Scythians, who invaded the
Land, and after them the Britains, and then the Scots under Gathelus, as is
aforementioned, came from Spain, and fixed here, Reigning agreat while in
peace, till the Picts came thither out of Scythia under Roderick, being
accidentally cast a shore upon those Coasts, who were brought before the King
of Ireland, to whom Roderick thus spoke.

It is not because we degenerate from the courage of our Ancestors, but by the
Frowns of Fortune, that we are now become humble Supplicants to Ireland, who
never yet submitted to any other Nation; Behold Sir King, and regard us well
and then believe that it is no small occasion which makes our lusty Bodies thus
to stoop. Scythians, we are even Picts of Scythia, from which two Names, there
redounds to us much Glory; we will not whine and complain, that Civil Wars at
home forced us from our own Country, thereby to move pity in you toward
Strangers let our Servants and Children discourse that at Leisure, we only
desire the Favor to Reside some short time in your Land, as our Necessities
require. A King craves this kindness of a King, and Soldiers of Soldiers;
Princes are easily sensible how much it concerns their Honor and Interest, to
Relieve and Support other Princes oppressed by Traiterous practices; yea, all
Men are naturally inclined to have Compassion of their fellow Creatures, and to
be sensibly touched with their Calamities. Admit then, we beseech you, these
scattered Remnants of Scythia. If your Land be narrow, we are not many, if your
Soil be Barren, we are born and bred to Hardiness. If you live in peace, we are
at your Command as Subjects. If you make War, we are ready to serve you as
Soldiers? We demand no Kingdom, no State, no Pomps, nor Triumphs in Ireland,
we are here alone, and have left those things behind us, with our Enemies,
howsoever you dispose of us, we shall be content therewith, not remembering what
we formerly have been, but what we now are.

After mature consultation with their Ancient Records, which forbid them to
mingle diverse Nations in one Realm, as occasioning quarrels and dissentions,
and considering their want of Room, they persuaded these strangers to go into
Britain, providing Ships and Guides to convey them thither, who landed them in
the North parts, now called Scotland, where contrary to their expectation,
Marius King of the Britains, waiting their coming, fell upon them, and slew
King Roderick, and most of his Followers, those who escaped, upon humble
Submission, he licensed to inhabit the uttermost parts of Scotland; at length
Fergus came out of Ireland with his Scots, and inhabited there, as is already
related. The Irish, as some Authors Write, were first converted to Christianity
by St James the Apostle about this time, though themselves say, that Paladius
was first sent from Pope Celestine to preach the Gospel to them, and after him
the Renowned St. Patrick, who acted wonders among them, making many female
Saints, and among others, St. Bridget, a By blow of a Captain in Leinster, who
finding his wench with Child; ^^^er she was Delivered of this Bridget, sold her
privately to an Irish Conjurer, for fear of his Wives Jealousy; the young Lass
was instructed in the Faith by St. Patrick, and was of so great Judgment, that
^ot only the people, but a whole Synod of Bishops assembled near Dublin to hear
her Wise Counsel in many weighty causes. One action in her Childhood made her
famous: The King of Leinster had bestowed on her Father for his good Service, a
Rich Sword, garnished with many costly Jewels: This Damsel going often to visit
her poor sick neighbors, and having not wherewithal to relieve them by reason
of the covetousness of her Father and Mother, she secretly gave them those
Jewels out of that useless Sword, which being known, the King was much offended
thereat, and coming one time to Banquet with her Father, he called her before
him, not yet above nine years old, demanding how she durst in that manner
deface the gift of a King, she answered, They are bestowed upon a better King
than you, whom finding in such extremity I would have given all that my Father,
yea all that you had, and your selves too, if it were in my power, rather than
Jesus Christ should starve.

In the year of Christ 586 the Danes or Norvegians, being much inclined to
invade other Countries, sensible they could not find more Barren Londs than
their own, grew dreadful both by Sea and Land, seizing upon the Isles of
Orkney, and going from thence to Ireland, under one Turgesius, conquering the
Irish Kings; and reigned thirty years, exercising all kind of Tyranny upon the
Nobility and Commons; it happened that the King of Mead was in some trust with
him, of whom he required his only Daughter for his Concubine; the Father
readily answered, saving your Highnesses Fancy, there are diverse Ladies of
Quality in this Country, fitter Bed-fellows for a King, than my Brown Girl;
and then reckoned up many of his Nieces and Cousens, extolling them to be
rather Angels than mortal Creatures, that he even ravished the Tyrant with Joy
before he saw them; but making some delay he began to suspect that it was only
a trick to preserve his Daughter from him; to take off which the King of Mead
spoke thus to him; If I should say that I willingly gave you my only Daughter
to be deflowred, your Highness wisdom would surely judge I did but flatter you,
and yet if ten such Daughters were dearer to me than the satisfying your
pleasure by whose bounty and goodness she, and I, and all the rest are
supported, I should be unworthy of that Friendship and Confidence, which you
are pleased to allow me; as for the Wench, she must needs reckon it a great
honor to be admitted to to the Bed of so great a Prince, since Queens have
formerly taken long Journeys, to yield themselves up to Noble Conquerors, in
hope to have issue by them; if there be any scandal in it, a short time will
wear that out, but such a friend as you have been to me and mine. I can never
hope to find, and therefore fear your displeasure more than the loss of Twenty
Maidenheads, since Fathers have not valued to give their own Wives to satisfy
the Lusts of their Sons; appoint then the time and place, remote from your
Court, and I will send you my Daughter accompanied with twelve or fixteen
Ladies, the meanest of whom is an Empress in comparison of her, and when they
are before you, choose your Game as you like, and if my Child chance to please
you, she cannot be too good to be at your Command, I defire only that if any
other of your friends shall require the same favor, your Majesty would
remember whose Daughter she is.

The Tyrant dismissed him with repeated thanks for this liberal offer, and the
King of Mead at the time appointed, dressed up his Daughter in the best manner,
and with her fixteen handsome beautiful young Men in Women's clothes who were
all presented to him in his privy Chamber (...) being present but a few
debauched attendants whereupon these Young Men drew out their (...) and killed
the Tyrant and all the rest (...) small resistance; this act was soon blown
over (...), and the oppressed Princes instantly rose in Arms to recover their
Liberties; all Mead and Leinster quickly assembled, whom the King commending
for their forwardness in so natural a quarrel, thus encouraged; my Lords and
Friends, the case neither admits delay, nor requires any great consulting,
speed and courage is all in all, while the thing is fresh and new, and some of
our Enemies are still and asleep, some lament, others curse, some are
counselling, but all dismayed, let us prevent their fury, dismember their
strength, cut off their flight, and seize upon their places of refuge and
defense; it is no Victory if we pluck their Feathers, and do not break their
Necks, not to chase them in, but to rouse them out, to weed them, not to rake
them over; not to tread them down, but utterly to root them up; this lesson the
Tyrant himself taught me, for demanding once of him, by way of Parable, how
Land might be freed from certain ravenous Fowls that annoyed it, he advised us
to watch where they bred, and fire their Nests about their Ears; let us go
then, and fall upon these Cormorants which shroud themselves in our
possessions; and let us destroy them, that neither nest nor root, neither seed
nor stalk, neither branch nor stump, remain of this cursed and ungracious
Generation.

He had scarce ended his Oration, when the People with shouts of Joy extolled
him as the Defender of their Lives and Liberties, assuring him of their utmost
assistance, and so joining their Forces, they with a running Camp in a very
short time cleared every corner of the (...) of the Norwegians, razing their
Castles to (...), killing all that resisted, and banishing (...) whereby every
Prince again recovered his own Government. The Histories of Denmark relate
that, some time before this, Fridlenus, King of the Danes, arriving in Ireland,
besieged Dublin, but perceiving it hard to take by reason of the strength of
the Walls, he contrived to catch a number of Swallows who had their Nests in
the Houses within the City, and tying Wildfire to their feet they flying home
set the Houses on Fire, which whilst the Citizens endeavored to quench, they
entered the City: after which Gonno the third King of Denmark, though a Pagan,
Married Thyra Daughter to the Christian King Etheldred of Britain, by whom he
had two Sons, Canute and Harold, who first invaded England and then Ireland,
where at the Siege of Dublin Canute was slain, who for his Valor was so
extremely beloved by his Father that he vowed to kill him with his own hands
who should bring him Tidings of his Death. Gonno was now very old and blind,
pleasing himself in nothing more than hearing of the Victories of his Sons;
when therefore Q. Thyra had notice of her Sons Death, which neither she nor any
other durst discover to him, she contrived to clothe her Husband all in
Mourning, and prepared all other things usual at a Funeral, and then used many
lamentable expressions of grief for the loss of some Friend, which Gonno
perceiving, woe is me, said he, you then fignifie the Death of my Son Canute;
whereunto she answered that he himself, and not she, had now discovered the
Truth; whereupon for grief thereof he instantly gave up the Ghost.

We find little material in the Irish Chronicles, from this time till the
Conquest thereof by King Henry the Second, which how it was occasioned I shall
now relate. In the year 1167. Dermot Macmur King of Leinster possessed all the
East parts of the Isle along the Seacoasts, using great cruelty toward the
Lords and Gentry; it happened that Morris King of Mead going far into the
Country, Dermot in the mean time stole away his Queen by her consent, which
Morris upon his return resolving to revenge, represented it to Roderick O
Conor King of Connaught and Monarch of all Ireland, beseeching his assistance
against the vile Adulterer; the People of Leinster, detesting both Dermot and
his quarrel for his former Tyrannies, universally forlook him, so that he was
forced to fly to King Henry the Second for succor, who was then employed in
his Wars in France; Henry had before cast an eye upon Ireland, because they
always assisted the French with men, and Adrian an Englishman being now Pope he
obtained his consent for the Conquest thereof, upon condition of reducing the
Inhabitants to Christianity, who were almost turned barbarous; at this very
time Dermot offered him his service, of which he was very joyful, but having
Wars with France, he had not opportunity to go with him, and therefore taking
an Oath of Fidelity and Obedience from him, he took him into his Protection,
and for his more speedy assistance sent him into England honorably attended,
with Letters Patents to this effect, 'Henry King of England, Duke of Normandy
and Aquitain, and Earl of Anjou, to all our Faithful Subjects, Englishmen,
Normans, Welchmen and Scots, and to all other Nations whatsoever subject to our
Dominion fendeth Greeting. When these Letters shall come to your hands, know ye
that we have received Dermot Prince of Leinster into the bosom of our Grace and
Benevolence, wherefore whosoever of our loving Subjects within our Dominions
will aid, assist, and restore him as our Leige-man and Faithful Subject, be you
assured that you have not only our license, but shall receive our favor and
thanks for the same; with these Letters he arrived at Bristow, where he agreed
with Richard Strongbow Earl of Pembroke to give him his only Daughter in
Marriage, for which the Earl was the next Spring to settle him in his Kingdom,
which was to descend to him in right of his Wife after Dermots decease, in the
mean time Robert Fitz Stephens and Maurice Fitzgerald his Brother, Gentlemen
of Wales, promised Dermot that if he would assure them an Estate in the Town of
Wexford for ever, they would assist him to begin the recovery of his Country,
while the Earl of Pembroke was providing stronger Forces, and accordingly
Dermot going over privately before, they with Thirty Knights, Sixty Esquires,
and Three Hundred Archers landed in Ireland, being the first Englishmen that
ever came thither, and marching toward Wexford, Dormet met with them with five
Hundred Men, and joining their Forces they soon took the Town of Wexford, which
was freely given to Fitz Stephens, according to their Covenant, and their Army
daily increasing they prevailed so much that Roderick the Monarch assembled all
the Petty Kings to defend their Country; at length an Agreement was made,
whereby Dermot was restored to his former Estate; and more Forces arriving from
England, Dermot encouraged thereby resolved to be revenged of those of Dublin
who had been great Enemies to him and his Father, and marching thither they
soon submitted themselves to him.

Now arrived the Earl of Pembroke with a considerable aid, wherewith he made
such notable Conquests that King Henry growing jealous of his greatness, sent
an Edict to recall all the English out of Ireland, but the troubles raised by
Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury hindered the Prosecution thereof;
Pembroke was then in Dublin, where he was closely besieged by the Irish under
Roderick (Dermot dying some time before) and was at last reduced to such
extremity that they resolved to Sally forth and dye like men, rather than
starve, and so issuing out with not above two or three hundred men, they
valiantly assaulted their Enemies Camp, consisting of near Thirty Thousand,
with so much resolution, that with great slaughter of them they obtained a
Glorious Victory, chasing their Enemies till night came on, and then returning
Triumphantly with abundance of Provisions and Rich Spoil into the City,
Roderick himself hardly escaping with his Life, after which the Earl of
Pembroke coming into England surrendered Dublin and all the Castles and Forts
on the Sea coasts to King Henry, and thereby removed his Jealousy, and was
again received into favor.

In 1172 King Henry the Second landed with a considerable Army, whom Roderick
in behalf of himself, and all the other petty Princes of that Kingdom
acknowledged for his Sovereign Lord, and the supreme Prince of all that Island,
so that none refused obedience to Henry, but only the Province of Ulster; the
Christmas after, the King Royally feasted all those Princes, who were become
his Subjects, at Dublin, and then taught the Irish first to eat Cranes flesh,
which was before abhorred by them. He then called a Synod where diverse abuses
were reformed, and new Canons made for the future Government of the Church, and
among others, That since it had pleased God to bring them under the English
Dominion, they should for the future observe all the Rites and Ceremonies of
the English Church. Soon after King Henry returned to England, being summoned
by the Pope to answer for the death of Thomas Becket, which occasioned much
Trouble. In 1185. Henry made over all his Right and Title to Ireland, to his
youngest Son John, after King of England, who Landing at Waterford, accompanied
with a few Dissolute Companions, whose advice he only regarded, caused great
Commotions, whereupon he went back again the same year. After the Death of his
Brother Richard the first, John succeeded, and came again into Ireland, settling
the Country, and Banishing the Lacies for some Misdemeanors, but upon
submission, gave them pardon, though not without paying him great Fines.

In 1300. Edward the first sent for Aid out of Ireland, to Assist him in his
Wars against Scotland, and after his Death, the Scots invaded Ireland, being
Assisted by the Wild Irish, whereby the Country was miserably ruined, four
Princes of Connaught joining with them; but by the valor of the English,
eleven Thousand were slain in one Fight, among whom were the King of Connaught,
Okelley a great Lord, and diverse others. The Death of Okelly is somewhat
Remarkable; The Lord Bremingham Commander of the English Army, sent one John
Hussy his Esquire into the Field, to view the dead Bodies, and search whether
his old mortal Enemy Okelley, were slain among the rest; Hussy goes only with
one man to turn up the Bodies, and was presently espied by Okelley, that lay
lurking behind a bush, who knowing Hussy to be a stout man, came toward him,
and said. Hussy, thou see I am Armed at all points, as well as my Esquire,
thou art naked with thy Page only, so that had I not a great kindness for thee,
for thine own sake, I would slay thee for the sake of thy Master, but if thou will come and serve me, as I desire, I promise upon St. Patricks Staff, to make
thee a Lord of a greater Estate in Connanght, than thy Master has in Ireland.
These words not prevailing upon Hussy, a lusty fellow belonging to Okelly,
began to reproach him for refusing so fair an offer; so that Hussy had now
three to deal with, he therefore dispatched this fellow first, and then struck
Okelleys Esquire, such a blow under the Ear, that he laid him for dead, Lastly,
he fell upon Okelley himself, and instantly slew him; and then perceiving the
Esquire, who was only astonished with the stroke, to revive again, he caused
him to carry his Lords Head upon a Truncheon, and presented it to Bremingham
who for this notable Service, Knighted Hussy, and gave him large possessions,
the Successors of whose Family, were after Lords of Galtrim.

In King Edward the Seconds Reign, the Lord Roger Mortimer was sent over
Justice into Ireland, at which time Edward Bruce, Brother to Robert Bruce, King
of Scotland, who had taken several places, and caused himself to be Crowned
King of Ireland, was slain in a great Battle, wherein the Scots were
vanquished; one Mawpas an Englishman, who rushed into the midst of the fight to
encounter Bruce hand to hand, was in the search found dead fallen upon the Body
of Bruce. This year 1320. An University was erected in Dublin, about which time
the Lady Alice Kettell with her two Companions, Petronelle and Basell were
charged with Enchantment, and that they had conference every Night with a
Spirit called Robin Artisson, to whom they Sacrificed in the Highway 9 red
Cocks, and 11 Peacocks eyes, and that this Lady swept the Streets of Kilkenny
in the Twilight, bringing all the filth to the Door of her Son William Outlaw,
muttering these words;

'To the House of William my Son,
'Go all the Wealth of Kilkenny Town.
The Lady made her escape, but in searching her Closet (says my Author) they
found a Wafer of Sacramental Bread, having the Devils Name stamped thereon
instead of Jesus Christ, and an Ointment wherewith she greazed a staff, upon
which she galloped through thick and thin, as she pleased; Petronelle was burnt
at Kilkenny, upon this account. In the Reign of King Edward the Third, 1329.
The Irish in Mead and Leinster, Rebelled and Vanquished the Earl of Ormond,
burning fourscore English in a Church, and committing woeful outrages, at length
the Citizens of Wexford falling upon them, slew 400, the rest being drowned in
the Water of Slane. At this time Sir Robert Savage a wealthy Knight dwelt in
Ulster, who to secure himself from the incursions of the Irish, began to
fortify his Manor Houses with Castles and Ditches, exhorting his Son and Heir
to do the same, for the benefit of himself and Posterity; Father, says young
Savage, I remember the Proverb, better a Castle of Bones, than of Stones, where
I have the strength and courage of Men, by the Grace of God, I will never
incumber my self with dead Walls, my Fort shall be the youthful Blood of my
Friends, and where I have room to fight. The Father in a fume left building;
but the neglect of this Counsel, was the Ruin of that and many other English
Families in Ulster. This Savage having raised Forces against the Irish, gave to
every man before the fight a stout Cup of Aquavitae, Wine or strong Ale, and
provided Plenty of Beef, Venison and Fowls, for their return which his Captains
disliking, considering the uncertainty of War, since the Enemy might happen to
feast upon the same, they being so few against a multitude of Irish, he
smiling, Gentlemen, said he, You are too full of Envy, this World is but an
Inn, wherein we have no certain Interest, but are only Tenants at the will of
the Lord. If it please him to command us hence, as from our Lodging, and set
other good fellows in our Room, what hurt can it be for us to leave them meat
for their Suppers? Let them stoutly win it, and eat it. If they should come to
our Houses, we could not but welcome them with what the Country affords, and
therefore much good may it do them with all my Heart; however, I have such
confidence in your Courage and Gallantry, that I doubt not but we shall return
home safe at Night, and Banquet merrily upon our own Provisions. Which happened
accordingly, for falling upon them, they in a short time cut off three thousand
Irish-men, and returned triumphantly home.

In 1394. King Richard the Second being much grieved for the Death of his
beloved Queen Ann, not able to endure his Chambers of State without Tears,
passed over into Ireland, to divert himself, where diverse Princes renewed their
Homage to him. In 1398. the Irish Rebelling, Roger Mortimer Earl of March, the
Kings Lieutenant was slain, with diverse other Persons of Quality, to Revenge
which, King Richard again sailed to Ireland, and had several successful
Skirmishes against them, killing at one time, two hundred of the Rebels, and
many more afterward, and then going to Dublin, he continued there some time,
diverse Lords and Princes submitting themselves, and were received very
courteously by him. During his stay here, he had intelligence, that Henry Duke
of Lancaster his Uncle, whom he had lately Banished, was returned into England,
designing to deprive him of his Crown, whereupon he committed the Dukes Son,
and the Duke of Glocesters Son, both then in Ireland, Prisoners to the Castle
of Trim, and then imbarquing arrived in Wales, where he found such weak
assistance, that at length he fell into his Adversaries Hands, and was Deposed
by Authority of Parliament, the Duke of Lancaster being admitted to Reign in
his stead, by the Name of Henry the Fourth. In whose Second year, Sir Stephen
Scroop was made Lieutenant, who was much exclaimed against by the People, for
his former Violences and Extortions under King Richard, upon which, his Lady
assured him, she would no longer continue with him there, unless he took a
Solemn Oath upon a Bible, not knowingly or willingly to wrong any Christian
Creature in that King^om, and to repair all the wrongs he had done, she h^^ing
made such a Vow to Christ, that unless this were performed, she could not live
with him, without peril of her Soul. Her Husband consented hereto, and became
afterward as Famous for Justice, as he had been before Infamous for Oppression.

In the Reign of King Henry 5. 1420. James Butler Earl of Ormond being
Lieutenant, some of the Irish Lords making Insurrections, the Earl fought with
them in the red Moor of Athy, where (says my Author) the Sun being almost
down, miraculously stood still for three hours, till the Irish who were
commanded by Omore, and his Terrible Army, were utterly vanquished, with the
loss of a very few English, neither did the bog or quagmire indamage either
Horse or Man of Ormonds party, till the feat was accomplished, but continued
firm, like other ground. In King Henry the Sixths Reign, Richard Duke of York,
Father to Edward the fourth, was Lieutenant, his second Son George, after Duke
of Clarence, being born in the Castle of Dublin. The Earl of Desmond was Deputy
in Edward the fourths time, who speaking Disgracefully of the Kings marrying
the Lady Elizabeth Gray, she carried his Government in Ireland to be examined,
and for misdemeanors therein, he was Condemned and Beheaded at Tredagh.

Girald Earl of Kildare, was Deputy in Henry the Sevenths time, to whom Richard
Symonds a subtle Priest applied himself, bringing to him a young lad his
Scholar, named Lambert, whom he affirmed to be the Son of George Earl of
Clarence, lately escaped out of the Tower of London; the Youth had been so well
Tutored, and acted the part of a Prince so Gracefully, that the Earl of Kildare
and many others of the Nobility espoused his quarrel, and Crowned him King in
Dablin, with much Joy and Triumph* and then raising Forces, they Imbarqued for
England, and Landed in Lancashire, but were Defeated by King Henry's Army, and
Lambert taken, but pardoned for Life. In 1460. The Duchess of Burgundy, raised
another Spirit or Illusion, one Perkin Warbeck, whom she sent into Ireland,
assuring the Lords, that he was the youngest Son of King Edward the Fourth,
named Richard; who had been strangely preserved from the Cruelty of his Uncle
Crook-back; but he being taken Prisoner, confessed the whole Imposture.

In King Henry the 8ths time, the Earl of Kildare was continued Deputy; a plain
open-hearted man, very passionate, and soon appeased. Being once in a great
Rage with his Servants, one of his Esquires offered Mr. Boyce, a Gentleman
retainer an Irish Hobby, upon Condition he would just then pluck an hair from
the Earls Beard: Mr. Boice took him at his word, and knowing the Earls good
Nature, stepped to him, and acquainted him with the business. Well, said the
Earl, I am content but if thou pluck above one Hair, I shall reach thee a sound
Box on the Ear. Being accused before Henry the Seventh for burning the
Cathedral of Cashels, and many Witnesses appearing to justify it, he suddenly
confessed the Fact, to the Wonder and Detestation of those present; who admiring
how he would come off, By Jesus (says he) I would never have done it, had I not
been told, that the Archbishop was within it. Now he being there present and
principal Accuser, the King Laughed at the plainness of the man, that he should
allege that for an Excuse, which was the greatest Aggravation of his offense;
Lastly, they sum'd up all in this Article, Finally, all Ireland cannot rule
this Earl, No, quoth the King? then in good Faith he shall Rule all Ireland;
and thereupon constituted him Deputy.

In 1521. Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey, after Duke of Norfolk was made Lord
Lieutenant, and the Earl of Kildare was by the Contrivance of his Enemies,
summoned over into England, to answer several Accusations against him, and
being brought before the Council, the proud Cardinal Wolsey, then Lord
Chancellor, charged him with several Misdemeanors, as holding Correspondence
with the Irish Rebels, especially the Earl of Desmond, his Kinsman, who had
been Treating with the French and Emperor, about invading the Island, and not
seizing him when in his power, with diverse other Crimes, using these
Expressions to Kildare among others, Surely this juggling and false play,
becomes neither a man of Honesty nor Honor; had you but lost a Horse or a Cow,
two hundred of your Retainers had come at your whistle to rescue the Prey, even
from the uttermost parts of Ulster; all the Irish in the Country, must have
fled before you; but in pursuing so great an Enemy as Desmond, merciful God!
How nice, how fearful, how backward have you been? One while he is from home,
another time he keeps close home, sometimes he is fled, sometimes on the
Borders, where you dare not venture; I find my Lord, there are dreadful
Bugbears on the Borders, which affright the Earl of Kidare, Earl, nay King of
Kildare, for when you please, you can command like an Emperor, where you are
malicious, the most Loyal Subjects are accounted Irish Enemies, and where you
plead an Irish Rebel, shall pass for a dutiful Subject, Hearts and Hands, Lives
and Fortunes, lie all at your pleasure and those that do not fawn upon you, and
flatter you, dare not presume to come into your presence.

The Earl, as well as the Lords of the Council, were much offended at this
odious and abusive Discourse, which was usual with the Cardinal, desiring him
to name and prove particulars; at length Kildare being out of patience,
interrupted him, saying; I find my Lord, that you are very fit to be the mouth
of this Board, but my Lord, those that put these words into your Graces Mouth,
had very wide ones themselves, and have long gaped for my Ruin, and having no
other stuff, have filled their Mouths with Smoke; what my Cosen Desmond has
Contrived, I know not, I beshrew his naked Heart, for holding out so long, but
what is this to me, cannot he Conspire, but I must be of his Council? Cannot he
hide, except I wink? Can he have no Friends, but I must bethe Traitor? This is
strange reasoning, you would not see him, say they, when was he within my View?
Who stood by, when I let him escape? they will swear it, they say, why? Because
they have my Letters, they may lie lewdly against my Cosen Desmond, since none
dares contradict them but for my part, I never thought them to have so much Wit
Honesty, that I would have ventured the Life of a good Hound, upon their
Secrecy or Silence, much less my own. Touching my Kingdom, I know not what your
Lordship means. If your Grace imagine, that a Kingdom consists in serving God,
obeying my Prince, Ruling with Love, suppressing Rebels, and executing Justice,
I would be glad to be invested with so Royal a name, but if you Term me King,
as Repining at the Government of my Sovereign, Conniving at Malefactors, or
injuring the peaceable, I utterly Disclaim that odious Title, admiring that
your Grace, out of your profound Wisdom, seems to appropriate so Sacred a Name,
to such wicked Actions. But however, I wish my Lord, you and I were to change
Kingdoms, but for one Month, I doubt not, but in that time, I should gather up
more Crumbs, than the Revenues of my Earldom are worth. But you you are well and
warm, and continue you so still, but do not upbraid me with such base Crimes, I
slumber in a hard Cabin, while you sleep in a Bed of Down, I serve the King
under the Cope of Heaven, when you are served at home under a Canopy; I drink
Water out of my Iron Headpiece, when you drink Wine out of Golden Cups; my
Horse is Trained up for the Wars, while your Gennet is taught to Amble; You are
Be-Graced, and Be-Lorded, you are crept and kneeled unto, when in the mean
time, I can find small regard with the Irish Borderers, who are so stout, they
will never kneel to me, except I cut off their Legs by the Knees.

The Council were much pleased at these sharp girds of Kildare against Wolsey,
who rising up in a Fury, committed the Earl to Prison, but he was afterward
bailed by the Duke of Norfolk, to the Cardinals great Grief, and entertained in
his House; during which, the Irish made another Insurrection, and the Cardinal
again charging Kildare, as the fomenter thereof, committed him to the Tower,
for which he was much pityed by the Lieutenant and all the Court, who loved him
heartily. One Night when the Lieutenant and he were playing at Shovel-Board, a
Warrant was sent for executing Kildare, at which the Lieutenant fetching a deep
sigh, By St. Bride, says he, Lieutenant, there is some mad game in that Scroll
of Paper, but let it fall how it will, have at the Game. When he understood the
Message, well said he, pray do me the Favor to go to the King, and know
certainly, whether it be his pleasure; The Lieutenant was much afraid of
displeasing the Cardinal, yet kindness to his Friend prevailing, he posted to
the King at Midnight, and having Admittance, showed him the Warrant; the King
incensed, as he said, at the Sawciness of the Priest, gave him his Signet in
Token of a Countermand; which when the Cardinal understood, he raved and raged
in such furious Language, that the Lieutenant went away, leaving him to mutter
the Devils Paternoster by himself. Shortly after Wolsey was thrown out of
Favor, and the Earl restored to his Life and Estate, and Sir William
Sheffington being made Deputy of Ireland, carried Kildare along with him.

About this time, the Lieutenant being at Dinner, News came, that the O Moors
were in Arms, and ready to invade the English Pale; whereupon the Mayor of
Dublin raising Forces, Marched against them, who Dispersing themselves, a party
fell upon the Carriages which were weakly Guarded, but were so warmly received,
by a stout young Man named Patrick Fitz-Simmons, that he routed them, and cut
off two of the Rebels Heads. Next Morning the Governors Men who fled from
Fitz-Simmons, Reported that he run away, and the Carriages were lost; whereupon
the Governor coming in a Rage to the Mayors Tent, cried out, that his Man
Fitz-Symmons was a Cowardly Traitor, in running away, and losing the Carriages;
Fitz-Symmons skipping out of the Tent in his Shirt, with the two Heads in his
Hand: My Lord, said he, I am no Coward, I stood to my Tackling, and when your
Men gave me the slip, I rescued the Carriages, of which these Heads are a
Token, throwing them down before him; say thou so, cried the Lieutenant,
then I cry thee Mercy, and I would I had been with thee, and so praising and
rewarding him, he Dismissed him; and soon after the O Moors retired to their Bogs
and Fastnesses.

In 1532. The Earl of Kildare having several great Enemies in Ireland, was
again sent for over into England, and charged with furnishing his own Forts
with Artillery out of the Castle of Dublin, for which he was committed to
Prison; he left his Son and Heir, Thomas Fitzgerald Vice-Deputy in his stead;
who hearing his Father was in Custody, the Enemies of the Geraldines incited
him to a Rebellion, thereby to destroy the Family of the Geralds. So that Lord
Thomas calling a Council, his Horsemen and Servants rushed into the Chamber
completely Armed, for he had been informed, that his Father was to be put to
Death, and himself to be seized, and therefore resolved to defend himself;
turning then to the Chancellor, he said: How injuriously soever we have been
used, and are thus forced to defend our selves by Arms, since our Service and
Loyalty is misrepresented to our Prince, yet let none say hereafter, but we
acted like Gentlemen and Soldiers, in using this open Hostility, and not
Treacherously and Basely; this Sword of State is yours, and not mine, I
received it with an Oath, and have used it to your Benefit, and should
therefore stain my Honor, if I should turn it to your Damage or Hurt; I have
now need of my own Sword, for the other only flattereth me with a painted
Scabbard, but has indeed a Pestilent Edg, already bathed in the Blood of the
Geraldines, and now newly whetted for further Destruction, defend your selves
therefore from us, as from declared Enemies; I am none of King Henry's Deputy,
I am his Mortal Foe, I have more mind to Conquer, than to Govern, to meet him
in the Field, than to serve him as an Officer, if all the Hearts in England and
Ireland, who have cause fol to do, would join in this quarrel, as I hope they
will, they would soon make him repent his Tyranny and Cruelty, for which the
Ages to come may justly Register him amongst the most Barbarous Tyrants, of
Abominable and Hateful Memory.

The Lord Chancellor taking Lord Thomas by the hand, requested him for the love
of God, to hear a few words, and then made a most Passionate Oration,
accompanied with many Tears, to dissuade him from this rash Enterprise, but all
in vain, for Lord Thomas thus proceeded; It is very easy for the sound, to
give Counsel to the Sick, if the Case were yours, you would be as impatient, it
may be as I; as you require me to Honor my Prince, so Duty binds me to
Reverence my Parents; therefore he that Tyrannically designs to kill my
innocent Father, and threatens my Destruction, I will never acknowledge to be
my King; if, as you intimate, I happen to miscarry, I had rather dye valiantly,
and at Liberty, than live under Henry in Slavery and Bondage: With these words
delivering up the Sword, he flung away like a Madman, and assembling all the
Irish he could get together, they committed several Outrages and Mischiefs, and
Scizing upon Alen Archbishop of Dublin, his Old Enemy, his followers murdered
him. At length after many Skirmishes, he was by the Lord Deputy Gray persuaded
to submit himself to the King; and going to England, was committed to the
Tower, Orders being sent to Ireland for apprehending his five Uncles, who were
all Seized, namely, James, Walter, Oliver, John, and Richard Fitz Gerald,
though two of them always opposed their Nephews Proceedings; but King Henry
being incensed against them, because he was informed, that as long as any
Geraldine breathed in the Country, he could never Conquer it. resolved to be
rid of them all. Thus were the Five Brethren Sailing to England, some
comforting themselves with the Kings Mercy, and others with their own
Innocence, when Richard Fitzgerald, who was more Bookish than the rest,
chanced to ask the Master, what the Name of his Ship was, who answering, it was
called the Cow, nay then good Brethren, quoth he, I utterly despair of our
return to Ireland, for I remember I have heard an Old Prophecy, that Five
Brethren to an Earl, should be carried into England in the Belly of a Cow, and
never come back again: At which words, the rest began to howl and Lament in a
grievous manner, which seemed very strange to the Spectators, that Five such
Valiant Gentlemen should be so disturbed at an Old Prophecy. However, what he
foretold, proved true for they no sooner arrived, but Thomas Fitzgerald was
Executed at Tower Hill, and the Five Brethren Hanged and Quartered at Tyburn,
the Old Earl of Kildare died for grief in the Tower, and Gerald the Younger
Brother of Thomas flying out of Ireland, Traveled many Foreign Countries, and
at length Died at Naples; Soon after the Lord Deputy Gray was Beheaded on
Tower Hill, being accused for holding Correspondence with the Fitz-Geralds,
though many thought him Innocent thereof. In the Three and Thirtieth of King
Henry the Eight, the Title of King of Ireland was by a Parliament settled upon
him and his Successors for ever, whereas before they were only called Lords of
Ireland.

During the short Reigns of King Edward the Sixth and Queen Mary, our
Chronicles relate little of any Transactions in Ireland; In 1566. The Seventh
of Queen Elizabeth, for the great Fame of her Wisdom, Donald Mac Carti More, a
great Potentate of Ireland, came and delivered up into her hands, all his ample
Territories, which she restored to him again, and in requital created him Earl
of Glencare, giving him many Presents and paying the expense of his Voyage. In
1570 O Brian Earl of Thomond, not brooking the severe Government of Edward
Fitton, President of Connaught, entered into a Conspiracy, which being ready to
break forth was strangely discovered. For the day before they meant to take up
Arms, Fitton knowing nothing of it, sent word to the Earl in a friendly manner,
that the next day he and some of his Friends would come and dine with him; the
Earl having a guilty Conscience, thought his designs were revealed, and that
Fitton would rather come as an Enemy than a Guest; Whereupon he presently fled
to France, where he confessed the whole to Queen Elizabeth's Ambassador, by
whose Intercession he was afterward pardoned and restored. Four years after
Sir Henry Sydney Lord Deputy going into Ulster, several Irish Grandees
submitted themselves and were received into favor.

In 1583 the famous Rebel Gerald Fitzgerald, the eleventh Earl of Desmond of
this Family, having a long time escaped the English in his lurking places, was
now discovered by a Common Soldier in a poor Cottage and there slain, his Head
was sent into England and set upon London Bridge. This end had this great Lord,
who possessed whole Countries, and had at least five hundred Gentlemen of his
own Name and Race, all whom and his own Life also, he lost within three years,
very few of his Family being left alive. And this disaster he fell into, by
being Traiterous to his Prince, at the instigation of certain Popish Priests,
of whom the chief was one Nicholas Sanders an Englishman, who at the same time
died miserably of Famine; for running mad upon his ill success, he wandered up
and down the Mountains, finding nothing to sustain him. In 1558, the Bourks
raised a Rebellion, the Irish declaring they would have one of that Family rule
over them, or some other Lord out of Spain; neither could they be quieted till
the President of Connaughts Brother following them into the Woods, drove away
five thousand head of their Cattle, so that after forty days, half starved they
came forth and submitted themselves. But the President understanding that about
this time two thousand Scotch Islanders were landed and joined with the Irish,
and ready to break into Connaught, he musters up his Men to give them Battle;
but they flying to Bogs and Woods, he retires back, as though in fear; thereby
to draw them to the firm ground; and then set upon them with his whose force,
slaying three thousand which was all their number except fourscore; by which
notable Victory the insolent attempts of the Scotch Islanders, were wholly
crushed.

In 1590. Hugh Cavelock, so called because he had been so long kept in Fetters,
the Son of Chan O Neal, accused Hugh Earl of Tyrone for holding correspondence
with the Spaniards in 88. who to prevent the accusation took a Cord, and with
his own hands strangled Hugh; For which being sent for over, he was pardoned
upon Condition of future obedience, and reducing the Country to Civility.
After this Mac-Mahon, a potentate of Ireland, compelled those under him to pay
tribute, whereupon the Deputy caused him to be taken and tried by a Jury of
Common Soldiers, and then to be hanged up, dividing his lands between some of
the Mahons and the English. Then Brian O Roch fearing he should be served in
the same manner raised a Rebellion, and being defeated fled into Scotland, but
at the Queens request was delivered up, and was arraigned at Westminster, for
dragging the Queens Picture at an Horse-tail, and for giving the Spaniards
entertainment; which being told him by an Interpreter, for he could speak no
English, he said, he would not be tried unless the Queen her self were Judge,
but being informed this was the Law, he only said; 'If it must be so, it must
be so, and was condemned and executed at Tyburn, which he valued as little as
if all had been in Jest. In 1596 Tyrone with considerable forces raised a
Rebellion and was proclaimed Traitor, after which he gave the English a great
defeat, whereupon all Ulster, Munster and Connaught were in Arms against the
English; at length the Earl of Essex was sent against him, who instead of
fighting made a Truce with him. But afterward, the English so prevailed that
Tyrone finding his condition desperate resolved to throw himself upon the
Queens mercy without Conditions; hereupon being admitted to the presence of the
Deputy, at the very entry of the Room he fell on his Knees, begging pardon for
his great fault against God, and a most bountiful Prince; the next day the
Deputy took him along with him to Dublin, intending to send him to England, but
before he could come thither the Queen died.

In King James his Reign Tyrone and all his adherents absolutely submitted to
his Majesty's pleasure; who by an Act of Oblivion, published by Proclamation
under the Great Seal, did forgive and utterly extinguish all offenses against
the Crown, and all particular Trespasses between Subject and Subject, to all
who would come into the Justice of Assize by such a day, and claim the benefit
thereof, by which all the Irishry who in former times were generally left under
the Tyranny of their Lords and Cheiftains and had no defense nor justice from
the Crown, were now received into his Majesty's immediate protection; The
public peace being thus established, public Justice was next settled by
dividing all Ireland into shires, and erecting Circuits in every Province, and
governing all things therein according to the Laws of England, and lastly the
Estates and possessions of the English, as well as Irish, were settled
throughout the Kingdom, to the great comfort and security of all men, and
thereupon ensued the calmest and most universal peace for above forty years
that ever was seen in Ireland.

Yet the foundation thereof was not so strongly laid, but it received a shake
by the first Storm that threatened England: For being engaged in a War with
France and Spain about the beginning of the Reign of King Charles the I. 1627.
there was occasion for sending some additional Forces into Ireland for the
security thereof, upon which a Proposition was made to the chief of the Irish
Nation by the Lord Deputy Falkland, for contributing a competent sum of money
toward the maintenance of those Forces to be established by the way of a
standing Army, to which they would not condescend without a Toleration of
Religion first obtained, though Archbishop Usher, then Lord Primate of all
Ireland, in a great Assembly of Irish and English at Dublin, used many cogent
Arguments to persuade them to it, and among others, That their being Romanists
would not exempt them the more from the danger of a Common Enemy, as they might
conjecture from the answer which the Duke of Medina Sidonia gave in this case
in 1588. That his Sword knew no difference between a Catholic and an Heretic,
but that he came to make way for his Master. Diverse other notable instances he
gave whereby he prophetically intimated what afterward fell upon Ireland in
1641. when above one hundred and fifty thousand British Planters were most
inhumanely massacred by the outrageous Irish, without the least provocation
given to prepetrate such wicked and unparalleled acts of Barbarism.

But before I proceed to give an account of that dismal Tragedy; I will make
some brief deduction of some former Transactions in this Kingdom, and discover
the beginnings and progress of the General Rebellion in 1641.

Ireland for near five hundred years has continued under the Sovereignty of the
Crown of England, and presently after its first Conquest was planted with
English Colonies, long since worn out or generally become Irish, and therefore
has in this last age been supplied with great numbers of People from England
and Scotland to settle there. The Irish, as we have related, want not many
Fabulous inventions to magnify the Original of their Nation, but whether the
Scythians, Gauls, Africans, Goths or some other Eastern Nations that anciently
inhabited Spain, came and sat down there is very uncertain yet their Manners,
Customs, words, names, and still retained Ceremonies seem very much to
demonstrate their first rise from some of those People; For it may be
conjectured that as the Eastern Parts of Ireland bordering upon England were
first planted by the old Britains, several of their words being still in use;
and as the Northern Parts were first inhabited by the Scythians, from whom it
was called Scyteland or Scotland; So the South and more Western Ports thereof
were peopled by the Maritime Parts of Spain, being the next Continent, not by
the present Spanish Nation, who are now a different mixture of People, but it
is probable by the Gauls, who anciently inhabited all the Seacoasts of Spain.

The whole Kingdom of Ireland was divided into five principal Cheiftains, or
Commanders, that is, Macmorough of Leinster, Mac-cartye of Munster, O Neal of
Ulster, O Connor of Connaught, and O Malaghlin of Mead, who were called Kings,
but as they had neither Hereditary Right nor Lawful Election, so they were
neither Anointed nor Crowned, but made their way by the Sword, and were
invested with certain Barbarous Ceremonies, and ruled with all manner of
Tyranny, the People being absolute slaves to all the savage Customs practiced
under their Dominion, which continued till the reign of Henry II. King of
England, in whose time the undertaking for the Conquest of Ireland, was very
Successful, being made by most Powerful, though private Adventurers upon this
occasion.

Dormet Mac-Morough King of Leinster, being forced to fly his Country by the
Kings of Conaught and Mead, repaired to King Heary, then personally attending
his Wars in France, and earnestly implored his Aid, for recovering his
Territories, most Injuriously, as he pretended, taken from him. The King
refused to imbark in the quarrel, yet graciously Recommended the Justice of his
Cause, to all his Loving Subjects, and assured them, that whoever would Assist
Dermot, should have free Liberty to Transport their Forces, and be held to do
very acceptable Service therein; Whereupon Strangebow Earl of Pembroke,
resolved as a private Adventurer, to Aid him with his utmost Power, and Dermot
coming to him at Bristol, an agreement was made, that Strangebow should marry
Dermots only Daughter Eva, and after his Death, should enjoy the Kingdom of
Leinster, of which she was Heiress; after which, Strangebow engaging some other
private Gentlemen in the Design, they got together a party of 490 Men, which
they Transported in three Ships to Wexford in Ireland, and there joining with
some of Dermots Forces, they not only Reduced that Town, but soon after possessed
themselves of all the Maritime Parts of Leinster.

King Henry upon the News of the prosperous reducement of so large a Territory,
by such inconsiderable Forces, desirous to share with his Subjects, both in the
profit and glory of so great an Action, Resolved to make an Expedition thither
in Person; when he Arrived there, the Presence of so great a Prince, had such a
strange Influence on the Minds of the rude Savage Natives, that partly by the
Power of his Arms, and partly by his Grace and Favor, in receiving them upon
their feigned Submissions, he soon Subdued this Barbarous Divided People. This
happened in 1172. the King found the Land good and flourishing with plenty of
all kind of Provisions, the Soil Rich and Fertile, the Air Sweet and Temperate,
the Heavens safe and commodious, several Towns and Villages scattered up and
down in several parts of the Country, but the Buildings so Mean and
Contemptible, that when the King Arrived at Dublin, their Chief City, he found
no place for Entertainment, but was obliged to set up a long House made of
Smoothed Wattles, after the manner of that Country, and therein kept his
Christmas; all their Forts, Castles, Stately Buildings, and other Edifices,
were afterward Erected by the English, except some of their Maritime Towns,
which were Built by the Easterlings, which formerly Inhabited there; He found
likewise, several Monuments of Piety, and other Remarkable Testimonies, that
the Christian Religion had been planted there about 400 years after Christ, by
some Holy and Learned Men from Foreign Part (...) Sedulius, Paladius, and
Patricius, the Famous Irish Staint born at Kirk Patrick near Glasgo^ in
Scotland, who came hither out of a Pious Desire, to propagate the Gospel, and
for the Conversion of a Barbarous People, instructing them in the Principles of
the Christian Faith; and St Patricius with his unwearied endeavors, had such
great Success, that some Authors write, the Couren of Armagh was by him Erected
into an Episcopal See, 350 Bishops Consecrated, great Numbers of Clergymen
Instituted, who (notwithstanding the Notorious Ignorance and Debauchery of the
Common People) being most Monks by Profession, and of strict and severe Lives,
were so admited by other Nations in those rude Times, that in Respect to them,
Ireland was Termed the Isle of Saints^ But so quickly did Piety Decay, that
this Name was lost, Yea, the very Prints and Characters of Devotion
Obliterated, even among the Clergy themselves, and so filthy and depraved were
the manners of the Common People, that when King Henry the II. designed to go
thither, he obtained a Bull of Pope Adrian, to go over and Conquer Ireland, and
Reduce the Beastly Inhabitants into the way of Truth, and the King at his
Arrival, found them so indeed, being generally void of all manner of Civility,
Governed by no Settled Laws, living like Beasts, Biting and Devouring one
another, without all Rules. Customs, or Reasonable Constitutions, either for
Regulation of Property, or against open Force and Violence, most Notorious
Murders, Rapes, Robberies, and other Acts of Inhumanity and Barbarism, Raging
without Control or Punishment; whereupon he without any manner of Scruple, or
further Inquisition into particular Titles, resolving it seems to make good by
the Sword, the Popes Donation, made a General Seizure of all the Lands of the
whole Kingdom, and without further Ceremony, took them into his own hands; And
the more speedily to introduce Religion and Civility, and Accomplish the Work
so gloriously begun, the King called a great Council at Lissemore, where he
caused the Laws of England to be received, and Settled in Ireland, which he
United to the Imperial Crown of England, and Distributed the whole Land among
his English Officers and Soldiers.

A Learned Author in his Observations upon the Causes of the sudden Reducing of
Ireland, gives this as one Reason thereof; That a Synod or Council of the
Clergy, being Assembled at Armagh, and that point fully Debated, it was
unanimously agreed; That the Sins of the People, and particularly their buying
of Englishmen from Pirates, and Detaining them under most miserable Bondage,
was one great occasion of the Heavy Judgment fallen upon the Nation, and that
Heaven by way of just Retaliation, had now suffered them to be Reduced by the
English, to the same Slavery; Whereupon they Ordered all the English in
Captivity throughout the Land, to be Released; If so heavy a Judgment fell upon
them for the hard usage of some few English, what Expiation can they now
pretend to make, for the Effusion of so much Innocent Blood in 1641. when in
two years time, above three Hundred Thousand Protestants were cruelly Murdered
in Cold Blood;

King John came into Ireland in his Minority to little purpose, but upon a
second general Defection in the 12 year of his Reign, he made a second
Expedition thither, and Built several Forts and strong Castles, many of which
remain to this Day; ^e Erected Courts of Judicature, and settled the English
Colonies, and Civil Government; King Richard II. upon the same occasion made
two Voyages thither in Person; but both these Princes to save English Blood and
Treasure, and having likewise Tro^bles at Home, were both content to suffer
themselves to be abused by the feigned Submissions of the Irish, who finding
their present inability to resist such great Forces, came from the farthest
parts of the Kingdom, to submit to their Merey, and yet some have observed,
that they left not one True Subject more behind them, than they found at their
first Arrival. However, by the Presence of these Princes, and the Care of the
Governors set over them, the first Adventurers, and others of the English
Nation, drove the Irish out of all the Habitable parts of the Country,
especially those on the Seacoasts, and afterward grew so Potent, that they
Entertained private Animosities against each other, yea, their Dissentions were
so great, that at length they drew in the Irish, whom they had driven up into
the Mountains, and ever esteemed their most deadly Enemies, to take part in
their Quarre's, shamelesly using their Affistance, for the Enlargement of their
own private Territories, against their own Compa^^iots and Joint Tenants in
that good Land; the Irish glad of the Occasion, Fomented these Broils among the
English, whom they mortally hated, to the utmost, and notwithstanding the great
Privileges they enjoyed by their Protection, always showed the utmost Aversion
to them, and their Laws; Insomuch that besides the five Irish Kings and their
Families aforementioned, the rest of that Nation were always reckoned Aliens,
and absolute Enemies, so that from Hen. II. to Hen. VIII. none were admitted to
be Subjects, or received any benefit by the English Laws, but such as purchased
Charters of Denization; and it was no Capital Offense to kill any of them,
since the Laws did neither protect their lives, nor Revenge their Deaths, so
that living in the Bogs and Woods on the Mountains, they upon all occasions,
declared their Malice and Hatred against the English Colonies, planted near
them.

However the English were still Owners and Possessors of the Kingdom, and kept
themselves almost Entire, for the first Hundred years after their Arrival, not
suffering the Irish to live promiscuously among them, but by an High Hand, Kept
them in due Obedience and Subjection to the Crown of England, and when they
afterward grew more careless, and intermingled among them, whereby the english
learnt their beastly Manners and Customs, there were very severe Laws made
against them, so that in the Reign of King Edward III. It was declared High
Treason to Marry with the Irish, or to let them Nurse their Children, and to
use the Irish Language, Names or Apparel was made a Praemunire, that is, to lose
their Estates, and be perpetually imprisoned; And though in after Ages, the
English endeavored to Civilize the People, and introduce the English Laws,
Language, Habit and Customs among them, thereby to reduce them to Civility, yet
such was their Rough, Rebellious Disposition, and their implacable Malice to
the English, that nothing could Attemper, or Reduce them to any Tolerable
patience, or persuade them to live peaceably among them; So that in all times,
as well when they were admitted into the Condition of Subjects, as while they
were Esteemed and Treated as Enemies, they took all Advantages, most
perfidiously to rise up and imbrue their Hands in the Blood of their English
Neighbors, and Ireland has long continued a true Aceldama, or Field of Blood,
and a dismal Sepulcher for the English Nation; for after their intermixing with
the Irish, they Barbarousl^ Degenerated into their Manners and Customs, inso
much, that-by their intestine Broils, and the Mischievous Attempts of the Irish
upon them the English from their first Access to Ireland, till the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, being above 380 years, had no settled Peace nor Comfortable
Subsistence amongst them, but were in such perpetual Troubles, and so overworn
with misery, that they could scarce Survive the Universal Calamity that
overspread the face of the whole Kingdom.

Whereupon that excellent Queen in the beginning of her Reign, out of her Pious
Intentions and Affections to her People, took care to Redress these Disorders,
and sending over Prudent and Religious Governors, made a great Reformation by
many good Laws Enacted against the Barbarous Customs of the Irish, and for the
Execution of Justice throughout the Country, which were reduced into Shires
and Sheriffs, and others Ministers of Justice placed in them, and the High
Powers, Usurpations and Extortions of the Irish were Restramed, and several
Destructive Customs Repress^d; The two Presidential Courts of Munster and
Connaught, were then Instituted, and special Order taken for Free Schools to be
Erected for Educating Youth throughout the Kingdom; But these and other Courses
for the Advancement of True Religion and Civility, were Highly Disagreeable to
the loose Humors of the Natives, who pretended the English Government was
Insupportable, and began Desperately to struggle for their Liberty, several
Plots were laid, some by those who were of the Old English by Extraction, and
diverse Rebellions and petty Revolts happened during that Queens Reign, which
she timely Suppressed, either by Force and Favor, often Renewing her kindness to
them, upon their continued provocations, Restoring some Rebellious Lords to
their Forfeited Estates and Commands, and Bestowing New Titles of Honor upon
others; But all was in vain, the Malignant impressions of Irreligion and
Barbarism, Transmitted from their Ancestors, either by Infusion or Natural
Generation, had so irrefragably Stiffened their Necks, and hardened their
Hearts, that they still retained all their wicked Customs and Inclinations,
without change in their Affections or Manners, having their Eyes inflamed, and
their minds enraged with Rancor and Revenge against the English Nation,
breathing forth nothing but their Ruin, Destruction, and ^tter Extirpation,
and resolving at once to Disburthen the whole Kingdom, and their Posterity of
them, and deliver themselves from their Subjection to the Crown of England, a
desperate Rebellion was raised by the Earl of Tyrone, who had received Titles
of Honor from the Queen a Command of Horse and Foot, great proportions of
Land, and other Favors, which he now ingratefully Cancelled engaging most of
the Irish, and some English Degenerate Families in his Treacherous Designs, and
likewise calling in some Foreign Forces to his Assistance. The Queen perceiving
that no Obligations would secure the Irish Loyalty, Resolved to Reduce them by
Force, which was done in a short time and Tyrone brought upon his Knees, though
not without the Expense of much English Blood, above a Million of Money, the
Country miserably wasted, and a general Desolation and Famine over-spreading
the Land.

King James at his first coming to the Crown, conceiving that the powerful
Conjunction of England and Scotland, would overcome the Irish, and contain them
in their due Obedience, resolved not to take any Advantage of these Forfeitures
and great Confiscations, which he was most justly Entitled to by Tyrones
Rebellion, but restored all the Natives to the entire possession of their own
Lands; After which, for six years, the Country was indifferent quiet, when
Tyrone made a second Insurrection, and drew in the whole Province of Ulster,
who were absolutely at his Devotion, to join with him; but his Plot failed him,
for not finding himself in a Capacity to Resist the English Forces, he fled
into Spain, promising speedily to return with Foreign Succors, but by the care
of the Government, this Designed Rebellion was quelled in the beginning, and
Tyrone never came back; After which, King James being justly provoked by the
High Ingratitude of these Traitors, caused their Persons to be Attainted, and
their Lands to be Seized, and Distributed them among British Undertakers, many
of whom came over and Settled in the Province of Ulster with their Families, and
Built several good Towns and Castles, in diverse parts of the Country, whereby
much Civility was introduced, and the whole Kingdom began to Flourish in Costly
Buildings, and all manner of Improvements, and the very Irish seemed to be much
satisfied with the Peace and Tranquillity they enjoyed.

King Charles the I. was no less Indulgent to them, for in 1640. upon the
Complaint and Remonstrance sent him from both Houses of Parliament, then
Sitting at Dublin, Representing the Heavy Pressures they had suffered under the
Government of the E. of Strafford, he made present Provision for their Redress,
Constituting Sir William Parsons and Sir John Burlace, Lords Justices of that
Kingdom, who declared against the late proceedings, as varying from the Common
Law, and abated the Subsidy that was given in the Earl of Straffords time, from
40000 to 12000 l. and soon after Robert Sydney Earl of Leicester was made Lord
Lieutenant; The Roman Catholics likewise privately enjoyed the free Exercise
of their Religion, and by the overgreat indulgence of the late Governors, had
their Titular Archbishops, Bishops, Vicars General, Provincial Consistories,
Deans, Abbots, Priors and Nuns, who without Control, exercised a voluntary
Jurisdiction over them; they had also their Priests, Jesuits and Friars, who
came in great Numbers from Foreign Parts, and without restraint, Settled
themselves in all the Chief Towns, Villages, Noblemen and Gentlemen's Houses,
and none of the Laws were put in Execution against them, and the Ancient
Animosities between the two Nations seemed to be Buried, so that they lived
together in Peace for 40 years, Marriages, and all other indearments of
Friendship, passing between them, and the Irish Lords and Gentlemen, found such
Advantage by the English Commerce and Cohabitation in the great Improvement of
their Lands, and Native Commodities beyond what they ever formerly enjoyed,
that Phelini O Neal, and many other principal Leaders in the Succeeding
Rebellion, had not long before, turned their Irish Tennants out of their Lands,
and exposed them to starve upon the Mountains, and took the English for their
Tenants, who gave them greater Rents, and paid them more certainly; These and
many other Symptoms of a Flourishing Kingdom seemed to declare, That the Peace
and Tranquillity of the Nation, was fully Settled, and humanly probable so to
continue, and the Irish Army Raised for the Invasion of Scotland, was peaceably
Disbanded, and no Noise of War temained in the Coasts.

In this great Calm, the English continued in a most deep Security, when on a
sudden, the Irish Papists raised a Rebellion so execrable in its self, so
o^ious to God and the whole World, as no Age, Kingdom nor People can parallel
the Horrid Cruelties, and Abominable Murders, that were without Number, as
well as without Mercy, committed upon the British Inhabitants throughout the
Land, of what Sex, Age, or Condition soever, which was long before presaged by
some discerning Persons, particularly by the excellent, Learned and Religious
Archbishop, Usher of Armagh, who amongst many other extraordinary Gifts and
Graces, wherewith he was endowed, had a wonderful Spirit of Prophecy, from
which among many other things, he foretold this Bloody Rebellion 40 years be^re
it came to pass, in a Sermon preached at Dublin, in 1601. where from Ezekiel
4.6. Discoursing concerning the Prophets bearing the iniquity of Judah 40 Days,
the Lord therein appointing a Day for a year, he made this direct Application,
in Relation to the Connivance at Popery at that time; From this year, says he,
will I reckon the Sin of Ireland, that those whom you now embrace, shall be
your Ruin, and you shall bear your Iniquity; Which Prediction proved exactly
true, for from that time, 1601. to 1641. was just 40 years. It is observed,
that the Irish have naturally a dull and deep Reservedness, which makes them
carry on their Business with much Silence and Secrecy, but yet it is Admirable,
to consider how this mischievous Plot which was generally to be acted by
several Persons, in diverse places at the same time, should without Noise, be
brought to the very point of Execution, without any Notice or Intimation given
to any two of that huge Multitude of Persons, who were designed to be
Sacrificed in it, there not being any certain Discovery made of it, till Oct.
22. which happened in the manner following.

Owen O Covally, a Gentleman of a mere Irish Family; but had long lived among
the English, being a Servant to Sir John Clothwarthy, and Trained up in the
Protestant Religion, came to the Lord Justice Parsons, about nine a Clock that
Evening, and gave an account of a Wicked and Damnable Plot, contrived by the
Irish Papists, for Seizing the Castle of Dublin, the very next Day; with all
the Arms and Ammunition therein: And at the same Hour, all other Forts and
Magazines of Arms in the Kingdom; and that all the Protestants and English, who
would not join with them should be cut off; and thereby, the Papists would be
possessed of the Government and Kingdom at the same instant; upon this Discovery,
the Lords, Justices and Councils, caused Recruits to be put into the Castle,
and the City to be Guarded, and then endeavored to seize the Traitors, many of
whom came into the City that Night, and Hugh Mac-Mahon Esquire, Grandson to the
Rebel Tyrone, and the Lord Mac-Guire: Two of the principal Conspirators, were
made Prisoners; but several others of the chief, escaped that Night: So that
only 30 of the most inconsiderable were taken, the great ones having too many
Friends in the City, who furthered their escape. Mac-Malion being Examined
before the Council, without much Difficulty, confessed the Plot, Resolutely
telling them; That on that very Day, Oct. 23. 1641. All the Forts and strong
Places in Ireland, would be taken; That he with the Lord Mac-Guire, Hugh Birn,
Captain Brian O Neal, and several other Irish Gentlemen, were come up expressly
to Surprise the Castle of Dublin, that 20 Men out of each County, were to be
there to join with them: That all the Popish Lords and Gentlemen in the
Kingdom, were engaged in this Plot; that what was that Day to be done in other
Parts of the Country, was so far Advanced by that time, as it was impossible
for the Wit of Man to prevent it; and added, that it was true, they had him now
in their power, and might use him how they pleased; but he was sure he should
be Revenged.

The next Day News Arrived, that the Irish were Risen in the Province of
Ulster, Plundering, Burning and Massacring the poor English, and the Rebellion
appeared to be general, over all the Northern part of the Kingdom; and every
Hour, people Arrived at Dublin, like Jobs Messengers, telling the Story of
their own Sufferings, and the fearful Murders of the Protestants, in all parts
from whence they came. The Rebels grew stronger every Day, and by the latter
end of October, had got possession of all the Towns, Forts, Castles, and
Gentlemen's Houses, in seven whole Counties, and half the County of Down, except
Londonderry, Colrain, and the Town and Castle of Inniskilling; this impetuous
Torrent of Success, seemed to proceed from the great Security and Confidence
the English had in the Irish, with whom they lived peaceably and quietly, and
to whom they had not given the least provocation: So that in the Northern
Countries, they were suddenly swallowed up, and overrun, before they could make
any manner of Resistance; For most of the English, having either Irish Tenants,
Servants, Landlords, or Familiar Neighbors: So soon as the Country began to
rise about them, many fled to them for preservation, and with great Confidence,
put their Lives, Wives, Children, and all they had into their Power; but these
generally, either betrayed them into the Hands of other Rebels, or most
persidiously Murdered them with their own Hands.

The Friests had now influenced the Irish with bloody Maxims; and the Day
before the horrid Massacre began, they gave the People a Dismission at Mass,
with full liberty, to go out and take possession of all their Lands; which they
pretended were unjustly detained from them, by the English, assuring them: That
it was a Mortal Sin, to give any manner of Relief or Protection to the
Protestants; and that they ought to spare neither, Man, Woman, nor Child: That
they might lawfully Strip, Rob, and despoil them of all their Goods and
Cattels; That the Protestants were worse than Dogs; for they were Devils, and
Worshipped the Devil, and that the killing of such, was an excellent
preservative against the pains of Purgatory, since the Bodies of such
Catholics, as should dye in this quarrel, would not be cold, before their
Souls should ascend up to Heaven, without touching (...) Purgatory; which
cursed Doctrine, caused some of these Murdering Villains to boast: That if
they should dye presently, they were certain of going straight to Heaven.

Having thus received the Watchword from their Priests, both as to time and
place, they rose up, actuated, as it were by the same Spirit in several places,
at one and the same time, Murdering and Stripping some, and expelling others
out of their Habitations; All Bonds of Faith and Friendship were now broken,
the Irish Landlords made a Prey of their English Tennants; Irish Tenants and
Servants made a Sacrifice of their English Landlords and Masters; one
Neighbor, was cruelly Murdered by another: Yea, the very Irish Children stripped
and killed the English Children, and it was esteemed a Meritorious work in any
of them, that could by any means and ways whatsoever, bring an English Man to
Slaughter. The English in the mean time, tho in some Churches and Castles, they
made a very gallant Defense with small Parties; yet did not draw together in
any considerable Body, so as to withstand the Numerous Forces of the Rebels: So
that generally every Man striving the best he could to secure his own Family,
Goods and Cattle gave their Enemies opportunity to destroy them all; which they
acted with great delight, to satiate their Ancient implacable Malice,
declaring; That it did them a great deal of good, to wash their Hands in the
Protestants Blood; and so it appeared by the Examination of several English
Persons upon Oath, who gave the following account of some of their most
Notorious Cruelties, and Barbarous Murders.

That in the County of Fermanah, multitudes were killed in cold Blood, some at
Plough, others as they sat peaceably in their own Houses, or Traveling on the
way, without any manner of Provecation; at Lisgol Castle, above 150 Men, Women
and Children, were Burnt or Smothered, the Rebels having set it on Fire: In the
Castle of Moneah, 90 Protestants were Murdered; and in the Castle of Tullah;
which was delivered upon promise of fair Quarters, they first stripped, and then
Murdered them all without Mercy; At Lissenskeah they hanged, and killed above
100 Scots: This County was very well Planted by the British Undertakers; but
all of them and their Tenants in a very short space, were in a most horrible
manner destroyed, or Banished from their Habitations. They compelled one
Middleton to hear Mass; and to Swear never to alter from it, and immediately
after, caused him, his Wife and Children, to be hanged up, and 100 Persons more
in that Town: There were a Thousand Men, Women and Children carried out at
several times, and unmercifully drowned at Portnedoum Bridge, which was broken
in the midst, and 4000 more in several Parts of that Country, the Rebels
thrusting them into the River, with their Swords and Pikes; and if any
endeavored to Swim, they knocked them on the Head, or Shot them: Among others,
one Mrs. Campbell, being forcibly brought by them to the River, and finding no
means to escape their fury, suddenly claspt her Arms about one of the chief
Rebels that was most forward to thrust her into the Water, and carried him to
the bottom with her, and so they were both drowned together. They burnt the
Cathedral of Armaugh, and Mardered 500 Persons there, and 48 Families were
Murdered by order of Sir Phelim O Neal, who had Remained, Protected by him 3
quarters of a year before; John Cander being told by a Rebel, that he would not
kill him, till he had said his Prayers, the poor Man was no sooner on his
knees; but he instantly cut off his Head. Some of the Villains, when the
Protestants desired to make their Prayers before their Death: told them that
they should bequeath their Souls to the Devil, and that they need not pray, for
their Souls were with the Devil already; and with these words in their Mouth,
would slaughter, and put them to Death. Others they buried alive, and some were
twice or thrice hanged up, and others wounded, and left half Dead, crying out
Lamentably; for some to come and Dispatch them out of their Miseries, by
killing them: At Clownis in the County of Ferr^^nagh. 17 Persons being hanged
till they were (...) Dead, were cast together into a Pit, and covered with a
little Earth, sending forth most Lamentable Groans, for a great while after;
and among them, four or five young Children, the youngest of whom not fully
Dead, put forth the Hand, crying, Mammy, Mammy, to the Murdered Mother; but was
without Mercy, Buried alive by these Miscreants: Some they grievously Wounded,
and then hung them up upon Tenter-Hooks, Others were drawn with Ropes about
their Necks, through Woods and Boggs, and hanged up, and taken down again
several times, to make them confess their Money; these inhuman Monsters,
exercised horrid Cruelty on the Female Sex, whom they neither pittyed nor
spared, hanging up several Women great with Child; and then ripped up their
Bellies, letting the little Infants fall out, and using such Barbarous, Beastly
Actions toward them, as are unfit to be related: At Kinard, the Rebels sent
abroad their Children in Troops, Armed with long Wattels and Whips, wherewith
to beat the Marthered Bodies of Men about the Nudities, until they beat, or
rather thresh them off; and for this Villainous Service, were received with
great joy by their Parents, and if any Woman were found Dead, lying with her
face downward, they would turn them on their Backs, and in great numbers, the
Irish would resort to look or them, censuring and abusing them, with all manner
of Filthiness: In Sligo, 30 Protestants, Men and Women, were Murdered in the
Jayl, after which, the Villains placed some of the Dead Bodies of the Men,
naked upon the Bodies of the Women; in which posture, they continued to be seen
by the Irish of the Town next Morning, who much delighted and rejoiced in these
inhuman Actions; and they that came to bury the Prisoners, stood up to the mid
Leg in the Blood and Brains of those that (...) so Murdered; after which, the
River of Sligo which used to abound in Fish, afforded none at all for a long
time, though the Friars in their white Habits, went in Solemn Procession, and
threw Holy Water therein.

It would be almost endless, to give a particular account, of all the
Detestable Cruelties and Murders acted by these incarnate Devils, upon the
Innocent English, of whom they destroyed, near three Hundred Thousand in a few
Months; being chiefly Animated thereto, by their Villainous Priests, upon the
account of their Religion; and therefore, they often declared their Despite to
the Bible, as being directly contrary to their Cursed Principles and Practices:
In one place they burnt two English Bibles, saying, It was Hell Fire they
burnt. They laid another in a puddle of Water, and then stamping on it, said, a
Plague on it, This Bible has bred all the quarrel: A Rebel persuaded a Man and
his Wife, to join with them in the Massacre, who protested, that rather than
they would forsake their Religion, they would dye upon the Sword's point; he
would then have had the Woman burn her Bible; but she refused, saying, she
would rather dye, than do it: Whereupon they were both cruelly Murdered: they
Murdered Mr. Bingham, a Famous Minister, and cutting off his Head, put a Gag
in his Mouth, and laying the leaf of a Bible before him, bid him Preach,
saying, his Mouth was open, and wide enough.

During these horrid Barbarities, there were several Indications of Divine
Displeasure, apparent in diverse places, the truth of which was sworn to, and
affirmed by Witnesses of Credit and Reputation; As in the Province of Munster,
near the Silver Works; where while the Rebels were Massacring a great number of
Protestant Men, Women, and Children on the Lords Day Afternoon, a most Loud and
Dreadful Noise and Storm of Thunder, Lightning, Wind, Hailstones and Rain
happened, though it was fair all the Day before; which much affrighted the
Murderers themselves, who confess it to be a sign of Gods Anger against them,
for their Bloody Cruelty; At Portnedown Bridge, where so many thousand
Protestants were drowned, the remaining Inhabitants, were so Terrified with the
noise of Spirits and Visions for Revenge, that they durst not continue
thereabout; and some of the Rebels themselves said to others; that the Blood of
some of those that were knocked on the Head, and afterward drowned in this
River, remained on the Bridge, and could not be washed away: There appeared
sometimes Men, sometimes Women, Breast high in the River, with Hands lifted up,
crying out with fearful Schreicks and Voices, Revenge. Revenge, Revenge; and it
was not long, ere Divine Justice overtook them: Many thousands of the most
Notorious Murderers, who perished by the Sword and Plague, that followed it;
so that it was computed, that in a few years, scarce any of these Miscreants
remained alive; but were sent to their own place to give an account of their
Tremendous Brutalities.

The King having made a Truce with the Scots, who were entered with an Army into
England, to demand the Redress of their Grievances, and the Forces on both
sides being Disbanded; he made a Journey into Scotland, in the beginning of
August, 1641. and continued there, till the latter end of October, when this
Horrid Rebellion happened. Owen O Covally, the first Discoverer of the Plot,
brought the first Letters to London, and received as a Reward, 500 l. in Money,
and an Annuity of 200 l. a year; and presently, the Parliament provided for the
Relief of Ireland; and the Lords of the Council, and the Lords Justices there,
had with the Arms that were in Dublin Armed many well-affected Gentlemen, and
several Active Commanders were sent out of the City, to defend the adjoining
Places from the Approach of the Rebels; at which time, the Parliament sent over
Twenty Thousand Pounds, for a present supply; but could not relieve them with
any Forces, till December following, when Sir Simon Harcourt Arrived with
Seasonable Supplies of men and money, and Raised the Seige of Drogheda; which
had been much straightened by Sir Phelim O Neal, and the Rebels; and the English
recovered Dundalk, Neury, and several other Towns and Castles out of their
Hands;

But though the Rebellion brake out in October 23. Yet the King, who was now
returned from Scotland, did not proclaim them Rebels, till Jan. 1. following,
and then gave strict Command, that only 40 Proclamations should be printed, and
that none of them should be Published, without the Kings Express Order; which
the Parliament among other things, afterward Taxed him with; Who Replied
thereto: That he was unwilling to make the Irish Desperate, and utterly undo
his Protestant Subjects, who were then too weak to withstand so Potent a
Rebellion; and that the Lords Justices of Ireland, required only 20, as many of
themselves well knew: Yet this proceeding unhappily increased the Jealousies
that began to arise between the King and his English Parliament; because it was
publicly discourst, that it had not been done at all; but that some Worthy
Protestant Lords, had earnestly advised him to proclaim them speedily, that a
better course might be taken against them, and to wash off that foul Stain from
himself, by prosecuting severely, those wicked Villains, who reported every
where: That they had Authority from the King, to Seize upon the Holds of the
English Protestants; that they were the Queens Soldiers, and rise to maintain
the Kings Prerogative, against the Puritan Parliament of England: That they
told the poor Protestants, it was for no purpose to fly for safety into
England; for that Kingdom would be as much distressed as theirs; and that the
King intended to forsake his Parliament in England, and make War against them,
and that then they would come over (having done their their Work in Ireland)
and help the King against his English Parliament. The Lords therefore advised
him by all means, to purge himself of these Accusations, than which there could
not be greater on Earth.

Soon after the Earl of Leicester was made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, the Earl
of Strafford being Beheaded some time before at Tower Hill; But the Relief of
that Bleeding Kingdom, was much obstructed by the wide Breaches which daily
happened between the King and the Parliament, particularly upon his going, Jan.
4. Attended with 300 Armed Gentlemen, into the H. of Commons, and Demanding 5
Members to be delivered him, which the Parliament declared to be, An High
Breach of their Privileges, a great Scandal to the King and his Government, a
Seditious Act, manifestly tending to the Subversion of the Peace, and an Injury
and Dishonor to the said Members, there being no Legal charge, or accusation
against them; and that there could be no Vindication of those Privileges,
unless his Majesty would discover the Names of those who advised him to such
unlawful Courses: After this, the Parliament considered of a Bill, for Pressing
Soldiers to be sent out of Scotland, to Ireland, as being near; but the King
excepted against it, while it lay in the House of Lords, as a Diminution to his
Prerogative; Whereupon the Parliament in their Petition to him Asserted; That
the King by taking notice of a Bill; while in Debate in the House of Lords, had
broken the Fundamental Privilege of Parliament; which he ought not to do,
concerning any Bill, till it be presented to him in due course of Parliament;
and desired Reparation. They then desired, that an Army of Scots should be sent
thither; and that they should have the keeping of the Town and Castle, of
Carick-fergus; but the King said, that he doubted this might be to the Damage
of England; The Scots Commissioners replied: That they were sorry, his Majesty
being their Native King, should repose less Trust in them, than their
Naighbouring Nation had freely done: So that at length, this was granted.

It was thought to be the most Feasible way for Reducing Ireland, that
proportions of Land there should be shared among English Adventurers,
proportional to those Sums of Money they should Subscribe; that so, whosoever
in Person, or Purse, should assist in Conquering the Bloody Rebels, might be
Recompensed, if the Work were done; and Propositions were framed in Parliament
to that purpose; which the King confirmed: Though at first he laughed at them,
and was heard to say: That they were like to him, who Sold the Bears Skin,
before the Bear was killed: At length an Act was passed for impowring the
Parliament to carry on that War, till Ireland should be declared wholly Subdued,
and that no Peace nor Cessation of Arms should ever be made with the Rebels,
without consent of both Houses of Parliament. The King then offered to go in
Person thither; but the Parliament thought it not fit to hazard his Person in
such an Expedition.

The Queen about February, went to Holland, carrying with her, most of the
Crown Jewels, which she had pledged for Money and Arms for the King her
Husband; and for which, she was afterward voted a Traitor by the Parliament;
the King having taken leave of her at Dover, went with the Prince and Duke of
York to Theobalds, and from thence to Newmarket; where both Houses Presented
him a Declaration, sent by two Lords, in which they Repeat the old Grievances,
the War of Scotland, the Rebellion in Ireland, his entering the House of
Commons, his causless fear of Residing near London to the perplexing of the
Kingdom, the hindering the Relief of Ireland; and encouraging the ill affected
Party in the Kingdom: To which the King answered, with great Indignation,
extenuating some things, and excusing others, accusing them for raising
needless Fears and Jealousies: After which, the King passed farther North, to
York: upon which, the Parliament voted, That the Kings Absence so far Remote
from his Parliament, is not only an Obstruction; but may be a Destruction to
the Affairs of Ireland: That when the Lords and Commons in Parliament shall
declare what the Law of the Land is, to have this not only questioned and
controverted, but contradicted, and a command that it should not be obeyed, is
an High Breach of the Privilege of Parliament. That they which advise the K.
to absent himself from his Parliament, are Enemies to the Peace of this
Kingdom; and justly to be suspected as Favorers of the Rebellion in Ireland.

From York, the King sent a Message to the Parliament, April 8. 1642. That he
would go in Person over to Ireland, against those Bloody Rebels, and intended
to raise a Guard for his Person in Cheshire, to carry thither of 2000 Foot, and
100 Horse; whom he would Arm from his Magazine of Hull: But the Parliament
having Intimation, that the K. designed to Seize that Magazine, to Arm himself
against them, sent Sir John Hotham thither, who refused to admit him Entrance;
upon which the K. Proclaimed him Traitor, and complained to the Parliament of
the Affront, who endeavored to appease him; but justified Hothams Act, and
declared, that the Proclaiming him Traitor, without process of Law, was against
the Liberty of the Subject, and Laws of the Land;

The King daily Summoned the Gentry of the Northern Counties to attend him, all
York as a Guard for his Person, which he declared, was in danger from the
Parliament, who thereupon declared, That it appears, that the King Seduced by
wicked Counsel, intends to make a War against the Parliament, who in all their
Consultations and Actions, have proposed no other end to themselves but the
Care of his Kingdoms, and the performance of all Duty and Loyalty to his
Person: That whenever the King makes War upon the Parliament, it is a breach
of the Trust Reposed in him by his People, contrary to his Oath, and tending to
the Dissolution of the Government; That whosoever shall Serve and Assist him in
such Wars, are Traitors by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom; and have been
so adjudged by two Acts of Parliament, 11 Rich. II. and 1 Henry IV. and that
such Persons ought to suffer as Traitors; the King Justified himself in his
Declarations and Proclamations, against the Parliament, which daily encountered
each other: So that all things tended to an absolute Rupture, and presaged the
Calamities of the Civil War, which soon after followed; For both sides flying
to Arms, and the Nation being divided into Parties, several bloody Battles were
fought, and the whole Kingdom was in a Flame.

In 1643. The Parliament of England invited the Scots to come in to their
Assistance, with an Army of 21000. Horse and Foot, engaging to pay them an
Hundred Thousand pound, toward the Charge of Raising them: On the other side,
the King to withdraw the Protestant Army out of Ireland, for Aiding him against
the Scots, concluded a Cessation of Arms for a year, with those Rebels; and
3000 of the English Army were Imbarqued from thence, to join with the King;
This Cessation was much complained of by the Parliament, since it was not only
for the benefit of the Irish Rebels, who gave him 3000 l. for the Favor; but
also directly contrary to the Act, which the King has lately Signed: That no
Cessation should be made, without the consent of both Houses. Thus was
Assistance brought to either side, and that English Army which for almost a
year, had fought Valiantly and Victoriously against those Rebels, was now
brought over to fight against the Parliament of England.

The War still continued with much Vigor, and great Slaughter was made
throughout the Kingdom; yet in the midst thereof, some Glimmerings of Peace
began to appear, for in 1644. Conditions were proposed, both by the King and
Parliament, and a Treaty began at Uxbridge, between Commissioners from both
Parties, during which, the care of the War was not neglected on either side,
the King endeavoring to bring over some Forces from the Duke of Lorrain, and
some Irish to his Assistance, and by his Letters to the Lord Lieutenant, to
make a Peace with the Rebels, or at least, to continue the Cessation for a
year; and to promise and grant them the free Exercise of the Romish Religion,
assuring them, that if by their Assistance, he could but finish his War in
England, he would Abrogate those Laws made against the Papists there: He gave
thanks likewise to Muskeny Plumket, and others of that party, promising a
Pardon for all that was past: But they were much troubled at the Treaty of
Peace with the Parliament; being sensible, that one necessary condition
thereof, must be the Vigorous Prosecution of the War in Ireland. The King to
remove this fear, writ to the Lord Lieutenant, that he could not refuse to make
a Peace with his Parliament, only upon the account of those Irish, it being a
point not Popular: Yet from that consideration, the Lieutenant might raise an
Advantage, to hasten a Peace with them, it letting them know their own Danger,
by being Excluded from all Hope of Pardon from the Parliament; For (says he)
if we agree upon all other conditions, it will not be convenient for me to
disagree, only concerning those Irish: Therefore let them take what I offer,
while time is, and hasten the Peace, and when once my Faith is passed, no Human
force shall make me break it.

The Queen also being then in France, writing to her Husband, seemed to grieve
much, that at Uxbridge, they were to Treat of Religion in the first place
assuring him, That if any thing severe against the Catholics, should be
concluded, and yet a ^eace not be made, the King could not hope for any
Assistance from the Catholic Princes, or from the Irish, who must needs think,
that after they had done their best, they should at last be forsaken; And often
entreats the King, that he would never forsake the Catholics, who had
faithfully served him in the Wars, etc. The Commissioners met at Uxbridge; but
nothing at all was concluded at that Treaty, so that the War must decide it; in
pursuance whereof, both Parties strengthen themselves with fresh Forces; and
the Kings Army was very formidable; but not content with so great a power of
English Soldiers, he seemed more earnest than before, to get over the Irish;
he had committed the Business to Ormond, to make an Absolute Peace; but
perceiving their Demands were too High, so that nothing was effected, he now
employed the Earl of Clamorgan, Son to the Marquess of Worcester, a zealous
Papist; and therefore more acceptable with the Rebels; giving him full power to
make a Peace; and indulge to the Irish, whatever might seem needful; and this
was Transacted so secretly, that both the Lord Lieutenant Ormond, and the Lord
Digby, Secretary of Ireland, were ignorant thereof, till it was afterward
Discovered and made public: But the King finding it difficult to make such a
Peace, as would bring him certain Assistance otherwise, that he might throw all
that Envy upon Glamorgan, empowered him, unknown to the rest; For so the Rebels
sweetened with large promises (unknown to Ormond) might the better admit of
Conditions just in show, and openly excusable; and the King might draw from
Ireland, such Soldiers as would more firmly adhere to his side, and whom he
might trust, (as being the greatest haters of the English Protestants, and
dispairing of Pardon) against the Parliament of England. He therefore gave
Letters of Authority to Glamorgan, in these words.

Charles by the Grace of God, King of England, etc. Defender of the Faith; to
our Trusty and well beloved Cosen, Edward Earl of Glamorgan, Greeting; Being
confident of your Wisdom and Fidelity: We do by these Letters, as if under our
Great Seal, grant unto you, full power and authority, to Treat with the
Confederate Roman Catholics in Ireland, and to indulge them, all those things
which necessity shall require, and which we cannot so Comodiously do by our
Lieutenant, nor our self publicly own at present: Therefore We Command, that
you do this Businese with as much Secrecy as can be; Whatsoever you shall think
fit to be promised in my Name, that I do attest upon the word of a King and a
Christian, to grant to those Confederate Catholics, who by their Assistance,
have abundantly showed their zeal to us, and our Cause; Given at Oxford, under
our Royal Seal, March 12. and 20 year of our Reign.

In pursuance of these Powers, the Earl of Glamorgan assured the King: He would
Land 6000 Irish Papists in May following in Wales, and with the Transport
Ships, block up Melford Haven, having already to advance the same, thirty
thousand pound in Money, 1000 Muskets, 2000 Case of Pistols, 800. Barrels of
Powder, besides his own Artillery, and a certainty of 30000 l. more. The K.
likewise obliged the Earl of Antrim to join with the Marquess of Montross, then
in Arms in Scotland, who engaged to send 10000 Irish thither from Ireland,
where the passage was shortestito assist him; but was very deficient therein,
being scarce able to send 1200 thither.

In 1644. the Parliament ordered the Arraignment of the Lord Macguire, and
Colonel Mahon, who were Seized at Dublin, the Night before the Discovery of
the Rebellion there, and had been in the Town ever since: They were now brought
to their Trial at the Kings Bench Bar at Westminster, where Macguire insisted
much upon his Peerage, but was over ruled; and both found Guilty of High
Treason, by a Jury of Middlesex Gentlemen, and executed at Tyburn. In 1646. the
Lord Lieutenant, endeavored to make the Cessation with the Irish, a kind of a
Peace; which they condescended to, upon the following Propositions. 1. That the
Exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion, should be in Dublin and Drogheda, and
in the Kingdom of Ireland, as free as in Paris and Brussels. 2. That the Privy
Council of Ireland consist of Members True and Faithful to his Majesty, and who
have been Enemies to the Parliament. 3. That Dublin, Drogheda, Trim, Newry,
Cathirly, Carlingford, and all Protestant Garrisons be Manned by the
Confederate Catholics, to keep the same for the use of the King, and Defense
of the Kingdom. 4. That the said Counselors, Generals, Commanders and
Soldiers, do Swear and Engage to fight against the Parliament of England, and
all the Kings Enemies; and that they will never come to any Agreement with
them, to the prejudice of His Majesty's Rights and and the Kingdoms. 5. That
both Parties according to their Oath of Association, shall to the best of their
power and cunning, defend the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, the Kings
Rights, and Liberties of the Subject.

This Peace was kept by some of the moderate Papists; but was ill Resented,
both by the Parliament of England, and the Popes Nuncio, who infiuenced the
most Serious Papists: To put a stop to which, the Parliament sent 2000 Men from
Chester, under Colonel George Monk, with 3 Commissioners to the Lord Lieutenant
at Dublin; who refused to Deliver the City to them, without the Kings Command:
So that after having Treated the Commissioners, the English Forces were again
Imbarqued, and Landed at Belfast in Ireland, whereby they did very good Service
against O Neal and his Fellow Rebels, who had of late been too Successful
against the Protestants: On the other side, the Nuncio's Party were so Elevated
with the Hopes of shaking off the English Yoke, neither of the two Kingdoms
being now in a Capacity to Relieve Ireland, that the Romish Clergy thundered
out Excommunication, against any that should Acquiesce in the said Peace and
Agreement, and with an Army of 17000 Horse and Hoot, resolved to Besiege
Dublin; which so startled the Protestants, that the Lord Lieutenant was obliged
to Resume the former Treaty with the Parliaments Commissioners, and the King
finding that all his Secret Transactions with the Earl of Glamorgan, were
Discovered by the Letters taken at Nas^by Fight, to the great Disgust of the
People in general; and that all the Assurance he had from the Lord Lieutenant,
and the Lord Digby, were Disappointed by the Falsness and Treachery of the
Rebels: He, though with much Reluctance, consented, that all manner of Treaty
with the Enemy, should cease; the Earl of Glamorgan being for a pretense
Imprisoned; the Lord Lieutenant being pressed with the Danger of a Seige from the
Roman Catholic Confederates, in 1647. Delivered up Dublin to the Parliaments
Commissioners, he having Articled for his passing freely to the King, on whom
he waited, while the Army carried him about, and afterward put him to Death;
and from thence passed to France, from whence about September, 16^8. The
Cathedral Confederates, dreading a Storm from England, by Letters to the King,
had importuned him to send for the said Marquess of Ormond, late Lord
Lieutenant; and ordered him to return again into Ireland, upon their Engagement
and Protestation of Plenary Submission to his Majesty's Authority, and to him
as his Lieutenant, as being the only proper Person for that Employment: The
Marquess accordingly undertook it, and making an agreement with the Lord
Inchequeen, and his Forces, and likewise with those of the Marquess of
Clan-riccard, and the Earl of Castlehaven, and the Confederate Catholics, who
had proclaimed the Nuncio's Party Rebels and Traitors; being all joined under
his Command, they designed to Reduce Dublin, then possessed by the Parliaments
Forces; but differences soon arose about the Exercise of the Popish Religion,
and upon points of Command, whereby Owen O Neal, that had a considerable Party
of Irish, was Disobliged, who thereupon makes an agreement with Colonel Monk,
in the Name of the Parliament, though they afterward disclaimed it; (but
acknowledged his Faithfulness and Well-meaning therein, by a Vote of
Parliament) considering how odious it would be, to have Assistance from Irish
Rebels; However, he Aided them all he could, and releived Londonderry, then
Besieged by the Confederate Forces: At length, the Marquess of Ormond comes
before Dublin with his Army, and obliges Colonel Jones the Governor, who had
drawn out some of the Garrison to interrupt them, to retire into the City,
which was indifferently Fortified, and plentifully Manned, both with Horse and
Foot; and therefore he durst not venture his Army upon a Desparate Assault,
since the Garrisons of Drogheda and Trim, lay so convenient to Attempt upon
them, Commanded by Coll^nel Monk and O Neal: So that the Marquess wanting Money
and Provisions, and the English and Irish Forces Murmuring against each other,
he was almost resolved to have Marched away; but O Neals Party being soon after
Defeated, and a Convoy of Arms and Ammunition, which were sent him by Colonel
Monk, being taken by the Lord Inchequeen; Drogheda was Surrendered, together
with Dundalk, the Garrison Compelling Colonel Monk to deliver it, and the
Soldiers took up Arms for the King; the Garrison of Trim, was soon after taken
from the Parliament; after which, the Lord Inchequeen brings up his Forces, now
much increased, to Assist the Marquess at the Siege of Dublin; who Designed to
shut up the Garrison within their works, and hinder them from getting Forage,
or to graze their Cattle without the Line, which was drawn round the Town; The
Besieged perceiving the Danger of being thus closely confined, whereby they
would have been prevented, of all Succor, both from Land and Sea; and knowing
the Marquesss want of Horse to Guard the New Forts, resolved by a desperate
Sally, to disturb them, which they made accordingly, Aug. 2. 1649. about 8 in
the Morning, with 1200 Foot, and 4000 Horse, and finding the New Fortification
slight, and the Resistance weak, they soon were Masters of it? from whence
seeing the Irish fly in great Disorder, they contrary to the first intentions,
pursued the Besiegers, even to the Avenues of their Camp, and being Animated by
Colonel Jones, their Governor, who had newly received a Supply of 3000 Men
from England, they fell with such fury upon the whole Army at Rachmines,
consisting of 19000 Men, that in a short time, they put them to the Rout,
killing 4000 on the place, and making 2517 Prisoners, many of them Persons of
quality, taking all their Cannon, and a Rich Camp to reward the Soldiers. Most
of the Lord Inchequeens Foot that at first made some Resistance, seeing the Day
lost, changed sides, and joined with the Parliaments Forces. All this was done
in so short a space, and with so little noise, that the Lord Dillon, and the
rest of the Marquess's Forces on the other side the River Liffy, knew nothing
of it, till some runaways brought the News, the Irish making such have home, in
so pannick a fear, that the Lord Lieutenant could not possibly rally them; and
therefore fled, with a considerable Perty to Kilkenny, and there endeavored to
draw together as many of his Dispersed Troops as possible, with which he speeds
away to Trim, and Drogheda, where he had notice, that Oliver Cromwell, the
Parliaments General, was Landed with considerable Forces, upon on which he put
a Garrison of 300 Horse, and 2500 Foot into Drogheda, which was thought
sufficient, and having furnished it with what Provisions he was able, and made
Sir Arthur Aston Governor, went from thence to Trim and Terrogan; About this
time, Londonderry possessed by the Parliament, and Besieged by Ormonds Forces
was relieved, and the Siege Raised, and not long after a Ship from Spain
brought the Plague into Galloway, whereof a great number of the Irish dyed.

Cromwell having refresht his Men at Dublin, Marches to Besiege Drogheda, and
made himself Master of it in a little time, after a stout Resistance from the
Garrison, putting most of the Officers, and every Tenth Soldier to the Sword,
to terrify others from making Opposition against his Victorious Arms: Sir
Arthur Afton, and several other principal Officers and Gentlemen, with near
3000 Soldiers being Slain; after this, Cromwell Besieges the Town of Wexford,
and soon reduced it, even before the Lord Lieutenants Eyes, with the loss of
2000 of the Irish; upon this, the Marquess makes an Agreement with Owen O Neal,
whereby the Ulster Army were to join with his, under the Command of Luke Taaf,
who was made Governor of Ross; but soon forced to surrender it to General
Cromwell, after which, the Garrisons of Bandon-Bridge, Yough-Hall, Cork,
Kingsale, and all the English Towns in Munster, declared for the Parliament;
and Cromwell marched to Besiege Dungannon; but finding little hopes of reducing
it quickly, he resolves to go to Kilkenny, and the Marquess of Ormond, and the
Lord Inchequeen retiring without hindering his March, he took in several strong
Towns and Forts, and at length Attacks Kilkenny with such Vigor, that he took
it in 6 days time; after which, he Besieges Clonmell, a strong Garrison, during
which, Colonel Reynolds and Hewson attack Trim, and the Lord Broghill Defeats
the Bishop of Ross, who designed to relieve Clonmell, which soon after was
taken by Assault, and a great carriage made; because of their Obstinacy in
defending the same: After this Cromwell having in 10 Months done the Work of so
many years, returns to England, and Colonel Ireton being made Lord Deputy is
sent over thither, there being only Lymrick, Waterford, Galloway, and some few
Castles in the hands of the Irish, the first of which, was Surrendered to him,
Oct. 29. 1651. But he dying, Colonel Edmond Ludlow, Succeeded him, as
Lieutenant General of the Army of that Kingdom: The War was now almost at at
end, and the Lord Claurivard being in Galloway, sends a Letter to Ludlow, to
desire him to appoint Commissioners to meet with others, for the composure and
conclusion of this wasting bloody War, which Ludlow refused; but sent him word:
That if the Irish would submit, they should have such Articles and Conditions,
as were fit for them; This prevailed on several Parties, as the Lord
Muskerries, Fitz Patricks, and the Odroyrs to come in and submit upon
condition, they might Transport their Forces into the Service of the King of
Spain: The Earl of Ormond, and the Lord Inchequeen, not pleased with the sace
of Affairs, left that Kingdom some time before, and went to France; and in
1652. the remaining Irish under the Lord Clanrick, and having received several
Defeats by the English Forces, May 12. Galloway was Surrendered, and afterward
the whole Country was Reduced to the Obedience of the English Parliament; Sir
Phelim O Neal, the Arch-Rebel, being likewise taken, Hanged and Quartered. The
last of the Irish, who held out in the Boggs and Fastnesses, was General O
Brian, who at length finding the weakness of his Party, and weary of his
sculking condition, obtained the usual Articles of Transportation; upon which
Articles it was reckoned, that from the year 1652. to 1653. near 27000. Irish
had departed the Kingdom, and the rest were Transported into the Province of
Connaught, environed on one side by the Sea, and locked up by Rivers and
Garrisons on the other, out of which they were not to stir, under a severe
penalty: By this means, the Country was much Depopulated, and the Lord
Fleetwood, and the Commissioners in Ireland sent over Letters, that some
English Colonies might be sent thither to inhabit, great Privileges being
offered to them that would Transport themselves; and accordingly, went over to
better their Fortunes, and in a short time, this Harassed and Ruinated Kingdom,
began to flourish again, both in Tillage, Buildings, and all other
Accomodations.

I have been very brief in relating any thing of the Affairs of England, or of
the Actions of Oliver Cromwell, in this Kingdom; having already published 2
Books, one, the History of the Wars of England, with all the most Remarkable
passages, till the Death of King Charles I. And his Trial and last Speech at
large: And another, called the History of the Life and Actions of Oliver
Cromwell, with his Death and Burial; both of the same value with this, to which
I refer the Reader, for further satisfaction.

In 1654. The Lord Fleetwood was Sworn Lord Deputy of Ireland, Sergeant Steel
was made Lord Chancellor, and Sergeant Pepys Lord Chief Justice; Colonel
Hammond, Corbet, with others, being made of the Privy Council, they ordered
that March 1. 1654. should be the longest time allowed to the Irish, to
Transport themselves out of that Kingdom, under very severe penalties. But a
while after Oliver Cromwell having taken the Government upon himself, with the
Title of Lord Protector, in July 1655. Henry Cromwell his Son, was made by him,
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, in the place of the Lord Fleetwood, all things
still continuing very quiet there: The same year, Archbishop Usher of Armagh
dyed a Prelate of incomparable Learning and Piety, upon whose Funeral, the
Protector expended 200 l. After the Death of Oliver Cromwell, his Son Richard
Succeeded; but in a short time, was removed from the Government, by M. General
Lambert, and the Army, and the Remnant of the Long Parliament restored in 1659.
who sent Dispatches to the Lord Henry, to Surrender the Government of Ireland
to Chancellor Steel, and Lord Chief Baron Corbet, which he did, without
opposition; and to oblige the Parliament the more, signified by an Express,
that he was preparing to come for England with all speed, to give them an
account of that Kingdom; which he had left in a very good conditon, and hoped
that his Successor might reap more Content in the Government, than he has
found: After his Arrival, he applied himself to the Council of State and had
Liberty by an Order, to go into the Country, or whither he pleased.

But the Nation being Discontented at the continual Fluctuations of the
Government, the Long Parliament being soon after turned out again by the Army,
the People generally desired a Free Parliament: And General Monk marching out
of Scotland with his Army, and Reinstating the Parliament, and restoring the
Excluded Members in March 1659. they Dissolved themselves, having sent out
Writs for Electing a New Representative to meet, April 25 following, and about
the same time, Sir Charles Coot in Ireland, declares himself for a Free
Parliament; and thereupon possessed himself of Dublin Castle, having before
Surprised Galloway from Colonel Sadler in this manner: He invited him and his
Officers all Zealots for the long Parliament, to his House over the Water to be
merry; which done, Sir Charles pretended a desire to drink a glass of Wine in
Galloway privately with the Colonel: So they two Secretly took a Boat, with
each a Servant, and being on the other side, Sir Charles said; Colonel Sadler,
I am resolved for a Free Parliament, and to have this Garrison; you have a
Sword about you, draw and fight, or else engage your Honor, you will make no
disturbance in the Town upon our Admission, and my Declaration; To which
Sadler, Surprised and Troubled, answered: He would Acquiesce: upon this he
caused the Gate to be opened, and Sir Charles having declared himself, the
Soldiers cried out. A Coot, a Coot, and a Free Parliament: After this he
secured Sadler, and Sir Hardress Waller at Dublin, and immediately all Ireland
declared themselves satisfied in this Change, offering their Lives and
Fortunes, in the Defense of the Parliament, then Assembled; and soon after a
Convention was called at Dublin, in Nature of a Parliament, to provide for the
safety of the Kingdom, from whence the Lord Shannon, Sir John Clothworthy, and
Major Aston were sent as Commissioners to England, where the Parliament Voted
the Restoration of K. Charles II. and upon notice thereof, the like was done in
Ireland, and several of the most Eminent of that Nation were upon the Kings
Arrival at White Hall, sent by the Convention to wait upon him in the Name of
that Kingdom, with a tender of their Allegiance, and a Present of 4000 l. to
the Duke of York; and soon after the King was proclaimed, and universally
acknowledged throughout the Kingdom.

But it was not long ere the great Inclinations to the Popish Party in
Ireland, were made apparent in the Court of England, and several Disputes arose
about the Settlement of that Kingdom; which were Debated before the King and
Council, where the Lord Chief Justice Santry in an Excellent Speech,
Represented to the Board, the Horrid Rebellion of 1641. with the Barbarous and
Inhuman Massacres, which he had been eye witness of: In Opposition to which Sir
Nich. Plunchel, one of the Popes Knights, endeavored to defend the Irish, but
so weakly, having a bad Cause to Manage, that the Lord Santry clearly carried
the point in the Judgment of the Auditors; he desiring that they might be Tried
by the Common Law, where they would meet with a fair and indifferent Trial by
Juties of their Neighbors, and thereby could have no wrong done them: But the
King having Dissolved the Convention, and called a Parliament in Ireland, he
prevailed so much upon them, that an Act of Settlement was pressed, and a Court
of Claims thereby erected, who were to Determine all Differences between the
English and Irish Proprietars of the Lands there, and to declare who were
Nocent, and who Innocent Papists: These Commissioners being Nominated by the
King, he had so great an influence over them, that they commonly gave their
Opinions according to his Direction, which was oftentimes very favorable to
the Irish Rebels, particularly in the Case of the Earl of Antrim, one of the
chief of them, as by the following Letter to (...) of Ormond then Lord
Lieutenant, and the Privy Council there, does appear.

CHARLES R.

RIght Trusty and well beloved Cousins and Counselors, etc. We greet you well.
How far we have been from interposing on the behalf of any of our Irish
Subjects, who by their miscarriages in the late Rebellion in that Kingdom of
Ireland, had made themselves unworthy of our Grace and Protection, is notorious
to all Men; and we were so jealous in that particular, that shortly after our
return into this our Kingdom, when the Marquess of Antrim came hither to
present his Duty to us, upon the Information we received from those Persons who
then attended us, by a Deputation from our Kingdom of Ireland, or from those
who at that time owned our Authority there, that the Marquess of Antrim had so
misbehaved himself toward us, and our late Royal Father of Blessed Memory,
that he was in no degree worthy of the least Countenance from us, and that they
had manifest and unquestionable Evidence of such his Guilt. Whereupon we refuse
to admit the said Marquess so much as into our Presence; but on the contrary,
committed him Prisoner to our Tower of London; where after he had continued
several Months under a strict restraint, upon the continued Information of the
said Persons, we sent him into Ireland, without interposing the least on his
behalf, but left him to undergo such a Trial and Punishment, as by the Justice
of that our Kingdom should be found due to his Crime, expecting still that some
heinous Matter would be objected and proved against him, to make him incapable,
and to deprive him of that Favor and Protection from us, which we know his
former Actions and Services had Meritest. After many Months attendance there,
and (w^presume) after such Examinations as were requisite, he was at last
dismissed without any Censure, and without any transmission of Charge against
him to us, and with a License to Transport himself into this Kingdom: We
concluded that it was then time to give him some instance of our Favor, and to
remember the many Services he had done, and the Sufferings he had undergone,
for his Affections and Fidelity to our Royal Father and our Self, and that it
was time to redeem him from those Calamities, which yet do lie as heavy upon
him fince, as before our happy Return. And thereupon we recommended him to you
our Lieutenant, that you should move our Council there, for preparing a Bill to
be Transmitted to us, for the Re-investing him the said Marquess, in the
possession of his Estate in that our Kingdom, as had been done in some other
Cases. To which Letter, you our said Lieutenant returned us answer, That you
had informed our Council of that our Letter, and that you were upon
consideration thereof, unanimously of Opinion, that such a Bill ought not to be
transmitted to us, the Reason whereof would forthwith be presented to us from
our Council. After which time we received the enclosed Petition from the said
Marquess, which we referred to the Considerations and Examinations of the Lords
of our Privy Council, whose Names are mentioned in that our Reference, which is
annexed to the said Petition; who thereupon met together, and after having
heard the Marquess of Antrim, did not think to make any Report to us, till they
might see and understand the Reasons which induced you not to transmit the Bill
we had proposed, which Letter was not then come to our Hands. After which time
we have received your Letter of the 18th of March, together with several
Petitions which had been presented to you, as well from the Old Soldiers and
Adventurers, as from the Lady Marchioness of Antrim, all which we likewise
transmitted to the Lords Referees; Upon a second Petition presented to us by
Lord Marquess, which is here likewise enclosed, commanding our said Referees to
take the same into their serious consideration, and to hear what the Petitioner
had to offer in his own Vindication, and to report the whole matter to us, upon
a third Petition herein likewise enclosed; we required them to expedite with
what speed they could. By which deliberate Proceedings of ours you cannot but
observe, that no Importunity how just soever, could prevail with us to bring
our self to a Judgment in this Affair, without very ample Information. Our said
Referees, after several Meetings, and perusal of what had been offered to them
by the said Marquess, have reported unto us, That they have seen several
Letters, all of them the Handwriting of our Royal Father to the said Marquess,
and several Instructions concerning his Treating and Joining with the Irish, in
order to the King's Service, by reducing to their Obedience, and by drawing
some Forces from them, for the Service of Scotland. That besides the Letters
and Orders under his Majesty's Hand, they have received sufficient Evidence and
Testimony of several private Messages and Directions sent from our Royal
Father, and from our Royal Mother, with the Privity, and with the Directions of
the King our Father; by which they are persuaded, that whatever Intelligence,
Correspondence or Actings, the said Marquess had with the Confederate Irish
Catholics, was directed or allowed by the said Letters, Instructions and
Directions; and that it manifestly appears to them, that THE KING OUR FATHER
WAS WELL PLEASED WITH WHAT THE MARQUESS DID, AFTER HE HAD DONE IT, AND APPROVED
THE SAME.

This being the true State of the Marquess his Case, and there being nothing
proved upon the first Information against him, nor any thing contained against
him in your Letter of March 18; but that you were informed he had put in his
Claim before the Commissioners, appointed for executing the Act of Settlement;
and that if his Innocence be such as is alleged, there is no need of
Transmitting such a Bill to us, as is desired; and that if he be Nocent, it
consists not with the Duty which you owe to us, to transmit such a Bill, as if
it should pass into a Law, must needs draw a great prejudice upon so many
Adventurers and Soldiers, which are, as is alleged, to be therein concerned.
We have considered of the Petition of the Adventurers and Soldiers, which was
transmitted to us by you; the Equity of which consists in nothing, but that
they have been peaceably in Possession, for the space of seven or eight Years,
of those Lands which were formerly the Estate of the Marquess of Antrim, and
others, who were all engaged in the late Irish Rebellion; and that they shall
suffer very much, and be ruined, if those Lands should be taken from them. And
we have likewise considered another Petition from several Citizens of London,
near sixty in number, directed to our self, wherein they desire, that the
Marquess his Estate may be made liable to the payment of his just Debts, that
so they may not be ruined (...) the Favor of the present Possessors, who (they
say) are but a few Citizens and Soldiers, who have disbursed very small Surns
thereon. Upon the whole matter no Man can think we are less engaged by our
Declaration, and by the Act of Settlement, to protect those who are Innocent,
and who have faithfully endeavored to serve the Crown, how unfortunate soever;
than to expose to Justice those who have been really and maliciously Guilty.
And therefore we cannot in Justice, but upon the Petition of the Marquess of
Antrim, and after the serious and strict Inquisition into his Actions, declare
unto you, That WE DO FIND HIM INNOCENT FROM ANY MALICE OR REBELLIOUS PURPOSE
AGAINST THE CROWN; and that what he did by way of Correspondence, or Compliance
with the Irish Rebels, was in order to the Service of our Royal Father, and
warranted by his Instructions, and the Trust reposed in him; and that the
Benefit thereof accrued to the Service of the Crown, and not to the particular
Advantage and Benefit of the Marquess. And as we cannot in Justice deny him
this Testimony, so we require you to transmit our Letter to our Commissioners,
that they may know our Judgment in this Case of the Lord of Antrim, and proceed
accordingly. And so we bid you heartily farewell.

Given at our Court at White Hall, July 10. in the 15th. Year of our Reign,
1663. By his Majesty's Command, HENRY BENNET.

To our Right Trusty and Right entirely wellbeloved Cousin and Counselor,
James D. of Ormond our Lieutenant General, and General Governor of our Kingdom
of Ireland; and to the Lords of our Council of that our Kingdom.
Entered at the Signet Office July 13, 1663

Soon after, the following Answer of the D. of Ormond, and the Irish Privy
Council, to the foregoing (...), was sent to Sir Henry Bennet, Principal
Secretary of State.

On the 20. I the Lord Lieutenant, received His Majesty's Letter of July 10.
concerning the Marquess of Antrim; which I imparted to the Council; upon
reading whereof at this Board we observing, that though in several other
matters relating to the proceedings of His Majesty's Commissioners appointed
for executing the Act of Settlement, his Majesty vouchsafed to direct this
Letter to the Commissioners: Yet that those Letters concerning the Marquess of
Antrim, are directed to us the Lieutenant and Council, requiring us to Transmit
the same to the Commissioners, that they may know His Majesty's Judgment in the
Case of the Lord Antrim, as it stands stated in those His Majesty's Letters,
and proceed accordingly: We hence gathered, that His Majesty did judge it fit,
that those His Letters for the Marquess of Antrim, should be directed to us, to
the end, that if we his Majesty's Servants here upon the place, should find
more in the Marquess of Antrims Case, than are in those Letters taken notice of
either in relation to his Majesty, or his Affairs, then in such Case, we might
Humbly Represent the same to His Majesty; And as it was the Use and Custom here
in former Times, and particularly in the Times of his Majesty's Royal Father of
Blessed Memory: That if any Directions came from the King, which in the
Execution thereof, might occasion inconveniences to his Majesty's Service, the
same was stayed, until the matter was by the Chief Governor here Humbly
Represented to the King: So it is also agreeable to his Majesty's Instructions
to me the Lord Lieutenant, particularly in things relating to his Majesty's
Revenue, which likewise is the present Case: For his Majesty's Revenues are
like to be hereby much lessened, and moreover it is agreeable likewise with his
now Majesty's gracious pleasure, signified thither by the Lords of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, by their Letters of Aug. 12. 1661.
directed to the late Justices and Council; wherein it was declared, That his
Majesty and the Lords of the most Honorable Privy Council were well assured of
a Demur the said Justices and Council had made upon Letters from His Majesty,
and their Forbearance to proceed thereupon, till they should receive His
Majesty's further pleasure: And therefore upon full consideration thereof had
at this Board, we humbly conceive, that it is our Duty to His Majesty, to defer
for some time, the Transmitting the said Letters to the said Commissioners,
till we shall have Represented to His Majesty, that which appears to us here;
which it seems was not made known to His Majesty, or those Lords of the Privy
Council, to whose consideration, his Majesty referred the Marquess of Antrims
Petitions, mentioned in his Majesty's Letters: We observe that his Majesty's
said Letters seem to be grounded on these particulars. 1. That after many
Months Attendance here, and as his Majesty is pleased to declare; that he
presumes that after such examinations as were requisite, the Marquess of Antrim
was dismissed hence, without any Censure, and without Transmitting any Charge
against him to his Majesty; and nothing proved against him on the first
Information, nor any thing contained against him in our Letters of March 18. 2.
The Report made by these Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
to whom his Majesty referred the Consideration of the Lord of Antrims Petitions:
3. That the Marquesses Case as it stands flated in those Letters, is the true
State of his his Case. As to the first we find, that the Lords of his Majesty's
Privy Council, by their Letters of Dec. 19. 1660. directed to the Justices of
this Kingdom, signified, that the Marquess of Antrim, then Prisoner in the
Tower of London, Petitioned His Majesty to be heard, as to his being Criminal
in the Aspersing the Memory of the late King our Sovereign; and their Lordships
by these Letters, required the Justices with all convenient speed, to send
their Lordships Authentic Copies of all Papers whatsoever, under his own Hand,
or any other which may any way relate to the said Marquess his being guilty of
so foul a Crime as the Defaming his late Majesty; and that the Justices should
cause all such Witnesses reside in this Kingdom, who can allege any thing to
the proving thereof, to be examined, and the Examinations to be returned to
their Lordships attested by us, and the Justices appointed to take the same;
and in pursuance of those Letters, the Justices caused a Commission to issue
under his Majesty's Great Seal to several Persons, some of them Members of this
Board, and some of His Majesty's Judges, and some of his Learned Council, to
call before them, and examine Witnesses upon Oath, concerning the Lord of
Antrims Aspersing the Memory of his late Majesty, That those Commissioners
having examined several Witnesses, and returned their examinations to the
Justices, with their Letters of Feb. 20. 1660. directed to the Lords of his
Majesty's Privy Council, Transmitted the same to their Lordships. That March
29. 1661. it was ordered by his Majesty in Council, that in order to a farther
proceeding here against the Lord Antrim, the Examinations and other Papers
should be returned hither. Thus far the matter proceeded, before the Arrival of
the Lord Lieutenant in this Kingdom, Aug. 18. 1661. the Lord Chief Justice
Santry made a report at this Board, of the Examinations taken concerning the
Marquess, and upon his Petition it was ordered: That the Chief Justice should
Cancel the Recognizance acknowledged by the Marquess and his Sureties, and as
to his being Criminal in Aspersing and Defaming the Memory of his Majesty's
Royal Father, we Humbly crave leave to send herewith the said Examinations, and
other Papers concerning the same; which we Humbly Submit to his Majesty's
Consideration, and we confess we are not willing upon these Examinations and
Papers, to aggravate any thing against him; and therefore it was, that there
was no censure, nor any Transmission of charge against him to his Majesty; and
as to our Letters of March 18. we confess there is nothing contained therein
against him, nor indeed, under favor, did we conceive it proper in these
Letters, to object any thing of Crime to him: Our work in those Letters, being
but to inform his Majesty, only of the particulars then under consideration,
and what occurred upon occasion of two Petitions exhibited, the one by the Lady
Marchioness of Antrim: the other in the Name of several Adventurers and
Soldiers, and their Assigns and Tenants; for we did not imagine the Lord
Marquess would have attempted to put His Majesty upon a difficulty of giving a
Rule contrary to the Act of Settlement; but would have abiden the Trial in the
proper way prescribed by the Act, wherein it is provided, that the said
Marquess shall be restored to his Estate in such Manner and Form, and according
to such Order and Method, and no other; as the Lord Viscount Nettervile, and
the Lord Viscount Gilmoy ought by virtue of the Act to be restored; and besides
we had no notice from thence, that the matters relating to the said Marquess,
were under Debate or Consideration there; which might give us occasion humbly
to Represent to his Majesty those things which now for his Majesty's Service,
we are necessrated to do.

To the Second, namely the report made, that those of the Lords of the Council
to whom his Majesty referred the Marquesses Petition, we must acknowledge the
justice of their Lordships proceedings, upon what appeared to them: But there
are some which we do verily believe, were not made known to them; and which do
appear to us here, wherein we may not be silent, without breach of Justice to
his Majesty: For I the Lord Lieutenant, do well know, that the Peaces made by
me in 1646. and in 1648. in this Kingdom, and both derived by Authority from
his Majesty's Royal Father, was both opposed by the Lord Marquess of Antrim,
who continually served with the Popes Nuncio and his Adherents against his
Majesty's authority then entrusted with me the Lieutenant, and appeared active
in all Assemblies and Councels, wherein he was present, in open opposition to
all Members of those Assemblies and Councils, who endeavored to incline the
People to Submission to the Peace: when I the Lord Lieuterant labored
earnestly by all Just and Honorable ways and means to Reduce his Majesty's
Subjects in this Kingdom, to their due Obedience to his Majesty, and to give
him assistance whereof he stood in need, in the greatest, and most imaginable
necessity; and when the Marquess of Antrim and the Popes Nuncio, and Clergies
Party and their Adherents, labored industriously to withdraw them from their
Obedience and Assistance to his Majesty, and so far prevailed, that when things
were in a tendency toward sending Ten Thousand Men to his Majesty's
Assistance, the Lord of Antrim declared openly in the Confederates great
Assembly, that not a Man should go out of the Province of Ulster, and in the
end, both these Peaces were by that Disloyalty to his Majesty, and by the
Countenance and Continuance of the said Marquess, Rendered Fruitless, and what
great and general Evils followed thereupon to his Majesty, and all his
Kingdoms, we need not now repeat; whence it was, that in the Act of Settlement
it is enacted; that such as at any time adhered to the Nuncio's or Clergy's
Party, or papal power in opposition to the Kings Authority, shall not be
restored as Innocent Papists: And this being the Marquess of Antrims Case, how
far it may be fit for his Majesty (in the greatest Humility we mention it) to
direft, contrary to the said Act of Parliament, that the ommissioners upon
these His Majesty's Letters should proceed to find him Innocent (for so the
Letter seems to imply,) and that, as we humbly conceive, without giving any
Latitude of power to the Commissioners to examine matter of Fact pursuant to
the said Act of Parliament: We humbly submit to His Majesty's Great Wisdom and
as we humbly conceive, it is not to be imagined, that his late Majesty a Prince
of most Eminent Honor and Prudence, would privately entrust the Marquess of
Antrim to oppose the conclusion of those Peaces, for the obtaining whereof, his
Majesty had given public authority to the Lieutenant; or that he ever gave any
Subsequent approbation, which tended to his said Majesty's utter reine; and if
it should be supposed that the Marquess his compliance with the Nuncio's and
Clergies Party, though most irreconcilable Enemies to the English Crown and
Interest, might have been allowed of by his said Majesty; upon the Marquesses
undertaking to employ the Credit he should thereby gain amongst them, to
dispose them at least to forbear that violent opposition to all Overtures
tending to the Reduction of the Irish Confederates to their Obedience, and to
the Assistance of his late Majesty: It cannot be rationally supposed, as we
humbly conceive; but that the Reason and End of the Marquess's Compliance,
would either by his late Majesty, for the better Management of the affair, or
by the Marquess himself, for his Security and Exeneration, have been made known
to me the Lord Lieutenant; the Marquess having frequent opportunity to do it:
The conclusion of this point is, that as the Marquess his constant opposition
to all the Motions of Peace set on foot, by virtue of authority derived from
his late Majesty, has been made apparent to us by sufficient proofs: So it is
clearly manifested by his taking the Oath of Association, a Copy whereof is
here enclosed, and that by the Administration of those who when they had, by
his Assistances prevailed in the Breach of the Peace, and of the public Faith
of the Confederates, assumed to themselves in the year 1646. the Government of
that Party, under the Name of a Supreme Council; as also by his becoming one of
that Council, and Signing severe Letters and Instruments, whereof some were
directed to me the Lieutenant, and all this without any Correspondence with me,
or the least private intimation, that his purpose in those his proceedings, had
any Authority from his Majesty, or any respect to his Service: And as to the
third, the two last mentioned particulars, do seem to us to manifest, that the
Marquess's Case as it stands stated in these Letters, is not the whole state of
the Case, seeing those Material things are omitted therein, which w^ have
before expressed, which indeed we should willingly have forborne, if our silence
could have consisted with the Duty which we owe to his Majesty, and to the
Settlement of this Kingdom, and to that which we humbly conceive, is expected
from us by his Majesty: For there is now, and has been for above a Month last
past, under our Consideration here, the Draught of a New Act, to supply those
Defects in the present Act of Settlement; which experience has manifested to
become absolutely necessary to be remedyed, in order to the General Settlement
of this Kingdom; and it is most evident, that if the said Marquess shall be
declared Innocent, and that in so extraordinary a way as it would be contrary
to the Act of Settlement; being the Public and Fundamental Security of Men's
Estates; so it would have this further operation; that the end of that intended
Act, for gaining of Reprizals for the Estates of justly Restorable Persons,
such as his Majesty by his Gracious Declaration, was pleased to acknowledge
himself obliged to provide for, will become in an high Degree disappointed, and
what general Mischiefs and Inconveniences may hereupon follow, to the
Settlement of the Kingdom ingeneral, is very apparent: When we had thus far
proceeded in Our Letter, a Petition of the Adventurers and Soldiers, and their
Assigns concerning the Estate formerly belonging to the said Marquess, was
exhibited at this Board; which being read before us, we find it to contain such
matters concerning the Marquess of Autrim, as we humbly conceive are necessary
upon this occasion, to be made known to his Majesty; and therefore do esteem it
our Duty, to exhibit it to his Majesty's Review and Royal consideration; all
which we Humbly submit to his Majesty's excellent Judgment; and we desire you
to move his Majesty for a Signification of his good pleasure herein to us his
Servants, as speedily as with convenience may be, if his Majesty in his Wisdom,
shall so judge fit and so we remain from the Council Chamber at Dublin.

July 31. 1663. Your assured loving Friends. Ormond, Maurice Eustace
Chancellor, James Dublin, Ossory, Shannon Dungannon, Hen. Midensis, Mich. Cork,
William Lawfield, Rich. Coot, Hev. Tickburn, Rob. Forth, James Ware, George
Wentworth, Robert Merideth, Theoph. Jones, Thomas Clergiss

To the Right Honorable Sir Hen. Bennet Knight, his Majesty's Principal
Secretary of State.

But what effect this Letter had, and what the Marquess of Antrims true Case
was, appears by the following Letter; which fully states the same.

Dublin Aug. 22. 1663.
EVer Honored Sir, Last Thursday we came to Trial with my Lord Marquess of
Autrim; but according to my Fears (which you always surmised to be in vain) he
was by the King's Extraordinary and Peremptory Letter of Favor, restored to
his Estate, as an Innocent Papist. We proved eight Qualifications in the Act of
Settlement against him, the last of which made him incapable of being restored
as Innocent. We proved, 1. That he was to have a Hand in Surprising the Castle
of Dublin, in the Year 1641. 2. That he was of the Rebels Party before the
15th. of September, 1643. Which we made appear by his hourly and frequent
Intercourse with Renny O Moore, and many others; being himself the most
notorious of the said Rebels. 3. That he entered into the Roman Catholic
Confederacy before the Peace in 1643. 4. That he constantly adhered to the
Nuncio's Party, in opposition to his Majesty's Authority. 5. That he sat from
time to time in the Supreme Council of Kilkenny. 6 That he signed that
execrable Oath of Association. 7. That he was commissionated, and acted as
Lieutenant General from the said Assembly at Kilkenny. 8. That he declared by
several Letters of his own penning, himself in conjunction with Owen To Oneal,
and a constant Opposer to the several Peaces made by the Lord Lieutenant with
the Irish. We were seven hours by the Clock in proving our Evidence against
him; but at last the King's Letter being opened, and read in Court, Rainsford,
one of the Commissioners, said to us, That the King's Letter on his behalf was
Evidence without exception, and thereupon declared him to be an Innocent
Papist. This Cause, Sir, has (though many Reflections have passed upon the
(...)) more startled the Judgments of all Men, than all the Trials since the
beginning of their sitting; and it is very strange and wonderful to all of the
Long Robe, that the King should give such a Letter, having divested himself of
that Authority, and reposed the Trust in Commissioners for that purpose: And
likewise it is admired, that the Commissioners having taken solemn Oaths, to
execute nothing but according to, and in pursuance of the Act of Settlement,
should barely upon his Majesty's Letter, declare the Marquess Innocent: To be
short, ^^ere never was so great a Rebel, that had so much Favor from so good a
King: And it is very evident, that the Consequence of these things will be very
bad; and if God of his extraordinary Mercy do not prevent it, War, and (if
possible) greater Judgments, cannot be far from (...); where Vice is
Patronized, and Antrim, a Rebel upon Record, and so lately and clearly proved
one, should have no other Color for his Actions, but the King's own Letter;
which takes off all Imputations from Antrim, and lays them totally upon his own
Father. Sir I shall by the next, if possible, send you over one of our Briefs
against my Lord, by some Friend: It Is too large for a Packet, it being no less
in Bulk, than a Book of Martyrs.


Well might the Irish decline their Trials by indifferent Juries, and Appeal to
this Court of Claims, which the Lord Chief Justice Santry declared, was like
the Usurpers High Court of Justice, Arbitrary and Unlimited; and the English
complained, that the Natives by this Illegal Court, were made Innocent, though
they were known to be deeply concerned in the Rebellion; for that it was beyond
all peradventure, that not 10 of the Irish Papists were free from Rebellion and
Murder, and most of them stood Indicted and Outlawed for Treason, and
therefore dispaired upon their Trial at the Bar, to make any considerable
defense: Upon this, a New Act was prepared to explain the former; But Talbot
(after Tyrconnel) being made a Principal Agent for the Irish, and they
insinuating themselves into the favor of Rainsford (afterward made a Judge in
England, for his good Services in Ireland) and the Commissioners of the Court
of Claims, it so fell out, that though it was believed upon the Kings
Restoration, there could not have been the twentieth part of Ireland gained
from the English: Yet by Recommendatory Letters, and other Stratagems of the
Court in England, there was almost an half of the Kingdom in value lost, and at
the same time, the most Innocent Irish lost their Estates, and the greatest
Rebels, got twice more than they had before the Rebellion began; to such a
height was Popery already grown, which so far encouraged the Irish, that they
often told the English, that in a short time, the Protestants must be all of
their Religion.

In 1669. The Lord Roberts, was made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland; but soon
recalled, and John Lord Berkley was sent in his Room. In 1670. The Papists set
up a pretense, that the King when in Exile, had engaged to the French King, to
restore the Irish to their Religion and Estates; which not being done, might
occasion a Breach with that Crown: Whereupon Commissions were sent to Irish
Papists, to make them Justices of Peace, in which Office they soon discovered
themselves to be so partial and insolent, that their proceedings were abhorred,
not only by the Protestants; but the most thinking Irish: After this, there was
a design for Regulating the Corporations of Ireland and the Popish Party began
with Dublin where without any Legal proceeding or pretense, 7 of the Aldermen,
and Sir William Davis the Recorder, who were opposite to the Romish Party, were
turned out in a Tumultuous Irregular manner, and 7 of the Rabble put in their
places; and Sir Ellis Leaton the Lord Lieutenants Secretary, was made Recorder;
and Papists were daily brought into the Common Council, to the great Terror of
the Citizens, who plainly perceived, that the design was apparently levelled at
the Foundation of the Protestant Interest and Religion, and for introducing
Popery and Arbitrary Power; In which Opinion, they were confirmed by some
Passages that happened about the same time; Particularly that Talbot the Popish
Archbishop of Dublin, in 1672. Desiring of the Lord Lieutenant, to borrow the
Hangings of the Castle, Silver Candlesticks, and other Plate, to the use at
High-^^^ss they were sent by Sir Ellis Leaton, with this Complement; that he
hoped to have High Mass by Christmas at Christ-Church: To effect which, soon
after an horrid Plot was discovered, whereby all the Protestants were to have
been barbarously Murdered; and the Signal appointed, to Distinguish the Irish
from the Heretics, was a Cross of Straw, which the Priests earnestly enjoined
every one to fix over their Doors, telling them the omission thereof might be
their Ruin; for where the Cross were not found; they would be destroyed as
Heretics: But this Horrid Conspiracy being happily Discovered, upon Search,
small Crosses of Straw not easily perceived, were found on the Houses of most
of the Irish in the Province of Munster: But the Government of Ireland was at
that time so Popishly inclined, that they would not encourage the further
Discovery thereof; and those that appeared earnest in laying it open, had their
Cattle stole, and were threatened to have their Houses burnt; so that the whole
Villainy was hushed up in silence.

In 3673. The Earl of Essex was made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, the
proceedings in the former year, being thought by Courts of England too
barefaced; This worthy and prudent Governor, managed Affairs with so much skill
and integrity, that the Papists could hope for no Advantage, whilst he held the
Sword; therefore one Sheredon, and Edward Coleman, were thought fit Instruments
to imbarrass Affairs, and manage the Catholic Interest; but by the
unparalled Conduct of this prudent Earl, he so far outvy'd the Romish
Politics, as to Cajole that Party into an approbation of those Proceedings;
which proved fatally Destructive to their designs, of which at length, the D.
of York was so sensible, that he became his inveterate enemy, and set up
private designs against him; and at length prevailed to have him recalled; and
in 1677. the Duke of Ormond was again sent Lord Lieutenant thither.

This year the Papists set up another Project, which was that the French should
make some new Demands for the Irish, upon pretense of the Articles made by King
Charles (...). in their favor, and the King of England was to admit the French
to Land Men: The Earl of Tyrone, the Lord Br^^as and others, were also to raise
Men in Ireland, in order to make a diversion to the putting the Popish Plot in
force in England; and an Insurrection was designed at the same time in Ireland;
the King was unacquainted with the chief part of the contrivance, the Duke of
York having undertaken to qualify him, if he should hear of the Irish
Intreague; but this was divulged by some of the Irish, and the King was hardly
prevailed with, not to believe it; at length the King and Council fearing some
danger from Ireland, the Duke of Ormond was sent thither, and the Duke of York
did not think it seasonable to oppose it; but yet prevailed so powerfully with
the King, that he sent Orders for raising Men in Ireland, upon pretense of
Foreign Service; they were all Papists, except some Officers who were ready to
be so; but the Lord Lieutenant would not deliver them Arms; so they were
exercised with Sticks;

The next year, 1678, the Popish Plot was discovered in England; and soon after
that in Ireland, which was detected by those of their own Party and Religion,
not one Protestant appearing as evidence against them: Upon which, Orders came
from England, for Disarming all Papists; but their Friends at Court, had given
them timely notice to conceal them, so that not above 150 Arms were found among
all the Papists in Ireland, they hiding them in Boggs, and other secret places
without any Damage; the Lord Brittas and others escaped into France, the Earl
of Tyrone was committed to the Gate House; Talbot (since Tyrconnel) with his
Brother the Popish Archbishop, were imprisoned in Dublin Castle, where the last
dyed: The Duke of York was sent to Flanders, and all things appeare^^ so
discouraging, that an Irish Lord swore a grea^^ Oath; that he believed Jesus
Christ was a Protestant, for that nothing they could do did prosper.

The Parliament of England were very busy in searching into the bottom of the
Popish Conspiracy, and found many Great Persons concerned therein; several
Papists were executed for the same; but still the Court endeavored by all
manner of Arts to obstruct any further Discoveries, the Duke of Yorks Interest
still prevailing, who was come from Flanders; but upon the sitting of the
Parliament, was obliged to go to Scotland, from whence he sent private
Encouragements to the Irish Papists, not to despair of retrieving all again:
But the English there were very secure, as judging themselves happy under the
peaceable Government of the D. of Ormond, and their Interest in Ireland seemed
more firm than ever; because they were of Opinion, that this late Conspiracy of
the Irish, would prevent the Kings showing them any kindness for the future;
the Lord Lieutenant likewise procured a Grant for calling a Parliament there,
the News whereof so alarmed the Duke of York, that he came with all speed from
Scotland to prevent it, which he likewise effected, and the Irish afterward
boldly affirmed, That there would be no Parliament, till the Duke came to the
Crown; which they seemed to believe, would be very shortly, and accordingly the
Death of King Charles the II. happened in February 1684. following, which still
remains a Mystery, though the Papists in Ireland for some time before, could
fix upon the utmost period of his Life: And now the long looken for day was
come, which so Transported them after all the Dangers and Difficulties they had
met with, that they could hardly contain their joys within any bounds.

So soon as King Charles II. was Dead, the Duke of Ormond was removed from the
Government of Ireland; and upon his Arrival in England, found King James
inclined to such violent Courses, as it is thought broke his Heart, he dying
soon after: Before his going, he called his Officers of his Army together, and
taking a glass of Wine in his Hand, Look here Gentlemen (says he) they say at
Court I am now become an old Doting Fool, you see, my Hand does not shake; nor
does my Heart fail, nor doubt I, but I shall make some of them see their
mistake.

The Lord Primate, and the Lord Granard, were now made Lords Justices of
Ireland; but the daily reported insolences of their Irish Nobility and Gentry,
as well as the Commonalty, soon made them weary of their Government; For they
repaired in great Numbers to Dublin, and in all places reproached and abused
the English, with the most impious Calumnies and Reflections; and those that
refused to drink Confusion to all Protestants and their Religion, were seized
with Warrants, and threatened to be Murdered: The Defeat of the Duke of
Monmouth in 1685. heightened their Rage more, and made them Contrive Hellish
Plots against the Lives and Estates of the Protestants, under the pretense that
they designed to Massacre the Irish, though they themselves knew too well, that
such an Horrid Attempt was as impossible, as Ridiculous, if any should have
been so Villainous to have contrived it, since in the most parts of the
Kingdom, the Irish were vastly more numerous than the English, nay in some
Countries an 100 Families for one.

After this, Tyrconnel began to Model the Army and Disarm the Protestants, upon
pretense that Monmoths Rebellion had infected many, aad might delude more in
that Kingdom; and the Irish declared, that if any Arms were found in the
Protestants Hands, they would be judged Persons Disaffected to the King and his
Government; which so affrighted many, that they brought in their own Arms, and
delivered them up to the Papists: After which, Tyrconnel went to England,
accompanied with one Neagle, a cunning Irish Lawyer, who published an account
of the injustice of the Act of Settlement, reflecting with all manner of
Invectives against King Charles II. But matters being not ripe enough in
England King James did not think it convenient to propose Tyrconnel for Lord
Lieutenant at present; and therefore it was contrived by the Popish Cabal, that
the Earl of Clarendon should go over Lord Lieutenant and Tyrconnel Lieutenant
General of the Army.

When the Earl arrived there, the English were much Discouraged, because of his
Relation to the King; but their Hopes were extremely revived, when they found
him acting with inviolable Integrity to the Protestant: The Irish Grandees were
very little concerned at it, proceeding still with all violence, in ruining the
Protestants Interest, and animating their vassals with hopes, that he would
soon be removed, the Irish Composing Barbarous Songs in praise of Tyrconnel;
and that his Heroic Hand, should Destroy the English Church: They declared
publicly, That they liked no Government, but that of France; and that they
would make King James as Absolute as King Lewis; that they would shortly have
the English Churches and Houses, and if they suffered them to live, would make
them Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water; That Ireland must be a Catholic
Country, and that they would make the English as poor Devils, as when they came
first thither: And of this they were so confident, that the most Serious
amongst them, privately advised their Protestant Friends, to change their
Religion; For said they, you will be forced to do it in a while, and if you
delay a little time, it may be too late; and perhaps you may not be accepted,
for no Protestant must expect to enjoy any thing in this Kingdom, and we
resolve to reduce all things to the State they were in before Poinings Act in
King Henry 7 time: Yea King James himself, and his followers use to say, That
the Irish must be restored to their former Power, Estates, and Religion in that
Kingdom; and when the English Objected, that their proceedings were Arbitrary
and against Law, they called them Traitors, Crying, Damn your Laws, it is the
Kings Pleasure it should be so; and you are all a company of Rebels, because
you are not of the Kings Religion; and will not own his Will and Pleasure, to
be above all Laws.

But the English Roman Catholics, were not so confident of their Game, so that
a general meeting of the chief of them at the Savoy, before Father Peter's, they
seemed very doubtful of the Kings Capacity, or willingness to expose himself to
the hazard of securing the Catholic Religion in his Reign, considering his
Age; and the almost insurmountable difficulties, they were to encounter with to
effect it; and therefore moved the King, that their Estates might be secured by
an Act of Parliament, with Liberty of Exercising their Religion only privately;
but Peter's opposed this, as a consideration too Worldly, adding, that if they
would pursue his measures, he doubted not to see the Holy Church Triumphant in
England: Other Papists desired the King they might have Liberty to sell their
Estates, and retire into France; and by his Intercession, might be provided for
in that Kings Dominions; To which he replied, that before their desires came to
him, he had often thought of them, and had as he believed, provided a sure
Sanctuary for them in Ireland, if all those endeavors should be blasted in
England, which he had made for their Security; and of whose Success he had not
reason to despair, adding many zealous Expressions of his extreme kindness for
the Catholic Church: As that he resolved rather to dye a Martyr, than not to
settle the Roman Religion, and that he would choose to dye the next day, that
design being compassed; rather than live 50 years without effecting it, having
already been almost a Martyr for the Catholic Cause, which had been the
occasion of all his Troubles.

In pursuance of these Resolutions, the King gave himself wholly up to the
Conduct and Counsels of the Furious Jesuits; being entered into their Society,
and was become a Lay Brother of that Order, and consequently judged it
Meritorious to extirpate and destroy Heresy, especially being told, That it
would be a most glorious Action; and that no doubt, he would be Canonized for a
Saint, if he could Reduce 3 Kingdoms to their Ancient Obedience to the Holy See
from which they had been so long Apostates; and had Nursed up so many Damned
Heretics, to the Disturbance of Holy Church.

But the present Lord Lieutenant, being an Obstacle to the Vigorous progress of
Popery in Ireland; land, the Jesuits resolved to remove him, of which design, a
Person of Honor acquainted the King; who absolutely denied there was any such
intention, or that he had any thoughts of it, nor did believe he ever should
(whilst both lived) remove him from that Government, though the Papists in
Ireland confidently affirmed: That he had before given assurance to Father
Peter's, that Tyrconnel should be Lord Deputy; and accordingly in 1686. he
obtained that Government against all opposition, the News of which so surprised
the Protestants in Ireland, that almost all that were able, Deserted the
Kingdom, and flockt in great numbers to the Isle of Man, Scotland, and other
places, so great was their Terror and Consternation at these dreadful tidings,
and the dismal effects which they expected from his Management of Affairs; at
length Tyrconnel arrived there, after having been kept a considerable time at
the Sea side by contrary winds; which seemed a Signal Act of providence, to
give warning and opportunity to the People, to fly from the judgments just
ready to fall upon that distressed Kingdom: The Lord Clarendon Surrendered the
Sword to him, with an Admirable Speech, concluding, that as he had kept an
equal hand of Justice to the Roman Catholics; so he hoped his Lordship would
do to the Protestants: But Popery was the Scene which must be Acted, and the
Protestants Trembled at the Terrible Consequences thereof, whilst the Irish
Triumphed and insulted over their Dejection, reproaching them both as Englishmen
and Protestants, and usually calling them Fanatic Dogs, and Damned Heretics:
Yea, so Barbarous were their Affronts and Indignities that the English were
daily afraid of a general Massacre, to be inhumanly put in Execution against
them.

Tyrconnel now places Popish Judges and Officers in all the Courts of
Judicature; and then proceeds against the Charters of all the Cities and
Corporations of the Kingdom: He endeavored to persuade the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen and Common Council of Dublin to Surrender theirs to the King; but
meeting with much Opposition therein, he in a Rage told them, that this was the
continuance of their former Rebellion, having turned out all the Loyal Subjects
in the last War of Ireland, and would do so now, if it were in their power;
whereupon they produced a Letter from King Charles I. Dated at Oxford,
containing great acknowledgments of their Signal Loyalty and Faithfulness to
him, with High Assurances of being Eminently rewarded, if he were again
Restored to his Crown: But this availed nothing; for the common saying of the
Irish was, that K. James would regard no Man for any Service formerly done to
him, his Father, or Brother; but only for future Service that he expected from
them. So that though the Citizens of Dublin sent a Gentleman on purpose to the
K. with a Petition, and Representation of their Case, yet he would not regard
him; but upon first sight asked him, if he had the Lord Deputies leave to come
with this Petition; and that he had those in Ireland that understood the Law
better than himself, and so turned from him; and he was forced to go back again
re infecta: Yet the City of Dublin was resolved not to betray their Liberties;
but employed the Council to defend their Charters; but these Judges who had
already broken through all enclosures of Law; and Trampled upon the known
Constitutions of the Kingdom, that they were opposite to their Popish and
Arbitrary Designs, over ruled all their Pleadings, and gave Judgment against
them, to the universal excessive Joy of the Irish; and great Mortification of
the Protestants. Consonant to the Sentence against Dublin, was Judgment given
against all the Charters of the Kingdom, except those who quietly Surrendered
them.

The New Lord Deputy, now chose him a Privy Council, that all but three, had
scarce common Sense, of which two of them would often complain, saying, that
nothing could pass at the Council Board of public concern; but their
Countrymen must first ask Teige, 'if that would not spoil his Potato Garden;
but however they all agreed to inslaven and beggar their Country, especially in
matter of Trade, as appeared by Tyrconnels first Proclamation, with the Advice
of his Council, to break an Act of Parliament in taking off the Duty of Iron,
and this without asking the King leave; but as soon as it was heard of in
England, a Proclamation came from thence, forbidding this wise Act made by
these Notable Statesmen; and the Lord Bellasis swore in Council; That Fool in
Ireland, was Fool and Madman enough to ruin 10 Kingdoms: And Father Peter's
secretly Reprimanded him for his Political Blunder; and writ to him, if he
acted not with greater Caution, the King could not possibly preserve him in
that Government. This with the vast numbers of People that Deserted the Kingdom
upon Tyrconnels coming Lord Deputy thither, whereby the Towns and Cities were
made almost Desolate, and Traffic so ruined, that the public Revenue was sunk
incredibly from the former value, were so strongly pressed against him at the
English Privy Council to his Disadvantage, that he obtained the Favor of K.
James, to meet and confer with him at Chester, carrying along with him Judge
Rice for his Councellor, and a Subtle Fellow, who told the King so many fine
Stories, there being none to contradict him, that he was dismissed, contrary to
the hopes and expectations of many who thought he would never have returned
again L. Deputy. When he took leave of several Privy Counselors and Officers,
at his going to wait on King James at Chester, Aug. 1687. He said, I have put
the Sword in your Hands: And then in his usual Style, prayed God to damn them
all, if ever they parted with it again.

During Tyrconnels stay here, the New Judges went their Circuits, wherein they
discovered the most gross partiality imaginable; for though they found the
Jayls full of Tories and Irish Robbers committed for several Notorious Crimes,
yet with the Assistance of Irish Sheriffs and Juries, they were most of them
Discharged, without punishment, either being indicted by wrong Names, or else
by taking off the Prosecutors with Threats; That if they proceeded, their
Cattle would be stolen, their Houses burnt, or their Throats Cut, which often
happened: And this was done in pursuance of one of the Lord Deputies
Instructions from Court to them; that they should by all possible means weaken
the Protestant Interest, which they so effectually performed, that no Englshman
was secure of any thing he had, by their Exorbitant proceedings against them:
So that had these Barbarous Injustices, and public Oppressions and Violences
in the several Law-Courts (even such as never were till then heard of among
Christians) continued but a few years longer, these without other means, might
have wholly Reduced the Kingdom into Irish Hands; it being observed, that never
one Cause came before them upon a Trial for Land; but the Judgment was
constantly given in favor of the Irish.

As to the Army in Ireland, of which I have mentioned something before, I shall
add, that when K. James came to the Crown, they consisted in about 7000 Men as
cordial to his Interest as possible, both Officers and Soldiers Respecting him
as their Master and Father; and showed a great forwardness to have assisted him
against Monmoth and Arguile: Yet he was no sooner settled in the Throne; but he
began to turn the most zealous of them out of his Service; because he could not
expect they would be useful to him in destroving the Protestant Religion and
Liberties of the Subjects, which was the Service he expected from them; and
therefore took there Troops away, and gave them to persons of mean or broken
Fortunes, and some of them unqualified by Law, and no consideration was had to
Loyalty or Merit, unless a Man were a Papist; of which there were too many
Notorious Instances: And the manner of their being Discarded, was with so much
falsehood and Barbarity from Tyrconnel, as might have shaken the Obedience of
any Army but this in the World; and caused them to have dispatched so false a
Wretch, for in the Morning he would take an Officer into his Closet, and with
his usual Oaths, Curses and Damnations, would profess the greatest kindness and
friendship, assuring them of the Continuance of their Commissions; and in the
Afternoon, would Cashier them with all manner of Scorn and Contempt; nay, while
he was Caressing them, he had actually given away their Commands. As for the
Soldiers and Troops, he Marched them to some place so far distant from their
Quarters, that they were not much known; and there after great Hardships,
stripped the Foot of their Clothes, which they had paid for, and the Troopers of
their Horses, Boots and Furniture bought with their own Money; and turned them
off to walk Barefoot some 100, others 150 Miles to their Houses and Homes: And
though they were promised something for their Horses, yet their Attendance cost
them twice as much as they expected, and most of them after all, got nothing;
By this means 2 or 300 Protestant Gentlemen, who had laid out great part of
their Fortunes, and Contracted Debts to obtain Commissions, were not left worth
any thing; but were turned out without reason, or any consideration, and 5 or
6000 Soldiers sent a begging; an Hardship perhaps, never put upon an Army
before, for no other reason; but because they were Englishmen and Protestants;
and Irish men and Papists were by K. James put in their places, clearly
Demonstrating, that he had no regard to the Laws, or the Preservation of that
Kingdom; and that he absolutely designed to Ruin the Protestant, and Advance
the Popish Interest in Ireland: And the same Fate attended all the Protestant
Civil Officers, several of them being outed, though they had places by Patent
for Life, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Officers of the Revenue, etc. who were
all changed for Roman Catholics, and this before the News of the Glorious
Expedition of his now Majesty, the Prince of Orange, and without any
provocation, or the least pretense of Disloyalty.

Dec. 9. 1687. Being Sunday, in the Morning happened such an Inundation of
Water at Dublin, as was never known before, carrying away Stone Bridges,
overflowing Houses, for 3 Days together, so that a great part of the City was
much indamaged thereby to their great Detriment and loss, and was the more
remarkable; because no great Rain, only a few small showers had fallen the
^ight before; which seemed to presage the deluge of Troubles, that were
impending over the poor English in that distressed Kingdom.

The Earl of Castlemain being returned to England, from his Embassy to the
Pope, and having received no Preferment, complained to the Pope, who writ to
his Nuncio to Address the King in his behalf; and being seconded by Father
Peter's, it was resolved in the Cabinet Council, Dec. 23. that Jefferies the
Lord Chancellor, for tampring in the business of Magdalen College, should be
put out, and 3 of the Lords of the Treasury, be made Lords Commissioners of the
Great Seal, and that Castlemain should be Lord Treasurer, Peter's roundly
telling the King, that the most effectual means for accomplishing his Design of
Establishing the Catholic Religion, was to let his Prime, Ministers, and the
World understand, That no Service they had or could do should protect them, or
be reckoned of any account, if they boggled in the least Tittle or Circumstance
relating to the Catholic Cause.

But still the Furious Jesuits and their Accomplices were very much
unsatisfied, that notwithstanding they had a Catholic King upon the Throne,
yet the Popish Religion made but small progress, and there was but a mean
harvest of Converts to the Roman Faith; Nay, not in Ireland, where all the
power both Civil and Military, was in their Hands; hereupon a Project is
contrived to destroy the Act of Settlement there, in hopes the Protestants
would Rebel, and Forfeit their Estates, whereby they should have an opportunity
totally to extirpate them out of that Kingdom; and so be in a capacity in a
short time, to subdue England and Scotland likewise: In Order hereto the Lord
Chief Justice Nugent, Lord Chief Baron Rice and Neagle, drew up the Form of an
Act, which in the nature of it, gave the whole Lands of Ireland into the Hands
of the King, and though the Catholics were to have but half their Estates, yet
the other part was under such qualifications, as the King might dispose of them
to those who were most Obedient and Useful to him: This was brought over by
these 3, who were called the Irish Ambassadors, and at length approved of by
Father Peter's, and presented to the King with strong Assurances; that if he
would but call a Parliament there, they could have whom they pleased elected,
all Corporations being already put into Popish hands, and all the Sheriffs of
Counties, Papists; who would be sure to make returns as they thought fit.

King James who was become a Vassal to the French King, durst not refuse their
Proposals, for fear of disobliging him; and having (as he constantly did)
debated it in the Cabinet Council; it was resolved to be brought into the Privy
Council, which the King did accordingly; and being read, the Lord Bellasis
passionately inveighed against it, saying; That if such Designs as these were
encouraged, the Catholics of England had best in time look out for another
Country, and not stay to be a mad Sacrifice for Irish Rebels; others seconded
it, and none durst offer any thing in behalf of it; afterward the 3 Irish
Ambassadors had Audience at the Council, where Rice spoke in the behalf of the
rest; but the Lords Bellasis and Pours called him Fool and Knave, even in the
Kings presence: Bellasis bidding them make have to the Fool their Master, and
bid him next Message he sent, to employ Wiser Men, and upon a more honest
Errand; and every one fell so violently upon them, that they kissed the Kings
Hand and departed, he himself not speaking a word; but instantly breaking up
the Council: And the noise of their Business being known abroad, the Boys in
the Streets run after the Coach, where Rice and Nugent at any time were with
Potatoes stuck in sticks, crying out, make way for the Irish Ambassadors.

In 1688. The Joyful News of the Birth of the supposed Prince of Wales arrived
there, about the same time with that of the Imprisoning the Bishop^ in the
Tower, which filled them with such exaltations, that they could hardly bear it,
Glorying, They had now a Prince, who would become a Patron to Holy Church, and
perpetuate the Catholic Religion to all Posterity, by the utter extirpation of
Heresy: It is remarkable, that as soon as ever it was publicly declared the
Queen was with Child, the Irish throughout the Nation, were so confident that
it would be a Son, that they offered to lay 20 Guinies to one of it; which the
English were very sensible they would never have ventured, had they not been
acquainted with the Mystery of it. And now they express their Rejoicing with
Bonfires, Bagpipes, Drinking and Revelling for several Nights together, forcing
the English to come out of their Beds, and to drink the King and Princes good
Health, with Confusion to their Enemies upon their Knees; which they well
understood were the Protestants: and such as would not comply, were called
Fanatic Oliverian Dogs, and they hardly refrained from Murdering them; and
the Officers of Christ-Church, were committed to the Stocks; because Tyrconnel
fancyed that the Bells did not Ring merrily enough on that occasion.

But the Scripture says; The Joy of the Wicked is short, and so theirs proved;
for a while after a Ship came from Amsterdam to Dublin, with Letters from a
Friend of Tyrconnels, to acquaint him, that he did imagine the Prince of Orange
had a Design against England, since none in Holland could guess what else the
great and hasty preparations made there should mean; Tyrconnel sent this Letter
to the Secretary of State, who showed it the King; but they made no other use
of it, than to Scorn and Redicule his Intelligence, as the Secretary did in a
Letter sent back to him: But fresh Suspicions daily arose, and the matter
seemed still more probable; whereupon the huffing Irish, called the English
Rebels, saying; they were sure they would join with the Prince, and as certain
that they would be beaten, and be served the same sauce as Monmoth was; and
Bloodily and Maliciously expressed themselves against the Prince, whose Head they
threatened to stick on a Pole, and carry it round the Kingdom; and after K.
James Proclamation came to them, L. C. Justice Nugent that Confident Ignorant
Irishman in his Charge to the Jury among other Vilifying Reproaches upon the P.
of Orange, Audaciously and Impudently added; that now the States of Holland
were weary of their Prince, they had sent him over to be dressed as Monmouth was;
but that was too good for him, and that he doubted not before a Month passed,
to hear that they were hung up all over England in Bunches, like Ropes of
Onions.

At this time of his present Majesty's Descent into England, the Popish Army in
Ireland were about 8000, whereof near half were sent into England to assist K.
James, and the other were dispersed up and down the Kingdom; being but an
handful in comparison of the Protestants, who had Arms enough in Dublin alone,
to have Mastered them; and it was proposed by some, (when they heard the King
had sent Commissioners to Treat with his Highness the Prince of Orange) to
Seize the Castle of Dublin with the Stores and Ammunition which had been very
Feasible by securing Tyrconnel, who had only 600 Men to guard him; and they by
the continual Expresses from England, of the wonderful Progress of the Princes
Forces, were so generally Discouraged, that they declared themselves desirous
to lay down their Arms, proposing to themselves, only to remain in the same
condition they were in K. Charles II. time, and Tyrconnel himself commanded the
Protestants to signify the same to their Friends in England, that he was
willing to part with the Sword upon those Terms, with K. James his leave; For
though he received the first News of the Princes Landing with the greatest
Disdain and Contempt, Boasting, that he was able to raise an Army of an Hundred
Thousand Men, on a Months notice, and gave Commissions to every one that would
accept of them, yet the additional Accounts of his Highnesses daily Success
raised such a Consternation in him, that by all his Actions, it did
sufficiently appear he had no thoughts of standing out, and all his Discourses
expressed his Disordered and ill Apprehension of the present Tendency of
Affairs; which was much increased by the dreadful Alarm that the Protestants
had from a Letter sent to the Earl of Mount Alexander, giving him an account of
an Horrible Massacre designed upon the Protestants on December 9. being Sunday;
the Letter came to Dublin the Friday before, and the News thereof so Terrified
the Protestants, that the next Day above 3000 got away into the Ships that were
in the Harbor at that time; which were so crammed, that they were ready to be
stifled, Deserting their Houses, and all that ever they had in the World, and
running to the Ships with scarce Clothes on their Backs, and went to the Isle
of Man in England, or the North of Ireland; such strange Confusions and
Distractions did the Dread of the Barbarous and cruel usage which they feared
from the Irish produce, many of them having been eye witnesses of the Horrid
Murders and Ravages committed by them in 1641.

Tyrconnel having notice of this sudden Hurry, on Sunday Morning sent two
Protestant Lords to persuade the People not to go away, and ordered a Yatch to
fetch back them that were gone; but both proved ineffectual: He then sent to
some of the Principal Protestants in Dublin, assuring them with many Oaths and
Protestations; that he had an utter Abhorrence of any such Design as Massacring
the Protestants, and begged them to persuade their their Friends not to remove:
The dreadful Tidings Arrived at other places in Ireland, that very Sunday
Morning, while the People were at Church and struck them with such Horror and
Amazement, for fear of present Destruction, that many for have got out of the
Windows, others were ready to be squeezed to Death at the Doors, many left
their Hats and Periwigs behind them; yea, the Clothes on their Backs were torn
to pieces in the Crowd, others were trampled under Foot, and the Women in worse
condition then the Men: Nay, for several Sundays after the Protestants carried
Arms with them to Church, the Minister himself being Armed while Preaching;
whether the Design was real or no, or whether this Discovery prevented it, is
not known; but certainly the dread of it produced the greatest Horror, Grief
and Despair that Humane Nature could be capable of.

In this Consternation things continued till Janunuary, when advice coming of
K. James his flying to France, the Irish Lords moved Tyrconnel to deliver up
the Sword, which many thought he would have been easily persuaded to, since at
the beginning of the Alarm, it was believed that he would be the first Man in
the Government, who would endeavor his escaping, having already packt up most
of his Goods of Value, and shipped some of his Treasure: His whole Council were
of the Opinion that he should surrender, and he finding himself so very weak,
and so much in the power of the Protestants, protested to them with the deepest
Oaths and Curses, according to his usual Acts of Dissimulation, Falsehood and
Flattery; That he would be rid of the Government very willingly, so as it might
be with Honor; that it was easy for him to ruin and destroy the Kingdom; and
make it not worth a Groat, but impossible to preserve it for his Master: At
another time he told them; that he could not deliver the Sword with Honor,
till it was demanded; and asked them, whether they would have him throw it over
the Castle Wall; for there was none to take it: Some imagined that he intended
in earnest, to have parted with it, especially if it had been demanded before
K. James went into France; having likewise before procured Letters to be sent
to England, to excuse the Male Administrations in the Government; and that it
was the Opinion of all the Catholics, that the Kingdom would be ruined and
themselves also, if they yielded not to the Prince of Orange; that they would
be contented to be reduced to the same State they were in, when King James came
to the Crown etc.

But after all, the generality of the Protestants were of Opinion, that he
meant nothing less, only designed to gain time, and delude them till he had got
a kind of an Army together to master them; and they were confirmed therein by
his Secret giving out 500 Commissions of one sort and another, in a Day: The
Irish likewise assembled in great Bodies, and and were called Rapparees, Armed
with Skeins and Half-Pikes, killing the Cattle of the English, and stealing an
100 or 2 at once in a Night, so that many Substantial Protestants, who owned
several Hundreds of black Cattle and Sheep, etc. had not one left; and for 40
Miles together in the Province of Munster, the Irish Cabbins were full of Beef,
stolen from the English; which they did not so much as bestow salt upon, but
hung it up in the Smoke, so that it looked and stunk as bad as Carrion; It was
affirmed, that in 9 Days, the Irish stole eleven thousand Cattle in that one
Province, and at length to complete the miseries of the Protestants, they
Robbed and Pillaged their Houses, so that those who had lived in great
Hospitality and Plenty, now wanted Bread to eat, and had nothing left to
preserve them from Starving.

All this while the New Levies were Mustering every Day, the Priests putting
off their Wolves Clothing; and with their Swords and Periwigs turned
Commanders, and Exercised the Irish Soldiers: All the Scum and Rascality of the
Country, were made Officers, every where Papists inlisted themselves, and the
Priests suffered no Man to come to (...) that did not Arm himself with a Skeine
and (...) Pike; the better Sort of their Captains and i^ (...) or Officers, had
been Footmen or Servants to Protestants most of them Sons or Descendants of
the Rebels in 1641. who had Murdered so many Protestants; many were Outlawed
and Condemned Persons for Torying and Robbing, no less then 14 Notorious Tories
were Officers in Cormuck O Neals Regiment: And these New Commissioned Officers
were obliged without pay, to subsist their Men (as they called it) being
between 40 and 50000 for three Months, a thing impossible for them to do, since
most of them were not able to maintain themselves; which gave mortal
apprehensions to the Protestants, who had reason to fear the Destruction that
immediately fell on them, when they saw their Enemies in Arms, and their own
Lives and Goods in the power, and at the Mercy of those Thieves, Robbers and
Tories, now Armed and Authorized, from whom they could scarce secure
themselves, when it was in their power to pursue and hang them: And this was
acknowledged by one of their own Justices, who in his Charge at the
Quarter Sessions, declared, That among other Conveniences which they received
from this Government, one was, That it had rid them of Tories, for all these
were taken into the Kings Army.

Tyrconnel and his Council were still in amaze and Confusion, and all unanimous
to submit, except Nugent and Rice; but on a sudden, they came to a Conclusion,
that might quiet the Irish Lords, who were for Submission to the Prince and
Goverrment of England; and the Project was, That the Lord Montjoy a Protestant,
and the Lord Chief ^^ron Rice, should be sent over to the late King (...) in
France to Represent to him; The im(...) ^^ility of their holding out against
England; (...) ^he necessity to yield to the time, and make (...) best Terms
they could, till a better Opportunity presented to serve himself of his Irish
Subjects: This was a Jesuitical Stratagem, contrived by Rice and Neagle, as one
of them afterward boasted, carried on without the privity of any but the Lord
Deputy and themselves; and every Body told the Lord Montjoy, that it was all
Sham and Trick, only to amuse the Protestants, and remove him out of the way,
who was most likely to Head them: Yet the Lord Tyrconnel Swore most Solemnly,
that he was in earnest in this Message, and that he knew the French Court would
oppose it to the utmost, who regarded only their own interest, and did not care
if Ireland were sunk into the Pit of Hell, so they could give the Prince of
Orange a Diversion but for 3 Months; but (said he) if the King be persuaded to
Ruin his fastest Friends, only to gratify France, and do himself no Service;
he is neither so Merciful nor Wise, as I believe him to be: If he recover
England, Ireland will fall in course; but he can never expect to conquer
England by Ireland: If he Attempts it, he ruins Ireland to do himself no
kindness; but rather to exasperate England the more against him, and make his
Restoration impossible; intimating, that if the King would not do it, he would
look on his refusal to be forced on him by those in whose power he was, and
that he should think himself obliged to do it without his consent: The Lord
Montjoy alleged, That his going into France, could not influence the Councils
in England, who could reduce the Kingdom without his Assistance, and that he
must either obey the Deputy, or Declare War against him and K. James's
interest, which he did not think safe, since he had no Order nor Encouragement
from England; but on the contrary, all the Advice he had from thence was, to be
quiet, and not to meddle; that he was obliged to K. James, and neither his
Conscience nor Gratitude, would permit him in his present Circumstances, to
make War on his own Authority against him, whilst there was any possibility of
doing the business peaceably: Upon these Motives, L. Montjoy proceeds in this
Negotiation, and took Shipping with Rice at Waterford in Jan. 1688. Tyrconnel
having first granted these General Concessions to the Protef^ants. 1. That no
more Commissions should be given out, nor new Men raised. 2. That no more of
the Army should be sent to the North. 3. That none should be questioned for
what was past. 4. That no private House should be obliged to quarter Soldiers:
These he sent about the Kingdom by Letters; yet the Lord Montjoy was no sooner
gone, but according to his usual Falsehood, he denied all, and was angry at the
Dispersing the Letters: Soon after came News, that the Lord Montjoy was made a
Prisoner in the Bastile in France; which more Exasperated the Protestants
against K. James as a Violator of Public Faith to his Subjects, and likewise
ruined the little Reputation that his Lord Deputy had among them.

Soon after a French Engineer Landed at Cork, and came with all Expedition to
Dublin, assuring Tyrconnel that K. James would be suddenly with him; and that
nothing was to be feared from England, till the end of the Summer, upon this,
the face of things quickly altered, and the little hopes that had hitherto
supported the English, now utterly vanished, so that there appeared a necessity
of associating together, and getting into the Castles and best places of
strength they had, for the Defense and Preservation of their Lives; some
Protestants had a while before, put themselves into a posture of Defense in the
North, etc. but Proclamations were issued out by the Council, (signed by
several Protestants) commanding them to go to their respective homes under the
penalty of being proceeded against as Traitors, which proved fatal to the
English, they judging thereby the danger was not so great as they imagined. But
at length matters were reduced to such extremity that no course remained to
preserve the Protestants; but of making their escape: for though the Lord
Kingstone, Sir Arthur Royden and others, endeavored to have secured several
places; yet matters were managed so indiscreetly, that all proved ineffectual,
and their inconsiderable Forces were soon Defeated: After which, Tyrconnel
Disarmed all the Protestants throughout the Kingdom in one Day; In the Cities
and Towns they shut up the Gates, and none were suffered to pass in or out,
without being strictly searched for Arms, under pretense of which, they ^^so
came into the English Houses, and often Seized (...) their Plate and Money, or
what else they could meet with in this Confusion, which lasted several days,
during which, most of the Horses which belonged to English Gentlemen and
Farmers, was seized in the Country, for the Kings use; which were brought into
the Towns, where the Soldiers were quartered in so great numbers, in private,
as well as public Houses, that the English had scarce Beds to lie on.

About this time, Colonel Hamilton is sent with an Army to the North of
Ireland, and though more early in the year than usual, yet the Judges were sent
into the Country, on pretense to punish the Thieves and Robbers that plundered
the Protestants; but the Design was to Condemn those poor Protestants, that had
taken up Arms and Defended their Houses against them, and likewise to raise
Money for the Army, their being very little in the Exchequer; And the Judges
read a Letter in every County, directed from the Government to the principal
Gentlemen, and to the Minister and Popish Priest of every Parish, requiring
them to Summon their Parishioners together, and persuade them to Subscribe to
the utmost of their Ability, for the Subsistence of the Kings Forces, assuring
them, that he would be soon at the Head of them with a confiderable Assistance
from France; and that they who had no Money, should send in Meal, Malt, Beef,
Cheese, Butter, Herrings, or else Leather Brogs, Stockins, Wool Cloth, Linen
or any other Goods the Country afforded: This was a great Oppression to the
Protestants, who though they had but very little left by the Rabble; yet must
Contribute largely, or else were reckoned well-wishers to the Kings Enemies.

The Lord Galmoy was likewise sent with Forces to Guard the passages between
the North of Ireland, and those parts of Munster and Connaught that adjoined to
Ulster, to prevent the South and Western Protestants from joining, who being a
Malicious and Bloody Papist first drew Blood there, causing two Gentlemen who
had taken Arms for their own Defense under Colonel Sandason, to be Hanged on a
Sign-post at Belniot, and their Heads being cut off, were kicked about the
Streets by his Soldiers like Foot-balls; at Ornagh he took 2 others upon the
same pretense, and caused the Son first to Hang his Father, and carry his Head
on a pole through the Streets, crying, this is the Head of a Traitor; and then
the young Man himself was Hanged: It was also Reported, that some of his
Dragoons meeting with a Clergymans Wife, whose Husband had fled Northward,
several of them one after another Ravished her, and then ripped up her Belly, and
exposed her with a dead Man upon her: At Tipperary, an English Gentleman seeing
some Dragoons marching toward his House, shut up his Doors, (it being late in
the Evening) as if they were gone to Bed; but 16 of them coming thither, and
not being quickly admitted, they forced open his Doors, calling him Traitor for
shutting them against the Kings Forces; and having pillaged all things of
value, they then deflowred his Daughter, and only Child before his Face; all 16
lay with her, and 3 of them (as was affirmed by his Family) after she was
actually dead. These were the beginnings of the Villainies which the
Protestants suffered from these execrable Wretches.

While things were in this posture, K. James was hourly expected by the Irish,
and almost every Post a false Alarm is given that he was Landed, Bonfi^es being
made, and Guns Discharged in the several Garrisons; and that so often, that not
only Protestants, but also many Papists thought it to be but a sham of
Tyrconnels, to Discourage the Protestants, and obtain better Terms from them:
But at length March 12. 1689. he Landed at Kingsale, at which the Protestants
and some Papists, seemed not very well satisfied, nay the first were so
indifferent, that for a Fortnight after he Arrived, they would not believe it;
because they imagined he had no great kindness for them, however they thought
he would have made their condition more easy for the present, and spoke them
fair, considering that the Irish depended upon many Friends which they boasted
they had in Scotland and England: But K. James soon let the World know he was
not fond of such Dependencies; for coming to Cork, where he was received by the
Mayor and Aldermen in their Formalities, the Recorder in a long Speech,
magnified the Irish Loyalty and Valor, saying; That he now hoped His Majesty
was convinced of their Fidelity, and that they were better Subjects than the
Church of England Men; to this part of the Speech, the K. Replied, That he
acknowledged all the Recorder had said to be true; and that he hoped by their
Forces and the Assistance he should receive from his Brother of France, to be
restored to his Throne in spite of those Slaves of the Church of England; at
this very time the Judges held the Assizes there, and one Brown a Gentleman of
about 500 pound a year, who had been in Arms against the Rapparees; being there
a Prisoner, he put himself on his Trial, and Petitioned K. James, thinking that
he would begin with an Act of Mercy, and give him his Life; but on the
contrary, he left him to the Law, whereby he was sure to be Condemned, and
accordingly was Hanged and Quartered; from hence K. James took his Journey to
Dublin, where he was received with all Demonstrations of Joy imaginable by
Tyrconnel and the Popish Party, who looked upon him as their only Support,
Champion and Deliverer: He was no sooner Arrived, but the Irish discovered what
his future Designs were in their common talk at public Houses, declaring
openly, That the King would have such a Powerful Army of French, Irish and
Scots Roman Catholics, as should force the English into Obedience: That he did
not think of returning into England by the means of any Protestant Friends; but
by a French power: So that when he came to his Throne, he might Rule as he
thought fit; that the Protestants of Ireland, might feed themselves with what
hopes they pleased; but they should quickly find the K. would neither value nor
regard them. That the K. had a long time Caressed the Damned Church of England
(as they called it) and that he could do no good with them; but now he would do
his Business without them, and so find an opportunity of shaking them quite
off; that they did not doubt but to be in the midst of England by Midsummer,
and make that the Seat of War, thereby preserving their own Country, Estates,
and Tenants, and living on the Churls, (as they called the English), who they
said were Rich, and a giddy inconstant People, not being satisfied with any
kind of Government, and would, they doubted not, be soon divided, and broken
among themselves, so that they did not fear carrying their Point.

King James himself by his Discourses and Actions, soon confirmed the same; For
he had but 2 Considerable Protestants in his Army, Sir Thomas Newcomer and
Colonel Russell, these he immediately Disbanded, without any other Objection
but their Religion; and declared to Colonel Sarsfield, who desired Commissions
for 2 of his Protestant Relations, and offered to be bound for their Fidelity,
That he would Trust no Protestant; and was heard to say as he came out of his
Chapel, upon occasion of some of his Courtiers Discoursing about Protestants,
That a Protestant Stunk in his Nostrils: And as his words, so his Deeds
discovered his Abhorrence of them; for he had not been long in Dublin, when the
Wife of one Maxwell, (who was Condemned for betaking himself with some others,
to a strong House in Queens County for the Security of their Lives) presented a
Petition to the King to pardon her Husband; This poor Woman had by her piteous
entreaties, prevailed with the High Sheriff to reprieve him for 15 Days, that
she might use her interest to save him, though against the command of the
Bloody Lord Gilmoy, who ordered him to be presently executed; she accordingly
went to Dublin, hoping that the King might be persuaded to do one Act of Grace,
being just come to the City, and the High Sheriff went with her, and promised
her Admittance to the Presence; where she appeared in the most lamentable
condition that was possible to excite Compassion, having 4 or five small
Children hanging about her all in Tears, and delivered her Petition, praying
his Majesty to pardon, or at least to Reprieve her poor Husband for some time;
which she delivered in such melting Terms as moved the very Irish Nobility then
present, to second her Request; and might have Mollified the hardest Heart in
the World; but the Answer she had from King James was, Woman your Husband shall
dye; and the High Sheriff was severely Reprimanded, for not executing him
according to his Warrant; and Threatened, that if the Prisoner escaped, he
should dye for him; and was commanded to hang him immediately, which was done
accordingly: There are several other instances of this kind, and it may easily
be imagined, how great an Encouragement this kind of Behavior in a Prince was
to the rude Soldiers to Treat the poor Protestants, not only in the Country,
but even in Dublin, under the very eye of the Government, in a Barbarous
manner: It was ordinary with them to take the meat that the poor people had
provided for their Families, without thanks or payment; no^ could a Protestant
be abroad after Sunset, without danger of his Life. One Power Bred a
Protestant; but turned Papist in K. James time, coming to his House one
Evening, was set upon by two Soldiers, demanding his Money, and calling him
Heretic Dog, he thought to have excused himself, and made some Opposition; but
was shot through the Body with a Pistol, and fell Dead, as well as unpittyed at
his own Door: about the same time, a Gentleman walking in a Bowling Green in
Dublin, was Stabbed by some Soldiers; and a poor Tapster of an Alehouse,
standing one Day at the Door on the Wood-key, was by some Dragoons thrown into
the water and drowned, and no notice taken of it; but only as a Jest: So that
considering how the K. and Government did connive at things of this Nature, and
that all the Irish bear so implacable an Hatred to the English, and are a
people of much Cruelty and forwardness to shed Blood, when they have an (...)
vantage; and which, to be sure, was not lessened by their being managed by
French Men: I say, considering all these Circumstances, it may seem very
wonderful, that they did not attempt a General Massacre, all the time before
the English Forces Arrived there; but it must be Attributed only to the Divine
providence (which restrains even the Devils) that prevented these Bloodhounds,
from Destroying the poor Protestants, at whom they stood grinning, and wanted
only the word to cut their Throats, as they and their Predecessors did in 1641.

K. James before his Arrival in Ireland, had Besolved immediately to call a
Popish Parliament there, to destroy the Act of Settlement, and restore the
Irish Rebels to their Estates; which he was so impatient in, that he issued out
Writs for them to Sit May 7. 1689 at Dublin, though it seemed directly against
his Interest at this time; and many of his own Party redicul'd him and his
Councils, to call a Parliament to spend their time in wrangling about settling
the Kingdom, and disposing Estates before it was reduced to the Kings
Obedience: But hereby it pleased God to infatuate them; for had they applied
themselves to the Seige of Londonderry, it is to be feared, that Town and
others in the North, had been taken before the Succors came, and then all
Ireland had been their own; which might have been of very fatal Consequence.

For the Protestants upon the Orders that were issued through all parts of the
Kingdom, to take away their Arms and Serviceable Horses, concluded that an
English Army was either Landed in some part of the Kingdom, or that the
Government expected one; which so encouraged the Protestants, that in many
places they betook themselves into Castles and strong Holds, thinking that if
they could defend themselves from flying Parties and the Rabble, the Irish Army
would be so employed by the Forces of England, that there could be no formal
Seiges laid against them; and they should secure themselves with their Horses
and Arms, till they might find an opportunity of joining with the English Army:
But these poor Men soon after found their mistake, and thereupon were forced to
Surrender upon tolerable Conditions, had they been observed: but the Irish
instead of performing them, sent them to Jayl. Tried and Executed several for
High Treason, and kept others in miserable Captivity and Slavery.

This vile Treachery and Severe Usage, encouraged the Protestants in the North,
who were possessed of London Derry, Inniskilling, and some other places to defend
themselves against the utmost Efforts of the Enemy: For Tyrconnel, as we have
heard, having Armed a Rabble of 40 or 50 Thousand Irish Papists, to live upon
the Country without pay, from whence ensued miserable Depredations, open and
Noonday Robberies, and an inevitable and sudden Ruin of the British and
Protestant interest in Ireland; The Protestants of the North, though themselves
no longer under obligation to be Active in their own Destruction; but took up
Arms in Defense of their Laws, against those who Acted in Contradiction to all
Laws; and from whom they had reason to fear all kind of Cruelty and Barbarity:

It happened that the L. Tyrconnell, having Orders to Transport 3 or 4000 of his
Irish Soldiers to England to Assist K. James, he took a particular care to
send away the whole Regiment, quartered in and about Londonderry; but soon saw
his Error, and endeavored to repair it, by Commanding the Earl of Antrim to
quarter there with his Regiment, who appeared before the Town without the Kings
Livery, or any Officers of Note, or the least warning of their coming; and
having no other Arms but Skeans, Clubs, and such other Weapons as Reams and
Tories uses, and this happening about the very time that the Protestants were
Alarmed with the Letter sent to the Lord Mount Alexander, concerning a designed
Massacre, the People of the Town were so Affrighted, that they refused them
Entrance into the City, and consulted their own safety, concluding to shut
their Gates: One of the Companies were already in view of the Town, and two of
the Officers in it; but the younger sort got together, and with their Swords
drawn ran to the main Guards; Seized the Key, drew up the Bridge, and locked the
Ferry-Gate, though the Irish Soldiers were advanced within 60 yards of it; from
thence they went to secure the other 3 Gates, and having placed Guards at each
of them, met in the Market: So happily did these Resolute Youths Nick the very
Minute of their Design, and upon such a seemingly Rash and Desperate Action,
did the preservation of that important place, and consequently in some measure,
the whole Kingdom, out of the Hands of the Irish depend.

The Alarm of the Designed Massacre, and Tyrconnels Arming such a Numerous
Swarm of Irish Highlanders, had the like effect upon the Protestants of
Inniskilling; and knowing this was the only place of Consequence upon Lough
Earne, which had held out with Remarkable Courage against the Irish Rebels in
1641. and which if they were now possessed of, would give them an open Passage
from Connaught to Ulster, they therefore resolve not to admit the 2 Companies
of Irish Papists, which were ordered thither to quarter in the Town; but
instantly dispatched Letters to all the Protestant Gentlemen thereabout, for
their Advice and Assistance in that juncture; not judging themselves able to
keep out the 2 Foot Companies, they being but 80 Dwellers in all, and few or no
Arms amongst them; The Messengers returned with very little Encouragement. most
of the English dissuading them from the Enterprise as dangerous, the Irish
being well provided of Arms, Ammunition, and Provisions, whereas they had not
10 pound of powder, nor 20 well fixed Fire Arms in the Town: But the Resolution
of the People, Surmounted all these Difficulties, resolving to run all Hazards,
rather than expose their Lives to the Mercy of their Barbarous and Bloody
principled Enemies: The Irish Army approaching them within 18 Miles, they made
fresh Instances to their Neighbors to come to their Aid, promising that whilst
they staid with them, they should have free quarter for Man and Horse;
whereupon several Protestants came into the Town, with their best Horses and
Arms, promising to stand by them in Defense of their Lives, and the Protestant
Religion; which they did believe by the Preparations they heard were making by
the Enemy, would be very, soon invaded; and the News they heard from London
Derry, did much Fortify their Courage: So that upon the Approach of the Irish
Companies, the Inniskillin Horse and Foot Advanced toward them; but came no
sooner in View, ere the 2 Companies with the whole Rabble that was with them,
turned their Backs and fled, without halting, in very great Fear and Disorder;
and their Officers being then at Dinner at a Gentleman's House not far from
thence, hearing the Inniskillin Men were come out, left their Dinners before
they had half done, and ran away after them, and all of them got the next Day
24 Miles off, in great Terror of the Inniskilliners, who afterward performed
many admirable Actions against the Irish.

King James's pretended Parliament Sat in Dublin, from May 7. 1689. to July
20. following, and in that short time, entirely destroyed the Settlement of
Ireland, and outed both the Protestant Clergy and Laity of their Free-Holds and
Inheritances, by Repealing the 2 Acts of Settlement: Whereby 2 thirds of the
Protestants of the Kingdom held their Estates: And the Real Estates of all that
dwelt or staid in any place in the 3 Kingdoms, who did not own K. James's
Power, or correspended with any such, as they Termed Rebels, or were any ways
Aiding, Abetting, or Assisting to them from Aug. 1. 1688 are declared to be
forefeited and vested in the King: By which Clause, almost every Protestant
that could write in the Kingdom, had forfeited his Estate, for the Pacquets
went constantly from London to Dublin, and back again, from August 1688. to
March following, and few had Friends in England or the North; but Corresponded
with them by Letters; and every such Letter is made by this Clause, a
Forfeiture of Estate. They likewise passed an Act of Attainder, whereby above
3000 Protestants were Attainted, and their Estates forfeited to the King, some
for being in Arms; but the greatest part for absenting themselves, and going
out of the Kingdom.

These proceedings were thought very severe by the Protestants, since those
that Armed themselves, did not Attempt any thing, even against those whom the
Lord Deputy, against the Laws of the Kingdom, and the Interest of the Nation,
had entrusted with Arms and Employments, except in their own Defense, when
Invaded and Assaulted by them: Neither was there one Act of Hostility
committed, wherein the Protestants were not on the Defensive: Their Crime then
if any, was only that they were unwilling to be Robbed and Plundered, as their
Neighbors were without opposition; but Disarmed some of those who under Color
of being King James's Soldiers, destroyed the Country; this was all the Reason:
Tyrconnel had to proclaim them Rebels, for Killing and Murdering his Majesty's
Subjects, and with pillaging the Country; whereas it was Notorious, they never
killed any but whom they found actually Robbing, for killing of whom the Laws of
the Kingdom not only indemnified them; but likewise assigned them a Reward, and
it is as plain, that the Protestants preserved the Country from being pillaged;
and for this they now forfeited their Estates: As for those that were absent,
it would have been unwisely done for the Protestants that were gone to England,
to have returned again to a Ruinous Kingdom the Actual Seat of War, where all
the goods they had left behind, were Imbezeled by Robbers; and their Estates
given to those Sons of Rebellion in 1641. And when Men of the best Estates in
Ireland, wished themselves away; and many were content to leave all and venture
their Lives in little Boats, to the Mercy of the Seas in the death of Winter,
reckoning any thing safer and easier, than to stay under a Government which had
effectually destroyed all the measures of Right and Wrong; and Condenmed so
many Gentlemen to the loss of all without allowing them the favor either of
being Tried or Heard: And of those that star^ many of them were killed by the
Soldiers, Murdered in their Houses, Executed by Martial Law, starved and
famished in Jay is, and destroyed by many other Violences, the Papists
declaring, That they designed to starve one half of the Protestants, and hang
the other and that it would never be well till this was done: So that all King
James's proceedings in that Kingdom, clearly manifested his design to be the
absolute inslaving it to Arbitrary Power and Popery, by his Invading the
Liberties and Estates, and exposing their Lives to his peremptory Will and
Pleasure. This the Protestants in the North, as well as others, were very
sensible of; and therefore the People of Londonderry, resolved to hold out to
the last Extremity.

Some time before the English Navy being out at Sea, to prevent Supplies from
France, Admiral Herbert with his Squadron, had notice by his Scent-Ships, that
part of the French Fleet were abroad, and stood for the Irish Coast: whereupon
he Sailed after them, and found them in Bantry-Bay, whereupon drawing his Ships
up into a Line, and lying upon the Stretch, he battered them extremely, from 10
in the Morning, till 5 in the Afternoon, at what time the French Admiral went
off, and stood farther into the Bay: On our side, we lost Captain Aylmer of the
Portland, with a Lieutenant, and about 300 Seamen killed and Wounded; the
Damage of the French was equal to ours, though they had the Bay to shelter
them, the Wind, and a double number of Ships: So soon as the English were gone,
the French weighed Anchor for fear of a second Engagement.

King James now sets forward with his Army toward London Derry; where the
Garrison had already Proclaimed King William and Queen Mary, and had received
from England 480 Barrels of Powder, and Arms for 2000 Men, with a Commission to
Colonel Lundy to be Governor, and promise of further Supply: King James's Army
consisted in about 12000 Men, and a very good Train of Artillery; his Generals
were Monsieur de Mornont, General of the French Horse, the Sieur Piscina,
General of the Foot; Colonel Hamilton Lieutenant General of the Irish Foot,
all under the Standard of France; and consisting of several Regiments,
commanded by the D, of Berwick, and Fitz-James his Brother, the Lord Nettervile
Abercorn, Colonel Shelden, and Colonel Randleigh: The King had some assurance
given him, that the Town upon his Approach, would undoubtedly Surrender, and
that the very sight of so formidable an Army, would fright them into a
Compliance, and therefore April. 18. he advances with his Army before the Walls
with flying Colors: Orders were given that none should fire, till the Kings
Demands were first known; but the People of Londonderry, wondering to see
Lieutenant General Hamilton approaching the Walls contrary to his engagement,
not to come within 4 Miles of the Town, imagined they were betrayed, and fired
their Guns upon them; which being unexpected by the Enemy, some of them fled,
others hid themselves, and a great many were killed; and it was reported that
one Captain Froy was slain near the Kings Person, who was in some disorder to
find himself so Roughly and Unmannerly Treated by those, from whom he expected
a Dutiful Compliance, as well as at the Behavior of his Army, so different
from the Character he had received of both; and therefore those in the Town,
who had encouraged him to try this dangerous Experiment, sent some Persons to
the King to excuse it, by alleging the Difficulty of Commanding an untractable
Multitude. But upon their return, they were three Days before this, kept out by
the People; Colonel Cunningham and Richards came into the Lough from England,
with 2 Regiments and other Necessaries for Supply of Derry, with Instructions
to receive Orders from Governor Lundy, who thereupon called a Council of War,
where the 2 Collenels being present, with others unacquainted with the
Condition of the Town, or the Inclination or Resolution of the People they make
an Order, that there not being Provision in the Town for the present Garrison
and the 2 Regiments, for above a week or ten Days; and the place not being
Tenable against a Formidable Army, therefore it was not Advisable to Land the 2
Regiments, and that considering the Enemy will soon possess themselves of the
place, the Principal Officers shall privately withdraw, that the Inhabitants by
a timely Capitulation, may make the better Terms with the Enemy: In pursuance
of this Order, Colonel Cunningham, Richards, with their Officers, went to
their Ships; which with 2 Regiments on Board, Sailed Back for England: And the
Council in pursuance of these pernicious intentions, proceeded to conclude upon
a Surrender, and drew up a Paper to that purpose, which most of them Signed;
and the Town was Designed to have been delivered up in 2 or 3 Days

In the mean time, the Officers and Soldiers in Londonderry, who knew nothing
of the Order of Council, earnestly entreated Colonel Lundy, that the English
Forces might Land, that with their Assistance, they might take the Field, and
fight the Enemy before the Cannon were brought over, in Order to the
Preservation of that Corner, into which the Provisions and Wealth of 3 or 4
Counties was crowded: The Colonel to delude them, told them publicly, That it
was resolved, the English Forces should immedately Land, and when they were in
their Quarters, the Gates should be opened, and all join in Defense of the
Town; and to carry on the Intreague, the Sheriffs were ordered to go through
the City, to provide quarters for them; but all this was a mere sham that he
and the Officers might get away with the greater Ease and Safety.

A Farty of Irish having a few Days before Attempted to Ford the River at
Castle Fin, were repulsed by some Forces sent out of Derry, who opposed their
coming over, till all their Ammunition was spent; After which, they followed
the rest of the English Army, which were 10000 strong, and made good their
Retreat to Derry; but were much Surprised to find the Gates shut against them
by the Governors Order: So that many Officers Soldiers, and Private Gentlemen,
were forced that Night to lie about the Walls; but the next Day with much
Difficulty, and some Violence upon the Centry by firing at him, and calling for
Fire to burn the Gates, that and the other Gates were thrown open: This and
other Passages, occasioned great jealousies of the Governor; but when the
Town Clerk found it absolutely necessary to Publish the Resolutions of the
Council of War, That Colonel Cunningham, his Ships, Men and Provisions, should
return to England, and all Gentlemen and others in Arms, should quit the
Garrison, and go along with him; the Common Soldiers were extremely enraged at
their Officers, several of whom at this time had Deserted them and fled for
England: So that they could not forbear expressing it with Violence on some of
them; One Captain Bell was shot Dead, and another Burnt, who with more Officers
was got into a Boat, as they imagined to get away.

K. James upon the Repulse he had received, retired the same Evening with his
Army to St. Johnstown, about 5 Miles from Derry; and staid there 2 Days to wait
for an Answer from the City, to the Proposal he had made April 17. That to
prevent the effusion of Christian Blood, if they would Surrender the City,
Honorable Terms should be allowed them; the Council in the absence of Colonel
Lundy (who thought it for his safety to keep his Chamber) proceeded upon the
Governors Project, to choose 20 Men to go out and Capitulate with K. James; but
the Multitude on the Walls, and at the Gates hearing of it, were so exceedingly
incensed, that they Threatened: If a Man of them offered to go out on that
Errand, they would Treat him as a betrayer of the Town, the Protestant Religion
and K. Williams Interest: Upon which, none of them durst offer to go, and so a
stop was put to that dangerous Capitulation, notwithstanding the Orders of the
Governor and Council; so little did the Soldiers regard any Command that seemed
to cross their Resolutions of Defending the City. The Multitude having thus
broken the Authority of the Council, they with Colonel Lundy, thought fit to
withdraw, and he with some Difficulty got to the Ships at Culmore and from
thence to England: Upon which, the Garrison seeing they were Deserted by their
Governor; and having resolved to Defend the Town against the Enemy, they chose
Mr. Walker a Clergyman, and Major Baker to be their Governors during the Siege;
and the Soldiers whom their Officers had left, chose their Captains, and each
Captain which of the Colonels he would serve under, as they pleased
themselves; and one Mr. Bennet was sent to England, to give an account of their
Resolutions to maintain the place; and to desire Speedy Succors to be sent from
thence for their Assistance.

April 9. A Trumpet came to the Walls from K. James, to know why they sent not
out Commissioners to Treat according to their Proposals, but the People having
put a stop to it, Colonel Whitney wrote a few Lines to excuse themselves to
the King: The next Day the Lord Straband came up, making many Proposals; and
offering his Kings Pardon, Protection, and Favor, if they would Surrender the
Town; but these fine words, had no place with the Garrison; for at that very
time of this Capitulating, the Enemy were observed to use that opportunity, for
drawing their Cannon to a convenient stand: Whereupon they desired his Lordship
to withdraw, or else they should fire upon him; he still continued his
Compliments, till they plainly told him, they would never deliver the Town to
any but K. William and Q Mary, and their Order: My Lord having ended all his
Insinuations, found himself at last obliged to Retire; So that K. James having
loft all hopes of Accommodation, reresolved if possible, to reduce them by
force, and raised several Batteries against the Town, his Head Quarters being
still at St. Johnstown: The Fort of Culmore had some time before been Deserted
by Captain Jemmat the Governor, by Order of Colonel Lundy, and a few Irish
possessed themselves of it; but it was soon Recovered by a small Artifice: Diverse
Skirmishes happened between the 2 Armies during the Siege, particularly May 6.
in a Sally made by the Besiegers, wherein 200 of the Enemy were killed, and 500
wounded, 300 of whom dyed in a few days of their wounds; and among others,
General Mommune a French Man, with other Officers of Note.

The Enemy now remove their Main Body, from St. Johnstown, and pitch their
Tents about 2 Miles from Derry, on an Hill, placing such strict Guards on all
sides of the Town, that the Besieged found it impossible to Convey or Receive
any intelligence and difficult to come by the Wells of water; which they often
sought for, and cost some of them their Blood. June 4. The Enemy with a Body of
Horse and Foot, made an Attack on the Windmill Works; beginning with a loud
Huzza, which was seconded from all parts of of the Camp, with most dreadful
Screicks and Howlings of a Numerous Rabble that attended their Army: The Faggot
Men were forced to quit their New Defense; which they laid before them for
Security against the Shot, and run for it; Captain Butler with 30 Horse,
mounted the Works; but none of his Men falling, though shot at, the Besieged
found they had Armor, and therefore killed their Horses, whereby only 3
Troopers escapt: The Irish Foot did not run away so fast as usual, which was
wondered at, till it was observed, that in their Retreat, they took the Dead on
their Backs, to secure themselves from the Shot; which was more secure than
when they were alive: the Enemy in this Action, lost 400 Men, most of their
Officers killed, and some made Prisoners, the Befieged had only six Soldiers
and a Captain killed.

June 15. A Fleet of 30 Sail came into the Lough from England; but to prevent
their coming up to the Town, the Enemy Contrived a Boom of Timber joined with
Iron Chains, and a Cable of 12 Inches, and afterward another, of which the
Besieged had an account by some Prisoners taken, which very much discouraged
them, for they doubted whether the Fleet (at the first fight, of which they
were very joyful) would be able to get up with the Provisions which they so
extremely wanted, insomuch that the Men where they could find an Horse a
Grazing near the Windmill, would kill and eat him: The Enemy upon the appearing
of the Ships, seemed to be in a mighty Consternation, pulling down their Tents,
and the Soldiers changing their red Coats, ran away; but the Terror was soon
over, when they saw them make no great Attempt to come up, though they had both
Wind and Tide to assist them; and thereupon they raised Batteries to hinder
them, and made the Boom aforementioned.

June 24. Rosen the French Marshal General, Arrived in the Camp; and finding so
little progress in the Siege, he Swore by the Belly of God, he would Demolish
the Town, and bury the Besieged in the Ashes; and put all to the Sword without
Consideration of Age or Sex, and Study the most Exquisite Torments, to lengthen
out the misery of those that opposed his Command; but providence disappointed
his Cruel Malice, and delivered the poor Protestants out of his bloody Hands.

The Besieged used all possible endeavors, to get intelligence from the Ships,
by making many signs from the Steeple, by Cannon Shot, and by drawing in their
Flag, to represent their Distressed condition to them; but all proved
ineffectual: At length June 25 One Roch, who got to the Water side over against
them, and then Swam cross the River, came and gave them an account of the Ships
Men, Provision and Arms in them for their Relief, adding, That it was desired,
that if he got safe to Town, to give them in the Ships notice of it by 4 Guns
from the Steeple; which was accordingdingly done: They endeavored to send back
to M. Genesis Kirk, and one went to that purpose; but was taken and hanged by the
Enemy: The Besieged were more straightened every day by the Enemy, their Iron
Balls being now spent; so that they were obliged to make Balls of Brick,
covered over with lead. June 30. The L. Clancarty at the Head of a Regiment,
possesses himself of a Line, and enters some Miners in a low Cellar; but the
Besieged fired so briskly upon them, that his Lordship was forced to quit his
Post; and leave his Miners, and 100 of his best Men dead on the place, which
much discouraged the Irish, who had a Prophecy among them, that a Clancarty
should knock at the Gates of Derry; but we see that little value is to be put
either upon Irish Prophecies or Courage.

The same day Governor Baker dyed, which was a sensible loss to the Garrison,
and generally lamented, being a valiant Person, who in all his Actions, showed
the greatest Honor, Courage and Conduct. And now Rosen sends a Letter into the
Town, that if they did not Surrender by 6 a Clock Afternoon, July 1. he would
Order all the Protestants in the adjacent Towns, to be driven under the Walls
of Derry, where they should perish, if not Relieved by the Besieged, that he
would destroy all the Country, if any Troops came to their Relief: But if the
Garrison would become Royalisss (as he termed it) and deliver on any Tolerable
Conditions, he would protect them from all injuries, and give them his Favor:
The Besieged received all these Proposals with Contempt, and some Indignation,
having before made an Order; That it should be Death to mention a Surrender;
the Enemy drive the poor Protestants, according to their Threatening under the
Walls; and the Besieged thinking them Enemies, fired on them, but were mightily
pleased to hear that Divine providence had spared them; and that their shot had
killed 3 of the Enemy; There were some thousands of them which so enraged the
Besieged, that in sight of their Camp, they erected a Gallows, threatening to
hang their Friends that were Prisoners, unless they were removed and sent home
again: The Prisoners themselves Reproached the Irish, declaring they could not
blame the Besieged for putting them to Death, seeing their People exercised
such Severity and Cruelty upon the poor Protestants that were under protection:
The sight of the Gallows, and the importunity of some Friends of those that
were to suffer, at length prevailed, so that July 4 the poor People had leave
to return home; the Enemy had now advanced so near the Town, that the Besieged
from the Works, could talk with the Irish, who expressed great prejudice and
hatred against the French, cursing those Damned Fellows that watched in Trunks
(meaning their Jack Boots) who had all Preferments in the Army that fell; and
took the Bread out of their Mouths; and they believed would have all the
Kingdom to themselves at last. July 11. The Enemy called for a Parley; and sent
one to know if they would Treat about Surrendering; which the Besieged to gain
time, thought fit to agree to, and Commissioners were named on both sides; but
the Enemy not allowing them time till July 26. the Treaty soon ended; The
Garrison was now reduced to 4456 Men, who were under the greatest extremity for
want of Provision, insomuch that Horseflesh was Sold for 20 d. a pound; a
quarter of a Dog. fatned by eating the Dead Bodies of the Irish, 5 s 6 d. a
Dogs Head half a Crown; A Cat 4 s. 6. d. A Rat a Shilling; a Mouse Six pence; a
pound of Greaces a Shilling; a pound of Tallow four Shillings; a pound of
Salted Hides a Shilling; a quart of Horse Blood a Shilling; a Horse pudding 6
d. an handful of Sea wreck two pence; Of Chickweed a ponny; a quart of Meal
when found, a Shilling: Yea, at length they were under so great necessity, that
they had nothing left, unless they could prey one upon another: And a fat
Gentlemen thought his Body in such danger, that he hid himself for 3 days,
imagining that several Soldiers looked on him with a greedy Eye; their Drink was
Water, and cost very dear, they mixed it with Ginger and Anniseeds, of which
they had great plenty: They eat a Composition of Tallow and Starch, which did
not only Nourish and Support them; but was an infallible Cure of the Looseness,
which many were sorely troubled with: And yet in the midst of this Extremity,
the Spirit and Courage of the Soldiers was so great, that they were often heard
confidently, and with some anger contend, whether they should take their Pay
and Arrears in Ireland or in France, when alas they could not promise
themselves 12 hours Life.

But the Hour of their Extremity, was the (...) Season for Divine Providence to
interpose, and render it self the more observeable in their Deliverance for
July 28. about 7 in the Evening, they perceived 3 Ships, which were the Montjoy
of Derry, the Phoenix of Colrain, and the Dartmouth Frigate, which they soon
discovered were the Ships Major G. Kirk had sent, who had assured them; That he
would certainly relieve them, when they could hold out no longer, though he
endangered himself, his Men and Ships: The Enemy Fired most Desperately upon
them from the Fort of Culmore and both sides the River; and they made
sufficient returns with the greatest Bravery: When they had passed the Fort,
the expectations of speedy Succor, raised in the Besieged a strange Transport of
Joy; The Montjoy made a little stop at the Boom, occasioned by her rebound
after striking, and breaking it, so that she was run aground: Upon which, the
Enemy who gathered in Swarms to the Waterside, set up the loudest Huzza's, and
the most Dreadful to the Besieged, that they ever heard, Crying out Their Ships
were taken: they fired all their Guns upon her, and were preparing Boats to
burn her; but by great Providence, she firing a Broadside the shock ^oosned
her: So that she got clear, and passed the Boom; the Phoenix all this while was
engaged, and the Dartmouth gave them very warm Entertainment; At length the
Ships got to them, to the inexpressible Transport and Comfort of the Distressed
Garrison, who only reckoned upon 2 Days Life, and had no more than 9 lean
Horses left, and one point of Meal to each Man; Hunger and the Fatigue of War
had so prevailed among them, that of 7500 Men Regimented, they had now alive
but 4300, whereof at least one 4th. part were rendered unserviceable: This brave
undertaking, and their several Successful Attempts against the Enemy so
Discouraged them, that July 31. They raised the Siege, and run away in the
Nightime, Robbing and Burning all before them for several Miles; the next
Morning after the Men were refresht with their New Provisions, they went out to
see what was become of the Besiegers, whom they saw in their March, and pursued
a little too far, so that the Reen guard of the Enemies Horse turned and kisted
7 of their Men, and upon the News of the De^^at of Lieutenant General Mackarty,
they so hastened (...) March, that they broke in pieces four of their great
Guns, and threw 12 Cartloads of Arms and A^^munition into the River, and the
Besieged had above 2000 Arms, besides Money, Cloths etc. Trus after 105 Days
being close besieged by near 20000 Men, constantly supplied from Dublin, God
Almighty was pleased to deliver this poor City from a powerful and inveterate
Enemy to their great Disappointment and Disreputation, insomuch, that K. James
upon his Retiring, was reported to have said in disdain to his Commanders:
Gentlemen, I think we have made a very fine Summers work of it: The Enemy lost
near 9000 Men before the Walls, and 100 of their best Officers, most of them by
the Sword, the rest of Fevers and Flux and the French Pox; which was very
remarkable on the Bodies of several of their dead Officers and Soldiers:
Whereas the Besieged had only Eighty Men slain by the Enemy.

Neither were the Inniskillin Men wanting in performing many notable Actions;
for during the whole time of the Siege, they kept at least one half of the
Irish Army from coming before Londonderry, for fear they should relieve the
Town; So that they durst not make a Regular Attack upon the place; but were
forced to divide their Men, keeping strong Guards at several distant places,
and therefore they deserve no small part of the Honor of that places
Preservation; and particularly the Remarkable Defeat given to the Irish the day
before the Raising the Siege, (the News whereof made the Enemy run away with
such great have and precipitation) ought never to be forgotten; for July 30.
The Inniskilliners hearing that a Body of about 6000 Irish under Major General
Mackarty, were Marching toward them, they very boldly and bravely went to meet
them about 20 Miles off, at a place called Newtown Butler, where though the
Enemy had secured their Army beyond a long Bog, yet the Courage of the English
was so great, that they came up to the Mouths of their Cannon, and Seized them,
killing all their Cannoneers, which so terrified the Irish, that both Horse and
Foot instantly fled; and the English Foot persuing theirs, and giving quarter
to sew or none but Officers that day, they not having Courage to fight for
their Lives, Desperately leapt into the Bogg to several places, to the Number
of about 500, and none escaped drowning, except one Person only, who got
through after many a shot made after him: In this Action, a Remarkable stroke
was given by Capt. William Smith, who at one blow, Cut off the upper part of a
Man's Head, just under the Hat, as much of the Skull as was within the Hat, with
all the Brains, being quite struck away from the other part of the Skull, that
stuck with the Body, and not so much as a bit of skin to keep them together;
but what was cut quite through: Mackarty when his Men were fled, got away with 5
or 6 Officers, to a wood near the place where the Ca^non were taken, and soon
after they came back again on Horseback, and he fired his Pisto^^on those that
guarded the Cannon; upon which, 7 or 8 Soldiers, who before thought them
Friends fired their Muskets at him; and killed his Horse, wounding hi^ in
several places, and then to put him out of is pain, one of the Soldiers Club'd
his Musket to have knocked out his Brains, upon which, one of his Company Cried
out, hold your hand, it is General Mackarty: Whereupon Captain Cooper coming
up, gave him and the rest quarter; and asking him, why he so rashly hazarded
his Life, when he might have escaped; He replied, That he now found the Kingdom
like to be lost; his Army being the best for Number that K. James had, unless
those before Derry; who were then much broken, and that he came with a Design
to loose his Life, and was sorry he had mist of his End, being unwilling to
outlive that Day. This was a most Remarkable Victory, obtained under the
Command of the Valiant Colonel Woolsey, the Irish were reckoned 5000 and the
English not above 2000, the Enemy confessed that 3000 of their Men were wanting,
they lost 7 Cannon, 14 Barrels of Powder, a great quantity of Cannon and
Musket Ball, and all their Drums and Colors; the English loft not above 20
Men, and 40 or 50 wounded; and hereby the Siege of Inniskillin was prevented,
which by a Letter found about Mackarty, was designed to have been Besieged in a
few Days by this Party, who were to be joined with another Detachment, under
the D. or Berwick: It has been since published, that this great Defeat partly
happened by a fatal mistake in the Word of Command among the Irish; for the
Inniskillin Men charged the Irish Right Wing very smartly, which Mackarty
perceiving, Ordered some of his Men to face to the Right, and March to Relieve
their Friends, the Officer that received the Orders mistook; and Commanding the
Men in stead of Facing to the Right, to Face to the Right about, and so March:
The Irish in the Rear seeing their Front look with their Faces toward them and
move, thought they had been Running; and so without more ado, threw down their
Arms, and run away: The rest seeing their Men run in the Rear, run after them
for Company, and were most of them Cut off, or drowned in the Beggs and Loughs;
so unhappy may a small thing prove to a great Body of Men, and at other times,
a little thing in appearance, proves very Advantageous: For we read of a Roman
at Plough, who stood with his Ox-Yoak in in a Gap, and stopped the Soldiers that
were running away, this made them face about and gain the Field; though all Men
must acknowledge in that Action of the Inniskilliners, as well as at
Londonderry, there was a great deal to be Attributed to their Valor; but more
to the providence of God.

Another Remarkable Passage is Related; That before the Fight, about an hour
and half after Sunset, the People of Inniskillin saw from thence a great Light
in the Air above Newtown Butler, where Mackarty then lay with his Army, which
coutinued for some hours, so that they concluded the Irish had set that Town
and all the Country about on Fire, or raised some Fire in the Country to give
notice to Lieutenant General Sarsfield to join with them; but after the fight
was over, upon inquiry into the matter, they found there was no fire that Night
raised among them: This is the more observable; because the like was seen at
Glaslough, before the Action they had there with the Irish of the Garrison of
Charlemont, whom they Defcated March 13. before, killing their Leader, and
about 200 of his Men. with the loss only of one Captain; about a week before
this happened, at 11 a Clock in a very dark Night, several Pillars of fire
appeared in the Air, pointed from toward Charlemont, which were so light, they
might have read by them, and continued thus 2 hours, to the Observation of all
People there: The like account we have from Dr. Robert Maxwell, late Bishop of
Kilmore, of what happened in the Rebellion of 1641. who relates that 56
Protestants Men, Women, and Children, were taken out of his House and Drowned
by the Irish at Curbridg, and that 3 or 4 Nights before, in the dark of the
Moon, about one a Clock in the Night, a Light was observed in manner of a long
Pillar to shine for a great way through the Air, and refracted upon the North
Gabel of his House; it gave so great a light about an hour together, that
diverse of the Watch Read both Letters and Books of a very small Character
thereby, which the Doctor believed, did presage that Bloody Massacre which
insued. It is difficult to enter into the reason of these things; but this is
only matter of Fact, and every Man is left to his own Conjectures in them.

During these Transactions in Ireland, K. William gives out Commissions in
England, to Raise 18 Regiments of Foot, and 4 or 5 of Horse, and the Leavies
went on with such speed, that the greatest part were Raised, Armed, and Clothed
in 6 Weeks, and August 12. they were Imbarqued at High-Lake near Chester for
Ireland; being about 10000 Foot and Horse, and 3 Days after they Landed near
Carrickfergus, incamping in the Fields that Night; the Garrison Apprehending a
Siege, burnt their Suburbs, and prepared for their Defense: Whereupon Duke
Schomberg General of all their Majesty's Forces, sent 5 Regiments to incamp
before the Town, and more the next day, which Surrounded it; whereupon they
desired a Parley, and required time to send to K. James for Succors; which the
General absolutely refused, and with his Mortars and Cannon, played upon the
Town: Four days after they beat another Parley desiring to March out with their
Drums beating, etc. but this was denied; During the Parley, the Duke visited
all the Trenches, and opserwed the Walls of the Castle, and a poor Dutchman was
shot from the Walls, making his returns to Reproaches against K. William,
saying, That their King was a Tinker King, and had nothing but brass Money: He
was not nimble enough at getting off, when the Parley was over, and so lost his
Life for his Jest's sake; Aug. 25. The Guns played furiously, and made a great
Breach in the Walls, which the Irish seeing, and fearing our Men would enter,
they got a great number of Cattle together; and drove them all as near the top
of the Breach, as they could force them to go, keeping themselves close behind
them, several of the Cattle were killed by the shot, and as they fell, the
Irish threw Earth, Stones and Wood upon them; but this they thought would not
hold long, and so desired a third Parley; and at length it was agreed, that
they should March out with their Arms, and some Baggage, which they did
accordingly; and the English Forces took possession of Carickfergus, (as they
had done before of the Towns of Belfast and Antrim, which the Enemy for fear
had Deserted:) While they were in Treaty at Carickfergus, and the Articles were
scarce agreed to, Mackarty Moor, Governor of the Town, was got in the Dukes
Kitchen in the English Camp; which his Grace smiled at, and did not invite him
to Dinner; Saying, If he had staid like a Soldier with his Men, he would have
sent to him; but if he would go and eat with Servants in a Kitchen, let him be
doing: The Country People were so Inveterate against the Soldiers, (remembering
how they served them some few days before) that they stripped most part of the
Women; and forced a great many. Arms from the Men, and took it very ill, that
the Duke did not hang them all, notwith standing the Articles: Nay, they were
so rude, that the Duke was obliged to ride in among them with his Pistol in his
Hand, to keep the Irish from being Murdered; who were forced to fly to the
Soldiers for Protection, so angry were they at one another, though they all
live in the same Country; The Enemy had about 150 killed and wounded in the
Siege; and the English as many killed and about 60 wounded.

The English Army now March on, through Lisburn, Drummore, Lought, it land, and
so to Newry; which they found newly burnt and Deserted by the D. of Berwick and
his Forces, who had only time to set it on fire, and take all the People, with
whatsoever was valuable along with him; upon which, the Duke sent a Trumpet to
the Irish, to let them know, That if they burnt any more Towns, he would give
them no Quarter; Sep. 7. The Army Marched thence to Dundalk which was likewise
Deserted, but not burnt: Here they Incampt within a Mile of the Town, in a low
moist Ground where many grew sickly; the Irish boasting to the Protestants when
they went away; That they would drive the English all back again into the Sea,
or else they would dye of themselves, not being used to the Field, especially
in a strange Country, and at that time of the year: And indeed it went hard
with them for want of Provisions, especially, Bread, of which the Enemy grew
sensible: They had before Retreated beyond Droghedah, in much Consternation,
not doubting but the Duke being an Old General, would not have come into
Ireland without a good Army, and all things well provided; and were upon the
point of Deserting not only Droghedah; but Dublin also, by the Advice of the
French General Rosen, and to Retreat toward Athlone and Lymerick: But when De
Rosen heard that D. Scomberg halted, he said, he was sure they wanted
something; and therefore advised to hasten their Army together, in which
Tyrconnel was so diligent, that from 8000, he made a Body of 20000 Men in a few
days, with which they Marched to Ardee, and Seized all the Provisions that the
Protestants had got together, for the English Army, which they expected there;
but unhappily stayed too long: Sep. 13. The English received 204 Loads of
Bread, which the Ships brought to Carlingford; and then the General Ordered the
Camp to be fortified, that the Enemy might not break in upon them, and strict
Guards to be kept in the Night, because they had notice that the Irish Marched
toward them, and accordingly Sep. 21. they advanced to the English Camp, and
offered Battle; but the D. knowing they could not easily force the Camp, and
for several other prudential Reasons declined to engage; upon which the Irish
drew off to Droghedah: About which time, a Correspondence was discovered to be
held with the Enemy by some Soldiers in the French Regiments upon which, 6 of
the Principal Conspirators were, Hanged, who all dyed Papists; and confessed they
lifted themselves on purpose to bring over as many as they could to K. James,
they prayed for K. William and Queen Mary, and asked their pardons for their
Treachery; and declared further, that if the General had engaged the Enemy when
they offered Battle, they themselves were to put the English Army into
Confusion, by firing in the Rear and so Deserting; so that it was a great
Providence that the Duke then refused to fight.

Sep. 25. Colonel Lloyd with about 1000 Inniskilliners Defeated a Body of 5000
Irish that were going to Sligo, killing 700, and taking O Kelly, and 40 more
Officers Prisoners, with a great Booty of about 8000 Cattle, with the loss only
of 14 Men; The News whereof coming to Duke Schomberg in the Camp, he ordered
all the Inniskilling Horse and Foot that had lately joined the Army to draw
out, and Complimented them so far, as to ride all along the Line with his Hat
off, and then ordered some Fireworks to be made for joy. A great many now
began to be sick, by reason of the bad weather, and most were so lazy, that
they would starve, rather than fetch Fern, or any thing else to keep themselves
dry and warm; which was the greatest occasion of Distempers, Sickness and Death
it self, and many when dead, were incredibly lousy; which caused the General to
say, the English Men will fight; but they do not love to work: Both Forage and
Firing grew now very scarce, which increased the distempers among the Soldiers,
upon which the Sick were ordered to be sent Aboard the Ships at Dundall^, that
had brought fresh Provisions. The beginning of November, the Enemy Decampt and
Marched to Winter Quarters; and at the same time, Sligo was taken by Sarsfield,
who came upon them unexpectedly with a considerably Body, and the place not
being provided either with Ammunition or Water, it was Surrendered to the Irish
upon Honorable Terms: As the English Soldiers came out of the Town, Colonel
Sarsfield stood with a Purse of Guineas, and offered to every one that would
serve K. James, 5 Guineas Advance, with Horse and Arms, but they all answered,
they would never fight for the Papishes, as they called them; Nay, even those
that were a dying in the Camp, were wont to express no other Sorrow, than
Plague on these Papishes, that we must dye here, and not have leave to go and
Fight them: The Sickness increased, and great numbers dyed daily; so that the
General concluded to decamp from Dundalk, and March back to Belfast; which they
did accordingly, the Sick being carried in Wagons, and the Army Marched in the
We and Snow, so that many Perished by the way, yet upon an Alarm that the Enemy
were coming upon them, they grew very hearty and began to unbuckle their Tents,
saying, If the Irish came, they should pay for their lying in the Cold so long:
As to the number of Men that dyed of this great Mortality, it is computed that
near 1700 dyed about Dundalk, about 2000 were shipped for England, and not much
above half came ashore; but dyed at Sea: So that in the whole, they lost near
5000 Men, which was imputed very much to the bad Weather, the Moistures of the
place, and the Tenderness and Carelessness of the English, whereas the Dutch
kept themselves so clean and warm, that not above 11 of them dyed the whole
Campaign.

A Remarkable Passage happened a year before, near Dundalk, which seemed to
presage this great destruction of Men: A worthy Gentleman with 2 others and
their Servants, coming from Dublin to the North, as they approached Dundalk
about 9 at Night, espied several little Trinkling Lights in the Air, with 2
larger then the rest; about the ground where the English Army Incampt this
year; and at the same time, they heard the most heavy and dismal Groans in the
World, which continued till they came to Newry; but the Lights they saw only
upon the Plains of Dundalk.

Nov. 23. The Enemy with a Detachment of 1600 Men, and 100 Volunteers,
Attempted to force the Pass at Newry, and then designed to go along the Line,
and destroy the Frontier Garrisons, there were not above 60 English in the
Town, and not 40 of those able to present a Musket, who yet fired upon them so
briskly, and affrighted them with such load Huzza's, that the Irish imagining
their number far greater then they were, fled, leaving 6 Men dead, and carrying
off 12 Horsload of dead and wounded Men. Dec. 4. Colonel Woolsely went in the
Night with a Party of Inniskilling Horse toward Belturbet; upon whose Approach,
the Garrison being Surprised, yielded to the first Summons: Soon after
^eutenant General Mackarty made his escape from Inniskilling, where he was
Prisoner, he pretended to be sick, and desired the Duke to remove his Guards,
which was granted; and the Town standing on a Lough, the water came to the
Door, whereupon he found means to Corrupt a Sergeant, and got 2 small Boats to
carry him and his Movables the Sergeant went along with him; but returned that
Night to deliver a Letter, which with Mackarty's Pass being found in the Lining
of his Ha^ he was the next day shot for it: The Duke was much concerned at the
News, and said* He took him for a Man of Honor; but he would not expect that
in an Irish^an any more. In February, (...) Woolsely with 700 Foot and 300
Horse, Routed a Body of 4000 Irish at Cavan, killing about 300 Soldiers and
several Officers; and 60 Soldiers with 12 Officers were made Prisoners, and all
with the loss only of 30 Men. and 2 Captains Feb. 15. Sir John Lanier with a
^arty of 1000 Horse. Foot and Dragoons, went from New^y toward Dundalk; which
the Enemy had Fortified very well, since the English left it; and therefore he
did not think fit to Attempt it, however he drew up near the Town, upon which
the Irish came out; but soon retired, and the Major General burnt the West part
of the Town, and took Bedloe Castle with 30 Prisoners, and the Ensign that
Commanded it; and returned with a Booty of nigh 1500 Cows and Horses: The
Ensign was arryed before the General at Lisburn, who took him aside to inquire
about the posture of the Enemy, you (says the Duke) have a Commission and for
that reason (if not otherwise) you are a Gentleman, this obliges you to speak
truth, which if you do not, I can know it by examining other Prisoners, and
then I shall have no good Opinion of you: But though the Duke talked with him
half an hour, it was thought he discovered little material.

In March 400 Danes Landed at Belfast, with the P. of Wirtemburg their General,
being lusty Fellows, well Clothed and Armed. The same Month about 5000 French
Foot Landed at Kingsale with 2 Generals, the Count de Lauzun, and the Marquess
de Lery, K. James sending back as many Irish under L. General Mackarty: Our
Fleet then attending the Queen of Spain, made this undertaking very easy to the
French; before they arrived, some of the Irish Nobility in Discourse with K.
James, said to him: Sir, Is not the French Fleet in danger to be met with by
the English? to which he Replied. That he during his time, had taken care that
the English should not have any great strength by Sea; and now to Equip and set
out a Fleet, would be tedious, besides the Expenses, and that he did not doubt
but the French would master them. As soon as these Forces Landed at Cork, above
500 of them dyed of some Pestilent Distemper; the rest being come to Dublin,
General Lauzun sent to the Governor Lutterel, to deliver the Keys of the City
and Castle to him, pursuant to K. James's promise to his Master, to give him
possession of Dublin, and all the strong places in Ireland; Lutter Replied, he
would first acquaint the King, and accordingly accompanied the I. Mayor and
Aldermen to Address the King, telling him, that they had hitherto ventured
their Lives and Fortunes in his Defense, and therefore hoped he would still
confide in them to govern Dublin; and would not make them absolute Subjects to
the French King; To whom he Replied, That he had engaged his Word to his
Brother Lewis, that Lauzun should have the Government of Dublin, and could not
recede from it; Thereupon the Keys of the City were delivered; but the French
would not Mount the Guards, till they had likewise the Keys of the Castle,
which were likewise given them; and so they possessed themselves of the City and
Castle, swearing; they had no King but King Lewis, nor would they obey any
other, and under him their General Lauzun; from thence they grew very insolent
to Protestants; and as they passed by any of the Clergy, threatened them
severely: So that they consulted to Disguise themselves in Frize Coats, for
security against these French Vultures; they had not been above 2 days in
Dublin, when they Murdered 2 or 3 Protestant Clothiers in the City, at a place
called Comb, for Protecting their Wives from being Ravished; of which Inhuman
Act, no more notice was taken, than if 2 Dogs had been shot; they took a
Country Maid that came to Market with her Father, and defloured her in the open
Street at Noonday; Many such Barbarous Villainies were committed by them:
There being above 10000 Protestant Men in Dublin able to bear Arms, besides
Women and Children; and being barred the Liberty of the Markets by the French,
who would not sell Bread to the Protestants, as the Irish Papist Soldiers did,
it was almost a Miracle that thousands had not perished; Many of the sober
Papists were also sensible of their rudeness, and grew mighty dejected, often
complaining to their King, of the disdainful Treatment they received from the
French, who called them Ten Thousand Cowards, and said, they were beaten by a
Priest and a few Boys, meaning the Valiant Colonel Walker, and those Marchless
Hero's that Defended Londonderry; and that De Avaux the French Ambossador,
said to General Lauzun upon his Landing; you are come to be a Sacrifice for a
poor Spirited and Cowardly People, whose Soldiers will never fight, and whose
Officers would never obey Orders; and therefore will meet with the same Fate
that our Masters Army did at Candia, that is to be wasted and destroyed by the
Enemy, and Deserted by those you came to relieve: But K. James had no power to
help himself or them, having by his Degenerate and Mean Spirit, Truckled his
Authority; and became Subject to the power of France, and contented himself to
be a King in Name only.

April 6. 1690. Colonel Woolseley with a Detached Party of 700 Men, Attackt
the Castle of Killishandra with such Briskness, that the Enemy Surrendered it,
they being 150 Men; On the 10th. Colonel Tiffen sent out a Party from
Bellishannon, who brought of a Prey from the Neighborhood of Sligo, and killed
about 16 of the Enemy as they pursued them.

April 12. Sir Clovesly Shovel came to Belfast, as Convoy to several Ships that
brought over necessaries for the Army; and having notice of a Frigate at Anchor
in the Bay of Dublin, with other small Vessels Laden with Hides, Tallow,
Wool, and some Plate, and other Goods designed for France, he Sailed thither,
and leaving the great Ships in the Bay, with the Monmouth Yatch, and 2 or 3
more, and several Long-Boats, he went to Polebeg, where the Frigate lay, of 16
Guns and 4 Pattereroes; being a Scotch Ship taken the year before in the
Channel: When K. James heard of it, he said; It was some of his Loyal Subjects
of England, returning to their Duty and Allegiance: But when he saw them draw
near the Ship, and heard the firing, he rid out toward Rings End, whither
gathered, a vast Crowd of People of all sorts, and several Regiments were drawn
up, if possible to kill those bold Fellows at Sea, who durst on a Good-Fryday
(as this happened to be) perform so wicked a deed, as they said; Captain Bennet
that Commanded the Frigate, run her aground, and after several firings from her,
and some other Ships, when they saw a Fire-Ship coming in, which Sir Clovesly
had given a sign to, they all quitted the Frigate, being at first 40; but lost 6
or 7 in the Action; Sir Clovesly was in the Monmouth Yatch; in going off, one
of the Hoys run aground, and was dry when the Tide was gone, and the rest of
the Boats were not far off; being full of Armed Men; and a Frenchman of King
James's Guards, coming nigh the Boats to fire his Pistols in a Bravado, had his
Horse shot under him; and was forced to fling off his Jack-Boots, and run back
in his Stockins to save himself; some of the Seamen went on Shore, and took his
Saddle and Furniture; when the Tide came in, they went off with their Prize to
the Ships below; K. James went back very much dissatisfied, and it was
reported, should say, That all the Protestants in Ireland were of Cromwells
Breed, and deserved to have their Throats Cut; However all the Protestants that
walked that way during the Action, were imprisoned, and 2 made their escape to
the Boats.

Monsieur Callimot with his French Regiment, had some time before Attempted the
strong Castle of Charlemont, setting fire to the Bridge, and killing about 20
Men, and then Retreated; May 2. The Irish put Relief into the place, which was
conveyed with a Detachment of 4 or 500 Men, and Colonel Callimots Regiment who
were quartered at Blackwater, knowing the Convoy must return, resolved to
intercept them; and as they were Marching back, fell upon them with such
Courage, that he forced them again into the Castle, and this they did 2 or 3
times, which Teague O Regan, the Old Irish Governor perceiving, he Swore, If
they could not get out, they should have no Entertainment nor Lodging within:
And was as good as his word, for they were forced to make little Huts within
the Palisadoes, so that between Teague and the English, the poor Fellows were
in a lamentable Condition; After this the General sent several Regiments to
block up Charlemont, with Cannon to force Old Teague out of his Nest if
possible, having Summoned him to Surrender some time before, who returned the
Messenger with this Answer; Go tell thy Master from Teague O Regan, that he is
an Old Knave, and by St Patrick, he shall not have the Town at all; when God
knows there was no Town standng, but an Old Castle: The Duke only smiled and
said. He would give Teague greater Reason to be angry in a short time, and
accordingly those Irish that had a mind to go out, being kept in, soon made
Victuals very scarce, and no hopes of Relief appearing, the Old Governor sent
to Treat about a Surrender, and the Terms being soon agreed to, this strong
place was delivered up, about 400 Men, and 200 Irish Women and Children
Marching out of it, the D. stood to observe them, and Teague O Regan appeared
Mounted upon an Old Stone Horse, very lame with Spavin and Scratches, and so
vicious, that he would fall a Squeeling and kicking if any Body came near him;
Teague himself had a great bunch upon his back, a plain red Coat, an Old
Weather-beaten Wig hanging down at full length, a little narrow white Beaver
Cockt up, a yellow Gravat-string tied all on one side, his Boots with a 1000
wrinkles, and though it was very hot, a great Muff hanging about his back, and
for uniformity, he was almost fudled with Brandy: In this Equipage he
approached the Duke; but had not made his Compliment. ere the Jade fell to
work, so that the D. had scarce time to make a Civil return; The Duke smiled
afterward, and said, Teagues Horse was very Mad, and himself very Drunk; The
Officers and Soldiers made the Duke a great many Legs, and stared upon him, to
see whether he was a Man or some other strange Creature; for the Irish usually
asked one another, what is that Shambear that all this talk is of? The Duke
inquired why they kept so many Women and Children in their Garrison, which must
needs consume their Provisions, He was told, that the Irish are naturally very
Hospitable, and that they all fared alike; but that the Soldiers would never be
persuaded to stay in Garrison, without their Wives and Mistresses: The Duke
replied, There was more Love than Policy in it; The Irish were to be guarded to
Armagh, and among them were 2 Priests, one of whom in the way, fell into
discourse with a Dragoon about Transubstantiation; but being baffled, was so
angry, that he fell a beating the Dragoon, who not being used to blows, thrasht
the Priest severely, of which complaint being made to Teague, he replied; I be
very glad of it, What te Deal had he to do to Dispute. Religion with a Dragoon.

King William being concerned that the War in Ireland should divert his Forces
from going into France, resolved if possible, to reduce the Kingdom this
Summer, by going thither in Person, and every one knew his Majesty's Industry,
Courage and Resolution to be so great, that he would endeavor to make a quick
dispatch, and accordingly having left Kensington June 4. Ten days after he
Arrived safe at Carickfergus, with his Highness Prince George, the D. of
Ormond, the Earls of Oxford, Manchester, Scarborough, and several other Persons
of Quality, and was received by the Officers, Soldiers, and People with all
manner of Demonstrations of Joy, the latter looking on His Majesty as their
good Angel, who was come to deliver them from worse than Egyptian Bondage;
Next day several of the Nobility, Officers, Gentry, and Clergy, presented a
very Loyal Address to the King, which he graciously accepted: His Majesty was
not idle, and seeing things did not go on so fast as he desired, expressed some
Dissatisfaction, saying, That he did not come there to let grass grow under his
Feet, he made his word good; for having taken a View of his Army, which with
the great Recruits lately sent from England, amounted to about 36000 Compounded
of English, Dutch, Danes, Germans and French, His Majesty advanced toward
Dundalk.

The certain News of K.W. Landing coming to Dublin, it was moved by some Irish
in K. James's Council, That the Protestants should be shut up in Churches and
Hospitals, and then if they lost the day, to set fire to all, and destroy the
People and City together: But the Irish Papists both in the City and Army,
applied themselves to the King, and told him; They should then be as much
sufferers as the Protestants, and that they would not draw a Sword in his
Defense, unless all thoughts of burning the City were laid aside; and declared
further, that as soon as they heard of any appearance of Fire, they would
Desert his Service, and fly to K. Williams Mercy, which manaces put a stop to
this Horrid Project. Before this, a Camp had been laid out by the Irish about
Ardee, and K. James had ordered his Army to Rendevouze there from several parts
of the Kingdom, and June 16. he Marched out of Dublin to join them with about
6000 French Foot, most old Soldiers, well Armed and Clad. The whole Irish Army
encamped, made about 27000, all well Clothed, and in good Heart, both Horse and
Foot, besides 15000 more that remained in Garrisons, and the same day 6000 of
the Country Militia cameto quarter in the City; The Protestants expected the
Irish would have been much dejected upon K. Will Arrival; but on the contrary,
they Triumphed and Rejoiced as if they had got him in a Pound, and the day were
their own, assuring themselves, That either the French Fleet would prevent his
return to England, or that an Insurrection would be made there, boasting that
an Hundred Thousand. Men were ready to Rise and declare for a Commonwealth; The
Protestants knew not what to believe, for they were kept as Prisoners of War,
and could know no more than they please to tell them; but they were more afraid
that some desperate Persons had undertaken to destroy K. William, because their
confidence was so great, that some told their Protestant Friends, They would be
glad to go to Mass within a Twelvemonth.

When K. James was gone, Colonel Lutterel, who was left Governor, Ordered all
Persons that walked in the Streets without Swords or Bagonets, to be taken up
and secured, whereby all Protestants who were suffered to wear none, were put
into Custody; After which followed a Proclamation; That not above 5 Protestants
besides the Family, should meet together in any place upon pain of Death. So
that now they durst not go to Church, as they had hitherto done, the Churchmen
still remained with them, though they had lost all their Maintenance by the
Irish Parliament, except what was given them by the People; Dr. King was sent
Prisoner to the Castle, and few Protestants durst walk the Streets: the method
that K. James and the French proposed to deal with K. Williams Army, was, To
make good the Passes upon the Newry Mountains, and at Dundalk; To spin out the
War, and dispute their ground without coming to a General Battle, till they
came to the Boyn, and there to Defend the Pass; but still without a Battle, if
they could help it much hoping for some Extraordinary thing from a Party in
England, etc.

But K. William soon broke all their Measures, for resolving to lose no time,
he came to the Camp at Lough-britland, where having taken a Critical Review of
every Regiment, His Majesty and Prince George had their moving Houses set up,
and never after lay out of the Camp, during their-stay in Ireland. The King
ordered a Party to go out to discover the motions of the Enemy, and heard they
were Marching off from Dundalk toward Ardee, Upon which the English Army
advanced to Newry, and from thence to Dundalk, and so forward to Ardee, the
Irish still retiring, and at length passing over the Boyn: upon which the whole
Army move in 3 Lines toward the Boyn, and by the way some Dragoons found in an
Old House about 200 Scythes stretched out upon Beams, which the Enemy had either
forgot, or left behind for have, and one of them being brought to the King, he
smiled and said, It was a Desperate Weapon: The Irish Encamped on the other
side the Boyn, and the King from an Hill took a view of them, and then rid
along the River side to make more strict Observations during which a Cannon
Ball from the Enemy, killed 2 Horses and a Man about 100 yards from the King;
and instantly comes another, which had like to have been a fatal Bullet, for it
grazed upon the Bank of the River, and in the rising slanted upon the Kings
right shoulder, and tore out a piece of his Coat, and also the Skin and Flesh;
and afterward broke the Head of a Gentleman's Pistol: A Gentleman seeing his
Majesty struck, rid up, and put his Handkerchef upon the place: his Majesty
took little notice of it; but rid on about 40 yards further, the Enemies Cannon
firing upon them all the while, and killed 2 of the Guards, and 9 Horses,
disturbing the rest; which the Irish perceiving, set up a prodigious shout all
over the Camp, as if our Army had been destroyed; The King went to change his
Coat, and get his Shoulder dressed, and then rid about to see the Army; After
which a Council of War was called; and his Majesty declared, That he was
resolved to pass the River next day, and accordingly all things were provided,
every Man having a green Bough or Sprig in his Hat, the Enemy wearing pieces of
Paper in theirs, the word that Night was Westminster; and about 12 at Night,
rid with Torches quite through the Army: The next Morning, July 1. the Dutch
Blew Guards took the River first, some 8 or 10 a breast, being presently almost
up to the middle, the Enemy stood on the other side; but did not fire till our
Men were toward the middle of the River, and then a whole Peal of shot came
from the Hedges, Brestworks Houses and all about; but only one Man fell, and
another staggered, a Lieutenant of Granadeers was the first that got footing on
the other side, who instantly drew up 2 Files of Men, then stoopt, and the
Enemy fired over him from the next Hedge, and afterward quitted the Hedge,
which, the rest that were posted thereabout, seeing, they likewise fled, and
were followed by a volley of shot from our Men: When on a sudden, a great many
Battasions of the Enemy appeared from behind the little Hills; we had two
French Regiments, and one English, who passed the River at the same time, about
200 yards below, and routed those that opposed them; The Dutch Advanced still,
and the Irish quitted the Hedges and Van, straggling up and down the Field; All
our Horse went over to the Right and Left, except one Squadron of Danes, whom
Lieut. Coll. Hamilton charged so home with 60 Horse, that they came faster
back, than they went; The want of Horse was so apparent here, that the very
Country People cried out Horse, Horse, which word going to the Right Wing, who
thought it had been Halt, stopped them nigh half an hours time; which with about
40 Irish Horse breaking through the French Regiment at the same time, was
thought to be the occasion of D. Schombergs going over so unseasonably; for in
this Hurry, he was killed near a little Village beyond the River; The Irish
Troopers as they rid through, struck at him with their Swords, and some believe
that his own Men firing too hastily when the Duke was before them, shot him
themselves; his Mortal Wound was through the Neck, and he had one or two Cuts
in the Head, he fell down, and did not speak a word; Dr. Walker going, as was
said, to look after the Duke, was shot in the Belly: The Action continued very
hot for about an Hour; but then the Irish Retreated to a rising ground, drew up
to Charge our Party again that had passed the River; The Danish and Dutch Horse
with Colonel Woolselys Horse and Dragoons, and likewise the Danish Foot, and
Colonel Cuts Regiment now got over the River; The King during these
Transactions, was almost every where, riding between our Army and theirs, and
giving the necessary Orders, attended only with one Dragoon, and then passed
the River with some difficulty; for his Horse being Bog'd on the other side, he
was forced to alight, till a Gentleman helped him to get his Horse out; when the
Men were got on the other bank, and put in order, his Majesty drew his Sword;
but with some Trouble, by reason of his wounded Arm, and Marched before them
toward the Enemy, who were coming in good Order upon our Foot, with double the
number, and charged several times at the Head of them; Our Horse were forced to
give ground, though the King was with them; His Majesty then went to the
Inniskilliners, and asked what they would do for him, and advanced before them;
Their Officer told them who it was and at the Head of these Men, the King
received the Enemies fire; The Danish Horse once gave way; but the K. went
himself, and brought them up again; o^ the Irish, K. James's Horse and Foot
Guards principally maintained this Opposition, and suffered much, Lieutenant
General Hamilton who had been employed by K. William, betrayed his Trust,
finding the Irish Food did not answer his Expectation, he put himself at the
Head of the Horse; and when they were Defeated, he was taken Prisoner, having
received a wound on the Head, and brought to the K. who asked him whether the
Irish would fight any more, Yes; said he, and please your Majesty, upon my
Honor I believe they will, for they have a good Body of Horse still: The King
looked a little aside at him, and repeated once or twice your Honor, etc.
intimating that he had but little left, who had forfeited it by joining with
Tyrconnel; and this was all the Rebuke the K. gave him, (who always says much
in few words) for his unfaithfulness; in the mean time, the Irish being beaten
from the Pass, the English hastened toward the Body of the Enemy, that were
posted at Duleek; and as they Advanced, the Enemy drew off with such speed,
that they left a great many Arms and Ammunition behind in that Village, and
before our Horse could come up to Attack them, they were gone at least a mile
before, their Horse and Ammunition in the Rear; and their Foot Marching in
great have and Confusion, we persued them 3 Miles; but did not Attack them, by
reason of the Boggy Fields and Ditches: Of the Irish were killed the Lords
Dungan and Carlingford, and many other Officers, with about 1500 Men; it was
observed, that most of the Horsemen who charged so desperately, were drunk with
Brandy, of which each Man that Morning, had half a pint for his own share. Of
the English, were killed nigh 400; but the greatest loss was of D. Schomberg
whom his very Enemies acknowledged a brave Man, and a great General: He was
certainly a Man of excellent Education, who was thoroughly acquainted with Men
and things, Courteous and Civil to all; and yet had always something so great,
that commanded respect from all Persons: A strong hearty Man, though 82 years
old, and when unbowelled, his Heart, Entrails, and Brain, were as fresh and
sound, as a Man of (...) and might have probably lived longer, if providence
had not ordered it otherwise.

K. James during part of the Action, stood at a little Old Church upon an Hill;
but when he saw how matters went, he Marched to Duleek, and from thence to
Dublin; The first News at that place was, That K. James had got the Day, Our
General was killed, and the P. of Orange (as they called him) taken Prisoner,
that the French Fleet was in the Bay of Dublin; That a French Express was come
from Waterford, with the News of taking the Isle of Wight by the French, and of
their being gone to Dover: This was very Afflicting to the poor Protestants,
who were all confined to their Houses; but toward night, some that had made
their escape upon tired Horses, brought word, That the Irish were much worsted,
and others That they were Totally routed; near 10 a Clock that Night, K. J.
came in with about 200 Horse all in Disorder; they concluded now, that it was
an absolute Defeat, and that the English were just ready to come into the Town;
but were greatly Surprised, when an hour or 2 after, they heard the whole Body
of the Irish Horse coming in, in very good Order, with kettle Drums, Hautboys,
and Trumpets; and early the next Morning, the French and a great part of the
Irish Foot; who being a little rested, Marched out again to meet the English
that were supposed to draw nigh.

When K. James came to the Castle Gate, the Lady Tyrconnel met him; and after
he was up stairs, asked him what he would have for his Supper? Who then gave her
an account, what a Breakfast he had got; which made him have but little Stomach
to his Supper: Next Morning, July 2d. about 5 a Clock. K. J. sent for the Irish
Lord Mayor, and some Principal Persons to the Castle, and told them; That in
England, he had an Army which durst have fought; but they proved false, and
Deserted him; and that here he had an Army which was Loyal enough; but would
not stand by him, so that he was now necessitated to provide for his Safety,
and that they should make the best Terms for themselves that they could, he
told his Menial Servants, That he should now have no further occasion to keep
such a Court as he had done; and that therefore they were at liberty to dispose
of themselves; He desired them all to be kind to the Protestants, and not to
burn or injure them nor the City, for though he quitted it, he did not quit his
Interest in it; Immediately after he took Horse, and with about twelve in
Company went toward Bray, and so to Waterford, having appointed his Carriages
to meet him another way, where he imbarqued for France, having some days days
before distrusting the issue, Ordered Sir Patrick Trant to go from the Camp at
the Boyn to Waterford, and provide Shipping. It is said, he did not sleep till
he got on Shipboard; All that day nothing was to be seen in Dublin, but
Officers, Carriages, and dusty wounded Soldiers, with several of K. James's
Horse-guards coming in straggling, without Pistols or Swords, and the Principal
Popish Persons of the Town, their Wives and Families going away; The Gates were
still kept by the Irish Militia, and the Castle by 250 of the Governors Foot
Soldiers, who still threatened that before they left the City, they would burn
and plunder it; This of a long time had been their talk (as we have heard)
though K. James said, It was a Report raised by the Protestants, to make him
odious; yet some Irish Persons of Note advised their Protestant Friends a few
days before this, to leave the Town, because they would not be safe there.

The Protestants (some of whom were crowded into the Hospitals, Colleges and
Churches, others into stinking, nasty, unhealthy Rooms) knew not yet what to
think of themselves; but hoped the English were so near as to prevent their
being burnt; but about 4 afternoon instead of them, they perceived the Irish
Horse, which were drawn out in the Morning, and thought to be quite gone,
entering the Town, followed by the French and Irish Foot in a full Body;
Presently a Noise run through the City, that they were come to fire it; and the
Papists who had secured themselves in Protestants Houses, began to look brisk
again; but all these Forces Marched through the Town, without doing any injury,
and were drawn up by Tyrconnel, on the further side of it, to March away; the
Militia followed them, only the Governor remained, who at last resolved to
March also, and drive 2 or 300 of the Principal Protestant Prisoners before
him; but while they were preparing for this, a false Alarm was spread, that a
Party of English being Landed at the Harbor, were just at the Towns end, it
was too dusky to discover the Truth, and they had not time to send a Messenger;
but in have shifted for themselves. The Protestants now began to look out,
(whom the Irish had released, not out of love to them; but for fear the English
were at their Heels) yet knew not well in what condition they were; but
venturing to the Castle, they found Captain Farlow, who had been Prisoner
there; keeping Garrison alone, upon which, Captain Fitz Gerald and several
others who had been Prisoners, went and staid there all Night; still they were
unsecure, and had no Arms; Early next morning July 3. the Protestants run about
to the Papists Houses, demanding their Arms, who being quite dispirited,
delivered them without dispute; and the Bishop of Mead, Dr King, and several
other Principal Protestants sent away an Express to K. William, that the Town
wa^ at liberty, desiring his Majesty's Presence and Protection, and began to
Form a Protestant Militia; Till Thursday July 3. in the Afternoon they heard
not a word of the English Army, and reports were raised, that the French and
Irish were coming back, which much dampt the Protestants; but this was soon
blown over, and they now perceived themselves to be free, which filled their
Hearts with so much joy, that they run about Saluting and Embracing one
another, and Blessing God for this wonderful Deliverance, as if they had been
raised from the Dead: The Streets were filled with Crowds and Shouts, and the
Papists were now under the same Terrors that they had been in some days before:
At 8 that Night, one Troop of English Dragoons came as a Guard to an Officer,
who was sent to take charge of the Stores, it is impossible to express the
rejoicing of the People at sight of them, they hung about the Horses, and were
ready to pull the Men off, and hug them in their Arm, as they Marched up to the
Castle.

The Night after the Battle, the English lay upon their Arms at Duleek, and
next Morning a Party were sent to fetch the Tents and Baggage from beyond the
Boyn, and another Party of 1000 Horse and Dragoons, and 300 Foot, and 8 pieces
of Cannon, Marched to Summon Droghedah; The Governor received the first Summons
very indifferently; but being Threatened that if he forced the Cannon to be
fired on them, they should have no Quarter: Thereupon he believing that the
Irish Army was totally Routed, Surrendered upon Condition, to be Conducted to
Athlone, there being about 1300 of them, who Marched out without Arms,
according to Agreement.

July 3. K. William Marched forward, and was met at Bally Brigham, by one Mr.
Saunders from the Protestants of Dublin, with a Tender of their Allegiance: The
D. of Ormond Marched thither with 1000 Horse, and the Dutch Guards took
possession of the Castle, and 2 days after his Majesty came to Finglass, within
2 Miles of Dublin, 300 Citizens coming to wait upon, and welcome him and his
Army, and abundance of People flockt from all places to see the Camp, and their
Great Deliverer, whose just Merits found Commendations from his very Enemies;
and whose Soul is not Subject to fear, or any thing that is below a Prince; and
who is only faulty in exposing his Royal Person too far. On Sunday, His Majesty
went to St. Patricks Church in Dublin, and returned to his Camp to Dinner, and
on Monday, the Bishops and Clergy Presented a very Loyal Address the Bishop of
Mead making a Speech, telling his Majesty, That they came not to beg his
Protection, for he had given sufficient Demonstrations of his Affection toward
them, by venturing his Royal Person for their Deliverance; but they came to
Congratulate his Arrival, to pray for the Continuance of his good Success, and
to give his Majesty all the Assurance imaginable of their Loyalty and
Obedience, entreating him not to think the worse of them for staying in
Ireland, and Submitting to a Power, that it was impossible for them to Resist,
since they had been as Serviceable to his Majesty's Interest by staying, as
they could have been otherwise, etc. The King made answer; That as he had by
the Blessing of God Succeeded so far, he doubted not; but by Gods Assistance,
to free them absolutely, and that in a short time, from Popish Tyranny, which
was his design in coming: They then desired his Majesty's leave to appoint a
day of Public Thanksgiving, which was done accordingly.

The Irish went away in such haste, that they left 16000 l. in brass Money in
the Treasury, and a great quantity of French Souses; of the first of which, K.
James coined above eleven Hundred Thousand Pound; The half Crowns of which were
now cried down for pence: Yet this did not grate so heavily upon the People, as
his late taking away all the Protestant Staple Goods, as Wool, Hydes, and
Tallow, to send to France, in exchange for Wine and Linen for his Army; Their
Tanned Leather was also taken away, for the use of the Soldiers: The Revenue he
raised otherwise, was by a Subsidy granted by Parliament, of Twenty Seven
Thousand Pound a Month, for 13 Months; which fell severely upon the
Protestants, who were forced to pay ready Money, though by Plundring they were
generally deprived of their Stocks, Rents and Incomes; and to show what future
Security they were like to have for their Estates; K. James by Proclamation,
under pretense of his Prerogative Royal, laid a Tax of 20000 l. a Month for 3
Months upon Goods and Chattels, that granted by Parliament, being only upon
Land; this way of Leavying Money, startled every body, the pretended Parliament
was then in being, and adjourned till Jan. 12. 1689 which happened to be about
the very time when the K. and his Council were upon this Project; some in the
Council opposed it, alleging, There was no need of levying Money by
extraordinary ways, when it might be had otherwise; and that it would cause his
Enemies to say, that he affected Arbitrary Power, but he was very angry with
those that spoke against it, saying, That they had made him believe it was a
branch of his Prerogative to levy Money, and it he could not do that he could
do nothing. And thereupon Popish Commissioners were appointed to assess it, who
never failed to lay the greatest burden upon their Protestant Neighbors; who
in effect paid all the Taxes that K. James ever received in Ireland.

July 7. K. William published a Declaration, assuring all Laborers, Soldiers,
Farmers, Ploughmen and Courtiers; as also all Citizens, Tradesmen, Townsmen,
and Artificers, of his Royal Protection, who should return to their Abodes by
Aug. 1. and deliver their Arms to the Justices of Peace, and that they should
be secured in their legal Rights, Goods, Stocks and Chattels etc. The next day
the King took a view of his Army by distinct Regiments, and though it rained
very fast, yet His Majesty sat on Horseback in the midst of it. It was
observable, that with heat, dust and marching, most of the Soldiers had got
very sore Lips, nor was His Majesty himself exempt from this inconvenience, for
he had toiled and labored as much as the best of them. July 9. The King had an
account of the misfortune of the English and Dutch Fleets; and at the same time
he divided his Army, going himself with the greatest part Westward, and sending
Lieut. Genesis Douglas with 3 Regiments of Horse, 2 of Dragoons, and 10 of Foot
toward Athlone, about 50 miles from Dublin. In their march they took 2 Spies
with Letters from Athlone; one was to advise one Tute to defend an Island nigh
Mullingar, in which the Governor had store of Horses, and other things of
value. Another Letter was from an Officer at Athlone to his Father in the
Country; telling him, That the Ld Tyrconnel, D. of Berwick; and several other
Great Officers were come to Lymerick with a good Body of Horse, and that all
their Army would be there in 2 or 3 days, so that they would make either a Hog
or a Dog of it (as he expressed it) That the Dauphin was landed in England with a
great Army; That the French had beat the English and Dutch Fleets; That D.
Schomberg was dead, and it was said the Prince of Orange was so too; That their
King was gone to France, but it was no great matter where he was, for they were
better without him. Then he advised his Father not to take a Protection from
the English, because those that did so, were looked upon as Enemies: And after
his Letter was sealed, he had writ on the outside, Just now we have an account
from Gentleman that is come to us from Dublin, that Orange is ^^tainly dead; so
that all will be well again. Such were their ho^^ and expectations at that
time; yet we find that the Irish had (...) a mean opinion of K. James; some of
them saying, That he (...) fitter to be a Monk than a King: and Sarsheld
sometime af^^^ ward speaking of the Action at the Boyn, swore, If the E^ wo^^
change Kings, they would fight it over again and beat us. S^ material is the
courage and countenance of the Chief Commande^ in an Army, especially a King,
which makes his Nobility, Gentry^ and Officers strive to imitate his example,
by which he is be^^^ served, and commonly more fortunate.

July 17. The Army encamped within a mile of Athlone, t^^ Enemy playing the
great Guns on them as they marched with litt^^ damage. The General sent a Drum
to Summon the Town, but o^^ Col. Grace the Governor fired a Pistol at him, and
sent word, The^^ were the Terms he was for: Upon which the English were
contriving to raise Batteries; but the Enemy having made Provision for their
coming, and Lieue Genesis Douglas not having Cannon large enough to endamage the
Town, and also very little Bread, it was resolved by a Council of War to remove
from the Town; which was done at 12 at Night with all their Baggage, the Enemy
not so much as firing one Gun at them, and soon after they joined the King's
Army.

July 9. His Majesty encamped at Cromlin 2 miles West of Dublin, where he
settled the method of granting Protections to those Irish that would submit to
the Government; and gave Orders that upon pain of Death no Soldier should dare
Plunder the Country, or any protected Person, nor to take violently the least
value from either Protestant or Papist; abuses of this kind having been lately
complained of. Two days after, the King passing by the Ness, saw a Soldier
robbing a poor Woman, which enraged His Majesty so much, that he beat him with
his Cane, and Commanded that he, and others, found guilty of the like
disobedience, should be Executed; which had so good effect upon that Army, that
no Pilfering happened for a long time after. The K. had notice in his march of
the confusion of the Enemy, and their resort to Lymerick; and People from
Kilkenny gave an account, That some Irish Horse and Foot were there still, but
with thoughts of quitting it upon our approach; which they did, after having
(...) the Inhabitants to give them a Sum of Money to save the Town from
P^undring; Upon which a Party of Horse under the D of Ormond went to take
possession of the place. J^^y 19. The K. dined with the D. at his Castle of
Kilkenny, which Count Lauzun had ^^^^ved with all the F^^niture in a good
Condition, the Cellars being well furnished with ^ine, which they had not time
to drink at their going off; Col. E^nger was sent from thence with 1000 Horse
and Dragoons to se^^re the Town of Wex ord, which was deserted by the Irish
Garri^on: As also Clonmel, whither Count Schomberg marched with a Body of
Horse, being one of the strongest Towns in Ireland, and cost Cromwell 2000 men
in taking it; the Irish pretended to defend it now, and levelled the Suburbs
and Hedges; but at length marched off, having got 300 l. of the People, to
secure it from burning and plunder. July 22. Maj. Genesis Kirk sent a Trumpet to
Summon the Town of Waterford to surrender, which they refused in very civil
Terms; but at length on the 25. they delivered it up on Articles, and at the
same time the strong Fort of Duncannon 7 miles below Waterford was surrendered
upon the like terms; The K. went into W^terford, and took care that none should
be disturbed in their Persons or Goods. At the King's return to his Camp. His
Majesty held a Council, where he declared his resolution to go for Engl. upon
some accounts he had from thence, leaving Count Solms Commander in Chief; But a
few days after having advice from England that the French were gone off the
Coast, and had only burnt a small Village in the West, His Majesty resolved to
return to the Army and Aug. 8. the L. Portland and Brigadier Stuart were sent
toward Lymerick with about 1100 Horse and Foot, and the next day the whole Army
advanced; The K. having ordered their several Posts sent a Trumpet to Summon
the Town: it seems a great part of the Ganison were for surrendering it, but
Mons. Boiselean the French Governor, the D. of Berwick, and Col. Sarsfield much
opposed it tel^ng the Soldiers, That there were great Divisions and
Insurrections in England; That the Dauphin was landed there with 50000 men, and
that the P. of Orange would be obliged soon to draw home his Army to England.
The Trumpeter was sent back from Mons. Boiseleau with a Letter directed to Sir
R. Southwell Secretary of State, not sending directly to the King, because, it
is thought, he would avoid giving him the Title of Majesty; That he was
surprised at the Summons, and that he thought the best way to gain the P. of
Orange's good opinion, was by a vigorous defense of that Town which his Majesty
had entrusted him withal. The next morning a Cornet deserted the Enemy, who
told K William, That a great many were for surrendering; That C^^nt Lauzun with
the French were encampt nigh Galloway, the Irish refusing to receive them into
the Town, because themselves had done so some time before at Lymerick, That
Tyrconnel with most of the Irish Horse, and some Foot, were encamped about 8
miles on the other side of Lymerick; That there were 14 Regiments of Foot, 3 of
Horse, and 2 of Dragoons then in the Town.

This City is very strong, both by Nature and Art, and the Irish had now added
some new Fortifications to it. In 1651. Lieut. Genesis Ireton laid Siege to it for
several Months, and did not take it at last, for it was in some measure
betrayed to him, by one Col. Stennel, and others of the Irish who against the
Governors consent, received in a or 300 men, thereby getting Possession of the
Town; Ireton Hanged the Mayor, and several others that were still for defending
it.

When His Majesty sat down before Lymerick, he had only a Field-Train of
Artillery, because some imagined the Town would have surrendered upon Summons:
But it being refused, Six Cannon called Pounders, two 18 Pounders, a great
quantity of Ammunition, Provisions, tin Boats, and abundance of other
materials, were upon the Road from Dublin, under the Convoy of 2 Troops of Col.
Villars Horse, of which Sarsfield having intelligence by a French Gunner who
went over to the Enemy, he passed the River in the Night with a Body of Horse;
for being satisfied that if this Train arrived before Lymerick it would not be
able to hold it, he resolved to run the hazard of destroying them; If he
succeeded, he broke our measures; if not, he designed for France, as he
afterward declared. The K. had notice of his march, and to prevent the worst,
ordered 500 Horse to march and meet the Guns, but by some neglect in the
Officers, it was 1 or 2 a Clock in the morning before the Party marched, which
they then did very slowly, till about an hour after they saw a great light in
the Air, and heard a strange rumbling noise, which they imagined to be the
blowing up of the Train, as really it was: For on Sunday night, Aug. 11. the
Guns lay at Cashel, and on Monday they marched beyond Cullen to a little old
ruinous Castle called Ballemedy, not 7 miles from the Camp, and being so near,
did not fear an Enemy, especially having no notice, and therefore being weary
of marthing, had turned most of their Horses to grass, leaving a very slender
Guard, and the greatest part went to sleep; but some never awaked in this
World, for Sarsheld lurking among the Mountains all the day, and being guided
through by-ways to the very spot, he unawares fell in upon them, and cut
several to pieces, with some Waggoners and Country People that were coming to
the Camp with Provisions. The Chief Officer seeing how it was, Commanded to
Sound to Horse, but those that went to fetch them up, were killed by the way;
The Officers and others after the best resistance they could make, were forced
to shift for themselves, with loss of Horses and Goods, a Lieutenant and some
few Troopers were killed, in all about 60. The Irish got what Horses they
could, some broke the Boats, others the Guns, and drawing all the Carriages and
Wagons, with Bread and Ammunition together in an heap, what they could not
carry away, they laid a Train and fired at their going off, blowing up all with
an astonishing noise, whereby every thing that would burn was reduced to Ashes.
The Party of Horse that were sent against them came when the business was over,
in sight of the Enemies Rear, but wheeling toward the Left to intercept their
passage over the Shannon, they unhappily went another way: This was very
unwelcome News in the Camp; however the Siege went on, and several more Guns
were planted, and Firings continued briskly from diverse Batteries.

Aug. 12. Brigadier Stuart went with a Detachement of Men and (...)
Fieldpieces toward Castle Connel, upon whose approach, the Gar^rison
consisting in 126 surrendered, and were brought Prisoners to the Camp. Aug. 19.
Our Batteries played upon the Walls and Houses of Lymerick, and the K. riding
softly up toward Cromwel's-Fort, as his Horse was entering a Gap, a Gentleman
stayed His Majesty to speak with him, and in that very moment a great Cannon
Bullet was shot into that very place, which would have struck His Majesty and
Horse too all in pieces, if his usual good Angel had not defended him; yet it
raised the dust all about him, of which He took little notice, but alighting
came and laid him down on the Fort among all the Dust Aug. 20. A brisk Attack
was made by Col. Cutt's Granadiers, who with some others made themselves
Masters of a Fort near St. John's Gate; After which the Enemy sallied out of
the Town, and a very hot Action happened, but the Irish was at length be at
back into the Town with the loss of 300 men; of ours 58 Foot were killed and
140 wounded; of Horse 21 killed and 52 wounded. Aug. 23. A Truce was made for
burying the Dead on both sides. We found a French Officer wounded and his Horse
lying upon him, and yet he was alive and recovered, though he lay from Wednesday
to Saturday. A Chaplain in the Army happened to go down after the Fort was
taken, and seeing a Trooper as he thought mortally wounded, he went to give him
good Advice, which the other was very thankful for; In the mean time comes the
Sally, and our Horse came thundering down, at which the Clergy man hastening
away fell down; The wounded Trooper seeing him fall, thought he had been dead,
and went to strip him, having soon got off his Coat, at which the other called
to him to hold, asking him what he meant; Sir, says the Trooper, I beg your
Pardon, for I believed you were killed, and therefore I thought my self obliged
to take care of your Clothes, as well as you did of my Soul.

Aug. 27. A Breach, about 12 yards long and pretty flat, being made nigh St.
John's Gate, the K. gave order for attacking the Counterscarp that Afternoon,
which was done by 500 Granadiers, and some other Regiments of Foot and Horse,
with much resolution. The Irish having all their Guns ready, discharged great
and small shot among them abundantly, and our Men were not behind in either; so
that in 2 Minutes the noise was so terrible, as if the Skies had rent asunder,
which was seconded with dust, smoke and all the terrors that the Art of Man
could invent to ruin and undo one another, the excessive heat making it yet
more uneasy. The Granadiers threw in their Grenades, and afterward get upon
the Counterscarp: Upon which the Irish were throwing down their Arms, and
running into the Town with all speed; which our Men perceiving, entered the
breach Pell mell upon them, and above half the E. of Drogheda's Granadiers, and
some others were actually in the Town; the Regiments that were to second the
Granadiers went to the Counterscarp, and having no Order to go further stopped;
The Irish were all running from the Walls, and quite over the Bridge into the
English Town, but seeing only a few of our Men enter, they were with much ado
persuaded to rally; Those English that were in, seeing themselves not followed,
and their Ammunition being spent, designed to retreat again, but some were shot,
others taken, and very few came out again unwounded. The Irish then ventured on
the Breach again, and from the Walls and all other places severely pestered
those on the Counterscarp for 3 hours together with Bullets, Stones, and broken
Bottles, even from the very Women, who boldly stood in the breach, and were
nearer our Men than their own; So that the Ammunition of the Besiegers being
spent, they thought it safest to return to their Trenches. In the heat of the
Attack the Brandenburg Regiment, who behaved themselves very well, were got
upon the Black Battery, where the Enemies Powder happened to take fire, and
blow up a great many of them the Men, Faggots, Stones, etc. flying into the Air
with a dreadful noise, From half an hour after 3 till 7 there was one continued
Fire of both great and small shot without intermission, insomuch that the smeak
from the Town reached in one continual Cloud to the top of a Mountain at least
6 miles off; when our Men retreated, some were brought out of the Trenches
dead, others without a Leg or Arm, and several Blind with Powder, and among
them a great many Brandenburgers who looked like Furies with the Gunpowder. The
King stood nigh Cromwell's Fort all the time, and afterward went to his Camp
much ^^^cerned, as well as the whole Army, a mixture of Anger and Sorrow
appearing in all their Faces. We loft at least 500 upon the place, and had 1000
more wounded. We killed a great number of the Irish by our Cannon, but it
cannot be thought their loss should be equal to ours, having the advantage of
the Walls to defend themselves. The Soldiers were desirous of a second Attack
seeming resolved to have the Town, or dye every m^n; but they did not know the
scarcity of our Ammunition, and besides it began to rain, and the next day
rained very fast; so that it was resolved by a Council of War the Siege should
be raised. We found some difficulty in getting off our Cannon, the Ways were so
seft with the wet, and we also oblig^d to draw them off with Oxen, the Enemy
having taken part of our Train-Horses, which was one main reason of raising the
Siege. In a day or 2 after Monsieur Boislean the Governor of Lymerick made a
Speech to the Irish, telling them, That with much ado he had persuad^d them to
defend the Town, which with God's help they had done; but assored them, It was
not Fear, but Prod^nce and Policy that had made the English quit the Siege, as
appeared by their slow marches; and withal told them his Opinion, That the next
time the Enemy came they would have it; which said, he took leave, and went to
the French Forces then at Galloway, and designed for France.

The day the Siege was raised, the K. went to Waterford, and thence to England,
sending the Lord Sidney and Tho. Connings by Esquire to the Camp with a Commission
to be Lord Justices. Sept 8. The Lord Lisburn went before Killmallak, being a
Garrison of 200 Men, which upon the approach of our Forces y^^lded on the first
Summons: Nignah Castle having done the like sometime before to Major General
Ginkle. Sept. 21. The E. of Marlborough landed near Cork with several Forces,
and was joined by Major General Scravenmore and others, who presently invested
the Town, and soon after made a breach in the Walls; so that after seven days
Siege the Garrison surrendered upon Articles. Oct. 2. The Earl of Marlborough
marched thence to Kingsale; the Town was presently delivered; he then sent a
Summons to the Governor to surrender up the Forts, who returned answer, That
it would be time enough to talk of a Surrender a month hence; upon this several
Batteries were raised against the old, and afterward the new Fort, which played
with such success, that they were both delivered up. Oct. 15. following; After
the taking these two Places, part of the Irish Army in Kenny made several
Incursions, and burnt all the Towns and Villages of the Counties of Lymerick
and Cork, and the Enemies gave leave to several Protestants to come from
Lymerick, where all Provisions were very scarce. In November. General Ginkle
returns to Dublin. In December. several Rapperees were got to the end of the Bog
of Allen about 12 miles from Dublin, it being about 40 miles in length, and
having several woody Islands from whence they plundered all the adjacent
Country; but Coll. Fouks drove them from their Posts: Several small Skirmishes
happened in the Winter between the English and the Rapperees, wherein the first
obtained diverse notable advantages; though generally their Parties were much
inferior to the Enemy, which was a great disheartning to them.

May 7. 1691. The whole Army took the Field under General Ginkle, and the Irish
were busy in making preparations for their defense, having a new French
General named St. Ruth sent them who issued out all Orders in K. Lewis's name,
and required the Irish Officers to take new Commissions under the French King,
in prosecution of the design of subjecting Ireland to France. The first place
the English attempted was Ballymore, seated upon an high Tongue of him Land,
jetting out into a Lake, and strengthened with several Fortifications; five
Batteries were raised against it and the next morning the General sent a
Messenger to the Governor, That if the Garrison would surrender within two
hours, he would save their lives, and receive them as Prisoners of War; if not,
that they should expect no Quarter: The Governor would not return a direct
Answer, in hopes of better Terms; Whereupon s^veral breaches were made, which
put them into such a Consternation, that diverse white Flags were hung out, and
May 9 the Garrison surrendered, out of which marched above 1000 Soldiers and
Rapparees, and about 600 Women and Children.

June 18. The Army marched from Bally more, and the next day came before
Athlone, and thought it very strange to see none but French Colors in four
parts of an Irish Garrison: A Battery of ten Guns was instantly planted, which
were so well directed, that in a few hours the Bastion against which they
played was laid in Ruins, and the reupon General Ginkle ordered an Assault to
be made: The Enemy seemed at first resolved to have maintained the Breach, but
upon fight of the Hand-granadoes they fled in great confusion to the other side
of the Town, which was divided by a River; so that the English had nothing to
do but to enter, not 20 of our Men being wounded, and some few slain: One part
of the Town being thus taken, the Cannon played with great success upon the
Castle and the Enemies Works on the other side the River, the Trish having
b^^^en down the Stone Bridge: But the General resolved to ford the River ^o get
to th^^, and accordingly June 30. the Sig^ being given by ringing the
Church-Bell 1500 Granadiers, with whom M. G. Talmash went that day as
Voluntier, entered the Water, the Enemy at first fired very smartly, but the
English wading up to the breasts in Water with continual Huzzaing, ad^anc^d
under the smoke and shelter of their own Cannon, and coming to the other fide,
they threw their Grenades so furi^ ^s^^, that the Enemy abandoned their Posts
and Trenches, and (...) an hour we were entirely Mastors of the Town, (...)
En^mies Works, and the Ruins of the Castle: M. G. (...) diverse other Officers,
with 200 common Soldiers (...) Prisoners, and near 1200 killed on the place,
besides (...) Officers of note, the rest escaped over the Ramparts and (...) to
the Enemies Camp, from whence some Battalions were coming to their relief; but
meeting the Fugitives, and receiving (...) warm Salute from those Works which
were so lately their own, they retreated to their Camp; The English in this
unparalled Action had not above 20 slain and 30 wounded.

The Irish Army upon reducing the Town, decamped in the night and retreated ten
Miles off, the English followed them, and having passed a River that lay
between them and the Enemy near Agrim, after some Skirmishing they drove in
their Out-Guards, the English Cannon having in the mean time dislodged the
Rebels Horse from the end of a nartow Lane that leads to Agrim: The Irish drew
down great Bodies of Horse and Foot from their Camp, which was advantagiously
placed, and strongly posted behind the high Banks that lay one beyond another,
and fell upon the Left Wing of the English, and had a warm Dispute with our
Foot for two hours, but at last the Rebels gave ground, notwithstanding new
supplies of Horse and Foot were continually sent to relieve and second those
that gave way, but the English Courage surmounted all dangers, who charged so
bravely up the Hills upon the Squadrons of the Enemy, that they put them to an
absolute Rout, and pursued them about four Miles, the Night preventing them
from following farther, it being fix in the Evening before they Engaged, and
eight before they took their flight: The Irish were never known to fight with
more Resolution, especially the Foot; but it was their last Effort wherein the
gasping Honor of the choice of all the Catholic Nobility and Gentry in the
Kingdom strove to do their utmost: And befides, their number was much superior
to ours, being no less than 20000 Foot, and 8000 Horse and Dragoons, with all
the advantage imaginable that the situation of ground could afford them; so
that nothing but the Blessing of God and the superior Valor and Conduct of the
English could have wrested such a complete Victory out of their hands: Of the
Enemy 8000 were slain upon the place, and among them the French General St.
Ruth, who was killed by a Cannon Bullet; the Lord Galloway, and several others
of Quality; about 500 were taken Prisoners, among whom were the principal
Commanders in the Army, with 12 Standards and 30 Colors.

After the Battle the General sent Brigadier Epinger with 1000 Horse and
Dragoons to seize Portumney, where the Rebels had a great Magazine of
Provisions, who soon possessed himself of it; and the next day the Fort and
Castle of Bom^ker surrendered, whereby the English became Masters of all the
Passes upon the Shannon except Lymerick, and those within 8 Miles of it. July
17. The Army came before Galloway, and the General sent a Trumpet to the Lord
Dillon Governor of the Town, that he should have Quarter and Pardon pursuant
to the Lords Justices Proclamation, which he sent him if he surrend^ed before
the Cannons were bronght to fire upon the Garrison; His Answer was, That Mons.
d'Vssone who commanded, was of the same Opinion with him and the rest of the
Officers; and that they resolved to defend the Place to the last; Upon which
the English instantly made their approaches with such vigor, that they took a
Fort upon an Hill which commanded a Valley between them and the Town without
the loss of one Man, and then crossed over the River is two Boats so suddenly,
that the Enemy were frighted into a Treaty: Balderick O Donnel who designed to
throw his Brigade into the place, being prevented of his intentions by the
prudent management of the General; so that July 26. the City of Galloway was
actually surrendered; Monfieur d'Vssone according to his desire, marching out
incogn^^o some hours before. August 25. The Army came before Lymerick, and soon
after several Batteries were raised against the Ci^y: The General hearing that
some Regiments of the Enemies Horse, and Rapparees were drawn together in
Kerry, about sixteen Miles off, he sent away Brigadier Levison with Five
hundred Horse and Dragoons in pursuit of them, which they did so effectually,
that few of them escaped. The English at the Siege advanced to Cromwell's Fort,
the Enemy quitting both that and their Line of Communication to the Church, and
returned to their Rettenchments near the Town. About the same time the Earl of
Tyrconnel died, as was certainly said, out of anguish of mind, to see the
ruinous condition of his Masters Affairs; and was buried at Lymerick. The
General having notice that Coll. Henry Lutterel was seized by order of the
French Lieutenant General d'Vss^ne, for having made some Proposals for a
Surrender, and that he was sentenced to death by a Court Martial, he sent word
to the Monsieur by a Trumpet, That if any Man were put to death for having a
mind to come over to the English, he would revenge it double upon the Irish
Prisoners; which prevented his death: Several Forts and Castles about the Town
were daily taken in, and the Batteries played continually upon the City, which
set it on fire in diverse places, and ruined the Walls and Castle: About the
same time the Irish having put between two and three hundred Protestants into a
little Island in the Shannon under a sufficient Guard, their sad and s^arved
condition so moved the compassion of the Irish Officers who guarded them, and
were also desirous to go over to the English, that they sent to Major Stroud,
who was posted hard by with some of that Militia, to let him know their
Intentions; Upon which the Major went over with a Party in small Boats, and
brought away both the Guards and Prisoners, who were almost starved for want of
food, in a place where they had only two pitiful Hutts to shelter them from the
Cold and Rain.

Sept. 8. A great Battery of 22 Pieces of Cannon began to play very early in
the Morning, and in a short time made a Breach of above thirty yards in the
English Town, and firing without intermission, made terrible havoc,
dismounting the Enemies Cannon, set the English Town several times on fire, and
laid the greatest part in r^bbish: Some of the Bombs fell into the Enemies
Stores burnt two of their Magazines of Biscuit, one of Brandy, and one of
Powder, so that they were fore't to remove the remainder into the Irish Town.

Sept. 15. The Lord Lisburn was killed by a Cannon-Ball, and two days after
S^ego was taken by the Earl of Granard, the Garrison consisting of five or fix
hundred Men, who left in the place sixteen Pieces of Cannon, thirty Barrels of
Powder with Shot and Provisions proportionable. One Captain Taaffe came out of
Lymerick to the English, and informed the General that the English Town was
utterly ruined; that the Cannon and Bombs had killed a great number of the
Garrison who were reduced to Six thousand Foot, and very ill clad.

General Ginkle having resolved that part of the Army should pass the Shannon,
and remove the Irish Horse which lay in the County of Clare, and so shut up the
Town on that side; to conceal his design, he ordered the heavy Cannon to be
drawn off, and shipped, and quitted several Castles as if he intended to raise
the Siege, which the Enemy observing, expressed tehir Joy by loud and repeated
Shouts: But the same night the Pontins were secretly laid over the Shannon, and
by break of day the Royal Regiment of Dragoons, and a Detatchment of Horse
passed the River undiscovered: Brigadier Clifford lay with four Regiments of
Dragoons to have prevented their Landing, but when he perceived they were got
over, he brought down all his Men on foot (their Horses being at Grass) to make
what opposition they could, but were presently routed, and for have threw away
their Arms, leaving behind them all their Tents, Baggage, Saddles, and other
Accoutrements, with two Pieces of Cannon and a Standard. These frequent
Successes much intimidated the Enemy, and the French that were in Lymerick had
some time before endeavored to get away, but a Squadron of English and Dutch
men of War, and the Provision and Ammunition Ships from Kingsale; being by the
Generals Orders come into the Shan on, they returned back again, but a Vessel,
on Board which were St. Ruths goods and plunder, attempting to get out of the
Shannon, was taken by one of their Majesty's Frigates.

Septem. 22. The General passed the Shannon with a strong Party of Horse,
Dragoons and Foot, and 14 pieces of Cannon; who were drawn up before the Irish
Town, notwithstanding the continual fire of the Enemy; and then Ordered them to
attack the Fort that secured Thomond Bridge: The Beseiged at the same time
sending 2 great Detachments to enforce and second the Irish that defended it
However, the English went on with such courage and bravery that they beat them
from theirworks, and forced them to fly toward the Town, but the Governor
fearing the Victorious English would enter with them, durst not let down the
Drawbridge to receive them; which occasioned a great slaughter of the
vanquished Irish, so that nothing was to be seen from the foot of Thomond Bridge
to the Drawbridge but heaps of dead bodies; 600 of the Enemy were slain, and
130 taken Prisoners, and among them many several great Officers, Whilst the
conflict endured the Irish played very furiously with their great and small
shot; and the metal of the English precipitating them too far, exposed them to
the Enemies fire, whereby many more were killed than would have been otherwise;
so that near 300 were slain and wounded though not any one of remark; The next
day afternoon the Enemy beat a Parley on both sides the River, and desired a
truce to be continued for three days that they might send to their Horse which
lay about Clare to know upon what conditions they desired to be comprehended in
the Capitulation.

Sept. 25. Colonel Sheldon and other Irish Officers came into the English
Camp, and from thence to Lymerick; The next day Sarsfeild and Nohop dined with
the General, and the Ld Cutts, and Sir David Collier, Coll. Tiffany, and Coll.
Piper were sent as Hostages into the Town, and four Irish Lords remained in the
Camp as Hostages for the Garrison.

Sept. 27, The Irish sent them out their Proposals, which the General not
approving, instead of an Answer sent back 12 other Articles, which was all he
would allow them, and at the same time gave Orders for the great Guns and
Mortars to be ready if they refused to consent to them; who seeing the Generals
resolution, and finding no other remedy, at length Octo. 3. the Articles of
Capitulation were signed; consisting of 2 parts, The first relating to Civil
Affairs which were signed by the Lord Justices, the General, and the Persons
deputed by the Garrison; The other in reference to Military Affairs, which were
subscribed by the Generals on both sides: Such of the French and Irish as had a
mind to pass the Seas, were to have Liberty for their present convenience to
stay in the English Town and Island till they could be shipped away, and the
Castles of Ross, Clare, with all other Places and Castles that were then in
possession of the Irish, were forthwith to be delivered to the English: In
pursuance of this Agreement, one Gate of the Town was delivered up that
Evening, and the next day the Lord Cutts marched into the Irish Town, and took
possession of it with seven Regiments of Foot.

At this very time nows came that diverse French Men of War with Transport
Ships, were on the Coasts, and endeavored to put into some places distant from
Lymerick, either not knowing the Harbors, or being uncertain how affairs stood
there, but at length, it seems, they had certain knowledge that Lymerick had
submitted and upon what Terms; and one Article being, That such of the Irish
and French as had a mind to leave the Kingdom and go to France might stay to
expect a free Passage thither without distirbance; the French being hereby
asured not to be attacked by our Men of War they boldly appeared on the Coasts
of Kerry, being about twenty five Men of War, and twenty five Transport Ships
with some Fireships, having aboard 1000 Arms, Wine, Brandy and other
Provisions. And that it might be thought their design in coming was only to
carry off the Frenh and Irish that were unwilling to stay, Monsieur D'Vssen the
late French Governor, took the first opportunity to give notice of them to M.
G. Talmash, who was appointed by the General to command in Lymerick, whereupon
it being judged most convenient that they should Transport themselves in French
Ships, than to trust ours in the Enemies Port: The Transport Ships were
admitted to come into the River Shannon, but the Men of War and Fire ships to
keep out at Sea, and those Transport-Ships to have Liberty to take on board
such as would freely imbarke.

But the Irish Noblemen and Gentlemen having been made too sensible of the
French insolency in their own Country, resolved not to trust to their kindness
in France, and therefore many of them, as well as some Chiefs of the Rapparees,
came in, and freely took the Oath of Fidelity to their Majesty's. But others
being promised great advantages in France, were persuaded by Sarsfield,
Sheldon, and other Commanders, to imbark with them, and make their Fortunes in
the service of the Late K. James. Nov. 1. The Irish entirely left the English
Town of Lymerick, and part of them went aboard the French Ships, one of which
that carried 400 Men, with several valuable goods, ran upon a Rock, and about
100 were drowned.

Dec. 22. The remainder of the Irish being about 2600 Men, Women and Children
were by Sarsfield imbarqued from Cork to France, though he thought to have
carried off a far greater number, but several whole Regiments deserted him upon
advice of the ill Treatment the Irish already landed in France had received,
where the Officers were generally displaced or made to serve in lower Stations,
and French men put over their heads; After this Coll. Foulk Governor of Dublin
had Orders to disband the Irish Regiments that came over to us upon the
surrender of Lymerick, except 1400. who were sent into the service of the
Emperor of Germany.

Ireland being thus happily reduced to the Obedience of their Majesty's,
General Ginkle went to Dublin where he and the rest of the gallant Commanders
were received with a general joy and the highest marks of respect to their
merits, who had been so serviceable to the Kingdom, Soon after the General
imbarqued for England and was received very graciously by Their Majesty's, and
created Earl of Athlone, the Parliament likewise sending their thanks to him
for his good services desiring him to communicate the same to all the Officers
that served under him in this Expedition. And he together with them, was highly
entertained with a noble Treat by the City of London.

The Lords Justices were very diligent to settle matters in Ireland, which now
began to breath again, after such ruins and devastations as had been made by
the brutish Irish And the Parliament in England abrogated the Oath of
Allegiance in that Kingdom and ordered another Oath to be taken; Sir David
Collier was made Governor of Lymerick.

In August 1692. The Ld, Vi. Sydney being constituted L. Leiuetenant of Ireland
arrived there, and was received with loud peals of Cannon and Complimented by
the Nobility and after having taken the Oath the sword was delivered to him,
and the day ended with acclamations of Joy and Bonesires. And soon after his
Excellency issued out Writs for calling a Parliament in that Kingdom, who met
accordingly, and his Excellency in an Eloquent Speech declared, The happiness
they enjoyed by being restored to this great Privilege, since the Kingdom
could not so well be recovered to any degree of settlement legally as by a
Parlirment constituted and settled, and that behoped they would make use of at
to pass such Laws as might tend to the firm settelment of the Conuntrey upon
the Protestant Interest, and that it would be a great satisfaction to his
Majesty to see them established in peace and prosperity having had so great and
glorious a part releiving them from the calamities under which they labored.

After this the Commons presented their Speaker, and proceeded to swear their
Members; They then ordered an Adress of Thanks to be drawn up to his Majesty,
and another to the Ld. Lieutenant, and then passed, 1. An Act of Recognition of
Their Majesty's undoubted Title to the Crown of Ireland: 2. For encouraging
Protestant Strangers to settle in that Kingdom. 3. For an Additional Excise
upon Beer, Ale and other Liquors, 4. For taking Affidavits in the Country.
After which the Parliament was Prorogued to April, and from thence to Sept.
1693.

A List of the Nobility in the Kingdom of Ireland. 1693.
SIR Charles Porter Kn. Lord Chancellor. Dr. Mich. Boil; Lord Archbishop of
Armagh, Primate of Ireland. Dr. ^r. March Archbishop of Dublin. Dr. Narcissus
March, Archbishop of Cashell. Dr. Joseph Vesey, Archbishop of Tuam. Rich. Earl
of Cork, Lord Treasurer.
DVKES.
Butler Duke of Ormond. Schomberg D. of Linster.
EARLS.
Fitzgerald E. of Kildare. O Bryon E. of Thomond. Burk E. of Clanriccard.
Touchett E. of Castlehaven. Boil E. of Cork. Mc. Donnel E. of Antrim. Nugent
E. of Westmeath. Dillon E. of Roscomon. Ridgeway E. of Londonderry. Feilding E.
of Desmond. Brabason E. of Mead. Barry E. of Barrymore. Vaugham E. of Carbury.
Plunkett E. of Fingale. Chichester E. of Donnegall. Lambert E. of Cavan. O
Bryan E. of Insiquin. Macarty E. of Clancarty. Boil E. of Orrery. Coote E. of
Montrath. Moore E. of Drogheda. Talbot E. of Waterford and Wexford. Montgomery
E. of Montalexander. Palmer E. of Castlemaine. Taaffe E. of Carlingford. Power
E. of Tyrone. Jones E. of Rarelagh. Aungier E. of Longford. Forbes E. of
Granard. Dungan E. of Lymerick. Coote E. of Eally more. Ginkell E. of Athlone.
VISCOVNTS.
Preston Visc. Gormanston. Roch. Visc. Fermoy. Butler Visc. Mountgarret.
Villiers Visc. Grandison. Annesly Visc. Valentia. Dillon Visc. Costello and
Gallen. Netterville Visc. Dowth. Loftus Visc. Ely. Beaumont Visc. Swords.
Magennis Visc. Iveagh. Needham Visc. Kilmurry. Sarsfield Visc. Kilmallock. Burk
Visc. Mayo. Sanderson Visc. Castlelown Chaworth Visc. Armagh. Scudamore Visc.
Sligoe. Lumly Visc. Waterford. Smith Visc Strangford. Wenman Visc. Tuam.
Molineux V. Maryborough. Fairfax Visc. Emmly. Butler Vis. Kerrine. Fitz-Will.
Visc. Merryon. O Dempsey V. Glenmalier. Cockaine Visc. Cullen. Tracey Visc.
Rathcoole. Smith Visc. Carrington of Barrefore. Bulkley Visc. Cashell. Brounker
Vis. Lions. Ogle Vis. Catherlogh. Butler Vis. Galmoy. Barnewall Vis. Kingsland.
Boil Vis. Shannon. Skevington Vis Massereene. Chalmondly Vis. Kells. Fanshaw
Vis. Dromore. O Bryan Vis. Clare. Trevor Vis. Dungannon. Boil Vis. Dungarven.
Berkely Vis. Fitzharding of Beerhaven. Caulfield Vis. Charlemont. Wingfield V.
Powerscourt. Boil Vis. Blessington. Lane Vis. Lanesborough. Dawney Vis. Down.
Parsons Vis. Ross. Steward Vis. Monjoy. Loftus V. Lisburne, Extinct. Bourke
Vis. Galway. Brown Vis. Kenmare. Mc. Carty V. Mountcashell Chievers Vis. M.
Leinster.
BARONS.
Bermingham B of Athenry. Coursey B. of Kingsale. Fitz-Morris B^. of Kerry and
Lixnow. Flemin Baron of Slane. St. Lawrence B. of Howth. Barnewall B. of
Trunleston. Plunkett. B. of Dunsany. Butler B. of Dunboyne. Fitz-patrick Ba. of
Upper-Ossory. Plunkett Baron of Lowth. Burke B. of Castle-Connell. Butler Baron
of Cahir. Burk Baron of Brittas. Steward Baron of Castle-Steward, Extinct.
Foliot B. of Bollyshannon. Maynard B. of Wicklo. George Ba. of Dundalk. Digby
Baron of Geashill. Fitx-Williams B. of Lifford. Blaney B. of Monaghan. Malone
B. of Glenmallum and Courchy. Herbert B. of Castle Island Calvert B. of
Baltimore. Brereton B. of Loughlin. Hare B. of Coleraine. Sherard B. of
Leitrim. Magwive B. of Inniskilling. Hamilton B. of Strabane. Hawley B. of
Ducannon. Arrington B. of Killard. King Baron of Kingston. Barry Baron of
Santry. Annesly B. of Altham. Bellow B. of Duleck. Petty B. of Shelborne.
Fitton B. of Gawsworth. Bourk B. of Bophin. Nugent Ba. of Riverston. Cutts B.
of Gowran. Coninges by B. of Clanbrazil.
Archbishops in Ireland 4.
1 Armagh. 2 Dublin. 3 Cashels. 4 Tuam.
Bishoprics 18.
1 Mtath. 2 Kildare. 3 Waterford. 4 Clowfert. 5 Elphin. 6 Fernes and Lagin. 7
Clogher 8 Dromore. 9 Ossory. 10 Derry. 11 Down. 12 Killallow. 13 Cork. 14
Lymerick. 15 Cloine. 16 Killalla. 17 Rapho. 18 Kilmore.
University 1. Dublin.

There are 32 Counties in Ireland out of which are returned in all 275
Parliament men.

A Catalogue of all the Lord Lieutenants, Lord Deputies and Lord Justices of
Ireland from 1603.
1603 Sir George Carry Treasurer, Deputy 1604 Arthur Chichester, Lord Belfast,
Deputy. 1613 Tho. Jones Lord Archbish. of Dublin Justices 1613 Sir Rich.
Wingfield. Justices 1614 Lord Belfast. L. Deputy 1615 Lord Archbishop of
Dublin. Justices 1615 Sir John Denham. Justices 1616 Sir O^iver St. John, L.
Deputy 1622 Adam Lostus V Ely. Justices 1622 Rich. Wingfield V. Poyerscourt.
Justices 1622 Henry Carry V. Falkland L. Deputy 1629 Adam Loftus V. Ely. Justice
1629 Richard Boil E. of Cork. Justice 1633 Thomas V. Wentworth. L. Deputy 1636
Adam Loftus V. Ely. Justices 1636 Chapter Wandsworth Esquire Mr. of the Rolls Justices
1636 Thomas. V. Wentworth. Lieutenant 1639 Rob Dillon L. Kilkenny West Justices
1639 Charles Wandesford. Esquire Justices 1640 Tho Wentworth Earl of Strafford.
Lieutenant 1640 Charles Wandsworth Master of Rolls Deputy 1641 Sir William
Parsons Justices 1641 Sir John Burlace, Mr. of the Ordinance Justices 1642 Sir
John Burlace Justices 1642 Sir Henry Tichburn. Justices 1643 James Butler Marq
Ormond Lieutenant 1654 Charles Fleetwood Deputy 1655 Henry Cromwell Lieutenant
1659 Chancellor Steel Justices 1659 Chancellor Baron Corbet Justices 1660
Maurice Eustace Lord Chancellor Justices 1660 Roger Earl of Orrery Justices
1660 Charles Earl of Montrath Justices 1662 James Butler D. of Ormond
Lieutenant 1663 Thomas Earl of Ossory Deputy 1665 Duke of Ormond Lieutenant
1668 Earl of Ossory Deputy 1669 John Lord Roberts. Lieutenant 1670 John Lord
Berkley Deputy 1671 Lord Arch. B. of Dublin. Justices 1671 Sir Arthur Forbes
Justices 1671 John Lord Berkley Lieutenant 1672 Henry Capel E. Essex Lieutenant
1678 Duke of Ormond Lieutenant 1684 Lord Primate Justices 1684 Lord Grannard
Justices 1685 E. of Clarendon Lieutenant 1686 E. of Trrconnel Lieutenant 1690
Lord Viscount Sydney Justices 1690 Tho Coningsby Esquire Justices 1692. Lord
Viscount Sydney Lieutenant
A Catalogue of Books Printed for N. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultrey near
Cheapside.
I. THe History of the House of Orange: or, a Brief Relation of the Glorious
and Magnanimous Achievements of His Majesty's Renowned Predecessors, and
likewise of His own Heroic Actions, till the Late Wonderful Revolution.
Together with the History of King William and Queen Mary, etc. Being an
Impartial Account of the most Remarkable Passages and Transactions in these
Kingdoms from their Majesty's Happy Accession to the Throne to this time. By R.
B. Price One Shilling.

II. THE History of the two late Kings, Charles the II. and James the Second;
being an Impartial account of the most remarkable Transactions, and observable
passages, during their Reigns; and the secret French and Popish Intrigues and
Designs managed in those Times. Together with a Relation of the happy
Revolution, and the Accession of Their present Majesty's to the Throne, Feb.
13. 1689. P. 1 s.

III. THe History of Oliver Cromwell, being an Impartial Account of all the
Battles, Sieges, and other Military Archievements, wherein he was engaged in
England, Scotland and Ireland; and likewise of his Civil Administrations, while
he had the Supreme Government, till his Death. Relating only matters of Fact,
without Reflection or Observaion. By R. B.P. 1 s.

IV. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and Present State of
London and Westminster showing the Foundations, Walls, Gates, Towers, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Schools, Inns of Courts, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with
the most remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and other
occurrences, for above 90 years past, Pr. 1 s.

V. ADmirable Curiosities, Rarities and Wonders in England, Scotland, and
Ireland; or an account of many remarkable persons and places; and likewise of
the Battles, Seiges, prodigious Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Thunders,
Lightnings, Fires, Murders and other Accidents for many hundred years past.
Together with the natural and artificial Raritie in every County in England,
with several curious Sculptures. Price one shilling.

VI. THE English Empire in America, or a prospect, of His Majesty's Dominions
in the West Indies, namely, New Foundland, New England, New York, New Jersey,
Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina, Bermudas, Barbuda, Anguila,
Monserrat, Dominica, St. Vincent, Antego, Mevis, or Nevis, St. Christophers,
Barbados and Jamaica: With an account of their Discovery, Situation and
product: The Religion and Manners of the Indians, and other excellencies of
these Countries. Illustrated with Maps, and Pictures, Price one Shilling.

VII. A View of the English Acquisitions in Guinea and the East Indies: With an
account of the Religion, Government, Wars, strange Customs, Beasts, Serpents,
Monssers, and other Observables in those Countries. Together with a description
of the Isle of St. Helena and the Bay of Souldania; intermixed with pleasant
Relations. Price one Shilling.

VIII. THE English Hero: Or, Sir Francis Drake Revived. Being a full Account
of the dangerous Voyages, admirable Adventures, of that Valiant and Renowned
Commander. As, I. His Voyage in 1572. to Nombre de Dios in the West Indies,
where they saw a Pile of Bars of Silver near 70 foot long, 10. foot broad, and
12. foot high. II. His incompassing the whole World in 1577. gaining a vast
quantity of Gold and Silver. III. His Voyage into America in 1585. and taking
the Towns of St. Jago, St. Domingo, Carthagena, and St. Augustine. IV. His last
Voyage into those Countries in 1595. with the manner of his Death and Burial.
By R. B. Price One Shilling.

IX. TWo Journeys to Jerusalem, Containing first, the Travels of two English
Pilgrims, some years since, and what Admirable Accidents befell them in their
Journey to Jerusalem, Grand Cairo, etc. 2. The Travels of 14 English Merchants
in 1669. from Scanderoon, and back again to Aleppo. Pr. one shilling.

X. EXtraordinary Adventures of several Famous Men: With Pictures Price one
shilling.

XI. THE History of the Nine Worthies of the World. With Poems and the Pictures
of each Worthy. By R. B. Price One shilling.

XII. FEmale Excellency, or the Ladies Glory, Illustrated in the Worthy Lives
of nine Famous Women. Adorned with Poems and Pictures to each History. By R. B.
Price One Shilling.

XIII. Wonderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy, discovered in above 300
memorable Histories. Price one shilling.

XIV. Unparalleled Varities, or the Matchless Actions and Passions of Mankind;
displayed in near 400 Examples. Imbellished with Proper Figures Price one
shilling.

XV. THE Kingdom of darkness: Or the History of Demons, Specters, Witches,
Apparitions, Possessions, Disturbances, and other wonderful and supernatural
Delusions, Mischievous Feats and Malicious Impostures of the Devil. With
Pictures of several memorable Accidents. Price one shilling.

XVI. SUprizing Miracles of Nature and Art, in two parts; Describing the most
magnificient Buildings in all Ages as the Seven Wonders of the World, etc.
Beautifyed with Pictures Pr. 1 s.

XVII. MEmorable Accidents and Uunheard of Tranfactions in several Countries in
this last Age. Printed at Brussels in 1691. and Dedicated to King William, etc.
Published in English by R. B. Price one shilling.

XVIII. MArtyrs in Flames or Popery in its true Colors being a Brief Relation
of the horrid Cruelties and Persecutions of the Pope and Church of Rome, for
many hundred years past. Price one shilling.

Miscellanies.
XIX. DElights for the Ingenious, in above Fifty Select and hoice Eblems,
Divine and Moral, Ancient and Modern, Curiously Engraven upon Coper Flates;
Collected by R. B. Price 2 s. 6 d.

XX. EXcellent Contemplations Divine and Moral, Written by the Magnanimous and
truly Loya^ A. L. Caple Baron of Hadham; Also the Speeches of D. Ham and the
Earl of Holl. who suffered with him. With his Pious Advice to his Son. Price
one shilling.

XXI. VVInter Evenings Entertainments in two parts Containing, 1. Ten Pleasant
Relations of many Rare and Notable Accidents and Occurrences: 2. Fifty
Ingenious Riddles, with their Explanations; and 60 Pictures. Pr. 1 s.

XXII. Aesops Fables the second Part in Prose and Verse, none of them to be
found in the first, but collected from diverse Ancient and Modern Authors, with
Pictures and proper Morals to every Eable. Several of them very applicable to
the Present times. by R. B. Price bound one shilling.

Divinity.
XXIII. THE Divine Banquet, or Sacramental Devotions, consisting of Morning and
Evening Prayers, Contemplations and Hymns for every day in the Week, in order
to a more Solemn Preparation for the worthy Receiving of the Holy Communion,
Representing the several steps and degrees of the Sorrows and sufferings of our
blessed Savior, till he gave up the Ghost, etc. Imprimatur. Z. Isham, R. H. D.
Hen. Epis. Land, a Sacris. Price One Shilling.

XXIV. YOuths Divine Pastime; Containing Forty Remarkable Scripture Histories,
turned into common English Verse. With Forty Pictures proper to each Story;
very delightful for the virtuous employing the vacant hours of Young Persons,
and preventing vain and vicious Divertisements. Together with several Scripture
Hymns upon diverse occasions. Price 8 d.

XXV. THE Young Man's Calling, or the whole Duty of Youth, in a serious and
compassionate Address to all young persons to remember their Creator in the
days of their Youth. Together with Remarks upon the Lives of several excellent
young Persons of both Sexes, as well Ancient as Modern, who have been famous
for Virtue and Piety in their Generations. With twelve curious Pictures,
Illustrating the several histories. Price 1 s. 6 d.

XXVI. THE Vanity of the Life of Man represented in the Seven several Stages
thereof; With Pictures and Poems exposing the Follies of every Age. Price
Eeight pence.

XXVII. DIstressed Sion Relieved, or, the Garmen of Praise for the Spirit of
Heaviness. A Poem. Wherein are Discovered the grand Cauies of the Churches
trouble and misery under the late dismal Dispensation. With a complete History
of, and Lamentation for those Renowned Worthies that fell in England, by Popish
rage and cruelty, from the Year 1680. Humbly Dedicated to their Present
Majesty's. By Benjamin Keach, Author of a Book called, Sion in Distress or the
Groans of the True Protestant Church. Price One Shilling.

28. ANtichrist Stormed, or the Church of Rome proved to be Mystery Babylon the
Great Whore, Revel. 17. by many and undeniable Arguments Answering all the
Objections of the Papists, and all others. Together with the Judgment of many
Ancient and Modern Divines, and most Eminent Writers concerning the rise and
final ruin of the Beast and Babylon, ^^^ving it will be in this present Age.
With an Account of many strange Predictions relating to these present Times. By
Benjamin Keach. Price One Shilling.

XXIX. MOunt Sion, or a draught of that Church that shall stand for ever.
Together with a view of that World which shall be broken in pieces and
consumed. By William Dyer, Author of Christ's Famous Titles, and a Believers
Golden Chain. price One Shilling.

XXX. THE Devout Soul's Daily Exercise in Prayers, Contemplations and Praises,
containing Devotions for Morning; Noon, and Night, for every day in the week;
with Prayers before and after the Holy Communion: And likewise for Persons of
all conditions, and upon all occasions: With Graces and Thanksgivings before
and after Meat. By R. P (...) (...) bound Six Pence.

XXXI. SAcramental Meditations upon diver (...) ^^ces of Scripture, wherein
Believers are assisted in (...) their hearts, and exciting their affections and
graces when they draw nigh to God in that most (...) Ordinance of the Lords
Supper. By Jo. (...) of Christ in Devon. Price One (...).

XXXII. (...) with GOD, and prevailing: Or, a Trea^^ concerning the Necessity
and Efficacy of Faith in Prayer^. Wherein diverse weighty Questions and Cases,
(...) about praying in Faith, are stated and (...) or the comforting and
satisfying of (...) and scrupuious Consciences: The Conviction of for (...)
awakening of all Saints, both weak (...) great and small, to this great Duty of
Prayer. (...) as Tailor, formerly at Edmunds Bury now Pastor to a Congregation
in Cambridge. Pri^^ One Shilling.

FINIS.

