A Guinean Monarch


THE English Acquisitions IN GUINEA and EAST INDIA: CONTAINING First, The
several Forts and Castles of the Royal African Company, from Sally in South
Barbary, to the Cape of Good Hope in Africa: Viz. James Fort in the River of
Gambo. Sherborow in York Island. Sierra Leona in Bence Island Dickeys Cove.
Commenda Cape Coast Castle Fort Royal. Annamabo. Winnebah. Accra.


Secondly, The Forts and Factories of the Honorable East India Company in
Persia, India, Sumatra, China, etc. Viz. Spawhawn and Gambroon. In Persia. Fort
St. George. Fort St. David. Conimeere. Cudaloor. Porto Novo. Madapollam.
Metchlapatam. Pettipolee. On the Coast of Coromandel. Carwar. Callicut. Surrat.
Bombay Island. Ballasore. Hugly. Chuttanetti. Daca. Rhajama. On the Co. of
Mallabar Atcheen, and York Fort. In Sumatra. Amoy, Canton, and Tonqueen. In
China, etc.


WITH An Account of the Inhabitants of all these Countries; their Religion,
Government, Trade, Marriages, Funerals, strange Customs, etc. Also the Birds,
Beasts, Serpents, Monsters and other strange Creatures found there. Intermixed
with diverse Accidents, and notable Remarks With Pictures. Likewise, A
Description of the Isle of St: Helena, where the English usually refresh in
their Indian Voyages. By R. B.

London, Printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultry near Cheapside,
1700.

TO THE READER.
HAving already endeavored to Inform my Countrymen of the Grandeur of the
English Monarchy, by giving them an Account of the Kingdoms of England,
Scotland and Ireland, and likewise of his Majestys Dominions in America; the
acceptance they met with, has encouraged me to discover to them what many have
only heard of by discourse, namely the English Acquisitions in the 2 other
Quarters of the World, Africa and Asia. In the first, the Royal African
Company being by their Charter from King Charles 2d. dated January, 2. 1662.
Incorporated, the Limits of their Trade were from Sally in South Barbary, to
the Cape of Good Hope. In which large Tract of Land, they have Erected several
Forts, Factories and Settlements for securing their Commerce, which is very
considerable in those Parts. In Asia the English began their Discoveries just
an hundred years since, in 1600. under Sr. James Lancaster with 4 Ships only.
And soon after, the Industry of others had such success, that the Merchants
Trading thither were likewise Incorporated by Charter. This Honorable
East India Company, by the prudent management of their affairs, settled Forts
and Factorys in Twenty four several noted Places, Of which our unkind
Neighbors deprived us of some, and others were Deserted for Convenience; the
names of those abandoned are as follows. Ormus and Jasques in the Persian Gulf.
Cambaja and Agra in the Great Mogols Country. Armagon, Pattana, and Siatu on
the Coast of Coromandell, and Continent of Asia, Ticko, Jambo, Prianan on the
Isle of Sumatra. Bantam, Jaccatra, and Japarra, on the Isle of Jara. Socodona
and Bornermasa on the Island Borneo. Macassar on the Isle of Celebs Polleroon
in the Isle of Banda. Firando in Japan, Amboina, Hitto, and other Molucco
Islands. So that now the English possess only those mentioned in the Title
Page, the Account of all those Places with the Religion, Government and Manners
of the Inhabitants, and the Strange Creatures therein cannot but be diverting,
I have also given a brief Description of the Isle of St. Helena, and the
wonderful Voyage from thence, of Don Domingo Gonsales the Little Spaniard,
which ingenious and well contrived Fancy would have been lost if not here
retreived. These with many other pleasant Relations therein, will I hope
procure as fair Quarter for this as those formerly published have met with,
from the Friends of

R. B.

The Acquisitions of the Royal African Company in Guinea, and the several Forts
and Castles belonging to them, from Sally in South Barbary to the Cape of Good
Hope in Africa. With an account of the Natives of those Countries; their
Religion, Government, Trade, Wars, Marriages, Funerals, and Strange Customs.
Also the Birds, Beasts, Monsters, Serpents etc. found there. Intermixed with
diverse Accidents, and Notable Remarks.
THat Tract of Land called Guinea, in Africa, comprehends 700 Leagues from Cape
Verd in 14 Degrees N. Latitude, to Cape Consalvo in the first Degree of South.
Latitude, The Portugals were the first that ranged this Shore, and having
Intelligence of the Commodities, and manner of Trading, the Natives by fair
means and force got footing on the Seacoasts, building Forts and placing
Garrisons and Factories in several places, and found such a Golden Trade, that
they called some Coasts thereof by that name. This was an inducement (as what
will not Gold attract) to their further search all along to the Cape of Good
Hope, and thereby consequently to the East Indies; The fair quarter, and usage,
the Inhabitants received from the Portugals already settled there, encouraged
them to exchange their Commodities, which Trade according to the Custom of that
Kingdom was maintained by Factors, upon the King of Portugals particular
account in every Port and Town, as if he intended the profits of Merchandising
should defray the charges of his Conquests and Garrisons; furnishing the
Natives with Salt, Iron, Tin, Copper, Basins, Knives, Cloth, Linen, and other
European Goods, and receiving in exchange, Cattle, Corn, Rice, and the like,
but chiefly Gold in great abundance, both in Sand and melted Ingots, which gave
Life and Briskness to the further Discovery of those Countries, and continuance
of that Trade to this day, though not so considerable as formerly.

The English and other Nations, desirous to share in this Rich Trade, in short
time Sailed thither, and because they had no Forts to Protect their Persons and
Goods from the Portugals, and treachery of the Inhabitants, they were compelled
to Anchor along the Coasts near the greatest Towns, and signifying to the
Negroes what Wares they had brought, by their plausible demeanor, they at
length imboldened them to come aboard their Ships, and bring their Gold; the
manner of which Trade was very different from that of any other Country; For
betimes in the Morning, the wind being then generally off the Shore, and the
weather calm, the Natives came aboard in their Canoes and Scu^es to Traffic
some for themselves, and some as Factors for others, carrying at their Girdles
a Purse, wherein were several small Clouts or Papers, containing the Gold
belonging sometimes to ten several Men, which though all of the same weight and
goodness, yet they readily distinguished, and having made their bargains for
Cloth, Linen, or the like, at Noon they returned with the Seabrize again to
the Shore; and beside the agreement, these Factors had some small thing for
themselves, in reward for their Brokage, but in process of time, the Hollanders
frequenting these Coasts, and being well acquainted with the manner of the
English Traffic, and coming into the same places where the English Traded and
were known, they soon spoiled this Golden Trade, by their sinister and indirect
dealing; for Anchoring with the English, whom they found to have a better Trade
than themselves, they secretly bribed those Factors to carry their Passengers
and Merchants aboard their own Ships, and not the English; obliging them to
Trade only with the Dutch; Which Craft the English perceiving, used the same
Arts to engage the Factors to themselves, so that out-vying each other, these
Brokers commonly gained to themselves six or seven per Cent. to the vast
prejudice of all Trade upon these Coasts, since this ill Custom must be kept up
by all Succeeding European Merchants;

It was observed that many Negro Merchants who dwelt up in the Country coming
to buy Wares of the Dutch, with great quantities of Gold, and diverse Slaves,
thirty or more according to their Quality, to carry back the Goods they should
purchase, and taking their Lodgings in the Houses of these Brokers, whom they
acquainted with their full Commissions and Intentions, and to whom they
delivered their Gold; these Factors would go aboard the Flemish Ships with them
to Trade and Barter, and if the Negro Merchants were not skilled in the
Portugal Tongue, these Brokers would bid the Hollanders not to speak the
Morisco Language to them, because they Inhabited far within the Land, thereby
giving the Dutch the watchword, that they meant to deceive their Countrymen,
and afterward divide the Spoil, so that the knavi^h Factor connived at the
extravagant prizes of the Hollanders, to draw the more Gold from the Merchant,
whom he likewise cheated, sometimes by putting some of his Gold into his Mouth,
Ears or otherwise, which the Merchant Negro finding wanting in the Scale, adds
to the Cheat himself by blowing into the Christians Balance to make it weight;
The bargain being finished, and the Negro again landed, the Factor returns back
to the Ship, to share his ill got gains with the Flemings; This way of
proceeding was very detrimental to the English, and other Christians Trading on
these Coasts, so that unless they connive with these Factors, their Voyage will
be lost, and their Goods unsold.

In 1553. Thomas Windam, and Anthony Pintado a Portugal, in two English Ships
Traded along these Coasts as far as Benin, where they presented themselves to
the King who sat in a great Hall, the Walls whereof were made of Earth without
Windows, the Roof of thin Boards, open in diverse places; his Nobles never look
him in the Face, but sit with their Buttocks on the ground, and their hands
before their Faces, not looking up till the King commands them; when they
depart they go backward, turning their Faces still toward him. The next year
Captain John Lock Sailed into these Parts to Trade for Gold and Elephants
Teeth; And after him Captain Towerson made several Voyages thither, who at the
River of St. Vincent, observed a kind of Pease growing on the Shore like Trees,
with stalks twenty seven paces long; At Cape Tres Puntas, they made him Swear
by the Water of the Sea, that he would not hurt them, before they would Trade
with him; Aban a Negro King treated them kindly with a Pot of Palm or
Coco-Wine, which they draw out of Trees.

The People are handsome and well proportioned, having nothing disagreeable in
their Countenances, but the blackness of their Complexion, some of them have
flattish Noses, all little Ears, the People go all Naked till they are married,
and then are clothed from the middle to the knees; At the Marriage of their
Daughters, they give half an Ounce of Gold to buy Wine for the Wedding; the
Bride in the presence of her Friends swears to be true to her Husband, which
the man does not; who have as many Wives as they can maintain, yet the first
has this pre-eminence, so that he can never take another but by her permission,
but because the multitude of Wives and Children are counted the greatest honor
and riches in that Country, they often persuade their Husbands to take more,
and glory therein; the first Wife likewise has the privilege to lie with her
Husband three Nights successively, whilst the rest must be content only with
one, so that they live very quietly together. A Merchant or Captain will have
thirty or forty; the King of Benin had six hundred, wherewith he went in Solemn
Procession every year; The King of Fetu's Son had fourteen Sons and twelve
Daughters, and kept an hundred Slaves to wait upon them; At Cape Gonsalvo they
pink and color their bodies, and offer their Wives to Strangers; The King uses
his own Daughters when grown up as Wives, and the Queens with the like
incestuous abomination make use of their own Sons.

Their Women are unfaithful Discoverers of Natures hidden secrets, not being
ashamed to be delivered publicly in the sight of Men, Boys and Girls. They
circumcise both Sexes; after Travel they accompany not their Husbands in three
months; As soon as she is delivered they give her a drink made of Rice, Mays,
Water, Wine, and Mallaguett like our Pepper, after which she lies warm three or
four hours, and then rises, washes her self and Child, and so falls to her work
as before; Next they give it a name, usually of some Christian they are obliged
to, then wrapping it in a kind of Blanket or Skin, they lay it upon Rushes
where it continues above five weeks, then the Mother ties it to a board and
carries it on her back with the Legs under her armpits, and the hands tied
about her neck, where it hangs all day, and never comes off till it goes to
bed, and yet few or none prove lame or deformed, notwithstanding the shaking of
their bodies; they give them the breast over their shoulders, and this may be
the reason of the flatness of their Noses by their knocking them continually
against the Back and Shoulders of the Mother while she is walking or at work;
for it is observed that the Children of their Gentry whose Mothers do not
labor, nor carry their Infants about them, have very comely Noses; they wash
and rub their Children every Morning with Oil of Palms.

When they are seven or eight years old, they hang a Net about their Necks,
made of the Bark of a Tree, full of Fetiches or little Gods to secure them from
the Devil, who they believe would else carry them away; They hang their Hair
full of Shells, and Coral about the Arms and Legs, with several Feticho's of
different qualities; one being an Antidote against Vomiting, a second against
dangerous Falls, a third prevents Bleeding, a fourth causes Sleep, a fifth
secures them against Wild Beasts, and the like, giving to each Fetisso a
different name: They soon learn to speak, go, and swim: When they are born,
they are not black, but red: About seven year old they learn to spin Thread,
make Nets, and go a Fishing with their Fathers, and feed as they do, picking up
any nasty thing in the Streets, which they eat with good Appetites: The Boys
and Girls are all naked, which makes them have no sense of shame or modesty,
they being neither reproved nor corrected by their Parents: They are excellent
at Swimming, even at this Age, so that if their Canoe overset at Sea, there are
very little concerned, all of them swimming back again to the place from whence
they came, and consequently they can Dive with great dexterity and fetch up any
thing from the bottom: About twelve their Fathers instruct them how to make a
Canoe, and catch Fish; The Merchants bring their Sons acquainted with
Europeans, and with the Mystery of Trade: At eighteen they begin to set up for
themselves, two or three together hiring a House and purchasing a Canoe; they
then cover their Nudities, grow amorous, and their Fathers look out Wives for
them: The Girls clean the Houses, pick the Rice, beat the Mays, make the Bread,
clean the Kitchen, buy and sell at Market, make Baskets of Rushes and Matts
which they weave extreme curiously, but their chief care is to provide Meat and
Drink for their Parents, secure their Goods, and all other kinds of good
Huswifry; when grown up, they are very lascivious, and boast of their
Gallantries, especially with Strangers, whom they seem to affect above their
own Men: They are very careful to keep their Teeth white, have Wit enough, but
are very wanton with the Young Fellows stark naked, to please whom they wash,
comb, and plait their hair with great curiosity; some paint their Foreheads and
Eyebrows red and white, and hang Pendants in their Ears; all love Ribbons
especially red, they have Necklaces of Coral, and Bracelets upon their Wrists,
Arms and Legs, when they go abroad they wear a piece of Silk, Taffaty or other
Stuff wrapped about from the breast to the midleg, and have always a great bunch
of Keys, though never a Coffer nor Trunk to open; the Virgins make it their
whole business to appear acceptable especially to white men, and are seldom
barren before, though not very fruitful after Marriage.

For many years the English frequenting these Coasts, made little benefit
thereby; for the Inhabitants, perceiving their Gold so earnestly desired by all
Nations, set such a rate thereon, and having been often beguiled, they grew
more wary in their bargaining, and to the measure and goodness of their
Commodities, and though at first they knew no distinction of Christians, but
thought the Portugals, and all other white men to be of the same Nation, yet
they have since learned the particular manners and dealing of each Country,
and have found the fairest Trade from the English, who are therefore most
welcome to them, and speed best of any other Nation; Especially since the
Traders into these parts were Incorporated, by their Charter dated Ian. 20.
1662. and entitled. The Company of Royal Adventurers of England Trading into
Africa, or the Guinea Company; The Limits of their Trade, being from Sally in
South Barbary, to Cape de bona Esperanza, or the Cape of Good Hope, within
which Limits all English Ships are prohibited to Trade unless Authorized by
them. The Commodities exported by the Royal Company to Africa are Iron, Copper,
Slesias, Sheets, Says, Perpetuana's, Cowries, Welsh Plains, Manillos, Boysades,
Chints, Romberges, Coral, Callico's, Nicanies, Clouts, Amber, Powder, Muskets,
Batteries of all sorts, Buckshaws, Knives and Sheaths, Swords, Tallow, etc. For
which they import from thence to England, Gold, Elephants Teeth, Hides,
Malagueta, or Ginny Pepper, Red Wood, Ambergreece, with several other good
Commodities, besides numbers of Negroes for supplying the American Plantations
to their great advantage;

The Royal African Company have Erected the following Forts and Castles upon
the Coast for Securing their Commerce.

On the North Part of Guinea,
I James Fort in the River Gambia. II. The Fort of Sierna Leona in Bence
Island. III. Sherbrow in York Island.
On the South Part of Guinea,
IV. Dickies Cove. V. Comenda. VI. Cape Coast Castle. VII. Fort Royal VIII.
Annamabo. IX. Winnebah X. Acra.
I. James Fort.
THis Fort was formerly secured with eight Pieces of Cannon, but was demolished
by the French in the late War. It is now rebuilding much stronger, and designed
to have ninety Guns, and a Garrison of Two Hundred and Fifty Europeans besides
Negro's and Mulatto's. The Government of this Place is reckoned worth about Two
Thousand pound a year. It is Situate near Cape Verde, so called from its
continual greenness, which makes it a delectable place, being a Promontory,
which throws it self into the Sea, covered with green Trees, and causing a
beautiful Prospect by reason of their evenness, seeming as if planted by a
line; the Natives, have generally small Bellies, long Legs, broad Feet, long
Toes, sharp Sight, quick Wits, are Envious, curiously Neat, Thieves,
Letcherous, subject to the Pox, of which as well as their Pudenda they are not
the least ashamed, yet hold breaking wind backward a great incivility, and
wondered at the Hollanders for offering them such contempt. They have Stomachs
like Estridges, as appears by their strange and usual repasts; when they go to
Market, they wash from Head to Foot, and put on other Cloths; They buy only for
one day; Their Bread is made by stamping their Millet as we do Spice in a
wooden dish, steeping it over night with a little Maiz, and in the morning
laying it on a stone, they grind it with another stone, as Painters do their
Colors, till it be dough, which they then temper with fresh Water and Salt,
and make Rolls thereof twice so big as a man's Fist baking them a little on the
Hearth, and then eat, them. Their Viands are raw flesh, handfuls of Corn, large
draughts of Aqua Vitae, Dogs, Catts, Buffles, Elephants, though stinking like
Carrion, and a thousand Magots crawling on them; They have little Birds like
Bullfinches which hang their Nests on the small ends of branches of Trees for
fear of Snakes, these they eat alive Feathers and all; The Negro's say that up
in the Country, they eat dried Snakes, and the guts of Dogs raw, which our
Author has seen, and a Boy who was left on Shipboard in pawn for Money, would
privately kill the Hens, that he might eat the raw Guts; They likewise eat raw
stinking Fish dried in the Sun, yet can dispense with dainties when they have
them; They make a kind of Ale of Mays and Water boiled together, and putting it
into a Vessel as large as a Kilderkin, four or five place themselves round, and
drink it off, each sending a little Pot full to his best beloved Wife; They lay
their hands upon the Head of him that drinks, and cry aloud thrice Tautosi, He
must not drink off all, but leave a little to throw on the ground to his
Fetisso, saying I, ou, spouting out some on the Arms and Legs of their
Fetisso's, supposing that otherwise they should not drink in quiet; They are
great drinkers, and feed as unmannerly as Swine, sitting on the ground, not
swallowing one Morsel after another, but tear their meat to pieces, and throw
it into their Mouths, which stand gaping to receive it, they are always hungry,
and would eat all day long; Yea the Europeans have great Appetites while they
are there; He that gets most, drinks most of their strong Liquors, for they lay
up but little.

II. Sierra Leona.
THis Fort is in Bence Island, and was likewise demolished by the French in the
late War. It is also rebuilding, and will be secured by Sixteen Guns, and
Thirty Europeans, besides Mulatto's and Blacks. An Englishman dwelt a long time
in one of the Isles, having a fine House, and was well beloved and protected by
the Kings of that Country. In the first War with Holland 1666. our Author
being aboard a Dutch Man of War, this English Factor writ to them diverse times
to come and Trade with them, and told him he might do it with safety, and upon
Parole the Englishman called Abraham came aboard them in his Shallop, rowed by
three Slaves, accompanied by a Hollander and two others which belonged to him,
and was kindly treated; but afterward the Captain contrary to the advice of the
rest, treacherously made him a Prisoner, and the three Moors with him, to
their great surprizal; And Ian. 1. 1667. their great Shallop was manned out
with thirty Men, and one Cannonto Besiege his House, which was built of Brick
and Freestone, defended with four great Guns, encompassed with a fine Wood of
Palmtrees, which supplied him with Wine; On one side were about twenty Cabines
for the Natives, and on the other a Spring of good Water, it being the most
beautiful Island upon the River.

Being about to land, they discovered 200 Moors got together about the House
with Firelocks, and a greater number farther up in the Woods, which obliged the
Hollanders to make a show of going up higher, as being weaker, and so had more
occasion for the wind, but the Negroes thought they had been gone to Bower, and
dispatched a Canoe to give the King of Boulom the Alarm, which was persued by
the Enemy, who fired into their Boat, and at length took them; they were two
young Slaves belonging to the Portugals, who lived with the English Factory but
would confess nothing of their Message; The English in the House observing what
passed fired at them with their Cannon, and three of their Bullets fell within
ten paces of the Boat; The Hollanders got out of the reach of their Guns, and
came to an Anchor to wait the Tide; About an hour after two Moors belonging to
one of the Neighbor Islands made up directly to them in a Canoe, and came
within Pistol-shot, but would not be persuaded aboard; the Dutch firing on
them, they fled, and stooping for fear of their fire, seemed no higher than
Catts; the English in the interim played upon them, though they saw they were
out of their reach, to show the Natives they had undertaken their Defense, and
desired their Friendship.

The Tide coming in, the Dutch retreated to their Ship, wherein they found
several Moors and Portugals, and among them the King of Bouloms Son called
Bembo, about 35 years old well proportioned, and abating his Blackness, a
handsome Man, he was a great Friend of Abraham's the English Factor, and when he
understood he was a Prisoner, interceded for his Ransom, and on Monday noon
came on board again with an hundred Elephants Teeth, weighing nine hundred
pound, and two Civet Catts alive, upon the delivery whereof Abraham was
dismissed, the Hollanders giving him a little Barrel of Strong Water, a Roll of
Tobacco, a Cheese and a Salvo of three Guns.

III. Sherbrow.
THis Fort is Situate in York River, fortified with Twenty Guns, and a
Garrison of an Hundred and Fifty white men, besides Mulatto's and Negro's. The
Fort consts of two Palankeys, exceeding strongly built of Stone, and of a great
height, in form of an half Moon.

The Religion of the Natives (if we may so call it) is generally Paganism, they
salute the New Moon with horrible roarings, and strange gestures of Adoration;
they offer their Sacrifices in the Woods before great hollow Trees wherein
their Idols are placed; yet this they do rather out of Custom than Zeal, using
neither Form nor Method in their Devotions, every one making a God after his
own fancy; some seeming to incline to Mahumatism, others to Judaism, and many
of them are Roman Catholics; yet diverse affirm, that God who gives all
things, and can do what he pleases, and causes Thanders, Lightning, Rain and
Wind, is Omnipotent, and needs neither praying to, nor to be set forth in so
mysterious a way as that of the Trinity. They believe that when People die they
go into another World, and will have occasion for many of the same things they
use here, and therefore put part of their Housholdstuff into the Grave with the
dead Corpse; and if they lose any thing, imagine their Friends in the other
World had need of it, and have taken it away.

They have no Letters nor Books, yet keep Tuesday for a Sabbath, forbearing
then their Fishing and Husbandry, and the Palm Wine which is gotten that day
must not be sold, but is offered to the King, who bestows it on his Courtiers
to drink at night. On this Day in the midst of the Marketplace they place a
Table on four Pillars about three yards high, whose flat cover is made of Straw
and Reeds woven together, upon which they place many Straw Rings called
Fetisso's or Gods, and within them set Wheat, Water and Oil for their God whom
they imagine devours it; Their Priest they call Fetissero, who every Festival
day places a Seat upon that Table, and sitting thereon, preaches to the
People, but what his Doctrine is, the Europeans cannot understand: After this
the Women offer him their Infants, whom he sprinkles with Water, wherein a live
Snake swims, wherewith he likewise besprinkles the Table, and then uttering
certain words very loud, and stroking the Children with some kind of Colors,
as if giving them his Blessing, he himself drinks of that Water, the People
clapping their hands and crying, I ou, I ou, and so he dismisseth this devout
Assembly.

Many wear such Rings next their Bodies, to preserve them from the mischiefs
their angry God might inflict upon them, in honor of whom they daub themselves
with a kind of Chalky Earth, which is their Morning Mattens; At their eating,
the first bit, and the first draught is consecrated to their Fetisso, wherewith
they besprinkle it: If Fishermen have not a good Draught, they present a piece
of Gold to the Priest to reconcile them to their frowning Saint, who with his
Wives makes a kind of Procession through the Streets, smiting his Breast, and
clapping his Hands with a mighty noise, till he comes to the Shore, where they
cut down boughs from certain Trees, and hang them on their Necks, playing on a
Timbrel; Then the Priest turns to his Wives, and expostulates with them, and
throws Wheat and other things into the Sea as an Offering to appease the
Fetisso's displeasure against the Fishermen; When the King Sacrifices to his
Fetisso, he commands the Priest or Fitessero to inquire of a Tree, whereunto he
ascribes Divinity, what he will demand; The Priest comes to the Tree, and in a
heap of Ashes there provided, sticks the Branch of a Tree, and drinking water
out of a Basin, spouts it upon the Branch, and then daubeth his Face with the
Ashes, after which the Devil out of the Tree gives answer to the Kings
questions; The Nobility likewise adore certain Trees, esteeming them Oracles,
and they report the Devil sometimes appears to them like a black Dog, and
otherwhile answers them without any visible apparition. Some worship a Bird
called Pittoie, spotted and painted as it were with Stars, and resembles the
voice of a Bull; To hear this Bird low in their Journey, is reckoned a good
Omen, they saying, their Fetisso promises them good Fortune, and so they set a
Vessel of Water and Wheat in the place where they hear it; And as the Earth and
Air yield them Deities, so the Sea yields certain Fishes whom they Canonize;
upon this account, they never take the Tunny Fish, the Swordfish they eat, but
dry the Sword on his back, which is held in great Veneration: Yea the Mountains
are not without honor, and if they did not pacify their Anger by setting
daily Presents of Meat and Drink thereon, they believe they would bend their
sullen Brows, and as their High Tops threaten to scale Heaven, would overwhelm
the Earth, and destroy them all.

Neither has Nature alone this privilege, but Art likewise is concerned in
making Gods, composed sometimes of filthy things, as of a piece of putrified
Earth anointed with Suet, Grease and Oil of Palms, with five or six Parrot
Feathers upright in the middle, to which morning and night they pay their
Devotions; when it Thunders, Rains hard, or the wind blows strong, there is not
one to be seen in the Streets, all hide themselves in their Houses, and cry,
The Gods of the Whites are angry. The Devil is so dreadful to them, they
tremble at naming him, and say he beats them, and makes them do evil things for
their Fetisso, which every one carries about him, some are only the ends of
Horns filled with Dung, others as the heads of some Creature and the like;
which their Priests sell them at their own price, and pretend they found them
under the Fetiche Tree. When any one Dies they make a new Fetisso or Ring of
Straw, and conjure it to keep company and protect the dead in their Journey to
the other World; They lay the Corpse on a Matt upon the ground, wrapped in
Woollen, with a Stool covered with a Goat-skin under the head, the body is then
strowed with Ashes, the Arms laid by its side, and the Eyes opened; this
continues half a day, the best beloved Wife sitting by the Husband (as the
Husband does by his first Wife) crying Aury, and wiping her Face with a wisp of
Straw; Other Women go round the House and Corpse, singing and beating on Basins;
The Eldest Morini or Gentleman goes from House to House with a Basin, into
which every one puts the value of Twelve Pence in Gold; with this they buy a
Cow, with whole Blood the Fittessero or Priest appeaseth the Fetisso, The
Friends and Kindred assembling, prepare a Hen, and then seating themselves in a
corner of the dead man's House, they place all his Fetisso's or Gods on a row,
the greatest in the midst, adorning them with Garlands of Pease and Beans, and
then sprinkle them with the Blood of the Hen, and hang a Chain or Garland of
Herbs about their Necks; after this the Hen being boiled, the Women set it in
the midst of his Fetisso's, and the Priest taking water into his Mouth, amidst
his Charms, spits it out on the Fetisso's, and plucking the Herbs from his
Neck, he makes a Ball of them, wherewith he besmears his Face; which Ball
hereby is made a Fetisso, and the Party deceased is now at rest.

In the mean time, the dearest of his Wives fills all the House with Mourning,
the Neighbors and Friends assisting with Songs and Dances; At length they take
up the Corpse and carry it to the Grave, which is about four foot deep, and
covered with Stakes that nothing may fall therein; The Women come about the
Sepulcher, and expostulate thus with him in a pitiful and lamenting voice,
Alas, why did thou dye? Thou had so much Wheat, so much Maiz, thou wast
beloved of thy Family, and they had great care of thy Person, why would thou
dye? what have we deserved, wherein have we offended thee, what discontent have
we ever given thee, to oblige thee to leave us? If he be a man, they add; Thou
were so valiant, so generous, thou have overthrown so many Enemies, thou have
behaved thy self gallently in so many Fights, who shall now defend us from our
Adversaries? Wherefore then would thou dye? Others cry, He is dead, that
brave Huntsman, that excellent Fisherman, that valiant Warrior, that great
destroyer of Portugals, that generous Defender of our Country, he is departed
this World. Then they throw on a little Earth, but none can get into the
Corpse, for he has with him his Household Stuff, Armor, and whatsoever he used
in his life time, and Wine too, if he loved it, to drink in the other World.
Lastly, they cover the Sepulcher with a Roof to defend all from Rain; If the
King dies, greater Solemnity is used, yea his Nobles thinking so great a
Personage ought to have Attendants, one offers to him a Servant, another a
Wife, a third his Son or Daughter, even many of both Sexes to wait upon him,
all whom are suddenly slain, and their Bloody Carcasses buried with him; yea
the Kings Wives who loved him best, refuse not this last and everlasting
Service, but are willing to dye, that they may again live with him. The Heads
of the Slain are set upon Poles round about the Sepulcher; Meat, Drink, Cloths,
Arms, and other Utensils are buried with them; After the Funeral, they go to
the Sea, and there use other Ceremonies, some washing, while others play on
Basins and Instruments, where the Widow or VViddower is laid backward on the
water with diverse words of complaint, at last they return back to the dead Man's
House, where they drink themselves drunk, and wash away all further sorrow.

IV. Dickeys Cove.
THis Fort has Ten Guns, very good Saker, and Minion. It lies on the Southern
Part of Guinea, and has four Palankers strongly built of Lime and Stone: With
a Garrison of Thirty white men, besides Blacks and Mulattoes. There is a Place
called Cape Miserado by the Portugals, either because it is encompassed with
Rocks that lie under water, and would inevitably destroy any Vessel which
should come nearer than half a League, or because the French who were formerly
Massacred here, cried out Misericorde, Misericorde, Mercy, Mercy; Besides the
Natives of this place being very cruel, they have denominated the River, and
called it Duro, as being hard and fatal to the Europeans. The Government of
this Country is absolute and unlimited Monarchy; so that the King is the only
and sole Judge in all Causes; and though he admit his Counselors sometimes to
give their Opinions, yet he follows his own single resolved determinations;
This absolute Power makes him jealous of his Honor, of which he will not
endure the least diminution; His Highest Pomp consists in sitting upon a
Shield, whereby he signifies that he is the Protection and Defense of his
Country, and the Manager of all Wars, pacifying Civil Insurrections, and
other weighty matters belonging to him alone; His Title is Dondagh, which is as
much as Monarch. When any Nobleman is Disobedient, and will not appear upon
Summons, he sends this Koredo or Shield, as if he would upbraidingly say, Be
thou Lord your self, and bear the burden of the Country. This peremptory
command by the Shield is sent by two Drummers, who when they come near the
Offenders Habitation, begin to beat their Drums, and so continue without
ceasing till they have delivered the Shield, upon receipt whereof, he must
speed to Court without delay, carrying the Shield with him, which he presents
to the King, begging forgiveness for his miscarriages, and so taking up the
Earth before the King, humbles himself.

Those that Address to the King for any favor, make their way with Presents of
Ribbons, Elephants Teeth, or such things, which he must deliver at the House of
the Kings chiefest Wife, who carries it to the King, requesting that the Person
may be admitted into his presence; If the King accept it, the Person has leave
to enter, otherwise if any complaints be brought against him, he sends it back,
yet so as the Presenter dares not receive and carry it away, but continues his
Suit by Friends without intermission; by whose frequent and renewed Mediations,
the King at last seeming a little pacified, remits his severity, takes the
Present, and calls for the Suppliant, who entering the Royal Presence, goes
bowing all along toward the King, who sits on the ground upon a Mat, leaning on
a Stool, when he approaches within two steps, he bows himself to the Earth,
kneeling upon one Knee with his right Elbow on the ground, and names the Kings
Title, Dondagh, whereupon the King if pleased Answers, Namady, I thank you, if
not he sits silent. If it be a Person of Quality and his Subject, the King
perhaps causes a Mat to be spread on the ground, upon which sitting at some
distance, he moves his request; But if a Forreigner, who comes only to salute
the King, he is conducted to him without any further Ceremony, and receives an
immediate dispatch; If the Person have any Proposition, Petition, or Complaint
to make, an Interpreter is called, who coming with his Bow in his hand, opens
the whole matter to the King, sentence by sentence, whereto according to the
quality of the Affair he receives Answer, with promise, if upon complaint, that
when he has heard the other party, he will forthwith give Judgment according
to Right.

If any man come to thank the King for doing Exemp^ary Justice in a difficult
Cause, after his Presents rec^ived, he divests himself of all his Cloths and
Ornaments, saving a little Cloth to cover his Virilities, and so casts himself
backward upon the ground, and instantly turning again, rises upon one knee,
takes up Earth with his hand, and lays it upon his head, then leaning with one
Elbow upon the Earth he says three times Dondagh, whereupon the King answers
sometimes Namady, I thank you, and sometimes otherwise as he thinks fit: The
first Address is usually performed in his own House in the presence of ^is
chiefest Wife; but such as concern Justice, or the State of the Country he
hears in the Council House in the presence of his Lords. When some Eminent
Person sent from a Neighbor King, desires Audience, one of the Kings Wives
goes with a Present, and tells him who sent it, whereupon the Person appears
before the King and takes up Earth.

When an Ambassador sent from another Great Prince approaches the Borders, he
gives notice of his coming; whereupon he is ordered to remain in the next Town
till all be made ready which is requisite in the Kings Town, There he is
received with great Triumphs, which consist in exercising with Bows, Arrows,
Lances and Shields, as if they were fighting against Enemies, with great
Drummings and Songs of War; The Sport ended, the King retires to the
Council-House, where after a little stay, inquiry is made if the King may be
saluted; having permission, the Ambassador enters, and kneeling down with his
back to the King, and his Bow in his hand bent to the utmost, he allusively
implys, that he will set himself to the utmost against his Enemies: Mean time
the Ambassadors Followers chant forth his praises, as before the Kings Servants
sung Elogiums to his Honor: These Encomiums they always begin with Polo, Polo
Sammach, and then add, His handiwork is not to be equalled by another man, and
then, I will stick as close as Pitch to him that opposes me. The Council-House
is open on all sides, with great Attendance round about, where he receives this
first Address; After which the Ambassador desires leave to relate his Embassy,
but is put off till next day, so retiring, he diverts himself till the
appointed time in Feasts and Recreations. The Ambassador receives Answer by the
Kings directions from an Interpreter, and then is showed the Apartment for him
and his Retinue, where the Kings Slaves bring them Water to wash, and the Kings
Women being neatly dre^t, in Dishes set on their heads bring Rice and Flesh,
after which the King sends for his VVelcome, Wine and other Presents, as a
Kettle, Basin, or the like. If any European Merchant bring the King a Present,
he is invited to eat with him, but with no Black of what Quality soever will he
eat out of the same Dish, but sends their Meat to them by his Women.

Once a year he makes a Great Feast for the Common People, buying up for that
purpose all the Palm-VVine, and Herds of Cattle, the Heads of which are painted
and hung up in the Kings Chamber, in testimony of his Bounty: He inviteth also
his Neighbor Kings, Captains and Gentlemen, and then prays and sacrifices to
his Fetisso, which is the highest Tree in the Town. The King comes little
abroad; morning and evening, his Slaves blow Trumpets made of Elephants Teeth,
while his Wives anoint and wash his Body: He sits in state holding in his hand
the Tail of an Horse to drive away Flies, adorned with Rings of Gold on his
Arms, Neck and Legs, and Coral Beads wherewith he se^s off his Beard. The Kings
Children must maintain themselves when of Age, the People not liking to
maintain them idle; the King only bestows on them a Marriage-Gift and a Slave;
when he dies, his eldest Brother succeeds in the Throne, and enjoys his Rice,
Fields, Slaves and Women. These People believe that the Almighty whom they call
Kanuo, will punish all their misdeeds, and reward well-doers, and therefore
when oppressed, call for his Aid to do them Justice, continually inculcating,
That there shall a time come when all ill men shall receive their deserts. They
imagine that their Friends after death become Spirits, whom they call Iannanen,
and know all Transactions here below, with whom therefore they hold familiar
Colloquies, acquainting them with all their troubles and adversities; When they
go into the Woods to hunt Elephants, Buffles, or upon any other dangerous
Enterprise, they go first and offer to the Spirit of their deceased Parents,
either a Cow, Wine or Rice, which they leave on the Grave; They suppose them to
reside in the Woods, to whom they address themselves with great complaints and
lamentations when in affliction; where likewise their most Solemn Acts of
Devotion are performed, where no Women nor Children are permitted to come; The
King calls upon the Souls of his Father and Mother in every difficulty.

If a Woman be suspected of Adultery, the complaining Husband desires she may
be delivered up to Iannanen, or the Spirits of his Ancestors, and brings her in
the Evening before the Council, where calling the Spirits to her, she is
blindfolded, admonished to forsake her evil Life, and not to go to any but her
own Husband, and presently a great noise or murmur is raised, as if Spirits did
appear, with some unintelligible (though articulate) sounds, which are
interpreted aloud to the whole Congregation, with threatenings, that if ever she
commit the like offense again, she shall be punished according to her demerits,
and with her Paramour, be carried away by Iannanen, to whom yet none are
delivered up but upon clear evidence of their Guilt; to which end they have a
Water of Cursing or Divination wherewith they extort the Truth in all doubtful
matters, compounded of Barks and Herbs boiled together, which when it is
enough, the Priest repeats secretly the names of the suspected persons, or
other matters to which the Witchcraft must be applied, and then washes the Legs
and Arms of those accused with fair Water; after this he puts his Divining
Staff, which is bruised and tusted at the end, into the Pot, and drops or
presses the Water out of it upon the Arm or Leg of the suspected Person,
muttering these words over it, If he be guilty of this or that, then let this
Water sc^ld or burn him till the very Skin come off. If the Party remain
unhurt, they judge him innocent, and proceed to the Trial of another till they
have discovered the Criminal, who being found, the Executioner instantly leads
him bound and blindfold into a Field or Wood, and placing him on his Knees with
his Head bowed down, he first runs him through the Body with a Scimetar, and
then c^ops off his Head with an Ax, for they do not believe he is dead till his
Head is off; The Carcass cut into four quarters, after great lamentations, they
leave in the Field as a Prey to the Beasts and Fowls, but the Friends take away
the Head as a great Present, and boiling it in a Kettle, drink up the Broth,
hanging the Scull by their Fetisso or Idol. The like Trial is made of other
offenses among the Blacks, so that every one had need be very careful to
prevent suspicion.

V. Commenda.
THis Fort is Four Square strongly built of Stone. It has Twenty Guns, and
Fourscore Europeans to defend it, with many Negro's and Mulatto's.

Some time since Mendino the King of Manou died, whose Subjects and Favorites
made strict inquiry according to Custom, how he came by his end, but the
narrowest of their scrutinies not being able to make any discovery, they were
forced to acquiesce, yet had such an inveterate hatred against Manimassah, his
Brother, that they forced him to the Trial, which seeing no other Remedy, he
underwent without any hurt, as a remarkable sign of his Innocence; whereupon he
demanded to be restored to his former Honor and Credit, but instead thereof,
the Tryers told him, The King in his Life time was our Common Father, and
should not we after his death endeavor to find out what caused him to dye it
were a great shame for us; we have examined and tried you but it shall not
remain so, we will look farther into the business, and make the Southsayers
acquainted with it; Manimassah mad at these inhumane usages, burst forth at
last into these words; This shame is not to be suffered from my own Subjects in
my own Country, I will go under the Conduct of the Spirits of my deceased
Friends, and seek a dwelling place. In this manner leaving his Native Country,
he traveled Northward into Gala, inhabited by a mean and simple People, and
won so upon them by his endearing behavior, that they unanimously besought him
to be their Prince, to which he consented upon condition, That they should give
him some of their Plants and Venison for an acknowledgement of their
subjection. This they yielded to, but such was their brutish Barbarism, that
though they owned him their Lord, they used him as there Companion, for being
wholly unacquainted with Civility, when any of them brought him Wine, Rice or
Flesh, they came again to him to require their Callibashes or Basquets, which
unmannerly clownish behavior, Manimassah so resented, that he withdrew from
them, to require assistance from Flansire King of Folgia, whose Daughter he had
Married, to reduce the Gala's to his Authority.

The King hearing the request of his Son in Law, lent him many Soldiers under
the Conduct of Flonikerry his General, who unexpectedly fell into Gala, and
subdued the People, settling Manimassah in an absolute Dominion, who has ever
since continued their Prince, and taught them with sorrow more respective
qualities; after this, Flonikerry returned to Folgia, where he was received and
welcomed with great applause, and the King willing to gratify him for his
honest performances, he according to Flonikerrys Petition, gave him leave to go
and Conquer, and settle himself and his People in Cabo Monte an adjacent
Country, expressing his kindness in saying, I shall do the desire of his
Heart. He with a considerable force Marching toward this place, the Inhabitants
being numerous and courageous, were not soon subdued, but at length tired with
the continual onsets of their Enemies, who shot poisoned Arrows; which made all
wounds though never so slight prove Mortal, a fatal Invention unknown to these
People, they went with their Hoods upon their Heads as usual, to ask favor,
which Flonikerry naturally inclined to pity, easily granted, bidding them go
lie down with their Faces upon the ground, then coming out of his Fort he trod
upon them with his feet; He then made an Agreement with them some Hens being
killed in the presence of them all, of whose Blood the Conquered swallowed a
little, as a token of Friendship. Afterward the Hens were boiled, and the Flesh
eaten among them, only the Legs were kept for a perpetual Remembrance, for if
any Man after that time broke his promise, to him were the Legs shown, who upon
sight thereof soon reca^ted for fear of the punishment that would follow.

Flonikerry overjoyed at his success; for assuring his new Dominion, sought to
win the minds of the vanquished to him, and to contract a firm League with the
Lords of his own Country. But scarce were the minds of the Nobility united,
when Miminique Son of Manimassah, with a great Army of Gala's, and others make
War upon him, of whose design his Father was not ignorant, having forgot the
kindness received from Flonikerrys Arms in settling him in his new acquired
Dominions; Flonikerry drew together his Forces, to whom the Nobles joining
theirs, he formed a considerable Army; wherewith marching toward the Enemy,
they came to a Battle, wherein by the multitude of their Enemies, they were at
first put to a disorderly retreat, which Flonikerry who was of an undaunted
Spirit perceiving, dug with his hand a hole in the ground, and put his Knees
in it, with a resolution either to die there, or to remain Conqueror; so after
a long and sharp contest being even covered with Arrows, he was slain on the
spot. However his Men to revenge their Princes death, rallied and gave a fresh
charge with such fury, that they turned the Fortune of the day, and became sole
Masters of the Field.

The death of Flonikerry, was kept secret till they sent for his Brother
Zillimanque to take his charge, who accepting the same, pursued the Victory,
and drew near the Enemies Camp, which he soon surprised, and gave as a spoil to
his Soldiers; After which he marched farther, the People all along yielding
subjection without blows, whereby they soon became Masters of the whole
Country, and gained the reputation of a Mighty People; After which he was
poisoned, as was thought, leaving behind him several Sons who were young, and
not capable to manage their Fathers Conquests. However, Flansire his eldest was
admitted Successor, during whose Minority his Uncle Iemmah undertook the
Government, but Flansire growing to years, took the Royal Authority into his
own hands, and to show that he inherited as well his Fathers Valor as
Countries, resolves to enlarge his bounds yet farther, and to that end marched
with his Forces over the River Galinas or Hens, taking all the adjacent places
as far as Sierra Leona, and placing Garrisons therein: having settled his new
Conquests, he returned to his own Native Principality, where he spent a good
part of his Life in peace and quietness, when on a sudden there came News from
Sierra Liona that Kandaqualla his Governor was driven out thence, and forced
to fly with all his People to the Islands of Bannaneo, not being able to
withstand Falma of Dogo, who with a mighty Force invaded them; Flansire
startled at this intelligence, and knowing nothing more necessary than
expedition, sent to the Lords, his Substitutes, to raise an Army and meet him
at an appointed Randezvouz; but they having made a private Confederacy with
Gamina their Master Flansires Brother, neglected and slighted his Commands.
Flansire, ignorant of this Combination, leaving the Government of his Kingdom,
Wives and Children to his treacherous Brother Gamina, marched with his eldest
Son Flambore the present King of Quoia, not doubting the Fidelity of his
Provincials: He went first by Land to the River of Hens, and from thence in
Canoes to the Isles of Bananes, to take with him his People who were driven
from Sierra Leona, and so bringing them back thither, he began a sharp War with
Falma.

This Falma had been formerly in great favor with the King of Dogo, or Hondo,
but having debauched one of his Wives, the King was so offended, that not
content it should, as usual, be bought off with Gifts or Slaves, he caused his
Ears to be out off, and banished him his presence, but length of time so wore
out the Kings Fury, that Falma was again admitted to Court, where he soon began
to show his Insolence, and at length addressed the King in these Terms; Sir King,
considering the wickedness committed against you my Lord and Master, I am
obliged to thank you for your gracious Sentence by which I am punished, whereby
every one that looks upon me derides and scorns me, and the rather because the
punishment is unusual, and the like offense customarily bought off with Goods
and Slaves: Now as you were pleased to punish me, so I desire the like offense
in others may be punished in the same manner. It may happen that some of the
Kings Servants or Subjects may fall into the same Lapse, but if this Sentence
be either denied, or not performed, I shall complain against my Lord the King
in the Ways and in the Woods to the Jannanen and Belli, that is, to all the
Spirits and Demons. The King having heard this audacious Speech,
notwithstanding this seeming Threat, determined that the punishment inflicted
on him should not follow upon all: But yet to pacify him, he made him General
of an Army to recover Sierra Leona out of the hands of Kandaqualla, who
presided there for Flansire.

To repel this Invader Flansire as we said coming to Sierra Leona with an Army,
and making sharp War, at length by the help of some Europeans he fell upon the
Town of Falmahah, and with Axes cutting down the Treewall, at last they forced
an entrance, and set the Houses on fire, whose fury soon increased to an
impossibility of being quenched, whereupon Falma unable to resist, fled, whom
young Flambore pursued, and though he mist him, yet got great Reputation, the
People stiling him, The Pursuer of Falma. Flansire having reconquered these
Countries, and settled Kandaqualla, retreated with his Forces, intending to
return to his Wife and Children; But on the way he had notice, that his Brother
Gamana had usurped his Kingdom, killed all his Sons he could meet with, taken
his Wives for himself, and had set up his Residence at a convenient place near
the River of Hens, to intercept and hinder his Brothers approach; this
Rebellion of his Brother was attended with the Invasion of Manou, who dwelt
near Cape Miserado. They fell into his Country at Cape de Monto, where they
burnt the Town, and led away all they met with for Slaves. Flansire
understanding these mischiefs, marched toward the River Maqualbary with all
speed, complaining to the Kanou and Iananies (that is, to God and the Angels)
of his distress in these words, To you it is known, that my Father left me
rightful Heir to his Kingdom, which falls to me by the Laws of the Land, seeing
I was the eldest: You likewise know that my Brother has rebelled against me,
and has set himself up to be Lord, be you Judges between him and me in this
intended Fight, and if the Cause be unjust that he manages against me, let the
mischief fall upon his own head.

Then he passed with all his Soldiers over the River, where the Armies met,
and his Brother with great numbers of men being slain, he obtained a complete
Victory, but still kept the Field, to be ready against any other appearing
Rebels, his Son Flambore went with a Squadron of Soldiers into the Woods to
hunt Civit Cats, and being by his sports got far into them, they discovered
some of the Rebels busy in burying the dead body of Gamana the Usurper, who
perceiving Flambore and his Followers, fled, imagining he had come to search
them out, and left the Corpse, with three Slaves in Chains, whom they intended
to have dispatch at his Grave: Being by this means assured of Gamana's death,
when they least expected it, they brought the three Slaves to Flansire, who
having understood how all things stood in the Country, he sent them to their
Fellow-Rebels to admonish them to come and ask his pardon, and that he would
forget their misdeeds; which wrought the desired Effect, for the Rebels
submitted, and received their Pardon. King Flansire then marched to Cape
Miserado and reduceing Monou, with great slaughter and spoil of the Country,
retired home with his Forces, Monou made a New Insurrection to revenge the
Losses of Falma, but was again totally subdued by Flansires People.

VI. Cape Coast Castle.
THis Castle is a strong Regular Fortification consisting in Four Bulwarks,
Seaventy Guns, and Two Hundred and Fifty men.

In the Principality of Anten near Tekorari, the Hollanders built a Fort, which
in 1664. was attaqued by Sir Robert Holms in behalf of the Royal African
Company, with two of the Kings Men of War, six Frigates, and some other Ships,
and by them with no great difficulty won, but regained the next year by Admiral
De Ruyter, being at that time only manned by four or five in health, and as
many sick Englishmen, having in it seven Iron Guns, and six or eight Pounders.
Upon the retaking, the Guns being drawn off to the Ship, De Ruyter caused it,
as not being tenable, without many People and great Charges, to be blown up
into the Air, and totally dismantled. In the mean time the Negro's of the Mine
plundered the Village of Tekorari, and laid it waste with Fire and Sword, out
of malice to the Blacks of that place, exercising great Cruelty upon the
Prisoners, cutting off their Heads, wherewith they went dancing and leaping up
and down, and at last carried them home in token of Victory; they were well
Armed according to the Country fashion, some having Caps like Helmets, adorned
with feathers and Horns of Beasts, and Swords hanging on their Bellies, whereon
instead of Handles they put the Bones of Lions, Tigers, and other Beasts, their
Faces are generally painted with Red and Yellow, which make a terrible sight.

In the Kingdom of Fet^ the Hollanders have a Fort called Cape Corso,
strengthened with great Guns, and manned with a strong Garrison of Slaves, but
in 1664. this with the Forts of Tekorari aforementioned, Adia, and Anemabo were
taken by Sir Robert Holmes for the Royal African Company, but when De Ruyter in
1665. with the Dutch Fleet had forced the English Fort Cormantyn, he spared
neither diligence nor cost to regain Cape Corso then in the English possession,
and the rather because John Valkenberge the Dutch Commander there, judged it
dangerous that any place in that Country should be left in the hands of the
English, alleging that if during the Wars in Europe they were expelled thence,
by consequence they might easily be kept out, whereas by the holding of this
place, they had an opportunity to settle their Jurisdiction in the Country
again, and in defiance of their Power might defend it against them: But finding
the Natives sided with the English, threatening Fire and Sword, having also
possessed themselves of a place, where a hundred men might beat off a thousand,
it was judged not feasible, without great danger, and the design was laid aside.

VII. Fort Royal.
THis Fort was demolished by the War, and is now repairing. It will be very
Strong, all built of Stone, with Sixteen Guns, and Forty White Men, besides
Blacks and Mulatto's.

In the Kingdom of Fantyn, the chief Town upon the Seaco^ts ^led Cormantyn is
the principal place of Trade, situate upon a high Mountain; it is the most
delightful prospect upon the whole Coast. In 1665. Feb. 8. Cormantyn was
attaqued by the Dutch, the manner thus; The Holland Fleet coming to Anchor Feb.
6. westward of Cormantyn, the next day they got four or five hundred Canoes
with Negro's from the Castle Del Mine, with which well manned they departed
from the Fleet, intending to land at Anemabo, but were upon their approach,
saluted by the Negro's of Cormantyn, who lay behind the clifts and bushes with
Muskets and Cannon, playing from the Fort with such fury that they were forced
to retreat. This Enterprise was twice reattempted upon hopes of having the
Negro's side with them, but without success, however they came at last to a
more strict alliance with the Negro's, who for security of their Faith
delivered several Hostages into their hands; and the design was to be executed
with the first opportunity; Having pitched on a time, at Night a Negro called
Antonio, came in a Canoe sent by the Inhabitants of Fantyn, declaring that the
People about Anemabo, and Adja could not be ready at the appointed hour, but in
the Morning they would not fail of their promised assistance, adding that early
in the Morning at the new cast up Fort of Adja the Prince of Oranges flag
should be set up, upon which sign the Dutch might land with their whole Force.
This concluded, the chief Commanders of the fleet resolved the following
Morning tomake the onset, yet before hand sent a Letter to the English
Commander in chief, requiring the surrender of the Fort without opposition.
Accordingly at eight a Clock in the Morning, the Princes flag being raised upon
the new erected Fort of Adja, they lanched through with much hazard near the
same fort, and marched in order along the Shote with three thousand Negro's,
every one with a Linen Cloth about his Neck to distinguish them from other
Blacks, and came about Noon to Anemabo, drawing forth about a Musket shot
westward of Cormantyn, to a Hill planted with three Pieces of Ordnance, where
they found stout opposition; but at length overpowered they fled, and then the
Hollanders entered the Town and set it on fire, the flame and Smoke whereof
suddenly surprised the Garrison in the Castle, insomuch that as soon as they
saw the Soldiers with scaling Ladders, hand Grenades, and other Utensils of
War under their Walls, they took down the red Flag from the Tower, and
immediately as it were without a stroke delivered it up. Into this Castle were
Soldiers out of the Castle of Mine instantly put to secure it; To the subduing
this Fort, the Hollanders were not a little animated by the promise of
assistance from the Natives of Fantyn, which they purchased of them as we
hinted before, for fifty two Bars of Gold, to the value of two thousand five
hundred Pound English Money.

VIII. Annamabo.
THis is a strong Fort built with Brick and Stone; The Walls are Twenty four
foot high. It has fourteen Guns, and Thirty white men, besides Natives to
guard it. This Fort lies half a Mile West from Cormantyn, one half whereof is
inhabited by the Fishermen of the Mine, and the other by those of Fantyn; At
Cannon shot distance West from this lies Adja, where the Dutch had a Fort taken
by the English in 1664. and by them kept till the attempt upon Cormantyn, when
they blew it up with Gunpowder by Stratagem, for having laid an heap of Earth
at the Mine, they ^ntended when any came thereon with hopes of plunder, to have
blown them up by springing the Mine, but little harm was done, however the
English in the mean time left the place and retreated to Cormantyn. Between
Adja and Anemabo lies a Town called Ianasia, where the English have a Fort. The
principal places of Trade lying near the sea and frequented by the Whites are
Cormantyn and Ademabo, the former having been the chief place of the English
upon this Coast for some years, where they got the best sort of Goods, and
enjoyed most friendship, for the support whereof, they built that Fort planted
with forty two Pieces of Ordnance, and fortified with four Bulwarks. The King
keeps his residence in the Town of Fantyn, and extends his Jurisdiction about
ten or twelve Miles round, being able in time of War to bring eight or ten
thousand men into the Field.

IX. Winnebah.
THis is a Regular Fortification strongly built of stone. It has 18 Guns, and
50 Europeans besides slaves to defend it.

These Countries produce variety of Creatures, and among others, Tigers and
Leopards, who bear great enmity to each other, though generally the Tiger is
the Conqueror, therefore when the Leopard is pursued by the Tiger, he with his
Tail wipes out his footsteps that so he may not be traced. Some of the Ancients
knowing the fierceness of the Tiger, attributed to him the command of the
Woods, but in these Parts, because he hurts no man but only Beasts, they make
the Leopard King of the Forest, for which ravening temper they are hunted and
killed by all Men, even for their own safety. When a Leopard is killed they
bring him dead to the Kings Town, there to be cut up and eaten, being flayed
they present his Skin and Teeth to the King, and the People assembled, eat the
Flesh boiled as a dainty, spending the remainder of the day in Revelling and
Dancing, as at their most Solemn Festivals. There is likewise a monstrous
Creature which the Portugals call Salvage, that is a Satyr, it has a great
head, a heavy body, fleshy and strong arms, no tail, and goes sometimes
upright, and otherwhile upon all four like an Ape. The Blacks affirm it is of
Humane Race, but by the alteration and change of the Woods and Wil^erness it is
become half a Beast, they sustain themselves in the Woods with Fruit and wild
Honey, which they get out of the Trees, and as they are numerous, so upon
meeting, they fight continually with each other. The Negro's relate strange
things of them, and aver for certain, that they not only overpower feeble Women
and Virgins, but dare also set upon armed Men. There is another strange Beast,
like a Crocodile six or seven Foot long, very slender, and the Tongue of an
extraordinary length. It is a Beast of Prey, and very strong, close set with
gaudy Quills over the whole body, wherewith it offends Men, and defends it self
against other Creatures, for when the Leopard attempts to seize it, it converts
into a round Ball, setting up the points of its Quills that no hold can be
fixed, their Food is generally Pismires, which with their Tongues they lick up
at a great distance.

Both on the Sea coasts, and the upland Country many Civet Cats are found, it
more resembles a Wolf than a Cat, for it has a long Head, small Nose, flat
Mouth, and short Ears, Teeth like a Dog, the Body part white, part ashcolour'd,
speckled with black spots, the Legs and Feet of a middle size, with black
Hairs, having four Claws forward and one backward, with black short flat Nails,
the Tail long, bushy and speckled hanging to the ground; The Civet lies between
the Privities and the Cods, and is taken thence with a spoon. The Giraffa or
Camelo-pard is a Beast not often seen, yet very tame, strangely compounded of a
Libard, Heart, Buffle and Camel, and by reason of his long legs before and
shorter behind, is not able to-graze without difficulty, but with his high
Head, which he can stretch forth half a Pikes length in height, feeds on the
leaves and boughs of Trees The Camels in Africa are more hardy than in other
places and will not only carry great burdens; but travel fifty days together
without any Corn, only turn them out at night to feed on Thistles, Boughs, and
the like, and no less patient are they of Thirst, being able to endure fifteen
days without Drink. The Lions in cold places are gentler, in hotter more
fierce, and will not fly the approach of two hundred Armed Horsemen; in time
of their coupling eight or ten will follow one Female, with bloody Battles
among themselves: They report that Lions spare those who kneel to them, and
prey rather on Men than Women, and not at all on Infants, unless compelled by
hunger. The Africans believe he has understanding, and tell of a Getulian
Woman, who lying at the mercy of a Lion, besought him, that being so noble a
Beast, he would not dishonor himself with so ignoble a Prey, as a weak Woman,
whereupon he went away and left her: His Tail seems to be his Scepter, whereby
he expresses his Passion; he shrinks at no danger, unle^s the covert of the
Woods shroud him from Witnesses, and then he will take the benefit of flight,
which otherwise he seems to disdain. Mentor a Man of Syracuse was encountered
with a Lion, who instead of rending, fawned upon him, and with his dumb
eloquence, seemed to implore his Aid showing his Foot, wherein Mentor perceived
a Thorn to stick, which he plucked out. The like is reported by Gellius of a
fugitive Servant, who having performed the same kind Office to a Lion, was by
him gratified for a long time by giving him a daily portion of his prey: It
happened afterward this Man was taken, and presented to his Master a Roman
Senator, who exhibited Games to the People, wherein Slaves and condemned
Persons were exposed to the fury of Beasts, among whom he put this Servant, and
by a wonderful fate this Lion was soon after taken, and brought to execute
these horrid Spectacles. The Beasts running with violence to their bloody
Encounter, suddenly this Lion stayed, and taking a strict view of him, ^awned
upon his Guest, and defended him from the Assaults of the other Beasts,
whereupon at the Peoples Intercession, who understood the Passages from him, he
was freed, and the Lion given him, who followed him with a string through the
Streets, the Spectators crying, This is the Man who was the Lions Physician;
This is the Lion who was this Man's Host.

The Hyaena is another strange Beast which some have thought to be Male one
year, and Female another, it has no Joint in the Neck, and so stirs not his
Head, but the whole Body at once; He is said to imitate the Voice of Men, and
having heard the name of some of the Shepherds, will call him, and when he
comes devour him: They say his Eyes are of various Colors, and that his shadow
prevents the barking of a Dog: By ingendring with this Beast, the Lioness
brings forth a Corcuta of like qualities with the Hyaena, he has one continued
Tooth without division throughout his Mouth. The Lybard is not hurtful to Men
except they disturb him. The Dabu is said to be a foolish Creature, in shape
like a Wolf, only his Legs and feet are like a Man's; they that know his haunts,
sing and fiddle before his Den, his Ears being so captivated with the Music,
that he is not aware his Legs are captivated with a Rope, whereby he is taken.
The Zebra exceeds all Creatures in beauty, resembling a fine Horse, but not so
swift, with curious party-colours, from Head to Tail, they live in great
Herds, and when one is shot, the rest stand still, gazing till they see three
or four fall down before them.

The Rivers breed Water Elephants, as big as a large Horse, but much thicker
and rounder, seeming as if they were blown up; likewise Sea-Cats, and other
monstrous Creatures. There are fowls of diverse kinds, as Eagles, Parrots,
Cranes, and a Bird like a Thrush, by whose chirping they guess at their good or
ill fortune in their Journey, Crocodiles are so large that they will swallow an
Ox whole; but above all the monstrous Serpents are remarkable, among which the
most poisonous are of a Grass Green: Some are so curiously spotted with lively
Colors as are scarce to be found in any other Creatures. The King of Benin,
whom the Inhabitants call King of Serpents, keeps commonly one in his Arms,
which he strokes and fosters as it were a young Child, and so highly esteems,
that none dare hurt it. The Negroes roast and eat some of them as great
Dainties. Africa has been famous in all Ages for prodigious Serpents and
Monsters. One called Minia is so large, that it can swallow a whole Deer
without chewing devouring Boars and other Beasts, It l^rks for Prey within some
bush, which coming within reach it suddenly seizes, winding two or three times
about the body and loins, till it falls down and dies, of which being glutted,
he lie^, not able to stir till his gorged Paunch has digested his Meal: Of this
kind was that which Attilius Regulus the Roman Consul in the first Punick War
at the River Bagrada encountered, and planted his Engines and Artillery against
it, whose skin sent to Rome, was in length an hundred and twenty Foot; the
scales defended it from Darts or Arrows, and with the Breath it killed many,
and eat diverse Soldiers, till at last with a Stone out of an Engine this
destroyer was destroyed. Hear how the elegant Lucan, as eloquently translated
describes it, when Julius Caesar in pursuit of Cato into Africa came to the
place which was formerly the habitation of this dreadful Serpent, and had this
account given him by an African.

Caesar within a shady Grove espies
A dismal Cave in which no chearing light,
At all ere peeped: but sad and doleful Night
A squalid filth, and mouldiness had made.
From whence exhaled steams and fumes invade
The upper Air; Whilst Caesar in amaze
Does nearly view the horror of the place
His longing thoughts an African there by
(Taught by Tradition) thus does satisfy.
This Den O Caesar which for many a year
Has empty stood and freed the Land from fear,
A monstrous Serpent by Heavens Vengeance bred
The plague of Africa, once uninhabited.
The Earth a greater Monster never bare
Not Hydra might with this dire Snake compare,
Nor though the Sun the mighty Python slew,
Did ere the Sun a greater Serpent view.
The several Snakes that out of Africks slime
Are bred, might all have been in him combined,
An hundred Feet in length was his extent;
When he upon this side the River went
With his long neck stretched out, what ere ^e spied
With ease he seized from the other side.
With Lions here he filled his hungry maw,
That came to drink the streams of Bagrada,
And fiercest Tigers all besmeared with Blood
Of Cattle slain, became themselves his Food.
When first the Roman Armies Sailing over,
And threatening Carthage on the Africa shore
Were led by Regulus, whose Tragic fall
Sadly renowned the Spartan General,
Here then this hideous Monster did remain;
The Army marching on yon spacious Plain,
Three Roman Soldiers by ill Fate drew near
To quench their fiery thirst in the River here,
And tempted by these shady Trees, to shun
A while the scorching fury of the Sun
Entering the Wood, down to the stream they stoop.
And in their Helmets take the Water up,
When suddenly surpised with chilling fear
A horrid hissing through the Air they hear
And from the Den the Serpents Head appears
At once amazing both their Eyes and Ears
What should they do? For help they could not call
The Serpents hissing loud had filled all
The VVood; nor strength nor Hearts had they to fight
Nor scarce did any hope appear by flight,
Nor could their trembling hands the Helmets hold,
When straight the Serpent from his scaly fold
Shot forth, and seized one, who calling on
His fellows names in vain, was swallowed down
And buried in the Monsters hungry maw.
His horrid destiny when the others saw
They leapt into the stream to save their lives,
But that alas to them no safety gives.
For forth his long twined Neck the Serpent stretched,
And swimming Havens in the River reached
Who though too late, he strived to be drowned
In Bagrada, a Fate more cruel found.
Marus at last, while Havens death did stay
The Monsters speed, had time to escape away,
And to the amazed General relates
The Serpents greatness, and his Fellows Fates.
But ere his faltring Tongue had fully told
The Tragic story, they from far behold
The scaly Monster rouling on the Sands
In spacious windings; Regulus commands,
The Army straight their Piles and Spears prepare
To charge and march against it as a War,
And ready all their Battering Engines make
That strongest VValls and Bulwarks used to shake;
The Trumpets then as to a Battle sound;
Which Noise the Serpent hearing, from the ground,
Where he in spa^ious Rings infolded lay,
Aloft his Head advances to survey
The Champion round, and to their Eyes appears
Large as the Dragon 'twixt the Heavenly Bears,
Fire from his threatening Eyes like lightning shot,
And hellish blasts exhaled from his wide Throat
While he advanced, you would suppose from far
A moving Castle made offensive War.
And shooting forth, he in a moment flew
Upon far distant faces; At whose view
The startling horses could no more be held
By bits, but snorting flew about the field,
Whilst this dread Serpent sad Massacres makes
Amongst the men; some 'twixt his Jaws he takes
And crushes there; some into the Air he flings
Who falling dye; and while his spacious Rings
He does unfold with fury, sweeping round
The Sand, he beats whole Cohorts to the ground,
The Army now gave ground, and 'gain retire
When Noble Regulus inflamed with Ire
To see this shame, cries out, Oh stand the Field,
To Africa Monsters shall Romes Virtue yield?
If so, I singly will the combat try,
And expi^ting Romes dishonor dye.
Then all alone, devoyd of fear he goes,
And his strong Pile against the Serpent throws
With skilful Aim, whom not in vain he struck
In his tough forehead the steeled Javelin struck,
The hideous Monster whose long Age before
Had nere felt steel, sent out a yelling rore,
And darting forth, impatient of the Wound
With his long Tail he lasht the suffering ground,
A shout the Soldiers raise, encouraged now
And altogether storms of Javelins throw,
Some harmless lighting on his Scaly Back
Such noise as Hail on tiled Houses make,
Some pierce his Breast, and softer Belly Wound,
Those parts alone they penetrable found,
Black gore from thence distains the swarthy Sands,
At last two Javelins sent from lucky Hands
In both his fiery threatening Eyes did light,
Depriving him, though not of strength, of sight;
Whose yet blind rage draws many a ruin on,
Until at last a huge and massy stone,
Shot from a Bulwark battering Engine stroke
His bowed Back with such gteat force, it broke
That many jointed Bone; Nor then could he
Lift as before his speckled Crest on high;
But as he struggling lay upon the plain,
Another Stone dash't out his poisonous Brain,
The Sands discolored with black filth appear,
And that so lately feared Serpent, there
Stretched out at length, his dismal Life expires,
His vast extent the General admires.
Some parts of Africa produce Dragons, of vast bulk, slow motion, and their
stinging incurable; some are said to be as big as a Ram with Wings, long Tail,
and diverse rows of Teeth in his Mouth, his scales seem painted with blew and
green, has two Feet, and feeds upon raw Flesh; another Serpent has a rundle
in his Tail like a Bell, that makes a noise as he goes, somewhat like the
Rattle-Snake. There are a multitude of deadly Serpents in those Countries, as
the Ceraestes which has a little Coronet of four horns, whereby ^he allureth
the Birds to him, hiding all but his Head in the Sands, and then devoureth
them: The Iaculi so called because they dart from Trees on such Creatures as
pass by. The Amphisbena has two Heads which causes it to crawl round. The
Scytale is admirable for variety of Colors. The Dips^ kills those she stings
with Thirst. The Hypanale causes them to sleep to death, as happened to
Cleopatra Queen of Egypt. The Hemorrhois makes them bleed to death. The Prester
occasions them to swell till they burst; And not to poison you with more names
of venomous Creatures, the Basilisk is said to kill with her sight or hissing,
as Galen and Solinus affirm, it is not half a Foot long, having on the Head
three pointles like a Crown or Bishops Miter, it blasteth the ground, herbs and
Trees, and so infecteth the Air, that Birds flying over fall down dead, it
affrights all other Serpents with the hissing, going upright from the Belly; if
it kill any thing that is also venomous to such as touch it, only a Weasil
kills it; The Bergameni bought the Carcass of one at an incredible price, which
they hung up in their Temple, (that was curiously painted by Apelles,) in a Net
of Gold, to preserve it from Birds or Spiders; Lemnius affirms that from an Egg
laid by an old Cock after he is past treading of Hens, is produced a Basilisk
or Cockatrice. The various kinds of Serpents in Africa, and the tremendous
effects of them upon Mankind are described by Lucan, lib. 9. relating the March
of Cato's Army over the burning Sands of Libia.

THe venomous Asp appears with swelling head,
Which in no Serpent is compacted more.
In scaly folds the great Hemorrhus lies
Whose bite from all Parts draws the flowing blood.
The Pareas whose way his Tail does guide
The greedy Prester too, distending wide
His venom-foaming Mouth. The Seps whose bite
Consumes the Bones, dissolves the Body quite.
The Basilisk whose hiss all Snakes do scare
(Hurtful before the Venom touch) who far
All Vulgar Serpents from his sight commands,
Reigning alone upon the empty d Sands,
You Dragons too, glistring in Golden Pride,
Who hurtless wander in all Lands beside.
You, Africa mortal Snakes; Aloft you fly,
Through the Air on Wings, and follow speedily,
The Herds; your strokes the mightiest Bulls destroy
Great Elephants escape you not; for you all kill,
Nor need you Poisons help to work your will.
This thirsty way among these venomed Snakes
Cato amidst his hardy Soldiers takes,
Where many losses of his Men be found,
And deaths unlook't for, from a little Wound.
A trodden Dipsas turning back his Head
Did sting young Aulus Ensign bearer bred
Of Tyrrhene Race, no grief no pa^n ensued,
His Wound no pity found, no danger showed,
But yet alas, did fiery Venom deep
Into his Marrow and scorcht entrails creep,
Which quite drunk up all Moisture that should flow
Into his vital Parts, his Palate now
And Tongue is scorch't and dry, no sweat could go
To his tired Joints, from's Eyes no Tears could flow.
His place, nor his sad Generals command
Could stay this thirsty Man; Out of his Hand
He throws his Ensign, Water runs to have
Which the dry Venom in his heart did crave.
Though he in midst of Tanais did lie
Padus or Rodanus, he would be dry,
Or drink the streams where ever Nilus flows.
The Soil adds to his drowth, the Worm does lose
His Venoms fame helped by so hot a Land.
He digs and seeks each vein in all the Sand.
Now to the Syrts he goes, and in his Mouth
Salt water takes; which could not quench his drowth
Although it pleased; He did not know what kind
Of death he died, nor his disease could find
But thinks it thirst, And now full fain he would
Rip open all his Veins, and drink his Blood.
Cato commands them (loath his men should stay
To know what thirst was,) straight to march away,
But a more woeful death before his Eye
Appeared; A Seps on poor Sabellus Thigh
Hung by the Teeth, which he straight with his hands
Cast off, and with his Pile nailed to the Sands.
A little Snake, but none more full than she
Of horrid death, the Flesh falls off that nigh
The Wound did grow; The Bones are bared round
Without the Body naked shows the Wound,
His Shanks fall off, matter each member fills,
His Knees are barred, his groin black filth distills,
And every muscle of his Thighs dissolves,
The skin that all his natural Parts involves,
Breaking lets fall his Bowels, nor does all
That should remain of a dead body fall,
The cruel Venom eating all the Parts,
All to a little poysnous filth converts
The Poison breaks his Nerves, his Ribs does part,
Opens his hollow breast, there shows his heart,
His Vitals all, yea all that man composes
And his whole nature this foul death discloses,
His head, Neck, Shoulders, and strong Arms do slow
In venomous filth; Not sooner melts the Snow
By hot South winds, nor wax against the Sun.
This is but small I speak; burnt bodies run
Melted by Fire in filth; but what Fire ere
Dissolved the bones? no bones of his appear,
Following their putrid Juice, they leave no sign
Of this swift death; The Palm is only thine
Of all the Africa Snakes; The soul take they,
But thou alone the Carcass take away.
But lo a death quite contrary to it
Marsian Nafidius an hot Praester bit
Whose face and cheeks a sudden Fire did Roast
His flesh and skin was strech't, his shape was lost.
His swelling body is distended far
Past humane growth, and undistinguisht are
His Limbs; All parts the poison does confound,
And he lies hid in his own body drowned,
Nor can his Armor keep his swollen growth in
Not more does boiling water rise within
A brazen Caldron, nor are sails more swelled
With western winds; No Limb he now can weil'd.
A Globe deformed he is, an heap confused,
Which ravening Beasts did s^are, which Birds refused
To which his Friends dust do no Obsequy
Nor touch; but from the growing Carcass fly.
These Serpents yet present more horrid sights'
A fierce Hemorrhus Noble Tullus bites,
A brave young man that studied Cato's worth,
And as in pouncing of a Picture, forth
Through every hole the pressed Saffron goes
So from his every part red poison flows
For blood; his Tears were blood, from every pore
Where Nature vented moisture heretofore,
His Mouth, his Nose flows blood; his sweat is red,
His running veins; All parts are bloodied,
And his whole body's but one wound become.
An Aspes sharp sting did Levus heart benum,
No pain he felt; surpised with sudden sleep
He died, descending to the Stygian deep.
On an old stump a dartlike Snake did lie
Which as from thence her self she nimbly threw
Through Paulus Head, and wounded Temples flew,
'Twas not the Poison brought his Fate, the blow
It self caused death; to her compared slow
Fly stones from slings, and not so swift as she
From Parthian bows do winged Arrows flee.
What helped it wretched Murrus that he did
Kill a fierce Basilisk? The poison slid
Along his Spear, and fastened on his hand
Which he cut off, and then did safely stand
With that hands loss, viewing securely there
The sad example of his death so near, etc.
Ostriches in Africa keep in great Companies, and appear afar off like Troops
of Horsemen, putting a ridiculous terror into the Caravans of Merchants, it
seems to be a foolish bird that forgets her Nest, and leaves her Eggs for
the sun and sand to hatch, she eats any thing even the hardest Iron, and is
said to be Deaf. Another bird bigger than a Crane soars so high in the Air that
his great body is invisible, yet from thence espieth his Prey and falls down
directly upon it, he lives so long that all his Feathers fall away by Age, and
then is fed by his young ones. Locusts or Grasshoppers do here often renew the
Egyptian Plague, coming in such vast numbers that like a Cloud they intercept
the Sun, and having eaten the fruits and leaves, they leave their spawn behind,
who are worse than themselves, devouring the very barks of the naked Trees.
Orosius says, that one time after they had done all this mischief, they did
worse by their deaths, for being carried by a strong wind into the Sea, and
again cast up dead on the Shore, their putrified Carcases caused such a
Pestilence, that in Numidia only there died eight hundred thousand, and on the
Sea coast near Utica and Carthage two hundred thousand. In some places they
forced the People to leave the Country, it being so desert and destroyed that
they left nothing to sustain them, and looked as if it had snowed by reason of
the Trees without barks; The fields of Maiz were as if trodden down after a
Tempest of Rain and Thunder; they lay above two yards thick upon the Rivers
Bank, In the River Nilus in the time of Mauricius the Emperor, at the place
where Grand Cario now stands, a Giant-like Monster was seen, from the bottom
of his belly upward he appeared like a Man, with Flaxen hair, frowning
Countenance and strong Limbs; After he had continued in the view of multitudes
three hours, there came out of the Water another like a Woman with a comely
Face, part of her black hair hanging down, and part gathered into a knot, her
face was fair, rosy Lips, fingers and breasts well composed, the rest of her
body hid under water, from Morning to Sunset they fed their greedy Eyes with
this spectacle, which then sunk down into the water and was never seen more.

X. Acra.
THis is a Strong Fort erected all of Stone, and consists of 4 Palankers, 25
Guns, and 70 white men, besides Blacks.

Mr. Ogilby in his History of Africa names several other Places belonging to
the Royal African Company as Madre Bomba, Cormantyn, Ianasia, Eniacham, Rio,
Nuno, Rio Grande, Serbro, Cestos, Achin, Auta, Ardra, Benin, with Old, and New
Calabar. But I am assured, that these mine aforementioned, are all the Castles
and Forts, of which they are possessed at this time.

This Country (unknown to the Ancients) is properly a part of Negroland, and
called Guinea from the heat hereof. The Air is so extreme hot and unwholesome
especially to strangers, many of whom live but a short time after their
arrival, that were it not for the Rains and Coolness of the Nights, it would be
altogether uninhabitable. It is governed by several Sovereigns, the Chief of
whom is called, Emperor of Guinea; to whom diverse other Kings and Princes are
subject. The Capital City is Arda. Next to him is the King of Benin, esteemed a
powerful Prince, having several large Territories subject to him. Upon the
Death of her Husband. in the kingdom of Benin the Wife is absolutely, subject
to her own Son, (if she have any) and cannot be sold for a Slave without leave
from the King.

A late Author gives the following List of the Forts, Factories, and Places of
Trade, wherein the Royal African Company are concerued on the Coast of Guinea.

On the Golden Coast.
James Fort in an Island in the River Gambia. Sierra Leona upon Bence Island.
On the Coast of Malaguette Sherborow in York Island. Druw^n.
On the Quaqua Coast Rio de St. Andro. Ieaque Ieaque. C St Apolonia.
Aymo in Comore Bay. Succundo. Cabo Corso. Fredecht Burg sold to us by the
Danes Annishan unfortifi'd. Anmamabou. Aggau of no defense.
In the Kingdom of Loango
Moango Mulemba Cabenda.


The Captivity and Deliverance of John Watts an Englishman, from Slavery under
the King of the Buckamores, and the King of Calanach, near Old Mallabar in
Guinea.
HAving met with the following Relation I shall conclude the Account of Guinea
therewith. In 1668 An English Ship bound for Guinea, Sailing to Old Calabar,
they entered a River called the Cross-River into Pirats-Island; after they had
taken in their Negro's, and were ready to Sail, the Master called up the
Boatswain and three Men more to look out the Copper Bars that were left, and
carry them on Shore to sell; The Boatswain with his small Company desired they
might have Arms, not believing they were so harmless a People as reported; they
took with them three Muskets and a Pistol; and so rowed toward the Shore, but
their Match unhappily fell into the Water, and the Ship being fallen down lower
toward the Sea quite out of sight, and they ashamed to go back without
dispatching their business, John Watt's went ashore to the first House to light
the match; but before he was twenty Rods from the Water side, he was seized on
by two Blacks or rather Tawny-Moores, and by them haled half a Mile up into the
Country, and thrown with great violence upon his Belly, and so compelled to
lie till they stripped him; and more Company coming, they were so eager for his
poor Canvas Apparel, that some they tore off, others they cut off, and with
that several pieces of his flesh to his intolerable pain; With these Rags they
made little Aprons to cover their Privities, clothing being very scarce there;
The Boatswain seeing Watts carried away, resolved with his two Companions to
venture their Lives to have him again, and arming themselves they were suddenly
beset with a dosen men in several Canoes, but they valiantly maintained their
Boat three hours; for after two or three Muskets were discharged, they
defended themselves with their Oars and Boat hooks; The Boatswain received a
mortal wound in his Groin, and fell down in the Boat, the other two adventured
into the River, endeavoring by swimming to escape the Hands of these cruel
Infidels; but the Negro's with their swift Canoes soon overtook them, and
brought them on Shore to the other; They took the Boatswain out of the Boat,
and instead of endeavoring to preserve what Life remained in him, one of them
with a keen Weapon instantly cut off his Head; And while he was yet reeking in
his Blood, they in a barbarous manner cut off pieces of Flesh from his
Buttocks, Thighs, Arms, and Shoulders, and broil d them on the Coals, and with
much impatience eat it before his Companions Faces to their great astonishment.

About a Fortnight after one of the Company fell sick; And instead of being his
Physicians to cure him, they were his Butchers to Murder him, cutting off his
Head, and broiling and eating his Flesh, rejoicing exceedingly at this rich
Banquet. Ten days after the other fell sick, whom they used in the very same
manner. Watts continued still in Health though the Natives daily expected such
another Banquet, because it seems it is not their Custom to kill those that are
well, and so resolved to s^ll him; his Master was free to discourse, especially
since he had before learned the Tata Language in the West Indies, which is
easily attained, being comprehended in few words, and all the Negro's speak it.
He began to discourse his Master of the reason of their cruelty, who told him,
he should be content, for if he were not sick, he should not have his Head cut
off; In the Boat which they took there was one Musket saved that was not
discharged, which his Master some time after brought to him to know the use of;
Watts endeavored to keep him in ignorance, but being threatened, at length was
forced to shoot it off; but the Negro's who expected some delightful thing were
frustrated, and at the sudden noise and flash of Fire, which they much dread,
ran from him affrighted, but hearing no more noise came up again, and commanded
him to do the like, he told them he had no Powder which caused the noise; but
this would not satisfy these Barbarians, who were about to murder him for
refusal, ha^ ^ot his Master prevented it; After in discourse his Master told
him, that the People were naturally civil, and simply honest, but it provoked
full of Revenge, and that this cruelty toward him and his Friends was
occasioned by the unhandsome carrying away some Native, without their leave
about a year before, they resolving if any came (...) they should never go off
alive; He had not been above seven Weeks in the Country but his Master
presented him to the King, whose name was Efme King of the Buckamores, who
immediately gave him to his Daughter Onijah; When the King went abroad, he
at^ended him as his Page throughout the whole Circuit of his Dominions, which
was not above twelve miles, yet boasting exceedingly of his Power and Strength,
and glorying extremely that he had a White to attend him, whom he employed to
carry his Bow and Arrows. At several places remote from the Seaside, some of
the People would run away from him for fear, others fell down and seemed to
worship him, using those Actions they do to their Gods. Their Progress was
never so long, but they could return home at Night, yet never without a full
Dose of the Creature.

During all the time Watts was a Slave he never knew him go abroad and come
home sober. They drink the best Palm-wine, and another Liquor called Penrore;
The Englishman knew how to humor this profound Prince, and if any of the
Natives abused him, upon his complaint he had Redress; as once by striving with
a Negro, his Arm was broke, which by providence more than skill was set again;
After some Months, the King of Calanach called Mancha, hearing of this
beautiful White, courted his Neighbor Prince to sell him, and at length he was
sold for a Cow and a Goat; This King was sober, free from the Treacheries and
Mischiefs the other was subject to, and would often inquire of him concerning his
King and Country, and whether his Kingdoms were bigger than his own, whose
whole Dominions were not above twenty five miles in length, and fifteen in
breadth; The Englishman told as much as he thought convenient, keeping within
the bounds of modesty, yet relating as much as possible to the honor and
dignity of his Sovereign; first informing him of the greatness of one of his
Kingdoms, the several Shires, and Counties it contained, with the number of its
Cities, Towns and Castles, and the strength of each, the infinite Inhabitants
and valor of his Subjects; One of these sufficiently amazed this petty
Governor, that he need mention no more of His Majesty's Glory and Dignity; It
put him into such a profound Consternation, that he resolved to find out some
way to tender his respects to this Mighty Prince, and could study none more
convenient, than that if he could find a passage he would let him go to
England, to inform King Charles the II. of the great favor and respect he had
for him; This did not a little rejoice our Englishman; He also told him that he
would send him a Present, which should be two Cabareets or Goats, which they
there value at a high rate, this King having himself not above seventeen or
eighteen. He tells the King that the King of England had many thousand Subjects
under the degree of Gentlemen, who had a thousand Sheep apie^e, the Flesh of
which they valued at a much higher rate than Goats.

Though our Captive lived happily with this King, yet his desires and hopes
were still to return to his Native Country, at length he promised him, that
the first English Ship which came into the Road, should have liberty to release
or purchase him; This much rejoiced his Heart now he thought every day a year,
till he could hear of, or see some English Ship arrived. Often did he walk down
to the Seaside, earnestly expecting the winds of Providence would blow some in
thither; which being observed by one Iaga the chiefest Wizard in those parts,
and much admired by the People (though they have a multitude of others) this
man came to him one day, and inquired why he went so often to the Sea shore, he
told him, to see if he could discover any English Vessel come in there and
knowing he was a Wizard, though not acquainted with his great Fame, nor willing
to credit his Divinations, yet to please him, asked when he did believe there
would one come in; Iaga instantly told him; That the fifteenth day after, an
English Ship would come into the Road. He then demanded whether that Ship
should carry him away, he answered doubtfully, but said, he should be offered
to the Master of the Ship, and if they did not agree, but he should come ashore
again, and not be sold, he would soon dye of grief. These fifteen days seemed
very long, many a look did he cast on the Sea with an aching Heart, the
fourteenth day he went to an high hill, but he could discover nothing; next
Morning he went again two or three times but saw none; about two or three hours
after, some of the Moors came running to the King, telling him there was a
Canoe coming, so they call our Ships, at which our Englishman rejoiced, hoping
to be releast, yet durst not show it for fear of punishment or death; for
though he lived better now than with his first Master, yet his Service was far
worse than the Slaves in Turkey, and their Diet worse than Dogs meat, The Ship
came in, and he runs to Iaga to know if it were an English Ship, who assured
him it was, and so it happened; one Captain Royden being Commander, who hastened
to dispatch his business, took in his Negro's, and was ready to Sail, our
Captive not hearing a word what should become of him, the King never offering
to sell him; This made him resolve to endeavor an escape; he had prepared a
piece of Timber, and drawn it toward the waterside, on which he intended to
paddle to the Ship, which lay about a League off.

Just by the Seaside as he was about to lanch his floating stick, he espied a
great Alligator, which will devour a man at a mouthful, this altered his mind,
resolving rather to live with Infidels, than be accessory to his own death; But
next day it pleased God to move the Kings Heart to let him go, sending him in a
Canoe placed between a Negro's Legs, with others to guide this small Vessel,
for fear he should leap overboard, and swim to the Ship* At a distance he
haled her in English to the great surprizal of those within her, the Negro's
let him stand up and show himself to the Captain, to whom he gave an Account
ho^ four were left there, and he only remained alive. It was some time before
they bargained, though the Captain was resolved not to leave him behind.
Several times the Negro's padled away with their Canoe, resolving not to part
with him, but what with his entreaties and promises, he persuaded them to the
Ship again, and at last they delivered him on board for forty five Copper and
Iron Bars about the bigness of a man's Finger; When he came on board, his Hair
was long, and his Skin tawny like a Mulatto, having gone naked all the time he
was there, and usually anointed himself with Palm-Oyl. The Sea men charitably
apparalel'd him, and he arrived safely in England with a thankful Heart for so
happy a deliverance. And here I shall conclude the view of Guinea.

A View of St. Helena an Island in the Ethiopian Ocean, in Africa Now in
possession of the Honorable East-India-Company, where their Ships usually
refresh in their Indian Voyages.
With an account of the Admirable Voyage of Domingo Gonsales, the Little
Spaniard, to the World in the Moon, by the help of several Ganza's or Large
Geese.

An Ingenious Fancy, written by a late Learned Bishop.

BEfore I come to relate the Acquisitions of the English in India, etc. I will
make a halt at St. Hellens or Hellena, which is now possessed by the Honorable
East-India-Company. It is called the Sea Inn, because the English and other
Nations stop there as a place for watering and refreshment in their Long
Voyages to India. It was formerly seized by the Dutch, but retaken May 6th,
1673 by Captain Monday, with a Squadron of English Ships, and 3 Rich Dutch
East India Ships made Prizes in the Harbor; since which the Company have
fortified and secured it, against any future invasion of Dutch, Portuguese, or
Spaniards. It was called Santa Helena by the Portuguese, who discovered it on
St. Hellens Day, being April 2. There is no Island in the World so far distant
from the Continent or main Land as this. It is about Sixteen Leagues in
Compass, in the Ethiopick-Sea; in 16 Degrees of South Latitude; about 1500
Miles from the Cape of Good Hope; 360 from Angola in Africa; and 510 from
Brasile in America. It lies high out of the Water, and surrounded on the
Seacoasts with steep Rocks, having within many Cliffs* Mountains and Valleys,
of which one is named Church-Valley, where behind a small Church they climb up
to the Mountains. To the South is Apple-Dale, so called from the abundance of
Oranges, Lemons and Pomegranats enough to furnish five or six Ships. On the
West side of the Church, Ships have good Anchorage close under the Shore, to
prevent the Winds which blow fiercely from the adjacent high Mountains.

The Air seems temperate and healthful, so that sick men brought ashore there,
in a short time recover; Yet the heat in the Valleys is as intolerable as the
cold upon the Mountains; It commonly rains there five or six times a day, so
that the barenness of the Hills is not occasioned for want of Water, of which
it has two or three good Springs for furnishing Ships with fresh Water; The
ground of its own accord brings forth wild Pease and Beans, also whole Woods of
Orange, Lemon, and Pomegranat Trees, all the year long laden both with Blossoms
and Fruit, good Figs; abundance of Ebony and Rose-trees, Parsley, Mustard Seed,
Purslain, Sorrel, and the like; The Woods and Mountains are full of Goats,
large Rams, and wild Swine, but difficult to be taken. When the Portuguese
discovered it, they found neither four-footed Beasts nor Fruit Trees, but only
fresh Water; They afterward planted Fruit Trees, which so increased since, that
all the Valleys stand full of them; Partridges, Pigeons, Moor-hens, and
Peacocks breed here numerously, whereof a good Marksman may soon provide a
Dinner for his Friends. On the Cliff-Islands, on the South are thousands of
gray and black Mews, or Sea-Pies, and white and colored Birds, some with long,
others with short Necks, who lay their Eggs on the Rocks, and suffer themselves
to be taken with the Hand, gazeing at their Surprizers, till they are knocked
on the Head with sticks.

From the Salt Water (...) against the Cl^s a (...) or Scum remains in some
places, which the heat of the S^n so purifies, that it becomes white and good
Salt; some of the Mountains yield Bole Armon^ck, and a fat Earth like Terra
Lemnia The Sea will answer the pains of a patient (...), who must use an Angle,
not a Net, because of the foul ground and beating of the waves; the chief are
Mackr^, Roach, ^p, but differing in color from those among us; E^s as big as a
man's Arm, and well tasted Crabs, Lobsters, Oysters and Mussels as good as
English.

IT is in this Island that the Scene of that notable fancy, called. The Man in
the Moon, or a discourse of a Voyage thither, by (...) Gonsales is laid,
written by a Learned Bishop, says the ingenious Bishop Wilkins, who calls it a
pleasant and well contrived fancy, in his own Book intitaled, A Discourse of
the New World, tending to prove that it is possible there may be another
habitable World in the Moon; Wherein among other curious arguments he affirms,
that this has been the direct opinion of diverse ancient, and some Modern
Mathematicians, and may probably be deduced from the Tenants of others, neither
does it contradict any Principle of reason nor Faith; And that as their World
is our Moon, so our World is theirs.

Now this small Tract having so worthy a Person to vouch for it, and many of
our English Historians having published for Truth, what is almost as improbable
as this, as Sr. John Mandavil in his Travels and others, and this having what
they are utterly destitute of, that is, Invention mixed with Judgment; and was
judged worthy to be Licensed 50 years ago, and not since reprinted, whereby it
would be utterly lost. I have thought fit to republish the Substance thereof,
wherein the Author says he does not design to discourse his Readers into a
belief of each particular circumstance, but expects that his new discovery of a
New World may find little better entertainment than Columbus had in his first
discovery of America, though yet that p^r espial betrayed so much knowledge as
has* since increast to vast Improvements, and the ^en Unknown is now found to
be of as large extent as all the other known World; That there should be
Antipodes was once thought as great a Paradox as now that the Moon should be
habitable. But the knowledge of it may be reserved for this our discovering
Age, wherein our Virtuosi can by their Telescopes gaze the Sun into Spots, and
d^ry Mountains in the Moon. But this and much more must be left to the
Critics, as well as the following Relation of our little Eyewitness and great
Discoverer, which you shall have in his own Spanish Style, and delivered with
that Grandeur and thirst of Glory, which is generally imputed to that Nation.

It is known to all the Countries of Andaluzia, that I Domingo Gonsales was
born of a Noble Family in the renowned City of Sevil My Fathers name being
Therando Gonsales near kinsman on the Mothers side to Don Pedro Sanches the
worthy Count of Almanera, My Mother was the Daughter of the famous Lawyer Otho
Perez de Sallaveda Governor of Barcellona, and Corrigidor of Biscay; I being
the youngest of seventeen Children, was put to School, and designed to the
Church; But Heaven purposing to use my Service in matters of far another
Nature, inspired me with spending some time in the Wars; It was at the time
that Don Ferando, the renowned Duke D' Alva was sent into the Low Countries in
1568. I then following the current of my desire leaving the University of
Salamanea, whither my Parents had sent me, without giving notice to any of my
Friends, got through France to Antwerp, where I arrived in a mean condition.
For having sold my Books, Bedding and other things which yielded me about 30
Ducats, and borrowed twenty more of my Fathers Friends, I bought a little Nag,
wherewith I traveled more thriftily than usually young Gentlemen do, till
arriving within a League of Antwerp, some of the cursed Gueses set upon me, and
bereaved me of my Horse, Money, and all; so I was forced through necessity to
enter into the Service of Marshal Cossey a French Nobleman, whom I served in an
honorable employ, though mine Enemies to my disgrace, affirm I was his
Horse-keepers Boy; But for that matter, I refer my self to Count Mansfield, and
other Persons of condition, who have often testified to many worthy men, the
very truth of the business, which indeed was this, Monsieur Cossey being about
this time sent to the Duke D' Alva Governor of the Low Countries, he
understanding the Nobility of my Birth, and my late misfortune, judging it
would be no small honor to him to have a Spaniard of that Quality about him,
furnished me with a Horse, Arms and whatever I wanted, using my Service, after
I had learned French, in writing his Letters, because my Hand was very fair. In
time of War if upon necessity, I sometime dressed my own Horse, I ought not to
be reproacht therewith, since I count it the part of a Gentleman to submit to
the vilest Office for the Service of his Prince.

The first expedition I was in, was when the Marshal my Friend met the Prince
of Orange making a Road into France, and forced him to fly even to the Walls of
Cambray; It was my good Fortune to defeat a Trooper by killing his Horse with
my Pistol, who falling upon his Leg could not stir, but yielded to my mercy; I
knowing my own weakness of Body, and seeing him a lusty tall Fellow, thought it
the surest way to dispatch him, which having done, I plundered him of a Chain,
Money, and other things to the value of 200 Ducats; This Money was no sooner in
my Pockets, but I resumed the remembrance of my Nobility, and taking my
audience of leave from Monsieur Gossey, I instantly repaired to the Duke D'
Alva's Court, where diverse of my Kindred seeing my Pocket full of good Crowns,
were ready enough to acknowledge me; By their means I was received into pay,
and in time obtained favor with the Duke, who would sometimes jest a little
more severely at my Personage than I could well bare, for though I must
acknowledge my Stature is so little, as I think no man living is less, yet
since it is the work of Heaven, and not my own, he ought not to have upbraided
a Gentleman therewith; And those glorious things that have happened to me may
evince, that wonderful matters may be performed by very unlikely Bodies, if the
mind be good, and Fortune second our endeavors;

Though the Dukes joques a little disgusted me, yet I endeavored to conceal my
re^entment, and accommodating my self to some other of his humors, I was so far
interested in his favor, that at his going into Spain. whither I attended him,
by his kindness, and other accidents, wherein by my Industry I was seldom
wanting to my self, I was able to carry home 3000 Crowns in my Pocket.

At my return, my Parents, who were extremely disturbed at my departure,
received me with joy, which was increased because they found I had brought
wherewith to maintain my self without being chargeable to them, or lessening
the Portions of my Brothers and Sisters. But doubting I would spend it as
lightly as I got it, they solicited me to marry the Daughter of John Figueres
a considerable Merchant of Lisbon, to which I complied, and putting my Marriage
Money, and good part of my own into the hands of my Father, I lived like a
Gentleman many years very happily; At length a quarrel-arising between me and
Pedro Delgades a Gentleman and Kinsman of mine, it grew so high, that when no
mediation of Friends could prevail, we two went alone with our Swords into the
Field, where it was my chance to kill him, though a stout proper man; but what
I wanted in strength I supplied in courage, and my agility countervailed for
his Stature. This being acted in Carmona, I fled to Lisbon, thinking to conceal
my self with some Friends of my Father in Law* till the business might be
accommodated, At which time, a famous Spanish Count coming from the West
Indies, published Triumphant Declarations, of a great Victory he had obtained
against the English near the Isle of Pines, whereas in reality he got nothing
at all in that Voyage but blows, and a considerable loss. It had been well if
vanity and lying had been his only crimes; His covetousness had like to have
been my utter ruin, though since it has proved the occasion of Eternizing my
name I verily believe to all Posterity, and to the unspeakable benefit of all
Mortals for ever hereafter, at least if it please Heaven that I return home
safe to my Country, and give perfect Instructions how those almost incredible
and impossible Acquirements may be imparted to the World. You shall then see
men flying in the Air from one place to another, you shall then be able to send
Messages many hundred miles in an instant, and receive answers immediately,
without the help of any Creature upon Earth; You shall then presently impart
your mind to your Friend though in the most remote and obscure place of a
populous City, and a multitude of other notable Experiments; But what exceeds
all, you shall then have the discovery of a New World, and abundance of rare
and incredible secrets of Nature, which the Philosophers of former Ages never
so much as dreamt of; But I must be cautious in publishing these wonderful
mysteries, till our Statesmen have considered how they may consist with the
Policy and good Government of our Country, and whether the Fathers of the
Church may not judge the divulging them prejudicial to the Catholic Faith,
which (by those wonders I have seen above any mortal man before me) I am
instructed to advance without respect to any temporal advantage whatsoever.

But to proceed; This huffing Captain, pretended much discontent for the Death
of Delgades, who was indeed some Ki^ to him; however he was willing to be quiet
if I would give him a thousand Ducats; I had now, besides a Wife, two Sons,
whom I was not willing to beggar, only to satisfy the avaritious humor of
this Boaster, and so was necessitated to take some other course; I imbarkt in a
stout Carrick bound for the East Indies, carrying the value of two thousand
Ducats to Trade with, leaving as much more for the support of my Wife and
Children behind, whatever misfortune might happen to me; In the Indies I
thrived exceedingly, laying out my Stock in Diamonds, Emeralds and Pearls,
which I bought at such easy rates, that my Stock safely arriving in Spain (as I
understood it did) must needs yield ten for one. But having doubled Cape Buona
Esperanza in my way home, I fell dangerously sick, expecting nothing but death,
which had undoubtedly happened, but that we just then recovered the Blessed
Isle of St. Hellens, the only Paradise I believe on Earth, for healthfulness of
Air, and fruitfulness of Soil, producing all necessaries for the Life of man;
It is about 16 Leagues in compass, and has no firm Land or Continent within 300
Leagues, nay not so much as an Island within an hundred Leagues of it; so that
it may seem a Miracle of Nature, that out of so vast and tempestuous an Ocean,
such a small Rock or piece of ground should arise and discover it self. On the
South is a good Harbor, and near it diverse small Houses built by the
Portuguese to accomodate Strangers, with a pretty Chapel handsomely beautified
with a Tower, and Bell therein. Near it is a Stream of excellent fresh water,
diverse handsome walks planted on both sides with Orange, Lemmon, Pomegranate,
Almond-trees and the like, which bare Fruit all the year, as do also diverse
others; There are store of Garden Herbs, with Wheat, Pease, Barley, and most
kinds of Pulse; but it chiefly abounds with Cattle and Fowl, as Goats, Swine,
Sheep, Partridges, wild Hens, Pheasants, Pigeons, and wild Fowl beyond credit;
But especially about February and March are to be seen huge Flocks of a kind of
wild Swans, (whereof I shall have occasion to speak more hereafter) who like
our Cuckoes and Nightingales, go away at a certain Season, and are no more seen
that year.

On this happy Island did they set me ashore with a Negro to attend me, where I
recovered my health, and continued a whole year, solacing my self for want of
Humane Society with birds and brute Beasts; Diego my Black-moor was forced to
live in a Cave at the West End of the Isle, for had we dwelt together, Victuals
would not have been so plenty with us; but now if one succeeded well in Hunting
or Fowling, the other would find means to treat him, and if both mist, we were
^ain to look out sharply; but this seldom happened, since no Creature there
fears a man more than a Goat or Cow, whereby I easily tamed diverse kinds of
birds and beasts by only muzling them, so that till they came either to me or
Diego they could not feed; at first I much delighted in a kind of Partridges,
and a tame Fox, whereof I made good use; For if I had occasion to confer with
Diego, I would take one of them muzled and hungry, and tying a note about his
neck, beat him from me, whereupon he would straight away to Diego's Cave, and
if he were not there, would beat about till he found him; yet this conveyance
being not without some inconvenience, I persuaded Dieg^, (who though a fellow
of good Parts, was content to be ruled by me) to remove to a Cape on the
north-west part of the Island, being though a League off, yet within sight of
my house and Chapel, and so when the weather was fair, we could by signals
declare our minds each to other in an instant either by night or day, wherein
we took much pleasure. If in the night I would signify any thing to him, I set
up a light in the bell Tower, which was a pretty large Room with a fair Window
well glazed, and the walls within plaistered white, so that though the light
were but small, it made a great show; after this light had stood half an hour I
covered it, and then if I saw any signal of light again from my Companion I
knew he waited for my notice, and so by hiding and showing my light according
to the agreement betwixt us I certified him of what I pleased. In the day I
advertised him by Smoke, Dust, and other refined ways.

After a while I grew weary of it as too painful, and again used my Winged
Messengers; Upon the shore, about the Mouth of our River, I found store of a
kind of Wild Swans feeding upon prey, both of fish and birds, and which is more
strange having one Claw like an Eagle, and the other like a Swan. These birds
breeding here in infinite numbers, I took thirty or forty of them young, and
bred them up by hand for recreation; yet not without some thoughts of that
experiment which I after put in practice. These being strong and able to
continue a great flight, I taught them first to come at call afar off, not
using any noise, but only showing them a White Cloth; and here I found it true
what Plutarch affirms, That Creatures which eat Flesh are more docible than
others. It Is wonderful to think what Tricks I taught them ere they were a
quarter old, amongst others I used them by degrees to fly with Burdens, wherein
I found them able beyond belief, and a white sheet being displayed to them by
Diego upon the side of a hill, they would carry from me to him bread, flesh, or
whatever I pleased, and upon the like call come to me again. Having proceeded
thus far, I consulted how to join a number of them together, so as to carry a
heavier weight, which if I could compass, I might enable a man to be carried
safely in the Air from one place to another. I puzzled my Wits extremely with
this thought, and upon Trial found that if many were put to the bearing of one
great Burden, by reason it was impossible all of them should rise together
just at one instant, the first that rise finding himself stayed by a weight
heavier than he could stir, would soon give over, and so the second, third, and
all the rest. I contrived at last a way whereby each might rise with only his
own proportion of weight, I fastened about each Gansa a little Pulley of Cork,
and putting a string of a just length through it, I fastened one end to a block
of almost eight pound weight, and tied a two pound weight to the other end of
the string, and then causing the signal to be Erected, they all rose together,
be^g four in number, and carried away my block to the place appointed. This
hitting so luckily, I added two or three birds more, and made Trial of their
carrying a Lamb, whose happiness I much ^vied, that he should be the first
living creature to partake of such an excellent device.

At length after diverse Trials, I was surprised with a great longing to cause
my self to be carried in the same manner, Diego my Moor was likewise possessed
with the same desire, and had I not loved him well, and wanted his Service, I
should have resented his ambitious thought; For I count it greater honor to
have been the first Flying Man, than to be another Neptune who first adventured
to Sail on the Sea. Yet seeming not to understand his intention, I only told
him that all my Gansa's were not strong enough to carry him, being a man though
of no great Bulk, yet twice heavier than my self; Having prepared all
necessaries, I one time placed my self and all my Utensils on the top of a Rock
at the Rivers Mouth, and putting my self upon my Engine at full Sea, I caused
Diego to advance the signal, whereupon my Birds, 25 in number rose all at once,
and carried me over lustily to the Rock on the other side, being about a
quarter of a League; I chose this time and place, because if any thing had
fallen out contrary to expectation, the worst that could happen was only
falling into the Water, and being able to swim well, I hoped to receive little
hurt in my fall; When I was once safe over, O how did my heart even swell with
Joy and admiration at my own Invention; How often did I wish my self in the midst
of Spain, that I might fill the World with the fame of my Glory and Renown?
Every hour I had a longing desire for the coming of the Indian Fleet to take me
home with them, which then stayed, three Months beyond their usual time; At
length they arrived being three Carricks much weather-beaten, the men Sick and
Weak, and so were constrained to refresh themselves in our Island a whole
Month; The Admiral was called Alphonso de Xima, a Valliant Wise Man, desirous
of Glory, and worthy better Fortune than afterward befell him; To him I
discovered my device of the Gansa's being satisfied, that it was impossible
otherwise to persuade him to take so many Birds into his Ship, who for the
niceness of their provision, would be more troublesome than so many men; Yet I
adjured him by Oaths and Persuasions to be secret in the business, though I did
not much doubt it assuring my self he durst not impart the Experiment to any
before our King were acquainted therewith. I had more apprehension, lest
Ambition and the desire of gaining to himself the honor of so admirable an
Invention should tempt him to dispatch me. However I was forced to run the
Risque unless I would adventure the loss of my Birds, the like whereof for my
purpose were not to be had in Christendom, nor was I sure ever to bring up
others to serve my turn.

It happened all these doubts were causless, the man I believe was honest, but
the misfortune we met with prevented all these thoughts, Thursday June 21.
1599. we set Sa^ for Spain, I having allowed me a convenient Cabin for my
Birds, and Engine, which the Captain would have persuaded me to have left
behind, and it was a wonder I did not, but my good fortune saved my life for
after two Months Sail we met with an English Fleet about (...) Leagues from the
Island of Teneriff, one of the Canaries famous for a Hill therein called Pico,
which is kenned at Sea above an hundred Leagues off. We had aboard five times
their number of men, all in health, and were well provided with Ammunition; yet
finding them resolved to fight, and knowing what infinite riches we carried,
concluded it better if possible to escape, than by encountering (...) crew of
desperate Fellows, to hazard not only ou^ Lives, which a man of courage does
not value, (...) the Estates of many poor Merchants, who I (...) afraid were
undone by the miscarriage of this business. Our Fleet consisted of five Sail,
that is three Carricks, a Bark, and a Caravel, who coming from St. Thomas Isle,
had in an ill hour ov^ taken us some days before. The English had three Ships
well provided, who no sooner spied but presently engaged us, and changing their
course, endeavored to bring us under their Lee, which the might easily do as
the Wind then stood, they being ^ght n^mble Vessels, as English Ships generally
are ours heavy, deep laden, and foul with the Sea^ So our Captain resolved,
wisely enough it may be^ out neither valiantly nor fortunately, to fly,
commanding us to disperse our selves. The Carav^ by too much have fell upon one
of the Carricks and bruised her so, that one of the English easily fetched her
up and entered her, the Caravel sinking before our eyes. The Bark escaped
unpursued and another of our Carricks after some chase was given over by the
Enemy, who expecting a sufficient Booty of us, and getting us between them,
fell upon us with much fury; our Captain hereupon gave direction to run ashore
upon Teneriff, the Port whereof we could not recover, saying, That he hoped to
save part of the Goods, and some of our Lives, and he had rather the rest
should be lost, than all fall into the mercy of our foes.

When I heard this Resolution, observing the Sea to work high, and knowing all
the Coast to be so full of Rocks and Shoals, that it was impossible our Ship
should come near the Land unless broken into a thousand pieces, I represented
to the Captain the desperateness of the attempt, wishing him rather to try the
kindness of the Enemy, than throw away himself and so many brave men; But he
would by no Remonstrances be removed from his Resolution, therefore finding it
high time to shift for my self, I locked up my little Casket of Jewels, which
putting into my sleeve, I then betook me to my Gansa's, and having harnassed
them to my Engine, and put my self thereon, supposing, as indeed it happened,
that when the Ship should split, my Birds though they wanted their signal, yet
for saving their own lives, which nature has taught all Creatures to preserve,
would make toward Land, which fell out, according to my expectation; The People
in the Ship wondered what I was doing, none being acquainted with the use of my
Birds but the Captain, Diego being in the other Ship which fled away unpursued;
We were about half a League from Land, when our Carrick struck upon a Rock, and
split to pieces, upon which I let loose the reins to my Birds, having first
placed my self upon the top of the Deck, and with the Shock they all arose
carrying me fortunately to the Land, of which you need not doubt but I was very
joyful, though it was a miserable fight to behold my Friends and acquaintance
in that wo^ul distress, of whom yet many escaped better than they expected, for
the English lanching out their Cock-boats, discovered more generous tempers
than we are pleased to allow them, taking compassion of their calamity, and
endeavoring with all diligence to save them from the fury of the Waves though
with much danger to themselves; among others they took up our Captain, who, as
Father Pacio since told me, having put himself with twelve others into the
Cock-boat, was forced to yield to one Captain Raymundo, who carried him and our
Pilot along with them in their Voyage to the East Indies whither they were
bound, but it was their hard fate by a breach of the Sea near Cape Buona
Esperanca to be swallowed of the Merci^ess Waves, whose Rage they a while
before had so hardly escaped; The rest as I likewise heard, who were about
twenty six Persons they took into their Ship, and set them a land at Cape Verde.

As for my self being now ashore in an Island inhabited by Spaniards, I
reckoned I was safe, but found my self mistaken, for it was my hap to pitch
upon that part of the Isle where the Pike begins to rise, which is inhabited by
a Savage People who live upon the sides of that Hill, the top whereof is for
the most part covered with Snow, and formerly accounted, for its Steepness
inaccessible either for man or Beast, yet these Salvages fearing the Spaniards,
keep as near the top as they can, never coming down into the fruitful valleys
but to seek for Booty, a crew of these Outlaws happened to spy me soon after I
landed, and thinking they had got a prize, approacht me with all speed; I guest
their design before they came within half a Mile, when perceiving them come
down the Hill directly toward me, with long slaves and other Weapons, I thought
it necessary to secure my self from these Villains, who out of hatred to us
Spaniards, would have cut me to pieces; The Country was Sandy, but the Pike
beginning to lift up it self, I espled in the side a white Cliff, which I hoped
my Ganza's would take for a Mark, and being put up, would make all that way,
whereby I might be carried so far that those Barbarous Raskals should not
overtake me, before I got to some Spaniards House, or hid my self, till by the
covert of the night I might travel to Laguna the chief City of the Island,
three Miles off. So I settled my self upon my Engine, and let loose the Reins to
my Gansa's who by good fortune took all one course, though not just the way I
aimed at. But what of that! O Reader prick up thy Ears and prepare thy self to
hear the strangest chance that ever happened to any Mortal, and which I know
thou will not have the grace to believe till thou see the like Experiment,
which I doubt not in a short time may be performed. My Gansa's like so many
Horses that had gotten the bit between their Teeth, made not their flight,
toward the Cliff I intended, though I used my wonted means to direct the Leader
of the Flock that way, but with might and main took up toward the top of the
Pike, and never stopped till they came there, a place in vulgar estimation
(though since experimentally contradicted) fifteen Miles in height. What kind
of place this was I would gladly relate, but that I hasten to matters of
greater Importance; When I was set down there my poor Gansa's fell to panting,
blowing, and gaping for breath as if they would all have died, so I did not
trouble them a while, forbearing to draw them in, which they never use to
endure without struggling, but little did I expect what followed.



It was now the season that these Birds take their flight away, as our Cu^ko's
and Swallows do in Spain toward Autumn, and as I afterward found, being mindful
of their usual Voyage, just when I began to settle my self to take them in,
they with one consent rose up, and having no other higher place to make toward,
to my unspeakable fear and amazement, struck bolt upright, and never left
towering upward, still higher and higher, for the space as I guest, of an Hour,
after which I thought they labored less than before, till at length; Ah
wonderful! they remained immovable as steadily as if they had sat upon so
many perches; the lines slacked, neither I, nor the Engine moved at all* but
continued still, as having no manner of weight* I found then by Experience what
no Philosopher ever dreamed of, namely, that those things we call heavy do not
fall toward the center of the Earth as their natural place, but are drawn by a
secret property of the Globe of the Earth, or rather something within it, as
the Lodestone draws Iron which is within the Compass of its attractive
Beams. For though my Gansa's could continue unmoved without being sustained by
any thing but the Air as easily and quietly as a Fish in the Water, yet if they
forced themselves never so little it is impossible to imagine with what
swiftness they were carried, either upward, downward or side ways; I must
ingenuously confess my horror and amazement in this place was such, that had I
not been armed with a true Spanish Resolution I should certainly have died for
fear.

The next thing that disturbed me was the swiftness of the motion, which was so
extraordinary that it almost stopped my breath, if I should liken it to an Arrow
out of a Bow, or a Stone thrown down from the top of an high Tower, it would
come vastly short of it; Another thing was exceeding troublesome to me, that is
the Illusions of Devi's and Wicked Spirits, who the first day of my arrival
came about me in great numbers in the likeness of Men and Women, wondering at me
like so many Birds about an Owl, and speaking several Languages which I
understood not, till at last I met with some that spoke good Spanish, some
Dutch, and others Italian, all which I understood; And here I had only a touch
of the Suns absence once for a short time, having him ever after in my sight.
Now though my Gansa's were entangled in my lines, yet they easily seized upon
diverse kinds of Flies and Birds, especially Swallows and Cuckoes whereof there
were multitudes even like Motes in the Sun, though I never saw them eat any
thing at all. I was much obliged to those, whether Men or Devils I know not,
who among diverse discourses told me, If I would follow their Directions, I
should not only be carried safe home, but be assured to command at all times
all the pleasures of that place. To which motion not daring to give a flat
denial, I desired time to consider, and withal entreated them, (though I felt
no hunger at all, which may seem strange) to help me to some Victuals least I
should starve in my Journey; So they readily brought me very good Flesh and
Fish of several sorts and well dressed, but that it was extreme fresh without any
relish of Salt. Wine likewise I tasted of diverse kinds as good as any in Spain,
and Beer no better in all Antwerp. They advised me that while I had opportunity
I should make my Provisions; telling me that till the next Thursday they could
help me to no more; at which time they would find means to carry me back, and
set me safe in Spain in any place I would desire, provided I would become one
of their Fraternity, and enter into such Covenants as they had made to their
Captain and Master whom they would not name, I answered civilly, I saw little
reason to rejoice in such an offer, desiring them to be mindful of me as
occasion served;So for that time I was rid of them; having first furnished my
Pockets with as much Victuals as I could thrust in, among which I would be sure
to find a place for a small Bottle of good Canary.

I shall now declare the quality of the place wherein I was; The Clouds I
perceived to be all under between me and the Earth. The Stars, because it was
always day, I^ saw at all times alike, not shining bright as we see in the
night upon Earth, but of a whitish color like the Moon with us in the day
time, those that were seen, which were not many, showed far greater than with
us, yea as I guest no less than ten times bigger; As for the Moon, being then
within 2 days of the change, she appeared of an huge and dreadful greatness. It
is not to be forgot that no Stars appeared but o^ that part of the Hemisphere
next the Moon, and the nearer to her, the larger they appeared Again, whether I
lay quiet and rested, or were carried in the Air, I perceived my self to be
always directly between the Moon and the Earth, whereby it is plain that my
Gansa's took their way directly toward the Moon, and that when we rested, as we
did at first for many hours, either we were insensibly carried round about the
Globe of the Earth, though I perceived no such motion, or else that according
to the opinion of Copernicus, the Earth is carried about, and turns round
perpetually from West to East, leaving to the Planets only that motion which
the Astronomers call natural, and is not upon the Poles of the Equinoctial,
commonly called the Poles of the World, but upon those of the Zodiac; The Air
in that place I found without any wind, and exceeding temperate, neither hot
nor cold, where neither the Sun beams had any Subject to reflect upon, nor the
Earth and Water so near to affect the Air with their natural Quality of
coldness; As for the Philosophers attributing heat and moisture to the Air, I
always esteemed it a fancy; Lastly, I remember that after my departure from
the Earth, I never felt either hunger or thirst, whether the purity of the Air,
freed from the Vapors of the Earth and Water, might yield nature sufficient
nourishment, or what else might be the cause I cannot determine, but so I found
it, though I was perfectly in health both of body and mind, even above my usual
Vigor.

Some hours after the departure of that Devilish Company my Gansa's began to
bestir themselves, still directing their course toward the Globe or body of the
Moon, making their way with such incredible swiftness, that I conceive they
advanced little less than fifty Leagues in an hour, in which passage I observed
three things very Remarkable, one that the farther we went the less the Globe
of the Earth appeared to us, and that of the Moon still larger; Again the
Earth, which I had ever in mine eye, seemed to mask it self with a kind of
brightness like another Moon, and as we discern certain Spots or Clouds as it
were in the Moon, so did I then see the like in the Earth; but whereas the form
of those Spots in the Moon are always the same, these on the Earth seemed by
degrees to change every hour; the reason whereof seems to be, that whereas the
Earth according to his natural motion (for such a motion I am now satisfied she
has according to the opinion of Coper^cus) turns round upon her own Axis every
four and twenty hours from West to East) I should at first see in the middle of
the Body of this New Star the Earth, a Spot like a Pear with a Morsel bit out
on one side, in some hours I should observe this Spot move away toward the
East; This no doubt was the main Land of Africa; Then might I perceive a great
shining brightness in that place which continued about the same time, and was
questionless the vast Atlantic Ocean; After this succeeded a Spot almost Oval,
just as we see America described in our Maps, then another immense cleerness
representing Mare del Zur or the South Sea, and lastly a number of Spots like
the Countries and Islands in the East Indies, so that it seemed to me no other
than an huge Mathematical Globe turned round leisurely be ore me, wherein
successively all the Countries of our earthly World were within twenty four
hours represented to my view, and this was all the means I now had to number
the days, and reckon the time.

I could now wish that Philosophers and Mathematicians would confess their own
blindness, who have hitherto made the World believe that the Earth has no
motion, and to confirm it are forced to attribute to every one of the celestial
Bodies two Motions directly contrary to each other, one from the East to the
West to be performed in twenty four hours with an impetuous rapid motion; the
other from West to East in several proportions; O incredible supposition! That
those huge Bodies of the fixed Stars in the highest Orb, whereof they confess
diverse are above an hundred times bigger than the whole Earth, should like so
many Na^s in a Cart wheel be whirled about in so short a time; whereas it is
many thousand years, no less (say they) than thirty thousand, before that Orb
finishes his course from West to East, which they call his natural motion; Now
whereas they allow their natural course from West to East to every one of them,
therein they do well; The Moon performs it in seven and twenty days, the Sun,
Venus and Mercury in a year or thereabout, Mars in three year, Jupiter in
twelve, and Saturn in thirty. But to attribute to these celestial Bodies
contrary motions at once, is an absurd conceit, and much more to imagine that
the same Orb wherein the fixed Stars are, whose natural course takes up so many
thousands of years, should be turned about every twenty four hours. I will not
go so far as Copernicus who makes the Sun the center of the Earth and
immovable, neither will I be positive in any thing, only this I say* allow the
Earth its motion, which these eyes of mine can testify to be true, and all
those absurdities are removed, every one having only his own single and proper
motion.

But where am I? I promised an history, and am unawares turned disputer. One
Accident more befell me worth mention, that during my stay I saw a kind of a
reddish Cloud coming toward me, and continually approaching nearer, which at
last I perceived was nothing but a huge swarm of Locusts. He that reads the
discourses of learned men concerning them, as John Leo of Africa and others who
relate that they are seen in the Air several days before they fall on the
Earth, and adds thereto this experience of mine, will easily conclude that they
can come from no other place than the Globe of the Moon. But now give me leave
to go on quietly in my Journey for eleven or twelve days, during all which time
I was carried directly toward the Globe or Body of the Moon, with such a
violent Whirling as is inexpressible, for I cannot imagine a Bullet out of a
Cannon could make* way through the vaporous and muddy Air near the Earth with
half that celerity; which is the more strange since my Gansa's moved their
Wings but now and then, and sometimes for a quarter of an hour not at all, only
holding them stretched out, as we see Kites, and Eagles sometimes do for a short
space; during which pauses I suppose they took their Naps, and times of
Sleeping, for other times I could perceive they never had any; For my self I
was so fastened to mine Engine that I durst slumber enough to serve my turn,
which I took with as great ease, as if I had lain on the best Down-Bed in Spain.

After eleven days passage in this violent flight, I perceived we began to
approach to another Earth (if I may so call it) being the Globe or very Body of
that Star which we call the Moon. The first difference I found between this and
our Earth was, that it appeared in its natural colors, as soon as ever I was
free from the attraction of the Earth; Whereas with us, a thing a League or two
from us puts on that deadly color of Blew. I then perceived also that this
World was the greatest part covered with a huge mighty Sea, those parts only
being dry Land which are to us somewhat darker than the rest of her Body, I
mean, what the Country people call, The Man in the Moon, and that part which
shines so bright is another Ocean besprinkled with Islands, which for their
smalness we cannot discern so far off; So that the Splendour which appears to us
in the Night, is nothing but the reflection of the Sun beams returned to us out
of the Water as from a Lookinglass. How much this disagrees with what our
Philosophers teach in the Schools is evident; But alas how many of their Errors
has time and experience refuted in this our Age, and among other vain
conjectures, who has not hitherto believed the upper Region of the Air to be
very hot; as being next, forsooth, to the natural place of the Element of Fire;
Mere Vanities, Fancies and Dreams; For after I was once free from the
attractive Beams of that Tyranous Load stone the Earth, I found the Air
altogether serene, without Winds, Rain, Mists or Clouds, neither hot nor cold,
but constantly pleasant, calm and comfortable till my arrival in that New World
of the Moon; As for that Region of fire our Philosophers talk of, I heard no
news of it, mine eyes have sufficiently informed me there is no such thing.

The Earth had now by turning about showed me all her parts twelve times when I
finished my course; For when by my reckoning it seemed to be (as indeed it was)
Tuesday September 11. at which time the Moon being two days old was in the
twentieth degree of Libra) my Gansa's seemed by one consent to stay their
course, and rested for certain hours, after which they took their flight, and
in less than an hour set me on the top of an high Hill in that Other World,
where many wonderful things were presented to my sight. For I observed first,
that though the Globe of the Earth appeared much greater there than the Moon
does to us, even three times bigger, yet all things there were ten, twenty, yea
thirty times larger than ours; Their Trees were thrice as high, and above five
times broader and thicker; So were their Herbs, Birds, and Beasts, though I
cannot well compare them to ours, because I found not any kind of Beast or Bird
there which any way resembled ours, except Swallows, Nightingals, Cuckoes,
Woodcocks, Batts, and some kiad of Wild Fowl; And likewise such Birds as my
Gansa's, all which as I now perceived, spend their time in their absence from
us, in that World, neither do they differ in any thing from ours, but are the
very same kind.

No sooner was I upon the ground, but I found my self extreme hungry; stepping
then to the next Tree I fastened my Engine and Gansa's thereto, and in great
have fell to examining my Pockets for the Victuals I had reserved there; but to
my great surprise and vexation, instead of Partridges and Capons, which I
thought I had hoarded there, I found nothing but a medley of dry leaves, Goats
Hair, Sheep or Goats Dung, Moss, and the like; my Canary-wine was turned, and
stunk like Hors-piss; Oh the villainy and cheats of these cursed Spirits, whose
assistance if I had depended on, in what a condition had I been! while I stood
musing at this strange Metamorphosis, on a sudden I heard my Gansa's fluttering
behind me, and looking back, I spied them falling greedily upon a Shrub within
the reach of their lines, whose leaves they fed earnestly upon, whereas before
I had never seen them eat any green thing whatever; so stepping to the Shrub, I
put a leaf to my Mouth; the taste was so excellent, that I cannot express it,
and if I had not with discretion moderated my Appetite, I should have surfeited
thereon, yet it happened to be a good bait both for me and my Birds, when we
had most need of refreshment.

Scarce had we ended our Banquet, when I saw my self surrounded with a strange
kind of People both in feature, manners, and apparel; their Stature was very
different, but they were generally twice as high as ours; their shape and
countenance pleasant, and their habit hardly to be described; for I never saw
either Cloth, Silk, nor other Stuff, like that whereof their Cloths were made;
neither can I possibly relate their color, they being in a manner all clothed
alike; it was neither Black, White, Yellow, Red nor Blue, nor any color
composed of these; If you ask what was it then, I must tell you, it was a
color never seen in our Earthly World, and so neither to be described nor
conceived by us; for as it is hard to make a man born b^ind understand the
difference between Green and Blue, so neither can I decipher this Moon color,
as having no affinity with any I ever beheld; I can only say it was the most
glorious and delightful that can be imagined, neither was any thing more
pleasant to me during my stay there.

Being surprised at the appearance of these People so suddenly and in such
accoutrements, I crossed my self and cry^d out, Jesus Maria; No sooner was the
word Jesus pronounced, but young and old fell all on their knees (whereat I not
a little rejoiced) holding up their hands on high, and repeating certain words
which I understood not; And presently rising again, one much taller than the
rest came and kindly embraced me, and ordering as I perceived, some of the rest
to attend my Birds, he took me by the hand, and led me to his dwelling down
toward the foot of the Hi^, which was a building so great and beautiful, as
nothing in our World is comparable thereto; Yet afterward I saw such as this
seemed but a Cottage in respect of them; There was no Door about the House less
than thirty Foot high, and twelve broad, the Rooms were forty or fifty Foot in
height, and answerable in proportion; neither could they be much less, the
Master thereof being full twenty eight high, and I suppose his Body would weigh
twenty five or thirty of ours; After I had rested with him about one of our
days* he led me five Leagues off to the Palace of the Prince of the Country*
the stateliness whereof I have not now leis^re to describe; This Prince was
much taller than the former, and called (as near as I can by letters declare
it, for their sounds are not perfectly to be expressed by our Characters,) Pyl^s
which in their Language is First or Chief, if ^t does not rather denote his
Authority and Dignity, as being the principal man in all those parts; Though
yet there is one Supreme Monarch amongst them, much greater of stature than he,
comm^g over all that whole World, having under him twenty nine other Princes of
great Power; and every one of these has twenty four Inferior Governors,
whereof this Pylonas was one. The first Ancestor of this great Monarch came out
of the Earth, as they relate, and by marrying the Heiress of that vast Monarchy
obtaining the government, left it to his Posterity, who have enjoyed it ever
since, even forty thousand Moons, which is 3077 years; His name was Irdonozur
whose Heirs to this day assume the same name; he, they say, having continued
there about four hundred Moons, and begot diverse Children, returned (though by
what means they know not) to the Earth again. I doubt they have their Fables as
well as we, since our Historians never mention any Earthly Man to have been in
that World before my self, and much less to have returned again. I cannot
therefore but condemn this tradition as false and Romantic, though I found
^earning was in great esteem among them, and they seem to detest Lying and
Falsehood which is there severely punished, and which may yield some credit to
their Historical Narrations. Many of them live wonderful long, even beyond
belief, affirming to me that some survived thirty thousand Moons, which is
above a thousand years, so that the Ages of three or four men might easily
reach to the time of the first Irdonozur, and this is generally noted that the
taller people are of Stature, the more excellent are their endowments of mind,
and the longer time they live; for their stature is very different, great
numbers not much exceeding ours, who seldom live above a thousand Moons, which
is fourscore of our years; these they account base, unworthy creatures, but one
degree above brute Beasts, and employ in mean and Servile Offices, calling them
Bastards, Counterfeits or Changlings; Those whom they account true Natural
Lunars or Moon Men, exceed ours generally thirty times, both in quantity of
Body, and length of life, proportionable to the quality of the day in both
Worlds, theirs containing almost thirty of our days

The manner of our travel to the Palace of Pylonas was more strange and
incredible than any thing we have related, for at our first setting forth there
were delivered to each of us two Feather Fans like those our Ladies in Spain
cool themselves with in Summer; You must understand that the Globe of the Moon
has likewise an attractive power, yet so much weaker than the Earth, that if a
man do but spring upward with all his strength, as Dancers do in showing their
Tricks, he will be able to mount fifty or sixty foot high; and being then above
all attraction from the Moons Earth, he falls down no more, but by the help of
these Fans as with Wings, they convey themselves in the Air in a short space,
(though not quite so swift as Birds) whither they please. In two hours time (as
I could guess) by the help of these Fans we were carried through the Air those
five Leagues, in all about sixty Persons. Being arrived at the Palace of
Pylonas, after our Conductor had declared what manner of Present he had
brought, I was called in to him by his Attendants; By the Stateliness of his
Palace and the reverence done him, I soon perceived his greatness, and managed
my affairs in order to procure his favor accordingly, and having, as you may
remember, a certain little Box or Casket of Jewels, the remainder of those I
brought from the East Indies, before I was introduced I secretly took them out
of my pocket, and choosing some of each sort. I made them ready to be presented
as I should think convenient.

I found him sitting in a magnificent Chair of State with his Wife or Queen on
one hand, and his Eldest Son on the other, one attended by a Troop of Ladies,
and the other of young men, and all along the side of the Room stood a great
number of handsome Personages, whereof scarce one was lower of Stature than
Pylonas, whose Age they report is now one and twenty thousand Moons. At my
entrance I fell on my knees, and taking out my Jewels, I presented to the King
seven Stones of several sorts, a Diamond, a Ruby, an Emerald, a Sapphire, a
Topaz and an Opal, which he accepted with Joy and admiration. Then I offered
the Queen and Prince some others, and designed to have bestowed diverse more
upon his Attendants, but Pylonas forbid them to accept any, supposing, as I
heard, they were all I had, which he would have me reserve for Irdonozur his
Sovereign; He then embraced me with much indearedness, and inquired diverse
things by signs, which I answered in the same manner to the best of my Skill
(...) which not contenting him, he delivered me to the guard of 100 of his
Giants as I may well call them, strictly charging them that I should want
nothing fit for me; That they should suffer none of the Dwarf Lunars or little
Moon Men, to come near me. That I should be inst^ucted in their Language, and
lastly that they should by no means impart to me the knowledge of several
things by him Specified, what they were I could never understand. It may be you
long to know what Pylonas inquired of me; Why what should it be but, whence I
came, how I arrived there, what was my name and business, with the like, to all
which I answered as near the truth as possible.

Being dismissed I was provided with all necessaries as my heart could wish, so
that I seemed to be in a Paradise, the pleasures whereof did not yet so
transport me, but I was much concerned with the thoughts of my Wife and
Children, and still retaining some (...) (...) I (...) again (...) to them I
tended my Gansa's daily with much care; which yet had signified little if other
men had not done more than I could; For now the time came when of necessity all
people of our Stature, and my self likewise, must needs sleep thirteen or
fourteen whole days together; for by a secret and irresistible decree of nature
when the day begins to appear, and the Moon to be enlightened by the Sun Beams
which is in the first Quarter of the Moon, all people of our Stature inhabiting
these parts fall into a dead sleep, and are not possibly to be wakened till the
Sun set; and is withdrawn; for as Owls and Bats with us cannot endure the
light, so at the first approach of day we begin to be amazed therewith, and
fall into a slumber, which grows by degrees into a dead sleep till the light be
gone, which is in fourteen or fifteen days, that is till the last Quarter.
During the Suns absence, there is a twofold light, one of the Sun which I could
not endure to behold, and another of the Earth; Now that of the Earth was at
the height, for when the Moon is at the change, then is the Earth a full Moon
to them, and as the Moon increases with us, so the light of the Earth
decreaseth with them. I found the light, though the Sun was absent, equal to
that with us in the day when the Sun is clouded; but toward the quarter it
daily diminishes, yet leaving still a competent light, which seems very
strange; though not so remarkable as what they there report, that in the other
Hemisphere of the Moon, contrary to that I fell upon, where during half the
Moon they see not the Sun, and the Earth never appears to them, they have yet a
kind of light not unlike our Moon light, which it seems the neerness of the
Stars and other Planets that are at a far less distance than from us, affords
them.

You must understand that of the true Lunars or Moon men there are three kinds,
some a little taller than we, as perhaps ten or twelve Foot high, these can
endure the day of the Moon, when the Earth shines but little, but not the Beams
of both, and so must then be laid asleep; Others are twenty Foot high or above,
who can suffer all the light both of the Earth and Sun. There are in a certain
Island (the mysteries whereof are carefully concealed) men whose Stature is at
least twenty seven Foot high; If any other come a land there in the Moons day
time, they instantly fall asleep; This is called Insula Martini, and has a
particular Governor, who as they report is sixty five thousand Moons old,
which makes five thousand of our years, his name is said to be Hirach, and be
in a manner commands Irdonozur himself, especially in that Island out of which
he never removes; There is another comes often thither, who they say is not
above half his Age, that is about thirty three thousand Moons, or two thousand
six hundred of our years, and he orders all things through the Globe of the
Moon in matters of Religion, as absolutely as the Pope does in any part of
Italy, I would fain have seen this man, but was not permitted to come near him,
his name is Imozes.

Now let me settle my self to a long nights sleep, to which end my Attendants
take charge of my Birds, prepare my lodging, and signify to me by signs how I
must order my self. It was then about the middle of September, when I perceived
the Air more clear than ordinary, and with the increase of the light I began to
feel my self first dull and then heavy to sleep, though I had not been lately
disturbed of my rest; At length I delivered my self into the custody of this
Sister of Death, whose Prisoner I was for almost a Fortnight after, and then
awaking, it is not to be believed how brisk and vigorous I found the faculties
both of my Body and Mind; I then applied my self to learning the Language,,
which is the same throughout all the Regions of the Moon, yet not so wonderful,
since I believe all the Earth of Moon does not amount to the fortieth part of
our inhabited Earth, partly because the Globe of the Moon is far less, and
besides the Sea or Ocean covers very nigh three parts of four, whereas the Land
and Sea in our World may be judged of an equal measure. Their Language is very
difficult, since it has no Affinity with any other I ever heard, and consists
not so much of Words and Letters as Tunes and strange sounds which no Letters
can express, for there are few words but signify several things, and are
distinguished only by their Sounds, which are sung as it were in uttering; yea
many words consist of tunes only without words; By occasion whereof I find a
Language may be framed, and easily learned, as copious as any other in the
World only of Tunes which is an Experiment worth searching after;
Notwithstanding these difficulties within two months I attained to such
knowledge therein that I understood most Questions demanded of me, and with
signs and words made reasonable shift to utter my mind; which Pylonas having
notice of, he oftimes sent for me, and was pleased to inform me of many things
my Guardians durst not disclose, though I must needs say I never found they
abused me with an untruth, but if I asked a question they were unwilling to
resolve, they would shake their heads, and with a Spanish shrug divert to some
other discourse.

After seven Months time the great Irdonozur making his Progress to a place
about two hundred Leagues from the Palace of Pylonas, sent for me, yet would
not-admit me into his presence but discourst me through a Window where I might
hear him, and he hear and see me at pleasure. I presented him the remainder of
my Jewels which he thankfully accepted, saying he would requite them with gifts
of a far more considerable value. I stayed there above a quarter of a Moon when
I was again sent back to Pylonas, for if we had stayed a day or two longer the
Sun would have overtaken us before we could have recovered our home. The gifts
he bestowed on me were such that a man would part with Mountains of Gold to
purchase; they were all Stones, nine only in number, of three sorts, one called
Poleastis, another Machrus, and the third Ebelus, of each sort 3. the first are
about the bigness of an Hazel-nu^ very like Jet, which among many other
incredible Virtues has this property, that being once put in the Fire they
ever after retain their heat, though without any outward appearance, till
quenched with some kind of liquor which no way endamages them though heated and
cooled therein a thousand times; Their heat is so vehement that it will make
any Metal within a foot of it red hot, and being in a Chimney warms the Room as
if a great fire were kindled therein. The Machrus is yet more precious, in
color like a Topaz, so clear and resplendent as though not above the bigness
of a Bean, yet being placed in the night in the midst of a large Church it
makes all as light as if an hundred Lamps were hanged round; can any man wish
for more useful properties in a Stone than these? Yet my Ebelus is so excellent
that it may be much preferred before them, yea prized above all the Diamonds,
Saphires, Rubies, and Emeralds that our World can afford. The Lunar color is
so exceeding beautiful that a man would travel a thousand Leagues to behold it,
the Shape is somewhat flat, of the breadth of a piece of Eight, and twice the
thickness, one side is of a more Orient color than the other, which being
clapped to a man's bare Skin, takes away all the weight and ponderousness of his
Body, but turning the other side, it adds force to the attractive beams of the
Earth either in this World or that, and makes the body half as heavy again; Do
you wonder now why I should so overprize this stone? before you see me on Earth
again, you will find I have reason to value this invaluable Jewel. I inquired
whether they had not any kind of Jem, or other means to make a man invisible,
which I judged a thing of admirable use, and could mention diverse of our
learned men who had written to this purpose; They answered, that if it were
possible, yet they were sure Heaven would not suffer it to be revealed to us
creatures subject to so many imperfections, and which might be easily abused to
ill purposes, and this was all I could get of them.

Now after it was known that Irdonozur the great Monarch had done me this
honor, it is strange how much all respected me more than before; my Guardians
who had been hitherto cautious in relating any thing of the Government of that
World, grew now more open, so that from them and Pylonas together I understood
many notable particulars; As that in a thousand years there is found neither
Thief nor Whore-Monger, for first there is no want of any thing necessary for
the use of man, food growing every where without labor, of all sorts that can
be desired. As for Cloths, Houses, or whatever else a man may be supposed to
want, it is provided by their Superiors, though not without some labor, but
yet so easy as if they did it for pleasure; Again their Females are all
absolute Beauties, and by a secret disposition of nature, a man there having
once known a Woman never desires any other; Murder was never heard of amongst
them, neither is it hardly po^le to be committed, for there can be no wou^ made
but what is cureable; yea they assured me, and for my part I believe it, that
though a man's head be out off, yet if within three Moons it be joined to the
Carcass again, and the Juice of a certain Herb there growing applied, it will
be so consolidated as the wounded party shall be perfectly cured. But the chief
cause of their good government is an excellent disposition in the nature of the
People, so that all both Old and Young hate all manner of vice and live in such
love, peace, and amity as it seems to be another Paradise; Though it is true
likewise that some are of a better disposition than others, which they discern
immediately at their Birth; And because it is an inviolable Law amongst them
that none shall be put to death, therefore perceiving by their Stature or some
other signs who are like to be of a wicked and deba^ched humor, they send them,
I know not by what means, into the Earth, and change them for other Children,
before they have either opportunity or ability to do amiss among them; but
first, they say, they are fain to keep them there for some time till the Air of
the Earth alters their color like ours. Their ordinary vent for them is a
certain high Hill in the North of Ameri^a, whose people, I am apt to believe,
are wholly descended from them, both in regard of their color, and their
continual use of Tobacco, which the Lunars or Moon Men smoke exceedingly, the
place abounding much with moisture, together with the pleasure they take
therein, and some other respects t^o long to rehearse: Sometimes, though but
seldom, they mistake their aim and fall upon Europe, Asia, or Africa. I
remember some years since I read certain stories tending to confirm what is
related by these Lunars, and especially one Chapter of Neubrigensis. Inigo
Mondejar in his description of Nova Granata. Also Joseph Defia de Carana in his
History of Mexico if my memory fail not, recount what will make my report more
credible; but I value not testimonies.

If you inquire how Justice is executed, alas what need is there of exemplary
punishment where no offenses are committed; neither need they any Lawyers, ^or
there is no contention, the seeds whereof when they begin to sprout are by the
wisdom of the next Superior plucked up by the Roots. And as little want is there
of Physicians, they never surfeit themselves; the Air is always pure and
temperate, neither is there any cause of sickness, I could never hear of any
that were distempered. But the time assigned them by nature being spent, they
dye without the least pain, or rather cease to live, as a Candle does to give
light when what nourishes it is consumed. I was once at the departure of one of
them, and was much surprised that notwithstanding the happy life he lived, and
the multitude of Friends and Children he should forsake, yet as soon as he
understood his end to approach, he prepared a great Feast, and inviting all
whom he esteemed, exhorts them, To be merry and re^oyce with him, since the
time was come he should now leave the counterfeit Pleasures of that World, and
be made partaker of all true Joy and perfect happiness; I did not so much
admir^ his own constancy as the behavior of his Friends; With us in the like
case all seem to mourn, when many of them do often but laugh in their Sieeves, or
under a Vizard. But here all both young and old did, in my conscience, not
pretendedly b^ really rejoice thereat, and if any dissembled, it was only grief
for their own particular loss. Being dead their Bodies putrify not, and so are
not buried, but kept in certain Rooms appointed to that purpose, so that most
of them can show their An^stors Bodies incorrupt for many Generations* There is
never any Rain, Wind or change of Weath^r, never either Summer or Winter, but
as it were a perpetual Spring, yielding all pleasure and content, free from the
least trouble or annoyan^* O my Wife and Children what wrong have you done me
to bereave me of the happiness of that pla^ But it is no great matter, for by
this Voyage I am sufficiently assured, that when the race of (...) mortal life
is run I shall attain a greater happine^ elsewhere.

It was the ninth of September that I began (...) ascend from the Pike of
Tena^iff; twelve days was upon my Voyage and Arrived in that Provin^ of the
Moon called Simiri Sept. 21. May 12 (...) came to the Court of the great
Irdonozur and (...) turned back the 17 to the Palace of Pyl^s wh^ I continued
till March 1601. When I earne^ requested Pylonas, as I had often done before to
g^ me leave to depart, though with hazard of my (...) back into the Earth
again. He dissuaded me, (...) sisting on the danger of the Voyage, the (...) of
that place from whence I came, and the ab^ dant happiness I now enjoyed, but
the remembra^ of my Wife and Children, out weighed all the reasons, and to say
the truth, I was so elated w^ a ^re of the glory I should purchase at my (...)
turn, as met ought I deserved not the name o^ (...) if I would not hazard
twenty lives r^ than lose the least particle thereof. I replied, I had so
strong a desire to see my Children, that I could not possibly live any longer
without going to them; He then requested me to stay one year longer, I told
him, I must needs depart now or never my Birds began to droop for want of their
usual Voyage, three were already dead, and if a few more failed I was destitute
of all possibility of return. At length with much soliciting I prevailed,
having first acquainted the great Irdonozur with my Intentions, and perceiving
by the often baying of my Birds a great longing in them to be gone, I trimmed up
my Engine, and took my leave of Pylonas, and March 29. Three days after my
waking from the last Moons light I fastened my self to my Engine, not
forgetting to take the Jewels Irdonozur had given me, with the Virtues and use
whereof Pylonas had acquainted me at large, with a small quantity of Victuals
whereof afterward I had great occa^on. A vast multitude of People being present
and among them Pylonas himself, after I had given them all the last Farewell, I
let loose the reins to my Birds, who with much greediness taking wing, quickly
carried me out of fight; it happened to me as in my first passage, for I never
felt either hunger or thirst till I fell upon an high Mountain in China about
five Leagues from the High and Mighty City of Pequin. This Voyage was per^ormed
in less then nine days, neither heard I any news of these Airy men I met with
in my ascending; nothing stayed me in my Journey, whether because of the
earnest desire of my Birds to return to the Earth, having already missed their
season, or that the attraction of the Earth was so much stronger than that of
the Moon, and so made it easier, yet so it was though I had three Birds less
than before. For the first eight days my Birds slew before me, and I on the
Engine was as it were drawn after, but the ninth day, when I began to approach
the Clouds, I perceived my self and Engine to sink toward the Earth, and go
before them. I was then horribly afraid least my Birds unable to bear our
weight, being so few, should be constrained to precipitate both me and
themselves headlong to the Earth, and thought it very necessary to make use of
my stone Eblus which I clapped to my bare Skin within my Cloths and instantly I
perceived my Birds made way with greater ease than before, as seeming freed
from a great but then, neither do I think they could possibly have let me down
safely to the Earth without that help.

China is a Country so populous that I think there is scarce a piece of ground
thrice a man's length which is not carefully manured; I being yet in the Air
some of the Country people spying me came running by Troops, and seizing me
would needs carry me before a Magistrate, and seeing no other remedy I yielded
to them. But when (...) tried to go I found my self so light that one foot
being on the ground I had much ado to set down the other, which was by reason
my Ebelus took all weight away from my Body, therefore I pretended a desire of
performing the necessities of nature* which being made known to them by signs,
for they understood not a word of any language I could speak, they permitted me
to go aside among a few ^shes, assuring themselves it was impossible I should
escape from the^; being there, I remembered Pylonas his directions about the use
of my (...), and knit them up, with a few remaining Jewels, into an
handkerchief, all except the least and worst Ebelus, which I found means to
apply in such manner to my body that but the half of its side touched my Skin;
This done I drew toward my Guardians, till coming so near that they could not
cross my way, I showed them a fair pair of ^ees, that I might have time to hide
my Jewels which I knew they would have robbed me of if not prevented. Being thus
lightened I led them such a dance, that had they been all upon the backs of so
many Race Horses they could never have overtaken me; I directed my Course to a
thick Wood, wherein I entered about a quarter of a League and there finding a
fine Spring, which I took for my mark, I thrust my Jewels into a hole made by a
Mole hard by.

I then took my Victuals out of my pocket, to which till now in all my Voyage I
had not the least appetite, and refreshed my self therewith, till the people
who pursued overtoo^ m^, into whose hands I quietly surrendered my self; They
led me to an inferior Officer, who understanding that I escaped from those who
first apprehended me, caused an enclosure of boards to be made, wherein they
put me, so that only my head was at liberty, and then carried me upon the
Shoulders of four slaves, like some notorious Malefactor, before a Person of
great Authority, who in their Language I learnt, was called a Mandarin* and
resided a Le^gue off the famous City of Pequin. I could not understand them,
but found I was accused for something with much vehemence, the substance of
this accusation it seems was, that I was a Magician as appeared by my being so
strangely carried in the Air, and that being a stranger as both my Language and
habit did declare, I contrary to the ^aws of China had entered the Kingdom
without a Warrant, and probably for no good intent. The Mandarin heard them
with a great deal of gravity, and being a man of quick apprehension, and
^udious of Novelties, he told them he would take such order as the case
required, and m^ bold attempt should not go unpunished; Having dismissed them he
ordered his Servants I should be kept in a remote part of his vast Palace, be
strictly guarded, and ^dly used; This I conjecture b^ my treatment and what
followed, for my accommodation was much better than I could expect, I lodged
well, eat well, was well attended, and could complain of nothing but my
restraint; Thus continued I many months, afflicted more with the thoughts of my
Gansa's than any thing else, who I knew must be irrecoverably lost, as indeed
they were.

In this time by my own Industry, and the assistance of those who accompanied
me, I learnt to speak indifferently the Language of that Province, (for almost
every Province in China has its proper Tongue) whereat I perceived they were
much pleased; At length I was permitted to take the Air, and brought into the
spacious Garden of that Palace, a place of extraordinary pleasure and delight,
adorned with Herbs and Flowers of admirable sweetness and beauty, with almost
infinite variety of Fruits, European and others, all composed with that rare
curiosity as even ravished my senses in the contemplation of such delightful
objects; I had not long recreated my self here, when the Mandarin entered the
Garden on that side I was walking, of which having notice by his Servants, and
that I ought to kneel to him (a usual reverence I found toward great Officers)
I did so, and humbly entreated his favor toward a poor stranger who arrived in
these parts not designedly but by the secret disposal of the Heavens; He
answered in a different Language which I hear all the Mandarins use, and like
that of the Lunars consisting chiefly of tunes, which was interpreted by one of
his Attendants, wishing me to be of good comfort since he intended no harm to
me. Next day I was ordered to come before him, and being conducted into a Noble
dining Room exquisitely painted, the Mandarin commanding all to avoid,
vouchsafed to confer with me in the Vulgar Language, inquiring into the state
of my Country, the Power of my Prince, and the Religion and Manners of the
People; wherein having satisfied him, he asked me about my education, and what
brought me into this remote Country; I then declared to him the Adventures of
my Life, omitting what I thought convenient, and especially forbearing to
mention the Stones given me by Irdonozur.

The strangeness of my story did much amaze him, and finding in all my
discourse nothing tending to Magic, wherein he hoped by my means to be
instructed, he began to admire the excellency of my Wit, applauding me for the
happiest man that this World ever saw, and wishing me to repose my self after
my long Narration, he for that time dismissed me. After which the Mandarin took
so much delight in me, that no day passed wherein he did not send for me; At
length he advised me to cloth my self in the habit of that Country, which I
willingly did, and gave me not only the liberty of his House, but took me also
with him when he went to Pequin, whereby I had opportunity to learn the
disposition of the People, and the Policy of the Country, neither did I by my
attendance on him, gain only the knowledge of these things, but the possibility
likewise of being restored to my native Soi^, and to those dear Pledges which I
value above the World, even my Wife and Children; For by often frequenting
Pequin, I at length heard of some Fathers of the Society of Jesus, who were
become famous for their extraordinary favor with the King, to whom they had
presented some European as Cocks, Watches, Dials, and the like, which by them
were counted exquisite Curiosities. To these by the Mandarins leave I repaired,
and was welcomed by them, they much wondering to see a ^ay Spaniard there,
whither they had with so much difficulty obtained leave to arrive. There did I
relate to Father Pantoja and others of the Society the forementi^ adventures by
whose directions I put them in writing, and sent this story of my Fortunes to
Macao, from thence to be conveyed to Spain as a forerunner of my return; And
the Mandarin being indulgent to me, I came often to the Fathers with whom I
consulted about many secrets, and with them also laid the Foundation of my
return, the blessed ^our whereof I do with patience expect, that by (...) my
Country with the knowledge of these hidden mysteries, I may at last reap the
Glory of my Fortunate Misfortunes.

A Journey of Several English Merchants from Oratava in Teneriff, one of the
Canary Islands on the Coast of Africa, to the Top of the Pike in that Island,
with the Observations they made there.
MEntion being made in the preceding Story of the Pike of Teneriff, it may be
some diversion to insert the following little Journey performed by diverse
Englishmen a few years since to the Top, who published the following account
thereof.

The Pike of Teneriff is thought not to have its equal in the World for height,
its top being so much above the Clouds, that in clear weather it may be seen
sixty Dutch Leagues at Sea.

It cannot be ascended but in July and August, lying all the other months
covered with Snow, though upon this and the near adjacent Islands none is to be
seen; It requires three days travel to come to the Top; The Merchants and other
worthy Persons who undertook this Journey proceed thus. Having farn^ our selves
with a Guide, Servants, and Horses to carry (...) Wine and Provision, we set
forth from Oratava a Port Town in the Island of Ten^riff, s^tuate on the north
(...)* two mile distant from the main Sea, and traveled from twelve at night
till eight in the morning, by which time we got to the Top o^ the first
Mountain toward the Pico de (...); (...) ^der a very large and conspicuous P^
we took (...) Breakfast, Dined, and refresht o^ selves till two in the
Afternoon. Then we pa^ through many sandy ways, over many los^y ^ountains, but
nak^ and bare, and not covered with P^ (...) (...) (...) (...) nights passage
was; this exp^sed (...) to excessive heat, till we arrived to the for of the
Pico, where we found diverse huge ^oues which (...) (...) have fallen from some
upper part; A^ (...) the evening we began to and up the Vi^, (...) were s^arce
advanced a mile, when (...) being no more passable for Horses, (...) left them
with our (...)* In the ascent of one mile, some of our Company grew very faint
and sick, disordered by ^xes, Vomitings and Aguish Distempers, our (...) hair
standing up like Bristles, and calling for (...) of our Wine carried in small
^ls on an Horse, we found it so wonderfully cold, that we could not drink it
till we had made a (...) to warm it ^otwithstanding the Air ^as very c^m and
moder^* but when the Sun was set, it began to blow with such violence, and grew
so cold, that taking up our lodging among the hollow ^ks, we were necessitated
to keep Fires in the mou^ of them all night.

About four in the morning w^ began to (...) again, and being come another ^ile
up, one of our Company failed and was abl^ to proceed no further; Here began
the black Roc^; the (...) of us pursued our Journey ti^ ^e came to the S^ Loaf,
where we began to travel again in a white Sand, being fitted with Shoes, whose
single Soles are made a Finger broader than the upper Leathers, to encounter
this difficult passage; Having ascended as far as the black Rocks, which lay
all fl^t like a plain Floor, we climbed within a mile of the very Top of the
Pico, and at last we attained the Summit, where we found no such smoke as
appeared a little below, but a continual perspiration of a hot and sulphurous
vapor that made our Faces extremely sore; all this way we found no
considerable alteration of the Air, and very little Wind, but on the Top it was
so impetuous that we had much ado to stand against it whilst we drank K Charles
II. Health, and fired each of us a Gun. Here also we took our Dinner, but found
that our strong Waters had lost their virtue, and were almost insipid, while
our Wine was more Brisk and Spirituous than before; The Top on which we stood
being not above a yard broad is the Brink of a Pit called the Caldera which we
judged to be a Musket Shot over, and near sourscore yards deep in form of a
Cone, hollow within like a Kettle, and covered over with small loose stones
mixed with Sulphur and Sand, from am^ng which issued diverse Spiracles of Smoke
and Heat, which being stirred with any thing puffs and makes a noise, and is so
offensive, that we were even suffocated with the sudden rising of Vapors upon
removing one of these Stones, which were so hot as not easily to be handled; We
descended not above four or five yards into the Caldera or Caldron because of
the Slippe^inefs under foot, and the difficulty; but some have adventured to
the bottom; Other matters obser^able we discovered none, besides a clear sort
of Sulphur which lay like Salt upon the Stones; From this renowned Pico we
could see the Grand Cana^ies fourteen Leagues distant, Palma eighteen, and
(...) seven, which interval of Sea seemed not much wider than the Thames about
London, We discerned also the Herro being distant about twenty Leagues, and so
to the utmost limits of the Sea much farther; As soon as the Sun appeared the
shadow of the Pico seemed to cover not only the whole Island and the Grand
Canaries but the Sea to the very Horizon, where the Top of the Sugar Loaf or
Pico visibly appeared to turn up, and cast its shade into the Air it self, at
which we were much surprised;

But the Sun was not far ascended when the Clouds began to rise so fast, as
intercepted our Prospect both of the Sea and the whole Island, except the Tops
only of the Subj^cent Mountains which seemed to pierce them through; whether
these Clouds do ever s^rmount the Pico we cannot say, but to such as are far
below they seem sometimes to hang above it, or rather wrap themselves about it,
constantly when the West Winds blow; this they cal^ the Cap, and is an
infall^le prognostic of ensuing Storms; One of our Company who made this
Journey again two years after, arriving at the Top of the Pico be^e day, and
creeping under a great stone to Shroud himself from the cold Air, after a
little space found himself all wet, and perceived it to come from a perpetual
trickling of the Water from the Rocks above him; Many excellent and exuberant
Springs we sound issuing* from the Tops of most of the other mountains, gushing
out in great Spouts almost as far as the huge Pinetree we mentioned before;
Having stayed a while at the Top, we a^l des^nded the S^ndy way till we came to
the foot of the Sugar Loaf, which being s^eep even almost to a perpendicular we
soon passed, and here we met with a Cave about ten yards deep and fift^en
broad, being in shape like an Oven or Cupola* having a hole at the Top near
eight yards over; This we descended by a Rope that our Servants held fast on
the Top, while with the other end being fastened about our middles we swung our
selves, till being over a Bank of Snow, we slid down, lighting upon it; we were
forced to swing thus in the descent, because in the midst of the bottom of this
Cave opposite to the overt^re at the Top is a round pit of Water like a Well,
the surface whereof is about a yard lower, but as wide as the Mouth at Top, and
about six Fathom deep; we supposed this Water was not a Spring, b^t dissolved
Snow blown in, or Water trickling through the Rocks; about the sides of the
Grott for some height there is Ice and Isicles hanging down to the Snow.

But being quickly weary of this excessive cold place, and drawn up again, we
continued our descent from the Mountains by the same Passage we went up the day
before, and so about five in the Evening arrived at Oratava from whence we set
forth; our faces were so red and sore that to cool them we were forced to wash
and bath them in Whites of Eggs; The whole height of the Pics in perpendicular
is vulgarly esteemed to be two miles and an (...). No Trees, Herbs nor Shrubs
did we find in all the Passage, but Pines, and among the whiter (...) a kind of
Broom being a bushy Plant; It is the opinion of some ingenious Persons who have
lived twenty years upon the place, that the whole Island being a Soil mightily
impregnated with Brimstone, did in former times take fire, and blow up all or
near all at the same time; and that many Mountains of h^ge Stones calcined and
burnt, which appear all over this Island, especially in the South-West part o^
it, were cast up and raised out of the Bowels of the Earth at the time of that
general (...); and that the greatest quan^ty of this Sulphur lying about the
center of the ^land raised up the Pico to that height at which it now is seen;
which appears by the scitu^tion of those Rocks that lie three or four Mile*
round the bottom of the Pico, and in such order one above another almost to the
Sugar loaf as it is called, as if the whole ground swel^ing and rising up
together by the asce^sion of the Brimstone, the Torrents and Rivers of it did
with a sudden eruption Roll and Tumble them down from the rest of the Rocks;
especially to the South-West where from the Top of the Pico to the Sea coast
lie huge heaps of these burnt Rocks one under another, and there still remain
the very tracks of (...) ^ne Rivers as they ran over this Quarter of the Island
which has so wasted the ground* ^ond recovery, that nothing can be made to
grow there but Broom.

A View of the Bay of Souldania near the Cape of Good Hope, on the Coast of
Africa; where the Ships of the Honorable East-India-Company used formerly to
refresh in their Indian Voyages. With an Account of the Natives, Birds, and
Beasts of that Country, now called Cafaria, and Monomopata; or the Country of
the Hottentots, With some Accidents happening there.
BEfore we arrive at the East Indies, I cannot but divert once more to the Bay
of Souldania lying in thirty four degrees and an half of South Latitude, about
twelve Leagues short of the Cape of Good Hope, in a sweet Climate full of
fragrant Herbs, which the Soil produces of it self, pleasing to the sense;
Where the Honorable East India Companies ships used formerly to refresh, and
arriving there very weak and feeble with that Sea disease the Scurvey, have
often found very great relief; and it is observable if any be not too much
overgone with this malady, as soon as they come to enjoy the fresh Air on any
shore with fresh Water and fresh Victuals, they presently recover; but if the
S^urvey has overmuch prevail^d, they instantly dye as soon as they set their
foot on Shore. Here is a most delicious Brook of sweet Water arising out of a
mighty Hill hard by, called for its form, The Table, near which is another Hill
exceeding high like a Pyramid, and called by Europeans the Sugar Loaf; here are
great store of Cattle as little Cows, called by the barbarous Inhabitants Boos,
and Sheep which they name Baas, who bear a short, course, hairy Wool, and seem
to have been never shorn. These Boos and Baas as they term them, were formerly
bought in great plenty for small quantities of Kettle-brass, and Iron Hoops
taken off our empty Cask, which for this long Voyage to the Indies are hoop't
with Iron. These Salvages had the Cattle we bought of them at very great
Command, for with a call they would presently run to them, and when they had
sold a Bullock to us for a little piece of Brass, if we did not presently knock
him down, they would by the same call make the poor creature break from us, and
run to them again, and then there was no getting them, but by giving more
Brass; thus they sell the same beast two or three times, by the covetousness
and deceit of this brutish People. Of all Metals they love B^ass best, it may
be for the rankness of the smell wearing great Rings thereof about their Arms,
so that if you lay before them a piece of Gold worth 40s. and a piece of Brass
worth Two pence, they will leave the Gold and take the Brass; On this shore are
excellent small Roots for Sallads, and store of large fat Mullets.

This remote part of Africa is mountainous, and overun with Lions, Tigers,
Wolves, and many other Beasts of Prey, which in the night discover themselves
by their noise and roaring; To the Teeth and Jaws of which cruel creatures the
Natives here expose their old people, when they grow decrep^t and troublesome;
laying them forth in some open place in the night, when the Wild Beasts, and
Lions roar after their Prey. One poor Old wretch was thus exposed when some
English Ships were there, and by his pitiful cries discovered by our Court of
Guard ashore, by whom he was delivered from Death; And they asking Cooree one
of the Natives why they did so, he replied, It was their Custom when People had
lived so long that they knew not what to do with them, thus to be rid of them;
They saw in this Bay of Souldania many Whales, party-colored Fowls and
Ostriches; The Soil about the Bay seems good, but the Sun shines not upon a
People more Barbarous than those which possess it, being rather Beasts in the
Skins of men, than Men in the Skins of Beasts, for by their Ig^rance, Habit,
Language, Diet and other things they appear absolutely brutish.

For generally all People as well Heathen as Christian acknowledge the great
God of Heaven and Earth, but they, as Cooree told us, own no God at all; Their
speech seems rather an inarticulate noise than a Language, like the clucking of
Hens, or Gabling of Turkies, sounding like the word Hott-en-tot, from whence
they are so called. As they walk about, they make a strange confused noise; if
there be two, three, ten, twenty or more in company, they walk in rank one
after another in small paths they have made by going thus, as Cows do when they
come home to the pail; or as Wild Geese flying in Ranks, make a noise, so these
walking together gabble from the first to the last as if all spoke and none
answered; Their Habits are Sheep Skins undrest thonged together, which cover
their bodies to the middle, with a little flap tied before them, being naked
downward; when it is cold they put the Woolley, and when hot the Fleshy side
next their Body. Their Ornaments are Bullocks or Sheeps guts full of Excrements
about their Necks; and when we bought their Cattle they would take, their
Skins, Guts, and Garbage, which plentifully furnished them with that stinking
attire; When they are hungry they sit down and shaking some of that filthy
pudding out of the Guts bow down their Mouths to their hands almost as low as
their knees, and like hungry Dogs gnaw and eat the Raw Guts.

The Women are adorned, habited and dieted in the same manner, only they wear
more about their lower parts than the men. They carry their sucking Infants
under their Skins upon their backs, and their Breasts hanging down like
^agpipes, they put them up with their hands that they may suck them over their
Shoulders; Both Sexes make coverings for their heads of Cow Dung mingled with a
little stinking Grease, and besmear their Faces therewith; which makes their
Company insufferable if they get the Wind of you; They eat rotten moldy
Biskets fit for nothing but the dunghill, yea they will devour what a hungry
Dog in England would refuse. A couple of them, had found on the Shore a large
piece of a dead Fish the Sea had cast up, which stunk intolerably; they made a
little fire with dry Cow Dung warmd and then eat it, with as much appetite as
an hungry man would feed upon a Savoury Dish; which makes one believe they have
but three senses, wanting both smelling and tasting. These Brutes devote
themselves to Idleness, for they neither spin nor dig; They are straight and
well limbed, though not very Tall, their Faces are ill favored, most of their
Noses flat, have little or no beard; the hair on their heads short, black and
curled; their Skins very tawny; swift they are of fo^t, and will throw Darts
and shoot Arrows very dangerously.

In 1615 an East India Ship returning thence, and arriving at this Harbor; when
she was ready to Sail, having two of these Salvages aboard, the Commander
resolved to bring them home with him, imagining that having learnt English
here, they might discover something of their Country to us; These poor
wretches thus carried away against their wills were much disturbed; One of them
merely out of ^enness, though he was very well used, died soon after they put
to Sea; The other who called himself Cooree, was brought to London, and kept
Six Months in Sir Thomas Smiths House Governor of the East India-Company, where
he had good Diet, good C^oths, good Lodging* and all other fitting
Accommodations; One would have thought that this wretch might have conceived
his present, compared with his former Condition a Heaven upon Earth.

But all these things gave him no content, though to his good Entertainment he
had gallantry added, having a Chain of Bright ^rass, with Breast, Back and
Headpeice of the same, and a Buckler all of Brass his beloved Metal, yet all
this did not now please him, for never was any man more weary of ill Usage,
than he was of Courtesies; being ever more desirous of returning to his
Country; For he would lve on the ground and cry out very often in broken
English, Cooree home go, Souldania go, home go. Not long after he was returned
home, and had no sooner set footing on his own shore but he threw away his
Cloths, Linen, with all his other covering, and instantly got his Sheepskins
upon his back, guts about his Neck, and a perfumed Cap of Cow Dung on his Head,
and so returned like a Dog to his vomit, and a Swine to his wallowing in the
Mire, without a Metaphor; After this Fellow was returned, the Natives were shy
of us, for though they would come about us in great Companies when we arrived,
yet three or four days before they thought we would depart not one was to be
seen, fearing we would have dealt with them as with Cooree. But it had been
well he had never seen England, for as he discovered nothing to us, so when he
came home he told his Countrymen, that Brass was but a base and cheap
Commodity in England; and we had never after such a free exchange of our Brass
and Iron for their Cattle. I asked Cooree, who was their God; He lifting up his
hands answered in bad English, England God, Great God; Souldania no God.

In 1614. Ten Englishmen being condemned to dye at the Old Bailey London, had
their Execution respited by the entreaty of the East India Merchants* upon
condition they should be all banished to this place, that they might discover
somewhat advantageous to Trade. One named Duffeld was that year redeemed from
this sad banishment by Sir Thomas Row Ambassador to the Great M^gol, and
afterward brought back to England by that Noble Gentleman, and being entrusted
by him, this ungrateful Villain stole some of his Plate and ran away; Another
was likewise on the Voyage, but what became of him I know not. So that only
eight were here left with Ammunition and Victual, and a small Boat to carry
them to a little uninhabited Island, in the Mouth of the Bay of Souldania, as a
place of retreat and safety from the Natives on the Main; It is called Penguin
Island, probably so named by some Welshman, Penguin signifying a white head,
there being many large Fowls with great Cole-Black Bodies and White Heads
called Penguins.

The Chief Person left here was one Cross, who called himself Captain; He was
one of the Yeomen of the Guard to King James I. but having twice or thrice had
his hand in the blood of men slain in Duels, and being now condemned with the
rest, upon great suit made he was banished hither with them; yet Divine Justice
seemed to pursue him, for being a stout man and abusing the Natives, he was
surprised by them who shot his Body so full of Arrows that he seemed all one
wound; The other seven recovered their Boat, and got off the Continent toward
the Island without much damage; but the Water running high, as soon as they
were ashore their Boat was split in pieces; so they were for^'t to continue in
that miserable place where neither Tree grew, nor any thing else to sustain
their lives, having no fresh Water but what the Showers left in the holes of
the Rocks; And so abounded with venomous Serpents that it was dangerous
treading in the long Grass; They h^d bu^ a small quantity of dry Biscuit, their
B^es were hungry, and their sleep unsafe, so that nothing could render their
condition more unhappy; and yet these seven vile Wret^es all lived ^o be made
examples of Divine Justice. For after the^ had continued in this desolate place
five or six months, and were all grown almost mad with Famine, an English Ship
came into that Road bound for England; Four of these seven growing impatient of
an hours stay there, immediately after the Ship came in made a float of the
Ruins of their sp^it Boat, and with ravell'd Boat Ropes fastening as well as
they could, all together, they got thereon, poizing it to the best advantage,
hoping by the ^enefit of their Oars, and strength of the ^de which ran quick
toward the Ship to recover her; But it being toward Evening when they made this
attemp^, and not being discovered by the Ship which rid a good way up in the
Bay, before they could come near her, the Tide returned and carried them back
into the Sea, where they all were cast away.

The day following the Ship sent a Boat to the Island, which took th^se three
yet surviving into her, who gave this account of their Fellows misfortune; But
notwithstanding all the sufferings of these Mi^creants, yet they behaved
themselves so lewdly in the Ship, that they were often put in the Bilbows; At
length the Ship arriving in the Downs she had not been at Anchor three hours,
when these Villains got ashore, where they had not been above three hours but
they committed a Robbery, and a few hours after were all apprehended for the
Fact, and by the Lord Chief Justices special Warrant Executed as incorrigible
Wret^es upon their former Sentence, near Sandwich in Kent, where they committed
the Crime. In 1615. Three other condemned Persons were carried to be left in
this place; but hearing of the ill success of their Predecessors, when the
Ships were ready to depart and leave them on shore, they all fell on their
Knees with tears in their Eyes before our Captain Joseph, beseeching him they
might be ^nged rather than left there; It was a sad sight to behold three men
in such a condition as to esteem Hanging a mercy; Our Commander said he had no
Commission to Execute them, but to leave them there, and so he must do, and
probably h^d done, but our fifth Ship the Swan staying a day or two after, took
these poor men in.

Though the English East India Company declined raising a Fort, or settling a
Colony at the Cape of Good Hope, yet the Dutch have Built a Strong Fort there
by the Sea side, against the Harbor, where the Governor lives. And about 300
pa^ces distant on the West of the Fort is a small Dutch Town of about 60 Houses
low, but well Built with Stone Walls, from a Quarry close by. The Country, for
near an 100 Mile^ up, is p^etty well settled with Farms, and yields good Crops
of Wheat. Barley, Pease, etc. to the industrio^ Dutch Families, and also to a
considerable ^mber of (...) Protestants; some of whom, Bless God that their
King has banished them their Native Country; since they are now settled in a
L^nd of ^eace, plenty, and security. There are great quantities of Grapes, of
which the French make excellent white wine, of a pale yellow color but sweet,
pleasant and strong. There are also Cows, Goats, Hogs, Horses, and Sheep very
large and fat. Ducks, Geese, Hens and Turkeys are very numerous; So are
Ostriches, who lay their Eggs in the S^nd, one of which will very well suffice
2 men. They have plenty of several sorts of Fish; one not so big as a Herring
of which they pickle great Quantities yearly, and send them to Europe.

On the backside of the Town toward the mountains the Dutch East India Company
have a large House, and a Garden, 3 mile long encompassed with a high Stone
Wall; full of diverse sorts of Herbs, Flowers, Roots, and Fruits; with spacious
Gravel Walks and Arbours; watered with a Brook which descends from the
Mountains and being cut into many Channells is conveyed into all parts of the
Garden. This water is afterward in Pipes carried into the Sea so far, that a
Longboat may come under the Pipe, which is raised to some height, and by
turning a Cock will fill all the Casks with fresh water* with the greatest
convenience; and is the best Watering Place in the World. The Hedges that make
the Walks of this Garden are very thick, and 9 or 10 foot high; They are kept
heat and even by continual pruning; They keep each sort of Fruit by themselves,
as Apples, Pears, Pomogranats, and abundance of Quinces, all which thrive well.
The Roots and Garden Herbs have also their distinct places, hedged in apart,
which makes the whole extreme pleasant and beautiful. Great numbers of Negro
Slaves are continually weeding and working therein. All Strangers are allowed
liberty to walk there, but not to taste of the fruit without leave.

The Dutch that live in the Town get well by the Ships that touch there. When
the Men come ashore to refresh themselves they must give 3s or a Dollar a day
for their entertainment, though Bread and Flesh is as cheap here as in England.
Besides, they buy good penniworths of several Commodities from Seamen, which
they sell again to the Country Farmers at a dear rate; none of which live
within 20 Miles of the Harbor. The high Tax that the Company lays upon drink
makes it very dear. There are but 3 Houses in the Town that sell strong liquor;
One, where they sell only Wine, and you must buy no where else but by stealth,
the Vintner paying a considerable price to the Company; So that you may
sometimes buy as much privately for 8d. as you give 18d. for there; but if the
Person that sold it be known, he is ruined. There is another House for Beer,
and Mum; and a Third sells only Brandy and Tobacco. The Natives or Hottentots
do likewise fell Beef and Mutton privately at an under rate, which else must be
bought only of the Companies Butchers; all others being prohibited buying of
the Hottentots. And so we leave the Cape of Good Hope.

The Factories of the Honorable East-India-Company in Persia. With an Account
of the Religion, Government, and other notable Remarks, in that Kingdom.
Also the Life and Doctrines of Mahomet the Grand Impostor.
HAving cleared our way let us now Sail m rrily toward the Indies, doubting
first the Cape of Good Hope, and then passing by Madagascar called also St.
Lawrence, one of the greatest Island in the World, stored with all manner of
Provisions, but inhabited by a barbarous and Heathenish People yet stout,
warlike and very numerous. Over against which on the Continent of Africa are Z
fala and Mazambique, where the Portugals have got footing, and may be strongly
supposed to be the places whither Solomon sent his Navy of Ships built at
Eziongebar, which stood on the Banks of the Red Sea in Arabia the Happy, the
Country of that famous Queen of the South, who hearing of his Wisdom and
Renown, took her Journey thence to visit the Court of King Solomon; From that
place Solomon sent his Ships for Gold, and Silver, and Ivory, coasting all
along the African shore, the Art of Navigation being then unknown; And the
Marri^ers steering without Chart or Compass, were necessitated to keep the
Neighboring Lands always in sight, as doubtless they did, these places being
stored with those rich Commodities above other parts of Africa.

The Portugals, Dutch and English, discovered these Countries of India in the
last Age; and have since settled themselves by Forts and Castles there; The
Portugals first brak^ the Ice, who in 1494. sailing from Lisbon under Vasco de
Gama, doubled the Cape of Good Hope, and succeeded so well as to Conquer and
Fortify several places in many Countries of Asia and the Islands thereof; In
1595. the Dutch set out a Fleet from Amsterdam to India, wherein they used such
extraordinary dexterity with their Cannon Law and Steel Arguments, that they
made themselves Masters of 28 Forts and Castles, and of forty four or forty
five Factories in a short time.

In 1600. the English began their Discoveries under Sir James Lancaster with
four Ships, whose endeavors were so blessed, and by the good Government of the
Honorable East-India-Company prospered so well, that they settled their
Residence and Factories in twenty four several plaees of note, as at Ormus and
Iasques in the entrance of the Persian Gulf under the Persian Monarch; At
Cambaja, Surat, Agria and other places in the Great Mogols Country; At
Maslapatan, Armagon, Petipoly, Pattana, Siam, and other places on the Coast of
Cormandel, and the Continent of Asia; At Achin, Ticko, Iambo, Prianian, on the
Isle of Sumatra; At Bantam, Iacatra and Iaparra on the Island of Iava; At
Socodana and Beniermasa, on the Island of Borneo; At Macassar in the Isle of
Celebs; At Poleroon on the Isle of Banda; At Firando in Iapan; And lastly at
Amhonio, Hitto, and other of the Molucco's, which they quietly enjoyed, till
our covetous Neighbors deprived us of some of them, and others were deserted
on several accounts.

The honorable the East India Company was incorporated in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, and has been confirmed, with diverse Immunities added to their
Charter by all the succeeding Kings, so that now they have as ample Privileges
as any Company whatsoever; and are found beneficial to the Nation by the great
Trade they drive in Importing so many rich Commodities from India, Persia, and
Arabia; They export from hence Pieces of Eight, Dollars, Broad clothes,
Perpetuana's, Gunpowder, Elephants Teeth, Lead, Amber, Looking-Glasses, Sizars,
Knives, Beads, Bracelets, Feathers, Coral, Quicksilver, Vermillion, Allom,
Brimstone and many others; For which they Import all sorts of Spices,
Cotton-yarn, Callicoes, Pintadoes, Tamerinds, Sanders, Spikenard, Bezoar,
Alloes, Mirrhe, Rubarb, Opium, Frankincense, Cassia, Borax, Calamus,
Mirabolans, Green Ginger, Sugars, Sugar Candy, Camphire, Sandal Wood, Benjamin,
Musk, Civet, Ambergreece, Rice, Indico, Silks both Raw and Wrought; Salt Petre,
Precious Stones of several sorts, Pearl, Mother of Pearl, Gold, Silver,
Crystal, Cornelian Rings, Agats, Lacqure, Furrs, and Skins of Wild Beasts,
Porcelane Copper, China Roots, Tea, Sanguis Draconis, China Wares of diverse
sorts, with several other Commodities and Drugs.

Of Ispahan, or Spawhawn, and Gambroon in the Kingdom of Persia.
DEsigning to give some Account of Persia, wherein these Factories are settled,
I shall begin with Ispahan. This is the Capital City of all Persia, and the
Residence of the King, being in the Center of his Empire, situate in a great
Plain, which extends 3 ways, 15 or 20 Leagues, healthy and pleasant, beautified
with stately Palaces, delicious Gardens, magnificent Piazza's, and wealthy
Bazars or Marketplaces; only the Streets are narrow and dark, to prevent the
burning Rays of the Sun; and annoyed with Loads of Ordure and Filth. In the
Summer dusty, and in the Winter dirty. In this City the East India Company have
a Factory, as also at Bussora.

Gambroon, or Gomrow, is a City of great Commerce, guarded with 2 Castles,
wherein are planted 80 Brass Cannon. The Air is so hot and unwholesome, that no
Stranger can live there above 3 or 4 Months in the Year, but retire to the
Mountains 2 or 3 days Journey off. All Nations that Traffic upon the Indian
Seas, and the Land Caravans, carry Commodities thither, and bring from thence
Velvets, Raw Silk, and other Persian Goods. This City of Gombroon, where the
English have a Factory, is risen upon the Ruins of Ormus, as you will hear,
which besng once the Staple of the Eastern World, and where we once had a
famous Factory, I shall give some account of it.

Ormus is an Island in the Persian Gulf, about 20 Miles in compass, Stony, and
full of Rocks, and in a manner barren of all Necessaries, except Salt,
wherewith the very Rocks are covered, and of Salt Stone many Houses built; So
destitute of all things fitting for the Life of Man, that they had their
Victuals, yea, the Water they drank from the adjoining Countries; the Summer so
hot, that the People rest in Caves covered with Wood, and stand or sit in Water
up to the Chin, and have Loopholes in their Houses to let in the Wind; yet in
regard of the Situation, it was one of the richest Empories in the World, the
Wealth of Persia and India being brought thither, and conveyed hence by Water
to the River Euphrates* and so by Boats, or on Camels Backs to Aleppo,
Alexandria, Tripoly, and thence dispersed into all the Countries of the
Mediterranean Sea; The only City was of the same name with the Island, founded
700 years ago by Mahomet Danku, descended from the Kings of Saba in Arabia
Felix; who, with many Families of the Sabeans. passed over the Streights into
Carmenia, and the Isles adjoining, and liking the Situation of this Island,
built this City in it, which he called Ormus, or Armuzium, the name of the
Promontory wherein it lies; It was seated at one end of the Isle, about 2 Miles
in compass, well built, with a fair Market place, some Churches, and a well
fortified Castle, furnished for a Siege; by reason of its wealth and resort of
Merchants, grown to such esteem that it gave occasion to this distich*

Si terrarum Orbis quaequa patet Annulus esset,
Illius Ormusium Gemma decusque foret,
Were all the World a Ring, this Isle alone
Might of that Ring be thought to be the Stone.
It was first under its own King, whose Dominion extended also to some part of
the Continent on either side, and over all the rest of the Islands within the
Gulf; His revenue was of no great yearly due, till the coming of the Portugals
thither, by whom it was discovered under the Conduct of Albukerque, in 1509.
Who having fortified some part of it for their own defense, made it the Staple
of Trade for Indian Merchandise, which so inricht the same, that the Revenues
of those Kings (though Vassals and Tributaries to the Portugals) amounted to an
Hundred and Forty Thousand Seriffs yearly; In this flourishing state it stood
till 1622. when Abbas the Sultan of Persia having received some affronts from
the Portuguess, or desirous to remove the Trade from Ormus to some Port of his
own, gave Order to Emangoli Chan the Duke of Shiras to besiege it with Fifteen
Thousand Men; Who despairing of prevailing by his Land Forces only, furnished
himself with Ships and Cannon of some English Merchants, to whom he promised
many things which he never performed; For being once Master of the City, he
utterly destroyed it, removing the Canon to Lar, the Wealth thereof to his own
Treasury at Shiras, and the Materials of the Houses to Gombroon; the Portuguess
and Christian Natives, passing over to Muskat in Arabia Felix; Since which
though the English Captains that ventured in it were disappointed of the
Rewards they expected, yet so much Honor has been given by the King of Persia
to the English Nation, that the Agent, who resides at Gombroon, takes Custom of
all Strangers who Traffic thither.

The Religion of the Persians. With the Life and Doctrines of Mahomet the Grand
Impostor.
THE Persians are generally Mahometans of the Sophian Sect, and the difference
and hatred is so great between them and the Turks, though both own Mahomet for
their Lawgiver, that they are absolutely irreconcilable. Now because this
horrible Impostor has infatuated so great a part of the World with his
blasphemous Dotages, I will here give a brief Account of his Life, and also of
his Doctrine, as it is comprehended in his Holy Book* as they call it, or the
Alcoran

Mahomet, the Son of Abdalla, an Idolatrous Pagan, was born after his Fathers
death, at Ia^hrip, an obscure Village of Arabia Foelix; but now become a City
called Medina Talnahi, or the Town of the Prophet, to which a multitude of
Mahometans go in Pilgrimage every Year. His Mother, named Hemina, was a
perverse Jewess both by Birth and Religion, who dying when he was but 2 Years
old, left him to the ca^e of his Uncle Abdal Mu^alib. He, unable to give him
any other Education than the Irreligion and Ignorance of his Country afforded
him, sold him at 10 Years of Age to the Ishmaelites, after the barbarous
Customs of the Arabians; who exposing him to Sale in the open Market, he was
bought by one Abdal (...) wealthy Merchant; By him he was employed as a Slave
in all Servile Offices, till observing his great Wit, and fitness for better
Services, he at last used him as his Factor, sending him with his Camels and
Loads of Merchandise into Syria, Persia, Egypt, and other places, wherein he
behaved himself with such dexterity that he much increased his Masters Wealth,
and his own Estimation; Of Person he is said to be low, and withal
Scald-headed, but otherwise comely, and of good aspect; Much troubled with the
Falling sickness, which Infirmity he made good use of afterward, affirming
those Fits were nothing but heavenly Raptures in which he conversed with the
Angel Gabriel; He is likewise said to have been well Skilled in Magic, by
which he taught a white Pigeon to feed at his Ear, which he declared was the
Holy Ghost, by whom he was instructed in the Law he was to publish; but this
not till afterward; By Sorcerie, comeliness of Person, and the great knowledge
he had in his Masters business, he gained so far on the Affections of his
Mistress, that upon the death of Abdal she made him her Husband.

Possessed of all his Masters Wealth, he affected Ease, and being till then of
no Religion, or at least a Pagan, he began to hearken to Sergius a Nestorian
Monk, who flying out of Syria for fear of punishment (the Heresies of Nestorius
being newly both revived and censured) came into Arabia, where he found
Entertainment in the House of Mahomet; By his persuasions, who found him a fit
Instrument for the Devil to work on, he began to entertain thoughts of
hammering out a new Religion which might unite all Parties in some common
Principles, and bring the Christians, Jews and Gentiles, into which the World
was then divided, under one Profession; Resolved on this, he retired to a Cave
not far from Mecca, as if he there attended only Contemplation; Sergius in the
mean time Trumpeting in the Ears of the People both his Parts and Piety; who
being thus prepared to behold the Pageant, out comes the principal Actor, with
some parts of his Alcoron, pleasing enough to sensual Minds, which he professed
to have received from the Angel Gabriel; And finding that this edified to his
Expectation, he next proclaimed Liberty* to all Slaves and Servants, as a thing
commanded him by God, by whom the natural Liberty of Mankind was most dearly
tendered; which drew to him such a Rabble of unruly People, that without Fear or
Opposition he dispersed his Doctrines, reducing them at last to a Book, or
Method. The Book of this Religion he calls the Alcoran, or Collestion of
Precepts, the Original whereof they feign is written on a Table kept in Heaven,
and the Copy brought to Mahomet by the Angel Gabriel. A Book so highly
reverenced by the Mahometans, that they write upon the Cover of it, Let none
touch this but he that is clean. The Body of it, as it now stands, was
Composed by Osman, the fourth Caliph or Governor; who seeing the Saracens
daily inclining to diverse Heresies by reason of some false Copies of Mahomet's
Law, and that the Empire, by the same means, was likely to fall into civil
dissension, by the help of his Wife, who was Mahomet's Daughter, he got a sight
of all Mahomet's Papers, which he reduced into four Volumes, and divided it
into 124 Chapters; commanding expressly, upon pain of death, that that Book, and
that only should be received as Canonical through his Dominions; The whole body
of it being only a Gloss and Exposition on Eight of the Commandments.

First, Every one ought to believe, that God is a great God, and one only God,
and Mahomet is his Prophet. They hold Abraham to be the Friend of God, Moses
the Messenger of God, and Christ the Breath of God, whom they deny to be
conceived of the Holy Ghost, affirming, that the Virgin Mary grew with Child of
him by smelling to a Rose, and was delivered of him at her Breasts; They deny
the Mystery of the Trinity, but punish such as speak against Christ, whose
Religion was not, say they, taken away, but amended by Mahomet, and whoever in
his Pilgrimage to Mecca does not visit the Sepulcher of Christ either going or
coming is reputed not to have merited or bettered himself by his Journey.

2. Every Man must Marry to increase the Disciples of Mahomet. Four Wives he
allows to every Man, and as many Concubines as he will, between whom the
Husband makes no difference either in Affection or Apparel, but that the first
Wife only enjoys his Sabbath days Benevolence; The Women are not admitted while
alive into their Churches, nor after death into Paradise; And whereas in most
other Countries Fathers give some Portions with their Daughters, the Mahometans
give Money for their Wives, which being once paid, the Contract is Registered in
the Cadies Book, and this is all their formality of Marriage.

3. Every one must give of his Wealth to the Poor. Hence some buy Slaves and
set them free, others buy Birds and let them fly; They use commonly to release
Prisoners and Bondslaves; To build Caves or Lodgings in the ways for relief of
Passengers; Repair Bridges and mend Highways; But their most ordinary Alms
consists in Sacrifices of Sheep and Oxen, which, when the Solemnity is
performed, they distribute amongst the Poor, to whom also on the first Day of
every Year, they are bound to give the Tyth or Tenth part of their Profits the
Year past, so that there are scarce any Beggars among them.

4. Every one must make his Prayers five times a Day. When they pray they turn
their Bodies toward Mecca, but their Faces sometimes one way, and sometimes
another, believing that Mahomet shall come behind them while at their
Devotions. The first time is an hour before Sun rising, the second at Noonday,
the third at three a Clock Afternoon* the fourth at Sunsetting, the fifth and
last before they go to sleep; At all these times the Cryers bawl in the
Steeples (for the Turks and Saracens have no Bells) for the People to come to
Church, and such as cannot, must, when they hear the Voice of the Cryers, fall
down in the place where they are, do their Devotions, and kiss the Ground
thrice.

4. Every one must keep a Lent one month in a Year. This Lent is called
Ramazan, in which they suppose the Alcoran was given to Mahomet by the Angel
Gabriel. This Fast is only in the day time, their Law allowing them to be as
Frolic in the Night as they please; so they abstain from Wine and Swines
Flesh, which is prohibited in their Law at all times, but never so strictly
abstained from as in Lent.

6. Be obedient to thy Parents. Which Law is most neglected of any in all the
Alcoran, never any Children being generally so nnnatural as the Turkish.

7. Thou shall not Kill. This they keep inviolate amongst themselves, but the
poor Christians are sure to feel their Fury. And as if by this Law the actual
shedding of blood only were prohibited, they have invented Punishments for
their Offenders worse than death. As first the Strappado which is hanging them
by the Arms drawn backward, and then drawn up on high, and letting down again
with a violent swing which unjointeth all their Back and Arms. Secondly, They
sometimes hoise up their Heels, and with a great Cudgel give them three or four
hundred blows on the soles of their Feet. Thirdly, It is ordinary to draw them
naked up to the top of a Gibbet or Tower full of Hooks, and cutting the Ropes
to let them fall down again, and by the way they are caught by some of the
Hooks, where they commonly hang till they die for Hunger.

8. Do unto others as thou would be done unto thy self.

To those that keep these Laws he promises Paradise, a place of all Delights,
adorned with flowery Fields, watered with Chrystalline Rivers, beautified with
Trees of Gold, under whose cool shade they shall spend their time with amorous
Virgins, whose Mansions shall not be far distant. The Men shall never exceed
the Age of Thirty, nor the Women of Fifteen, and those to have their
Virginities renewed as often as lost. Friday he ordained to be their Sabbath,
partly to distinguish his Followers from the Jews and Christians, who solemnize
the 2 days ensuing; but principally because he was on that day proclaimed King,
or Emperor, and so accordingly created; Wine and Swines Flesh are the principal
things forbidden by the Alcoran, from the last whereof they all unanimously
refrain, but on the first they are so besotted, that when they come at it they
seldom go home again unled; insomuch that all the Wines in Constantinople have
been thrown about the Streets, and death made the Penalty for any who shall
presume to bring any more into the City; Mahomet taught them, that every one
should be saved by his own Religion, except those who revolt from the Alcoran
to another Law; But so that under the Notion of Religion h^ means only such as
worship the One and only God, excluding thereby the Old Gentile Idolaters from
the hope of Salvation. He likewise taught that at the end of the World all Men
who professed any such Religion should go into Paradise, the Jews under the
Banner of Moses, the Christians under the Banner of Christ, and the Saracens
under the Banner of Mahomet. They compel no Man therefore to abjure the Faith
wherein he was born, but secretly commecd and approve such as are zealous in
their own Religion, yet counting it a great Honor to have daily new
Proselites, they allure them with hopes of Freedom and Preferment, which with
many are too prevailing Motives to cause them to renounce their Christian
Profession; Hence some infer, it is better for a Man that desires his Liberty,
to live in these Countries than in some others, since he is never molested if
he meddle not with their Law, their Women, or their Slaves.

Their Opinions of the end of the World are very rediculous, as that at the
Winding of an Horn, not all Flesh only, but the Angels themselves shall dye;
That the Earth with an Earthquake shall be kneaded together like a lump of
Dough; That a second blast of the same Horn shall, after forty days, restore
all again; That Cain shall be the Captain or Ringleader of the Damned, who
shall have the Faces of Dogs and Swine; That they shall pass over the Bridge of
Justice laden with their sins in Satchels; That the greater Sinners shall fall
into Hell, the lesser into Purgatory only, with a thousand the like Fopperies,
needless to relate, which may be found in the Alcoran; a^thing so full of
Tautologies, Incoherences, and gross Absurdities of so impure and carnal a
mixture, that whoever is taken with it must abandon his natural Reason, if
Force, Ambition, or want of Christian Education, do not induce him to embrace
it. For if we seriously consider the Causes of the deplorable increase and long
continuance of this Religion, we shall find them to be chiefly these. 1. The
greatness of the Victories obtained by the Saracens, who easily compelled the
conquered Nations to receive their Law. 2. The great Zeal and Diligence of the
Arabians themselves, who being a numerous People, and much given to
Merchandise, have possessed themselves of all the Seacoasts of Africa from the
Streights of Babel Mandel almost to the Cape of Good Hope; of all the Islands
in those Seas, and of many Factories and good Towns on the Coast of India, in
all which they have settled their Religion also, as a thing inseparable from
their Nation. 3. A peremptory Restraint of all Disputations in any point of
Religion whatsoever. 4. The suppressing Philosophy, and the study of Humane
Sciences, the light whereof might easily detect the grosness of their
Superstitions. 5. The sensual liberty allowed of having variety of Wives, and
as many Concubines as they are able to keep. 6. The promise of the like sensual
pleasures in the other World, with which a Mind not illuminated with the Spirit
of God, is generally more affected, than with the speculative hope of a future
Happiness. 7. The forbidding Printing and Printed Books, whereby People might
perceive the truth and purity of the Christian Faith, with the Falsehood and
Impurity of the Law of Mohomet. Yet had not these last been sufficient to
induce the belief of such Absurdities if the first had not opened and prepared
the way.

For force of Arms was really the most prevailing Argumen^y which Mahomet
himself confirmed, and his Successors since have propogated and dispersed his
Doctrine; Who being strengthened by that Rascal Rabble which resorted to him, he
assaults Medina, pretending a quarrel to the Jews, who had there a Synagogue,
He was repulsed at first with loss of Men and a Wound in his Face, by which
some of his foreteeth were beaten out, and was there likely to have ended his
New Religion, but recovered by his Soldiers for further Mischief. At the next
onset he prevailed, the Battle being fought near a place called Bedez, situate
betwixt Mecca and Medina, frequently mentioned in the Alcoran. After which
Fight he took the City, converting the Synagogue to a Temple for their own
Impieties; the News hereof so startled the Nobility of Mecca, that they armed
all their Powers against him, and succeeded so well in the beginning of the
War, that they drove him forcibly from their Territories; which yet not long
after he again subdued, and made his chief Residence at Mecca. From that his
flight the Saracens compute their Years, (as w^ from Christ's Nativity) which
they call the Hegira, and begins about the Year of our Lord ^17. so termed from
an Arabic word that signifies, The Persecution raised about Religion. It
happened about this time that the Saracens revolting from Heraclius the Eastern
Emperor joined themselves to Mahomet, being exasperated by Julian the Apostate,
whom they served in his Wars against the Persians, for telling them upon
demanding their Pay* That he had greater store of Steel than Gold. But they
then wanted a Head to resort to. Now serving Heraclius in the same War, they
were used by his Officers in the same ill manner, for asking their Pay, the
Treasurer of the Army made them this churlish Answer, There is scarce Money
enough to pay the Roman and Grecian Soldiers, and why must these Dogs be so
importunate for their Wages? Provoked herewith, and hearing the Fame of
Mahomet, they joined him, who strengthened by them, and the coming in of the
rest of their Contrymen, he soon brought all Arabia under his subjection;
and having defeated the Emperors Forces sent against him, he conquered some
parts of Syria and Egypt, and returning to Mecca there died Frantic and
distempered, in the 70 Year of his Age, and 23 of his Impostures, of which he
spent thirteen at Medina, and the rest at Mecca. His dead Body being kept four
days in expectation of a Resurrection, which he promised to perform at the end
of three, grown full of stench and putrefaction, was carried to Medina, and
there interred. His Successors, out of wicked and worldly Policy, keeping up
the reputation of that Religion after his decease, which they scorned and
derided in his life, calling themselves Caliphs, or Vicar Generals to him their
Prophet.

Thus dyed Mahomet the Persion and Turkish Prophet, Haraclius being Emperor of
Constantinople^ Sadinion Bishop of Rome, Clotaire K. of France, Viteric K. of
Spain, and Ecbald K. of England, about 630 Years after our Savious Birth. He
was, as himself confessed, altogether Unlearned, and tho* naturally Subtle and
Witty, yet often puzzled to invent Miracles to confirm the deluded Arabians in
their vain Belief. For he contidually Preaching to them, that God sent him to
confirm his Law by force of Arms, the People earnestly demanded some Sign of
his Mission; so he was constrained to amuse them with the story of a Voyage
which he made to Heaven, to this effect.

That the Angel Gabriel with 70 pair of Wings came to him by Night, as he was
in Bed with his Wife, saying, That God had sent for him. He going down with
this Angel, found at his Door an Heterogeneous Beast, called Elborach, half
Ass, half Mule, but much swifter than either; for it would go as far at one
step as the most quick-sighted Man could see. This Beast (or Mahumetan) would
not let Mahomet mount him, unless he would first promise to pray for him, which
the charitable Prophet did; and was then, in the twinkling of an Eye, brought
by him to Jerusalem; where the Angel Gabriel tied the Beast with his Girdle to
a Rock; and taking Mahomet on his shoulders, carried him to Heaven Gate* They
knocked, and the Porter understanding Mahomet to be there, instantly opened, and
bid him welcome. In the first Heavens he saw Angels of diverse and monstrous
shapes; some composed of Fire and Snow; others of Fire alone, every one of a
different Form. Among the rest, one with the Head of a Cock, whose Feet trod
upon one Heaven, and his Head touched another; each Heaven being so far distant,
that it was a Journey of 500 Years to pass from one to the other; and when this
Cock Crows, which it seems is his language, all the Cocks upon the Earth Crow
likewise. This Angel conveyed him to another, he to a third, and so from one to
another, till at length he came to the Heaven where God himself was; who
courteously received him, asking how his people did and whether they received
his Law. God then familiarly laid his hand upon his Shoulder, which was so
cold that it peirced the marrow of his back bone. He was soon dismissed, God
telling him only how often in a day his Disciples should make their Prayers;
which were so many that in his return to the fourth Heaven, Moses met him,
advising him to go back, and entreat God that fewer prayers might serve his
turn, since his Followers were not able to say so many; so at length the number
was reduced to five. He then went back to his Elborach, which in a moment
brought him home to his house in Mecca, where he went to bed again to his wife;
she not once dreaming her husband would leave Heaven for her company, or
imagining he had been there; all this he performed in the tenth part of a night.

The Turks do still believe this Romantic story for truth, but the Arabians at
that time, requiring him to ascend again to Heaven in their view, he unwilling
to take so long a Journey only replied, Praised be God that I am a Man, and an
Apostle. On the Seal which he used was engraven, Mahomet the Messenger of God.
He had several slights to deceive his Followers, performed either by Art or
Witchcraft. Once an Ox brought him a Chapter of the Alcoran upon his Horns in a
full Assembly. Another time being at dinner with one that was his pretended
friend, who yet designed to poison him, and a Shoulder of Mutton being brought
to Table, he pretended the meat spoke, and forbid him to eat of it, though none
but himself heard it among a great Company; however he permitted one of his
dearest friends to eat, and dye, poisoned therewith. Other vain Miracles he
published, as that the Trees bowed to him, (though only shaken by a sudden gust
of wind) the Wolves howled, and the Asses brayed to him, all in their several
Languages desiring his Prayers, which he being a Prophet understanding, as
religiously performed. He often declared that God gave him Commission to fulfill
his own desires in all things, and in his Alcoran writes, that he thus spoke to
him, O Prophet! it is permitted thee to lie with all Women that are given thee,
or which thou do purchase; thy Aunts, or kindred, and all other good Women
that freely desire thy Company, and this is lawful for thee alone. Thus he
pretended Religion for fulfilling his inordinate Lusts, in which it is said he
equalled his strength to that of 40 men.

The day of his Death was no less prodigious then the course of his life, a
Comet resembling a Sword, appearing at high noon, pointing from South to North,
and continued in the sight of all for thirty days together, which the Wise men
of that Age concluded to be a Presage of the fatal riseing and grandeur of the
Arabian Empire. Haly was astonished at his distemper, and the high frenzy
wherein he dyed, esteeming it no divine quality in a Prophet and a Redeemer (as
he called himself) of so many People. He derided his presumption, yet carefully
concealed the manner of his death, being willing to promote his Law, that so he
might inherit his power and Empire.

For near 800 Years after his decease the Arabians, Saracens, Turks and
Persians continued in the Mohammedan Faith without any divisions. But in 1482.
there happened this memorable alteration of Religion and State in Persia.

Mahomet the Lawgiver of the Saracens by his last Will bequeathed to his Cosen
Hali (who was also the Husband of his Daughter Fatime) all his Estate with the
Title of Caliph; but Abubezar, Haumar and Osman, 3 powerful men of Arabia, and
great Assistants to Mahomet, succeeded one another in that dignity. After their
Death Hali hoped to obtain the Government which had so long been detained from
him. But M^avias, a valiant Soldier advanced himself, and to remove all future
pretensions, he slew Hali, with his Son Ossan, and eleven of Ossans Sons; but
Musa Ceresin the twelsth Son made his escape; From this Musa one Guine Sophie
derived his Pedigree in 1360. And considering that there had been no Caliphs
for many Years past, he began to contrive the reviving and establishing that
Honorable Dignity in his own Family. He dying in the midst of his Projects,
left the prosecution of them to his Son Aider Sophie, who being a man of great
industry, sanctity, and power; and strenghtned with the love, and real
affection of his people, Ussan Cassanes Prince of the Armenians gave him his
Daughter to Wife. But Iacup the Son and successor of Ussan after his fathers
Death, envying the glory of Aider Sophie, and fearing his power, caused him to
be slain, and delivered his 2 Sons which he had by Iacups Sister, named Ishmael
and Solomon, to Amazor one of his Captains to secure them in prison. Amazor
being of a generous temper, afforded them not only liberty, but gave them
ingenuous education.

Afterward Ismael the eldest, a Gentleman of promising hopes, undertook to
revenge the Death of his Father, which he likewise performed* staying Iacup and
his Son Elvan. After this Victory Ismael being crowned King, or Sophie, or Shaa
of Persia, he altered the form of Religion there, declaring Hali and himself to
be the only true Successors of Mahomet the Prophet, and condemning Abubezer,
Haumar and Osman, with the Turks their Abettors and Followers, as Usurpers,
Rebels and Schismatics; and ordered all Books to be Burnt, and all Monuments
to be defaced that mentioned any thing in honor of those 3 Caliphs. This
difference in Religion has created so mortal an aversion in them to each
other, that the Turks hold it more meritorious to kill one Persian than 70
Christians.

The City of Medina where Mahomet lies buried is in Arabia, 3 days Journey from
the Red Sea. His Tomb is enclosed within an Iron Grate, and covered with green
Velvet, which is every year made New and sent by the Grand Seignior; the old
one being by the Priests cut into small pieces and sold at great Rates, as
Relics to the Pilgrims. In the Temple where this Tomb is placed, there are
said to be 3000 Lamps of Gold and Silver, wherein is Balsome, and other rich
odours, ointments and oils, continually kept burning. They would impose it for
a Miracle that this Tomb should hang in the Air by means of Loadstones, but
besides that there is no such thing, for it stands on the Floor, were it true,
there were no such wonder in it. For Democrates the Atheniah by order of
Ptolomy K. of Egypt, undertook to make the Statue of Arsinoe all of Iron, and
to hang in the Air. And in the Temple of Serapis in Alexandria, there was an
Iron Sun that hung in the Air by the force of a Loadstone, being a rare piece
of Workmanship.

The Turks make a Pilgrimage to this Tomb, and all true Musselmen are obliged
once in their Lives, at least, to go thither. To this purpose I will relate the
following Story, from a late Traveller into Turkey. A Mahumitan having, in
obedience to a Religious Vow, undertaken this Journey, and being of the Opinion
of the rest of his fellow Travelers (or the Caravan, as it is called) that
they should meet with Water at a certain Well or Cistern upon the Road, had
made use of the best part of their Provision, as the rest had done, upon the
Ceremony of the Abdest or Ablution, which is their washing themseives before
their Devotious, for they wash the best part of the Head and Neck; their Arms
up to the Elbows, their Feet, the end of the Priapus, and the Posterior
Orifice. And for this Reason they never erect any Mosquee, or Church, without
planting Fountains round about it, for they firmly believe, that their Prayers
put up without these Washings, and in a state of Impurity, would rather draw
down the Wrath of Heaven upon them than procure the blessings of God. And
indeed these severe Commands of washing so often, are very troublesome, as well
to those that live in dry places far from Water, as others in the Northern cold
Climates; so that several Turks could wish heartily* that they might be
permitted to change their Religion, which ties them to so many inconvenient
slabberings.

When these Pilgrims came to the Cistern where they hoped to be supplied, they
found the Water dried up by the heat of the Sun. They were extremely concerned
thereat, finding themselves in the midst of the Sands, Deserts, and heats of
Arabia. They knew not what course to take in that extremity of drowth which
tormented them with Impatience; nor had many of them Money to buy Water of
those who had been more provident, and indeed had not much to spare. Our poor
Mahumetan found himself reduced to endure a scorching drouth, and ready to be
buried alive in the stifling Clouds of Sand which the Wind raises in that
miserable Road. inspired him with more Execrations against Mahomet and his
accursed Errors, tren the most zealous of the Eastern Christians could have
invented for him. He said, He did not wish the Devil had taken Mahomet, for he
did not believe him so unjust as to let that Impostor escape his Claws, who
being the only cause of the death of so many Millions of people as perished in
going to his Tomb, justly deserved as many deaths in Hell as he had caused poor
Creatures to suffer torments in this infamous cruel Pilgrimage; But he wished
with all his heart, That Heaven had Thunderstruck from above, and that Hell had
then swallowed in Flames the first contrive s of that accursed Alcoran, and the
unfortunate Propogators of the Law of Mahomet, or that he himself had been born
a Christian.

Some Christians in the Company were much surprised to hear a Mohammedan thus
blaspheme his own Religion, but they were told, That this Person was of a Sect
who were neither Turks nor Christians, but a sort of Mahumetan Heretics.

When a Mahumetan has purified himself, he goes into the Church with his Eyes
fixed upon the Ground, and barefoot. To which end the Eastern People have Shoes,
or Slippers, of Goats Skins dyed Yellow, Red, Violet, or Black, but none of
them may wear them Green in the Turkish Dominions, this being the sacred color
which Mahomet so much affected; only their Emirs wear a Green Bonnet, which
they put on with great reverence on their Heads; and is a mark of their being
allied to their Great Prophet and Legislator.

But this is not regarded in Persia. as we may find by the following Story. Sha
Abbas, the renowned K. of Persia, was the most accomplished Prince in all the
East. It happened that a Turkish Ambassador one time at his Court, being much
concerned to see Christians as well as Mahometans wearing green Shoes and
Trowses over all Persia, He* in the name of his Master* required the King to
forbid his Subjects any longer to profane a Color which all true Mahometans
ought to have a greater Veneration for. That the King knew very well, that it
being the Prophets peculiar Color, it did not become the happy observers of
his Law, to cover any part of the Body therewith, but only the Head; or at
least the more decent part of the Body above the Wast; it being an
insupportable Comtempt to trample under Foot a Color so sacred, as his
Subjects not only did, but also the Giaurs, or Christians, the Jews, and all
other Infidels, and impure Nations in his Dominions. Sha Abbas perceived the
folly of this Discourse, and so resolved to make a Jest of it. He made show of
consenting to the Grand Seigniors desire, and promised the Ambassador that he
would take Order his Subjects should no longer profane the Prophets Color,
hoping the Grand Seignior would issue out the same Orders over his Dominions.
For, said the King, your Master beholds every day a greater profanation of
that Color, and yet lets it go unpunished. My Subjects only wear the Color
dead upon their Shoes and Trowses, but all the Beasts in Turkey dung without
any Penalty upon the Grass, which is the living Color that Mahomet lov d.
Therefore if he will prohibit all the Beasts in his Empire from defiling the
green Grass with their Excrements, which they do continually, then will I take
care that my Subjects shall wear green no longer.The Ambassador finding the
Emperor did but deride his Folly, withdrew silently from the Presence, and left
the Persians to their own liberty.

This washing and cleanliness of the Mahometans has occasioned the building of
several necessary Houses (which they call The Houses of Shame) for public
convenience, which are kept very sweet, having a Cock to turn and take away all
ill smells; so that you shall never see in all the East, the Walls of their
Churches stained with Urine or Excrements, as in our parts of the World; Nor is
any one prejudiced in his Health by retaining his ^rtural Evacuations for want
of convemency.

I never heard so many I^vectives (says a French Gentleman) as were uttered
upon this account by a Turk at Constantinople, who had traveled to Marseilles,
and thence to Paris. He being in France, used, according to the custom of his
Country, to eat great plenty of Fruits, Salads, and, among the rest, Cucumbers
half ripe, Stalks and all; a Diet enough to break a French Horses Belly, yet
much admired by the Eastern People, whose D^gestion tames it* well enough. This
Mohammedan said, He found it hotter in Paris, during the heat of Summer, than at
Damasco in Syria, though it lie 15 Degrees more to the South; so, to cool
himself, he resolved to eat a great Dish of Milk and Cucumbers, and so to walk
about half a Mile off where he had business. Returning back, the motion of his
Body. the coldness of the Cucumbers, and the heat of the season, caused great
commotion in the Bowels of the Musselman, and would by no means be appeased. He
searched about for an House of Easement, yet could discover nothing but open
shops and throngs of people; He grew disconsolate, not knowing what course to
take. He cursed all the streets of Paris, and wished himself at Damascus, where
is a great place walled in, containing 40 of these Necessary Houses. At last,
in the height of his trouble, he thus lamented his Misfortunes, Were I now at
Grand Cario, my pains would find redress by only bowing the head, and crying
according to custom to Passengers, Pray Sir look another way; but here in
Paris, where there are more people than stones in the street, what shall a Man
do in my forlorn condition? But these sad Complaints little availed, for before
he could get to his Lodgings, the Cucumbers forced their way open at his
Backdoor, and made the disconsolate Syrian know that Milk and Cucumbers was
not so sweet as Milk and Honey, yet he must endure the smell as well as he made
several others, as he passed in that stinking pickle to his Lodgings to cleanse
himself. This cleanliness of the Mahometans makes them call Christians Filthy,
Unclean, and Nasty Infidels, or Unbelievers.

And thus much for this Grand Impastor Mahomet, whom Heaven permitted to be a
scourge for punishing the Christians; who, at that time, had forsaken the
Doctrines of the Gospel, and had embraced damnable Herisies. Let this excite us
to bless the goodness of God, who enjoy the glorious Light of his Truth; and to
admire Gods Judgments, who suffers so many large Kingdoms and Countries to be
infatuated, deluded, and inslaved; and so many Millions of people to be abused
by that false Prophet, and to believe his Lies, Nonsense and Blasphemy. He
belies God in making him the Author of his Alcoran, boasting that his Name is
written upon the Throne of God, and that he is the greatest of the Prophets,
having more knowledge than all the Men and Angels in the World. He belies Jesus
Christ, in saying he could not be Gods Son, because God was never Married, as
if there were no other way of Generation but what is Carnal. He says the
Virgin Mary conceived Christ by the smell of a Rose, and that she was the
sister of Moses, confounding her with Miriam, though there were so many hundred
Years between. He belieth the Holy Ghost in affirming, that he inspired Mahomet
to write his Alcoran. He belieth the Scriptures, in saying they are corrupted
by Christians; and that they Worship many Gods, and give God a Companion, by
affirming the Divinity of Christ Jesus. He belieth the Jews, in saying they
make Eleazer a God. He belieth the Patriarchs, in saying that Noah, Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob believed his Alcoran, though they lived so many thousand Years
before he or his Alcoran had a being. He belies the Apostles, in making them
his Scholars, though they lived near 600 Years before he saw the Light. By all
which it appears, that the Compiler of this Alcoran, was not the God of Truth
but the Father of Lies. Especially if we consider the ridiculous stories found
therein. He tells us, That he once divided the Noon, one half whereof fell into
his Lap, the other half on the Ground, which he after joined again together;
and, perhaps, in memory of this lying Miracle the Turks use yet the Half Moon
for their Arms, and on their Churches and Steeples. He tells of a great Army of
Men and Angels raised by Solomon, which being much disturbed in their March by
an Army of Flies, Solnmon reb^ked and routed them. He tells, that in Noah's Ark
a Hog was generated of the Elephants Dung, and a Rat of the Hogs Dung, which
knawing a hole in the Ark, Noah was so affrighted, that he touched the Forehead
of the Lion, out of whose Brains leaped a Cat that chased away the Rat. To
conclude, in the Paradise which he promises his Followers, he allows
Appartments therein to several Beasts, such as Abraham's Ram; Moses's Heifer*
Solomon's Ant; the Queen of Sheba's Parrot; Esdras his Ass; Jonas his Whale;
the 7 Sleepers Dog; and Mahomet's Camel. Which sufficiently demonstrates the
Author to be Ignorant, Impudent and Foolish.

The Government of the Kingdom of Persia.
THe Government of Persia is purely Tyranical, for the King has the sole Power
of life and death over all his Subjects, independent from his Council, and
without any Trials at Law. He can put to what death he pleases the chief Lords
of the Kingdom, no man daring to dispute the reason; Nor is any Sovereign in
the World more absolute than he. The King deceasing and leaving Male Issu^
behind him, the Eldest ascends the Throne, while his Brothers are kept in the
Haram or Castle, and their Eyes put out, and if the King have the least
jealously, they are instantly put to death, yea the Children of the Kings
Brothers and Sisters likewise; Formerly they were not so rigorous, but only
moved a red hot Iron to and fro before their Eyes; But Sha Sefi perceiving that
the poor unhappy Princes had some sight left, ordered their Eyes to be dug
out of their Heads; Sha Sefi's cruelty spared not his Eldest Son Sha Abhas the
Heir of his Throne, ordering one of the Eunuchs to move an Iron before his
Eyes, no man knowing a reason; but the Eunuch compassionating the young Prince,
moved an Iron yet not red hot before his Eyes, and teaching him to counterfeit
blindness preserved his sight till his Father lay upon his Deathbed, when
being very Penitent for having put out the Eyes of his Eldest Son to whom the
Crown did of right belong, the Eunuch seeing the King so sadly afflicted, and
ready to give up the Ghost, assured him that he would restore the Prince to his
sight, and brought him with perfect Eyes to his Bedside, the sight of whom
prolonged the Kings life till next day, and gave him time to command all the
Gaandees of the Court to obey Sha Abbas his Eldest Son, as his lawful Successor.

There are several of these blind Princes at Ispahan, and I knew one
particularly, says my Author, a person of excellent natural parts; As blind as
he is, he is a great lover of Curiosities, and has built him a House at Ispahan
worth seeing. He is overjoyed when he meets with any Rarities out of Europe,
feeling them in his hands, and causing his Eunuchs to tell him the meaning of
every thing: He is a great admirer of Clock-work and Watches, and to know what
a Clock it is, has little points set up in the Dial-plate, and a half hand
which points to the hour; with certain Figures which he makes of soft Wax, and
sets in order upon a Table, he will cast up an Account exactly. Several other
good quilities are eminent in him, and it is a miserable spectacle that a Man
should be reduced to that deplorable condition only because he is of the
Blood Royal of Persia, This State is distinguished like most of those in Europe
into three bodies, First that of the Sword, which answers to the Nobility, and
consists of the Kings household, the Kans or Governors, and all the Soldiery.
The second that of the Gown, comprehending all those that belong to the Law and
Courts of Justice. The third is composed of Merchants, Handicrafts men, and
Laborers.

Among other cunning Contrivances of Sha Abbas to know the true state of his
Affairs without trusting too much to his Ministers, he often went disguised into
the City like an ordinary man under pretense of buying and selling, to discover
whether false Weights and Measures were used; so going one Evening, in the
habit of a Countryman, to a Bakers to buy a Man of Bread, and thence to a
Cooks to buy a Man of Roast-meat, (a Man is six pound sixteen ounces to the
pound) having bought his bargains he returned to the Court, where causing them
to be weighed exactly, he found the Bread to want 57 Drams, and the Meat 43.
Upon which he fell into a rage against the Officers and the Governor of the
City (whose Belly he had caused to have been ripped up but for the intercession
of his Lords) reproaching them for their negligence of the public good, and of
the injustice of false Weights, how sadly the cheat fell upon poor Men, who
having great Families, and thinking to give them 800 Drams of Bread, by that
fraud deprived them of 143, then turning to the Lords, he demanded what Justice
ought to be done to those people; none daring to open their Mouths while he was
in that passion; he commanded a great Oven to be made in the Marketplace; and
a Spit big and long enough to roast a Man, and the Oven to be heated all Night,
and a Fire to be kindled near the Oven. Next Morning the King caused the Cook
and Baker to be apprehended, and led quite though the City, with two Men going
before proclaiming to the people; We are going to put the Baker into a red hot
Oven in the Piazza, to be baked alive for selling bread by false Weights; and
the Cook is to be roasted alive for having sold Meat by false Weights.Thus
these two Men served for an Example not only to Ispahan but to all the Kingdom,
every one dreading the severe Justice of Sha Abbas.

Sha Abbas his successor acted almost such another piece of severity, for
having made one Iafer Kan, a great Lord, who kept a magnificent Train,
Governouor of Asterabat; At first he was very mild, but at last began to exact
such sums from the people, that his violences reached the Kings Ear; who being
one day drinking with his Lords, and seeing the Master of his Music in the
Room, who was a merry Droll, and had always some pleasant news to tell the
King, he was pleased to ask him what the people said of Iafer-Kan, adding that
he had made him Governor of diverse Provinces, and had never heard any
complaint of him, but now he was accused of Tyranizing over the people. The
Music Master being a mere Flatterer, and knowing that Iafer-Kan was extremely
beloved of the King, confidently averd'd, that the Governor was falsely accused,
and that he had always known him apter to give than receive. There was present
an Agis lately returned from a Pilgrimage to Mecca; him the King also asked
what was his opinion of Iafer-Kan and his Government, being a person long
acquainted with him; The Agis thinking to please the King, returned the same
answer. The King who was well informed of the Kans behavior, turning to the
Lords present, What think you, said he, of these two Flatterers, that
absolutely know the contrary to what they speak.And commanded two of the Music
Masters Teeth to be plucked out and driven into the head of the Agis, which had
like to have cost him his life, being a very old Man; As for Iafer-Kan he was
disgraced for a time, but his excellent Accomplishments soon restored him again
to favor.

Murder is severely punished, nor will Money save the Criminal; The Murderer
is carried before the Magistrate; he delivers him to the Parents or Kindred of
the person slain, who carry him to Execution, and without compassion torture
him to death. The Governor of Shiras had a Favorite, who falling in love with
a young Persian Gentleman endeavored to abuse his Body; One day meeting upon
the Road, and lying under the same Tent, the Favorite about Midnight came to
his Bedside, and after many solicitations would have forced him; But being
violently resisted, for madness to find himself disappointed, and liable to be
discovered, he stabbed the young Gentleman to the heart, and fled to the
Mountains. The Murder being divulged, the Mother, Widow, and Sister of the
young Man repaired to the Governor for Justice, who willing to save his
Favorite, offered them Money, which they with scorn refusing, and threatening
to complain to the King; he was constrained to pursue hi^ Favorite; at length
he took and sent him to Ispahan, saying, he would not judge of the Affair, but
refer it to the King. The M^ther, Widow, and Sister followed the Murderer to
Ispahan and demanded Justice with that eagerness, that though the King had an
inclination to save the Favorite for the Governors sake, he was forced to
abandon him, and bid them pay themselves with his blood. Immediately he was
carried to execution, where the Widow first stabbed him to the heart with a
Dagger, then the Mother took he^ turn, and after that the Sister, and then
holding a Cup to receive his b^ood, drank every one a Cup full to quench the
thirst of their Revenge.

Extraordinary care is taken for securing the Highways, and Guards set at
convenient distances; As the Caravan was one day setting out from Tauris to
Ispahan, a poor Fellow took an occasion to rob a Cloak-bag, and fled cross the
Fields not knowing the way, the Merchant missing his Goods complained to the
Governor, who sent order to the Guards to search strictly for him. The Thief
being constrained to forsake his Cloak-bag, and cross the Fields for Water, was
seized and carried to the Governor, and soon convicted, for Thieves find no
mercy in Persia; Only they are variously put to death, being sometimes tied to
a Camels Tail by the Feet, and their Bellies ripped open. Sometimes buried alive
all but their Heads, and starved to death, in which torment they will often
desire Passengers to cut off their Heads, though it be a kindness forbidden by
the Law. But the most cruel punishment is, when they set the Thief on Horseback
with his extended Arms fastened to a long stiek behind, then larding him with
lighted Candles, they burn him to the very Bowels; We met two in this Misery
who desired us to hasten their deaths, which we durst not do, only we gave them
a Pipe of Tobacco according to their desire. One day there was a great hubbub
in a Bawdy House where the Woman had prostituted her own Daughter, the King
being informed of it, commanded the Mother to be thrown head long from a Tower,
and the Daughter to be torn in pieces by his Dogs, which he keeps on purpose
for such Chastizements.

The Forts and Factories of the Honorable East India Company upon the Coasts
of Malabar, Cormandel, in the Bay of Bengal and in the Empire of the Great
Mogul, in India. With an account of the Religion, Government, Trade, Marriages,
Funerals, strange Customs of the Natives. Intermixed with diverse Accidents and
notable Remarks.
HAving given some Account of Persia, let us next advance unto the Indies,
wherein the Honorable the East India Company have these Forts and Factories.

Fort St. George Fort St David Comineer Cudaloor. Porto Novo. Madapollam.
Metchlapatam. Pettipolee. Carwar. Calliutt. Surat. Bombay Island. Balla-sore.
Hugli. Chuttanutti. Daca. Rhajamal.
All on the Coasts of Coromandell, Malabar, and the Bay of Bengale.

Fort St. George.
THis Fort is on the Coast of Coromandell where the Honorable East India
Company have a Factory. On November 3. 1684. About 9 at night there happened a
violent Storm in this Place, which continued till 2 next morning. It untiled
all the Houses in the Town, with such a rattling noise, as if some thousands of
Grenades had been thrown on them, and laid all their Gardens (of which they
have many pleasant ones) as level as the Smoothest Bowling Green. Trees of an
ancient and prodigious Growth, some perhaps as ancient as Noah's Flood, were
violently torn up by the Roots, and their Aged Trunks riven in pieces, the
noise of the crashing and fall of their Boughs and Branches seeming almost to
equal that of a Tempest. But what was most surprising was, that a strong Iron
Bar which belonged to a Window, was with the extreme force of the Wind, snapped
into 3 pieces. Had this Hurricane continued two or 3 hours longer, it would
certainly have levelled both the Fort and Town; though strongly built, and well
fortified. Fort St. David, Commineer, Cudaloor, Porto Noro, Madapollam.
Pettipole and Carwar, are all on the Coast of Coromandell, In all which the
East India Company have Factories. It is reported that St. Thomas the Apostle
wrought many ^iracles in these Countries; and foretold the coming of white
People thither. And that the Children of those that murdered him, have still
one Leg bigger than another.

Callicut.
This is a Town on the Coast of Malabar, where the Portugals first settled
themselves, and the English Merchants have a Factory. The Prince of Calicut
calls himself Zamorin, a Prince of great power; and not more black of color
than treacherous in disposition. Many deformed Pagods are here worshipped, but
with this Ordinary Evasion, that they adore not Idols, but the Deumo's they
represent. The Dutch General who was Cook of the Ship Crowned the present
Prince with those hands which had oftener managed a Ladle than a Sword. Malabar
is a Low Country, with a delightful Coast, and inhabited by people that
practice Pyracy. There is a certain wind which blowing there in Winter, so
disturbs the neighboring Sea, that it rowls the Sands to the mouths of the
adjoining Ports, so that then the Water is not deep enough for the least Bark
to enter. But in the Summer another contrary wind, drives back the same Sand,
and makes the Port again Navigable. The great number of Rivers in this Country
render Horses useless, especially for War. A Country for the most part of the
Year green, and abounding with Cattle, Corn, Cotton, Pepper, Ginger, Cassia,
Cardamum, Rice, Myrabolans Ananas Papas, Melons, Dates, Coco's, and other Fruit.

Surat.
THis Town is about 40 days Journey from Agra, and drives as great a Trade as
any City in Asia; though the access to it be very dangerous. For the River
Tappy or Tindy rising out of the Decan mountains, glides through Brampore, and
in Meanders runs by the walls of Surat; and after 15 Miles wrigling about,
discharges it self into the Ocean, but is so shallow at the mouth that it will
hardly bear a Bark of 70 or 80 Tuns; So that Ships are forced to unlade at
Swally. Which is remarkable for the mischance of Capt. Woodcock, who at the
taking of Ormus* seized a Frigate as Prize laden with near a Million of Ryals;
but coming into Swally Road the Ship sunk, and therewith all his Golden hopes
vanished. The English East India Company, and also the Dutch, have their
Presidents and Factories in this City, making it the greatest Mart in the
Indies. Surat is secured with a Castle of Stone, well stored with Cannon. The
Houses are generally Built of Sun dried Bricks, which are very large, and
lasting; They have flat roofs, railed round about to prevent falling. They have
beautiful Gardens of Pomegranats, Melons, Figs, and Lemons, interlaced with
Rivulets and Springs.

The English House for the reception and Staple of their Goods is very
Magnificent.

Baroche not far distant drives a great Trade in Cottons. The English have a
very Noble House here. Not far from which Tavernier writes, that of a dry
stick, a Mountebank in less then half an Hour, made a Tree grow Five foot high,
which did bear Leaves and Flowers.

The History of Savagi the Indian Rebel.
THe Plundeiing of Surat by the famous Rebel Savagi, and other his Actions
deserve here to be inserted. This Raja, or Lord Savagi was Born at Bashaim, the
Son of a Captain of the King of Visiapour, and being of a turbulent Spirit,
rebelled in his Fathers lite time; and putting himself in the head of several
Banditti, and other debauched young men, he retired into the mountains of
Visiapour, and defended himself against all those that came to attack him. The
King of Visiapour thinking that his Father kept Intelligence with him, caused
him to be seized and imprisoned where he dyed. Savagi was hereat so incensed
against the King that he breathed nothing but revenge. And in a short time
plundered Visiapour his principal City, and with the booty he took there, made
himself so powerful, as to be able to seize several Towns, as Rajapour,
Sasigar, Crapaten, Daboul, and to form a little State thereabout. The King
dying about that time, and the Queens endeavors to reduce him being
unsuccessful, she accepted the Peace he proposed to her, That he should enjoy
the Territories which he had subdued, and be tributary to the Young King, and
pay him half his Revenue.

However Savagi could not rest, but being a stout man, vigilant, bold, and
undertaking in the highest degree, he resolved to seize upon Cha-bestkan
Governor of Decan, and Uncle to the Great Mogol, with all his Treasures even
in the midst of his Armies, in the Town of Aurenge Abad. And had effected his
design if he had not been discovered too soon. For one night being accompanied
with a crew of resolute Fellows he got into the very Apartment of Cha-hest kan;
where the Governors Son, forward in his Fathers defense was killed, and he
himself grieivously wounded; Savagi in the mean time getting away without
damage. Yet this disappointment did not daunt him in the least, insomuch that
he undertook another bold and dangerous enterprise in the Year 1664. which
succeeded better. He drew about 3000 chosen men out of his Army, with whom he
took the Field without noise; spreading a Report by the way, that it was a
Nobleman going to Court.

When he was near Surat that Famous and Rich Port of the Indies, instead of
Marching farther* as he made the Grand Provost of that Country whom he met,
believe, he fell into that Town, cutting off the Arms and Legs of the
Inhabitants to make them discover their Treasures, searching, digging, and
loading away, or burning what he could not carry away with him. He continued
plundring 40 days; So that none but the Dutch and English saved themselves,
because they were in a good posture of defense; especially the English, who
having time to send for assistance from some of their Ships which lay near the
Town, behaved themselves gallantly and saved besides their own, several other
Houses near them.

A certain Jew of Constantinople, who had brought Rubies of a great value, to
sell them to the Great Mogol, was thrice brought upon his knees, and had the
knife held up to cut his Throat, yet still persisted in his denial that he had
any, and so saed his Life and Jewels.

At that time the K. of Ethiopia had sent an Ambassador to the Great Mogol with
several Presents, and among others, Twelve curious Horses, and a little Mule,
the Skin of which was speckled like that of a Tiger; So finely, so variously,
and so orderly streaked that no Silkin Stuff of India was more beautiful. There
were also 2 Elephants Teeth, so prodigiously large that a very strong man could
scarce lift one of them from the ground. Lastly, the Horn of an Ox full of
Civet, half a foot broad on the top. They were no sooner arrived at Surat, but
Savagi came and ransackt and burnt the Town, and there House among the rest, So
that they could save nothing but their Letters. He emptied the Oxes horn, and
carried away the Horses and the Elephants Teeth. He durst not attack the
Castle; but Marched off without opposition, laden with Gold, Silver, Jewels,
Silk Stuffs, fine Linen and other Rich Merchandise, to the Value of Three
hundred thousand pound English money.

The Great Mogol sent an Army under Iesseingue to besiege the principal
Fortress of Savagi, who being expert in matters of treaty, he so ordered the
business, that Savagi surrendered before it came to extremity; and afterward
joined with the Mogol against Visapour; The Mogol declaring him a Raja, taking
him under his protection, and making his Son a considerable Commander. Some
time after the Mogol intending War against Persia, writ such obliging Letters
to Savagi, extolling his Generosity, Ability and Conduct, that he at length
resolved, upon the Faith of Iesseingue to come to the Mogol at Dehli. A
Kinswoman to the Mogol being then at Court, having a great influence upon him,
persuaded him to secure Savagi, who had murdered her Son, wounded her husband,
and destroyed Surat. So that one evening Savagi saw his Pavillions beset with 3
or 4 Begments of Soldiers. But he made shift to get away in the night; the
eldest Son of Iesseingue was suspected to have furthered his escape; but many
said, that it was by the consent of the Great Mogol, since he could no longer
retain him at Court, because of the great spleen of the Women against him, for
having dipped his hands in the Blood of their kinsmen. After this Savagi seized
on many strong Holds, mostly seated upon steep mountains, the Mogol not being
able to reduce him, and he often ravages the Country from Goa to the very
Gates of Surat.

He has likewise Ships at Sea, and in the Year 1683 Fifteen hundred of his men
in 3 Ships and four Grabbs, attackt an English East India Ship Capt. John Hide
Commander, but were bravely repulsed with a great slaughter, though those brave
Englishmen had not the happiness long to enjoy the honor of that Noble Action,
their Ship being unfortunately cast* away coming into the Channel, and all the
Men but Two, lost. Savagi now Acts as King, and secures himself in the
mountains where the Mogol is not able to attack him.

Caambaia is 3 Miles from the River Indus and about 3 Miles in Compass, one of
the neatest and best Built Citys in all the East, and called the Indian Grand
Cairo for its Greatness, Traffic and Fertility of soil, and so populous as to
contain an hundred and thirty thousand Families. Here they cut the Agats that
come from other Countries, into several sorts of shapes, and in the Suburbs
they make Indico Here the East India Company had a Factory; the tides are so
swift, that a Horse at full speed cannot keep pace with the Waves; but the Sea
and the Trade is fallen away from it. Swalley is more South, and about a Mile
from the Sea, but gives name to a large Capacious Bay where the Ships ride that
Trade to Surat, from which it is about ten Mile distant.

Maslipatan.
MAslipatan, or Metchlapatam is a great City, the Houses whereof are only Wood,
Built at a distance from each other. It stands by the Sea, and the Honorable
East India Company have a Factory here. This being the most famous Road for
Ships, in the Bay of Bengal from whence they Sail to Pegu, Siam, Ormus,
Sumatra, and other Places of Traffic. This City is in Golkonda, but the Great
Mogol is so much dreaded there that his Commissioner is Master thereof, buying,
selling, bringing in and sending abroad his Merchants Ships none daring to
contradict him in any thing, nor to demand any Customs of him. Pa^ania is a
City South from Siam, and was governed many years by a Queen. In 1612. Some
English Men came hither with a Letter from Q. Elizabeth, and a Present from the
Merchants of 600 Rials of Eight. The Letter was carried in great state, being
laid in a Basin of Gold, laid on an Elephant, adorned with little Flaggs,
Lances and Minstrils. They then obtained a Grant to Trade there, upon the same
conditions as the Hollanders, and there was an English Factory which is now
removed.

Siam is a Kingdom; The chiefest part lying between the Gulf of Siam and
Bengale; the Country is plentiful in Rice and Fruits. The Forests stored with
Deer, Elephants, Ty^ers; Rhinocero's, and Apes. Here grew store of large Bamboo
Canes; under the knots of them are Ants or Emmets Nests, as big as a Man's head*
where they preserve themselves during the Rains, which continue 4, or 5 Months.
The King of Siam was accounted a very Rich Prince, and styled himself King of
Heaven and Earth* though he be tributary to the Kings of China. There were
Idols in his Temples Seven foot high all of massy Gold. When the King appeared
all the Doors and Windows of the Houses must be shut; All the People
prostrating themselves on the ground, not daring to look up. And because no
Person was to be in an higher Place then the King, they within doors were bound
to keep their lowest Rooms; He would suffer no Barbar to come near him; one of
his Wives cutting his hair for him. One part of his magnificence consists in
his Train of 200 Elephants, among which one was White, which he valued so
highly as to style himself, King of the white Elephant. He passionately admires
them, accounting them his Favorites, and the Ornaments of his Kingdom. If an
Elephant dyed he was burned with the same Funeral Pomp as a Nobleman. The
English had a Factory formerly in this Kingdom, as well as at Armagon. As for
Ballasore, Hugli, Chuttanetti, Daca, Rajamell; the present Honorable East
India Company have Factorys in all those Places, of which little more can be
said then what has been spoken of others.

At the famous Port of Bombay Island, the English have Built a strong ^ort and
here they Coin both Silver Copper and Tin, which passes among themselves, and
the Villages along the Coast.

The Empire and Government of the Great Mogol.
HAving given some account of the Forts and Factrys of the Honorable East
India Company. I shall subjoine a brief Relation of the Empire and Government
of that Mighty Monarch.

The name of India is now given to the Empire of the Great Mogol, and to the
two Peninsula's, one on this side, and the other beyond Ganges; with the
Islands scattered in the Indian Sea; which are all comprehended under the
general Name of the East Indies; yea some Authors take in all the Oriental Part
of Asia. It is recorded, that the Old Inhabitants consisted in 122 several
Nations; originally descended from the Sons of Noah, before their Journey to
the Valley of Shinaar, and their attempt in Building the Tower of Babel. That
it was first invaded by the famous Queen Seinramis, with an Army of above four
Millions, whom Staurobates an Indian King opposed with equal forces, who
overcame and slew her. That the next Invasion was by Bacchus the Son of Jupiter
and Hercules, who by policy and force subdued them, and taught them the use of
Wine, Oil, and the Art of Architecture. After this, India was invaded by
Alexander the Great; He vanquishing first Clophae Queen of Magaza, and then
King Porus, both whom he took Prisoners; But restoring them again their Liberty
and Kingdom returned back to Babylon, where he dyed of poison. After this they
lived in peace under several Kings. In 1587. their Country being discovered by
the Portugals, and after by the Dutch and English, they have had much Traffic
with them.

This vast Empire comprehends the greatest part of the Continent of Asia,
wherein are contained 37 Kingdoms. As for Remains of Antiquity, there are few
or none, the Mogols having ruined all the Ancient Buildings, which according to
the Ancients were 30 large Citys, and 3^00 Walled Towns and Castles, so strong
as to be thought impregnable; which may not be improbable, if Noah first
planted there, after his descent from Mount Ararat, not far distant from hence.
Since such mighty Armies were raised in those Countries not many Years after,
and the Land so well Built and planted; so that when Alexander had overthrown
King Porus near the River Hydaspis, he said, He found greater Citys and more
sumptuous Buildings in India then in all the World besides. Some of the Citys
that end in Pore, as Meliapore, Visiapore, and others, seem to retain the
Memory of K. Porus, as others in Scander, the Name of Alexander.

The Dominions of the Great Mogol are larger then the Persians, and equal to
the Grand Seigniors. His strength lies in the Number of his Subjects, the
Vastnes of his wealth, and the extent of his Empire; his Revenue exceeding the
Persian and the Turks both put together. But the K. of Persia exceeds him in
Horse, Arms, and warlike People. His Revenue is reckoned to be about Seven
Millions and an half, English money. The Throne alone wherein he gives
Audience, is valued at near Four Millions, being almost covered with Jewels,
Pearls, and all kind of precious stones of a vast Value. The present Mogol
derives his Original from Tamberlan the Scythian, who overcame all Asia, and
took Bajazet the Ottoman Emperor Prisoner, putting him into an Iron Cage,
against the Bars of which he beat out his brains. When Tamberlain had taken him
Prisoner, he was brought before him, who fixing his Eyes upon him fell a
laughing, B^jazet being highly offended feircely said to him, Laugh not at my
Fortune Sir, but know it is God that disposes of Kingdoms and Empires, and the
same may happen to you to morrow that has befaln me to day. To which ^amerlain
replied, I know this as well as you, nor do I laugh at your misfortunes but am
thinking that certainly these Kingdoms and Empires are very contemptible things
in the eyes of God, since he gives them to such inconsiderable Persons as we
are, you a deformed one eyed man, and I pitiful lame Creature.

The Mogol is the General Heir to all those to whom he gives Pensions; and his
will is a Law in the decision of his subjects affairs, and therefore they carry
the Names of their Employments, and not of the Lands which they enjoy. Now
because of this Barbarous though Ancient Custom, in the late Mogols Reign one of
the Ancient Governors being very Rich, and finding himself near Death,
thinking upon this unreasonable Law, which often renders the Wife of a Nobleman
and her Children poor and miserable in an Instant; He secretly distributed all
his great Estate to indigent Gentlemen, and poor Widows; filling his Trunks,
with Old Iron, old Shoes, Rags and bones, Locking and Sealing them close,
saying, they were Goods belonging to the Mogol; before whom they were brought
after his death, and opened in his presence before his Lords that all saw this
fine stuff; which so discomposed the Mogol, that he rose and went away in a
great fury. He is able to bring 100000 Horse into the Field, but the Foot are
inconsiderable. Chah, Iehan the Father of the present Emperor left behind him
about 500000 Livers, besides the Rich Throne aforementioned. The present
Emperor or Mogol is called Aureng-zeb, having usurpt the kingdom from his
Father upon this occasion. This great King having reigned 40 Years with much
clemency and Justice; in his declining Age fancied a Young Lady of
extraordinary beauty not above 13 Years Old. And because the strength of nature
would not permit him to satisfy his Passion, he took certain Provocatives,
which were so hot that he fell into a distemper which had almost killed him.
This obliged him to shut himself up in a strong Fortress, together with his
Women, for 2 or 3 Months; During this time he seldom appeared to his People,
and then at a great distance, which made them believe he was dead. He had 4
Sons and 2 Daughters, whom he loved all alike, making his Sons Governors or
Vice Roys of four of the principal Provinces in his Kingdom. During this false
report of his Death, Dara his eldest Son continued with him; But soon after
they raised Armies, and fought against one another; And after many Battles and
much Bloodshed Aurengzeb the Third Son having destroyed his Three Brethren,
mounted the Throne, keeping his Father Prisoner. Some time after, he sent to
his Father for some of his Jewels, that he might appear before his People with
the same magnificence his Predecessors had done. Chah-Iehan taking his request
for an Affront, fell into such a rage that he continued mad for some days, and
had like to have died upon it; he called several times for a Mortar and Pestle,
to beat all his Jewels to Powder rather than his Son should have them, but
Begum Saheb his Eldest Daughter throwing her self at his feet, by virtue of
that Criminal power she had over him as being both his Daughter and his Wife,
kept him from it, more out of design to preserve the Jewels for her self than
her Brother, to whom she was a Mortal Enemy; For this reason when Aureng-zeb
ascended the Throne he had only one Jewel on his Bonnet, and as a Penance, for
so many Crimes he would not eat wheaten Bread, Flesh nor Fish, but fed upon
Barley Bread, Herbs and Sweat Meats; But Chajehan his Father dying in 1666.
finding himself rid of an object that reproached his Tyranny, he began to enjoy
himself with more delight, receiving his Sister Begum into favor, and calling
her Cha Begum or Princess Queen; a Woman of excellent accomplishments, and able
to govern an Empire; and had her Father and Brothers taken her Counsel
Auren-zeb had never been King; He had another Sister called R^uchenara Begum,
who always took his part and sent him all the Gold and Silver she could procure
when she heard he had taken Arms; in recompense whereof he promised when he
came to be King to give her the Title of Cha Begum, and that she should fit
upon a Throne; all which he performed; and they lived lovingly together. This
Princess having secretly conveyed a handsome young man into her Apartment could
not let him out so privately, after she had quite tired him, but the King had
notice thereof; The Princess to prevent the shame ran to the King, and in a
pretended fright told him, there was a man got into the Haram even to her very
Chamber who designed either to have kill or Rob her; That such an accident was
never before known, and that it concerned the safety of his Royal Person, and
he would do well to punish the Eunuchs who kept the Guard that night. The King
ran instantly with a great number of Eunuchs, so that the poor Young Man had no
way to escape but by leaping out at a Window into the River that runs by the
Palace Walls; a multitude of people ran out to seize him, the King commanding
they should do him no harm, but carry him to the Officer of Justice; yet he
happily escaped and has not been since heard of.

It is an Ancient custom among the Heathen Indians that the Husband happening
to dye the Wife can never marry again; so when he is dead, she retires to
bewail him, shaves her hair, and lays aside all her ornaments, taking off her
Arms and Legs, the Braccelets her Husband put on when he espoused her, in token
of her submission, and being chained to him; and all her life after she lives
despised, yea worse than a Slave in the House where she was formerly Mistress.
This causes them rather to dye with their Husbands than live in such Contempt,
the Bramins or Priests persuading them, that after Death they shall meet him
again in the other World with greater advantage; Yet can no Woman burn her self
without leave from the Governor of the Place, who being a Mehometan, and
abhorring this execrable custom of self Murder does often deny it. Some women,
are so offended thereat that they spend the rest of their lives, in works of
Charity. Some sit on the Road Boiling Pulse in Water and giving the Liquor to
Travelers to drink; others hold Fire ready in their hands to light their
Tobacco; others make vows to eat nothing but the undigested grains which they
find in Cow Dung. But when the Governor finds no persuasions will alter the
Woman's resolution, and perceives by a sign from his Secretary that she has
given him Money to that purpose, he in a surly manner bids the Devil take her,
and all her kindred; Immediately the Music strikes up, and away they go to the
House of the deceased, with Drums beating and Flutes playing, in which manner
they accompany the Person to the place appointed; All her kindred and Friends
come and congratulate her for the happiness she is to enjoy in the other World,
and the honor their Family receives by this her generous resolution. She then
dresses her self as if going to be Married and is conducted in Triumph to the
place of Execution, with a loud noise of Musical Instruments and Women's voices,
singing Songs in honor of the miserable creature that is going to dye. The
Bramins, exhort her to courage and constancy, and many European Spectators
think that these Priests give her some stupifying Liquor to take away the fear
of Death; for it is their interest that these miserable Wretches should destroy
themselves: Their Bracelets about their Legs and Arms, Pendants, Rings, and
Jewels all belonging to them, who rake them from among the ashes when she is
burnt; sometimes a little Hut of Reeds is erected on the bank of a River,
besmeared with Oil and other Drugs. The Woman is placed in the middle in a
leaning posture with her head on a kind of Wooden Bolster, and reststing her
back against a Pillar, to which the Bramin ties her about the middle, lest she
should run away upon feeling the Fire. In this posture she holds the Body of
her deceased Husband upon her knees, chewing Betele about half an hour. The
Woman bids them fire the Hut, which is quickly done, her kindred and Friends
throwing Pots of Oil into it, to dispatch her. In some places they only build a
Pile of Wood upon which the Woman is placed as on a Bed, with her Husbands Body
laid cross her, then some bring her a Letter, others pieces of Calicoe, Silver
or Copper, desiring her to deliver them to their Mother, Brother, Kinsman, or
Friend in the other World; when she has received all, she puts them between her
Husbands Body and her own, tied up in a piece of Taffety, and then calls to
kindle the Pile, wherewith she is soon stifled; but there being scarcity of
Wood in Bengale, the bodies of these poor Wretches arem any times only
grilliaded and then cast into the River Ganges to be devoured by Crocodiles.

The magnanimity of many of these Women is admirable; The Raja of Velou having
lost his City and life in a Battle against the King of Visiapours General, he
was extremely lamented, and eleven of his Wives resolved to be burnt at his
Funeral. The General endeavored to divert them by kind usage, but finding
persuasions in vain he ordered them to be shut up in a Room; the Women in a
rage told him, That 'twas to no purpose to keep them Prisoners, for if they
might not have leave to do what they had resolved, in three hours there would
not one of them be alive. He laughed at this Menace, but the Keeper of those
Women opening the Doors 3 hours after, found them all stretched out dead upon
the place, without the lest Mark of any outward violence offered to them.

Two of the greatest Lords of India came in 1642. to do Homage to Cha-jehan;
they having offended the Grand Master of the Household, he told one of them one
day in the Kings presence, that they had not behaved themselves as became them
toward so great a Monarch. The Raja, or Lord looking on himself as a great
Prince, he and his Brother having brought with them a Train of sixteen thousand
Horse, being netled at this bold reproof of the Grand Master, drew out his
dagger and slew him on the place before the King; The Grand Master falling at
the feet of his own Brother who stood just by him, he was going to revenge his
Death, but was prevented by the Raja's Brother who stabbed him likewise, and
laid him athwart his Brothers Body; The King seeing these 2 Murders retired
into his Apartment for fear; but the Nobles and people presently fell upon the
Raja's and cut them to pieces; The King incensed at such an attempt committed
in his House and presence, commanded the bodies of the Raja's to be thrown into
the River, which their Troops that they had left about Agra understanding
threatened to enter the City and Pillage it; so the King was advised to deliver
them the Bodies of their Princes. When they were to be burned, thirteen Women
belonging to the two Raja's came dancing and got upon the Funeral Pile, holding
one another by the hands, and being stifled by the Smoke, fell all together
into the Fire; presently the Bramins threw in great heaps of Wood, Pots of Oil,
and other combustible matter to dispatch them. When I was at Patna, says my
Author, a handsome young Woman of about two and twenty, came to desire leave of
the Governor to be burnt with the Body of her dead Husband; The Governor
compassionating her Youth and Beauty, strove to dissuade her, but finding her
resolute, asked her, whether she understood what the Torment of Fire was, or had
ever burnt her Fingers? No, no, answered she, I do not fear fire, and to let
you know as much send for a lighted Torch hither. The Governor abominating her
answer, in passion bid her go to the Devil. Some young Lords present desired
the Governor to call for a Torch and try her; the Woman ran to meet it, and
held her hand in the Flame without altering her countenance, fearing her Arm up
to the very Elbow, that her Flesh looked as if broil d, whereupon the Governor
commanded her out of his sight.

The Government of the Great Mogol is (as we have said) arbitrary and
Tyranical, measuring his power by his Sword and Lance, and making his will his
Law, there being no Laws to regulate Governors in the administration of
Justice but what are written in the Breasts of the King and his Substitutes;
and so they often take the Liberty to punish the offender rather than the
offense; men's persons more than their Crimes; though they still pretend to
proceed by proofs and not presumptions. In matters of consequence the Mogol
himself will sit as Judge, and no Malefactors lie above one night in Prison,
and many times not at all, for if the Offender be apprehended early in the
morning, he is instantly brought before the Judge, by whom he is either
acquitted or condemned; if it be Whipping, that is executed usually with much
severity in the place of Justice; If condemned to dye he is presently carried
from Sentence to Execution, commonly in the Marketplace; which quick Judgment
keeps the People in such awe, that there are not many Executions. Murder and
Theft they punish with death of what kind the Judge please to impose, some
Malefactors being hanged, others beheaded, some imp^led upon sharp Stakes a
death of extreme cruelty and torture; some are torn to pieces by wild Beasts,
some killed by Elephants, and others Stung to death by Serpents. Those that
suffer by Elephants, who are trained up for Executions, are thus dealt withal;
If the Beast be commanded by his Rider to dispatch the poor trembling Offender
presently, who lies prostrate before him, he with his broad round Foot at one
stamp kills him, but if he be condemned so to die as to (...) himself dye, the
Elephant will break his Bones by degrees with his hard trunk, as first his
Legs, then his Thighs, after that the Bones in both his Arms, this done his
wretched Spirit is left to breath its last out of the midst of those broken
Bones. In other Places, Some are Crucified or Nailed to a Cross, others rather
Roasted than burnt to Death, for there is a Stake set up, and a Fire made at a
distance round about it; the condemned Person being naked is so fastened to the
Stake the (...) may move round about it, so long as (...) (...) (...) (...)
till his Flesh begins to blister; (...) (...) down, roaring till the Fire made
about (...) (...) ^h his Voice and Life; The (...) (...) exquisite torments is
because they (...) (...) (...) for a manto die by an (...) (...) ^iminals are
usually commanded (...) (...) (...), and those who will not (...) (...) (...);
h^nce these Condemned (...) (...) (...) (...) eat and seem to be (...) (...)
and i^ the close of the Banquet (...) (...) ^ddle, the wretched Self-m^* (...)
(...) (...) into the bottom of his (...) (...) (...) ^p; and if after this he
can wipe his bloody Knife upon a white Paper or Napkin laid by him, he is
reckoned to dye with honor, and is persuaded he goes to Fa^aman, or the God of
War.

When I was in India, says my Author. One was sentenced by the Mogol for
killing his own Father to dye thus; a small Iron Chain was fastened to his Heel,
and tied to the hind Leg of a great Elephant, who dragged him one whole remove
of that King being about ten Miles, so that all his Flesh was torn off his
Bones when we met him, and appeared rather a Skeleton than a Body. Another
having killed his Mother, the Emperor was at a stand to think of a punishment
adequate to so horrible a crime, but after a little pause, he adjudged him to
be stung to Death by Serpents; so one of those Mountebanks who keep them to
show tricks to the People, brought two Serpents to do Execution upon this
wretched man; whom he found naked (only a little covering before) and
trembling. Then having angered these venomous Creatures, he put one to his
Thigh, which presently twined it self about that part till it came near his
Groin, and there bit him till Blood followed; The other was fastened to the
outside of the other Thigh twisting it round, and there bit him likewise; the
Wretch kept upon his Feet a quarter of an hour, before which the Serpents were
taken from him, but complained extremely of a Fire that tormented all his
Limbs, and his whole Body began to swell exceedingly, like Nafidius bit by a
Libyan Serpent called a Prester; and about half an hour after, the Soul of that
unnatural Monster left his groaning Carcass.

It happened a few years before Sir Thomas Row was Ambassador in this Court in
1618. that a Jugler of Bengal, a place famous for Witches, brought an Ape
before the Mogol, who loved Novelties, that did many strange feats; the King to
try his sk^l plucked a Ring off his Finger, and gave it one of his Boys to hide,
whom the Ape presently discovered; several other trials he made, wherein the
Ape did his part to admiration; At length this strange and unexpected fancy
came into the Kings Head; There are many disputes, said he, about that true
Prophet which should come into the World, we are for Mahomet; The Persians
magnify Mortis Ally, the Hindoos or Heathens extol Bramon, Ram. and others,
the Jews are for Moses. and the Christians for Christ, adding several others to
the number of twelve, who have all their several Followers in that part of the
World; He then caused them twelve names to be written on twelve several
Scrolls, and put together to try if the Ape could draw out the name of the true
Prophet; this done the Ape put his paw amongst them and pulled out the name of
Christ; The Mogol a second time caused these twelve names to be writ again in
twelve other Scrolls and Characters, and put together, when the Ape again
plucked forth the name of Christ as before; Mahomet Chan a great Favorite
present, said it was an Imposture of the Christians, though none were then
there; and desired to make a third trial, which granted, he put but eleven of
those names together, reserving the name of Christ in his hand; the Ape
searching as before, plucked forth his empty paw, and so twice or thrice
together the King demanding the reason, was answered, that happily the thing he
looked for was not there; the Ape was bid search for it, who putting out those
eleven names one after the other in a seeming indignation rent them, then
running to Mahomet Chan caught him by the hand where the name of Christ was
concealed, which he opened, and held up to the King, but did not tear it as the
former. Upon which the Mogol took the Ape, and gave his Keeper a good Pension
to keep him near about him, calling him the Divining Ape. And this was all
which followed upon this admrable event, except the great wonder and amazement
of the people, the truth whereof says my Author, was confirmed to me by
several Persons of different Religions, who all agreed in the story and the
several circumstances thereof.

I cannot but relate a remarkable example of a gross Flatterer, but a great
Favorite of this King, noted to be a great neglecter of God, believing it
Religion enough to please the Mogol his Master, though a Soldier of approved
valor. This man on a time sitting in dalliance with one of his Women, she
plucked an hair from his breast about his Nipple in wantonness, without
designing any hurt. This little inconsiderable wound by an unparalled fare
became the occasion of his death, beginning presently to fester, and in a short
time turned to an incurable Canker; When he found he must needs dye, he spoke
these notable words worthy to be recorded. Who would not have thought but that
I who have been so long a Soldier should have died in the face of an Enemy,
either by a Sword, Lance, Arrow, Bullet, or some such Instrument of death? But
now, though too late, I am forced to confess that there is a great God above,
whose Majesty I have ever despised, who needs no bigger Lance than an hair to
kill an Atheist or a despiser of his Divinity; and so desiring these his last
words might be told the King his Master, he died.

The Great Mogol, is a Prince of much Wealth and Power having multitudes of
Soldiers in constant pay, and in his ordinary removes which are not usually
above ten mile at once, has such an infinite number of men and other Creatures
attending him whose drink is water, that in a little time, as it was said of
the mighty Host of Sennacherib, they are able to drink up Rivers.

Aureng-zeb if he be alive, is about 86 yeurs of Age, and has lived in Tents
several years; the Son of Savagi being still in Rebellion against him. In 1699.
Sr. William Norris was sent Ambassador to the Great Mogol, and received with
all the Honor imaginable; He will endeavor to satisfy the Mogol, that the
Pirates as well English as others Nations who have done him very great damages,
are brought to Justice when taken; several of them having been already executed
in England.

The Travels of Mr Thomas Coryat.
I Shall conclude this Account of the Empire of the Great Mogol, with the
Travels of Mr. Thomas Coryat a Man in his time sufficiently known. He formerly
writ a Book Entitled Coriats Crudities hastily Globed up in Five Months
Travels in France, Savoy, Italy Rhetia, Helvetia, or Switzerland some parts of
High Germany, and the Netherlands, newly digested in the hungry Air of Odcomb
in Somersetshire, Printed in 1611.

If Coryat had lived he designed to have Writ his last Travels to, in and out
of East India, for he resolved like another Ulysses to have rambled up and down
the World at least ten years to see Tartary in all the vast parts thereof, with
as much as he could of China, and after that to have visited the Court of
Prester John in Ethiopia, who is there called by his own people Ho Biot, The
King, with many other places, which if he had lived to perform and publish,
might have been of good use, since he was both a particular and faithful
Relator of what he saw, ever disclaiming that bold Liberty of Travelers in
Speaking and Writing what they please of remote parts, where they cannot be
easily contradicted.

So believing him an honest Historian, I shall give some Account of his
Footsteps and Flittings up and down, who while he lived being like a perpetual
motion, though dead ought not to be forgotten; In 1612. He shipped himself for
Constantinople, where he strictly observed all remarkables, and found much
respect from St. Paul Pindar then Ambassador there, to whose House he had free
Access; Here he viewed several parts of Greece, and in the Hellespont, and of
those two Castles directly opposite to each other called Sestos and Abidos on
the Banks of that narrow Sea famous for the Story of Hero and Leander; He much
desired to see those seven Churches of Asia, which lie now in ruins, only
Smyrna is still famous for Trade, but not Religion; and Ephesus, with some
others, retain their names, though they have lost the profession of their Faith
with the rest. He saw the Ruins of Great Troy, once so populous as if sown with
people, but now with standing Corn; the very ruins being almost gone to ruin,
there only remaining part of an exceeding great House, supposed part of the
Famous Palace of Great King Priam. From Smyrna he went to Gran Cairo in Egypt
anciently called Memphis and observed the remains of the once famed Pyramids;
Returning thence to Alexandria with another Englishman, they passed by Sea to
Ioppa and met some going to Jerusalem, with whom joining, they traveled
through a Solitary, Rocky way, full of danger from the Wild Arabs, who Rob
Travelers; Arriving at Jerusalem they saw and heard all wherewith Pilgrims are
usually treated, of which you have a full Account in a small Book called Two
Iourneys to Jerusalem, etc. Here our Traveller had the Arms of Jerusalem made
upon his left Arm; and on his Right a single Cross like that whereon our
Savior suffered on the sides of which were written, Via, Veritas, Vita, The
way, Truth, and Life, and on the foot three Nails like those which fastened our
Savior to it, done so artificially and indelibly by a Black Powder, as if
drawn by some accurate Pencil upon Parchment. The poor man would much glory in
beholding these Characters, applying the words of St. Paul to himself, I bear
in my Body the Marks of the Lord Jesus, Gal. 6. 17.

Hence they went to the Dead, Sea, the River Jordan, Sidon, Alexandretta,
Scanderoon and Aleppo, where he was kindly received by the English Consul,
staying some time there for the Caravan, which consists of a mixed multitude
from diverse parts, who travel together to prevent Theives and Murderers; With
these setting forward they came to the City of Nineveh in Ass^ria which in
Ionahs time was three days Journey, but now so mean and obscure, that
Passengers cannot say, this is Nineveh, having lost its name and called now
Mozel. From thence they journeyed to Babylon in Chaldea upon the River
Euphrates, once for its magnitude called a Country, now much contracted, and
named Bagdat; From hence they pro ceeded through both the Armenias, where our
Traveller saw Mount Ararat whereon the Ark rested after Noah's Flood, They went
thence to Ispahan in Persia, and after that to Sushan where King Ahasuerus kept
his Court in Esthers time; from thence to Candahor the first Province
North-East under the Great Mogol, and so to Lahore the second City of this
Empire, a place of great Trade, Wealth and Delight, more temperate than any
other of his great Cities; At length he arrived at Agra the Mogols Metropolis;
from Lahore to Agra is 400 English Miles; the Country rich, even, and
pleasant, and the Road on both sides planted with great Trees, clothed all the
year with Leaves, of exceeding benefit to Travelers in that hot Clime. It is
called, The Long Walk, full of Villages and Towns convenient for supply of
Travelers.

At Agra our Traveller was kindly entertained by the English Factory, and there
learned the Turkish, Arabian, Persian, and Indostan Tongues; which was very
advantageous to him in his Travels through the Mogols Territories, he wearing
the habit, and speakking the Language of that Nation; He made an Oration to the
Great Mogol in the Persian Tongue' bringing in the Story of the Queen of Sheba.
1 King* 10. In which parts of the Sacred Scripture the Mahometans have some
knowledge, and told the King, That as the Queen of Sheba having heard of the
Fame of King Solomon, came from far to visit him, and confessed that she had
not been told half of what she now saw concerning the Wisdom, Greatness,
Retinue and Riches of Solomon, so said our Orator, I had heard much of your
Majesty before I had the honor of your sight, when I was very ^far off in my
own Country, but what I now behold exceedingly surmounts all the reports
thereof. Intermixing other slatteries therewith which pleased the Mogol, who
gave him an hundred Ro^pies, being about twelve pound t^n Shillings in our
money, looking on him as a Dervise Prophet, or Pilgrim as he called him, who in
that Country value not money, which might be the reason he did not reward him
more liberally. He after got the Vulgar Language; and a Woman belonging to the
English Ambassador there, having such freedom of Speech that she would rail
from Morning to Night, Coryat one day undertook her in her own Dialect, and by
eight a Clock in the Morning so silenced her that she had not one word more to
speak*

At the four Corners of their Mosquets or Churches in this Country there are
high, round, small Turrets; into the top of these their* reists ascend five
times every day, whence they proclaim aloud these Arabian words, La alla illa,
alla Mahomet Resul-alla, that is, There is no God but one God, and Mahomet the
Messenger from God. This is instead of Bells, which they use not in their
Churches, One time Tom. Coryat hearing Priest a thus crying, got upon a high
place directly opposite to him, (...) thus contradicted him, La alla illa alla,
^asaret Eesa Benalla, that is, No God but one God and the Lord Christ the Son
of God, and said that Mahomet was an Impostor; All this he uttered in their
own Language, as loud as possible, in the Ears of many Mahometans present, but
it may be questioned whether the discretion of our Pilgrim were to be
commended; for if this had been acted in many other places of Asia it would
have cost him his Life with as much torture as cruelty could have invented; But
being here taken for a madman he was let alone, happily since every one there has
liberty to profess his own Religion freely, and may argue against theirs
without danger; as Tom Coryat did another time with a Moola; The question was
which of them was the Musselman or true Believer; After much heat on both sides
Coryat made this Learned distinction, That himself was the Orthodox Musselman
or True Believer, and the Priest the Pseudo Musselman, or False True Believer.
He was a man of a coveting Eye, never satisfied with seeing, as Solomon speaks,
and took as much pleasure therein as others in enjoying great and rare things;
He had the mastery of many hard Languages, besides Greek and Latin which he
brought from England, and had he had Wisdom to manage them as he had skill to
speak them, he had deserved more Fame in his Generation, but his Seize
made him ignorant of himself, being so ambitious of praise that he would hear
more than he could possibly deserve, yet had he not fallen into the smart hands
of the Wits of those times he might have passed better.

On a time a Merchant who came from England met Tom. Crryat traveling toward
East India, and told him that when he was in England King James I. inquired
after him, and when he had certified him of his meeting him, the King replied,
Is that Fool yet living? our Pilgrim was much concerned because the King spoke
no more nor better of him, saying, that Kings would speak of poor men what they
pleased; Another time the English Ambassador gave him a Letter (with a Bill to
receive ten pound) to the Counsul of Aleppo, wherein were these words, Sir,
when you shall hand these Letters, I desire you to receive the Bearer of them
Mr. Thom. Coryat with Courtesy, for you shall find him a very honest poor
Wretch, and further I must entreat you to furnish him with ten pounds which
shall be repaid, etc. Our Pilgrim liked the gift well but the Language much
displeased him, saying, That my Lord Ambassador had even spoiled his Courtesy
in the carriage thereof, so that if he had been a very Fool indeed he could
have said very little less of him than he did to call him honest poor Wretch
and to say no more of him was t^ say as much as nothing, and his favor does
rather trouble than please me; when I was at Venice, said he, a Person of
Honor wrote thus on my behalf to Sr. Hen. Wotton then Ambassador there, My
Lord, good Wine needs no Bush, neither a worthy man Letters Commendatory
because whithersoever he goes he is his own Epistle; this, said he, was some
Language on my behalf; At length his Letter was phrased to his mind, but he
never lived to receive his money* A little before his death he seemed
apprehensive thereof for swounding away once, upon his recovery he declared the
occasion was, for fear he should die in the way toward Surat whither he
intended to go, and be buried in obscurity, and none of his Friends know what
became of him, he traveling now as he usually did alone; Upon which the
Ambassador willed him to stay longer, which he thankfully refused, and
presently turned his face for Surat, which was then about three hundred English
Miles distant, and lived to come safe thither, where being over-kindl^ treated
by some English who gave him Sack which they had brought from England, he
calling for it as soon as he heard of it, and Crying, Sack, Sack, is there such
a thing as Sack, pray give me some Sack, and drinking of it, though not
immoderately (being very temperate) it increased his Flux that he had then upon
him which caused him in a few days after his tedious and troublesome Travels
(for he went most on foot) to come at this place to his Iourneys end, for here
he overtook death, Dec. 1617. and was buried at Swalley under a little Monument
likt those in our Churchyards.

The Factories of the Honorable East India Company in the Island of Sumatra.
SUmarra is accounted one of the largest Eastern Islands, in length about 700,
and in breadth above 200 where the English have two very considerable Factories
named Achen and York Fort.

York Fort.
IT lies to Leagues from the Continent of Asia. Six Kings command therein, the
King of Acheen is best known to us. They have so well defended their Island
that the Europeans could never erect any Fort or Castle in it. There is a
Mountain that casts forth Fire like Mount Etna. The Pepper here is better than
that of Malabar, because the Land is more moist. They find Gold in Grains, and
in little pieces after great Floods of Water. The Inland Country is inhabited
by Barbarians who kill and eat the Bodies of their Enemies, being seasoned with
Pepper and Salt. The City of Acheen is the best in the Island, lying half a
League from the Sea upon a Plain, by the side of a very shallow River, upon the
bank thereof there is a Fortress built.

Our English first settled their Trade here in the reign of Q Elizabeth, whose
name was then famous for her expoits against the Spaniards. The Q. Letters to
this King were received with much Pomp, the King entertained the Messenger with
a Banquet, presented him with a Robe, and a piece of Callicoe wrought with
Gold, and gave his Passport for the Generals security, for whom he sent six
Elephants, wi^ Drums, Trumpets, Streamers and many Attendants; The chief
Elephant was about 14 Foot high having a small Cactle like a Coach, covered
with Velvet on his back; in the midst was a great Basin of Gold with a rich
Covering of Silk, wherein the Letter was put; The General was mounted on
another Elephant, and being arrived the Dishes wherein he was treated were of
Gold, their Wine is of Rice, wherein the King drank to the General out of his
Gallery, 4 Foot higher than where he fate; it (...) as strong as Aqua Vitae;
After the ^ast some Young Women danced and played on the Music, the King sent
a Letter and a Present to the Q. and upon parting asked if they had the Psalms
of David, and caused them to sing one, which he and his Nobles seconded with a
Psalm (as he said) for their Prosperity.

Another considerable English Factory was at Bantam on the Isle of Java Major;
tho chief City in the Island, at the foot of a Mountain, whence issue three
Rivers, two running by the Walls, and the other through the City, yet not deep
enough to admit any Ships. The Houses are very mean, consisting of three chief
Streets; The Natives are Heathens, and believe when they dye their Souls enter
into some Bird, Beast or Fish, and so eat neither Flesh nor Fish, Toward the
South are many of the Turkish Religion, some called ^aqui^s are desperate
Vilains, who having been at Mecca to visit Mahomets Tomb, run through the
Streets and kill all they meet with their poisoned Daggers, thinking they do
God and Mahomet good service and shall be saved thereby; If any of these Mad
men are killd their Followers bury them as Saints, erecting them a Tomb, which
they visit, and bestow Alms upon the Keeper thereof. I remember says my
Author, that in 1642. a Vessel of the Great Mogols returned from Mecca to
Surrat with a great number of these Faquir^ or Derviches, and one of them was
no sooner landed and had said his Prayers, but he took his Dagger and ran among
several Dutch Mariners unlading goods upon the Shore, and ^fore they were
aware this desperate Wretch had wounded 1^ of them whereof 13 died at length
the Sentinel shot him through the Body so that he fell down dead; the other
Faquirs and Mahometans upon the place took up the Body and buried it, and in 15
days erected him a fair Monument; Every year the English and Hollanders plucked
it down, but when they are gone the Faquirs rebuild and plant Banners over it,
nay some perform their Devonions at it; One time, says my Author, my Brother
and I, and a Dutch Chyrurgeon going along a narrow way, having the Pales of a
Garden on one hand, one of these Rascals thrust hii Pike between the Pales
thinking to have stabd it into one of our Breasts, the Dutch man being before,
the head of the Pike ran into hii Breeches; we both laid hold on the Staff;
while my Brother leaped over and ran the Faquir through; several Chinese came
and gave my Brother thanks for killing him; After which we waited on the K. who
far from being displeased gave him a Girdle, for the K, is glad when those
Rogues are slain, counting them Desperados, and not fit to live. In 1682. The
Eldest Son of the K of Bantam declared himself King, and by the assistance of
the Dutch took the City of Bantam and the English Factory there, proclaiming
the old K his Father a Rebel, About the same time an Ambassador came from the
old K. to K. Charles. 2, by whom he was kindly entertained, and having
continued here some time oeturned again to his own Country.

At Socodona and Beniermasa in the Isse of Borneo the English settled other
Factories; It is as big as Spain, encompassed with other smaller Islands, and
has a City of the same name founded on Piles in the Salt Water, with Sumptuou^
buildings of Stone covered with Coco leaves. The People are more white than
other Indians, of good Wits and divided beewixt two Kings and two Religions,
the K of Borneo and his Wife being Mahumetans, these of Laus still remaining in
their Ancient Gentelism: These believe the Sun and Moon are Man and Wife, and
the Stars their Children, ascribing to them divine Honors, to the Sun
especially, whom they salute at his rising with great reverence, repeating
certain verses; Their public business being treated in the Night, the
Counselors of State ascend some Tree, viewing the Heavens till the Moon rise,
and then go to the Senate house. Their Apparel is very thin by reason of the
extreme heat, being only a Shirt of Silk or Callico which they wear more for
modesty than warmth.

One of the Isles of Celebs is called Macassar where the English likewise
settled a Factory, being 600 miles from East to West, plentiful of all
necessaries, in some part overgrown with Wood, in which fiery Flies make
nightly such light as if every Twig or Bough were a Candel. In the midst are
high Mountains, out of which flow many (...) Rivers. The Islanders Poison their
Arrows with the (...) of certain Trees in (...), so as to work a swift or slow
death (...) ^re. They think the K. has only these ret Receipt to take away the
(...) of it, who boast^ that he has the most effectual P^son in the World,
which no Remedy can cure One time an Englishman in heat of B^d had killed one
of the King of Macassets Subjects, and though the King had pardoned him, yet
both English, Hollanders and Portugals fearing if the Englishman should go
unpunished the (...) would revenge it upon some of them, besought the King to
put him to de^, which (...) much ad^ being granted, the King unwilling to put
him to a ^ngring death, and desirous to show the effect of his Poison resolved
to dispatch the Criminal himself, so he took a long Trunk, and shot him exactly
in the great Toe of the right Foot, the place he particularly aimed at, Two
^hirurgcons one an Englishman the other an Hollander provided on purpose,
immediately cut off his Toe, but for all that the Poison had dispersed it self
so speedily that the Englishman died presently; All the Kings and Princes of
the East use strong Poisons, and some Europeans having tried their Arrows by
shooting at Squirrels, they felt down dead as soon as they were touched.

The English Factories in China.
THis vast Kingdom was governed by Kings of their own for many Generatiens. But
Zunchin the last Emperor, suffering the Eunuchs by extortion to oppress the
People, became odious to them. So that in 1640. They joined with 2 Revolted
Generals, one of whom named Ly, overra^ the whole Empire in a short space and
was crowned K: at Pequin Zunchin to prevent any Insult from the Rebels, hanged
himself upon a Tree in the Garden, where his Empress had just before done the
same, the Traitor Ly enjoyed his Usurpation ^ut a short time, for the Cham of
Tartary reckoning the former League of Peace with Zunchin, void by his Death,
without an Heir, He invaded China with mighty Forces and made an absolute
Conquest thereof, forcing the Tyrant to fly and hide himself, and most of the
treacherous Chinois were cut off by the Tartars, the present Emperor of China
and Tartary, is the Son of him who made this prodigious Conquest The East India
Company have 3 Factories in this Kingdom, named Amoy Canton, and Tunqueen, from
whence they bring great Quantities of Druggs, and several other Commodities.

A late Author gives the following List of the Fors, Factories, and Places of
Trade wherein the Honorable East India Company are concerned in Asia.

Bombay Castle and Island; And Dabul in Decan.

On the Coast of Cormandel.
Fort St. George. Trinity Watch. Trinity Bass. Porto Novo. Fort St. David
Cudaloor. Conimere Manjeckpatam Arzapore, Pettipolee. Messulipatam. Madapollam.
Viccegaparam
In the Gulf of Bengale.
Bengal Hugli Ballasore Cassumbezar Moulda Daca Chutta Nutta Pattana
In the Empire of the Great Mogol
Agra Cambaia Surat Amada^vd
On the Coast of Malabar.
Callicut Carwar Gussurat Camboia Batricullay Duno Satanam Tully Chery Beataer
Bringen
In Arabia Faelix
Muscat Mocha Macku^la Shahare Kisen Durga Doffare Aden
In the kingdom of of Persia.
JSpahan Gombroon Bassora
In the Isle of Sumatra.
AChem Indrapore, Bengalis Jambee Eyer Barma Eyer Dickets ^yamong ^ppon ^amola
Selabar
On the Malay Coast.
PEque Trinacore Cudda
In the Empire of China.
TUnqueen Canton ^moy Hock^eu
Siam, Camboida in the Kingdom of Siam. Mindano, in the Island of Mindano.
Borneo, in the Island of Borneo. Iudda, upon the Red Sea. Mucassar in the Isle
of Celebs. Now Expelled. Bantam in Iava, till expelled by the Dutch, 1682.
FINIS.
Books Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultry near Cheapside.
History.
1. ENglands Mouarchs: Or, a Relation of the most remarkable Transactions, from
Julius Caesar; adorned with Poems, and the Picture of every Monarch from King
Willim the Conqueror to this time. With a List of the Nobility, and the number
of the Lords and Commons in both Houses of Parliament, and other useful
particulars. Price one Shilling.

2. THE History of the House of Orange: Or, a Relation of the Magnanimous
Atchivements of his Majesty's Renowned Predecess^rs, and likewise of his own
Heroic Actions, till the ^ate Glorious Revolution. Together with the History
of K. William and Q. Mary. Being an Account of the most remarkable passages to
this time. By R. B. Price one Shilling.

3. THE History of the Two late Kings, Charles II. and James II. and of the
most observable Passages during their Reigns; and the secret French and Popish
Intrigues in those Times Pr. 1^.

4. THE History of Oliver Cromwell L. Protector, being an Impartial Account of
all the Battles, Seiges, and Military Achievements, wherein he was engaged in
England, Scotland and Ireland; and of his Civil Administrations. till his
Death. Relating matters of Fact, without Reflections or Observation. Price 1
Shilling.

5. THE Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland, containing an Account of all the
Battles, Sieges, other remarkable Transactions, from the beginning of the Reign
of K. Charles I. 1625. to 1660. The Trial of K. Charles I. at large, and his
last Speech with Pictures of several Accidents. Price 1 Shilling

6. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and present State of
London and Westminster, showing the Foundation, Walls' Gates, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls' Hospitals, Schools, Inns of Courts, Charters,
and Privileges thereof; with the most, remarkable Accidents, as to Wars,
Fires, Plagues, etc. for above 900 years past. Pr. 1. Shilling.

7. ADmirable Curiosities, Rarities, and Wonders in England, Scotland and
Ireland, or an account of many remarkable Persons and Places; and of the
Battles, Sieges, Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Fires, Thunders, Murders,
and other Occurrences, for many hundred years past: with the natural and
artificial Rarities in every County, and several Pictures. pr. 1s.

8. THE History of the Kingdom of Scotland, containing an Account of all the
Wars, Battles, and other remarkable Transactions, Revolutions, and State
Intrigues in that Nation during the Reigns of 72 Kings and Queens to the Reign
of King William II. Intermixed with variety of strange Accidents, Prodigious
Appearances, and other considerable Events. And a List of the present Nobility
of that Kingdom. pr. 1 shilling.

9. THE History of the Kingdom of Ireland, being an Account of all the Battles,
Seiges, and other memorable Passages during the late Wars there, till the
entire Reduction thereof by the victorious Arms of K. Will. III. To which is
prefixed a relation of the Ancient Inhabitants, and the first Conquest of that
Nation by K. Henry II. The horrid Rebellion in 164^. and the Popish and
Arbitrary designs in the two last Reigns. pr. 1 s.

10. THE History of the Principality of Wales: Containing, A brief account of
the ancient Kings and Princes of Britain and Wales, till the final extinguishng
of the Royal British Line. Also Remarks upon the Lives of all the Princes of
Wales of the Royal Families of England, from K. Edward I. to this time; With
Remarkable Observations on the most memorable Persons and Places for many
hundred years past: And the birth and strange actions of Merlin the famous
Welsh Prophet. pr. one shilling.

11. THE Unfortunate Court Favorites of England; Exemplified in some Remarks
upon the Lives, Actions and (...) ^all of diverse Great men, who have been
Favorites to several English Kings and Queens Namely, I. Pierce Gaveston
Favorite to K. Ed. II. III. Hugh Spencer the Father and Son, both Favorites
(...) K. Ed. 2. I^ Rog. Mortimer Favorite (...) Q. Isabel, Mother (...) K. Ed.
3. with their priva^ ^mours, etc. V. (...). ^afford Favorite to Crook-^t
Richard with that King's secret Intrigues for usurping the Crown and murdering
his Nephews. Likewise the Character of Jane Shore by Sir Tho. More who saw her.
VI. Cardinal Woo^ey; VII. Tho. L. Cromwell; both favorites to K. Henry S.
VIII. E. of E^x, Favorite to Q. Elizabeth. IX. D. of Bucks Favorite to K.
James I. and K. Charles I. X. E. of Strafford, Favorite to K. Charles I. With
all their Pictures. Price 1. shilling.

12. THE English Empire in America, or a p^ospect of his Majesty's Dominions in
the West Indies, namely, New Foundland, New England, New York, New Jersey,
Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina, Bermudas, Berbuda, Anguilla,
Monserrat, Dominica, St. Vincent, Antego Mevis or Nevis, St. Christophers,
Barbados, and Jamaica. With an account of their Discovery, Situation and
Product: The religion and Manners of the Indians, etc. With pictures of the
strange Fruits, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Insects, Serpents and Monsters found in
those parts of the World. pr. 1 s.

13. THE English Acquisitions in Guinea and East India. Inlivened with
^ictures. Price one Shilling.

14. THE English Hero: Or, Sir Francis Drake Revived. Being a full Account of
the dangerous Voyages, admirable Adventures, notable Discoveries and and
Magnanimous Achievements of that Valiant and Renowned Commander. As I. His
Voyage in 1572. to Nombre de Dios in the West Indies, where they saw a pile of
Bars of Silver near 70 foot long, 10 foot broad and 12 foot high. II. His
incompassing the whole World in 1577. which he performed in 2 years and 10
months, gaining a vast Quantity of Gold and Silver. III. His Voyage into
America in 1585. and taking the Towns of St. Jago, St. Domingo, Carthagena and
St. Augustine IV. His last Voyage into those Countries in 1595. with his Death
and Burial. Revised Corrected, enlarged, and beautified with pictures by R. B.
price one shilling.

15. TWO Journeys to Jerusalem, Containing first, An account of the Travels of
2 English Pilgrims some years since, and what Accidents befell them in their
Journey to Jerusalem, Grand Cairo, Alexandria, etc. II. The Travels of 14
Englishmen in 1669. With the Antiquities, Monuments and Memorable places
mentioned in Scripture. To which are prefixed, Memorable Remarks on the Ancient
and modern State of the Jewish Nation, As 1. A Description of the Holy Land its
Situation, Fertility, etc. 2. The several Captivities of the Jews, 3. Probable
Conjectures what is become of the Ten Tribes carried Captive by the Affyrians.
with diverse pertinent Relations pursuant thereto, 4. The State of the Jews
since their extermination, with the present condition of Palestine. 5. Of the
Septuagint or 70 Jewish Interpreters of the Law of Moses. Together with a
Relation of the great Council of the Jews in Hungary, in 1650. to examine the
Scriptures concerning Christ. Written By S. B. an Eyewitness. Beautified with
Pictures ^rice one shilling.

16. EXtraordinary Adventures of several Famous Men. With the strange Events,
and signal mutations and changes in the Fortunes of diverse Illustrious Places
and Persons in all Ages; being an account of a multitude of stupendous
Revolutions, Accidents, and observable matters in diverse States and Provinces
throughout the World; with Pictures. pr. 1s.

17. THE History of the Nine Worthies of the World Three whereof were Gentiles.
1. Hector Son of Pri^mus K. of Troy. 2. Alexander the Great King of Macedon. 3.
Julius Caesar first Emp. of Rome. Three Jews. 4. Joshua C. General of Israel.
5. David K. of Israel. 6. Judas Maccabeus a valiant Jewish Commander against
Antiochus. Three Christians 7. Arthur K. of Britain, 8. Charles the Great K. of
France, and Emp. of Germany. 9. Godfrey of Bullen K. of Jerusalem. Being an
account of their Lives, and Victories. With Poems and Pictures of each Worthy.
By R. B. Pr. 1s.

18. FEmale Excellency, or the Ladies Glory, Illustrated in the Lives of nine
famous Women. As 1. Deborah the Prophetess. 2. The valiant Judi^h. 3. Q.
Esther. 4. The virtuous Susanna. 5. The Chaste Lucretia. 6. Boadicia Q. of
Britain, in the Reign of Nero; containing an account of the Original
Inhabitants of Britain. The History of Danaus and his fifty Daughters, who
murdered their Husbands in one night Of the valor of Boadicia, under whose
conduct the Brittans slew 70 thousand Romans, with other remarkable
particulars. 7. Mariamne Wife of K. Herod. 8. Clotilda Q. of France. 9.
Andegona Princess of Spain. Adorned with Poems and Pictures. Pr. 1^.

19. WOnderful Prodigies of Judgment and mercy, discovered in above 300
memorable Histories; containing, (...). Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists,
Blasphemers, and Perjured Villains, 2. The miserable end of many Magicians,
etc. 3. Remarkable Predictions and Presages of approaching Death, and how the
Event has been answerable. 4. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants, Murderers,
etc. 5. Admirable Deliverances from imminent dangers and deplorable distresses
at Sea and Land. Lastly, Divine goodness to penitents, with the Dying thoughts
of several famous Men, concerning a Future State. With pictures pr. 1 shilling.

20. Unparalleled Varieties, or the matchless Actions and Passions of Mankind
displayed, in near 300 notable Instances and Examples, discovering the
transcendent Effects, 1. Of Love, Eriendship and Gratitude. 2. Of Magnanimity,
Courage and Fidelity. 3. Of Chastity. Temperance and Humility: And on the
contrary, the Tremenduous Consequences. 4. Of Hatred, Revenge and Ingratitude,
5. Of Cowardice, Barbarity and Treachery. 6* Of Unchastity, Intemperance and
Ambition. Imbellished with Figures. pr. 1s.

21. THE Kingdom of Darkness: Or, The History of D^mons, Specters, Witches,
Apparitions and other supernatural Delusions and Malicious Impostures of the
Devil. Containing near 80 memorable Relations, Foreign and Domestic, ancient
and modern. Collected from Authors of undoubted Verity. With pictures. pr. 1s.

22. Surprising Miracles of Nature and Art, in two parts; containing, 1.
Miracles of Nature, or the wonderful Signs, and prodigious Aspects and
Appearances in the Heavens, Earth and Sea; with an account of the most Famous
Comets, and other Prodiges, from the Birth of Christ to this time. pr. 1s

23. THE General History of Earthquakes. Or an Account of the most Remarkable
Earthquakes, in diverse parts of the World, from the Creation to this time
particularly those lately in Naples, Smyrna, Iamaica, England and Sicily; With
a Description of the famous Burning Mount Aetna. p^ one shilling.

24. MEmorable Accidents and Unheard of Transactions, containing an account of
several strange Events: As the Deposing of Tyrants, Lamentable Shipwracks
Dismal Misfortunes, Stratagems of War, P^rilous Adventures, Happy Deliverances,
with other select Historical passages in several Countries in this last Age.
Printed at Brussels and Dedicated to K. William 3* etc. Published in English by
R. B. pr. 1 s.

25. MArtyrs in Flames, or the History of Popery; Displaying the Horrid
Persecutions and Cruelties, exercised upon Protestants by the Papists for many
hundred years past to this time: In Piedmont, France, Orange, Bohemia, Hungary,
the Palatine* Poland, Lithuania, Italy, Spain, with the bloody Inquisition,
Portugal, Holland, ^landers, Scotland, Ireland, with the Massacre in 1641.
England, Containing an Account of* 1. The Martyrs in the Reign of K. Hen. 8.
and Q. Mary. 2. The Spanish Invasion in 1588. III. The Gunpowder Treason. IV.
The burning of London. V. The horrid Popish Plot 1678. VI. The murder of Sir.
Ed. B. Godfrey. VII. The detestable Conspiraces of the Papists, and their
Adherents against K. Will. 3. 1. By Grandevile a Frenchman. 2. By Charmock. Sr.
W. Perkins, Sr. J. Friend, Sr J. Fennick and others, with their Trials and
Executions. Also Gods Judgments upon Persecutors, with several pictures pr. one
shilling.

Miscellani^s.
26. DElights for the Ingenious, in above Fifty Select Emblems, Divine and
Moral, curiously Engraven on Copper Plates, with 50 delightful Poems and Lots,
for the lively Illustration of each Emblem, whereby instruction may be promoted
by pleasant Recreation; to which is prefixed, A Poem, entitled, Majesty in
Misery, or an Imploration of the K. of Kings, written by K. C. Collected by R.
B. Price. 2 s. od.

27. EXcellent Contemplations Divine and Moral written by A. L. Capel, with
some account of his Life, his Letters to his Lady, and his last Speech. Also
the Speeches of D. Hamilton, and the Earl of ^olland, who suffered with him:
Pr. 1 s.

28. WInter Evenings Entertainments, in two parts, Containing, 1. Ten pleasant
Relations of many Notable Accidents. 2. Fifty Ingenious Riddles, with
explanations Observations and Morals upon each. Enlivened with above 60
pictures, for illustrating every Story and Riddle. pr. 1 s.

29. ESops Fables in Prose and Verse, with Pictures and proper Morals to every
Fable; Some very pertinent to the present Times. pr. 1 s.

Divinity.
30 A Guide to Eternal Glory: Or, brief Directions to all Christians how to
attain Everlasting Salvation: To which are added several other small Tracts,
price one shilling.

31. YOuths Divine Pastime 1. and 2 containing 76 Remarkable Scripture
Histories, turned into English Verse. With 70 Pictures proper to each story;
very delightful for the Virtuous employing the vacant hours of young Persons.
pr. 1 s.

32. THe Young Man's Calling, or the whole duty of Youth, in a serious and
compassionate Address to all young Persons to Remember their Creator in the
days of their Youth. Together with Remarks upon the Lives of several excellent
young Persons of both Sexes as well Ancient and Modern; who have been famous
for Virtue and Piety in their Generations. With pictures pr. eighteen pence.

33. THe Vanity of the Life of Man Represented in the Seven several Stages
thereof; with Pictures and Poems, exposing the Follies of every Age. Pr. 6d.

34. ANtichrist Stormed, or the Church of Rome proved to be Mystery Babylon the
great Whore, Rev. 17. By many and undeniable Arguments, Answering all the
Objections of the Papists, Pr. 1 s.

35. THe Devout Souls Daily Exercise, in Prayers, Contemplations and Praises
containing Devotions for Morning, Noon and Night, for every day in the Week;
with prayers before and after the Holy Communion: And likewise for person^
(...) (...) Conditions and upon all occasions: With Graces and Thanksgivins
before and after Meat. By R. P. D. D. price bound 6 d.

36. SAcramental Meditations upon diverse select places of Scripture, wherein
Believers are assisted in preparing their hearts, and exciting their affections
and Graces when they draw nigh to God, in that most awful and solemn Ordinance
of the Supper. By Jo. Flavel late Minister of Christ in Devon pr. bound 1s.

3. JAcob wrestling with God, and prevailing; Or, a Treatise concerning the
Necessity and Efficacy of Faith in prayer: With diverse Questions resolved by T.
Tailor. price one shilling.

38. HEaven upon Earth or Good News for Repenting Sinners. Being an Account of
the Remarkable Experiences and Evidences of many Eminent C^ristians in several
Declarations made by them upon solemn Occasions. Displaying the exceeding
Riches of the Free Grace and Love of God in supporting them under violent
Temptations, and at length filling their Souls with Divine Consolation. With
the Memorable Conversion, Exemplary, Repentance, and Dying Expressions of the
late Earl of Rochester, Approved of as very necessary for comforting poor
Doubting Believers, By W. Dyer Minister of the Gospel. pr. 1s.

39. THe VVelcome Communicant, Containing brief Directions to the weakest
Christians how to proceed from one Grace to another, according to the Rule of
the Sacred Scriptures, that so they may come with cheerfulness and Acceptance
to the LORDS TABLE. with Devotions and prayers before, at, and after the
Receiving the ^y Communion yy (...) (...) pri. 6. d*

FINIS

