MIRACLES OF ART and NATURE: OR, A Brief Description of the several varieties
of BIRDS, BEASTS, FISHES, PLANTS, and FRUITS of other Countries.

Together with several other Remarkable Things in the World.

By R. B. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for William Bowtel at the Sign of the Golden Key near
Miter-Court in Fleet Street, 1678.

TO THE Ingenious Reader.
Candid Reader,
WHat thou find herein, are Collections out of several Ancient Authors,
which (with no small trouble,) I have carefully and diligently Collected, and
Comprised into this small Book at some vacant hours, for the divertisement of
such as thy self, who are disposed to read it; For as the several Climates of
the world, have not only influenced the Inhabitants, but the very Beasts, with
Natures different from one another: So have thou here, not only a Description
of the several Shapes and Natures of Variety of Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Plants
and Fruits; but also of the Dispositions and Customs (though some of them
Barbarous and Inhumane,) of several People, who Inhabit many pleasing and other
parts of the World. I think there is not a Chapter wherein thou will not find
various and remarkable things worth thy Observation; and such (take the Book
throughout,) that thou can not have in any one Author, at least Modern, and
of this Volume. And if what I have done, shall not dislike thee, I shall
possibly proceed, and go on to a further discovery in this kind, which
doubtless cannot (as all Variety does,) please thee. It Is probable they are not
so Methodically disposed as some hands might have done; Yet for Variety and
Pleasure-sake, they are (I hope) pleasingly enough intermixed. And as I find
this accepted, so I shall proceed.

Farewell.
CHAP. I.
Of EGYPT in General.
BY reason of the Southernly Situation of it, the Air is very hot, and
offensive; so that to avoid the insupportable Heat thereof, and to have the
benefit of some fresh winds, the Inhabitants are accustomed to build high
Towers in all their Towns, in which they use to solace, and refresh themselves.
The Soil made fruitful by the overflowing of the River Nilus, is so exceeding
plentiful of all sorts of Grain, that it was called, Horreum populi Romani, the
Granary or Storehouse of the People of Rome: which City, it did annually
furnish with four months Provisions. It abounds also with Rich Pastures, in
which they feed great store of Camels, Horses, Asses, Oxen, Sheep, and Goats,
greater of growth then usually in most places else; and by reason of the
Moorishness of the Country, they have great store of Fowls, Poultry they have
in great abundance about their houses, hatched in a different manner from all
other Countries, not by sitting of the Hen, but by the heat of Furnaces, or
Ovens, in which their Eggs are orderly laid in Dung, and by a gentle heat
brought to animation. Palmtrees there are in great store, growing in couples,
Male and Female, both thrusting forth their rods full of Seeds; but the Female
is only fruitful, and that not except growing by the Male, and having his Seeds
mixed with hers: the pith of these trees is most excellent Salad, in taste
somewhat resembling a Hartichoke; of the branches of this tree they make
Beadsteads, Latices, etc. Of the Leaves, Baskets, Mats, Fans, etc. Of the
outward husk of the Cod, Cordage; of the Inner, brushes; the Fruit it bears
best known by the name of a Date. Finally, it is said to bear whatsoever is
necessary to the life of a man: It is the nature of this tree, though never so
ponderous a weight were put upon it, not to yield to the burden; but still to
resist the heaviness, and endeavor to raise it self the more upwards. For this
cause planted in Churchyards in the Eastern Countries as an Emblem of the
Resurrection: Instead whereof we use the Yew-tree in these more colder Regions.

The People, though the Country be in the same Clime with Barbary, are not
black, but Tawny; affirmed to weep and mourn over the Bodies of their Dead,
daubed over with Dung; to have held it a great Impiety to burn or bury them;
but having Imbalmed them; to lay them in some inward Room of their houses: The
Men to keep themselves at home, for the household business, whilst the Women
follow Merchandise and other Affairs abroad; the Men to carry Burdens upon
their heads, and the Women theirs on their shoulders; Antipodes in these last
to most other Nations; But certainly they were witty and Ingenious People, the
first Inventers of Geometry, Arithmetic, Physic; as also Astronomy,
Necromancy, and Sorcery: They first taught the use of Letters to the
neighboring Phenicians, accustomed at first to express their conceits in the
shape of Birds, Beasts, and Trees etc. which they termed Hyeroglyphicks, of
which, two or three examples will not be Impertinent. For Eternity, they
painted the Sun and Moon, as things which they believed to have had no
beginning, nor were likely to have any ending. For a Year, they painted a
Snake, with his tail in his mouth, to show how one Year succeeding another,
kept the World still in an endless Circle. For a Month, they painted a
Palm Tree, because at every new Moon, it sends forth a new branch. For God,
they painted a Faulcon, as well for that he soared so high, as that he governed
the lesser Birds For Integrity of life, they painted Fire and Water; both
because these Elements are in themselves most pure, and because all other
things are putrified by them. For any thing that was abominable to the Gods,
they painted a Fish, because in their Sacrifices their Priests never used them.

CHAP. II.
MEMPHIS. in Egypt.
NEar to the City Memphis in Egypt, stands, or did stand a Pyramide square at
the bottom, supposed to take up eight Acres of ground, and each square 300
single paces long, and 255 steps from top to bottom, cach step above three foot
high, and the breadth proportionable, growing by degrees narrower, till it
comes to the top, which consists but of three stones only, yet so large, that
sixty men may stand thereon: no stone so little in the whole, as to be drawn by
any the greatest of our carriages; and yet all brought thither from the
Arrabian mountains, how or by what manner is as great a Wonder as the rest;
built for the Sepulcher of an Egyptian King, who employed in it for twenty
years together, no less then 366000 men continually at work on it; the charges
they put him to in no other food then Garlic, Radishes, and Onyons, being
imputed at a thousand eight hundred Tallents. Others there are of great Note,
though not so Famous as this.

CHAP. III.
CAIRE in Egypt.
NEar that City, Caire in Egypt, is a place, which upon Good Friday, there
appears the Heads, Legs, and Arms of Men, rising out of the ground to a very
great Number; which if a Man come near, or touch any of them, they immediately
shrink into the Earth again; supposed by some to be the Imposture of Watermen
only, who stick them in the Sands over night, and keeping them secret; obtain
thereby the carrying of many thousands to behold the sight: But it is reported
by a sober and credible Person; who was an Eyewitness of the Wonder, that he
had touched diverse of them; and going so to do to the Head of a Child, a Man of
Caire cried out to him, Kali, Kali, ante Materasde; that is to say, hold, hold,
you know not what you do; a strange Forerunner (if true) of the Resurrection
of the whole Body.

CHAP. IV.
BOTANTER in India.
BOTANTER in India, is a Country very large, of three Months Journey in
Extent, full of high Mountains; one of which may be seen five days Journey off;
in which are said to dwell a sort of People with Ears of a span long, or more;
whom those of the Valleys count as Apes. In those Parts which are next to
Bengab; they are white, and Gentiles, in other places more inclining to an
Olive color; their Garments they wear close to their Bodies, so straight that
one cannot see a pleat or wrinkle in them; and those they never put off by
Night or Day, whilst they are able to hang on: Nor do they wash at any time,
for fear of defiling so pure a Creature as the Water. Content with one Wife,
and yet co-habit not with her after two or three Children; when any of them
die, the South-sayers are to tell them what to do with the Body: according to
whose Directions, (first consulting his Books,) they burn, bury, or eat the
dead Bodies of their Friends.

CHAP. V.
NARSINGA in India.
IN the Country Narsinga in India, the People are in Religion, Gentiles,
worshipping one God, as the Lord of all, who is taught them by the Light of
Nature, that they join the Devil, or their Pa-Gods in Commission with them,
whereto induced by the persuasion of their Beastly Bramines, or Priests, who
suck there-out no small advantage: Some Christians there are intermixed of the
old Plantation, especially in Maliapur, and the Region of Choromandel, but not
so well Instructed in the Principles of their own Belief, as to be able to
convince or convert the Gentiles, nor to dissuade them from the use of some
heathenish Customs, though barborous and Inhumane, and against all reason; not
used in any place, but amongst the Indians: Amongst which is reckoned for most
Savage, the forcing the poor Women to burn themselves with their Husbands
Bodies, the Women's kindred not the Husbands, thrusting them on these hard
conditions, who reckon it a disgrace to their Family, if She should refuse: And
because they will be sure not to have that Infamy stick upon them, they have
ordered, that the Women, who shall refuse, must shave her Head, and break her
Jewels, and not be suffered to eat, drink, or sleep, or accompany with any body
till her Death; a life more miserable then the Flames which they seek to shun.
This makes them leap into the Fire with joy and greediness, and to contend
which shall be foremost: She being thought to have been most loving during his
life, which is now most willing to accompany him in his Death.

CHAP. VI.
QVILLACARE.
QVillacare is the head City, of a peculiar Seigneury in India, but held of the
Kings of Traneanor, as their next and immediate Lord; sthough this and other
Kings also are Feuditaries of the Throne of Narsinga, and were that the worst
Tenure by which they held, it might be tolerable: But there is a matter of
worse consequence; which attends these besotted Princes. The Kingdom here, is
but a Pomp of twelve years continuance, and then ends in a sad Catastrophe:
For at the end of those twelve years, the King repairs to Quillacare, prays
before an Idol; then mounteth on a Scaffold, covered with Silk, or Tapestry,
and in the sight of all his People (gathered together to behold this strange
Solemnity) cuteth off his nose, ears, lips, and other parts, which he casts
toward the Idol, and in conclusion cuts his own Throat: His designed
Successor being present at this bloody Sacrifice, who at the twelve years end
is to do the like.

CHAP. VII.
INDIA.
THere are in other parts of India, a sort of People called by the Name of
Basadae, said to be crooked, short, and thick; but of a cheerful Aspect, and
clear Complexion: Of which composition are all the Inhabitants of the Golden
Chersonese observed to the Barrae, and Cudute, other People also called
Sinris-Magnus; the Lestori, a thievish and Piratical people, who lived in
Caves, and were affirmed to have had Skins so hard that they were not
penetrable by an Arrow.

CHAP. VIII.
CHINA.
CHina is said to be a very Rich and fertile Country, insomuch that in many
places they have two, and in some three Harvests in a year, well cultivated and
sown with all manner of Grain, and planted with the best kind of Fruits, which
do not only bring corn to a speedy maturity, but to more excellency and
perfection then any of these western parts; particularly it abounds with
Wheat, Barley, Rice, Wool, Cotton, Olives, Vines, Flax, Silk, all kinds of
Metals, Fruits, Cattle, Sugar, Honey, Rhuburb, Camphire, Ginger, and all kind
of Spices, medicinal Wood called China Wood, Musk, and Salt, it yields also
an Herb, out of which they press delicate juice, which serves not only instead
of Wine, but preserves their health; and freeth them from many of these
Inconveniences, which the immoderate use of Wine breeds in others. Such store
of Poultry of all sorts, but of Ducks especially, that in the Town of Canton
only, it is thought, there are eaten no less then 12000 every day, one day with
an other.

The People are for the most part of a Swarthy complexion, but more or less
according to their nearness to the Heat of the Sun; short nosed, black eyed,
and of very thin Beards: they wear their Garments very long, with long loose
Sleeves, and their Hair much longer then their neighboring Tartars, who wear
their Hair exceeding short, and their Clothes much straighter, to which two
Fashions so addicted, that more of them take up Arms for their Hair and Habit,
(when required to conform in those particulars to the will of the Conqueror)
then had done either for their King, or their common liberty: so much delighted
with their own Fashion, that as the Negroes use to paint the Devil white, as a
color contrary to their own; so when these Chinoises use to draw the Picture
of a deformed person, they set him forth in a short Coat, broad Eyes, long
Nose, and bushey Beard, they are much given to their Bellies, and eat thrice a
day, but not Imoderately; drink their drink hot, and eat their meat with two
sticks of Ivory, Ebony, or the like, not touching their meat with their hands
at all.

CHHP. IX.
INDIA.
IT is reported, that in some parts of India, there are men with Dogsheads; men
with one Leg only, yet of great Swiftness, of such as live by Scent, of men
that had but one Eye only, and that in their foreheads; and of others, whose
years hung to the ground. It is reported also, that these men by eating the
Heart, and Liver of a Dragon, attain to the understanding of the Language of
Beasts; that they can make themselves invisible, when they please; they have
two tubs, whereof the one opened, yields Wine; and the other Rain, and the
like. But of these I doubt not but the understanding Reader, knows how to
judge, and what to believe.

CHAP. X.
AETHIOPIA.
AeThiopia, is a Country said to be parching hot, that the People dare not only
go out without their shoes, but that they roast their meat by setting it in the
Sun. Here is also a Lake, whose Waters are thrice a day, and thrice a night
very salt, and unpleasant, but at all other times most sweet and deliberate to
the Palate; there are also in this Country two other Lakes of that poisonous
nature, that who so ever drinks of them, does either fall immediately mad, or
else is troubled for a long time with a continual drowsiness: Of which thus
Ovid Aethiopesque Lacus; quos si quis faucibus hausit, aut furit, aut patitur
mirum gravitate soporum.

Which may be thus paraphrased.

Who does not know the Ethiopian Lake,
Of which who ever drinks his thirst to slake,
Either grows mad, or does his Soul oppress,
With an unheard of heavy drowfiness.
CHAP. XI.
ADELL in Aethiopia.
ADell in AEthiopia, is a Country, plentiful of Flesh, Honey, Corn, Wax, Gold,
and Ivory; great Flocks of Sheep, and many of those Sheep of such burdensome
Fleeces, that their Tails weigh twenty five pounds in weight; some Kine there
are which have Horns like Stags; others but one Horn only, and that in the
Forehead, about a foot and half long, but bending backward.

CHAP. XII
QVIOLA in Aethiopia.
QViola in Aethiopia, is a Country rich and pleasant, the Inhabitants for the
most part of Arrabian Ancestry; of complexion near to white. Their Women
comely, and sumptuous in Attire, and of civil Carriage; neat in their Houses,
which are generally well built, and richly furnished. The People of the Quiola
are said to have a strange Custom amongst them, more to be mentioned for the
rarity, then the decency of it: which is the sewing up of the private passages
of Nature in their Female Children, leaving only a small vent for their Urine,
thus sewed, they keep them careful at home, till they come to be married. And
She that is by her Husband found to want this Sign of her perpetual Virginity,
is with all kind of Ignominy sent back to her Parents, and by them as
disgracefully received.

CHAP. XIII.
CESARIA in Aethiopia.
THe Inhabitants of CESARIA in Aethiopia, wear for the most part no other
Habits then the Skins of Beasts undrest, just as they have them from the flesh;
but when they cloth themselves with Sheepskins, they have so much Wit, as to
wear the Flece next their Bodies, in cold weather; which at other times they
expose (with no small Pride and Glory) to open View. Their Voices so
Inarticulate, that it is hard to be distinguished into Words and Syllables;
which being Composed with that Bruitishness, which commonly appears in all
their Actions, makes it hard to say, whether the People generally may be
thought to be men in the skins of Beasts: or Beasts Created in the shape and
likeness of men; but they make greater use of their Cattle, then for Garments
only, their raw flesh serving them for food, and the Guts for Ornaments, which
they hang about their necks uncleansed, and with all the filth in them, in as
great a bravery as Ropes of Pearls, or Chains of Gold in more Civil Countries:
but amongst the several Nations which Inhabit this flourishing Country, none
are more Barbarous then those, whom they call the Imbians, dwelling not far
from the Cape of good Hope; Tall, Square and Strong, addicted always to War and
Rapine; feeding on the flesh, both of their Conquered Enemy, and their dying
Friends; whose death they hasten for the Shambles, the Skulls of whom they use
for Drinking-cups: their Weapons for poisoned Arrows, and Poles burnt at the
end: and in their War they always carry fire before them, meaning thereby to
Roast, or Boil all such as they overcome; The King, (if such a Sacred name,
become such an Impious Monster,) they account for Lord of all the Earth: and he
with the old Giant-like Arrogance, not only threathneth the destruction of men,
but shoots his poisoned Arrows against Heaven it self, as often as the Rain,
or heat offends him.

CHAP. XIV.
SIAN in India.
THe Inhabitants of the City of SIAN in India, are said to maintain amongst
other strange Opinions, that after 2000 years, (from when I know not) the World
shall be consumed with fire; and under the Ashes of it shall remain two Eggs,
out of which shall come a Man and a Woman, who are to People the World again.
It Is said that in the City Socotai in the Kingdom of SIAM, there is a Temple
made wholly of Metal, of a great height, adorned with many high Steeples and
Idols.

CHAP. XV.
ORIENTAL Islands.
IT is reported by Travelers, that in some of the ORIENTAL Islands, are a sort
of Hoggs that have Teeth growing out of their Snouts, and as many behind their
Ears, of a span and half long. A Tree whose Western part is said to be rank
poison, and the Eastern part an excellent preservative against it. A sort of
Fruit, that whosoever eats of it, is for the space of 12 hours out of his
Wits. Also a Stone, on which, whosoever sits has imediately a Rupture in
his Belly; That there are Tortoises taken there of that largeness, that 10 men
may sit in one of the shells. It is also Reported that there is a River,
plentifully stored with Fish, whose Water is so hot that it scalds the skin of
any Beast thrown therein; that some of their men have Tails, and most of their
Swine Horns, that they have Oysters so large, that they often carry Children in
the Shells, and that the Cocks have a hole in their backs, wherein the Hen lays
her Eggs, and Hatches her young ones.

Sumatra one of the said Islands, Famous for having a whole Mountain of Gold in
it, as appears by a Letter written by Pedrunoa Sirie, one of the Kings of the
said Isle, to Ring James of Great Britain; that all the Furnitures of his
House, Trappings of his Horses and Elephants; with all, his Armor, were of
pure Gold: The Inhabitants of the Island, said to be the lovingest of all to
their Enemies of any People in this World; otherwise they would never eat them,
and after make use of their skulls instead of Money; which they Exchange for
such other necessaries as their wants require. And he is accounted the Richest
man that has most of this sort of Coin.

CHAP. XVI.
AMERICA.
IN AMERICA are said to be Beasts and Fowls, of strange shapes and colors, as
their Lions, less in greatness then those of other Countries; of color Gray,
and so nimble as to climb Trees; their Dogs snowted like Foxes, but cannot
bark at all; their Hoggs with Talons sharp as Razors, and the Navil of their
Bellies, on the ridge of their backs; their Staggs and Dear without Horns;
their Sheep, not only profitable for Food and Raiment, but used to carry
burdens, some of 150 pounds weight, another sort of Beast whose name not
commonly known, whose forepart resembles a Fox, his hinder part an Ass,
except his feet, which are like a man's; beneath her Belley is a receptacle like
a purse, where she keeps her young ones, till they are able to shift for
themselves, never coming thence, but when they suck; and then in again: The
Armadilla, a Beast in form like a Barbed Horse, seeming to be Armed all over,
and that with Artificial, rather then Natural Plates, which both shut and open.
The Vicugue, some what resembling a Goat, but much larger, and of more profit;
for with the Fleece is made Ruggs, Coverings and Stuffs, and in his Belly is
found the Bezoar, a Sovereign Antidote against poisons, and venomous Diseases:
A kind of Hare like a Want in his feet, and a Cat in his tail, under whose chin
Nature has fastened as it were a little bagg, which she has also taught him
to use as a Storehouse; for in this (having filled his Belly,) he preserves
the rest of his Provision. The Pigritia, a little Beast that in 14 or 15 days,
cannot go so far as a man can throw a stone at once. Of Birds, there are
several sorts, and of most excellent colors; amongst the rest one, called by
the name of Tominejo, of all colors; and so little that he seems no bigger
than a Butter-fly, the mouth thereof no bigger then the eye of a Needle; and
yet not at all yielding to the Nightingale, in sweetness of his Notes and
Music: the Bird and Nest, both put into Gold Scales, weights not above 24
Grains, yet beautified with Feathers of so many colors, especially in the Neck
and Breast, that the Indians make great use of them in their Feather-Pictures;
others, as big as these are little, as the Condore, of such strength and
greatness, that they will fall upon a Sheep or Calf, open it, and eat it; The
like Miracles of Nature, they have in their Fruits, Plants, etc.

CHAP. XVII.
ISLE of Rhodes
The ISLE of Rhodes honored in Ancient time with the huge Collossus, one of
the Seven wonders of the World, made of Brass; in height Seventy Cubits, every
finger of it as bigg as an ordinary Man, and consecrated to the Sun, as the
proper diety of the Island; 'twas 12 years in making and having stood but 66
years, was thrown down in an instant by an Earthquake, which terribly shook
the whole Island; The Rhodians being forbidden by an Oracle to erect it again,
(or possibly pretending such an Oracle to save the charge) yet held the Brass
and other Materials of it, in a manner Sacred, not meddled with nor
Sacrilegiously purloined till Mnaias, the General of Osmen, the Mohammedan
Caliph, finding in himself no such scruple of Conscience, (after he had subdued
the Island,) made a Prey thereof, loading 900 Camels with the very Brass of it.

CHAP. XVIII.
PERV.
IN Peru, are a sort of Sheep by the Inhabitants called Pacos, profitable both
for Fleece and Burden, as big as a small breed of Horses, but in taste as
pleasing, and no less nourishing then our Mutton: A Creature so well acquainted
with his own abilities, that when he finds himself to be overoaded, no Blows
nor Violence shall make him move forwards, till his load be lessened; and of so
cheap a Diet, that he is content with very little, and some times goes three
whole days without so much as a little Water. The Camels of those parts not
much unlike them, many Rarities there are both in Beasts and Plants in this
Country, amongst their Plants, they have a Fig Tree, the North part whereof
looking toward the Mountains, brings forth its Fruits in the Summer only; the
Southern part looking toward the Sea, fruitful only in Winter. Some as
deservedly, account the Coca for a wonder, the leaves whereof being dried, and
formed into Lozenges (or little pellets) are exceeding useful in a Journey; for
melting in the mouth, they satisfy both hunger and thirst, and preserve a man
in his strength, and his Spirits in vigor; and are generally esteemed of such
Sovereign use, that it is thought, no less then 100000 Baskets full of the
leaves of this tree, are sold yearly at the Mines of Potosia only, each of
which at some other places would yield 12 d. or 18 d. apiece. Another Plant,
they tell us off, though there is no name found for it, which if put into the
hands of a sick person will instantly discover, whether he be like to live or
dye: For if on the pressing it in his hand, he look merry, and cheerful, it is
an assured Sign of his recovery, as on the other side of Death, if sad and
troubled. Here is said also to be a Lake, near the Mines of Potozi; whose
Waters is so hot, though the Country be exceeding cold, that they who bath
themselves therein, are not able to endure the Heat of it, if they go but a
little from the Banks, there being in the midst thereof a Boiling of above
twenty foot square: A Lake, which never does decrease, though they have drawn a
great stream from it to serve their metal Mills.

CHAP. XIX.
ORVIETTO.
IN Orvietto, a City in Italy, is said to be a Church of wondrous lightness,
and yet the Windows not made of Glass, as in other Churches; but of Alablaster.
And now we are in Italy, we must wander into Rome, and take a short view of the
life of Pope Formosus, who was so ill beloved, and of such a general
dis-esteem, that Pope Stephen the 7th. caused his Body to be unburied: All his
Acts reversed, two of his Fingers to be cut off, and then the mangled Carcass
to be Interred again amongst the Laity. And though the Acts of Stephen were
adjudged illegal, both by John the 10th. and Pope Romauus, two of his
Successors, and the doing of Formosus justified, yet Sergius the third caused
his corrupt and putrified Body to be taken once more out of the Grave, and his
Head to be cut off, as if still alive: So little did the Infallibility of St.
Peter's Chair preserve them from contraditions.

John the 12th. also a wicked cruel, and libidinous Pope, taken in Adultery,
and slain by the Husband of the Woman.

CHAP. XX.
CASTILE in Spain.
IN Castile in Spain, in the times of our Grandfathers (says mine Author) was
discovered in a valley situate amongst high and impassible Mountains, a kind
of Patoecos or salvage People, never heard of in Spain before, the occasion of
this. An Hawk of the Duke of Ava's, which he very much valued; flew over those
Mountains, and his men not being able to find her at first, they were sent back
again to seek her, clambering from one Hill to another; they happened at last
upon a large and pleasant valley, where they spied a company of naked salvage
People; hemmed in amongst many craggy Rocks. The Salvages gazing a while upon
them, ran into their Caves made in the hollows of the Rocks, the best Houses
they had, which being observed by the Faulconers, they returned again to their
Lord; telling him that instead of a Faulcon, they had brought him news of a new
World in the midst of Spain, and of a Race of People, which came in with
Tuball, strongly affirming what they said, they obtained Belief, and the Duke
shortly after went with a company of Musketteers, and subdued them easily; they
having no offensive Weapons, but only Slings. They worshipped the Sun and Moon,
fed upon nothing that had life; but had good store of excellent Fruits, Roots,
and Springs of water, wherewith a Nature was well content, and though their
Language was not altogether understood by any, yet many of their words were
found to be purely Busquish, reduced on this discovery to Christianity, but
easily discernable by all other Spaniards by their rawney complexions,
occasioned by the Reverberation of the Sunbeams, from those rocky Mountains,
wherewith on all sides they are encompassed.

CHAP. XXI.
NORWEY.
IN Norwey, there is a little sort of Beast, called by the name of Lemers,
about the bigness of a Mouse, and are by the Inhabitants said to drop out of
the Clouds in tempestious Weather, like the Locusts, they devour every green
thing on the Earth, and at a certain time die all in heaps (as it were)
together; and with their stench so poison the Air, that the poor People are
long after troubled with the Jaundies, and a giddiness in the Head: But these
Beast come not so often to infect the Land, as the Whales do to terrify the
shores; the Seas being there so deep, and therefore a fit habitation for those
great Leviathans, against whose violence and fury; the People of the Seacoast
have found a remedy, which is by casting some water intermixed with Oil of
Castor; the smell whereof forces them immediately to retire, without this help
there were no Fishing on the Coasts.

CHAP. XXII.
ZISCA a Bohemian Cap.
WE read of one Zisca a Bohemian Captain, who in eleven Battles fought in
defense of the Hussites against the Pope, and his Confederates; prevailed, and
went away victorious: Insomuch that at his Death, he willed the Behemians to
flea him, and make a Drum of his skin; persuading himself, if they so did, they
would never be overcome: a fancy no less Idle then strange.

In some of the Forests of Bohemia, there is a little Beast called LOMIE,
which has hanging under its neck a Bladder always full of scalding water, with
which when she is hunted, she so tortureth the Dogs, that she thereby easily
makes her escape.

CHAP. XXIII.
ASSIRIA.
THe Country of Assiria, is said to be so fertile, that the Hedges on the high
way sides, afford very good Fruit, and the adjoining Fields affords to the
Passengers the shades of Figtrees, were it not naturally so, it would not be
much helped by Art, or Industry; as being but meanly peopled, and those few
without any encouragement, either to the planting Fruits, or manuring the Land.
Their Sheep are commonly fat and fair, but so over-laded on the Tail both with
Flesh and Fleece, that they hang in long wreaths to the ground, dragged after
them with no small difficulty, the Tails of these Sheep frequently weighing
thirty pounds or upward. It Is said, that the Assirians have a strange way of
contracting their Marriages, their Wives they never see till the day of their
Marriage, but hearing a good report of them; they negotiate with her Friends,
and when agreed, they meet in the Chancell of the Church; wherein there is a
partition with a hole in it: The Bridegroom and his Friends standing on one
side; and the Bride and her kindred on the other, then that Churchman bids
the Bridgeroom to put his hand through the hole in the partition, and take his
Bride by the hand, which he does accordingly; the mother of the Bride with a
sharp pointed Instrument made of purpose, pricking the Bridegrooms hand all
over with sufficient eagerness, if when he feels the smart, he lets go her
hand, they take it for a Sign, that he will not love her; but if he hold her
fast, and wring her hand so hard, till She cry again; they take it as a very
good Omen, and are glad, they have so well bestowed her. After the Marriage is
consummate, if a Male child be born unto them, the Father loses his own name,
and is called after his Sons name; so as if the Fathers name be Moses, and his
Sons name Joseph; the Father is no more called Moses, but Abba Joseph; or the
Father of Joseph, so highly do they reverence Marriage, and the Fruits thereof,
Posterity.

CHAP. XXIIII.
QVIVIRA in Califormia.
THe Province of Quivira in Califormia, is a Country full of Herbage, breeding
great store of Cattle, differing not much in bigness from those of Europe. but
that they have an high Bunch betwixt their shoulders, bristled on the back like
Bores, which somewhat resemble the mane of a Horse; their legs short and clad
with Fetlocks, their Horns short, but sharp; the whole Beast of so horrid an
aspect, that a Horse will not venture near him, till well acquainted; yet in
this Beast lies all the Riches of the Inhabitants of the Country; for they are
to them, as Ale to Drunkards, Meat, Drink, and Cloth, and more too; for the
Hides yield them houses, or at least the covering of them, their Bones,
Bodkins; their Hair, Thread; their Sinews, Ropes; their Horns, Mawes, and
Bladders, Vessels; their Dung Fire; their Calfskins, Budgets to draw and keep
water in; their Blood, Drink; and their Flesh Meat.

There is also said to be a Cave between two Mountains, from which the Rain
descending, turns into Alablaster, naturally fashioned into Pillars; and other
Portraitures.

CHAP. XXV.
GERMANY.
IN Germany, once lived an EARL, whose Wife was called Iermentrudis, having
accused a poor Woman of Adultery, and caused her to be grievously punnished,
for having twelve Children at a birth; was afterward her self delivered of the
same number, and all of them Sons: her Husband being absent at the time of her
delivery, She commanded the Nurse to kill eleven of them; fearing (it seems)
the like shame and punishment, as by her Instigation was inflicted on the poor
Woman: The Nurse going to perform this wicked command, was met by the old Earl,
then returning home-ward: who asked her; what she had in her Apron, she made
answer whelps; he desired to see them, she denied him: angry at this refusal,
he opened her Apron, and there found eleven of his own sweet Babes, and most of
them of promising countenances, examining the matter; he found out the truth,
and enjoining the old Nurse to be secret in it, he put the children out to
Nurse; six years being expired, the Earl invited to a Feast, most of his own
and his Ladies kindred, and attiring the young Boys all alike, presented them
to their Mother, who suspecting by the number of them, what the matter was;
confessed her offense, is pardoned by a good old Earl, and carefully educates her
children: whom the Father commanded to be called Guelps, alluding to Whelps, or
the Puppis which the Nurse told him, she had in her Apron.

CHAP. XXVI.
NOVA ZELINA.
NOva Zelina, is one of the Russian Islands, situate on the East of Willoughby
Island, (so called from Sir Hugh Willoughby, because he first discovered it,
and was hereabout found frozen to Death the next year following) and was first
discovered by such adventurers as followed Willoughby's design: Famous for
having a Race of short statuted men, not above four foot high, a degree above
the height of Pigmies; who by the relation of the Russes have neither Laws, nor
Religion, or Civility; but that they worshipped the Sun, Moon, and Northern
Star, to which they offer a yearly Sacrifice of their Deer; and that the Island
is a woody Desert, and not easy for travel; having in it neither green Bough
nor Grass, yet there are abundance of Bears, and such ravenous Beasts.

CHAP. XXVII.
SAMOGITIA in Poland.
SAmogitia, is a small Province in Poland, the People thereof supposed to be of
the Saxon race, of a good stature, well set, bold, and apt for War, but withal
boisterous, rude, and barbarous; Christians in general, but many who retain
still their old Idolatries: nourishing amongst them a kind of four-footed
Serpents, above three handfuls in length, which they worship; as their
household Gods, mending them with fear and reverence when they call them out to
their repasts; and if any mischance do happen; to any of their Family, it is
imputed presently to some want of due observations of these ugly Creatures,
naturally inclined to Divinations, Charms, and Sorceries, frequently abused (as
for the most part such People are) by Diabolical Illusions. They have some
customs also as unprofitable, as these are heathenish; breaking up their
Grounds as they do in Muscovy, with Spades or Stocks; and when one of their
Governors observing the Husbandry of other Countries, had brought them the use
of the Plough. It fortuned that for two or three years either by the
Indisposition of the Weather, or some other accident, they had not so much
Corn, as they used to have, which want the People attributed to the use of the
Plough, and not believing that there was any other cause of it, grew so much
incensed; that the Governor fearing some Sedition like to follow on it, was
forced to leave them to the old way, which before they went. An humor like to
that of the present Irish, in plowing with their Horses tails.

CHAP. XXVIII.
LIVONIA.
IN some part of Livonia, are a sort of People, so simple in point of Religion,
and the like; that when they bury any of their Dead, every one drinks one
health to him, and pours his part upon him, when his trun comes to drink;
putting into the grave with him an Hatchet, Wine, Meat, and some Money for his
Voyage: And yet they are great lovers of Confession, esteemers of Holy Water,
and diligent Frequenters of their Churches; but so Ignorant in matters of
Religion, that there is hardly one in a Village, can say his Pater Noster.

CHAP. XXIX.
SODOM.
THe Country, where the Cities of Sodom and Gomorra once stood, was called the
valley of Sidim, which was exceeding fruitful; Insomuch that 'twas compared to
an Earthly Paradise; but this place, so beautified and adorned with such a
wonderful Richness of Soil, and other pleasures, that might make glad the heart
of man; through the sinfulness of the Inhabitants, is so changed; that after
the Cities and Fields were destroyed by Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, the
whole Country was turned into a most horrid stinking Lake, called Mare mortuum,
or the dead Sea.

The Waters whereof most thick, stinking, bitter, and salt, beyond any
Seawater; whatsoever, wherein no Creature lives or can live, therefore called
the dead Sea. The River Jordan runs into it, and is infected by it; Insomuch
that the Fish of that River shun the Lake as a deadly Poison, and if at any
time by the swiftness of the River, they are driven into it, they immediately
die.

No living thing can be drowned in it; which Vespasian being desirous to make
trial of, came in person to see it; and caused some Persons altogether Ignorant
in swimming, to be bound with their hands behind them, and thrown into the
Lake, but was as it were repulsed, by a certain Spirit of the Water; and like a
Rock they floated upon the superficies of the Water.

Every fair Sun-shiny day, it changes the color thrice, by reason of the Sun
Beams falling either. Rightly or Oblickly upon it, as at Morning Noon and Sun
set, according to which it varieth the color, and yields a certain Pitchy
substance, called in Latin Bitumen, which swims upon the top of the Lake, in
great abundance, some pieces as big as an Ox; and is of such a Nature, that if
any small Ships come near to fetch it away, they are caught and drawn away by
the Tenacity, or Limy catching hold thereof, and not to be loosed again, but by
application of Urine. Tui menses mulierbres permixti sunt, says mine Author,
and with this only the Bitumen is dissolved. It sends up a most Pestilent
Air, insomuch, that one would think the very stream of Hell fire were beneath
it; hereupon the Banks, and Neighboring; Mountains are quite barren: if but an
Aple grow near it, it is by Nature such, that it speaks the Anger of God; for
without, it is beautiful and Red; but within nothing but dusty Smoke and
Cinders, the like says Tacitus.

CHAP. XXX:
ANATOLIA:
IN ANATOLIA, stands the Mountain Taurus; a Branch whereof called by the name
of Chimaera, vomiting flames of fire like Sicilian Aetna; the bottom whereof
infested with Serpents, the middle part grazed upon with Goats, and the higher
parts made dangerous by the dens of Lions; hence by the Poets made a Monster,
having the head of a Lion, the Body of a Goat, and the Tail of a Serpent.

The City Cyzieus in this Country, famous in its time for having a Glorious
Temple in it; the Pillars whereof being Four Cubits thick, and 50 Cubits high,
were each of an Entire Stone only; the whole Fabric all of polished Marble;
every Stone joined to the other with a line of Gold; but at last ruined by an
Earthquake.

CHAP. XXXI.
SCHELINK in Sevenwolden.
IN the Isle SCHELINK, in the Province of Sevenwolden in West Friezland, the
Shores, and said to be well stored with Dogg-Fish, which the Inhabitants take
after this manner; the Men attire themselves with the Skins of Beasts, which
they have made for that purpose, then going to the Sea side, fall a Dancing,
with which sport, the silly Fish being much delighted, presently make out of
the water toward them, and Nets are immediately pitched betwixt them and the
water: which done, the men put off their disguises, which when the affrighted
Fishes see, Post toward the Sea, and so are caught in the Coyles.

CHAP. XXXII.
BEGORRE
IN the Earldom of BEGORRE near the Pyrenaean Mountains, are said to live a
Leprous, and Infectious sort of People, of noisome Breaths, deformed Bodies, and
ghastly Visages: in which regard not suffered to have commerce with other
People, nor to Inherit any Lands, but only to apply themselves to drudgery, and
the basest of Mechanic Trades, from their great misshapen heads called Capets
or Gabets.

CHAP. XXXIII.
CASCAR.
CASCAR, a Province in Altay in Tartaria, the People thereof Generally Rude and
Barbarious, insomuch that in some parts, both Sexes Indulge themselves this
mutual Privilege; that if the Husband or Wife be absent twenty days, the
other party is at Liberty again to Marry.

Chesmur, Lopp, and Camull, three other Provinces in the said Country, whereof
the Inhabitants of the first, are generally both Idolaters and Inchanters,
causing the dumb Idols to speak, the Winds to rise; and the Sun to be darkened;
for studying which Black-Art (if it comes to them by Study) they have many
Monasteries, in which their Hermits, or Monasticks live a strickt kind of life.

The Province of Lopp, memorable for having a great Desert of 30 days Journey
in it, so true a Desert, that whosoever means not to starve himself, must carry
all his victuals with him; dangerous to Travelers, if not beforehand made
acquainted with their danger; the evil Spirits calling Men by their names, and
so make them stray from their Company; where they either perish with Famine, or
are devoured with wild Beasts.

Camull, an Idolatrous Country, the People whereof account it a great honor
to them, to have their Wives and Sisters at the pleasures of such, as they
entertain; from which Brutish Custom, when restrained by Mango Cham, they
Petitioned at the three years end, to be restored again to their former
Liberty; protesting they could never thrive since they left that Custom; which
desire of theirs was at last granted, and is still in use.

CHAP. XXXIV.
MORAVIA.
IN MORAVIA, amongst other things, is said to grow great store of Frankincense,
and contrary to the Nature of it; not on Trees, but on the ground: and that too
(which adds much to the Miracle) in the shape and figure of those parts, which
Men and Women must endeavor to conceal.

In the same Country, is a Town called Massa, or Messa, famous in Ancient
time, for having a Temple in it; whose Beams and Rafters are of the Bones of
Whales, which usually are left dead on the Sea-shores.

CHAP. XXXV.
HASCORA in Morrocca.
IN the Province of HASCORA in Moroocca, are said to grow a sort of Grapes, as
large as Pullets Eggs. And not far from a Town called Tedza, in the said
Country stands the hill Anchisa, where it is said that it Snoweth at all
seasons of the year, notwithstanding the Inhabitants go extremely thin clad in
the sharpest Winters.

CHAP. XXXVI.
TVNIS.
It Is reported, that in the Kingdom of TVNIS, Corn has in former time been so
plentiful, that in the Reign of Augustus, were 400 Ears growing upon one stalk.
And in the time of Domitius Nero, were 360 more growing upon another; and both
sent to Rome.

CHAP. XXXVI.
GREECE.
IN GREECE, are said to be two Rivers by name Cireus, and Nileus, both of that
strange Nature, that if a Sheep drink of the former, his Wool turns white;
and if of the latter, it turns cole-black.

There is also a Stone called Aminthus, which is drawn into Thread like Hemp
and Cloth made thereof; which when it is foul, instead of being cleansed with
water, as other Cloth is, it is thrown into the fire, and so cleansed by burning
it* But more of this hereafter.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
IANGOMA.
IANGOMA, in the Country of Laos, is a mighty Nation, and a stout sort of
People; by Religion Gentiles, naked from the Wast upward, russing up their Hair
like Caps; their Country very Rich and Level, but very ill Neighboured, by the
Gneons, who possess the Mountains, whence falling into great Companies, they
hunt for men, whom if they take, they Kill, and Eat, as we do any sort of our
Game with us.

CHAP. XXXIX.
CHALDAEA.
IN some part of CHALDAEA, and other places; it is said that for Communicating
the Success of their Affairs from Town to Town, and Stage to Stage; they make
use of Pigeons as the speediest Messengers; which is done after this manner:
When the Hen Pigeon sits, or has any young, they take the Cock, and set him
in an open Cage: whom when they have Traveled a days Journey, they let go at
Liberty, and he straight flies home to his Mate; when they have trained them
thus from one place to another, and that there be occasion to send any
advertisements; they tie a Letter about one of their Necks, which at their
return is taken off, by some of the house; advertised thereby of the State of
other places, the like is also used betwixt Ormius and Balfora.

CHAP. XL.
Of Locusts, and other strange Meats.
MOSES.
WE Read in the Law of MOSES, Levit, the 11. ver. 22. That Locusts were allowed
of to be eaten, which surely had not been done, had they not been good and
fitting to eat. Pliny tell us, the Parthians fed upon them as dainties; Strabo
also affirm* that the Aethiopians lived most upon them: And Galon tell us that
the Egyptians, did use to eat Vipers and Adders, as familiarly as we do Eels,
Besides St. Hierome affirms, that in Pontus and Phrygia, they usually eat
those white Worms with black heads that lie in wood, and between the bark of
Trees; And that by Tenants they were presented to Landlords, as special
dainties; and some took them in Lieu of Rent. The Assyrians were wont to eat
Land Crocodiles; and the Affricans Green Lizards: Among others, Dormise were
accounted the daintiest meat. In Cozumela, and Iucatana, Islands of the
East Indies, and other places there-abouts, they fat a king of Dog, which
cannot bark, as we do Swine, and eat them; the Ancients also supposed sucking
Whelps to be so clean and pure, that they offered them their Gods in Sacrifice;
The Parian Indians, did not only eat man's flesh, but also (as Apes do) Lice,
Froggs, Worms, and such filthy things: The Tartarians eat the Carrion Carcasses
of dead Horses, Camels, Asses, Cats, and Dogs, even when they stink and are
full of Maggots; and hold them as dainty as we do Venison.

CHAP. XLI.
GALEN.
GALEN tell us of a certain man, that was extremely sick of a Leprosy, kept
company a good time with some Companions of his; till one above the rest was
infected with the contagion of the Disease: for he was not to be endured, by
reason of the loathsome stench that proceed from his unclean Body: wherefore a
Cottage was Built for him near a Town, upon a Hill remote from People, a fair
spring running hard by; and herein the Leaper was placed, with a man attending
him, to carry him Victuals, and other necessaries: It happened that about the
Dogg-days, sweet Wine being brought in an Earthen Vessel into the Field to the
Mowers, near the place where this Leaper was placed; he that brought it, set it
not far from them, and went his way; being gone, and some of them being thirsty,
came and took up the Pitcher to pour out some Wine into a Bowl half full of
Water; which they mixed with their Wine, and out falls a drowned Viper from the
Pitcher into the Bowl; hereupon the men being amazed, let the Wine alone, and
drank, and contented themselves with Water: but when they had finished their
days work, and were to go out of the Field, as it were out of pity, they gave
to the Leprous man the Wine; wherein the Viper was drowned, supposing it better
for him to dye, than to live in that misery; but he, when he had drank it, was
as it were miraculously cured: for all that thick and most loathsome scabby
swelling of the Disease, that covered him over, fell aaway from him, like the
hard outside of a Crab-Fish, and new skin and flesh succeeding underneath in
the place, another example hereof though upon an unlike occasion, happened in
Mysia, a Town of Asia.

CHAP. XLII.
ANZIEHANA in Aethiopia:
ANziehana in Aethiopia, has on the west part of it, Songo and Loango;
extended thence to the East, as far almost as the Lake of Zembre; the
Inhabitants of it, the cruellest Canibals in the World; for they do not only
eat their Enemies, but their Friends, and Kinds-folk also; and that they may be
sure not to want these Dainties, they have shambles of man's Flesh, as in other
places of Beef, and Mutton, so covetous with all, that if their Slaves will but
yield a penny more, when fold joint by joint, then if sold alive, they will
kill and cut them out in pieces, and sell them so upon their Shambles.

CHAP. XLIII.
SYRIA.
IN Syria, are said to be a choice of Religions, as a Christian, Mohammedan,
Pagan, and one Compound out of them all; which is that of the Drusians. The
Mahometans embraced by the generality of the People throughout the whole, and
by all that are in Office or Authority, is only countenanced and approved;
though all the rest be tolerated: The Pagan entertained only in the mountanous
Country, bordering on America, Inhabited by a sort of People, whom they call
Curdi, or the Curdens, supposed to be so descended from the Ancient Parthians,
as being very expert in Bows and Arrows, their most usual Arms: A Race of
People, who are said to worship alike, both God and the Devil; the one, that
they may receive Benefits from him; the other, that he may not hurt them: but
their principal Devotions are addressed to the Devil only, and that upon good
reasons, as themselves conceive; for God they say, is a good man, and will do
no Body harm, but the Devil is a mischievious fellow, and must be pleased with
Sacrifices, that he do not hurt them,

CHAP. XLIIII.
THEBET.
THebet, is a fenny Region of Tartaria, full of Woods, rich in Corral; which
they find on the Sea-shores, and use it instead of Money, so named from the
chief City of it; the ordinary seat of the Abassi, or Pope of this Idolatrous
People, much reverenced, and having in his power the disposing of all Affairs
which concern the Service of their Idols: They have also good store of Music,
and abundance of wild Beasts bred in their Forersts; but no Beast wilder then
the People, who in times past (if not at present) use to bury their Parents in
their own bowels, and to make drinking cups of their skuls, for fear least in
the midst of their Jollity, they should forget their Progenitors. Yet not more
barbarous then Immodest, it being contrary to their Custom to take a Wife that
is a Virgin: and therefore the mothers use to prostitute their Daughters to the
Merchant-strangers, who having had their pleasures of them, gratify them with
a Jewel, or some other present, which they wear on their Wedding Day, she being
the most acceptable Bride to her Husband, who brings the greatest Dowry with
her of these base rewards.

CHAP. XLV.
PATAVIVM in Italy.
THere was found in the Territory of Patavium in Italy, in former Ages, a very
ancient Monument, wherein were two Urnes, a greater and a less, both made of
Earth, the bigger contained the less: now in the less was found a Lamp burning
between two Viols, the one of Gold, the other of Silver, and both full of a
most excellent Liquor; by the Benefit of which, it was supposed to have burned
many years. The learned coming to the Monument, affirmed it to be that
perpetual Fire, invented by the wonderful Industry of the ancient Philosophers,
which would endure so many years: In which opinion they were confirmed, by
verses written on both Urnes, which seemed to be of great Antiquity. The like
Ludovicus Vives reports in his time, to have been found in ancient Graves,
which by Inscription had burnt above five hundred years. St. Augustine likewise
affirms, that in the Temple of Venus, was a Lamp that never went out; which he
supposed to have been done either by Art Magical, or by the Industry of some
man, who had put Lapidem Asbestum, or the unchangeable burning stone within the
said Lamp, and in the time of Pope Paulus the Third, the Grave of Tullio,
Cicero's Daughter was found, wherein was the like Lamp burning; but as soon as
'twas opened, that the Air came to it, it presently went out; This Lamp had
burnt there 15 hundred years.

CHAP. XLVI.
CRETE.
It Is observable, that in CRETE, there is bred no Serpents, or Venomous Beasts,
or Worms, Ravenous or hurtful Creatures; so that their Sheep Graze very
securely without any Shepherd; yet if a Woman happen to bite a Man any thing
hard, he will hardly be cured of it; which if true, then the last part of the
Privilege foregoing (of breeding no hurtful Creature) must needs be false.
They have an Herb called Alimos, which if one chew in his mouth, he shall feel
no hunger for that day; Here is (besides many Medicinal Herbs) that is called
Dictamnum, or Dictamnas, of special virtue against Poison, either, by way of
Prevention, or present Cure; peculiar only to this Island: It affords great
store of Laudanum, a Juice or Gum, forced with incredible labor, out of a
certain Tree Cisto, of which the Mountains yield abundance; good to cause
sleep, if immoderately taken, but if not very well prepared, and taken with
moderation, it brings the last sleep upon a man, out of which not to be
awakened, till the sound of the last Trumpet raise him.

CHAP. XLVII.
HVNGARIA.
IN HVNGARIA, are said to be many Medicinal Waters, and more hot Baths then in
any one Country in Europe; some Waters also of a strange Nature, whereof some
falling on the ground is turned into a Stone; others about the Town of
Smalnice, which falling into Ditches makes up a kind of mud, out of which
tried, and melted, they make an excellent Copper; and some again which flow in
Winter, and freeze in Summer; and near to ^ristice, or Mensoll, is a Spring or
Fountain, out of which comes a green Water, whereof they make a Soder for
their Gold.

CHAP. XLVIII.
ARMAGH.
IN the County ARMAGH, in the Kingdom of Ireland, is a Lake; into which if one
thrust a piece of Wood, he shall find that part of it which remains in the
mud to be turned into Iron; and that in the Water to be turned into a
Whetstone. It Is said, that their Kine will give no Milk, if their Calves be not
by them; or at least their Calf-skins stuffed out with Straw or Hay.

CHAP. XLIX.
MADAGASCAR.
MADAGASCAR, one of the Affrican Islands, is a Country plentiful of all things
necessary for the life of Man; particularly of Mill, Rice, Honey, Wax, Cotton,
Wool, Sugars, Stags, Goats, Dear, and other Creatures both Wild and Tame;
Lemons, and other cooling Fruits, Red Sanders, Saffron, Amber, and some Mines
of Gold, Silver, Iron, and Copper: Their Beefs and Mutton so good and cheap,
that for a two penny Bead, or some such trifle, they will sell Beefs and Sheep
of good taste and bigness* great store of Elephants and rare Fruits, and
amongst the rest they have plenty of those they call Coco's, or Cocon-uts; a
kind of Date as bigg as a Cabbage; the Liquor in it about the quantity of a
Pint, in taste like Wine and Sugar; the Kernel bigg enough to content two Men:
and like good Ale, it affords not only Meat and Drink, but Clothing two; as
also Furniture for their Houses, Tackle for their Ships, Fuel for their Fire,
and Timber for their Building; A Country far too good for so bad a People.

For as Travelers report they are Treacherous, Inhospitable, Ignorant both of
Prayers and Festivals; destitute of the distinction of Time, into Years and
Months; not knowing any proper names for the days in the week, nor able to
reckon above 10; naked except their privities, which they cover with a Cotton;
Idolaters in the Midland parts, and Mahometans on the Shores; commendable only
for their hate to Poligamy, and restravning themselves to one wife; the
defiling of the Marriage Bed severely punished: but otherwise so eager upon
Copulation, that their Boys at the Age of 12 years, and the Girls at Ten, think
they stay too long if they keep their Virginity any longer; some of them like
Quartilla in Petronius Arbiter, begin so early, ut nunquam meminerint se
Virgins fuisse, that they remember not the time when they lost their
Maiden-heads. Of color they are Black, and of strong complexion; their Breasts
and Faces Cut and Pinct, to appear more beautiful.

CHAP. L.
Isle of CVBA in America.
AMongst the Rarities of the Isle of Cuba in America, they mention a Fountain,
out of which flows a Pitchey substance, which is found frequently on the
Seas, into which it falls; excellent for the calking of Ships: Secondly a
navigable River, (but the name not told us) the Waters whereof are so hot, that
a man cannot hold his hand in it withont scalding; they tell us also of a
Valley fifteen Leagues from St. Iago, which produces Stones exactly round, as
if made for pleasure; but yet merely natural, but these no greater Rarities
then in other places, nor altogether so great as in Hispaniola: Of which they
tell us of a fair River, whose Waters are salt, and yet none but fresh streams
fall into it: Of another Lake (three Leagues in compass) on the top of the
Mountains, into which many Rivers were known to run without any exit; yet
neither of these so rare or strange as the Cucugo, a kind of a Beetle, the eyes
and wings whereof when opened, give so great a light in the darkest night, or
places, that a man may see to read or write by it, as well as by a Candle.

CHAP. LI.
TIBERIUS.
It Is reported in the time of Tiberius the Roman Emperor, there was invented
Glass of that temper, that it would abide the hamer, and be beaten in length or
breadth like lead, and pliable to bend every way like Paper; and that the
Inventor was put to death upon this occasion: He having built a magnificent
Palace in Rome, which after the building began to sink, and was likely to fall,
which Tiberius seeing, and having beforehand paid him for the building of it;
commanded him to depart, and never to see him in the face again. He afterward
having invented the way of making Glass malyable, or to abide the hamer, came
to show the same to Tiberius, in hopes of obtaining a reward for his nvention,
but instead thereof, his whole Shop was pulled down and laid waste, least
Brass, Gold, and Silver, should be undervalued in their price and esteem, Some
report that Tiberius did it out of malice and envy, because he naturally hated
learning, and all Ingenious men: Petronius relates the matter after this
manner, saying, that there was a skilful Crafts-man, who made Cups, and Vessels
of Glass, of that firmness that they would no more break their Pots of Silver
or Gold.

Now when he had made a Viol of this Glass, and thought it worthy to be given
to Tiberius, he was brought with his present before him; Tiberius received the
Viol, and much commended the workmanship of it, the workman more to amaze the
beholders, and that he might make himself a further way into Tiberius favor;
took the Glass-viol again into his hand, and threw it down upon the pavement
with so great a force, that had it been made of Gold or Silver, it had been
either broke or bruised. Tiberius was hereat astonished, but the maker took up
his Glass again, which was only a little bruised, but no where broken; then
taking a hamer out of his pocket, he beat out the bruise again, and brought it
to 'its right fashion; which being done, he thought he had purchased Heaven,
gaining at once Tiberius's Favor and Admiration; But it fell out otherwise,
for Tiberius demanded, if any knew that Art but himself? He answered, none that
he knew; whereupon Tiberius commanded, he should be beheaded; For, ( says he)
If this Art were publicly known, Gold and Silver would be no more esteemed of
then Clay.

CHAP. LII.
HENRY the third Emperor.
THere was a Lady lived iu the time of Henry the third, Emperor, who brought
forth at one Birth 365 Children, the just nnmber of days in the year; In memory
whereof, not far from Leiden in Holland, in a Village called Lansdunen, there
is to be seen a Table of Marble, which contains the whole story of this
stupendous accident. These two Verses were Engraven uppermost being her
Epitaph.

En tibi monstrosum nimis, memorabile factum
Quale nec a mundi condition datum.
Margaret, the Wife of Herman Earl of Henenberge, and Daughter of Florence, the
4 th Earl of Holland, and Zealand, Sister of William King of the Romans, and
after Caesar, or Governor of the Empire, etc. This noble Countess being about
forty years of age, upon Easter day about nine of the clock in the year of our
Lord God, 1276. was brought to bed of 365 Children, half Males; and half
Females, the odd one an Fermophradite, all which were baptized, in the Church
of Laudunen aforesaid by the names of John and Elizabeth, who together with
their mother, dyed the same day, and lie buried in the said Church. This
happened by the means of a poor Woman, who carried in her Arms two Children,
who were Twins, and both of them Males, which the Countess admiring, said, that
she could not have them by one Father, and so shook her off with Contempt and
Scorn: Whereupon the poor woman being much perplexed, presently prayed to God
to send her as many Children, as there was days in the year, which thing beyond
the course of nature, in a stupendous manner; came to pass, as is before
related.

CHAP. LIII.
LINVM VIVVM.
It Is reported, that in ancient times, there was a certain kind of Flax, which
the Latins called Linum vivum, whereof were made whole pieces of Linen Cloth,
and Garments, which could not be consumed by Fire, not only so, but being cast
into the Fire, the Soil and Dirtiness of it would be burnt away, and taken out
again; it became more white then any water could wash it. The Bodies of
Emperors and Kings were burnt in sheets of this Linen, least the Ashes of
their Bodies should mingle with the Ashes of the Wood: This Flax is hard to be
found, and as difficult to be woven, by reason of the shortness of it; but
being found, it is equalled in price to the most excellent Pearls Nero is
reported to have had a linen Garment of it, It Is also reported, that
Podocatarus a Knight of Cyprius, brought some of it to Venice, or at least a
sort of Flax that could not be consumed by Fire. Now the Flax of Cyprus
proceeds from no Plant, as our Flax, but from the stone of Amiantus, which
being found in Cyprus, and Broken, the earthy dross being purged away, there
remains fine hair threads, like to Flax which is woven into Cloth; this Flax
was seen in the house of the said Padocatarus by many men of worth and credit;
wherefore Lime being made of this stone, and Incombustible; Constantine the
Emperor ordained, that it should always burn in Lamps in his Chapel at Rome:
The same reports Damasus in the life of Pope Silvester. St. Augustine says
also, that he saw Lamps at Paris, whose lights never consumed. Also at Lovain,
a Napkin taken from the table at a Feast, and thrown into the Fire; and being
red as a Coal, was taken out again, cooled, and restored to the owner more
white then if it had been washed with all the water and Soap in the Town.

CHAP. LIVE.
CHILE.
IN CHILE, are said to be several fine Rivers; but there is one more Famous
then the rest, though nameless; which in the day time runs with a violent
stream, and in the Night has no Water at all: The reason of it is, because
this River has no constant Fountain, but is, both begun and continued by the
Snow falling from the Mountains; which in the heat of the day is melted into
water, and precipitately carried into the Sea; but congealed in the coldness of
the night, yields no water at all, whereby the Channel becomes empty.

CHAP. LV.
IAPAN.
IAPAN, is a Country Mountanous and barren, but of a very healthy Air, if not
too much subject to cold: yet in some places they have Wheat in the Month of
May; but their Rice, which is their Principal sustenance, they gather not
before September. The surface of the Earth clothed with Woods and Forests, in
which are some Cedars of so tall and large a body, that one of them only is
sufficient to make a Pillar for a Church: the Bowels of it stored with diverse
Metals; and amongst others such inexhaustible Mines of Gold, Paulus Venetus
reports some of their Palaces of their Kings, to be covered with sheets of
Gold, as ours in Europe are with Lead Their fields and Meadows, full of Cattle,
but hitherto not made acquainted with making of Butter, their Fens much visited
with wild Ducks, as their yards with Pigeons, Turtle, Quails, and Putten. The
People for the most part of a good understanding, apt to learn, and of able
memories; cunning and subtle in their dealings, of Body vigorous and strong,
accustomed to bear Arms till sixty years old, their Complexion of an
Olive-colour, their Beards thin, and the one half of their hair of their Heads
shaved off, patient they are of pain, ambitious of Glory, incapable of
suffering wrong, but can withal dissemble their resentments of it, till
opportunity of Revenge.

They reproach no man for his poverty, so it come not by his own thriftness,
for which cause they detest all kind of Gaming, as the ways or ill Husbandry;
and Generally abhor Slandering, Swearing, and Theft. Their Mourning commonly is
in White, as their Feasts in Black; their Teeth they color black also, to make
them more beautiful; they mount on the Right side of the Horse, and sit (as we
use to rise) when they entertain. In Physiek they eat salt things, sharp and
raw; and in their Salutations, they put off their shoes; The very Antipodes of
our World in Custom, though not in sight; In other things they much resemble
those of China, if not the more Ceremonious of the two: washing their Infant
children in the nearest River as soon as born, and putting on shoes when they
go to meat.

The People have but one Language, but that so intermingled with the words of
other Nations, that it seems rather to be many then one: they have long used
the Art of Printing, which probably they might have from China: the Characters
whereof are a kind of Burchigraphy, and signify not only Letters, but some
whole Words also; in matters of Religion Gentiles, Adorning Anciently the Sun,
Moon, and Stars of Heaven, and giving Divine honor to wild Beasts, and the
Staggs of the Forests: but specially worshipping some of their Deceased
Priests and Princes, by the names of Fotoques, and Cames; to the first of
which, they use to pray for Goods of the other World, and to the last for
Temporal Blessings; Two Famous Mountains there are, one of which called
Figenojama, is said to Transcend the Clouds in height, the other (but without a
Name,) uses to cast forth dreadful Flames like Corsican Aetna: on the top
whereof the Devil environed with a white shining cloud, does sometimes show
himself to such of his Votaries, as live about this hill an abstemious life,
like the Ancient Hermits.

CHAP. LVI.
GILOLO.
GILOLO, called also Batachina, one of the Oriental Islands, which our
Navigators include under the Name of Del Moro, of large extent, conceived to be
half as big as Italy, by that account (the truth thereof is very much doubled)
greater than Zelan is in Compass, though of less Reputation; that being
Governed by its own Princes, this is Subject for the most part to the King of
Ternate. Situate East of the Mollucoes, exceeding plentiful of Rice, well
stored with Wild Hens, and on the shores provided of a kind of Shellfish,
which in taste much resembles Mutton; a Tree they have which they call by the
Name of Sagu, of the pith thereof they make their Bread; and of the Sap or
Juice of it, they compose a pleasing Drink, which serves them instead of Wine;
the Air Intemperately hot; the People well proportioned, but Rude and Salvage;
some of them Gentiles, some Mahometans; of which last Religion is their King;
the chief Town of it is Batchane or Batachina, in which the Hollanders have a
Fort to defend their Factory.

CHAP. LVII.
CALEBS or Gilolo.
WEst of the CALEBS or Gilolo, lies the Isle of Borneo, of more Note and
Greatness than any of the Oriental Islands; the Country said to be provided of
all things necessary, the People generally more White the then rest of the
Indians, of good Wits, and approved Integrity; though all Mahometans, or
Gentiles, divided betwixt two Kings, and two Religions; the Kings of Borneo and
his Subjects, being all Mahometans; those of Laus still remaining in their
Ancient Gentilism. These think the Sun and Moon to be Man and Wife, and the
Stars their children, ascribing to each of them Divine honor, to the Sun
especially, whom they Salute at first Rising with great Reverence, saying
certain Verses; their public business are Treated on in the Night, at which
time the Counselors of State meet and Assend some Tree, viewing the Heavens
till the Moon rise, and then go to their Senate House, the same Apparel,
Generally of both Religions; but thin by reason of the great heat of the Air: a
Shirt of Calico, or some such light stuff, worn more for modesty then for
warmth.

CHAP. LVIII.
BORNEO.
OPposite to Borneo, toward the South lies the Isles of Iava, two in number,
distinguished by Iava Major, and Iava Minor; Iava Major the more Northward of
the two, and much the bigger, said to be in Compass 3000 Miles, the Country
Rich and Fertile, yielding great plenty of Fruit, Corn and Rice especially, the
People of a middle Stature, Corpulent, and broad Faces, most of them naked, or
covered only with a thin Silk, and that no lower then the knee: accounted the
most civillest People of all the Indians, as fetching their Deseent from China:
but withal Treacherous, very Proud, much given to lying, and very careless of
their words, to which so used, that they count it not amongst their faults;
Cruel they are also said to be, and implacable, if once offended: accustomed of
old to eat the Bodies of their Friend, accounting no Burial so honorable, nor
Obsequie so applausive. This is also a Custom amongst the rest of the Indians,
and so has been ever since the beginning of the Persian Monarchy; Herodotus
reports how Darius Hystaspes, understanding of this custom, and withal
knowing how the Grecians use to burn their dead; sent to the Greeks, that it
was his pleasure they should eat the Bodies of their dead; but they used all
manner of persuasion, and entreaty, not to be forced to so Brutish and
Barbarous a Custom; then commanding the Indians to comform themselves to the
fashion of the Grecians; but they all more abhorred to burn their dead, then
the Greeks did to eat them; so impossible is it for a Custom, either to be
suddenly left off, or to seem undecent and inconvenient, if once thoroughly
settled.

CHAP. LIX.
FESSE in Barbary.
THe Province of Fesse in Barbary, is a Country very Fruitful, well stored
with Cattle, and exceeding Populous; the Villages whereof as bigg as the better
sort of Towns, in other places; but contrary to the Customs of other Countries,
better Inhabited on the Hills, then amongst the Villages, the People making use
of the Mountains, for their Habitations as places of defense and safety, but
Husbanding the Villages which lie nearest to them, In this Province it is said
they have Lions so tame, that they will gather up Bones in the Street like
Dogs, without hurting any Body; and other Lions that are of so cowardly a
Nature, that they will run away at the Voice of the least child.

CHAP. LX.
PARIA in America.
PARIA in America, is a County for so much as has been discovered, neither
Rich nor Pleasant, and consequently, the less looked after; covered with Shrubs
and Bushes, and such unprofitable things, heretofore famed for pearl, Fishing
all along the Coast, from the Gulf of Paria, to that of Venezuela, called
therefore Costos de las perlas; but that gainful Trade has long since failed
it, not only in esteem for a vein of excellent Salt, found near Promontory of
Araya, and the Bay of Cariaco; gathered and dug up thereabout in great
abundance, and yet never diminishing; there are some strange Creatures in this
Country, as the Beast called Capa, the soles of whose feet are like a shoe, a
kind of Hog which lives altogether upon Ants, or Pismires; Parrots and Bats, of
more then ordinary greatness; of the People there is nothing singullers except
it be, that having plenty of good Fruits, Fish, and Flesh, they use themselves
to a far worse diet, feeding on Horseleeches, Bats, spiders, Grasshoppers,
Worms, Lice, and such other vermin. In other things they seem to have, a
mixture of all ill Customs, used amongst the Salvages of Asia, Afric, and
America; as multitudes of Wives, prostituting these Wives for the first Nights
lodging, to the Piacos, or Priests; and after to their Guests, taking great
pains to black their Teeth, and putting strange colors on their Bodies instead
of Garments, high minded they are, Treacherous and revengeful, accustomed to
the use of poisoned Arrows, which they Invenom with the blood of Snakes, and
other mixtures. In one thing only different from their Neighbors, fencing of
their grounds, Orchards, with a Cotton thread, as high as ones wast, and an
opinion which they have, that whosoever breaks it, or goes over, or under it,
shall die immediately; more safe in that opinion then by Brazen Walls.

CHAP. LXI.
NVMIDIA.
THe natural Inhabitants of Numidia, are said to be a base vile People,
Thieves, Murderers, Treacherous, and Ignorant of all things; feeding most
commonly on Dates, Barley, and Carrion; accounting Bread a diet for their
Festival-days. But the Arrabians, who are intermingled with them, in most part
of the Country, affirmed to be (comparatively with the Nations) Ingenious,
liberal, and civil. The Garments of the Numidians, of the coursest Cloth, so
short that they cover not half the Body: The Richer sort distinguished by a
Jacket of blew Cotton with wide Sleeves; their Steeds are Camels, which they
ride without a Stirrup, or so much as a Sadle: A leather Thrust through an hole
made in the Nose of the Camel, serves them for a Bridle; and to save the charge
of Spurs, they make use of a Goad; their Religion Mahometism, to which
perverted (Christianity having once had footing here) in the year 710. The
Azanaghi, and other People of those parts then subdued by the Saracens, who
held them for a Nation of so little reckoning, that no man of account amongst
them would descend so low, as to be their Prince; but left them to be ruled as
in former times, by the Chiefs, or Heads, of their several Claris.

CHAP. LXII.
NIGRITARVM.
THe Country of NIGRITARVM, is said to be hot by reason of its Situation under
the torrid Zone; yet very well Inhabited, full of People; and in some places
always green, well watered, and exceeding fruitful, Especially in those parts,
which lie within the compass of the overflowing of the River Niger; and on the
further side of the River Sanaga, abundantly well stored both with Corn,
Cattle, and Garden-ware for the use of their Kitchings, well wooded, and those
Woods well furnished with Elephants, and other Beasts; both wild and tame.
Their greatest want (but such a want as may be born with) is the want of
Fruit Trees, few of which they have; and those they have, bear one kind of
Fruit only; which is like the Chestnut, but some what bitterer; Rain here does
neither help nor hurt; their greatest Welfare consisting in the Over-flowings
of Niger, as that of Egypt in the Innundations of Nile. In some parts very
liberally enriched with Mines of Gold and Silver, very fine and pure.

The Inhabitants, till the coming of the Portugals thither, were for the most
part so rude and barbarous, that they seem to want that use of Reason, which is
peculiar to man; of little Wit, and destitute of all Arts and Sciences; prone
to Luxury, and for the greatest part Idolaters, though not without some
admixture of Mahometans. When the Portugals first failed into these parts, the
People took the Ships for great Birds with white wings, and after upon better
acquaintance, they could not be brought to believe, but that the eyes which
were casually painted on the Beaks of the Ships, were the eyes by which they
saw how to direct themselves in their Course. Guns seemed to them for their
hideous noise, to be the Works of the Devil; and for Bag-pipes they took them
to be living Creatures; neither when they had been permitted to touch them,
would they be persuaded, but that they were the work of Gods own hands: The
very Nobles (if so noble a Name may without offense be given to such blokish
People) are so dull and stupid, that they are Ignorant of all things, which
belong to civil Society, and yet so reverent of their King; that when they are
in his presence, they never look him in the face, but still flat on their
Buttock, with their Elbows on their Knees, and their hands on their faces; they
use to anoint their Hair with the Fat of Fishes, which makes them stink more
wretchedly then they would do otherwise. Of Complexion they are for the most
part cole-black, whence the name of Negroes; but on the South Side of the River
Senaga, they are tawney: The Blacks so much in love with their own Complexion,
that they use to paint the Devil White, which I find thus versified.

The Land of Negroes is not far from thence,
Nearer extended to the Atlantic main;
Wherein the black Prince keeps his residence.
Attended by his Ietty colored Train:
Who in their native Beauty most delight,
And in contempt do paint the Devil white*
CHAP. LXIII.
BENIN.
BENIN, a Province in the said Country, Iyeth East of Gainea, by the Portugals
reckoned for a Province, or Kingdom of it: The King whereof is said to have six
hundred Wives, withal which twice a year he goes out in Pomp. The Gentlemen
(if I abuse not the Name) have most of them eighty Wives, some more, he that is
poorest, Ten or Twelve; and the more the merrier. The People thereof cut and
raze their skin, with three lines drawn to the Navel; esteeming it necessary to
Salvation, they use all, both Men and Women, to go naked, till they are
married; and then to be clothed only from the wast to the Knees.

CHAP. LXIV.
BORNVM.
BORNVM, a large and opulent Province in the said County, extending in length
500 Miles, distinguished equally into Hills and Villages: the Hills Inhabited
by neat herds, and Sheep herds, breeding great flocks of Sheep and Cattle; the
People are of no Religion, but live like Beasts without propriety, so much as
in their Wives, and Children: nor are they differenced by names, as in other
Countries, but by some mark upon their Bodies; which though it seem strange to
us of this present Age, yet was it thus in part with our Saxon Ancestors,
whence have we else the names of White, Black, Brown, Gray, and Tawney; or
those of Long, short, Low, Curle, Crisp, and others; but from such Originals.
The name of their chief City is Borneo, where their King resideth; A Potent
Prince who keeps in continual pay 3000 Horse, and great numbers of Foot, and
yet is said to have no other Revenew, then what he gets by strong hand from
his Enemies, which if it be true, those Kings must needs be good Warriors, and
have great success also in undertakings: It being also said of those Kings,
that all the Furniture of their Horse, all the Dishes, Cups, and Plates, which
they eat or drink in; nay the very Chains of their Dogs were of purest Gold.

CHAP. LXV.
NOVA ALBION.
NOVA ALBION, is a Country abundantly replenished herds of Deer, grazing upon
the Hills by thousands, as also a with kind of Conies, in their feet somewhat
resembling a Want, and on each side a Sack, where they keep such Victuals they
cannot eat; the Flesh of them serving for Food; and of their Skins, the Kings,
or Chiefs of their several Tribes, make their Royal Robes. Their Men quite
naked; the Women with a piece of Matt, instead of an Apron; Chaste, and Obedient
to their Husbands: their Houses made of Turf and Oyer, so wrought together, as
serves to keep them from the cold; in the midst whereof they have a hearth,
where they make fire; and about which they lie along upon Beds of Bull-rushes.

CHAP. LXVI.
NOVA Hispania.
AMongst the Rarities of Nova Hispania, (though there be many Plants in it of
singular Nature) is mentioned that which they call Eagney or Meto, said to be
one of the Principal: a Tree which they both Plant and Dress as we do our
Vines; it has on it 40 kind of leaves, fit for several uses: for when they be
tender, they make of them Conserves, Paper, Flax, Mantles, Mats, Shoes,
Girdles, and Cordage; upon them there grow certain prickles, so strong and
sharp, that the People use them instead of Staws from the top of the Tree
comes a Juice like Syrrup; which if you sees it, will become Honey; if
purified, Sugar; the Bark of it roasted makes a good Plaster for sores; and
from the highest of the Boughs comes a kind of Gum, a Sovereign Antidote
against poisons. Nor is it less a Rarity, though less useful to the good of
Mankind, (except it be to keep them in continual mind of the fires of Hell)
that they have a Mountain in this Country, called Propochampeche (Situate in
the Province of Mexico) which vomiteth flames of Fire like Aetna: and other in
the Province of Guaxaca, which sends forth two great streams, the one of Red
Pitch, and the other of Black; they have many other Mountains, but these most
memorable.

CHAP. LXVII.
BRASIL.
IN BRASIL, amongst other things is said to be a Plant called Copiba, the Bark
of which being cut, does send forth a Balm, the sovereign virtue so well known
to the very Beasts, that being bit by venomous Serpents, they resort to it for
their cure. 2. The herb called Sentida, or Viva, which roughly touched will
close the leaves, and not open them again, till the man that had offended it be
gone out of sight. 3. A kind of Wheat in the Valley near St. Sebastian, which is
continually growing, and always ripe; nor never wholly ripe, because always
growing; for when one Ear does Grain, another does Bloom; when one is Ripe and
Yellow, and another is Green. 4. The Ox, Fish, with Eyes and Eyelids, two Arms
a Cubit long, and at each and Hand with Five Fingers and Nails, as in a Man;
under the Arm two Teats, inwards like a Cow, in every Female. 5. A Creature
found of Cate in the Bay of All Saints, which had the Face of an Ape, the Foot
of a Lion, and all the rest of a Man; a Beast of a most terrible aspect. 6.
Beasts of such strange shapes, such several kinds, that it may be said of
Brasill, as once of Africa. Semper aliquid apportat novi; every day some new
Object of Admiration.

CHAP. LXVIII.
ARABIA.
It Is said, the People of ARABIA, had anciently many strange and barbarous
Customs amongst them; Adultery was punished with Death, as in other places; but
only he was held an Adulterer, which enjoyed any that was not his own
Kins-Woman, be she Sister, or Mother; and so they kept themselves in their own
Families. Community of Wives or Women was esteemed no Crime; and of this there
is a tale in Strabo, that a King of this Country had fifteen Sons, but one
Daughter, who according to the Customs hereof, was the common Wife of all her
Brethren; every of which had a staff of like making, which when he went in to
his Sister, he did leave at the Door; and by so doing did forbid entrance to
the rest, till it were removed. The young Lady, wearied with a continual supply
of Dalliance, secretly procured a staff like to the rest; which when she was
desirous to prohibit their accesses to her, she left at her Chamber Door, and
by that means did many times enjoy her desired privacy: At last it happened,
that all the Brothers being together, one of them departed toward his Sisters
Lodging; where finding a staff before the Door, and knowing that he had left
his Brethren in one place together, he accused her of Adultery; but the Truth
being made known, the Lady was quitted, and their Visits afterward restrained,
of dead Bodies they took no care, not so much as of their Chiefs, or Princes;
but left them to the custody of the next Dunghill.

CHAP. LXIX.
ALBANIA.
THe Country ALBANIA in Turcomania, is of so Rich a Soil, that without the
least labor of the Husbandman, the Earth does naturally and liberally afford
her store; and where it is but once sown, will yield two or three reapings:
But being ill Husbands on it in former times, they occasioned Strabo to give
them this note for a Remembrance, that they needed not the use of the Sea, who
knew no better how to make use of the Land: The People anciently so simple,
that they could not reckon above an hundred: Ignorant of Weights, Measures, and
the use of Money. Old Age they had in high esteem, but hold it utterly unlawful
to make Speech of the dead. Pliny reports, that they were Gray Headed from
their very youth, and could see as well by night as by day: But withal
affirmed to be a stout and courageous People, strong Bodies, patient of Toil
and Labor, as they are at this day. And well the men may be courageous and
stout, where the Women are so truly masculine; of whom it is affirmed by
Authors of undoubted Credit, that they were exercised in Arms, and Martial
Feats, as if descended from the ancient Amazons.

CHAP. LXX.
FLORIDA.
THe People of FLORIDA, are said to be of an Olive-coulour, great stature, and
well proportioned; naked except their Privities, which they hide with the skins
of Stags: Their Arms and Knees stained with diverse paintings, not to be washed
off; their Hair black, and hanging down as low as their Thighs, cunning they
be, and excellent in the Arts of dissimulation; so stomackful, that they
naturally love War and Revenge: Insomuch that they are in continual War with
themselves; the Women, when their Husbands are dead, use to cut off their Hair
close to the ears, and strew it on his Sepulcher; and cannot marry again, till
it be grown long enough to cover their shoulders. Hermophradites Hair are in
great plenty, whom they use as Beasts to carry their Luggage, and put them to
all kinds of Drudgery.

CHAP. LXXI.
PERV.
THe People of Peru, are affirmed to be (for the most part) of great
simplicity; yet some of them (those especially which lie near the Equator) to
be great dissemblers, and never to discover their conceptions freely. Ignorant
of Letters, but of good Courage in the Wars; well skilled in Managing such
weapons they have been used too, and fearless of death; the rather prompted to
this last by an old Opinion held among them, that in the other World they shall
Eat, and Drink, and make love to Women. And therefore commonly at the Funeral
of any great Person, who was attended on in his life, they use to Kill and Bury
with him one or more of his Servants, to wait upon him after death; The Women
here less esteemed of then in other places, treated as Slaves, and sometimes
cruelly beaten upon slight occasions.

FINIS.

