Strang' And Prodigious RELIGIONS Customs and Manners of Sundry Nations.



THE Strange and Prodigious RELIGIONS, Customs, and Manners, Of Sundry NATIONS.

CONTAINING, I. Their ridiculous Rites and Ceremonies in the Worship of their
several Deities. II. The various Changes of the Jewish Religion, and the State
it is now in; with the final Destruction of Jerusalem under Titus. III. The
Rise and Growth of Mahometanism, with the Life of that great Impostor. IV. The
Schisms and Heresies in the Christian Church; being an account of those grand
Heretics the Adamites, Muggletonians, etc. All intermingled with pleasant
Relations of the fantastical Rites both of the Ancients and Moderns in the
Celebration of their Marriages, and Solemnization of their Funerals, etc.


Faithfully collected from ancient and modern Authors; and adorned with diverse
Pictures of several remarkable Passages therein.

By R. D.

LONDON, Printed for and sold by Hen. Rodes next door to the Bear Tavern near
Bride-Lane in Fleet Street. 1683.

TO THE READER.
IF the Variety and Greatness of Subjects are capable of affording satisfaction
to a Reader, you will have in this Piece I now present thee wherewith
abundantly to satisfy thy Curiosity. You have first a perfect Account of the
different Opinions of Mankind concerning a Deity; their several fantastical
Ceremonies in their Devotion and Worship; and likewise a Compendium of the many
Schisms and Heresies that have been in the Christian Religion it self. Then you
are entertained with the Life, Death, and abominable Doctrine of that grand
Impostor Mahomet; and this Account may in some kind be a means to hinder others
from falling into the like Errors and Abominations. After this you have a
Description of the diverse and ridiculous Rites of most Nations of the
Universe, in their Customs, and Celebration of Marriages, and Solemnization of
Funerals, intermingled with several Instances of extraordinary Love and
Affection. Then you have a relation of the several fore Bodings and Apparitions
that foretold the Fall of Jerusalem, with all the circumstances of the final
Destruction of that famous City; with many other instances too long here to
insert: So that you have in this Epitome what has been the subjects of the
greatest Pens which have filled many large Volumes, and would require a great
deal of time to read over; and I hope may be a means to induce us to bless and
praise God the more, for having brought us into the light of Truth when we see
how many millions of men have wandered in such horrible Darkness.

R. D.

The Manner of the Ancient Virginians in their Worshipping of Idols Page 20



Strange and Prodigious Religions, Customs, and Manners, etc.
AMongst the many millions of Faces which have been, and are to be seen in the
World there are not any two of 'em that are exactly, and in all points alike:
and tho there may be some similitude in Voices, and in the Deportment and
Behavior, yet there is something in every one that is peculiar, and a certain
Air that serves to difference and distinguish one man from another; so there is
no less variety in the Wits, Minds, and Inclinations of men. From whence
proceeds, not only the alteration and variety of the Customs and Manners of
Nations, and particular Persons, but the several sorts of Idolatrous Worship,
and Paganism, that have been in the World, and the many Sects and Schisms that
have started up in the true Religion it self. Which to make appear, is the
scope and business of the following Discourse.

I. And first, we will begin with Paganism, and show the strange Whimsies and
Caprices of mankind in their Opinions of a Deity, and the Worship that was to
be paid thereto. Thus then, the ancient Babylonians worshipped Jupiter under
the name of Belus, Bell, and Baal, Juno under the name of Astoroth, or Astorte.
And their Priests called Chaldeans and Magi were bound by their Superstitious
Discipline to worship the Sun, and so was the King to offer him every day a
white Horse richly furnished. The Fire they also worshipped, and the Earth too,
under certain Names: to the Earth they kept a certain Feast for five days in
Babylon; where, during that time, the Servants were Masters, and the Masters
Servants. They worshipped also Venus; for maintaining of whose Service, the
Women prostituted themselves to Strangers: these held a Divine Providence, but
denied a Creation, and were much addicted to Astrology and Divination. Ninus
was the first Idolater; who after the Death of his Father Belus, set up his
Image, and caused it to be adored with Divine Honors, at Babylon, and in the
rest of his Dominions: thus they were Men whom the Pagans affirmed to be Gods;
and every one according to his Merits and Magnificence, began after his Death
to be worshipped by his Friends: thus all the Idols of the Gentiles were the
Images of dead men. The Egyptian God Osyris was a Man, who, because he
distinguished every Region in the Camp by their Colors, in which, Dogs, Oxen,
and other Beasts, were painted; therefore, after his Death, he was honored
under those Shapes: and this begot in 'em such a Veneration for those
Creatures, that when there was a mighty Famine in Egypt, so as that all kind of
Food failed them, they betook 'emselves to feed upon Man's Flesh, when in the
mean time they spared Dogs, Cats, Wolves, Hawks, etc. which they worshipped as
their Gods; and not only forbore to lay Hands upon them, but also fed them, and
that too with Man's Flesh. The Ancients were no less ridiculous in the Choice
of their Gods than in their Worship to 'em: for, if we do but consider
Jupiter's Adulteries, his Incests with his own Sister Juno, and his Daughter
Minerva; if his Sodomy with Ganymedes, his ravishing of Europa and many others;
if his Impiety against his Father Saturn, whom he drove out of his Kingdom, and
forced to hide himself in Italy; if we consider these things, we must needs say
that he was so far from being a God, that he scarce deserved the name of a Man,
but rather of a Savage Beast; and indeed, not unlike in Salacity to the Goat
his Nurse. Such another God was Saturn, a cruel Murderer of his own Children,
and whose chief delight was to have little Children sacrificed to him. What was
Mercury but a Thief, Venus a Whore, Bacchus a Drunkard, Vulcan was but a Smith,
Apollo a Shepherd and Mason, Mars a Soldier, Neptune a Mariner, Minerva a
Spinster or Weaver, Saturn a Husbandman, Eseulapius a Physician? so as that
they had no other Deity but what were Men, and the lowest of Men too. And no
less abominable was their Cruelty in their Sacrifices and Offerings; for, there
was a brazen Statue of Saturn's at Carthage, with hands somewhat lifted up; the
Statue it self was open, hallow, and bending toward the Earth, a Man or Youth
was solemnly laid upon these Arms, and thence he was straight tumbled down
headlong into a burning Furnace that was flaming underneath. This burning
alive was bestowed upon that God yearly, upon a set day, and at other times
also, even with multiplied Victims, especially in case of any great Calamity
that should befall the City. Accordingly upon the Slaughter they received by
Agathocles, they made a Decree, (I tremble to speak it) to offer up two hundred
of their noblest Youths in this manner to Saturn; and who would believe it,
there were as many more who freely offered themselves to the same Death.

II. So great a Reverence to Religion had the Ethiopian Kings, to the time of
Ptolomy King of Egypt, that whenever the Priests of Jupiter, who was
worshipped in Meroc, declared to any of them that his Life was hateful to the
Gods, he immediately put an end to his days; nor was there any of them found to
have had a more tender Regard to the Safety of his own Life than he had
Reverence to Religion; till King Arganes, who lest the Priests should tell him
he should dye, began with themselves, put them all to Death first, and thereby
abolished the Custom. At Hierapolis in Syria was a magnificent Temple, where
men used to geld themselves and put on Women's Apparel; such Priests were called
Galli: Here stood two, Priapi or Phalli, and within the Quire, (into which the
Chief Priest only might enter) stood Jupiter's Statue, supported with Bulls,
Juno's with Lions, having in one hand a Scepter, and a Distaff in the other. In
the Temple stood Apollo, whose Oracles were much consulted; if the Petition was
liked the Image would move forward, if otherwise, backward. They had diverse
Feasts, the greatest was that of the Fire, where they set diverse Trees, hung
with diverse sorts of Beast for Sacrifice on Fire, after they had carried about
these Fires (in Procession) to their Idols. Here the gelded Priests wound each
other, and diverse young men at this Feast geld themselves. Here was much
confused Music, Disorder, Fury, and Prophecyings. Into the Temple none might
enter in thirty days in whose Family any died, and then his Head must be
shaved. He that but looked upon a dead Corpse was excluded the Temple a whole
day. To touch a Dove was Abomination, because Semiramis was transformed into a
Dove; and so it was to touch Fishes, because of Dercito, the Mermaid and Mother
of Semiramis, half a Fish and half a Woman. To Hierapolis were diverse
Pilgrimages; each Pilgrim was bound to cut his Hair on his Head and Brows, to
sacrifice a Sheep, to lay the Head and Feet of the Sheep upon his own Head, to
crown himself, to drink cold Water only, and to sleep on the Ground till his
Return: the young men were bound to consecrate their Hair, then to cut it in
the Temple, and to offer it in a Box of Gold and Silver, with their Names
inscribed thereon. The Phaenicians were bound to offer yearly Sacrifices of
young Children to Saturn, and in the Temple of Venus to practice not only
Whoredom but Sodomy also; The Phaenicians were bound to prostitute their
Daughters to Venus before they married 'em. In the Temple of Venus were
celebrated the annual Rites of Adonis, with Beatings and Howlings, to whom they
performed solemn Obsequies. The Arabians worshipped the Sun and Moon, Serpents,
Trees, and other such like Deities. The Nabathaeans burned Frankincense to the
Sun or his Altar; they do not bury their Dead, but lay 'em, even their Kings,
on Dunghils. Adultery is Death among 'em, but Incest is no Sin. In Panchaea is
a rich stately Temple, adorned with Statues, and the Priests ruled all there
both in politic and ecclesiastic Affairs.

III. The ancient Persians had neither Temples, Altars, nor Images, holding
these improper for their Gods; but on the tops of Hills offered Sacrifices to
Heaven, and to the Sun, Moon, Fire, Earth, Water, and Winds. The Priests used
neither Music, Vestments, nor Libaments, but only his Tiara or Head-attire,
crowned with Myrtle. To Lie and be in Debt are heinous Crimes with them; so it
is to spit, wash, or piss in a River, which with them are hallowed. The old
Scythians had neither Temples, Images, nor Altars, for any of their Gods,
except for Mars, whose Temples they erected of bundles of Twigs heaped up
together: Instead of his Image they set up an old Iron Sword, to which they
offered yearly Sacrifices of Cattle and Horses, and of Men every hundredth
Captive, with whose Blood they besprinkled Mars's Sword; then they cut off the
right Shoulders of the slain men, and fling them into the Air: they used to
wound first, and then to strangle the Beast which they sacrificed, praying to
that God to whom they offered the Beast: they kindled no Fire of Wood, for the
Country yielded none; but they burned the Bones of the Beast to boil the Flesh
withal; if they want a Vessel they boil the Flesh in the Beast's Paunch; they
use no Vows, nor any other Ceremonies.

IV. The Tartars worshipped the Sun, Stars, Fire, Earth, and Water, to whom
they offered the first Fruits of their Meat and Drink each morning before they
eat and drink themselves. They believe there is one God, Maker of all things,
yet they worship not nor pray unto him. They place Idols at the Tent doors:
these Idols being made of Silk and Felt, are offered the first Fruits of Milk,
Meat, and Drink; the Hearts also of Beasts, which they leave before them all
night, and then eat them in the morning: they offer Horses to the Emperor's
Idol, which none afterward must ride; they do not break, but burn the Bones of
their Sacrifices; by their Discipline they must not touch the Fire with a
Knife, nor meddle with young Birds, nor pour Milk, Drink, or Meat, on the
ground, nor break one Bone with another, nor make Water within their Tents,
with diverse other such Traditions, which if violated, are punished with Death,
or else redeemed with much Money. They believe another World, but such as this.
When one dies he has Meat set before him, and Mare's Milk, his Friends eat a
Horse, and burn the Bones thereof for his Soul; they bury also with him a Mare,
a Colt, and a Horse, bridled and sadled, his Gold and Silver also; and they set
upon Poles the Horse Hide that was eat, that he may not be without a Tent in
the other World. They use to feed the Ghosts or Spirits with Mares Milk cast in
the Air, or poured on the Ground. They have their religious Votaries or
Monasteries, amongst which there is an Order called Senschin, which eat nothing
but Bran steeped in hot Water. They do not worship Idols, nor do they marry,
but they hold Transanimation, and diverse other ridiculous Opinions. They have a
strange Custom among them, that their Priests on high Trees preach to them, and
after Sermon besprinkle their Auditors with Blood, Milk, Earth, and Cow Dung,
mixed together: and no less strange it is, that they do not bury their Dead but
hang them upon Trees. But the Tartars were not all of one Religion; for as they
compose several Nations, so they had several Sects in their Paganism. Before
the Corpse of any great Man they set a Table, furnished with all sorts of meats;
with the Odor of which, they think the departed Soul is refreshed, and
heartned against the burning of the Body. They cast into the Fire, with the
Body, Pictures of his Men, Women, and Horses, and other things to serve in the
other World.

V. The Inhabitants of Nova Zembla worship the Sun so long as he is with them,
and in his absence the Moon and the North-Star, having no Religion prescribed
them by Law. To the Northern Star they offer a yearly Sacrifice of their Deer,
which they burn, except their Head and Feet: they sacrifice also for their
Dead. The Samodyes, which are subject to the Zar of Muscovy, are much addicted
to Witchcraft and Idolatry; among them, each Kindred have their Temple, where
they sacrifice. Their Priest is he that is eldest, whose Ornaments are small
Ribs and Teeth of Fishes and Wild Beasts hanging about them, with a white
Garland on his Head; in his Divine Service he does not sing, but howl, and that
so long, till he become like a Madman, and then falls down as though he were
dead, but rises again, orders five Deer to be sacrificed, and thrusts a
Sword half way into his Belly, still singing, or howling rather; the Sword he
takes out again, heats it in the Fire, and then thrusts it in at the Navel, and
out at the Fundament; then he lets two Women, standing by him, pull off his
Head and left Shoulder, with a small Line by which they pull the Head and
Shoulder into a Kettle of hot Water; but he reviveth again, and comes out
whole as he was before. In Samogitia, a small Province between Poland and
Lithuania, the Inhabitants nourish among them a kind of four-footed Serpents,
about three handfuls in length, which they worship as their Household Gods,
attending them with Fear and Reverence when they call them out to their
Repasts; and if any mischance do happen to any of the Family, it is imputed
presently to some want of due Observance of these ugly Creatures. They are
naturally inclined to Divinations, Charms, and Sorceries, and frequently
abused, as for the most part such People are, by diabolical Illusions. The
Lithuanians anciently had Fire and Serpents for their Gods, nourishing the last
in their Houses, and keeping the other continually burning; the Priests and
Ministers of the Temple always adding Fuel, that it might not fail: the Vestal
Fire was not kept more carefully at Rome, nor with greater Ceremony. To this
God whom they called Dishpan, or the Lord of the Smoke, they used to sacrifice
young Pullets, to the other, Cocks.

VI. The Saracens in old time adored the Star of Venus; they worshipped
likewise the Image of Venus set on a great Stone, on which they believed that
Abraham lay with Hagar, or else that he tied his Camel thereunto while he was
sacrificing Isaac. In the beginning of Spring, and in the beginning of Autumn,
the Sun entering into Aries or Libra, the Arabians used to cast Stones upon
heaps, being naked and bare-headed, with Cries, and going about their Idols,
kissing the Corners in honor of their Gods. This they used at Mecca, in honor
of Venus; and therefore in that Solemnity did they cast Stones under their
Privities, because those Parts were under her Dominion; only, whereas Nakedness
was immodest, some ordained that they should bind a Cloth about their Reins.
This Mahomet sound before his time, and did not reject, as he did some other
idolatrous Rites, but in their Pilgrimage Rites they still observe it. The
Moxi, a sort of Tartars, at a certain time in the Year, take a Horse, which
they set in the Field, with his four Legs tied to four Posts, and his Head to
another Post fastened in the Ground; This done, one of them standing at a
convenient Distance, shoots him to the Heart; afterward they slay him, and
observing certain Ceremonies about the Flesh, eat the same. The Skin they fill
with Chaff, and in each of his Legs thrust a straight Stick, that he may stand
upright as if he were alive; lastly, they go to a great Tree, and lop there
from as many Boughs as they think good, and make a Room or Seller in that tree,
where they set this Horse on his Feet, and worship him, offering unto him Foxes
and diverse Beasts which bear rich Furrs; of which Offerings the Trees hang
full. There are another sort of Tartars who worship the Sun, as they do also a
red Cloth fastened to the top of a Pole, and eat Serpents, Worms, and other
Filth.

VII. The Inhabitants of Bascia, a Province lying somewhat to the South of
Tartary, are Idolaters and Magicians, cruel and deceitful, living on Flesh and
Rice. Scarce a days Journey from hence is Chesmur, the People whereof are
wickedly cunning in their devilish Arts, by which they cause the dumb Idols to
speak, the day to grow dark, and other mavelous things, being the Wellspring
of Idols and Idolatry in those parts, They have Hermites after their Law, which
abide in their Monasteries, are very abstinent in eating and drinking, contain
their Bodies in straight Chastity, and are very careful to abstain from such
Sins wherewith they think their Idols offended, and live long. In the Province
of Tanguth, bordering likewise upon Tartary, their Temples are made like the
Christians, capable of four or five thousand Persons. In them are two Images of
a Man and Woman, lying in length forty foot, all of one Piece, or Stone; for
which use, they have Carts with forty Wheels, drawn by five or six hundred
Horses and Mules, two or three Months Journey. They have also little Images
with six or seven Heads, and ten Hands, holding in each of them several things,
as a Serpent, Bird, Flower, etc. They have Monasteries, wherein are men of Holy
Life, never coming forth, but have food carried them thither daily: their Gates
are walled up, and there are an infinity of Fryer-like Companions passing to
and fro in their Cities. Caindu is a Heathenish Nation, where, in honor of
their Idols, they prostitute their Wives, Sisters, and Daughters, to the Lust
of Travelers; which being entertained in the House, the good man departs,
and the Woman sets some Token over the Door, which there remains as long
as this Stallion Stranger, for a sign to her Husband not to return till the
Guest be as well gone from her House as Honesty from her Heart, and Wit from
his Head. In Cailar and Cailocoram are such monstrous huge Idols, that it is
reported, some of 'em may be seen two days before a man comes at 'em.

VIII. And now I will proceed to give an Account of the Gods and Religion of
China; and begin with what Odoricus affirms, That at Kaiton or Zaiton, he
found two Convents of Minorite Friars, and many Monasteries of Idolaters; in
one whereof he was, in which, as it was told him, were three thousand Votaries,
and eleven thousand Idols: one of those Idols, less than some others, was as
big as a Popish St. Christopher. These Idols they feed every day with the smoke
of hot Meats set before them, but the Meat they eat themselves. At Quinsay, a
Chineze conveyed him into a certain Monastery, where he called to a Religious
Person, and said, this Raban Francus, that is, this Religious Frenchman,
comes from the Sunsetting, and is now going to Cambaleth to pray for the Life
of the Great Chan, and therefore you must show him some strange sight: then the
said Religious Person took great Baskets full of broken Relics, and led me
into a little walled Park, and unlocked the door: we entered into a fair Green,
wherein was a Mount in form of a Steeple, replenished with Herbs and Trees;
then did he ring with a Bell, at the sound whereof, many Creatures, like Apes,
Cats, and Monkeys, came down the Mount, and some had Faces like Men, to the
number of four thousand, and two hundred, putting themselves in good order,
before whom he set a Platter, and gave them those Fragments; which, when they
had eaten, he rung the second time, and they all returned to their former
places. I wondered at the sight, and demanded what Creatures they were; they
are, said he, the Souls of Noblemen, which we here feed for the love of God,
who governs the World. And as a man was honorable in his Life, so his Soul
enters after Death into the Body of some excellent Beast; but the Souls of
simple and rustical People possess the Bodies of more vile and brutish
Creatures. Neither could I dissuade him from the Opinion, or persuade him that
any Soul might remain without a Body.

IX. Gasper de la Crux being in Canton, a City of China, entered a certain
Religious House, where he saw a Chapel, having therein, besides many of her
things of great Curiosity, the Image of a Woman with a Child hanging about her
Neck, and a Lamp burning before her. The Mystery hereof none of the Chinezes
could declare. The Sun, Moon, Stars, and especially Heaven it self, are Gods of
the first form in their Idol School. They acknowledge Laocon Tzanter, the
Governor of the Great God, (so it signifies) to be eternal and a Spirit. Of
like Nature they esteem Causay, unto whom they ascribe the lower Heaven, and
power of Life and Death: they subject unto him three other Spirits, Tauquam,
Teyquam, Tzuiquam, the first supposed to be Author of Rain, the second of
Humane Nativity, Husbandry, and Wars, the third is their Sea Neptune: to these
they offer Victuals, Odours, and Altar Clothes, presenting them also with Plays
and Comedies. They have Images of the Devil, with Serpentine Locks, and as
deformed Looks as here he is painted; whom they worship, not to obtain any good
at his hand, but to detain and hold his hand from doing them evil. They have
many he and she Saints in great Veneration, with long Legends of their Lives.
Amongst the chief of them are Sichia, the first Inventer of their Religious
Votaries of both Sects; Quannia an Anchoress; and Neoma, a great Sorceress.
Friar Martin, in one Temple in Vchco, told a hundred and twelve Idols. They
tell of one Hujansin in the Province of Cechiam, which did much good to the
People, both by Alchimy, making true Silver of Quicksilver, and by freeing the
Metropolitan City from a huge Dragon, which he fastened to an Iron Pillar,
still showed, and then flew into Heaven with all his House Mice and all, Lie
and all, and there they have built him a Temple; the Ministers whereof, are of
that Sect. Thausu and Trigautius writes of certain Gods called Foe, which they
say go a visiting Cities and Provinces; and the Jesuits in one City were taken
for these Idols Foe. At Sciauchim, they in time of Drought proclaimed a Fast,
every Idol was solicited with Tapers and Odours, for Rain; a peculiar Officer
with the Elders of the People, observed peculiar Rites to this purpose, the
Priests went on Procession all in vain. When the City-Gods could do nothing,
they fetched a Country Idol, called Locu, which they carry about, worship, and
offer to: but Locu is now grown old; thus they said of his Deafness: at last
they go to a Witch, who told them, Quonim, a Goddess, was angry that her Back
was burned, meaning the Converts which burned their Idols; which incensed them
against the Christians. Hoaquim is the name of an Idol, which has rule over
the Eyes, which they carry about in Procession, and beg in his name. In time of
Trouble they have Familiarity with the Devil. Pedro de Alfero observed, being
in a Ship with a Chineze, in this sort; They cause a man to lie on the Ground
grovelling, and then one reads on a Book, the rest answering, and some make a
sound with Bells and Tabors. The man in short space begins to make Visages
and Gestures, whereby they know the Devil is entered, and then do they propound
their Requests, to which he answers by a Word or Letters. And when they
cannot extort an answer by Word, they spread a red Mantle on the Ground,
equally dispersing all over the same a certain quantity of Rice: then do they
cause a man, that cannot write, to stand there, themselves renewing their
former Invocation; and the Devil entering into this man causes him to write
upon the Rice: but his Answers are often full of Lies. In the Entries of their
Houses they have an Idol Room, where they incense their Deities Morning and
Evening: they offer to them the sweetest Odours, Hens, Geese, Ducks, Rice,
Wine; a Hogs-head boiled is the chief Offering; but little hereof falls to
the God's share, which is set in a Dish apart, as the tips of the Hogs Ears,
the Bylls and Feet of the Hens, a few Corns of Rice, three or four drops of
Wine: their Books tell much of Hell; their Devotions little. Their Temples are
homely and filthy, no Oracle is in any of them; they have Fables of men turned
into Dogs or Snakes, and again metamorphosed into men: and they which believe
the Pains of Hell, yet believe, after a certain space, that those damned Souls
shall pass thence into the Bodies of Beasts. But their Idolatries and religious
Rites will better appear, if we take a view of their different Religions and
Sects.

X. The Chinezes do conceive thus of the Creation, That there was one Taine,
who created Panzon and Paullina, whose Posterity remained ninety thousand
Years; but they, for their Wickedness, being destroyed, Taine created Luitzam,
who had two Horns, from the right came men, from the left came Women. They are
very much afraid when there is any Eclipse of the Sun or Moon, which they hold
to be man or Wife; for then they think that these two Gods are angry with them.
In Canada the Natives worship the Devil, who when he is offended with them,
flings Dust in their Eyes. The men marry two or three Wives, who after the
Death of their Husbands never marry again, but go still in black, and besinear
their Faces with Coal-Dust and Greese: they do first expose their Daughters to
any that will lie with them, and then give them in Marriage. They believe, that
after Death their Souls ascend unto the Stars, and go down with them under the
Horrison, into a Paradise of Pleasure: They believe also, that God stuck a
multitude of Arrows in the Beginning, into the Ground, and of these sprung up
Men and Women. They have diverse ridiculous Opinions of God, as, That he once
drank much Tobacco, and then gave the Pipe to their Governor, with a Command
that he should keep it carefully, and so doing, he should want nothing; but he
lost the Pipe, and so fell into Want and Misery. They use to sing to the
Devils, Praises; to dance about Fires which they make to his Honor, and leap
over them. They bemoan the Dead a great while, and bring Presents to their
Graves. In Florida the Chief Deities are the Sun and Moon, which they honor
with Dances and Songs. Once a Year they offer to the Sun a Harts-hide stuffed
with Herbs, hanging Garlands of Fruits about his Horns, so presenting this Gift
toward the East, they pray the Sun to make the Land produce the same Fruits
again: but to their Kings they use to sacrifice their firstborn Males; much of
their Devotion, like the rest of barbarous Savages, consisting in singing,
dancing, howling, feasting, and cutting off their own Skins. Adultery in the
Woman is punished with whipping. In some parts of this Country the next of Kin
is permitted to cut the Adulteresses Throat, and the Woman to cut the
Adulterers Throat. In some parts also of the Country they worship the Devil;
who when he complains of Thirst, humane Blood is shed to quench his Thirst.
When a King is buried, the Cup wherein he used to drink is still (...) upon his
Grave, and round about the same are stuck many Arrows; the People weep and fast
three days together; the neighbor Kings, his Friends, cut off half their Hair;
Women are hired, who for six Months howl for him three times a day. This honor
the King and Priest have, that they are buried in their Houses, and burned with
their Houses and Goods.

XII. In Mexico, besides their inferior Priests they had one Chief, whose
Habit was a Crown of rich Feathers on his Head, Pendants of Gold with green
Stones at his Ears, and under his Lips an azure Stone. His Office was to
receive the Body of the Dead King at the Temple door with a mournful Song, to
open the Breast of the sacrificed Man, to pull out his Heart to offer it to the
Sun, and then to fling that to the Idol to which the man was sanctified: The
inferior Priests in the interim, holding the Legs, Arms, and Head of the
sacrificed Wretch, whilst his Heart was taking out. They used also to flay off
the Skins of men, and cloth some therewith, who went about dancing, and
forcing People to offer them Presents or else they would strike them over the
face with the bloody Corner of the Skin. The Priests Office also was to burn
Incense before their Idols every Morning, Noontide, Evening, and at Midnight,
for then, with Trumpets and Coronets they sounded a long time; which done, they
burned the Incense in Censures with much Reverence, and then they beat
themselves and draw Blood with sharp Bodkins; they preach also on some Festival
days to the People. The Revenues of the Priests were great: the Temples, in
State, Magnificence, and Wealth, exceed ours. The Priests were all anointed,
and wear their Hair long, for they never cut it. They did sometimes anoint
themselves with an Unguent made of venomous Beasts, which made them without
fear, and armed them with Cruelty. They painted their Skins black; they washed
their new born Children, and let them Blood in their Ears: they performed
Marriages by asking the Parties mutual Consent, and tying together a Corner of
the Woman's Vail with the Corner of the Man's Gown, and so brought them to the
Bridegroom's groom's House, causing the Bride to go seven times about the
Hearth. They buried the dead either in their Gardens or on Mountains; sometimes
they burned the Body: and if he was a great man they killed his Chaplain and
his Officers to attend him, burying also Wealth with him, that he might not
want in the other World. The Priest used to attire himself in these great
Funerals, like a Devil, with many Mouths, and glass Eyes, and with his Staff
stirred and mingled the Ashes. When the King dyed the Priests were to sing his
Elogies, and to sacrifice two hundred Persons to serve him. Adultery was
punished with Death, and so was Dishonesty in their Nuns and Monks, of which
there were two great Cloisters at Mexico.

XIII. The Indians of Peru believed commonly, That the Souls lived after this
Life, and that the Good were in Glory and the Bad in Pain; so as there is
little difficulty to persuade them to these Articles. But they are not yet come
to the Knowledge of that point, that the Bodies should rise with the Souls: and
therefore they did use a wonderful Care to preserve the Bodies, which they
honored after Death. To this end their Successors gave them Garments, and made
Sacrifices unto them, especially the King's Inguas, being accompanied at their
Funerals with a great number of Servants and Women for their Service in the
other Life: and therefore on the day of his decease they did put to death the
Woman he had loved best, his Servants and Officers, that they might serve him
in the other Life. When as Guanacapa died (who was Father to Atagu^lpa, at what
time the Spaniards entered Peru) they put to death a thousand Persons of all
Ages and Conditions, for his Service to accompany him in the other Life, after
many Songs and Drunkenness they slew them; and these that were appointed to
death, held themselves happy. They did sacrifice many things unto them,
especially young Children, and with the Blood they made a stroke on the dead
man's Face from one Ear to the other. This Superstition and Inhumanity to kill
both Men and Women to accompany and serve the Dead in the other Life, has been
followed by others, and is at this day used amongst some other barbarous
Nations. And as Apollo writes, it has been in a manner general throughout all
the Indies. The Reverend Beda reports, That before the Englishmen were
converted to the Gospel, they had the same Custom, to kill men to accompany and
serve the dead. It is written of a Portugal who being Captive among the
Barbarians, had been hurt with a Dart, so as he lost one Eye, and as they would
have sacrificed him to accompany a Nobleman that was dead, he said unto them,
That those that were in the other Life would make small account of the dead if
they gave him a blind man for a Companion; and that it were better to give him
an Attendant that had both his Eyes: this Reason being found good by the
Barbarians, they let him go. Besides this Superstition of sacrificing Men to
the Dead, being used but to great Personages, there is another far more general
and common in all the Indies; which is, to set Meat and Drink upon the Grave of
the dead, imagining they did feed thereon; the which has been an Error amongst
the Ancients, as St. Augustine writes, and therefore they gave them Meat and
Drink. At this day many Indian Infidels do secretly draw their dead out of the
Churchyard, and bury them on Hills, or upon Passages of Mountains, or else in
their own Houses. They have also used to put Gold and Silver in their Mouth,
Hands, and Bosom, and to apparel them with new Garments, durable, and well
lined under the Hearse. They believe that the Souls of the dead wandered up and
down, and endured Cold, Thirst, Hunger, and Travel; and for this Cause they
make their Anniversaries, carrying them Clothes, Meat, and Drink.

XIV. The Kings Inguas of Peru caused Images to be made to their Likeness,
which they called Guacos, or Brothers, causing them for to be honored like
themselves, which was in this sort. They took a Captive, such as they thought
good, and before they did sacrifice unto him their Idols, they gave him the
Name of the Idol to whom he should be sacrificed, and appareled with the same
Ornaments like their Idol, saying, that he did represent the same Idol: and
during the time that this Representation lasted, which was for a Year in some
Feasts, in others six months, and in others less: they reverenced and
worshipped him in the same manner as the proper Idol, and in the mean time he
did eat, drink, and was merry. When he went through the Streets the People came
forth to worship him, and every one brought him an Alms, with Children, and
sick Folks, that he might cure them and bless them, suffering him to do all
things at his Pleasure, only he was accompanied with ten or twelve Men lest he
should fly. And he, to the end he might be reverenced as he passed, sometimes
sounded upon a small Flute, that the People might prepare to worship him. The
Feast being come, and he grown fat, they killed him, opened him, and eat him,
making a solemn Sacrifice of him.

XV. The chief Idol of Mexico was Vitziliputzli; It was an Image of Wood like
to a Mars set upon a Stool of the Color of Azure, in a Brankard or Litter; at
every Corner was a piece of Wood in form of a Serpents head. The Stool
fignified that he was set in Heaven; this Idol had all the Forehead azure, and
had a Band of azure under the Nose, from one Ear to the other; upon his Head he
had a rich Plume of Feathers, like to the Beak of a small Bird, the which was
covered on the top with Gold burnished very brown; he had in his Left hand a
white Target, with the Figure of five Pine-apples made of white Feathers, set
in a Cross, and from above issued forth a Crest of Gold, and at his Sides he
had four Darts, which (the Magicians say) had been sent from Heaven for the
doing mighty Acts and Prowesses; in his Right hand he had an azured Staff, cut
in fashion of a waving Snake.

XVI. The People of Peru's chief God was Wirachocha, by whom they understood
the Maker of all things; next to him they worshipped the Sun and the Thunder
after him: the Images of those three they never touched with their bare hands:
they worshipped all the Stars, Earth, Sea, Rainbow, Rivers, Fountains, and
Trees. They adored also wild Beasts, that they might not hurt them; and in sign
of their Devotion, when they traveled they left in the Cross-way and dangerous
Places, old Shoes, Feathers, and if they had nothing else, Stones. They
worshipped the Sun, by pulling off the Hairs from their Eyebrows. When they
fear, they touch the Earth, and look up to the Sun: they worship also the dead
Bodies of their Emperors, and indeed, every thing they either affected or
feared. They have some glimmering Knowledge of the beginning of the World, of
Noah's Flood, and they believe the end of the World, which they still fear when
the Sun is eclipsed, which they think to be the Moon's Husband: they held their
Priests in such esteem, that no great matter was undertaken by Prince or People
without their Advice. None had Access to their Idols but they, and then only
when they are clothed in white, and prostrate on the Ground. In sacrificing
they abstain from Women, and some out of Zeal would put out their own Eyes.
They used to consult with the Devil to whom they sacrificed men and dedicated
Boys in their Temples for Sodomy. They had also their Temples richly adorned
with Gold and Silver, and their Monasteries for Priests and Sorcerers. Their
Nuns were so strictly kept, that it was Death to be deflowred: after fourteen
years of age they were taken out of the Monastery, either to serve their Idols
(and such must be Virgins still) or else to serve as Wives and Concubines to
the Ingua or Emperor. They are very frequent and strict in their Confessions,
and cheerfully undertake what Penance is enjoined them: but the Ingua
confesses only to the Sun. After Confession they all wash in Baths, leaving
their Sins in the Water; they used to sacrifice Vegitables, Animals, and Men,
chiefly Children, for the Health or Prosperity of their Ingua, and for Victory
in War. In some places they eat their man Sacrifices, in others they only dried
and preserved them in Silver Coffins; they anoint with Blood the Faces of their
Idols and Doors of their Temples, or rather, Slaughter-houses.

XVII. Before the English planted Christianity in Virginia, the Natives
worshipped the Devil and many Idols, as yet they do in many places there. They
believe many Gods, but one principally, who made the rest, and that all
Creatures were made of Water, and the Woman before the Man, who by help of one
of the Gods, conceived and bore Children. They are all Anthropomorphites,
giving to their Gods the form of Men, whom they worship with praising, singing,
and Offerings. They hold the Souls Immortality, Rewards and Punishments after
this Life, the one in Heaven, the other in a burning Pit toward the West. The
Priests are distinguished from other People by Garments of Skin, and their Hair
cut like a Comb on their Crowns. They carry their Gods about with them, and ask
Counsel of them. Much of their Devotions consisted in howling and dancing about
Fires, with Rattles, or Gourd, or Pompian Rinds in their hands, beating the
ground with Stones, and offering Tobacco, Deers Suet, and Blood on the Stone
Altars. They undertake no matters of Consequence without advice of their
Priests, the chief whereof, is adorned with Feathers and Weasels Tails, and his
Face painted as ugly as the Devils. They bury their Kings (after their Bodies
are burned and dried) in white Skins, within Arches and Mats, with their Wealth
at their Feet, and by the Body is placed the Devils Image: the Women express
their Sorrow with black Paint and Yellings for twenty four hours. None but the
King and Priest may enter these Houses where the Images of Devils, and their
Kings, are kept. Instead of saying Grace at Meat they fling the first Bit into
the Fire; and when they will appease a Storm they cast Tobacco into the Water:
sometimes they sacrifice Children to the Devil.

XVIII. In Hispaniola they worshipped the Sun and Moon, which they say at first
shined out of a Cave; and their Tradition is, That out of two Caves came
Mankind; the biggest men out of the greatest Cave, and the least men out of the
lesser Cave. They worship also diverse Idols with ugly Shapes, by which the
Devil uses to speak to them; these they call Zermes, to which they kept diverse
Festivals. In these they had their public Dances, with the Music of Shells
tied about their Arms, Thighs, and Legs. The King fits drumming, when the
People present themselves, having their Skins painted with diverse Colors of
Herbs. When they sacrifice they use with a sacred Hook to thrust down their
Throats to turn up their Stomachs: then they sitdown in a Ring cross-legged and
wry-necked about the Idol, praying their Sacrifice might be accepted. In some
places the Women dance about their Idols, and sing the Prayers of their ancient
Kings; then both Sexes, on their Knees, offer Cakes, which the Priests cut, and
give to every one a piece: this each Man keeps as a Relick against Dangers. If
any fall sick, the Priests impute this to their neglect in the Idol's Service;
therefore exhort them to build a Chapel, or dedicate a Grove to their God:
they think the Ghosts of the dead walk, who assault such as are fearful, and
vanish from them who are not afraid.

XIX. In Malabar they have a Pagod or Idol, which they worship, seated upon a
brazen Throne, and crowned with a rich Diadem: From his Head issue out four
Horns, from his Mouth four Tusks, his Eyes fiery, like a Glowworm, his Nose
flat and ugly, his Visage terrible, his Hands like Claws, his Legs and Thighs
like those of a Lion; in a word, we cannot paint the Devil in a more ugly
Figure than they do their God. Unto this Pagod or his Priest, they offer the
Virginity of all their Daughters; the Pagod having, in the place of his Privy
Parts, a Bodkin of Gold or Silver, upon which the Bride (married most commonly
at ten or twelve years of Age) is forcibly set; the sharpness of it being such,
that it forces out the Blood in great Abundance; and if she prove with Child
that Year, it is said to be of his begetting, and the more esteemed. Others
with more Humanity, instead of torturing their Daughters on this wretched Idol,
(parallel almost to the offering their Sons to Moloch amongst the Syrians)
present them to the Bramini or Idol-Priest, to be defloured the first Night of
the Wedding and without one of these two Handsels no man is suffered to enjoy
the use of his Wife; not their Kings themselves. More privileged yet than many
Women neighboring on them, in that they are not compelled to burn themselves
with their Husbands Bodies, but may have many Husbands, either successively or
at once, as they list themselves: and if at once, she sends her Children to
that Husband (as we know who did) who she thinks to have the best right to them.

XX. The former Story brings to mind a Custom amongst the Scots, which took
beginning, as the Scottish Historians affirm, in the Reign of Ewen the Third,
who is the fifteenth King in their Catalogue, after the first Fergus. This Ewen
being a Prince much addicted, or wholly rather given over unto lasciviousness,
made a Law, that himself and his Successors should have the Maidenhead or
first Nights Lodging with every Woman whose Husband held Land immediately from
the Crown; and the Lords and Gentlemen, of all those whose Husbands were their
Tenants or Homagers. This was it seems the Knights Service, which men held
their Estates by, and continued till the days of Malcolm Commor, who at the
Request of his Wife Margaret, (she was the Sister of Edgar Atheling) abolished
this Law, and ordained, That the Tenants, by way of Commutation, should pay
unto their Lords a Mark in Money; which Tributes, the Historians say, is still
in force.

XXI. In Loango, a Country under the Line, they worship Idols, and are
circumcised. Every Tradesman appeaseth his God with such things as belong to
his Trade; the Husbandman with Corn, the Weaver with Cloth, etc. At the
Death of their Friends they kill Goats, to the honor of their Idols, and make
diverse Feasts in memorial of the dead. They will rather dye than touch any Meat
which is prohibited by their Priests. At Keaga, the Seaport of Loango, there
is an Idol kept by an old Woman, which is once a Year honored with great
Solemnity and feasting. There is another Idol at Morumba, thirty Leagues
Northward, where Boys are sworn to serve this God, and are initiated with hard
Diet, ten days Silence, Abstinence from certain Meats, and a Cut in their
Shoulder, the Blood of which, is sprinkled at the Idol's Feet. Their Trials of
Life and Death are in the Presence of this Idol. At Anzichi they are
circumcised, worship the Sun and Moon, and each man his particular Idol. In
some of these neighboring Countries the People are Man-eaters and worship the
Devil, to whom they offer Sacrifice, which they continue from Morning till
Night, using charming Vociferations, dancing and piping.

XXII. Gentilism is likewise professed in Guinea, for they adore strawen
things, instead of God, of whom they speak blasphemously, calling him evil,
black, and the Author of their Miseries; and that they are no ways beholding to
him for what they enjoy, but to their own Industry. They put within their
Rings, Wheat, Water, and Oil, for their God to feed upon: such Rings are worn
by many, as Preservatives against Danger. Their Priests use to preach to them
on Festival days, and after Sermon to besprinkle the Infants with Water, in
which a Newt does swim. They consecrate to their Idol the first Bit and Draught
of their Meat and Drink. But, I believe this black God they rail against is the
Devil, whom their cunning Priests represent to that ignorant People in some
black and ugly Shape, sometimes of a black Dog. If they paint themselves with
Chalk, they think they do good Service to their God. When he is angry with them
they use to bribe the Priest with Gold; so their Fishermen are use to do when
they have no success at Sea: the Priest with his Wives, walk in Procession,
knocking his Breasts and clapping his Hands, then hanging some Boughs from
their Necks, and playing on a Timbrel, the Priests fling Wheat into the Sea, to
appease the angry God. They have certain Trees in great Veneration, consulting
with them as with Oracles, using diverse foolish Ceremonies. They worship a
certain Bird which has Feathers like Stars, and a voice like a Bull. The Tunny
is a sacred Fish with them, and not to be touched; so are the Mountains, whose
Tops they daily feed, or the Priests rather, with Meat and Drink, When one
dies the Priest makes Gods of Straw to accompany the Dead into the other
World; Wine and good Cheer are sent with him, and Servants with his Wives: if
he be the King, these are slain to wait upon the King, and their Heads advanced
upon Poles round about the Grave. They hold it a Sin to spit on the Ground. The
Tuesday is their Sabbath. They use Circumcision, and some other Turkish
Ceremonies.

XXIII. The Goths believed, That the Dead went into a pleasant place, where
their God Tamolxines ruled: to him they used still to send a Messenger, chosen
out among themselves by Lot, who in a Boat of five Oars went to supplicate for
such things as they wanted. Their manner of sending him was thus; They took him
Hand and Foot and flung him upon the points of sharp Pikes; if he fell down,
they concluded that the God was well pleased with that Messenger; if otherwise,
they rejected him as an unworthy Envoy: therefore they chose another, to whom
they gave Instructions, before he died, what he should say to their God; and so
having slain him upon their Pikes, committed the dead Body in the Boat to the
mercy of the Sea. The Lithuanians used to burn their chief Captives to their
Gods. The Lusitanians ripped open the Bowels of their Captives in their
Divinations, and presented their right hands, being cut off, to their Gods. The
Sclavonians worshipped an Idol called Suantovitus, whose Priest, the day before
he sacrifices, makes clean the Chapel, which none must enter but he alone;
and whilst he is in it he must not draw his Breath, but hold his Head out of
the Window, lest with his mortal Breath he should pollute the Idol. The next
day, the People watching without the Chapel door, view the Idol's Cup; if they
find any of the Liquor which was put there wasted, they conclude the next years
Scarcity, but otherwise they hope for Plenty; and so they fill the Cup again,
and pray to the Idol for Victory and Plenty: then pouring out old Wine at the
Idol's Feet, and offering to him a great Cake, they spend the rest of the day
in gormondizing: it is held a sin and dishonor to the Idol, not to be drunk
then. Every one pays a piece of Money to the Idol's maintenance; to which
also is paid the third part of all Booties taken in the War. To this purpose
the Idol maintains three hundred Horse, whom the Priest paid, being the
Idol's Treasurer. In Lithuania, Russia, and the adjacent places, the Rusticks
offer a yearly Sacrifice of Calves, Hogs, Sows, Cocks, and Hens, about the end
of October, when their Fruits are all gathered in, to their Idol Ziemiennick:
they beat all these Creatures to death, then offer them with Prayers and
Thanksgivings; which done, they fall to eating and drinking, flinging first
pieces of Flesh into every Corner of the House.

XXIV. The ancient Britains worshipped Mercury in the first place, as being
the God of Highways, Journeys, Gain, and Merchandising. After him they
worshipped Apollo, Jupiter, Mars, and Minerva. They and the Germans were wont
to sacrifice Men sometimes, so did the ancient Britains, which with the Gauls
had the same Religion and Priests, called Druides, from the Oaks, under which
they used to teach and sacrifice; for, they expounded all Religious Mysteries,
taught the Youth, decided Controversies and Suits in Law, ordained Rewards and
Punishments; and such as obeyed not their Decrees they excommunicated,
debarring them from all Divine Exercises, and all Commerce with Men. These
Druides had one chief over them, whose Successor was always elected: they were
free from paying Taxes, from serving in the Wars, and had many other
Privileges. They committed not the mysteries of their Religion to Writing, but
to the Memory of their Disciples, who spent many years in learning by heart
their Precepts in Verse. They believed the Immortality of Souls, they read
Philosophy to their Scholars. It is thought by some, that Diana's Temple stood
where St. Paul's Church in London stands now; and Minerva had her Temple at
Bath; and Apollo in Scotland, near Dalkeith. The Saxons worshipped the seven
Planets, among which, Thor, the same with Jupiter, was chief; from him Thursday
was denominated. Next was Woden, or Mars, Wednesday is so called from him:
Frea, or Frico, was Venus, to whom Friday was dedicated, as Tuesday to Tuisco
the Founder of the German Nation: but the Germans at first had neither Images
nor Temples, but abroad worshipped the Sun, Moon, and Stars. Mother Earth was
in chief Esteem among them; to her they dedicated a Chariot in a Grove, which
was lawful only for the Priest to touch. He was never to leave the Chariot,
which was always covered with Cloth, and was drawn by two Oxen in Procession:
then Holy Days were appointed; at the end of her Journey, she, with the Chariot
and Cloth, were washed in a certain Lake; but the Ministers who performed this
Work, were never seen any more, but were swallowed by the Lake, and the Goddess
restored again by her Priest to her Grove.

XXV. The old Saracens worshipped the Sun under the shape of a half naked Man
set upon a Pillar, whose Head and Face was all beset with fiery Rays, holding
on his Breast a flaming Wheel, by which they signified the Sun's Heat, Light,
and Motion. They worshipped the Moon under the form of a Woman, with a short
Coat, and a Hood with long Ears, with the Picture of the Moon before her
Breast; they gave her also piked Shoos: the reason whereof might possibly be
this, if I may have leave to conjecture; They gave her a short Coat to show the
swiftness of her Motion, for a long Coat signifies a slow Motion; therefore
they painted Saturn, whose motion is the slowest of all the Planets, with a
long Coat. The Hood or Chapron with long Ears, was to represent her Horns, or
else to show that Sounds are heard afar off in the Night, which is the time of
her Dominion. Her piked Shoos may also resemble her Horns. But now having gone
through all the Idolatries of all Nations of the World, both Ancient and
Modern, it is now high time to give some account of Christianity and it is
Division into several Schisms, Sects, and Superstitions.

XXVI. Christianity, which is the Doctrine of Salvation, delivered to Man by
Christ Jesus, the Son of God, who assuming our Nature of a pure Virgin, taught
the Jews the true way to Happiness, confirming his Doctrine by Signs and
Miracles, at length sealed it with his Blood; and so having suffered Death for
our Sins, and rose again for our Justification, he ascended to his Father,
leaving twelve Apostles behind him to propagate this Doctrine through the
World, which they did accordingly, confirming their Words with Miracles and
their own Blood; and so this Light of the Gospel scattered all the Fogs and
Mists of Gentile Superstition, at the sight of this Ark of the new Covenant,
the Dagon of Idolatry fell to the ground. When this Lion of the Tribe of Judah
did roar, all the Beasts of the Forest, that is, the Pagan Idols, or Devil
rather, hid themselves in their Dens. Apollo complained that his Oracles failed
him, and that the Hebrew Child had stopped his Mouth. When it was proclaimed at
Palotci by Thanas the Egyptian Ship-Master, that the great God Pan was dead,
all the Evil Spirits were heard to howl and bewail the Overthrow of their
Kingdom. Porphyri complained, that the Preaching of Christ had weakened the
Power of their Gods, and hindered the Gain of their Priests. The Bones of
Babylas so hindered Apollo, that he could deliver no Oracle while they were
there. The Delphick Temple fell down with Earthquake and Thunder when Julian
sent to consult with the Oracle. Such was the irresistible Power of the
two-edged Sword which came out of Christ's Mouth, that nothing was able to
withstand it. The little Stone cut out of the Mountain without Hands, smote the
great Image of Nebuchadnezzar, and brake it in pieces. To the Doctrine of
twelve poor Fishermen did the great Potentates of the World submit their
Scepters. Thus the Stone which the Builders refused became the head of the
Corner. The terrible Beast, which with his iron Teeth destroyed all the other
Beasts, is destroyed by the weakness of preaching; against which, the more the
Roman Empire strugled the more it was foiled, and found by Experience, that the
blood of Martyrs was the Seed of the Church, which conquered the great
Conquerours, not with acting, but with suffering; not by the Sword but by the
Word; and more by their Death than by their Life: like so many Sampsons
triumphing over these Philistines in their Death and Torments. But long did it
not continue in it is Splendor and Purity: Heresy and Persecution did quickly
break in upon it. Persecution first beginning under Nero, and continued with
all the Barbarity imaginable under his Successors: but Heresy broke forth much
sooner, and made way for Mahumetanism.

XXVII. The first Heretic was Simon, called Magus, because he was a Witch; a
Samaritan by Birth, and a Christian by Profession; he would have bought the
Gifts of the Holy Ghost for Money, Act. 8.13. He denied the Trinity, and
affirmed himself to be the true God: he taught that the World was made by the
Angels, not by God; and that Christ came not into the World, nor did he truly
suffer: he denied also the Resurrection of the Flesh, and permitted promiscuous
Marriages: he likewise affirmed, that the true God was never known to the
Patriarchs and Prophets. Besides these impious Opinions, he held Magic and
Idolatry lawful: he gave to the Angels barbarous Names: he slighted the Law of
Moses, as being not from God; and blasphemously denied the Holy Ghost to be a
Substance, but a bare Virtue or Operation: and caused his Disciples to worship
his Whore Helena, or Selena, for a Goddess.

XXVIII. 2. Nicholas, of whom are the Nicholaitans, was a Proselite of Antioch,
and one of the seven Deacons mentioned Acts 6. He had a most beautiful Wife,
and being upbraided by the Apostles that he was jealous of her, he brought her
out before them, and to clear himself, gave her Liberty to marry to whom she
pleased; neither did he afterward marry any other, but taught his Sons and his
Daughters to follow Chastity. But certain perverse men, who boasted that they
were his Followers, gave themselves to all Uncleanness, teaching that Men ought
to have their Wives in common: they scrupled not to eat of things offered to
Idols: at their Love Feasts they used to put out their Lights, and commit
promiscuous Adulteries with each others Wives. They said that not God but
Angels created the World. Not long did they retain this Name, but were called
Gnostics, from (...), Knowledge, as if therein they excelled other Men. They
taught also, that in faithful Men were two Souls, one holy, of the Divine
Substance, the other adventitious, by Divine Insufflation, common to Man and
Beasts. Their Doctrine began to spread about the beginning of Domitian's Reign,
after Christ fifty two Years.

XXIX. 3. Corinthus was a Jew by Birth, and circumcised, taught that all
Christians ought to be so also: he taught that it was Jesus that dyed and rose
again, but not Christ: he denied the Article of Eternal Life, and taught, that
the Saints should enjoy in Jerusalem carnal Delights, for one thousand Years:
he denied the Divinity of Christ, he owned no other Gospel but that of St.
Matthew, rejected Paul as an Apostate from the Law of Moses, and worshipped
Judas the Traitor: in most things they agreed with the Ebionites, so called
from Ebion a Samaritan: St. John would not enter the same Bath with the
pernicious Heretic Corinthus: but against his and the Heresy of Ebion, he
wrote his Gospel. He spread his Heresy in Domitian's time, about sixty two
Years after Christ.

XXXI. 4. Carpocrates, of whom came the Carpocratians, was born at Alexandria
in Egypt: he flourished about the Year of Christ 109. in the time of Antoninus
Pius. Eusebius accounts him the Father of the Gnostics, and says, That his
Followers gloried of charmed love Drinks, of devilish and drunken Dreams, of
ossistane and associate Spirits; and taught, That he who would attain to
Perfection in their Mysteries, must commit the most filthy Acts, nor could
they, but by doing evil, avoid the Rage of Evil Spirits. They said that Christ
was but a mere Man, and that only his Soul ascended into Heaven. They hold
Pythagorean Transmigration, but denied the Resurrection, They said, not God but
Satan, made this World; and that their Disciples should not publish their
abominable Mystery, they bored their right Ear with a Bodkin.

XXXI. 5. Valentinus an Egyptian, lived in the time of Antoninus Pius. When
Hyginus was Bishop of Rome, he began to spread his Heresy. He held that there
were many Gods, and that he that made the World was the Author of Death: that
Christ took Flesh from Heaven, and passed through the Virgin as Water through a
Pipe or Conduit. He said there were thirty Ages or Worlds; the last of which,
produced the Heaven, Earth, and Sea; out of the Imperfections of this Creator
were procreated diverse Evils; as Darkness from his Fear, evil Spirits out of
his Ignorance, out of his Tears Springs and Rivers, and out of his Laughter,
Light. They have Wives in common, and say that both Christ and the Angels have
Wives. They celebrated the Heathenish Festivals, were addicted to Magic, and
what not. This Heretic was of great Reputation in Rome, from whence he went to
Cyprus, and thence into Egypt.

XXXII. 6. Marcion (of whom came the Marcionites) was of Senope, a City of
Pontus, or Paphlagonia; being driven from Ephesus by St. John, he went to Rome:
he was the Son of a Bishop in Pontus, and by his Father exiled for Fornication:
being not received by the Brethren in Rome, he fell in with Cerdon, maintained
his Heresy, and became his Successor in the time of Marcus Antoninus
Philosophus, one hundred thirty three years after Christ. He held three Gods, a
visible, invisible, and a middle one; that the Body of Christ was only a
Phantasm; that Christ by his Descent into Hell, delivered thence Cain and the
Sodomites, and other Reprobates. He condemned the eating of Flesh, and the
married Life: he held that Souls only were saved, permitted Women to baptize,
and condemned all War as unlawful. Polycarpus called him the first begotten of
the Devil. Justin Martyr wrote a Book against him.

XXXIII. 7. Tutianus (whence came the Tutiani) was a Syrian by Birth, an
Orator, and familiar with Justin Martyr, under whom he wrote a profitable Book
against the Gentiles. He flourished one hundred forty two Years after Christ:
his Disciples were also called Eneratita, from (...), Temperance or Continence;
for they abstain from Wine, Flesh, or Marriage. When Justin Martyr was dead, he
composed his Tenants out of diverse others. He held that Adam after his Fall was
never restored to Mercy: that all Men are damned besides his Disciples: that
Women are made by the Devil. He condemned the Law of Moses, made use of Water
instead of Wine in the Sacrament, and denied that Christ was the Seed of David:
he wrote a Gospel of his own which he called Diatesseron; and spread his
Heresy through Pisidia and Cilicia.

XXXIV. 8. Montanus, Father of the Montanists. His Heresy began about one
hundred forty five Years after Christ: by Nation he was a Phrygian, and carried
about with him two Strumpets, Prisca and Maximilla, who fled from their
Husbands to follow him: these took upon them to prophecy, and their Dictates
were held by Montanus for Oracles; but at last, he and they, for Company,
hanged themselves: his Disciples, ashamed either of his Life or ignominious
Death, called themselves Cataphrygians. He confounded the Persons in the
Trinity, saying, That the Father suffered: he held Christ to be mere Man, and
gave out, that he himself was the Holy Ghost: his Disciples baptized the dead,
denied Repentance and Marriage, yet allowed of Incest. They trusted to
Revelations and Enthusiasms, and not to the Scripture. In the Eucharist they
mingled the Bread with the Blood of an Infant not a Year old. In Phrygia this
Heresy began, and spread it self over all Cappadocia.

XXXV. 9. Origin gave Name to the Origanists, whose Errors began to spread Anno
Dom. 247. under Aurelian the Emperor, and continued about three hundred thirty
four years. They were condemned first in the Council of Alexandria, two hundred
years after his death; and again in the fifth General Council of Constantinople
under Justinian the first. They held a Revolution of Souls from their estate
and condition after death into their Bodies again. They held the Devils and
Reprobates, after one thousand years, should be saved; That Christ and the holy
Church do no more see the Father than we see the Angels. That the Son is
co-essential with the Father, but not coeternal; because, say they, the Father
created both him and the Spirit; That Souls were created long before this
World, and for sinning in Heaven, were sent down into their Bodies, as into
Prisons; They did also overthrow the whole Historical truth of Scriptures by
their Allegories.

XXXVI. 10. Paulus Samosatenus, so called from Samosata near Euphrates, where
he was born; a man of infinite pride, commanding himself to be received as an
Angel. His Heresy broke out two hundred thirty two years after Christ, and
has continued in the Eastern Parts ever since. He held that Christ was merely
Man, and had no Being till his Incarnation; That the Godhead dwelt not in
Christ bodily, but as in the Prophets of old, by Grace and Efficacy; and that
he was only the external, not the internal Word of God, therefore they did not
baptize in his Name; for which the Council of Nice rejected their Baptism as
none, and ordered they should be rebaptized, who were baptized by them. He
denied the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, allowed Circumcision, took away such
Psalms as were sung in honor of Christ, and instead thereof ordered some in
honor of himself to be sung in Churches by Women. In the Synod of Antioch he
was convicted by Malchion a Presbyter, and condemned Anno 273. This Heresy was
also embraced by Photinus, Gelatian Bishop of Sirmium, and propagated by him
Anno 323. and thence they took the name of Photinians.

XXXVII. 11. Manis, a Persian by Birth, and a Servant by Condition, was Father
of the Manichoran Seat: he was flead alive for poisoning the King of Persia's
Son: yet his wicked Opinions raged in the World for three hundred and forty
Years after his Death. He held two Principals or Gods, one good one bad;
condemned eating of Flesh, Eggs, and Milk; held that God had Members, and was
substantially in every thing, how base soever, but was separate from them by
Christ's coming and the Elect Manichorans. He rejected the Old Testament, and
curtailed the New, by excluding Christ's Genealogy: he held, Christ was the
Serpent which deceived our first Parents, saying, that he feigned to dye, and
rose again; and that it was really the Devil who truly was crucified. He denied
the Resurrection, and held Transmigration: he affirmed that he was the
Comforter whom Christ promised to send. They worshipped the Sun, and Moon, and
other Idols: they condemned Marriages and permitted promiscuous Copulation:
they rejected Baptism as needless, and all works of Charity: they taught, that
our Will to Sin is natural, and not acquired by the Fall; that Sin is a
Substance, and not a Quality, communicated from Parents to their Children: they
say they cannot sin; deny the last Judgment; and affirm that their Souls shall
be taken up to the Globe of the Moon.

XXXVIII. 12. Arrius, whence sprung the Arrians, was a Lybian by Birth, by
Profession a Presbyter of Alexandria. His Heresy brake out two hundred and
ninety Years before Christ, and overran a great part of the Christian World.
They held Christ to be a Creature, that he had a Man's Body, but no humane
Soul, the Divinity supplying the room thereof; they also held the Holy Ghost a
Creature, proceeding from a Creature, that is, Christ: their Doxology was,
Glory be to the Father, by the Son, in the Holy Ghost: they re-baptize the
Orthodox Christians. This Heresy was condemned by the Council of Nice, under
Constantine; and Arrius himself, in the midst of his Pomp, seized with a
Disentery, voided his Guts in the Draught, and so dyed.

XXXIX. 13. Macedonius, Bishop of Constantinople, gave Name to the Macedonians.
They held that the Holy Ghost was a Creature, and the Servant of God; and that
by the Holy Spirit was meant only a Power created by God, and communicated to
the Creatures. This Heresy sprung up, or rather, was stiffly maintained under
Constantius, the Son of Constantine, three hundred and twelve Years after
Christ; and was condemned in the second Occumenical Council at Constantinople,
under Theodosius the Great. Macedonius himself being deprived by the Arrian
Bishops, died private at Pylas.

XL. 14. The Aerians, so called from Aerius the Presbyter, who lived under
Valentinian, the first three hundred and forty Years after Christ: he held that
there was no difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter; that Bishops could
not ordain, that there should be no set or anniversary Feasts; and they
admitted none to their Communion but such as were continent and had renounced
the World: they were also called Sillabici, as standing captiously upon Words
and Syllables. The occasion of his maintaining his Heresy was, his Resentment
that Eustathius was preferred before him to a Bishopric.

XLI. 15. Florinus, or Florianus, a Roman Presbyter, lived under Commodus the
Roman Emperor, one hundred fifty three Years after Christ: hence came the
Floriani: They held that God made Evil, and was the Author of Sin; whereas
Moses tells us, that all things which he made were very good. They retained
also the Jewish manner of keeping Easter, and their other Ceremonies.

XLII. 16. Lucifer, Bishop of Caralitanum in Sardinia, gave Name to the
Luciferians. He lived under Julian the Apostate, three hundred thirty three
Years after Christ. He taught that this World was made by the Devil: that Men's
Souls are corporal, and have their Being by Propagation or Tradition: they
denied to the Clergy that fell any place for Repentance; neither did they
restore Bishops, or inferior Clerks to their Dignities, if they fell into
Heresy, tho they afterward repented.

XLIII. 17. Tertullian, that famous Lawyer and Divine, was the Leader of the
Tertullianists. He lived under Severus the Emperor, about one hundred and
seventy Years after Christ. Being excommunicated by the Roman Clergy as a
Montanist, he fell into these Heretical Tenets, That God was corporal, but
without declination of Members; that Men's Souls were not only corporal but also
distinguished into Members, and have corporal Dimensions, and increase and
decrease with the Body: that the original of Souls is by Traduction: that Souls
of wicked Men, after Death, are converted into Devils: That the Virgin Mary,
after Christ's Birth, did marry once. They bragged much of the Paraclete or
Spirit, which they said was poured on them in greater measure than on the
Apostles: they condemned War amongst Christians; and rejected second Marriages
as no better than Adultery.

XLIV. 18. Nestorius, born in Germany, and by fraud made Patriarch of
Constantinople, was the Head of the Nestorians. He broached his Heresy under
Theodosius the Younger, four hundred Years after Christ. He taught that in
Christ were two distinct Persons, the Son of God, and the Son of Mary; that is,
the Son of God in Christ's Baptism, descended into the Son of Mary, and dwelt
there as a Lodger in a House: he made the Humanity of Christ equal with his
Divinity, and so confounded their Properties and Operations. A great part of
the Eastern Bishops were of his Persuasion. His Heresy was condemned in the
Council of Ephesus, under Theodosius the Younger, in which Cyril, Bishop of
Alexandria, was President, and the Author Nestorius deposed, and banished into
the Thebean Deserts, where his blasphemous Tongue was eaten out with Worms.
Zeno the Emperor razed to the Ground the School in Edessa called Persica,
where the Nestorian Heresy was taught.

XLV. 19. Eutyches, Abbot of Constantinople, from whence came the Eutychians,
in the Year after Christ, 413. set forth his Heresy, holding Opinions quite
contrary to Nestorius, to wit, That Christ, before the Union, had two distinct
Natures, but after the Union, only one, to wit, the Divinity, which swallowed
up the Humanity; so confounding the Properties of the two Natures, affirming,
that the Divine Nature suffered and died, and that God, the Word, did not take
from the Virgin Humane Nature. This Heresy, condemned first in a Provincial
Synod at Constantinople, was set up again by Dioscarus, Bishop of Alexandria;
at last condemned in the General Council of Chalcedon, under Marcian the
Emperor.

XLVI. 20. Eunonius, Bishop of Cyzicum, embraced the Heresy of Arrius: he said
blasphemously, God of his Essence understands no more than we do; whatsoever
we know of it the same knows he; and look what his Capacity reaches to, the
same thou shall find in us his Followers; rebaptized Orthodox, Professors, and
baptized in the Name of the Father uncreated, the Son created, and the Holy
Ghost created by the Son. They affirmed the Trinity to be three different
Substances, as Gold, Silver, and Brass. He was a Cappadocian by Birth, and
lived under Valens the Emperor.

XLVII. 21. Novatus, Father of the Novatians, was an African born: he lived
under Decius the Emperor, after Christ two hundred and twenty Years; his
Heresy lasted one hundred forty eight Years. They denied Repentance to those
who fell after Baptism: they bragged much of their Sanctity and good Works:
they condemned second Marriages as adulterous, and used Rebaptization as the
Donatists. He was a Priest of Carthage, and Father of the Cathari or Puritans.

XLVIII. 22. Donatus (whence arose the Donatists) was a Numidian; who, because
Cicilianus was preferred before him to the Bishopric of Carthage, accused him,
and all the Bishops that ordained him, to be Traditores, that is, such as had
delivered their Bibles to be burnt by Idolaters, under the Persecution of
Maximinus. Though this Accusation was found faulty, yet Donatus continued
obstinate, and separated himself and Congregation from all others, accounting
that no Church where any spot of Infirmity was to be found; that such a pure
Church was only amongst them; yet they would have no man forced to a godly
Life: they slighted the Magistracy, and would not suffer them to punish
Heretics: they held the Efficacy of the Sacraments too upon the dignity of the
Minister: they rebaptized all that were admitted to their Communion; they held
it no Sin to kill themselves rather than to fall into the hands of the
Magistrate, and scrupled not to kill such as were not of their Faith: they used
certain magical Purifications, and bragged of Enthusiasms and Revelations. With
the Arrians, they made the Son less than the Father, and the Holy Ghost than
the Son. The Circumc^lliones were part of these, who lived in Cells and Caves,
and murdered all they met that were not of their Religion.

XLIX. 23. Pelagius, a Britain by Birth, and a Monk at Rome, was the
Ringleader of the Pelagians: he was afterward a Presbyter under Theodosius
the Younger, three hundred eighty two Years after Christ: thence he went into
England, and poisoned the whole Island with his Opinions, which were such as
these; That Death was not the Wages of Sin, but that Adam should have dyed
though he had not sinned: that Adam's Sin was hurtful only to himself, and not
to his Posterity: that Concupiscence was no sin: that Infants did not draw
original Sins from their Parents: that Infants might be saved without Baptism:
that they should have eternal Life, but out of the Kingdom of God: that Man,
after the Fall, had free Will to do good, and ascribed no more to Grace, but
that by it we had our Nature, and that by our good Works we obtain Grace: they
also rejected the Doctrine of Predestination: they say the number of the Elect
may be increased or diminished: that Faith is by Nature, but the increase of it
from God, and that Charity is from Men. They hold that their elect ones have no
Sin, nor can sin if they would: that the Concupiscence of the Flesh is from
God, and that rich Men that are baptized cannot be saved unless they give away
all that they have. Celestinus and Julianus were his chief Followers in these
Errors. St. Augustine and Alypyus, his Friend, wrote against them. They were
condemned by five African Councils, and also by a sixth Synod at Carthage, Anno
Christi 419. in the tenth Year of Honorius.

L. 24. Priscillianus, a Spaniard, some say a Galatian, Father of the
Priscillianists, under Gratian the Emperor, spread his Heresy first in Spain,
three hundred forty Years after Christ: from thence, like a Canker, it ran
through all the West. This Heresy was made up of former Heresy: for, with the
Manichees, he held the World was made by an evil God: with the Sabellians, he
confounded the Persons of the Trinity: with the Origanists, he held the
Pre-existence of Souls: with Astrologers, that all humane Events depended upon
the Stars: with the Stoics, that we sin necessarily and coactively: with the
Enaratites, they abstained from Flesh: and with the Gnostics, they rejected
the ancient Prophets, as ignorant of the Will of God. He was condemned in his
Absence by the Synod of Aquitane: but at his Return into Spain he troubled all
things. At last he was put to death with Felicissimus, Armenius, Latronianus,
and Euchocia, his Companions. Priscillianus himself confessed unto Euclius the
Prafect, That he kept Conventicles in the Night with filthy Women, and that he
used to pray amongst them. He was condemned of Heresy at Rome by Damasus, from
whom he appealed to the Emperor Maximus, who put him to Death. His Body was
carried into Spain by his Party, by whom he was esteemed, first as a Saint,
then as a Martyr; insomuch, that at last, in matters of Religion, they used to
swear by his Name.

LI. Apollinaris, Presbyter in Loadicea, was the Author of the Apollinarists:
he divided Christ's Humanity, affirming, That he assumed Man's Body, and a
sensitive Soul, but not the reasonable, or intellective Soul of Man, because
that was supplied by the Divinity. Instead of the Trinity they acknowledge only
three distinct degrees of Power in God; the greatest is the Father, the lesser
is the Son, and the least of all the Holy Ghost. They held that Christ's Soul
was consubstantial with his Divinity, and that he took not his Flesh from the
Virgin but brought it from Heaven: that Christ had but one Will: that Souls did
propagate others, and that after the Resurrection, the Ceremonial-Law should be
kept as before. This Heresy brake out three hundred and fifty Years after
Christ, under Valens the Emperor. It was confuted in the Roman Synod by
Damasus Bishop of Rome, and Petrus Bishop of Alexandria; and in the Synod at
Constantinople utterly condemned and exploded.

LII. The Adamians or Adamites, so called either from one Adam their Author, or
from Adam the first Man, whose Nakedness they imitate, sprung up shortly after
the Gnostics, and were called Prodiciani, from one Prodicus, whom they
followed: of this Sect there be many extant at this day. They held it unlawful
for Men or Women to wear Clothes in their Congregation and Assemblies, seeing
their Meetings were the only Paradise on Earth, where they were to have Life
Eternal, and not in Heaven; as Adam then in his Paradise, so Christians in
theirs should be naked, and not clothed with the Badges of their Sin and
Shame. They rejected Marriages as diabolical, therefore they used promiscuous
Copulation in the dark: they rejected also all Prayers to God, seeing he knew
without us what we wanted.

LIII. The Elcesei, so called from Elcesa an Impostor, and Sampsei from a
spotted kind of Serpent, which they represented in their changeable
Dispositions, were much addicted to Judicial Astrology and Sooth-saying. They
held two Priests, one below, made of the Virgin, a mere man, and one above:
they confound Christ with the Holy Ghost, and sometimes they call him Christ's
Sister, but in a masculine Name, to both which Persons they give Longitude,
Latitude, and Locality. To Water they ascribe a Divinity, and so they did to
two Whores, Marthus and Marthana, the Dust of whose Feet, and Spittle, they
worshipped as holy Relics: they had a certain Apocrypha Book, the reading
whereof procured Remission of Sins; and they held it no Sin to deny Christ in
time of Persecution. This Heresy began to spread about two hundred and ten
Years after Christ, under Gordian the Emperor.

LIVE. The Valesians, so called from one Valens, an Arabian, who out of the
Doctrine of the Gnostics or Tatians, condemned Marriage and Procreation.
Therefore his Scholars, after the Example of Origin, gelded themselves,
thinking none can enter into Heaven but Eunuchs: whereas the Eunuchs Christ
speaks of be such as by Continence subdue the Lusts of the Flesh. This Heresy
springing under Julianus Philippus, Emperor, about the Year of Christ, two
hundred and sixteen.

LV. The Heicitae professed a Monastical Life; but withal, taught that the
Service of God consisted in holy Dances, and singing with the Nuns, after the
Example of Moses and Miriam, Exodus 15. upon the overthrow of Pharaoh in the Red
Sea. Gnosimachi were Haters and Despisers of all Learning or Book-Knowledge;
teaching that God required nothing from us but a good Life. Of these we have
too many in this Age. But Christ tells us, that Life Eternal consists in
Knowledge; and God complains by the Prophet, that his People perish for want
of Knowledge: So Christ shows, that Destruction fell on Jerusalem, because
she knew not her day; and the Lord complained, that his People had less
Knowledge than the Ox or the Ass: therefore God has given Lips to the Priest
to preserve Knowledge; and Christ, by his own Knowledge, has justified many,
says the Prophet. The Armenii taught that the Holy Ghost proceeded only from
the Father, and not from the Son: that Christ rose from the dead on the Sabbath
day, whereas the Scripture tells us plainly, that he arose the third day. They
observed also the Jewish Sacrifices: they used first to baptize the Cross, then
to worship it: they taught, it was not Man that sinned, but Satan, by tempting
him; and, that Man had not propagated by carual Copulation if he had not sinned
They denied Original Sin, and held, that all who dyed before Christ were damned
for Adam's Sin: they ascribed no Efficacy to the Sacraments, and yet held
Baptism absolutely necessary: they placed the Children of unbaptized Infants,
if they were of faithful Parents, in earthly Paradise; if of unfaithful, in
Hell: they never baptized without administering the Eucharist: they held Baptism
without Crism ineffectual: they used Rebaptization: they permitted the Husband
to dissolve Matrimony when he pleased, and denied Prayers for the Dead, and the
Eternity of Hell Fire; and that the Souls were not in Bliss till the
Resurrection; and taught, that then there should be no Women at all, but that
they should be converted into Men. Chazinzarii were so called from Chazus,
which in their Language signifies the Cross: for, they taught that the Cross
was only to be worshipped; therefore they were named Cross-Worshippers: they
professed all Nestorianism. The Thnetopsychitae held, that the Souls dyed with
the Bodies. Theocatus Nostor were such as reprehended some of God's Actions and
Words. Ethnophrones were Paganising Christians, who with Christianity taught
Gentile Superstition. But passing over the rest, let us pass on to Mahomet, the
greatest of all Impostors.

The Life of Mahomet.
SOME Men have brave Names, but mean Actions; some brave Actions and mean
Names; and some both brave Names and Actions. In the first number Mahomet may
not be unfitly reckoned, who in excellency of Name was second to none, and yet
in depravity of Manners had few Equals: for, we are assured by the learned in
the Arabian Language, that Mahomet comes of a Word signifying Praise and
Honor, and that this Notation of his Name was but a Presage of his future
Actions, whereby he merited and purchased both. Others say, Mahomet imports
Thanksgiving; which is to be understood with respect to their Duty of
Gratitude, who believe he procured great Benefits for them. And that there
might want nothing of lucky Abodement in the Name of this great Impostor, some
of his flattering Doctors paraphrase it by a Man of Desires. But, be his name
what it will, we shall proceed to give an account of the Life of this Impostor,
according as we find it written by the Saracens themselves.

The Book of the Generation of Mahomet, the Messenger of God, (the Prayer and
Salvation of God be upon him) from Adam and Eve to the time when God brought
him forth gracious, perfect, and fit for himself. When as Rabachbar had learned
out of the Scriptures, and by Astrology, that this Prophet should be born to
the World, he heard that there was a Man born in Jeseras, a City of Arabia,
having all such Marks and Tokens as he had foreseen by the Prophesies and his
Arts; viz. a spot on his Forehead, a print between his Shoulders, etc. and to
satisfy his desire, he went thither to see; where finding those Tokens
fulfilled in young Mahomet, he thereupon expounded the dark Mystery of his
far-fetched Light, learned of his Master Kabelmedi, in this manner: When Adam
was newly created, as he stood up his Brain shaked, and made a Noise, as the
Leaves do which are shaken with the Wind; whereat Adam wondering, God said unto
him, The sound which thou have heard is the sign of the Prophets and Messengers
of my Commandments; take heed therefore that thou commit this Seed of Light
only to worthy Loins, and to a clean Womb: and this Light of Mahomet that
should be born, shined from the face of Adam, as the Sun, or Moon at the full.
And when he had begotten Seth, that Light passed instantly from the Face of
Adam into the Face of Eve, insomuch that the Birds of the Air, and Beasts of
the Earth, wondered at her Beauty: yea, the Angels every day saluted her, and
brought her Odours out of Paradise, till she brought forth Seth alone, having
before at every Burden brought forth a Brother and a Sister.

Seth inherited this Light, which remained between Heaven and Earth, the Angels
thereby ascending and descending upon Seth, and crying always, Rejoice thou
Earth, worthy of the Light of Mahomet, on him be Prayer and Salvation of God.
Adam drawing near to his end, declared unto him, by his Testament, the
Mysteries of that Light, and the Genealogy of the Prophets. Then descended
Gabriel, accompanied with threescore and ten thousand Angels, bearing every one
of them a white Leaf and a Pen, which signed the Writing for the Continuance of
the Order of the prophetical Generation. Seth received this Writing, and was
clothed with a double red Garment, shining as the Sun, as soft as the Violet
Flower.

From him it passed by Succession to Noah and Sem; then to Abraham, at whose
Birth two Lights from the East and West (meeting in the midst) lightened the
whole World; and the Angels were heard singing, that it was the light of the
Prophet Mahomet, who should be born of his Seed, whose Words should be the
virtue of God. This Light passed from Abraham to the face of Hagar, being with
Child, and after to Ishmael; and God told him, that the Soul of Mahomet in the
beginning of the Creation, was mingled with his, and that his name in Heaven
should be Asmet, in Earth Mahomet, and in Paradise Abvaltrazim. At this Sarah
grieved, until three Angels comforted her with the Promise of Isaac. From
Ishmael it removed to Keydar his Son, who being endued with seven Gifts,
married Nulta of the Land of Isaac; but being warned by an Oracle, he took to
Wife Algadira, an Arabian, and after, by divine warning, carried the Chest of
this Light unto Jacob. Then was Hamel born to him, and received the same Light;
in which, succeeded Thebickt, Hamiessa, Adoth, Adure, Adne, Machat, Nizar,
Musar, Aliez, Madraca, Hoocima, Knieva, Anofro, Melic, Falhrem, Luic, Galiben,
Kab, Murran, Cudai, Abdamenef, Hesim, a man by divine Testimony free of all
uncleanness. To him did all Kings offer their Daughters in Marriage, and
amongst the rest Constantine, which he refused, and married Selina, the
Daughter of Geit, and had by her Abdalmutalib, whose Light caused Rain in the
Drought. To him an Elephant prostrated himself, and said with Man's Voice,
Selvation be on you, and on the Light that shines out of your Reins. Divinity,
Fame, Honor, and Victory, be on you, and that there should proceed from him a
King greater than all the Kings of the Earth. Another time, as he slept on the
Stone which was placed by Abraham, in his Oratory at Mecca, he dreamed of a
Chain reaching East and West, and to Heaven, and to the Depth, which was
presently converted into a flourishing Herb. Noe and Abraham presented
themselves Interpreters of this dream. Abdalla's Son, the Father of Mahomet,
had a Tutor given unto him to defend him from his Enemies, who seemed a Man,
but was none. He was preserved from the lying in wait of the Jews, by
threescore and ten Angels, which seemed men. He wedded Hermina, and therefore
two hundred Women perished for his love, some hanging, some burning themselves.

When the prescribed time was come, in the Month Dulheia, on a Friday night,
God bad Ariduran to open the Gates of Paradise, that the innermost of his
Secrets might be manifested: for it pleases me, said he, this night to
transport the Light of my Prophet from the Reins of Abdalla into the Womb of
Hermina, and that it come into the World. This being done, as Abdalla, the
Judge and Lord of the Arabians, went into the House of Prayer, he perceived a
great Light to lighten from his House up toward Heaven, and presently died. On
the twelfth day of Rab, on a Tuesday Mahomet was circumcised, and all frolic.
And then all Idols fell, and became black; all Kingdoms were destroyed, and not
one stood upright. Lucifer was cast into the bottom of the Sea, and in forty
days could not get out, and then called his Fellows, and told them, that
Mahomet was born with the power of the Sword, who should take away all their
Power. The same also God caused to be proclaimed in Heaven and Earth. His
Mother said, that she was delivered of him without pain; and Angelical Birds
came to nourish the Child, and a man clothed in white presented him with three
Keys, like to Pearls, which he took; the Key of Victory, they Key of the Laws,
and the Key of Prophecy. And after came three Persons with shining Faces,
presenting him with a Caldron of Emeralds, with four handles, which Mahomet
accepted as a sign of his Rule over all the World. The Birds, Clouds, Winds,
Angels, contended, for the nourishment of the Child. But the case was
determined by Heavenly Voice, affirming that he should not be taken from the
hands of men. An Ass almost famished worshipped him, and receiving him on her
back, became Herald to this new Prophet, with man's voice proclaiming the
worthiness of her Carriage. Three men carried him up into a Mountain: of which,
one opened him from the Breast unto the Navil, and washed his Entrails with
Snow: the second cleared his Heart in the midst, and took out of it a black
grain, saying, that it was the portion of the Devil. The third made him whole
again. Seraphin nourished him three years, and Gabriel nine and twenty, who
gave unto him, in the fortieth year of his age, the Law, and carried him to
Heaven.

Afterward, Gabriel, with threescore and ten pair of Wings, came to Mahomet,
in the Chamber of Aissa, his best beloved Wife, and said, that God would have
him to visit him where he is, and brought with him the Beast Elmparac, or
Albarach of nature between a Mule and an Ass. This Beast told Mahomet, that he
would not take him on his back until he had prayed God for him. His steps were
as far as one could see, so that in the twinkling of an Eye, he had brought
Mahomet to Jerusalem. Then Gabriel with his Girdle tied the Beast to a Rock,
and carried Mahomet on his shoulders into Heaven, where he knocked, and the
Porter opened. Here Mahomet saw footsteps of Angels, and prayed twice on his
knees for them: and amongst the rest, old Father Adam, rejoicing for such a
Son, and commending him to his Prayers. Then he brought him to the second
Heaven, which was a Journey of five hundred years; and so forth on to the
seventh Heaven: Here he saw the Angelical People, every one of which was a
thousand times greater than the World, and every of them had threescore and ten
thousand Heads, and every Head threescore and ten thousand Mouths, and every
Mouth seventeen hundred Tongues, praying to God in seven hundred thousand
Languages. And he saw one Angel weeping, and he asked the cause, who answered,
that he was Sin: and Mahomet prayed for him. Then Gabriel commended him to
another Angel, and he to another, and so forth in order, till he came before
God and his Throne. Then God, whose Face was covered with threescore and ten
thousand Clothes of Light, and from whom Mahomet stood two stones cast below,
touched him with his Hand, the Coldness whereof pierced to the Marrow of of his
Backbone; and God said, I have imposed on thee and on thy People, Prayers.
When he was returned as far as the fourth Heaven, Moses counseled him to
return back, to obtain ease unto the People, which could not bear so many
Prayers; which he did oftentimes, till there remained but few. Thus returning
to his Elmparac, he rode back to his House at Mecca: all this was done in the
tenth part of the Night. But when he was requested to do thus much in the
Peoples sight, he answered, Praised be God, I am a Man, and an Apostle.

The Book Ascar tells further, that in this Journey Mahomet heard a Woman's
Voice, crying, Mahomet, Mahomet, but he held his Peace: Afterward another
called him, but he gave no Answer, Mahomet asked the Angel who they were? He
answered, that the one was she which published the Jews Law, and if he had
answered her, all his Disciples should have been Jews; the other was she which
delivered the Gospel, whom if he had answered, all his Followers had been
Christians.

The said Book tells, that God gave him a five-fold Privilege: first, that
he should be the highest Creature in Heaven or Earth; secondly, the most
excellent of the Sons of Adam; thirdly, an universal Redeemer; fourthly,
skilful in all Languages; fifthly, that the Spoils of Wars should be given him.
Gabriel after, says that Book, carried him to Hell, to see the Secrets
thereof, and the seven Gates thereof, etc. where (as in the place fittest for
him) we will leave him. The Book of the Virtues of Mahomet says, that in
glorying Mahomet Comunicating his Doctrine to the People. with their Pilgramage
to Mecca Page 50

of his Strength, he would boast, that he had known his eleven Wives
successively in one hour.

One of their Chronicles tells of his Martial Affairs. This Chronicle, from
Adam to Noe, one thousand two hundred two and forty years; from thence to
Abraham, one thousand and fourscore; thence to Moses, five hundred and fifteen;
after him to David, five hundred threescore and nine; and from this time to
Christ, one thousand three hundred and fifty: from whence to Mahomet is numbered
six hundred and twenty; in all, five thousand three hundred threescore and
sixteen from Adam to Mahomet. All the Prophets were in number an hundred and
twenty thousand, and the Messengers of God three hundred and fifteen: whereas
Adam, Seth, Esdrik, Noe, Abraham, were Hebrews, Huth, Scale, Ishmael, Schaib,
Mahomet, were Arabians.

But to leave these fabulous, nay, blasphemous Relations, it is convenient to
entertain the Reader with a true account of the Life of this infamous Impostor.

The Life of MAHOMET, according to the truth.
BY Birth he was of Jathrip, an obscure Village, then not far from Medina; his
Father called Abdalla, an Idolatrous Pagan, his Mother named Hemina, as
perverse a Jewess. Deprived of both his Parents when but two years old, he was
left unto the care of an Uncle: who, not able to give him Education, nor
willing to be at the charge to keep him any longer, sold him at sixteen years
of age to the Ismaelites; by whom, exposed to sale in the open Markets, he was
bought by one Abdalmutalif, a Wealthy Merchant. By him employed at first in
Drudgery and servile Offices, till noting his great Wit, and fitness for better
Services, he at last used him as his Factor, sending him with his Camels, and
loads of Merchandise into Syria, Persia, Egypt, and other Places, wherein he
did behave himself with such dexterity, that he much increased his Master's
Wealth. and his own Estimation. Of Person, he is said to be low, and withal,
scald-headed; but otherwise comely to the Eye, and of good aspect: Much
troubled with the Fallingsickness, which Infirmity he made good use of
afterward, affirming, that those Fits were nothing but Heavenly Raptures, in
which he did converse with the Angel Gabriel. He is said to have been also well
skilled in Magic, by which he taught a white Pidgeon to feed at his Ear, which
he gave out to be the holy Ghost, by whom he was instructed in the Law which he
was to publish; but this not till afterward. By Sorceries, comeliness of
Person, and the great knowledge which he had in his Master's Business, he
gained so far on the Affections of his Mistress, that on the Death of
Abdalmutalif, she made him her Husband. Possessed of all his Master's Wealth,
he affected ease, and being till then of no Religion, or at best, a Pagan, he
began to hearken to Sergius, a Nestorian Monk, who flying out of Syria for fear
of punishment, (the Heresies of Nestorius being newly both revived and
censured) came into Arabia, where he found entertainment in the House of
Abdalmutalif, the Master of Mahomet. By his persuasions, finding him a fit
Instrument for the Devil to work on, he began to entertain the thoughts of
hammering out a new Religion, which might unite all Parties in some common
Principles, and bring the Christians, Jews, and Gentiles, (into which the World
was then divided) under one Profession. Resolved upon this, he retired himself
into a Cave not far from Mecca, as if he there attended nothing but Meditation;
Sergius in the mean time sounding in the Ears of the People, both his Parts and
Piety. The People being thus prepared to behold the Pageant, out comes the
Principal Actor with some parts of his Alcoran, (pleasing enough to sensual
minds) which he professed to have received from the Angel Gabriel. And finding
that this edified to his expectation, he next proclaimed Liberty to all Slaves
and Servants, as a thing commanded him by God, by whom the Natural Liberty of
Mankind was most dearly tendered; which drew unto him such a Rabble of unruly
People, that without fear or opposition he dispersed his Doctrines, reducing
them at last to a Book or Method.

The Book of this Religion he called the Alcoran, that is to say, the
Collection of Precepts; the Original whereof they feign to be written on a
Table which is kept in Heaven, and the Copy of it brought to Mahomet by the
Angel Gabriel. A Book so highly reverenced by the Mahometans, that they write
upon the Cover of it, Let none touch this but he that is clean. The Body of it
(as it now stands) was composed by Osman, the fourth Caliph, who seeing the
Saracens daily inclining to diverse Heresies, by reason of some false Copies of
Mahomet's Law, and that the Empire by the same means was likely to fall into
Civil Dissension; by the help of his Wife, who was Mahomet's Daughter, he got a
sight of all Mahomet's Papers, which he reduced unto four Volumes, and divided
into one hundred twenty and four Chapters; commanding expressly upon pain of
death, that that Book, and that only, should be received as Canonical through
his Dominions. The whole Body of it is but an Exposition and Gloss on the eight
Commandments.

1. Every one ought to believe that God is a great God, and one only God, and
Mahomet is his Prophet. They hold Abraham to be the Friend of God, Moses the
Messenger of God, and Christ the Breath of God; whom they deny to be conceived
by the Holy Ghost, affirming that the Virgin Mary grew with Child of him by
smelling to a Rose, and was delivered of him at her Breasts. They deny the
Mystery of the Trinity, but punish such as speak against Christ: whose Religion
was not (say they) taken away, but mended by Mahomet. And he who in his
Pilgrimage to Mecca, does not, coming or going, visit the Sepulcher of Christ,
is reputed not to have merited, or bettered himself any thing by his Journey.

2. Every one must marry, to increase the Sectaries of Mahomet. Four Wives he
allows to every man, and as many Concubines as he will, between whom the
Husband sets no difference, either in Affection or Apparel, but that his
Wives only can enjoy his Sabbath's benevolence. The Women are not admitted in
the time of their Lives to come into their Churches, nor after Death, to
Paradise: And whereas in most, or all other Countries, Fathers give some
Portions with their Daughters, the Mahometans give Money for their Wives; which
being once paid, the Contract is registered in the Cadies Book, and this is all
their formality of Marriage.

3. Every one must give of his Wealth to the Poor. Hence you shall have some
buy Slaves, and then manumit them; buy Birds, and then let them fly. They use
commonly to free Prisoners, release Bondslaves, build Caves or Lodgings in the
ways for the Relief of Passengers, repair Bridges, and mend Highways. But
their most ordinary Alms consist in Sacrifices of Sheep or Oxen, which, when
the Solemnity is performed, they distribute among the Poor, to whom also, on
the first day of every Year, they are bound to give the tithe, or tenth part of
their Gettings in the year foregoing; insomuch that you shall hardly find any
Beggars amongst them.

4. Every one must make his Prayers five times a day. When they pray, they turn
their Bodies toward Mecca, but their Faces sometimes one way, sometimes another
way, believing that Mahomet shall come behind them, being at their Devotions.
The first time is an hour before Sunrising; the second, at Noonday; the
third, at three of the clock in the Afternoon; the fourth, at Sunsetting; the
fifth and last before they go to sleep. At all these times the Cryers kept a
bawling in the Steeples (for the Turks and Saracens have no Bells) for the
People to come to Church. And such as cannot come, must when they hear the
voice of the Cryers, fall down in the place where they are, do their Devotions,
and kiss the Ground thrice.

5. Every one must keep a Lent one Month in the year. This Lent is called
Ramazan, in which they suppose the Alcoran was given to Mahomer by the Angel
Gabriel. This Fast is only intended in the Bay-time, the Law giving leave to
frolic in the Night, as they best please, for they abstain from Wine and
Swines-Flesh, prohibited in their Law at all times, but never so punctually
abstained from as in the time of their Lent.

6. Be Obedient to thy Parents. Which Law is the most neglected of any in all
the Alcoran; never any Children being so unnatural as the Turkish.

7. Thou shall not Kill. And this they heep inviolated among themselves, but
the poor Christians are sare to feel the Smart of their Fury: And, as if by
this Law the actual shedding of Blood only were prohibited, they have invented
Punishments for their Offenders worse than Death it self. As first, the
Strappado, which is hanging of them by the Arms drawn backwards: when they are
so bound, they are drawn up on high, and let down again with a violent swing,
which unjoynteth all their Back and Arms. Secondly, they use to hoise up their
Heels, and with a great Cudgel to give them three or four hundred blows on the
Soles of their Feet. Thirdly, it is ordinary to draw them naked up to the top
of a Gibbet or Tower, full of Hooks, and cutting the Rope to let them fall down
again; and by the way they are caught by force of the Hooks, where they
commonly hang till they die for Hunger.

8. Do unto others as thou would be done unto thyself. To those that keep
these Laws he promises Paradise, a place of all Delights, adorned with Flowery
Fields, watered with Chrystalline Rivers, beautified with Trees of Gold, under
whose cool shade they shall spend their time with Amorous Virgins, whose
Mansions shall not be far distant. The Man shall never exceed the Age of
thirty, nor the Woman of fifteen; and those to have their Virginity renewed, as
fast as lost.

Friday He ordained to be the Sabbath, partly to distinguish his followers from
the Jews and Christians, who solemnize the days ensuing; but principally
because he was on that day proclaimed King or Emperor, and solemnly so
created. Wine and Swines-flesh are the principal things forbidden by the
Alcoran: from the last whereof they all unanimously refrain; but on the first
they are so sotted, that when they come at it they seldom go home again unled:
Insomuch that all the Wines in Constantinople have been thrown about the
Streets, and Death made the Penalty for any that will presume to bring any more
into the City. Mahomet taught them, that every one should be saved by his own
Religion, him only excepted, that revolted from the Alcoran to another Law but
so, that under the Notion of Religion, he means only such as Worship the one
and only God, excluding by that means the Old Idolaters of the Gentiles from
the hopes of Salvation. And he taught too, that at the end of the World, all
men that professed any such Religion, should go into Paradise, the Jews under
the Banner of Moses; the Christians under the Banner of Christ, and the
Saracens under the Banner of Mahomet. They compel no man therefore to abjure
the Faith to which he was Born, but commend and approve secretly such as they
find Zealous and Constant in their own Religion; yet holding it an especial
Honor to have daily new Prosolytes; they incite them by hope of Freedom and
Preferment, which with many are motives too much prevailing. Hence I have heard
many say, that it is better for a man that would enjoy liberty of Conscience,
to live in the Countries professing Mahometanism than Papistry: for in the one
he shall never be free from the Bloody Inquisition; in the other he is never
molested, if he meddle not with their Law, their Wives, or their Slaves.

The Opinions which they hold concerning the end of the World, are very
ridiculous; as, That at the winding of a Horn, not all Flesh only, but the
Angels themselves shall die; that the Earth with an Earthquake shall be kneaded
together like a lump of Dough; that a second blast of the same Horn shall after
forty days restore all again; that Cain shall be the Captain or Ringleader of
the Damned, who shall have the Countenance of Dogs and Swine; that they shall
pass over the Bridge of Justice, laden with their Sins in Satchels, that the
greater Sinners shall fall into Hell, the lesser into Purgatory only; with a
thousand the like Fopperies, which is needless to add here, considering that
the Alcoran it self is now extant in English, and every one that lists may read
it. A thing so full of Tautologies, incoherencies, and such gross absurdities,
of so impure and carnal mixture, that he must lay aside the use of his natural
Reason who is taken by it, if Force, Ambition, or want of a Christian Education
do not lead him on. For if we seriously look into the causes of the deplorable
exercise and long continuance of this Religion, we shall find them to be
chiefly these. 1. The greatness of the Victories gotten by the Saracens, who
easily compelled the conquered Nations to receive their Law. 2. The great zeal
and diligence of the Arabians themselves, who being a numerous People, and much
given to Merchandise, have possessed themselves of all the Seacoasts of
Africa, from the Streights o Babel-mandel, almost as far as to the Cape of Good
Hope; of all the Islands in those Seas, and many Facto ries and good Towns on
the Coasts of India: In all which they have settled their Religion also, as a
thing inseparable from their Nation, 3. A peremptory Restraint of all
Disputation in any point of Religion, whatsoever it be. 4. The suppressing of
Philosophy, and the study of Humane Sciences; the light whereof, might easily
detect the grossness of their Superstitions. 5. The sensual Liberty allowed of
having variety of Wives, and as many Concubines as they are able to keep. 6.
The promise of the like sensual Pleasures in the other World; with which, a
Sense not illuminated with the Spirit of God, does for the most part use to be
more affected than with the speculative hope of Spiritual Happiness. 7. The
forbidding of Printing and printed Books, by which the People might come to see
the Verity and Purity of the Christian Faith; the Falsehood and Impurity of the
Law of Mahomet: the last not useful, or at least not able to induce Belief, if
the first had not opened and prepared the way.

For indeed, force of Arms was the strongest Argument by which Mahomet himself
confirms, and his Successors in their times have since propagated and dispersed
his Doctrine. Strengthened by the Resorts of that rascal Rabble, which repaired
to him, he assaults Medina, pretending a Quarrel to the Jews, who had there a
Synagogue, repulsed at first with loss of men, and a wound in his Face, by
which some of his foreteeth were beaten out; there likely to have made an end
of his new Religion, if not recovered by his Soldiers for a farther Mischief.
At the next Onset he prevailed, the Battle being fought near a place called
Bedez, situate betwixt Mecca and Medina, frequently mentioned in the Alcoran.
After which Fight, he took the City, converting the Synagogue to a Temple, for
his own Impieties: the News whereof so startled the Phylarchice, or Nobility of
Mecca, that they armed their Powers against him, and sped so well in the
beginning of the War, that they drove him forcibly from their Territories,
which not long after he subdued, and set his chief Seat at Mecca. From that his
Flight the Saracens began their Computation of Years, (as we from Christ's
Nativity) which they call the Hegira, which begins about the Year of our
Redemption, 617. Concerning which time, I cannot but observe that Mahomet
compelled devilish Doctrine, beginning his Empire; and Boniface the Third
assumed his Antichristian Title, beginning his unlimited Supremacy the same
year.

About the same time, the Saracens, revolting from Heraclius the Eastern
Emperor, joined themselves to him. They had long been displeased with their
condition, and now hoped to mend it: Exasperated by Julian the Apostate, when
they served in his Wars against the Persians, for telling them when they asked
for their Pay, that he had more store of Steel than Gold; but then they wanted
a fit Head to resort unto. Now serving Heraclius in the same War, his Officers
used them in the same ill manner. Asking for Pay, the Treasurer of the Army
made them this answer, that there was scarce money enough to pay the Roman and
Grecian Soldiers, and must those Dogs be so importunate for their Wages?
Provoked herewith, and hearing of the same of Mahomet, they took to him; who,
much strengthened by them, and the rest of their Countrymen, soon subjected
the three Arabias to him; And having defeated the Emperor's Forces sent
against him, he added some Parts of Syria and Egypt; and returning to Mecca,
there died Frantic, in the seventieth year of his Age, and twenty third of his
Impostures; of which he had spent thirteen at Medina, and the rest at Mecca.
His dead Body being kept four days, in expectation of a Resurrection, which he
promised to perform at the end of three; grown full of stench and putrefaction,
was conveyed to Medina, and there interred: his Successors, out of wicked
Policy, keeping up the reputation of that Religion after his decease, which
they derided in his life; and called themselves Caliphs and Vicars General to
him their Prophet. His Corpse does not hang in the Air by force of Loadstones
drawing up his Iron Coffin or Chest, but lies buried in the ground, as
Ludovicus Vertomannus, by his own view, has observed.

But having given an account of this Impostor, and his abominable Doctrines, I
will show the Ceremonies they use in their Pilgrimages to Mecca. This Journey
is performed every year, and it is held so necessary, that he who does not once
in his Life go this Pilgrimage, shall be assuredly damned; when reas Paradise
and Remission of sin is procured to them that go it. The Journey is tedious to
them of Greece, being six months Journey, and dangerous, by reason of Arabian
Thieves, Mountains of Sand, with which diverse are overwhelmed, and want of
Water in those Deserts. Their chief care is to be reconciled to each other
before they go; for if they leave hot behind them all animosities, their
Pilgrimage will do them no good. They begin their Journey from Caire, about
three Weeks after their Easter, being guarded with 200 Spachi on Dromedaries,
and 200 Janissaries on Camels, with 8 pieces of Ordnance, and rich Vestures for
the Prophet, and a green Velvet covering wrought with Gold to cover his Tomb,
which the Bassa delivers to the Captain of the Pilgrims. The Camels that carry
these vestures are covered with cloth of gold, and many small Bells. The night
before they go is kept with great feasting and triumphs. No man may hinder his
Wife from this Pilgrimage, and every Servant is made free that goes it. The
Camel that carries the Box with the Alcoran is covered with cloth of gold and
folk, the Box with silk only during the Journey, but with Gold and Jewels at
their entering into Mecca. Musicians also and Singers encompass the Camel, and
much vain pomp is used. They use diverse washings by the way, where they find
water. When they come to Mecca, the house of Abraham, which they fable was
miraculously built, receives a new covering, and a new Gate; the old vestment
is sold to Pilgrims, which has a virtue in it to pardon sins. But that you may
be the better acquainted with the Mosquita and House of Abraham, you are to
know, that in the midst of the City is the great Mosquita built, they say, in
the time when their Prophet lived. It is four square, every square half a mile,
the whole circuit two miles; in manner of a Cloister; the Galleries round about
are in manner of four Streets, these Streets being separated from each other
with Pillars, of Marble some, and some of Lime and Stone. In the midst of all,
separate from the rest, is the House of Abraham. This Mosquita has 99 Gotes,
and five Steeples, of which the Talismans call the People to their Devotion.
And the Pilgrims which are not provided of Tents resort hither, Men and Women
lying together; their House of Prayer becoming a Den of Thieves. Barthema
says, that this Temple is round, like the Colisco at Rome; that at every
Entrance is a descent of ten or twelve steps, on both sides whereof stand
Jewellers, who sell Gems only; within it is valuted, gilded, and odoriferous,
beyond what can be spoken: for there are four or five hundred men which sell
Powders to preserve dead Corpses and other sweets. It seems, that since his
time the Temple and House of Abraham are altered. This House is apiece,
made of speckled Stone, twenty Paces high, and forty in circuit, and upon one
side of this House, within a Wall, there is a Stone of a Span long, and half a
Span broad; which Stone, they say, fell down from Heaven, a voice from Heaven
at the same fall being heard; That wheresoever this Stone fell, there should be
built the House of God, wherein he will hear the Prayers of Sinners. Then was
the Stone as white as Snow; but now, through the kisses of Sinners, it is
become so black as it is. The Entrance into this House is small and high there
are without this House 31 Pillars of Brass, upon square Stones, sustaining a
thread of Copper reaching from one to another; on which are fastened many burning
Lamps: The Founder of these was Solomon. Being entered into this House through
that difficult Passage, there stands two Pillars of Marble at the entrance; in
the midst are three of Aloes Wood, covered with Tyles of India, of a thousand
Colors, which serve to underprop the Terratza or Roof. It is so dark, that
they can hardly see within for want of Light; nor is it without an evil Smell.
Without the Gate, five Paces, is the Pond Zunzun, that blessed Pond which the
Angel thewed to Agar for her Son Ishmath, After many idle Ceremonies performed,
they go round about Abraham's House seven times; then they wash-themselves it
the Pond Zunzun: of this also they drink, and pray for Pardon of their Sins.
After five days abode at Mecca, they go to the Hill of Pardons, fifteen miles
distant, and there they leave all their Sins behind them, after they have
heard; Sermon, and prayed, and offered Sacrifices. Upon their Return, they must
not look back to the Hill, lest their Sins follow them. From hence they repair
to Medina, where Mahomet's Sepulcher is thought to be; but by the way they run
up a certain Hill, which they call the Mount of Health; they run that they may
sweat out all their Sins. Thence they come pure to the Seducers Tomb, which
notwithstanding they may not see, being hanged about with a Silk Curtain, which
by the Eunuchs, being fifty in number, to attend on the Tomb, and to light the
Lamps, is taken down when the Pilgrims Captain presents the new one; without,
each man gives Handkerchiefs, or such like, to touch the Tomb therewith; this
they keep as a special Relic. When they return to Egypt, the Captain
presents the Alcoran to the Bassa to kiss, and then it is laid up again: the
Captain is feasted, and presented with a Garment, of Cloth of Gold. They used
to cut in pieces the Camel, whith his Furniture, which carried the Alcoran, and
reserve these pieces for holy Relics. The Alcoran also is elevated, that all
might see and adore it; which done every one with Joy returns to his own home.

Now, as to the Ceremonies they use in their Circumsicion, they are circumcised
about eight years of Age; the Child is carried on Horseback, with a Tullipant
on his Head, to the Temple, with a Torch before him on a spear decked with
Flowers, which is left with the Priest as his Fee, who first nipped the end of
the Skin of the Child's yard with Pincers, to mortify it, then with his
Sissers he nimbly cuts it off; presently a powder is laid to ease the Pain, and
afterward Salt. The Child's hands being loosed, looks, as he is taught ^y
the Priest toward Heaven, and lifting up the first Finger of his right hand,
says these Words: God is one God and Mahomet is his Prophet. Then he is
carried ^ome in haste, after some Prayers and Offerings of the Church,
sometimes the Child is circumcised at home, and receives his name not then,
but when he is Born. They Feast then commonly three days, which ended, ^^e
Child is carried with Pomp to the Bath, and from thence home, where he is
presented with diverse gifts from his Parent's Friends. Women are not
circumcised, but are tied to make the Profession of their Mahumetan Faith.

They believe the forbidden Tree was Wheat, which had seven Ears, whereof Adam
plucked one, wherein were five Grains, of which, two he eat, two he gave to
Eve, and one he carried away. This Grain was bigger than any Egg, and being
bruised, brought forth all kinds of Seed. They believe that Adam was received
after the expulsion from Paradise into India, and Eve into Nubia; that Adam was
covered with three Leaves of Taradice; Eve, with her Hair: they met together in
Araffe. Further as concerning Eve, she was made of a Rib of the left side, for
otherwise she had been as strong as the Man. They believe the Devils first
dwelt in the Earth, seven thousand years; after them Angels. They say the
Ground of Paradise is of Gold, enammelled with Emeralds and Hyacinths, planted
with every fruitful Tree, watered with streams of Milk, and Honey, and wine: the
Day is of a thousand years Continuance. The People shall have whatsoever can be
desired; they shall be clothed in all Colors except black, which is the
proper Color of Mahomet. They shall all be of the Stature of Adam, in
Resemblance like Christ, never increasing or diminishing. As soon as they are
entered, shall be set before them the Liver of the Fish Albehbut, and whatsoever
Dainties they can desire: they shall not need going to Stool any more than the
Child in the Womb, but they shall sweat out all Superfluities, of Scent like
Musk; they shall eat but for Desight, not for Hunger: unlawful Meats, as Swines
Flesh, they shall refrain. And if you list to know why this Beast is unclean,
understand, That Jesus on a time called forth Japhet, to tell his Disciples the
History of the Ark: Who told them, That by the weight of the Ordure the Ark
leaned on one side; whereupon, Noe consulting with God, was bidden to bring in
the Elephant thither, out of whose Dung, mixed with Man's, came forth a Hog,
which rooted in that Mire with his Snout, and by the stink thereof was produced
out of his Nose a Mouse, which knawed the Bords of the Ark; Noe fearing this
danger, was bidden to strike the Lion on the Forehead; and by the Lyon's
Breath was a Cat engendered, mortal Enemy to the Mouse. But to return from this
stinking Tale, to refresh our selves with the like Sweets of this Paradise;
They believe that there they have the Wives that there they had, and other
Concubines, whom, how, when, wheresoever they will. That Wine shall be lawful
there, though here unlawful; the reason whereof Mahomet said, was, That the
Angels, Arots and Merot, were sometime sent to instruct and govern the World,
forbidding Men Wine, Injustice, and Murder. But a Woman having whereof to
accuse her Husband, invited them to Dinner, and made them drunk. They, inflamed
with a double heat of Wine and Lust, could not obtain that their desire of
their fair Hostess, except one would teach her the Word of ascending to Heaven,
and the other of descending. Thus she mounted up to Heaven; and upon enquiry of
the matter, she was made the Morning Star, and they put to their choice,
whether they would be punished in this World or the World to come: they
accepting their Punishment in this, are hanged by Chains, with their Head in a
Pit of Babel, till the day of Judgment. Hell, says Mahomet, has a Floor of
Brimstone, smoaky, pitchy, with stinking Flames, with deep Pits of scalding
Pitch, and sulpherous Flames, wherein the damned are punished daily; the Trees
bear most loathsome Fruits, which they eat.

The day of Judgment shall be in this sort. In that day God will command the
Angel of Death to kill every Creature: which being done, he shall ask him if
nothing be alive; Adriel, the Angel of Death shall answer, nothing but my self:
then go thy ways betwixt Paradise and Hell and last of all kill thy self. Thus
he, folded in his Wings, prostrate on the Earth, shall strangle himself with
such a bellowing noise, as would terrify the very Angels if they were alive.

Thus the World shall be empty forty Years: Then shall God hold the Heaven and
Earth in his Fist, and say, Where are now the mighty Men, the Kings and Princes
of the World? Tell me, if you be true, whose is the Kingdom, and Empire, and
Powers? Repeating these Words three times, he shall raise up Seraphiel, and
say, Take this Trumpet and go to Jerusalem and sound. This Trumpet is of five
hundred years Journey. At that Sound all Souls shall come forth, and disperse
themselves unto their own Bodies, and their Bones shall be gathered together.
Forty years after he shall sound again, and then the Bones shall resume Flesh
and Sinews. After forty Years the third Sound shall warn the Souls to
re-possess their Bodies; and a Fire from the West shall drive every Creature
into Jerusalem. When they have here swam forty Years in their own Sweat, they
shall, with much vexation, come to Adam, and say, Father Adam, Father Adam, Why
have thou begotten us to these Miseries and Torments? Why suffer thou us to
hang between Hope and Fear? Pray to God, that he will finish his Determination
of us, between Paradise and Hell. Adam shall excuse his unworthiness for his
Disobedience, and send them to Noe; Noe will post them to Abraham; Abraham to
Moses; he shall send them to Jesus Christ: to him they shall come, and say, The
Spirit, Word, and Power of God, let thy Pity move thee to make Intercession for
us. He shall answer them. That which you ask you have lost. I w^^ indeed sent
unto you in the Power of God and Word of Truth, but ye have erred, and have
made me God; more than I ever preached to you, and therefore have lost my
benefit: but go to the lost of the Prophets, meaning Mahomet himself. Then
shall they turn to him and say often, Faithful Messenger and Friend of God, we
have sinned; hear us holy Prophet, our only hope, etc. Then shall Gabriel
present himself to help his Friend, and they shall go to the Throne of God; and
God shall say, I know why you are come; far be it that I should not hear the
Prayer of my faithful one. Then shall a Bridge be made over Hell, and on the
top of the Bridge shall be set a Balance, wherein every man's Works shall be
weighed, and those which are saved shall pass over the Bridge, the other shall
fall into Hell: That there will be a hundred and twenty Bands of men that day;
of which, three only shall be found faithful; and every Band or Trace of men
shall be in length the Journey of a thousand Years, in breadth five hundred;
and then Death shall be transformed into a Ram, and they shall bring him
between Paradise and Hell. Then shall arise much Dissentions between these two
People, through fear of the one, and hope of the other: but the People of
Paradise shall prevail, and shall slay Death between Paradise and Hell. With
these and a hundred such wild and frantic Opinions and Tenants is their
Alcoran stuffed; which we leave, to give some light touch on some Heretics who
have broached their impious Opinions in these late Centuries.

LVI. Amongst whom, sprung up Thomas Muntzer; who boasted that he had had
Communication with God. By his teaching and writing he did publicly affirm,
That the Preachers of that time that contributed their Endeavors to the
advancement of the Gospel, were not sent by God, but were mere Scribes, and
impertinent Interpreters of the Scriptures: That the Scriptures and the written
Word were not the pure Word of God, but only a bare Testimony of the true Word:
That the true real Word was something that was intrinsecal and heavenly, and
immediately proceeding out of the Mouth of God, and consequently, to be learned
intrinsecally, and not out of Scriptures, or by any humane Suggestion: with
several other such like Tenets, which won him several Sectaries; and stuffing
his Sermons with most seditious and better Invectives against the Magistrate,
and pretending to groan for the return of lost Liberty, and for the
insufferable pressures of the people under Tyranny, a very great Concourse of
the Dregs of the People repaired to him; insomuch, that they broke out into
open Rebellion, forced away a great part of the Nobility, plundered Towns and
Castles; to be short, made an absolute Devastation by Fire and Sword.
Whereupon, the Landgrave of Hess fought the Country People with advantage, and
prepared for a second Fight the next day; which Muntzer having intelligence of,
said, by way of Animation to his Followers, What are those Cannon Bullets? I
will receive them in my Gloves, and they shall not hurt me: whereby the Country
People being encouraged, were the next day beaten by the Landgrave, five
thousand slain, and three hundred taken, who had all their Heads cut off: so
that while they were ambitious of Liberty, they lost even the Liberty of Life
it self. But Muntzer himself made his Escape; but though he sculk'd for some
time, yet being at length taken, he continued obstinate, though the Landgrave
convinced him by Scripture. But being condemned, and laid upon the Rack, while
he cried out aloud, and wept, the Duke of Saxony spoke to him to this purpose;
Now thou art punished, Muntzer, consider with thy self by what means thou have
seduced and brought so many to Destruction: whereat Muntzer broke out into a
great Laughter, saying, This is the Judgment of the Country People. But when
being brought to his Death, he was thrust into a close Prison, it is wonderful
how faint-hearted he was, and stood extremely troubled in mind, not being able
to give any account of his Faith, but as the Duke of Saxony pronounced before
him, and which he told him he was to make a Confession of before God. Being
surrounded with Soldiers, he openly acknowledged his Wickedness, and withal,
addressed these Words to the Princes that were present, Show Mercy and
Compassion, ye Princes, lest hereafter you incur by my Example the Punishment I
now suffer. Read, and attentively consider the holy Books of the Kings. Having
said this, his Head was struck off, and fastened to a Stake, for a Monument and
Example to others.

LVII. In the Year of our Lord, 1535. upon the Third of February, at Amsterdam,
in a Street called Salar Street, at the House of John Sifrid, a Cloath-Worker,
who at that time was gone into Austria about some business, there met seven men
Anabaptists, and five Women of the same Persuasion, of which Flock, the
Bell-weather was Theodothere Botcher; who, raped into a strange Enthusiasm and
Extacy, stretching himself upon the Ground, naked upon his Back, before his
Brethren and Sisters, seemed to pray unto God with a certain religious Dread
and Horror. Having ended his Prayers, he affirmed, That he had beheld God with
his Eyes in the excessive and ineffable Riches of his Glory; and that he had
had Communication with him both in Heaven and Hell; and that the day of his
Judgment was at hand. After which, he said to one of his Companions, Thou art
decreed to eternal Damnation, and shall be cast into the bottomless Pit; at
which the other crying out, the Lord God of Mercy have Compassion of me, the
Prophet said to him, be of good cheer, now art thou the Son of God, thy Sins
are forgiven thee. Upon the eleventh day of February, the foresaid Year, the
Persons forementioned, unknown to their Husbands, repaired to the same place.
This Prophet or Seer, having entertained them with a Sermon of three or four
Hours long, casts a Helmet, a Breast-pla^e, a Sword, and other Arms, together
with all his Clothes, into the Fire. Being thus stark naked, and his
Companions, who yet had their Clothes, being uncovered, he peremptorily
commanded them to do the like, as being such as must be as safe as himself. He
farther affirmed, that the Children of God ought to look upon all things of
this World with Contempt and indignation. And since Truth, which is most
glorious in her Nakedness, will not admit the Deformity of any Earthly disguise
whatsoever, he affirmed, that they ought in all things to conform themselves to
that example of Truth and Justice. A great many hearing these things, having
quite cashiered all shame, offered up their shirts, smocks, and petticoats, and
whatsoever savoured of Earth, as a burnt-offering unto God. The Mistress of the
House bing awakened by the stink which these clothes made in burning, and going
up into the upper Chambers, she finds this deplorable representation of
immodesty and impudence; but the power and influence of Prophetical integrity
brought the Woman to that pass, that she was drawn in to wallow in the same
mire of unshamefacedness, whom therefore he advised to continue always a
constant adherer to the unblameable Truth. Going out of the House in this
posture, about three of the clock, the other men and Women marched barefoot
after him, crying out with a horrid Voice, Woe, woe, woe, the heavy wrath of
God, the heavy wrath of God, etc. In this fanatic Error did this
Hypocondriack Rabble run about the Streets, making such horrid noise, that all
Amsterdam seemed to shake and tremble at it, as if it had been assaulted by a
public Enemy. The Burghers not having the lest hint of such a strange and
unlooked for accident (for this furious action happened in the dead of the
night) took up Arms, and getting these People (lost to all shame and Modesty)
up to the Palace, clapped them into Prison. Being so disposed of, they would own
no thoughts of shame or Chastity, but would justify their most white and naked
truth. In the mean time, the Fire being smelt, they brake into the House where
it was, and wondering at their casting of their Clothes into the Fire, which had
since reached the Bed, they made a shift to quench it. But the other distracted
and mad People, such as deserved to be sent to their Kindred the Savages and
Heathens, inconvincibly persisted in their pestiferous Opinion, and so upon the
fifth of May the same year, they expiated their wicked Impieties with their
Death. Ones farewell Saying was, Praise the Lord incessantly. Another was, O
God, revenge thou our Sufferings! Others cried out, Woe, woe, shut thine eyes.

LVIII. The next we will bring upon the Stage, are John Reeves and Lodowick
Muggleton, who would persuade us, that they are the two last Witnesses and
Prophets of Christ, sent by his Spirit to seal the foreheads of the Elect and
Reprobate: that one John Robins is the last great Antichrist, and Son of
Perdition, spoken of by the Apostle in the Thessalonians, because he shows
lying signs and wonders, and assumes to himself the Titles of the only God, in
that he calls himself Adam and Melchisedeck, and Father of Jesus Christ; in
saying the three Persons in Trinity are Adam, that is, Himself, Abel, that is,
the Son Jesus, and Cain, that is the Holy Ghost: many such Blasphemies they
ascribe to him. They affirm also, that Christians using the Sword of Steel, are
ignorant of Jesus, and Enemies to his Gospel; and they teach, that the two
uncreated Substances of Earth and Water, were eternally resident in the
Presence of God the Creator; that Death was from Eternity: that the Person of
the reprobate Angel or Serpent, entered into the Womb of Eve, and there died,
but quickened in her all manner of uncleanness: that there is no Devil at all
without the Body of Man or Woman, but what dwells within them, so that the
Devil spoken of so often in the Scripture, is man's Spirit of unclean Reason,
and cursed imagination; that God the Father was a Spiritual man from Eternity,
and that in time his Spiritual Body brought a Natural Body; that if the very
Godhead had not died, that is, say they, the Soul of Christ, which is the
Eternal Father, had not died, all men had perished eternally: that Moses and
Eliah are Angels, and did represent the Person of the Father in Heaven, as they
did the Person of the Son on Earth; that Eliah was made Protector of God, when
God became a Child; and that he filled the Lord Jesus with those great
Revelations of his former Glory which he possessed in Heaven, when he was the
immortal Father; and that it was Eliah who spoke these words, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: they say also, that all the Ministry in
this World, whether Prophetical or Ministerial, with all the Worship taught by
them, is a Lie, and abomination to the Lord. Again, they declare, that whereas
there are three Witnesses on Earth, Water, Blood, and Spirit: that by Water is
meant the Commission given to Moses, and the Prophets under the Law; by Blood,
the Commission given to the Apostles, and Ministers of the Gospel; and by the
Spirit is meant the Commission of the two Witnesses that were to come in this
last age, whose Ministry is invisible and Spiritual, cutting off all formal
worshipping of an invisible, spiritual, personal God: they say there is hardly
a Minister in the World that confesses an invisible God, but they preach a God
of three Persons, that is a Monster instead of one true Personal God: they say,
that the true God is a distinct Body or Person, as a Man is a distinct Body or
Person: Again, they say that there is no Christian Magistrate in the World that
has any Authority from Christ to set up any invisible Form of Worship; and
that the Spirits and Bodies of men are both mortal, both begot together, and
both of one nature; that the Spirit is nothing without the Body, and that is
the Spirit alone that walks and works, eats and drinks, and dies, for the
Spirit is a natural fire of Reason: they say also, that the Bodies or Persons
of holy men, wherein they lived and died, shall not appear again any more; but
when the Saints are glorified, they are absolutely of the very same glorious
nature, both in Spirit and Body, as God is; and that Believers Spirits are of
the very same Divine nature of God. This is the Sum of their Divinity and
Philosophy, as may be seen in their transcendent Spiritual Treatise, as they
call it, which is sull of transcendent nonsense and blasphemies; for here they
lay the axe to the very root of Christianity, in giving a new Father to our
Savior Jesus Christ, in calling the Blessed Trinity a Monster, in denying the
Creation, whilst they make Earth and Water eternal; in making Angels and men's
Souls mortal; in making weak man Gods Protector, and Author of that Divine
knowledge which was in Christ; in denying the Ministry of the Gospel, and the
Power of the Magistrates, and the outward Worship of God, and making the Souls
of men corporeal; in denying also the Resurrection of the Flesh, and
transforming men into the Divine nature. By these and other wicked Tenets,
permitted and countenanced among us at this time, we see what Christian
Religion is come to in this Land.

LIX. But before I quit this Theme, it will not be altogether unseasonable,
that I give an account of the Ranters, who are a sort of Beasts who neither
divide the hoof, nor chew the cud; that is to say, unclean ones, such as hold
no small correspondence with the Quakers; their Lives and demeanours are much
alike, only what the Ranters act upon the Stage, by an open profession of
lewdness and irreligion, the other do it within the Curtain, by crafty and
seemingly innocent insinuations and pretenses of Sanctity, and contempt of the
things of this World. These are they that make a laughing stock of
Christianity, by their bitter invectives and derision of the Ordinances and
Ceremonies of the Christian Religion; these are they that make no distinction
between Forms and Order; for having cried down the former, their Dispensations
will not bear with the latter; it being their main design to bring the business
of Religion to that condition wherein Man was before he had assumed thoughts of
Government; that is to say, into Anarchy and confusion. As for their
Blasphemies and horrid expressions of Christian things, Mahumetans, Jews, and
Pagans, own more Modesty and less Profaneness. But to retail their Opinions, or
to anatomize this Monster, we must come to particulars. 1. They hold, that God,
Devils, Angels, Heaven, Hell, etc. are Fictions and Fables. 2. That Moses, the
Baptist, and Christ are Impostors; and what Christ and his Apostles acquainted
the World with, as to matter of Religion, perished with them, and nothing
transmitted to us. 3. That preaching and praying is useless, and that it is but
public lying. 4. That there is an end of all Ministry and Administrations, and
People are to be taught immediately from God. 5. They hold Baptism a pure legal
Administration, nor proceeding from Christ, but from John. 6. They jest the
Scriptures, (that Divine Legacy of our Salvation) out of all Life, Reverence,
and Authority, quoting it in driblets and shreds, to make it the more
ridiculous. In their Letters they endeavor to be strangely profane and
blasphemous, uttering Atheistical Curses and imprecations, which is a kind of
canting amongst them, as among Gypsies; as for example, in one you have this
style, My own hearts-blood, from whom I daily receive Life and Being, to whom
is ascribed all Honor, etc. Thou art my Garment of Needle Work, my Garment of
Salvation. Eternal Plagues consume you all, not, sink, and damn your Bodies and
Souls into devouring fire, where none but those who walk uprightly can enter.
The Lord grant that we may know the worth of Hell, that we may scorn Heaven. 7.
Sin is only what a man imagines and conceives to be so within himself. 8.
Ordinances they account poor low things, nay, the perfections of the Scriptures
are so inconsiderable in their apprehensions, that they pretend to live above
them. Their Lives witness without them. 9. If you ask them what Christian
Liberty is, they will tell you, that it consists in a Community of all things;
and among the rest, of Women; which they paint over with an expression, called,
The enjoyment of the Fellow Creature. 10. The enjoyment of the Fellow Creature
cannot but be seconded with lascivious Songs, drinking of Healths, Music,
Dancing, and Bawdry. Lastly, They are those who most of all kick against the
Pricks of Authority: for Magistracy cannot have any thing more sacred than the
Ministry; so that they wish as much Policy in the State as Government in the
Church; which is none at all; so to bring an Egyptian Darkness upon both, that
the Word might be the less scandalized at their Madnesses and Extravagancies.
But this Age, which is much more faithful in Religions than good Works, of
Scripture Phrases than of Scripture Practices, of Opinions than of Piety, has
spawned more Religions than that Lady of Holland did Infants; to mention all
which, were to tire my self and Reader; therefore I shall quit so nauseous a
Subject, and look back, and give a short account of the several Sects amongst
the Jews: it not being at all necessary to speak of it in it is Purity, that
matter having been canvassed by so many others.

LX. Now in the business of Alterations, and Altercations amongst them; about
Questions and Practice of Religion. We are in the first place to observe their
often Apostacies from the truth of the Law to the idolatrous Superstitions of
the neighboring Nations, as the Relics of the Egyptian Idolatry in the
Golden Calf, Exodus 32. their often Murmurings in the Desert, the Presumption of
Nadab and Abihu, and after of Aaron and Miriam, the Conspiracy of Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram, Balaam's stumbling block, to couple them in idolatrous
Service to Baal-peor, the Idol of the Moabites; and after their possession of
the Land, when Joshua and the Elders were dead, they served the Gods of the
People that were round about them, as Baal and Astaroth. And although Gideon
cut down the Grove and destroyed the Altar of Baal, yet he made an Ephod of the
Earings of the Prey, and put it in Ophrah, his City, and all Israel went a
whoring there after it; and after his Death made Baal-berith their God. They
served also the Gods of Aram, Zidon, Moab, Ammon, and the Philistines. Micah an
Ephramite made a House of Gods, and Ephod, and Teraphim, and consecrated one of
his Sons to be his Priest, and after set a Levite, Jonathan, in his room, the
occasion of Apostasy to a great part of the Tribe of Dan, all the while the
House of God was in Shiloth; besides the Corruption of State and Religion by
the Benjamites, and by Hephni and Phineas the Sons of Eli. Elias Levita
describes the form of sacring or hallowing their Teraphim, in this sort. They
killed a man which was a first born, wreathing his Head from his Body, and
embalming the same with Salt and Spices; and then wrote upon a plate of Gold
the name of an unclean Spirit, and putting the same under the Head, set it upon
a Wall, and burned before it, and worshipped the same. R. Abraham says, they
were Images of Men made to receive Powers from above, as the Idolaters
conceived of them. But after the Reformation of Religion by Samuel, David, and
Solomon, (who yet became after an Idolater) befell their greatest Apostasy; to
wit, of the ten Tribes, from God, their King, and Religion, by the over-wise
Policy of Jeroboam, which corrupted and subverted both it and himself. He (lest
those revolted Israelites should by frequenting God's appointed Worship at
Jerusalem, re-acknowledge their former and truer Lord) consecrated two
Egyptian Calves at Bethel and Dan, and made an House of high places, and
Priests of the lowest of the People. Judah also made them in the same times
high Places, Images, and Groves, on every high Hill, and under every green
Tree; yet had the Kingdom of Judah their intercourses of Corruption and
Reformation, according as they had good or bad things: but in Israel, the
Commonwealth and Church received by that sin of Jeroboam, an uncurable Wound,
and irrecoverable Loss, until that in Gods just Punishment they were carried
away by the Assyrian Kings into Assyria, and into Hala, Habor, and the Cities
of the Medes, as 2 Kin. 17. appears, where is recorded a summary Collection
of these and other their Idolatries. Of these exiled Israelites (if we believe
the Reports and Conjectures of diverse Authors) are descended those Tartarians,
which since overran with their Conquests, a greater part of Asia and Europe
than ever any other Nation before or since; of which their Original and
Exploits, we shall in fitter place further discourse. But it is far more
probable, that in, and after the Babylonish Captivity the Israelites adjoined
themselves in Religion to the other Jews; at least, the greatest part of them:
and though not many returned with Ezra, yet those parts remained full of Jews,
having their Universities and some kind of Government, till the Saracenical
Deluge, and in some tolerable Condition after, as Benjamin relates, which
continued till the time of the Tartars, which had they been of this Nation,
they would have preferred them; whereas, ever since their times the Estate of
the Jews has been more contemptible than before. The other Kingdom of Judah,
although it received sometime breathing and refreshing under her more virtuous
and religious Kings, yet for the most part, groaning under Tyranny and
Idolatry, was at last a Prey to the Babylonians: from which Servitude being
freed by the Persian Monarchs, under varieties of adverse and prosperous
Fortunes, it was afterward rent and torn by the Macedonians, being made a
common Stage for the Arms and Armies of the Successors of Prolomy in Egypt,
and Scleucus in Asia, remaining ruined unto the Conqueror, and receiving no
small Impressions in Wounds as well as Body, in Religion as in Polity. But
being afterward delivered from the Macedonian Thraldom, by the Family of the
Macchabees, Two Sons Carrying their Parents through The flames of Mount Aetna.
Page 119

the Government Ecclesiastical and Temporal became theirs; but, the Minds of
this Jewish People was in those times divided in diversity of Sects and
Opinions, of which the Evangelical and other Histories make mention. Now in the
pursuit of this point, I shall begin with the Prophets; those not only going
under that Name, to whom God revealed Himself and his Purposes in an
extraordinary way, but those also that expounded the Scriptures; they were also
called Fathers, Doctors of the Law, Disputers, Wisemen, and Rabbis, from
their greatness in Knowledge; which Title, the Pharisees did appropriate to
themselves: their Scholars were called Children and Sons of the Prophets. The
name of Scribes was given to Scriveners, and Public Notaries; these were
called Scribes of the People, Mat. 2.4. and likewise to those that did write
and expound the Law; such a Scribe was Esdras, Esd. 7.6. These were called
Doctors of the Law; so that this was not so much a differing Sect, as an Office
and a Ministry. The Pharisees were so called from Separation, and by the
Greeks, Separatists; for they separated themselves to a strict kind of Life and
the Study of the Law, having no commerce with other People, nor communicating
with them, in Diet, Apparel, nor Customs: They held a fatal necessity, with the
Stoics; and Transanimation, with the Pythagoreans. Hence they thought that
either the Soul of John Baptist, or of Elias, or of Jeremy, had animated
Christ's Body. They preferred Traditions to the written Word, and placed most
of their Holiness in washing, counting it a less sin to commit Fornication than
to eat with unwashed hands: from their daily Washings they were named Hemero
Baptists: they always washed when they returned from the Market, thinking
themselves polluted with the touch of other People. They are noted, Mat. 9.11.
for holding it unlawful to eat with Sinners: and Mark 7.4. for their
superstitious washing of Cups, Pots, brazen Vessels and Tables, and Luke 18.12.
for fasting twice in the Week: and Math. 23.5. for their broad Phylacteries,
which were Scrolls of Parchment, wherein the Law was written. They are noted
also for their large Borders and Fringes, Mark 23.5. They wore their
Phylacteries on their Foreheads and left Arms: and Hierom observes in Math.
23. that they used sharp Thorns in their Fringes; that by the pricking thereof
they might be put in mind of the Commandments.

LXII. The Nazarites were Votaries, Numb. 6. so called from Nazar, to separate;
for, they separated themselves from Wine and strong Drink, from coming near the
Dead, and from the Razor. Some were Nazarites for their Life, as Sampson, John
Baptist, etc. others only for a time; to wit, thirty days; as Absalom, who cut
his Hair the thirtieth day of his Vow: such a Nazarite was Paul, Act 21.24.
Nazareth was a Village in Galilee, where Christ was conceived and bred, and
therefore was called a Nazarite, Mat. 2.23. and his Disciples Nazarites, Acts
24.5. but indeed he was the only true Nazarite, because he was pure, holy, and
separate from Sinners: but he was no legal Nazarite, for, he drunk Wine, and
went near the Dead. These Heretics were also called Nazarites, who taught,
that with the Gospel should be joined the Law of Moses, Act. 15.2. Of the
Rechabites, so called from Rechab their Father, we read Jer. 35.2, 3, 4, etc.
These neither drunk Wine, nor sowed Seed, nor built Houses, nor planted
Vine-yards, but like Strangers, lived all their days in Tents. The Sampsorans
acknowledged one God, and worshipped him, using certain Washings. Some of them
abstained from living Creatures, and would dye for Elxai his Posterity; which
they had in such Honor, that if they went abroad, the People would gather up
the dust of their feet for Cures, and their Spittle, and used them for Amulets
and Preservatives. They admit neither the Apostles nor Prophets; they worship
Water, esteeming it as a God, believing that Life is from thence. The. Essenes,
so called from their skill in curing Diseases, (for they were much given to the
Study of Physic) in their Opinions were Pythagoreans, ascribing all things to
Fate, offering no Sacrifices but of inanimate things, shunning Oaths,
Pleasures, and Wine, contenting themselves with Water only, and mean Apparel;
their Garments were white, and they had all things in common amongst them. They
worshipped toward the East, observed the Sabbath more strictly than others;
kept seven Pentecosts every Year, to wit, every seventh Week one; and generally
they abstained from Marriage; yet some did marry for Procreation. They were
superstitious in preserving the Names of Angels; they were much given to
Silence, with the Pythagoreans, chiefly at Table: none were admitted into their
Society without four Years Probation. There were some of these Essenes
contemplative only, and lived in Gardens or remote Villages, who contented
themselves with Bread and Salt; others were active, and gave themselves to
manual Labors: these lived in Cities, and fared better, and eat twice a day.

LXIII. The Sadduces were so called, either from Tzedek Justice, because they
would be accounted the only just men in the World; or from Sadok, the Author of
their Sect, who was the Scholar of Antigonus Socheus. These rejected all
Traditions and Scriptures, except the five Books of Moses; denied the
Resurrection, Pains or Rewards after this Life, Angels and Spirits, Fate
likewise or Destiny, ascribing all to man's free will: they held also, that the
Soul dyed, and perished with the Body. The Samaritans held with the Sadduces,
that there was no Scripture but the Pentateuch; that there was no Resurrection,
nor Life eternal, nor any Traditions to be admitted; yet they dissented from
the Sadduces in acknowledging Angels, in worshipping only upon Mount Gerizim,
whereas the Sadduces worshipped also in Jerusalem, and kept fair Correspondence
with the other Jews; whereas the Samaritans and Jews did so hate one another,
that there was no Commerce between them, but did curse and excommunicate each
other. But since they are in this ill humor, I think it will be convenient to
leave them, and proceed to the giving an account of the different Ceremonies
used in Marriage by several Nations in the Universe.

Of Marriage Ceremonies.
IN the Roman Marriages, which commenced with Contracts, mutually sealed and
signed with the Signets of diverse Witnesses there present, there were sundry
Customs observed by them. The Man, in token of good Will, gave to the Woman a
Ring, which she was to wear upon the next Finger to the little one of the
Left Hand, because unto that finger alone a certain Artery proceeds from the
Heart. The word Nuptiae which signifies Marriage, had it is derivation a nubo,
which in old time signified to cover; the Custom being, that the Woman should
be brought to her Husband with a Covering or Veil cast over her Face. Also by
cause of the good Success that Romulus and his Followers had in the violent
taking away of the Sabine Women, they continued a Custom, that the Man should
come and take away his Wife by a seeming violence from the Lap or Bosom of her
Mother, or her next Kin. She being thus taken away, her Husband did dissever
and divide the Hair of her Head with the top of a Spear, wherewith some Fencer
had been formerly killed; which Ceremony did betoken, that nothing should
disjoyn them but such a Spear and such like violence. Toward Night the Woman
was brought home to her Husband's House with five Torches, signifying thereby
the need which married Persons have of five Goddesses and Gods, Jupiter, Juno,
Venus, Suadela, and Diana, who is also called Lucina. When the Woman was thus
brought to the door, then did she anoint the Posts of the Door with Oil; from
which Ceremony the Wife was called Vxor, quasi Vnxor. This ended, the Bride-men
did lift her over the Threshold, and so carried her in by a seeming violence,
because in modesty she would not seem to go without force into that place where
she must cease to be a Maid. At her carrying in, all the Company did cry out
with a loud Voice, Talassio, Talassio; for which Custom Plutarch alleges this
Reason for one; At the Rapture of the Sabine Virgins, there were some of the
poorer sort spied carrying away one of the fairest Women, some of the chief
Citizens would have taken her from them, but they began to cry out, That they
carried her to Talassius, a great Man, and well-beloved among the Romans; at
the naming of Talassius they suffered her to be carried away, themselves
accompanying her, and often crying, Talassio, Talassio, from whence it has
been continued as a Custom amongst the Romans ever after at their Marriages to
sing Talassio, Talassio.

LXV. Now as to the Jewish Virgins and Espousals, these were made, says Moses
de Kotsi, either with Money, or with an Instrument, or with Copulation: it
seems, that this last is understood of such as had lain with a Maid, and
therefore must by the Law marry her, (if the Father denied him not their
Daughter;) whereas otherwise they might not have carnal Company before the
Marriage was solemnized, this being forbidden no less than to lie with a Woman
in her disease. Their Prayer Book says thus, He who shall espouse a Woman
brings Witnesses, and before them does betroth her with Money, or somewhat
Moneyworth, which he gives her, saying, Be thou espoused to me according to
the Law of Moses and Israel. If there be not Witnesses it is nothing,
notwithstanding they both consess it. If one shall affiance a Woman to another,
he says, Be thou espoused to N. with this Ring, according to the Law of Moses
and Israel. Buxtorfius writes, That when Promise has passed between two, many
Jews are called together into a great Chamber, where every of the Youths
holds a Post in his Hand: then comes one and reads the Letters of Contract,
that N. Son of N. and N. Daughter of N. have promised Marriage to each other,
each giving so much in Dowry, which Marriage is to be solemnized on such a day,
and the Party which fails in the Promises shall give fifty Florens. This
done, they wish Joy to each other; and the Jewlings presently break their
earthen Pots, whereby they signify to the Parties Prosperity and Abundance. At
parting, every one has a Cup of Wine given them; eight days after neither
Party goes out of the House, and many Youths come and make merry with the
Bridegroom, imitating, they think, Sampson: herein some say that the Man takes
the espoused Bride home to his House, to be Witness and Keeper of her
Virginity, till the Marriage Solemnity. The day before the Marriage, the Bride
must wash and purify her self in cold Water, and put on white and clean
Garments. Their washing is performed with great Scrapulosity, in a common
watering, or in private Cisterns, or Fountains, which must be so deep that they
must stand up to the Neck in Water; and if it be muddy in the bottom, they must
have a square Stone to stand on, that their whole Feet may stand in clear
Water, and that the Water may pass betwixt their Toes; for the least part not
covered with Water would frustrate the whole Action: and for this cause they
lay aside all their Hair-laces, Neck-laces, and Rings: they dive under the
Water, so that no part may be free from the same: Some Jewess must stand by for
witness hereof, which is twelve years old and a day at least; and there must be
certain Women ringing with somewhat when she goes in or comes out of the
Water, some of them also leaping and dancing. The Bridegroom sends the Bride a
Wedding Girdle embossed with Gold, and she him another with Silver Studs. On
the Wedding Day the Bride adorns her self in the best Jewish Dress, with her
Marriage attire, and by Women, singing their sweetest Epithalamia, is conveyed
into a Chamber; and there placing her on a fair Seat, braid her Hair into
goodly Curles, and put a Veil over her Eyes, (in imitation of Rebecca's
Modesty) singing mean while, dancing, and expressing the greatest signs of Joy,
thinking they therein please God, as being taught by their Rabbis, that God
used the like curling, singing, and dancing, when he presented Eve to Adam;
yea, refused not to serve that new Couple, and with his own hands made the
Canopy, under which they were to receive their marriage Blessing, the Angels
with Pipes and Trumpets making Music to lead the Dance. That which Moses
says, God built a Woman, the Talmud interprets, He made Curls, and he
brought her to Adam, to wit, with leaping and dancing. When the Marriage
Benediction is to be solemnized, four Boys bear a Canopy on four Poles into the
place appointed, which is some Street or Garden abroad in the open Air, the
People sounding their Acclamations, Blessed be he which comes. The Bride
(being led by others) goes three times about the Bridegroom, as a Cock goes
about a Hen, and that forsooth to fulfill that Prophecy, A Woman shall compass
a Man; he also must fetch one Compass about her: the People also besprinkle the
Bride with Wheat, crying out, Increase and multiply; according to that of the
Psalmist, He fills thee with the Fat of Wheat. In some places they mingle
Money with the Wheat, which the poor Jews gather up. The Bride stands on the
right hand; for it is written, Thy Wife stands on thy right hand; with her
Face also to the South, for then she shall be fruitful. The Rabbi who marries
them, takes the end of the Vestment about the Bride-groom's Neck (they call it
Talles) and puts it on the Bride's head, after the example of Boaz and Ruth,
and then takes a Glass filled with Wine, over which he utters the Marriage
Blessing, praising God, by whose instinct these Persons were espoused, and so
reaches the Glass to them, and bids them drink. This Glass, if she be a
Virgin, has but a narrow Mouth; at Worms they use an earthen Pot. Now the
Rabbi receiving a Ring of pure Gold, without any Jewel in it, shows it to
some Witnesses, asking them if it be good, and worth the Money it cost, and
then puts it on the Bride's Finger, and with a loud Voice pronounces the
Spousal Letters. After this he takes another Glass of Wine, and blesses God,
that the Bridegroom and Bride have accepted of each other, and gives it them to
taste. This done, the Bridegroom breaks the former Glass against the Wall or
Ground, in remembrance of the Destruction of Jerusalem; in which respect, in
some places they put Ashes on the Bridegroom's head: he wears for this cause
a black Hood on his Head, like a Mourner, and the Bride likewife wears a
black Cloth, fit to terrify Children with the Deformity, Thus do they mix
Mirth and Mourning, as David warns, Rejoice unto him in trembling. This
ended, they sit down at Table, and then must the Bridegroom make Trial of his
Breast in singing a long Prayer; others in the mean time call to make ready the
Hen. Then is there an Hen and an Egg set before the Bride; of that the
Bridegroom carveth her a piece, and then presently all the Company, Men and
Women, tear the Hen amongst them like hungry Hounds, snatching out of each
others Hands and Mouths, all to glad the new married Couple. The Egg is not
sod, but in another Scene of Mirth one casts it in the face of another, of
some Christian especially, if any be present at the Nuptials: in the same is a
Mystery included for the Bride, that she shall have as easy Travel in
Childbirth as the Hen lays her Eggs. After this they fall to their Cheer and
Dances: one they call the Mitzvah, or Commandment-dance, as if God had enjoined
it. The chief Guest takes the Bridegroom by the hand, another him, and so on
through the Company: likewise the chief Woman takes the Bride, another her, and
so one another; then do they dance in a long row with a tumultuous noise, and
so end the Nuptial Sports. Amongst all their other Blessings, the Bridegroom is
to say one, Vbi perspexerit sanguinem Virginum, to use the words of Genebrad,
who expresses it, being borrowed from some Words of the Canticles, fleshly
abused by such Application. The Marriage commonly lasts eight days, and on
the Sabbath they dance the lustiest of all, doing the Sabbath herein a singular
Honor, because that also is called a Bride. It is prohibited to bid any
uncircumcised Guest to this Banquet; for Solomon says, The Stranger does not
intermeddle with his Joy: yea, the good Angels seeing such there, will depart;
and the evil will come and raise Strifes and Contentions: for they think no
place empty from the Earth to the Sky, but all full of good or bad Angels,
flying or standing in the same. The Marriage is in public, lest Whoredom
should be covered under that Pretext, pretending themselves married when they
were not.

LXVI. Let it not grieve the Reader to hear something of the Duties betwixt Man
and Wife. The Husband owes ten things to the Wife; three according to the Law,
her Nourishment, her Clothing, and her Time, namely, of due Benevolence to be
performed; and seven things according to the Words of the Scribes; the first
whereof is the Foundation of Dowry, viz. two hundred Denarii, if she be a
Virgin, otherwise a hundred. The other concern the Condition of the Dowry; the
Woman which renders not her Husband his due, is rebellious and refractory; and
he is bidden to expel her without a Dowry. The Conditions of the Dowr^ were,
first, to cure her in Sickness, secondly, to redeem her, being captive;
thirdly, to bury her, being dead; fourthly, to nourish her out of his own
Goods, and that she dwell in his House in her Widdow-hood; fifthly, to keep her
Daughters till Marriage; fixthly, that her Sons inherit. They appoint not only
Love but Honor to the Wife (as Peter also enjoyneth to this weaker Vessel)
which Honor they say is Meat and Drink, and goodly Garments; for which he
shall (this was a Woman's Friend) have favor with God. The Author of Arbaa
Turim adds, That a Man should love his Wife as his own Body, and honor her
above his Body, and keep her as one of his Members; for the Wife is the other
half of Man, and a Wife without a Man is but half a Man. And let him take heed
of striking his Wife, said another, or to be virulent in terms against her:
for, for her Tears (how pitifully easy are they to some) his Punishment is
near. And howsoever, since the Destruction of the Temple, the door of Prayers
has been shut, yet the door of Tears has not been shut, as says David, Be
not thou silent at my Tears. And should not a Man honor his Wife? Yes, says
R. Hanina, for a Man has no Blessing but for his Wife, as it is written, He
blessed Abraham for her. Let a Man cloth himself (I would not have Women hear
it) beneath his Ability, his Children according to his Ability, and his Wife
above his Ability. Let the Wife honor her Husband as her Father, and fear to
displease him, and let him spare her in his Anger, remembering that she was
taken out of his Ribs: But for the Wives choice, a Man ought, says one, to
sell all that he has, and buy a Wife, the Daughter of a wise Disciple; if he
find not such a one, let him take a Daughter of the Great Men of his time; if
not such, the Daughter of a Synagogue Ruler, in that defect let him take the
Daughter of one which gathers Alms; if not, then of a Schoolmaster, and not
the Daughter of the People of the Land, of whom the Scripture says, Cursed be
he that lies with a Beast. They say that a Man ought not to lodge in the same
Chamber, no not with his Sister, Daughter, or Daughter-in-law; yea, their wise
Men forbid Conference with a Woman altogether.

LXVII. But now it will be convenient to proceed to their way of Divorce and
other Marriage-Ceremonies. The Bill of Divorce is still practiced among the
Jews; it must be written in twelve Lines, (it is therefore called Get) neither
more nor less, and delivered to the Woman before three credible Witnesses,
under their Hands and Seals. Then does the Husband deliver it to her, saying,
Lo Woman, the Bill of this Divorce, take it of me, by it being divorced from
me, be thou free to another Husband. The Tenor of this Bill is this; The second
day of the Week, the eight and twentieth of the Month, in the Year of the
World, 5363. as we here at Mentz upon Rhine use to reckon; I Isaac, surnamed
Eckenderf, Son of R. Abr. now dwelling at Mentz, of my free Will, without
Constraint, thee Sarah, surnamed Trummerle, Daughter of R. Levi, which hitherto
has been my Wife, have determined to free, forsake, and divorce, and now do
forsake, free, and put thee from me, that thou may be thine own, and at thine
own free Will and Pleasure may depart whither thou will, and none from
henceforth for ever shall prohibit thee; and thou art so freed, that thou
may marry to any other Man. This Divorce may not be done in every place, but
they have some special place appointed, noted, and known, situate on some
known River, whereto certain chief Rabbis are called by writing, if there be
none there dwelling, which consummate the business. By the old Law a Woman
might be reconciled to her Husband before the Bill of Divorce given, or after.

The Observation of the Brother to marry the Wife of the Brother deceased
without Issue, or else to lose the Inheritance, which was testified by pulling
off his Shoe, and spitting in his Face, is now thus ruled by the Rabbis, That
none shall marry such a Widow, but rather suffer the premised Ignominy; which
is performed in this sort; She comes before the chief Rabbi with five
Witnesses, where the Rabbi demands if she have been three Months a Widow, if
her Husband had a Brother unmarried, if the Party convented be he, etc. and
lastly, if she be fasting; (for otherwise she might not spit in her Brothers
Face) of him also the Rabbi likewise asks like Questions; and receiving a
denial of Marriage, there is brought a Shoo of singular Fashion for that
purpose, which he puts on his right foot, bare, and then sets himself
against a Wall. The Woman comes, and disclaiming his Affinity, stoopeth, and
with her right hand (for if she want a right hand it puts the Rabbis out of
their Wits to scan whether with her Teeth or how else it may be done) unlooseth
the Shoo, and taking it off, spits in his face; so that the five Witnesses may
see it, saying, Thus shall it be done with him which will not build the House
of his Brother. In the time of her Uncleanness, a Woman may not enter into the
Synagogue, nor pray, nor name the Name of God, nor handle any holy Book; which
if they observe, the Rabbis promise them longer Life. As soon as she knows
of her Uncleanness, she presently separateth her self from her Husband the
space of seven days, not touching him, nor sitting on the same Seat, nor eating
in the same Dish, or on the same Cloth, nor may drink out of the same Cup, nor
stand against him, nor speak in his Face: if one will give any thing to the
other, one lays it on a Bench or Table, and goes away, and the other comes
and takes it: they say it procures the Leprosy in the Children which are
then gotten, which they object to Christians. When she has numbered seven days
of her Uncleanness, she proceeds to number as many of her Purification; after
which time, finding her self pure, she cloatheth her self in white, and taking
a Woman with her, washes her self in cold Water, (some in Winter put in warm
Water to it, which others in the coldest Season refuse) and leaves not a hair
of her Head unwashed, as before is described. Some fast till they have done it,
lest the flesh in the Teeth should hinder the Water from coming to them; for
Mouth and Eyes must be open, and they must stoop that the Pap keep not the
Water from the Breast; and if they have a Plaster on a sore it must off, and
their Nails must be pared. They write, That if any shall exceed twenty years,
and not marry, or if he shall marry a Wife which is barren, he sins as much
as if he had slain a Man, and deserves the Punishment of Onan, whom God slew,
provided, if he addict himself to the Study of the Law, and finds no need of
a Wife; but if he find Concupiscence prevail, he ought to marry
notwithstanding. And this necessity remains until he has begotten a Son and
a Daughter. But having forgotten to speak of Circumcision under the Head of
Religion, it will not be improper to touch something upon that Point in this
place. The Child is first washed and laid in clean Linen; for if he be foul,
or defile himself while he is circumcised, the Mohel or Circumciser is to
suspend or interrupt his Prayer till he be washed again. In the Morning of the
eighth day, the Godfather seateth himself down in a Seat placed near the Ark,
and the Mohel near him: twelve wax-candles are brought in to represent the
twelve Tribes; then two Cups of red Wine, the circumcising Knife, with two
Dishes, the one of Oil, the other of Sand. When the Child is brought to the
door by the Woman, the Congregation rises up, the Godfather takes the Child
and sits down in his Seat. There is also a Seat prepared for Eliah, whose
coming they expect at the Circumcision. The Child is then named, and usually by
the name of some of his Ancestors; so that Luke 1.61. it was wondered at that
Zachary should name his Son, John, seeing none of his Kindred was named with
his Name. The eighth day was so strictly observed, that if it fell on the
Sabbath the Child was then circumcised, not sooner, lest God should be thought
to be tied to the Sacrament; and because the Child the first seven days after
the Birth was held legally unclean, and yet remaining in his Blood, Levit.
12.2, 3. and 22.27. nor later, lest the Parents should be longer withheld from
the comforts of the Sacrament. The penalty of Contempt or neglect of
Circumcision, was a cutting off from the People, Genesis 17.14. that is, by
Excommunication, or bodily death of the Parents. Therefore God would have
killed Moses for not circumcising his Son: or else by the death of the Son
himself, when he comes to years of discretion, if he be not circumcised, either
by himself, or by his Parents, or by the Judges.

Now the manner of the Mohel's cutting off the foreskin, is, that he first rubs
it, that it may be the less sensible, then blesses God for the Covenant of
Circumcision, and withal cuts off the forepart of the skin, and flings it
into the Sand, in memory of that promise, Genesis 32.12. I will make thee as the
sand of the Sea: then he spits some red Wine on the Wound, and washes it it,
and some also on the Child's face, if he faint; and takes the bleeding Member
in his Mouth, and sucks the blood from it, which he spits into the other cup of
Wine, then he tears off the remaining skin with his sharp-pointed Nails, and
lays Clouts dipped in Oil in the Wound, and binds them. Then he blesses God
again, and the Godfather takes the other Cup of Wine, and prays for the
Child. And the Mohel moistneth the Child's Lips with Wine and his own blood, and
prays again. If the Child be sick on the eighth day, his Circumcision is
deferred till he recover. If he dye before the eighth day, he is circumcised at
the Grave, but without Prayers.

They redeem their Firstborn. When the Child is one and thirty days old, he
is set upon a Table by the Father, before the Priest, with as much money as two
Dollars and an half. After some questions propounded by the Priest to the
Father and Mother, amongst others, Whether he esteem^ ^ore of his Money or of
his Child? He answers, of his Child. Then the Priest takes the Money, and
^^^eth it on the Child's head, and pronounces, that he being the firstborn,
and presented before the Lord, is now redeemed. If before this time the Father
dies, then the Mother signifies by a Scroll about the Child's neck, that he is
the firstborn, and not redeemed; who, when he comes of age, is bound to redeem
himself. He is held to be of just age to redeem himself, when he is thirteen
years old, for then the Parents stand no more charged with his Sin, but he must
himself bear his own burden.

LXVIII. The ancient Persians used to celebrate their Marriages in the Spring,
and on their Marriage-day the Husband eats nothing but an Apple, or the Marrow
of a Camel. As for the Marriages in New-Spain; The Bridegroom and the Bride
stood together before the Priest, who took them by the hands, asking them if
they would marry? Understanding their Will, he took a corner of the Veil
wherewith the Woman had her head covered, and a corner of the man's Gown, which
he tied together on a knot, and so led them thus tied to the Bridegroom's
house, where there was a Hearth kindled. Then he caused the Wife to go seven
times about the Hearth, and so the married couple sat down together, and so was
the Marriage contracted. In other places of that Country, an Amantesa, or
Broker, carried the Bride on her back at the beginning of the night, four Women
attending with Torches of Pine Tree rosined. At the Bridegroom's house, his
Parents receive her, and carry her to him in a Hall, where they are both caused
to sit on a Mat near the Fire, and tied together with a corner of their
Apparel, and a Perfume of Copale-wood is made to their Gods. Two old men and as
many old women were present. The married couple eat, and then these old folks,
which after this separate them asunder, and give them good instructions for
Oeconomical Duties.

LXIX. In other parts of New-Spain, they used other Marriage Rites; at
Thaxcalla the Bridegroom and Bride polled their Heads, to signify, that from
thenceforth all childish courses should be laid aside. At Michuacan the Bride
must look directly upon the Bridegroom, or else the Marriage was not perfect.
In Mixteopan, they used to carry the Bridegroom upon their backs, as if he were
forced; and then they both join hands, and knit their Mantles together with a
great knot. The Macatecas did not come together in twenty days after Marriage,
but abode in fasting and praying all that while, sacrificing their Bodies, and
anointing the Mouths of their Idols with their blood. In Panuco, the Husbands
buy the Wives for a Bow, two Arrows, and a Net; and afterward the
Father-in-law speaks not one word to the Son-in-law for the space of a year.
When he has a Child, he lies not with his Wife in two years after, lest she
should be with Child again before the other be out of danger. Some suck twelve
years, and for this cause they have many Wives. No woman while she has her
Disease, may touch or dress any thing.

LXX. Adultery in Mexico was death. Common Women were permitted, but no
ordinary Stews. The Devil did many times talk with their Priests, and some
other Rulers and particular Persons. Great gifts were offered to the man to
whom the Devil had vouchsafed this Conference. He appeared unto them in many
shapes, and was often familiar with them. He to whom he appeared, carried about
him, painted, the likeness wherein he showed himself the first time; and they
painted his Image on their Doors, Benches, and every corner of the House; and
likewise according to his Protean and diversified Apparitions, they painted him
in many shapes.

The Dutchmen, who are well acquainted with Guiney, tell us, that at the
Marriages of their Daughters, in those Parts, they give half an Ounce of Gold
to buy Wine for the Bridal; the King himself gives no other Portion. The
Bride, in the presence of her Friends, swears to be true to her Husband,
which the man does not. For Adultery he may divorce her, and the Adulterer
pays to the King four and twenty Pesos of Gold, and the Husband may also
drive him out of Town: but the Dutchmen paid no Fine, therefore the Women were
only blamed, and paid four Pesos. If the Husband suspects his Wife, he makes
trial of her honesty, by causing her to eat Salt, with diverse of their Paganish
Ceremonies, the fear whereof makes her confess. They have many Wives, if they
can buy and keep them; each dwells in a House by her self, tho there be ten
of them; they eat and lodge asunder; sometimes they will bring their Cheer
together. The Husband closely takes which he will have lie with him to his
Room, where their Bed is a Mat. The Women after Travel wash themselves, and do
not accompany with their Husbands for three Months after. The Child new born
has a clean Cloth wrapped about the middle, and is laid down on a Mat. The
Mothers use to bear their Children at their backs, and so travel with them,
none proving lame, notwithstanding that shaking of their Bodies; they give them
the Breast over their shoulders. When it is a Month old, they hang a Net about
the Body, like a shirt, made of the Bark of a tree, hanged full of fetisso's,
or their Idols, to secure it from the Devil, who otherwise would, they think,
carry it away. They hang the hair full of shells, and Corals about the Neck,
Arms, and Legs, applying diverse fetissos or wreaths, with superstitious fancy,
that one is good for vomiting, a second for falling, a third for bleeding, a
fourth to make it sleep, a fifth against wild Beasts, and so in the rest,
giving to each fetisso a several name. They quickly learn them to eat, and then
leave them about the House, like Dogs: they soon learn to go, to speak, to
swim: when they are first born, they are not black but reddish, as the
Brasilians: Each Woman brings up her own: they teach them no Civility, and beat
them sometimes cruelly with staves: when they are eight, or ten, or twelve
years old they learn them to spin Bark-thread, and make Nets. After that, they
go with their Fathers to fish: at eighteen Years old they begin to set up for
themselves, two or three of them together hiring a House and Canoe: and then
they cover their Privities, grow amorous, and their Fathers look out Wives for
them. They have little Hair on their face at thirty; they wear Nails as long as
the Joint of a Man's Finger, as a token of Gentility, which is also observed by
Merchants; they keep them very clean, and as white as Ivory; they are great in
Flesh, beyond Men of these Parts; at threescore and ten, or fourscore, their
blackness decays, and they grow yellow; they have small Bellies, long Legs,
broad Feet, long Toes, sharp Sight, quick Wit, Estridge maws; are spiteful,
curiously neat, Drunkards, Thieves, leacherous, and subject to the Pox, whereof
they are not ashamed, as neither of showing their Nakedness.

LXXI. If a Man amongst the Turks likes a young Woman, he buyeth her of her
Father, and then enrolleth her in the Cadies Book, the Marriage following with
all Bacchanal Solemnities. Many Women are invited by the Brides Mother the
Night before, when after the feasting they bathe her, and the next Morning
trick her in her richest Ornaments, tying on her silken Buskins, with Knots not
easily unknit; (which the Bridegroom must untie, though with his Teeth) after
that, with much Solemnity, his Companions on horseback, riding two in a Rank,
and conducted by the Sacdish, who is nearest of his Kindred, have fetched her
home, the Bride being delivered with her Face close covered, set a stride on
Horseback, with a Canopy over her head, and received of him at his door;
thence led, if she be of Quality, by an Eunuch, to the Bride-chamber. The
Guests honor him with Presents, yet go not in: The Father also gives only
some pieces of Household stuff, carried openly by Particulars through the
Streets. Now he is to entertain the Wives with an equal Respect. Alike is
their Diet, Apparel, yea, and Benevolence (unless they consent to change and
give turns) or else they may complain to the Cady, and procure a Divorce; but
the Husband may put away his Wives at pleasure, who may marry unto another
within five Months after, except she prove with Child, and then she must stay
so long after her delivery: but if he will have her again he must buy her; and
if after the third Divorce, another is first to lie with her as a Punishment of
his Levity. They will sell some of them, or give them to their Slaves: the
Wives give him the reverence of a Master. They are at no time to deny him
their Embracements; whom he touches not again, until he has been at the
Bath. They hold their Chastisement, which they receive from him, as an Argument
of Affection. They intermeddle not with Household Affairs, only it is required
of them to content their Husbands, to nurse their own Children, and to live
peaceably together, which also they do without Jealousy or Envy. They are
exceeding beautiful, for the most part ruddy, clear and smooth as the polished
Ivory, tender and soft, as frequenting the Baths daily, and never open to the
Weather, but wither quickly. Great and black Eyes are the greatest Beauty to
the Eyes of a Turk. They sit not at Table with their Husband, but wait and
serve them: and then they dine by themselves, admitting no Mankind with them
above twelve Years old; and they never go abroad without leave, except to the
Bath, and on Thursday to weep at the Graves of the dead; they rise to their
Husbands, and stand while they are in Presence, and besides them, come in no
Company of men, nor do they speak with a Man, or in any other part of their
Body are seen of any Man, because they think sight, especially where Beauty and
Comeliness is, cannot be without sin; only the Brother may be permitted to see
the Sister, but not the Husband's Brother: yea, their Sons, when they come to
growth are separated from them. For this cause that Sex is not suffered to buy
and sell, but is closely mewed, save that their Law allows them to frequent
the public Baths The Wife and Concubine differ in the right to a Dowry, which
the latter wants; but the Wife must cause the other to be her Husband's
Bedfellow when he commands, without gainsaying, except on their Sabbath or
Friday nights, which is the Wives peculiar. Yet are the Turks given in both
Sexes to unnatural Lusts, even the Women in public Baths, sometimes are so
inflamed in that Filthiness as is intolerable. Busbequius tells of one Woman,
who falling in love with a young Maid, and no way else prevailing, clothed her
self in Man's Apparel, and hiring a House near, procured the Fathers good Will
to have that his Daughter in Marriage; which being solemnized between them, and
the truth discovered (which black Mantle of Night could not cover them from
Hymen's Torch) Complaint was made, and the Governor quenched the hot flames of
this new Bridegroom, causing her to be drowned for that offense. If the Man
abuse the Wife to unnatural Lust, she may have her Remedy by Divorce, if she
accuse her Husband; which Modesty forbids to be done in Words, and therefore
she puts off her Shoe, and by inverting the same accuses her Husband's
Perverseness. There are some Turks who keep Boys gallantly arrayed, to serve
for the worse than beastly Lust of such as will hire them. They have this
loathsome Punishment for that loathsome Sin of Whoredom; to take the Paunch of
a Beast new killed, and cutting a Hole thorough, to thrust the Adulterers Head
in this Dung-Wallet, and so carry him in Pomp thorough the Streets. It is Death
either to the Body by Judicial Sentence, or the Soul, by turning Turk, for a
Christian to have carnal Dealing with any of their Women. A Jew who had dealing
with a Turk's Wife, with her Husband's Consent, could not escape hanging
therefore, (this indeed was a favor, for he should have been burned)
notwithstanding his rich Contrymen offered two thousand Ducats to save him:
her Husband was hanged for his wittally Persuasion, and she her self drowned.
It is certain, that they buy Boys of an hundred or two hundred Ducats, and mew
them up for their filthy Lust, till they prove bearded: they will also steal
Boys for that Villainy.

LXXII. In Negapatan, upon the River Ganges, in the East Indies, the manner of
their Marriages is extraordinary; for, many times the Priest, with a Cow, and
the Man and Woman, go together to the Waterside, where the Bramane first
mutters a short Prayer, and then links their Hands about the Cow's Tail, pours
upon them all his hallowed Oil, and lastly, forces the Beast into the River,
whereinto she goes willingly so far as till they be to the middle in Water;
neither returns she, nor do they disunite till the Waves advise them; when
being on shore they unite, and hold that mysterious Tie forcible and sacred
ever after.

LXXIII. The Manner of the Tartars wedding is as follows. The Husband
covenanteth with the Father of the Maid; who having given him power to take her
wheresoever he shall find her, he seeks her among some of her Friends, where
she has then of purpose hidden her self, and by a kind of force carries her
away. They marry with any except their own Mother and Sister: Their Widows
seldom marry, because of their Service to their former Husbands in another
World, except the Son marry his Fathers Wives, or the Brother his Brother's,
because they can there in the next World be content to resign them to their
former Husbands again. The Women sell and provide all Necessaries into the
House, the Men intending nothing but their Arms, Hunting, and Hawking. If one
has buried a Male-child, and another a Female, the Parents contract a Marriage
between those two, and painting in Papers, Servants, Horses, Clothes, and
Household, and making Writings for the Confirmation of the Dower, burn these
things in the Fire, by the smoke whereof, they (in their smoky conceits)
imagine all these things to be carried and confirmed to their Children in the
other world; and the Parents of the two dead Parties claim kindred each of
other, as if they indeed had married their Children whilst they lived: yet they
do not account the woman they have married a Wife, until she has honored them
with the name of a Father, and then begins he to take Dowry of her Friends,
of Horses, Sheep, Kine, etc. But if she be barren, after a certain time he
turns her home again.

LXXIV. In China their Marriages and Espousals want not many Ceremonies; both
are done in their Youth: they like equality of age and state betwixt the
Parties. The Parents make the Contracts, not asking the Childrens consent,
neither do they ever refuse. As for their Concubines, every one keeps according
to his pleasure and ability, respecting in them especially their Beauty; and
buy them for the most part, their price being an hundred Crowns, or less. The
common People also buy their Wives, and sell them at their pleasure. The
Magistrates marry in their own Rank their Legitimate wife. This chief wife only
fits at Table with her husband, the rest (except in the Royal Families) are as
Servants, which in the presence of either of the former may not sit but stand.
Their Children also call that wife their Mother, not their Natural Parent, and
for her Funerals alone solemnize three years mourning, or leave their Office;
not for their own Mother. In these Marriages they are very scrupulous, that the
Wife have not the same surname with her Husband, although there be no kindred
betwixt them, and the sirnames in China are not a thousand, neither may any
devise new, but must have one, and that the same which their Ancestors by the
Fathers side (not the Mothers) had, except they be adopted into another Family.
They had no degrees of Affinity or Consanguinity, so the surname differ, and
therefore marry in the Mothers Kindred, be it almost never so near. The Bride
brings no Portion to her Husband, and yet the first day she comes to his House,
she has to attend abundance of Houshold-furniture, even the Streets being
filled with it, all at the Husbands cost, who some Months before sends her a
great Sum of Money to this purpose. There are many, who being poor, do for Lust
make themselves Slaves to rich men, that so they may be furnished with a wife
amongst his Women-Slaves; whereby also the Children become perpetually bond.
Others buy their wives, but seeing their increasing Family grow chargeable,
beyond their ability, sell their young Sons and Daughters at the same price
they would sell a Swine or Beast, or some two or three Ducats more; yea,
though they be not by Dearth compelled thereto.

LXXV. If any Merchant resort into Pegu, he shall have many Maids offered him
by their Parents, to take his choice, and having agreed with the Parents, he
may for the time of his abode use her as his Slave, or his Concubine, without
any discredit to her. Yea, if he come again after she is married, he may for
the time he stays there, demand her in like sort to his use. And when a man
marries, he will request some of his Friends to lie the first night with his
Bride. There are also among them, that sow up the privy Parts of their
Daughters, leaving only passage for Urine; which, when they marry, pass under
the Surgeons hand for Remedy.

LXXVI. The Marriages of the Bengalans are after this sort; The man and woman
come to the Waterside, where stands a Bramane or Priest, with a Cow and a
Calf, or a Cow with Calf: These all go into the water together, the Bramane
holding a white Cloth of four yards long, and a Basket cross bound, with diverse
things in it. This cloth he lays upon the back of the Cow, by the Tail, and
says certain words. She has a Copper or brass Pot full of Water. The Man
holds his hand by the Braman's Hand, and the Wives hand by her Husbands, and
all have the Cow by the Tail. Then they pour Water out of the Pot upon the
Cow's Tail, which runs thorough all their hands, and they lade up Water with
their hands, and then the Bramane tieth their Clothes together. After this,
they go round about the Cow and Calf, and give somewhat to the Poor there
attending, leaving the Cow and Calf for the Braman's use, and offer to diverse
of their Idols Money; then lying down upon the ground, they kiss it diverse
times, and go their way

LXXVII. The young men in Arabia may go a wooing to diverse Maids, till such
time as they have sped of a Wife; yea, the Father of the Maid most friendly
welcometh her Suitor; so that I think scarce any Noble or Gentleman among them
can choose a Virgin for his House: albeit, so soon as any Woman is married she
is quite forsaken of all her Suitors, who then seek out new Paramours for their
liking.

LXXVIII. The Bramanes marry but once, and that not all, but only the eldest of
the Brethren, to continue the Succession, who is also Heir of the Father's
Substance, and keeps his Wife straightly, killing her, if he find her
adulterous, with Poison. The younger Brethren lie with other Men's Wives, who
account the same as a singular Honor done unto them, having Liberty to enter
into any Man's house, yea, of the Kings, no less than of the Subjects, of that
Religion; the Husbands leaving the Wives, and the Brethren their Sisters unto
their Pleasures, and therefore departing out of the House when they come in;
and hence it is, that no Man's Son inheriteth his Fathers Goods, but the
Sister's Son succeeds, as being most certain of the Blood. So in the Kingdom
of Calicat, when the King marries a Wife, one of the principal Bramanes has
the first Nights lodgings with her, for which, he has assigned him by the
King, four hundred or five hundred Ducats. The King commits the Custody of
his Wife to the Bramanes when he travelleth any whither, and takes in too
honest part their dishonest Familiarity: but, for this cause the King's Son
succeeds not in the Crown, but his Sisters Son, as being certainly of his
Blood. These Sisters of the King choose what Gentleman they please on whom to
bestow their Virginity; and if they prove not in a certain time to be with
Child, they betake them to these Bramane Stallions: the Gentlemen and Merchants
have a Custom to exchange Wives, in token of great Friendship. Some Women
amongst them have six or seven Husbands, fathering her Children on which of
them she best pleases. The Men when they marry, get others to use them if they
be Virgins, fifteen or twenty days before they themselves will bed them.

LXXIX. As for the Marriages in Peru, the Men had many Wives, but one was
principal, which was wedded with Solemnity, and that in this sort. The
Bridegroom went to the Bride's House, and put O Hoya, which was an open Shoe,
on her foot; this, if she were a Maid, was of Wool, otherwise, of Reeds: and
this done, he led her thence with him. If she committed Adultery she was
punished with Death. When the Husband died, she carried a mourning Weed of
black a Year after, and might not marry in that time, which befell not the
other Wives. The Ingua, or Emperor himself, with his own hand, gave this
Woman to his Governors and Captains, and the Governors assembled all the
young Men and Maids in one place of the City, where they gave to every one his
Wife, with the aforesaid Ceremony in putting on the O Hoya; the other Wives
did serve and honor this. None might marry with his Mother, Daughter, Grand
Mother, or Grand Child: and Yupangui, the Father of Guayanacapa, was the first
Ingua that married his Sister, and confirmed his Fact, by a Decree, That the
Ingua's might do it, commanding his own Children to do it, permitting the
Noblemen also to marry their Sisters by the Father's side.

LXXX. In the Canaries they used for Hospitality to let their Friends lie with
their Wives, and received theirs in like courtesy: and therefore, as in
India, the Sisters Son inherited. Amongst the Georgians too, the Husband
bringing home a Guest, commends him to his Wife and Sister, with charge to
yield him Content and Delight, esteeming it a Credit that their Wives can
please and be acceptable. Their Virgins become Mothers very soon; most of them
at ten years old can bring witnesses in their Arms, (little bigger than a great
Frog, which yet after grow tall and square men) to prove that there is never a
Maid the less for them. So in Chamul, a Province in Tartary, they not only
permit, but account it a great Honor to have their Wives and Sisters at the
pleasure of such Strangers as they entertain, themselves departing the while,
and suffering all things to be their Guests Will; for so are their Idols
served, who therefore for this Hospitality, they think, will prosper all that
they have. And when one of their Chams forbad them this beastly practice, they
abstained three Years, but then sent a lamentable Embassage to him, with
request, that they might continue their former Custom, for since they left it
they could not thrive; who, overcome by their fond Importunity, granted their
Requests; which they with Joy accepted, and do still observe.

LXXXI. In Carazan, another Province of Tartary, they have a barbarous Custom,
which they used, when any proper and personable Gentleman of valourous Spirit
and goodly Presence lodged in any House amongst them: in the Night they killed
him, not for the spoil, but that his Soul, furnished with such parts of Body
and Mind, might remain in that House: much hope of future happiness to that
House did they repose in such unhappy Attempts. There too, when a Woman is
delivered of a Child, the Man lies in, and keeps his Bed, with Visitation of
Gossips the space of forty days: they worship the ancientest Person in the
house, ascribing to him all their good. In some part of the Country, Knights
and Soldiers never marry, but lie with such Women or Daughters as like them,
leaving his VVeapon mean while at the door, which forbid any Man else, although
it be the good man himself, to enter till he has ended his Business, and be
gone. At a place in the Kingdom of Fez, there was a Temple built; to which, at
certain times in the Year, resorted Men and Women in the night; where, after
Sacrifices, the Candles were put out, and each Man lay with the Woman he first
touched. Those Women were forbidden to lie with any other for a Year after. The
Children begotten in this Adultery were brought up by the Priests of the Temple.

But, having spoken of the strange Rites and Ceremonies used in Marriage by
many Nations of the Universe, it will not be unseasonable to give some
Instances of such unnatural Wives and Husbands, as we meet with recorded in
History.

LXXXII. 1. Joan, Grandchild to Robert King of Naples, by Charles his Son,
succeeded her Grandfather in the Kingdom of Naples and Sicily, Anno 1343. a
Woman of a beautiful Body, and rare Endowments of Nature; she was first married
to her Cousin Andrew, a Prince of Royal Extraction, and of a sweet and loving
Disposition: but, he being not able to satisfy her Wantonness, she kept
company with low Persons; at last she grew weary of him, complaining of his
Insufficiency, and caused him, in the City of Arersa, to be hung upon a Beam,
and strangled in the night time, and then threw out his Corpse into a Garden,
where it lay some days unburied. It is said, that this Andrew on a day coming
into the Queen's Chamber, and finding her twisting a thick string of Silk and
Silver, demanded of her for what purpose she made it; she answered, to hang you
in: which he then little believed, the rather, because those who intend such
mischief use not to speak of it before hand: but it seems she was as good as
her word.

LXXXIII. 2. Cicero put away his Wife Ferentia for diverse Reasons; as, because
she had made small account of him in the time of the Wars which were betwixt
Caesar and Pompey; so that when he went from Rome to Pompey she provided no fit
Accommodations for his Journey; and when he came back again into Italy, she
never showed the least spark or sign of Love or good Will toward him; for,
though he staid long at Brundusium, she never went to see him; and when his
Daughter took that Journey, to visit him, she neither provided Company to
conduct her, nor gave her Money or other Necessaries for the way: yea, she so
handled the matter, that when Cicero came to Rome he found nothing in his House
but bare Walls, and yet he was much set in debt by her.

LXXXIV. 3. Bithricus, King of the West Saxons, married Ethelburga the Daughter
of Offa, King of Mercia; by whom, after he had reigned seventeen Years, he was
poisoned and buried at Warham; upon which occasion it was ordained by the
Nobles, That from thenceforth the King's Wives should not be called Queens, nor
suffered to sit with them in place of State. This Ethelburga fled into France
with infinite Treasure, where, offering a mighty Sum of her Gold to Charles
King of France, he put her to her choice, whether she would have him or his Son
to her Husband: she chose the Son, for the Reason (as she said) that he was the
youngest: then, said Charles, had thou chosen me thou should have had my
Son; but now thou shall neither have him nor me: and then sent her to a
Monastery, wherein she professed her self a Nun, and became there the Abbess
for some years; but afterward being found to have committed Adultery with a
Layman, she was cast out of the Monastery, and ended her Life in Poverty and
much Misery.

LXXXV. 4. Alboinus, the first King of Italy of the Lombards, having slain
Cummundus, King of the Gepidae, made a drinking-cup of his Skull. Rosamond, the
Daughter of that King, he had taken to Wife; and being one day very merry at
Verona, forced her to drink out of that detested Cup; which she so stomached,
that she promised one Hemichild, a Courtier, that if he would aid her in
killing the King, she would give him both her self and the Kingdom of Lombardy.
This when he consented to, and performed, they were so hated, that they were
constrained to fly to Rarenna, unto the Protection of Longinus the Exarch, who
persuaded her to dispatch Hemichild out of the way, and to take him for her
Husband; to which she willingly agreed. Hemichild coming out of the Bath,
called for Drink, and she gave him a strong Poison; half of which when he had
drunk, and found by the strange Operation, how the matter went, he compelled
her to drink the rest, and so both died together.

LXXXVI. 5. When Alexander the Great had determined to invade the Daca, where
he knew Spitamenes was, who not only had revolted himself, but had also drawn
several others into the Society of his Rebellion, and had at sometimes
overthrown some of Alexander's Captains, there fell out one thing remarkable;
The Wife of Spitamenes, (upon whom he extremely doted) when by her feminine
Flatteries she was not able to persuade her Husband to make trial of the
Victor's Clemency, and to endeavor to appease that Alexander, whom he could
not avoid nor escape, she set upon her Husband, when intoxicated with Wine. He
lay fast asleep, and drawing a Sword that she had concealed under her Garments,
she cut off his Head, delivered it to a Servant that was conscious of her fact,
and with him only in her Company, as she was, with her Garments besprinkled
with his Blood, she went directly to Alexander's Camp, and caused him to be
informed that there was one there to inform him of something that he was
concerned to know from her. When she was admitted, she desired the Servant
might come in, who showed the Head of Spitamenes to those that searched what he
carried wrapped up under his Garment. When the King knew this, though he looked
upon it as a very considerable piece of Service to him, that a Renegado and a
Traitor was dispatched, yet had he a horror of the Fact, that she should
ensnare his Life that had well deserved at her hands, who was her Husband, and
Parent of the Children which they had betwixt them; so that considering the
Atrocity of the Fact, over-weighed any pretended merit from himself; he sent
her Word that she should forthwith depart his Camp lest she should infect the
barbarity of her Example.

LXXXVII. 6. Semiramis, the Wife of Ninus, King of Assyria, was a witty and
beautiful Woman, beloved of her Husband even unto Dotage: as she was one day in
discourse with him, she told him that she was exceedingly desirous of a Thing,
yet because of the greatness of it she durst not discover it, nor could hope to
prevail; Ninus not apprehending her subtilty, bad her tell him what it was; she
answered, that he should deliver to her the Government of his Empire for five
days; which when she had obtained, she caused her Husband to be slain, and so
usurped his Throne.

LXXXVIII. 7. Fulvius understanding that he was proscribed by the Tryumvirate,
betook himself to his Wife, hoping to be hid, and some way kept private by her
in this time of his Extremity. He might the rather expect her fidelity in this
thing, for of a Slave he had made her a free Woman, and received her to his
Bed; but he found a deadly Enemy instead of a Friend; for, she suspecting that
he was in love with another Woman, did her self accuse and discover him to the
Triumviri; by whose order, he died in a miserable manner.

LXXXIX. 8. The noble Pittacus, so famous for his Valor, and as much renowned
for his Wisdom and Justice, feasted upon a time certain of his Friends, who
were Strangers. His Wife coming in at the midst of the Dinner, being angry at
something else, overthrew the Table, and tumbled down all the Provision under
foot. Now when his Guests and Friends were wonderfully dismayed and abashed
hereat, Pittacus made no more ado at the matter, but turning to them, There is
not one of us all, says he, but he has his Cross, and one thing or other
wherewith to exercise his Patience: and for my own part, this is the only thing
that checketh my Felicity; for, were it not for this shrewing Wife, I were the
happiest Man in the World: so that of me these Verses may be verified; This Man
who while he walks the Street
Or public Place, is happy thought;
No sooner sets in House his feet,
But woe is him, and not for ought:
His Wife him rules, and that is a spite,
She scolds, she fights from Noon to Night:.


But now it is time to say something of unnatural Husbands.

XC. 1. Anno Dom. 1652. in the Isle of Thanet in Kent, lived one Adam
Sprackling, Esquire, who about twenty Years before had married Katharine, the
Daughter of Sir Robert Leukner of Kent. This Sprackling had a fair Estate, but
had exhausted it by Drinking, Gaming, etc. At last Executions were out against
him, and he forced to keep home and make his House his Prison: This filled him
full of Rage, so that his Wife was constrained many times to lock her self from
him. But, upon Saturday night, Dec. 11. 1652. as it seems, he resolved to
mischief her; and being at ten a Clock at night in his Kitchen, he sent for one
Martin, a poor old Man, out of his Bed to him; so that there were in the
Kitchen, Sprackling and his Wife, one Ewell, and this Martin; Sprackling
commanded Martin to bind Ewell's Legs, which the one did, and the other
suffered, thinking it had only been a ranting humor of their Master: then he
began to rage against his Wife, who sat quietly by; and though she gave him
none but sweet and loving words, yet he drew his Dagger, and struck her over
the face with it, which she bore patiently, though she was hurt in the Jaw. He
still continuing to rage at her, she weary and in great fear, rose up, and went
to the door; Her Husband followed her with a chopping-knife in his hand, with
which he struck at her wrist, and cut the bone in sunder, so that her hand hung
down, only by the Sinews and Skin. No help was near; Ewell was bound, and
Martin being old and weak durst not interpose, fearing his own Life, only
prayed his Mistress to stay and be quiet, hoping all should be well, and so
getting a Napkin bound up her hand with it. After this, toward Morning, still
railing and raging at his Wife, he dashed her on the Forehead with the Iron
Cleaver, Whereupon she fell down bleeeding but recovering her self on her
Knees, she cried and prayed unto God for the pardon of her own and her
Husband's Sins: praying God to forgive him as she did; but as she was thus
praying, her bloody Husband chopped her head in the midst of the very Brains, so
that she fell down and died immediately. Then did he kill six Dogs, four of
which he threw by his Wife; and after she was dead chopping her twice into the
Legs, compelled Martin to wash Ewell's Face with her Blood, himself also
dipping Linen in her Blood, washed Martin's face, and bloodied his own face
with it. For all which, being apprehended and carried to Sandwich Goal, at the
Sessions following, which were April the 22. 1653. he was araigned, condemned
and hanged on the 27. day: dying very desperately, and not suffering any,
either Minister or Gentleman to speak with him after his Condemnation.

XCI. 2. Periander the Corinthian, in a high fit of Passion, trod his Wife
under Foot, and although she was at that time with Child of a Boy, yet he never
desisted from his injurious treatment of her, till such time as he had killed
her upon the place. Afterward, when he was come to himself, and was sensible
that what he had done was thorough the calumniating instigation of his
Concubines, he caused them all to be burnt alive, and banished his Son
Lycophron as far as Corcyra, upon no other occasion than that he lamented the
death of his Mother with tears and outcries.

XCII. 3. Nero the Emperor, being once incensed against his Wife Poppora
Sabina, gave her such a kick with his Foot upon the Belly that she thereupon
departed this Life. But though he was a man that seemed to be born to Cruelty
and Blood, yet he afterward so repented himself of this act, that he would not
suffer her Body to be burned after the Roman manner; but built the Funeral Pile
for her of odours and persumes, and so ordered her to be brought into the
Julian Monument.

XCIII. 4. Herod the Sophist, being offended at his Wife Rhegilla for some
slight fault of his, commanded his Freed-man Alcimedon to beat her: she was at
that time eight Months gone with Child, or near upon; so that (by the
imprudence of him who was employed to chastize her) she received some blows
upon her Belly, which occasioned first her Miscarriage, and soon after her
Death. Her Brother Brudeas, a Person of great Nobility, cited her Husband Herod
to answer the Death of his Sister before the Senate of Rome; where, if he had
not, it is pity but he should have received a Condign punishment.

XCIV. 5. When M. Antonius was overcome at Actium, Herod King of Judea,
believing that he was in danger to lose his Kingdom because he had been a fast
friend to Antonius, determined to meeet Caesar Augustus at Rhodes and there
endeavored to assure his favor to him; having resolved upon his Journey, he
committed the care and custody of his Wife to Sohemus his Friend; giving him
withal thus much in command, that in case he should hear of his death by the
way, or at the place whither he was intended, that then he should not fail
forthwith to kill Mariamne, his Wife; yielding this only reason of his
injunction, that it might not be in the power of any man to enjoy so great a
Beauty after his death. Mariamne had extorted this Secret from Sohemus, and at
Herod's return twitted him with it. Herod caused Sohemus, unheard, to be
immediately put to death; and not long after, he also beheaded Mariamne, his
beloved Queen and Wife. But Herod had impotent desires of her even after she
was dead; he often called upon her name, and frequently betook himself to
uncomely lamentations; he invented all the delight he could, he feasted and
drank liberally, and yet to small purpose, he therefore left off the care of
his Kingdom, and was so overcome with his grief, that he often commanded his
Servants to call Mariamne, as if she had been still alive; his grief
increasing, he exiled himself in Solitudes, under pretense of hunting, where,
continuing to afflict himself, he fell into a grievous Disease, and when
recovered of it, he became so fell and cruel, that for slight causes he was apt
to inflict death.

XCV. 6. Amalasunta had raised Theodahitus at once to be her Husband, and King
of the Goths; but upon this Proviso, that he should make Oath, that he would
rest contented with the Title of a King, and leave all matters of Government to
her sole dispose. But no sooner was he accepted as King, but he forgot his Wife
and Benefactress, recalled her Enemies from banishment, put her Friends and
Relations many of them to death; banished her self into an Island in the
Vulsiner Lake, and there set a strong guard upon her: At last, he thought
himself not sufficiently safe, so long as Amalasunta was alive, and thereupon
he dispatched certain of his Instruments to the place of her Exile, with order
to put her to death; who finding her in a Bath, gave her no further time, but
strangled her there.

But on the other side, it will be fitting to give a few Instances of the Love
of some Husbands.

XCVI. 1. Darius the last King of the Persians, supposing that his Wife Statira
was slain by Alexander, filled all the Camp with lamentations and outcryes, O,
Alexander, (said he) whom of thy Relations have I put to Death, that thou
should thus retaliate my severities: thou have hated me without any
provocation on my part: but suppose thou have Justice on thy side, should
thou manage the War against Women? Thus he bewailed the supposed death of his
Wife; but as soon as he heard, she was not only preserved alive, but also
treated by Alexander with the highest honor, he then prayed to God to render
Alexander fortunate in all things, though he was his Enemy.

XCVII. 2. Titus Gracchus loved his Wife Cornelia with such fervency, that when
two Snakes were by chance found in his House, and that the Augurs had
pronounced that they should not suffer them both to escape, but that one of
them should be killed: affirming also, that if the male was let go, Cornelia
should dye first; on the other side that Gracchus should first expire, if the
Female was dismissed: Dismiss then the Female, (said he) that so Cornelia may
survive me, who am at this time the Elder. It so fell out, that he dyed soon
after, leaving behind him many Sons, so entirely loved by the Mother, and the
memory of her husband so dear to her, that she refused the proffered Marriage
with Ptolomais King of Egypt. The buried Ashes of her Husband it seemed, lay
so cold at her Heart, that splendour of a Diadem, and all the Pomp of a Rich and
proffered Kingdom, were not able so to warm it, as to make it capable of
receiving the impression of a new Love,

XCVIII. 3. M. Plautius, by the command of the Senate, was to bring back a Navy
of sixty Ships of the Confederates into Asia, he put ashore at Tarentum;
thither had Oristilla his Wife followed him, and there (overcome with a
disease) she departed this Life. Plautius having ordered all things for the
celebration of the Funeral, she was laid upon the Pile to be burnt, as the
Roman manner was; the last offices to be performed were to anoint the dead
Body, and to give it a valedictory kiss, but betwixt these, the grieved Husband
fell upon his own Sword, and died. His Friends took him up in his Gown and
Shoos, as he was, and laying his Body by that of his Wives, burnt them both
together. The Sepulcher of these two is yet to be seen at Tarentum, and is
called the Tomb of the two Lovers.

XCIX. 4. One of the Neapolitans (pity his Name as well as his Country is not
remembered) being buisily employed in a Field near the Sea, and his Wife at some
distance from him, the Woman was seized upon by some Moorish Pirates, who came
on shore to prey upon all they could find. Upon his return; not finding his
Wife, and perceiving a Ship that lay at Anchor not far off, conjecturing the
matter as it was, he threw himself into the Sea and swam up to the Ship; when
calling to the Captain, he told him that he was therefore come because he must
needs follow his Wife. He feared not the Barbarism of the Enemies of the
Christian Faith, nor the miseries those Slaves endure that are thrust into
places where they must tug at the Oar, his Love overcame all these. The Moors
were full of admiration at the carriage of the Man, for they had seen some of
his Countrymen rather choose Death, than endure so hard a loss as that of their
Liberty, and at their return, they told the whole of this story to the King of
Tunis, who, moved with the Relation of so great a Love, gave him and his wife
their freedom, and the man was made, by his command, one of the Soldiers of
his Lifeguard.

C. 5. Ferdinand King of Spain, married Elizabeth the Sister of Ferdinand Son
of John King of Arragon. Great were the Virtues of this admirable Princess,
whereby she gained so much upon the heart of her Husband, a valiant and
fortunate Prince, that he admitted her to an equal share in the Government of
the Kingdom with himself: wherein they lived with such mutual agreement; as the
like has not been known amongst any of the Kings and Queens of that Country.
There was nothing done in the Affairs of State, but what was debated, ordained,
and subscribed by both: the Kingdom of Spain was a name common to them both;
Ambassadors were sent abroad in both their names: Armies and Soudliers were
levied and formed in both their names, and so was the whole Wars and all civil
affairs, that King Ferdinand did not challenge to himself an Authority in any
thing or in any respect greater than that whereunto he had admitted this his
beloved Wife.

CI. 6. Meleager challenged to himself the chief Glory and Honor of slaying
the Calidontan Boar, but this being denied him, he sat in his Chamber so angry
and discontented, that when the Curetes were assaulting the City where he
lived, he would not stir out to lend the Citizens the least of his assistance.
The Elders, Magistrates, the Chief of the City and the Priests came to him with
their humble supplications, but he would not move, they propounded a great
reward, he despised at once both it and them. His Father Oenaeus came to him,
and imbraceing his Knees, sought to make him relent, but all in vain: His
Mother came and tried allways, but was refused, his Sisters and his most
familiar friends were sent to him, and begged he would not forsake them in their
last extremity; but neither this way was his fierce mind to be wrought upon. In
the mean time the Enemy had broken into the City, and then came his Wife
Cleopatra trembling: O my dearest Love (said she) help us, or we are lost: the
Enemy is already entered. The Hero was moved with this voice alone, and roused
himself at the apprehension of the danger of his beloved Wife: he Armed
himself, went forth, and left not till he had repulsed the Enemy and put the
City in its wonted safety vnd security.

But no less extraordinary has the Love of some Wives been to their Husbands,
as of the Husbands to their Wives.

CII. 1. The Prince of the Province of Fingo, in the Empire of Japan, hearing
that a Gentleman of the Country had a very beautiful Women to his Wife, got him
dispatched; and having sent for the Widow some days after her Husband's Death,
acquainted her with his Desires: She told him, she had much reason to think her
self happy in being honored with the friendship of so great a Prince, yet she
was resolved to bite off her Tongue, and murder her self, if he proffered her
any violence; but, if he would grant her the favor to spend one Month in
bewailing her Husband, and then give her the liberty to make an Entertainment
for the Relations of the deceased, to take her leave of them, he should find
how much she was his Servant, and how far she would comply with his Affections.
It was easily granted: a very great Dinner was provided, whither came all the
Kindred of the deceased: the Gentlewoman perceiving the Prince began to be warm
with his Wine, in hopes of enjoying her promise, she desired liberty to
withdraw into an adjoining Gallery, to take the Air; but, as soon as she was
come into it, she cast her self headlong down, in the Presence of the Prince,
and all her dead Husbands Relations.

CIII. 2. Constantine the Ninth, exercising Tyranny, as well in matters of Love
as within his Empire, caused the Roman Argyropulus to be sought out, and
commanded him to repudiate his Wife whom he had lawfully married, to take his
Daughter, on Condition that he would make him Caesar, and associate him with
himself in his Dignity: but if he condescended not to his Will, he threatened to
pull out his Eyes, and to make him all the days of his Life miserable. The
Lady, who was present, seeing her Husband involved in all the Perplexities that
might be, and ignorant what Answer to give unto the Emperor, Ah! Sir, said
she, I see you are much hindered in a brave way: if it only rest in your Wife
that you be not great and happy, I freely deprive my self of all, yea of your
Company (which is more precious to me than all the Empires of the World) rather
than prejudice your Fortune; for know, I love you better than my self. And
saying this, she cut off her Hair, and voluntarily entered into a Monastery,
which the other was willing enough to suffer, preferring Ambition before Love.

CIV. 3. The Emperor Conrad the Third, besieged Guelphus Duke of Bavaria, in
the City of Hensbery in Germany: The Women perceiving that the Town could not
possibly hold out long, petitioned the Emperor that they might depart only
with so much as each of them could carry upon their Backs; which the Emperor
condescended to, expecting they would have laden themselves with Silver and
Gold, etc. But they came all forth with every one her Husband on her Back;
whereat the Emperor was so moved, that he wept, received the Duke into his
favor, gave all the Men their Wives, and extolled the Women with deserved
Praises.

CV. 4. Hota was the Wife of Rahi Benxamut, a valiant Captain, and of great
Reputation amongst the Alarbes, she had been bravely rescued out of the hands
of the Portugals, (who were carrying her away Prisoner) by the exceeding
Courage and Valor of Benxamut her Husband. She showed her thankfulness to him
by the ready performance of all the Offices of Love and Duty: Some time after
Benxamut was slain in a Conflict, and Hota performed her Husbands Funeral
Obsequies with infinite Lamentations, laid his Body in a stately Tomb, and then
for nine days together she would neither eat nor drink, whereof she died and
was buried (as she had ordained in her last Will) by the side of her beloved
Husband.

He first deceased; she for a few days tried
To live without him, liked it not, and died.
CVI. 5. King Edward the First, while Prince, warred in the Holy Land; where he
rescued the great City of Acon from being surrendered to the Souldan: after
which, one Anzazim, a desperate Saracen, (who had often been employed to him
from the General) being one time, upon pretense of some secret Message,
admitted alone into his Chamber, he, with an empoyson'd Knife gave him three
Wounds in the Body, two in the Arm, and one near the Arm-pit, which were
thought to be mortal, and had perhaps been so, if out of unspeakable Love the
Lady Elianor his Wife, had not sucked out the Poison of his Wounds with her
Mouth, and thereby effected a Cure, which otherwise had been incurable. Thus it
is no wonder that Love should do Wonders seeing it is it self a Wonder.

CVII. 6. Artemisia, the Queen of Caria, bore so true a Love to her Husband
Mausolus, that when he was dead she prepared his Funeral in a sumptuous Manner;
she sent for the chiefest and most eloquent Orators out of all Greece, to speak
Orations in his Praise upon the chief day of the Solemnity. When the Body was
burned, she had the Ashes carefully preserved, and by degrees (in her Drink)
she took down those last Remainders of her Husband into her own Body; and as a
further Testimony of her love to his Memory, she built him a Sepulcher with
such Magnificence, that it was numbered amongst the seven Wonders of the World.

CVIII. 7. Camma, the Wife of Sinatus, the Priestess of Diana, was a Person of
most rare Beauty and no less Virtue: Erasmoria, to enjoy her, had treacherously
slain her Husband; he had often attempted in vain to persuade her to his
Embraces by fair Speeches and Gifts; and she fearing he would add force to
these, feigned her self to be overcome with his Importunity. To the Temple they
went, and standing before the Altar (as the Custom was) the new Bride drank a
Cup of Wine in a golden Viol, to the Bridegroom, which he received, and drank
of with great Pleasure; which done, falling on her Knees, with a loud Voice she
said, I thank thee, O venerable Diana, that thou have granted me in thy Temple
to revenge the blood of my Husband, which was shed for my sake: which said, she
fell down and died. Now did Erasinorix perceive the Wine he had drank was
poisoned, nor was it long e're he himself, as another Sacrifice, fell dead at
the foot of the Altar.

CIX. 8. Pandocrus, was one of the Captains of the Men of War under Jacobus,
King of Persia, who was the Son of Vsun Cassan: this Man had a most beautiful
young Lady to his Wife (though not above sixteen Years of Age) by whom he was
most entirely beloved. He having rebelled against his Sovereign, she long
besought him that he would not enter Battle with his Enemy: but when he would
not agree to her in that, she then entreated that at least he would kill her
before the Fight, that so she might not be compelled to outlive him; when he
had also denied her in this, he gave Battle, wherein he was overcome and slain;
and his Wife being taken, was by the King bestowed upon one of his Captains.
When therefore he would take her to Wife, she long opposed his Intentions; and
when at last she perceived he went about to gain that by force which he could
not by entreaty, she requested some time wherein to deliberate upon the Matter:
it was granted; and when she had sent him a Note, wherein she had written, No
Man shall ever say that the Wife of Pandocrus did long survive him, she fell
upon a Sword and died.

CX. 9. Leonidus, King of Sparta, had married his Daughter Chelonis to
Cleambrotus, afterward he fell out with him and would have slain him. Chelonis
taking her two little Sons, went to her Husband, earnestly begging his Life of
her angry Father, telling him, that if he proceeded to kill her Husband, she
would first kill her self; and pitifully complaining, she laid her Face upon
Cleombrotus his Head, and casting her swollen and blubbered Eyes upon the
Standers by, Leonidus was moved to Pity, and commanded Cleombrotus to get him
thence into Exile, withal, praying his Daughter for his sake, to remain with
him, and not to forsake her Father, who did so dearly love her, as for her sake
alone, to save the forfeit Life of her Husband. But she by no means would yield
to his Request; but rising up with her Husband, she gave him one of his Sons,
and taking the other in her own Arms, she voluntarily went with him into
Banishment.

CXI. 10. Portia, the Daughter of Cato, and Wife of Marcus Brutus, when she
conjectured by the sleepless and restless Nights of her Husband, that he had
conceived some great thing in his Mind, and concealed it from her in suspicion
of her Weakness; she (to give her Husband an instance of her Constancy and
Secrecy) made her a deep Wound in her Thigh with her Razor, there followed a
stream of Blood, Debility, and a Fever. When Brutus came home, sad at so
unexpected an accident, she causing all to withdraw, Sit down Husband, said
she, I have something that is serious to discourse with you. When I married you
I came to your House as a Wife, not as a Mistress or Whore, not only as a
Companion of your Bed and Board, but of all prosperous and adverse things. I am
Cato's Daughter, and reckon you that I am of that Blood. What then? Do I
complain of you? Not at all, if I look at other Matters, conjugal Solemnities,
good Will, and this external Love; but I look higher, and would have your
Friendship also, and that is the only grief of my Mind, which torments me, that
you have my Fidelity in suspicion; for, wherefore should you dissemble? Do not
I perceive the care you are in? That there is some secret and great Enterprise
that you are in Agitation about? Why do you conceal it from me? If I can lend
you no Assistance expect some Comfort at least from me: for, as to my Secrecy,
I am able to engage. Consider not the rest of my Sex; I say again, that I am
the Daughter of Cato, and I add thereunto, that I am the Wife of Brutus; either
Nature, (being from such a Father, or Conversation with such a Husband, will
render me constant and invincible against all that is to be feared. Why do I
multiply Words? I my self have made experiment of my self, and see this Wound,
which of my own Accord I have given my self, that I might know whether I could
undergo with Courage any Grief and Torments. I can believe it, I am able to
bear them, to despise them, and I can dye, Brutus, with and for my Husband. If
therefore you are about any thing that is just and honorable, and worthy of us
both, conceal it no longer. Brutus admiring the greatness of her Mind, and
surprised with the discovery of such an Affection, lift up his Hands for Joy;
and, O, all ye Powers above, said he, be ye favorable and propitious to my
Desires, and make me a Husband that is worthy of Portia! Then he recited in
order to her the Conspiracy against Caesar, and who they were that were
concerned therein. She was so far from being affrighted therewith; or deterring
him from it, that she encouraged him to proceed: But the day they were to
perform the Enterprise, being in fear for Brutus, she swooned, and was secretly
recovered by him. At the last Brutus being overcome, and slain at Philippi, she
determined to dye, and when her Friends being ever with her, deprived her of
the opportunity and means: she at last snatched the burning Coals with her
hands out of the Fire, and thrusting them into her Mouth, she kept them there
till she was choked.

CXII. 11. In the reign of Vespasian, there was a Rebellion in Gaul, the chief
leader of which was Julius Sabinus, the Gauls being reduced, the Captain was
sought after to be punished. But he had hid himself in a Vault or Cave which
was the Monument of his Grandfather, he caused a report to be spread of his
Death, as if he had voluntarily poisoned himself, and the better to persuade
men of the truth of it, he caused his House to be set on fire, as if his Body
had therein been burnt. He had a Wife whose name was Eponina, she knew nothing
of his safety, but bewailed his death with inconsolable Tears. There were only
two of his Freemen who were privy to it, who pitying their Lady, (who was
determined tody, and in order thereunto had now abstained from Food three days
together) declared her purpose to her Husband, and besought him to save her
that loved him so well. It was granted, and she was told that her Sabinus
lived, she came to him, where they lived with secrecy and undiscovered for the
space of nine years together she conceived and brought forth Children in that
solitary mansion. At last, the place of their abode came to be known; they were
taken and brought to Rome, where Vespasian commanded they should be slain:
Eponina producing and showing her Children, Behold, O Caesar, said she, such as
I have brought forth, and brought up in a Monument, that thou might have more
supplicants for our Lives: Cruel Vespasian that could not be moved at such
words as these! well, they were both led to death, and Eponina joyfully died
with her Husband, who had been before buried with him for so many years
together.

CXIII. 12. Eumines burying the Dead that had fallen in the Battle of Jabins,
against Antigonus; amongst others, there was found the Body of Ceteas, the
Captain of those Troops that had come out of India, This man had two Wives who
accompanied him in the Wars, the one of which he had newly married, and another
which he had married a few years before, but both of them bore an entire love
to him; for whereas the Laws of India require that one Wife shall be burnt with
her dead Husband; both proffered themselves to Death, and strove with that
ambition as if it was some Glorious Prize they sought after. Before such
Captains as were appointed their Judges, the younger pleaded that the other was
with Child; and that therefore she could not have the benefit of that Law. The
elder pleaded, that whereas she was before the other, it was also fit that she
should be before her in honor since it was customary in other things, that the
elder should have place. The Judges, when they understood by Midwives, that the
elder was with Child, passed Judgment that the younger should be burnt, which
done she that had lost the Cause, departed, rending her Diadem, and tearing her
Hair, as if some grievous calamity had befallen her The other all Joy at her
victory, went to the Funeral fire magnificiently dressed up by her Friends, led
along by her Kindred, as if to her Nuptials, they all the way singing Hymns in
her praises. When she drew near the Fire, taking off her Ornaments, she
delivered them to her Friends and Servants as tokens of remembrance, they were
a multitude of Rings, with variety of precious Stones, Chains, and Stars of
Gold, etc. this done, she was by her Brother placed upon the Cumbustible matter
by the side of her Husband; and after the Army had thrice compassed the Funeral
Pile, fire was put to it; and she, without a word of Complaint, finished her
life in the Flames,

CXIIII. 13. Clara Cerenda was one of the most beautiful and fairest Virgins in
all Bruges; she was married to Bernard Valdaura, at that time above forty four
years of age. The first night after her marriage she found that her Husbhnd's
Thighs were rolled and wrapped with Clouts, and that he was a man very Sore and
sickly. For all which she loved him not a whit the less. Not long after
Valdaura fell so Sick, that all the Physicians despaired of his Life: then did
she so attend upon him, that in six Weeks space she put not off her Clothes,
only for shift, nor rested above an hour or two at the most in the Night, and
that in her Clothes. This disease was a venomous Relic of the Pox; and the
Physicians counseled Clara not to touch the Sick man, or come near him; and so
also did her Kindred and Neighbors. All which moved her not, but having taken
order for that which concerned the benefit of his Soul, she provided him all
things which might tend to the health of his Body. She made him Broths and
Julips, she changed his Sheets and clouts, although by reason of a continual
looseness and many Sores about him, his Body never left running with Matter and
Filth, so that he never had any clean part about him. All the day she rested
not, the strength of her Love supporting the delicacy of her Body; by this good
means Valdaura escaped that danger. After this, by reason of a sharp hot Rheum
falling from his Brain, the Gristle within his Nose began to be eaten away,
wherefore the Physicians appointed a certain Powder to be blown up softly into
his Nose at certain times with a Quill; No Body could be found to take such a
loathsome service in hand, because of the stench that came from him; but Clara
did it cheerfully; and when his cheeks and chin were all covered over with
Scabs, Wheals, and Scales, so as no Barber could or would shave him, she with
her her little Scissers played the Barber, and made him a deft Beard. From this
sickness he fell into another, which lasted seven years, during which time,
with incredible diligence she made ready his meat, put in his tents, laid on
his plasters, dressed and bound up his thighs, all rotten with Scabs and
Ulcers, his breath was such, that none durst come near by ten paces and abide
by it, which yet she protested was sweet to her. This long sickness, and the
nourishing and medicining of a Body oppressed by so many Diseases, was a great
matter in a house that had no Rents or profits coming in, and where Trade had
ceased of a long time, and consequently the gain; she therefore, to furnish the
expenses, sold her precious Jewels, her gold Chains, her rich Carcanets, her
Garments of great value, a Cupboard of Plate, not caring for any thing so her
Husband was relieved, and contenting her self with little, so he wanted
nothing. Thus Valdaura lingered on a Life, by the help of his Wife, within a
rotten Body, or rather within a Grave, for twenty years together, in which time
she had eight Children by him, yet neither she nor they had so much as a Scab,
Wheal, or Pimple in any part of their Bodies. Valdaura died an old man, for
whose death his Wife Clara made such mourning, as they who knew her well say,
never Woman did for any Husband. When some, instead of comforting her, told
her, God had done much in taking him away, and that they therefore came to
congratulate with her, she detested their Speeches, wishing for her Husband
again, in exchange of five Children; and though she was yet both young and
lusty, and sought to by many, she resolved not to marry, saying, she could
never meet with any whom she could like so well as her dear Bernard Valdaura.

I think in this place it will not be unseasonable to speak of the Reverence
and Piety of some Children to their Parents.

CXV. Sir Thomas Moor being Lord Chancellor of England, at the same time that
his Father was a Judge of the King's Bench, he would always, at his going to
Westminster, go first to the King's Bench and ask his Father Blessing before he
went to sit in the Chancery.

CXVI. There happened in Sicily (as it has often) an Eruption of Aetna, now
called Mount Gibel, it murmurs, burns, belches up Flames, and throws out it is
fiery Entrails, making all the World to fly from it. It happened then, that in
this violent and horrible breach of Flames (every one flying and carrying away
what they had most precious with them, two Sons, the one called Anagias, the
other Amphinomus, careful of the Wealth and Goods of their Houses, reflected on
their Father and Mother, both very old, who could not save themselves from the
fire by flight; And where shall we, said they, find a more precious Treasure
than those who begat us? The one took up his Father on his Shoulders, the other
his Mother, and so made passage through the Flames. It is an admirable thing,
that God, in consideration of this Piety, though Pagans, did a Miracle: for,
the Monuments of all Antiquity witness, that the devouring Flames staid at this
Spectacle, and the Fire wasting, and broiling all about them, the way only
through which these two good Sons passed, was tapistried with fresh Verdure,
and called afterward by Posterity the Field of the Pious, in memory of this
Accident.

CXVII. There were three Brothers, who upon the Death of the King their Father,
fell out amongst themselves about Succession in the Kingdom: at last they
agreed to stand to the Judgment and Determination of a neighbor King, to whom
they fully referred the matter. He therefore commanded the dead Body of the
Father to be fetched out of his Monument, and ordered that each of them should
shoot an Arrow at his Heart; and he that hit it, or came the nearest to it,
should succeed, The Elder shot first, and his Arrow passed through the Throat
of his Father: The second Brother shot his Father into the Breast, but yet
missed his Heart: The Youngest detesting this Wickedness, I had rather, said
he, yield to all my Brothers, and utterly resign up all my Pretenses to the
Kingdom, than to treat the Body of my Father with this Contumely. This Saying
of his considered, the King passed Sentence, that he alone was worthy of the
Kingdom, as having given evidence how much he excelled his Brothers in Virtue,
by the Piety he had showed to the dead Body of his Father.

CXVIII. The Praetor had sentenced to death a Woman of good Birth for a Capital
Crime, and had consigned her over to the Triumvir to be killed in Prison; the
Jailer that received her, moved with compassion, did not presently strangle
her, but besides permitted her Daughter for to come often to her, though first
diligently searched, lest she should convey in any Sustenance to her, the
Jailer expecting that she should dye of Famine. When therefore diverse days had
passed, wondering within himself what it might be that occasioned her to live so
long, he one day set himself to observe her Daughter with greater curiosity,
and then discovered how with the Milk in her Breasts she allayed the Famine of
her Mother. The news of this strange Spectacle, of the Daughter suckling her
Mother, was by him carried to the Triumviri, by the Triumviri to the Praetor,
from the Praetor it was brought to the Judgment of the Consul, who pardoned the
Woman as to the Sentence of Death passed upon her, and to preserve the Memory
of that Fact, where her Prison stood they caused an Altar to be erected to
Piety.

CXIX. But now I will take the liberty to give some Instances of the
Indulgence, Fondness, and great Love of some Parents to their Children: and
begin with Solon, who was a Person famous throughout all Greece, as having
given Laws to the Athenians. Being in his Travels, came to Miletum to converse
with Thales, who was one of the seven wise Men of Greece: these two walking
together upon the Marketplace, one comes to Solon, and told him that his Son
was dead: afflicted with this unexpected as well as unwelcome News, he fell to
tearing of his Beard, Hair, and Clothes, and fouling of his Face in the Dust,
immediately a mighty Conflux of People was about him, whom he entertained with
Howlings and Tears. When he had lain long upon the Ground, and delivered
himself up to all manner of Expressions of Grief, unworthy the Person he
sustained, so renowned for Gravity and Wisdom, Thales bad him be of good
Courage, for the whole was but a Contrivance of his, who by this Artifice had
desired to make experiment whether it was convenient for a Wise Man to marry
and have Children, as he had pressed them to do; but that now he was
sufficiently satisfied it was no way conducible, seeing he perceived that the
loss of a Child might occasion a Person famous for Wisdom to discover all the
signs of a Madman.

CXX. Mahomet the Second, first Emperor of the Turks, was no sooner possessed
of his Father's Throne, but as a young Tyrant, forgetting the Laws of Nature,
was presently in Person himself, about to have murdered with his own hands his
youngest Brother, but rather to commit the Execution thereof to some other;
which thing, Mahomet commanded him, the Author of that Counsel, forthwith to
do: so Moses taking the Child from the Nurse, strangled it with pouring Water
down the Throat thereof. The young Lady understanding of the Death of her Child
(as a Woman whom fury had made past fear) came, and in her Rage reviled the
Tyrant to his Face, shamefully upbraiding him for his inhumane Cruelty: when
Mahomet, to appease her Fury, requested her to be content, for that it stood
with the Policy of his State, and willed her, for her better Contentment, to
ask whatsoever she pleased, and she should forthwith have it. But she desiring
nothing more than in some sort to be revenged, demanded to have Moses, the
Executioner of her Son, delivered unto her bound, which when she had obtained,
she presently struck him into the Breast with a Knife, (crying in vain upon his
unthankful Master for help) and proceeding in her cruel Execution, cut an hole
in his right-side, and by piecemeal cast out his Liver, and cast it to the
Dogs to eat; to that Extremity did she resent the Death of her beloved Son.

CXXI. Egeus stood upon a high Rock, whence he might see a great way upon the
Sea, in expectation of the Return of his Son Theseus from Creet, having made
him Promise at his Departure, that if all things went well with him, at his
Return his Ship should be fet forth with Sails and Streamers of white Colors,
to express the Joyfulness of his Return. The old man, after his long watching,
at last did discern the Ship making homewards; but it seems they had forgot to
advance the white Colors, as they had promised: when therefore Egeus saw
nothing but black, concluding that his Son had miscarried in his Journey, and
was dead, not able to endure the grief he had conceived hereof, he threw
himself headlong into the Sea, from the top of the Rock whereon he stood, and
so died.

CXXII. And now I will go on in giving some Examples of brotherly Love. In the
Year 1584. the Portugal Ship called S. Iago, was cast away upon the Shallows
near to S. Lawrence, and toward the Coast of Mosambique: here it was that
diverse Persons had leaped into the great Boat to save their Lives; and finding
that it was burdened, they chose a Captain, whom they swore to obey, who
caused them to cast Lots, and such as the Lot light upon, to be cast
overboard, There was one of those that in Portugal are called New Christians;
he being allotted to be cast overboard into the Sea, had a younger Brother in
the same Boat, who suddenly rose up, and desired the Captain that he would
pardon and make free his Brother, and let him supply his place; saying, My
Brother is elder and of better Knowledge in the. World than I, therefore more
fit to live in the World, and to help my Sisters and Friends in their need, so
that I had rather dye for him than live without him. At which Request they
remitted the elder Brother, and threw the younger, at his own Request, into the
Sea; who swam at least six hours after the Boat: and although they held up
their Hands with their naked Swords, willing him that he should not once come
to touch the Boat; yet laying hold thereon, and having his Hand half cut in
two, he would not let go; so that in the end they were constrained to take him
in again.

CXXIII. When the Emperor Augustus had (...) Adiatoriges, a Prince of
Cappadocia, together (...) Wife and Children, in War, and had led them to Ro^^
in Triumph, he gave order that the Father and the elder of the Brothers should
be slain. The designed Ministers of this Execution were come to the place of
Restraint, to this unfortunate Family, and there enquiring which of the
Brethren was the eldest, there arose a vehement and earnest Contention between
the two young Princes, each affirming himself to be the elder, that by his
Death he might preserve the Life of the other; when they had long continued in
this pious Emulation, the Mother at last, not without difficulty, prevailed
with her Son Dyetentus, that he would permit his younger Brother to dye in his
stead, as hoping that by him she might most probably be sustained. Augustus was
at length certified of this great Example of Brotherly Love, and not only
lamented that Act of his Severity, but gave an honorable Support to the Mother
and her surviving Son, by some called Clitatus.

CXXIV. Heliodorus the Britain, had afterward the surname of Pius, upon this
occasion, The People, provoked with the Cruelty and Avarice of Archigallus, had
deposed him, and raised Heliodorus to the Throne of his Brother. One time when
the King went a hunting, he accidentally met with his Brother Archigallus in
the Wood, whose altered Visage and ragged Clothes, gave sufficient Evidence of
his afflicted Condition. As soon as the King knew him, though he was not
ignorant how he had sought his Restoration both by Force and Fraud, yet he
lovingly embraced him, and caused him privately to be conveyed into the City.
The King pretended he was sick, and giving forth that he would dispose of the
Affairs of his Realm by his last Will and Testament, he called his Nobles
together. He then signified that he would confer in private with each of them
singly; and as every Man entered his Chamber, he caused him to be laid hold on,
threatening him with Death if he would not consent to the sparing of his
Brother, and that he should resign the Throne and Kingdom to him. Having by
this means gained an universal Assent, he then opened the business in the
presence of them all together. So Archigallus was restored to the Kingdom; and
he dying in few Years, Heliodorus succeeded him with equal Justice and Glory.

CXXV. Rare and memorable was the Love that was betwixt the Vitellii, they were
named Johannes, Camillus, Paulus, and Vitellorius; these four were the Sons of
Nicolaus Vitellius, a principal Person in the City of Tifernas: to whom, while
he lived, they performed all due Obedience. He dead, all the rest were all
ways, and in all things, obedient to the Commands of their elder Brother: and
although for the greatness of their Military Virtue, they were all in high
Reputation amongst them that bare Arms, and were Leaders of Armies in Italy,
and were hired with great Stipends to assist on this or the other side; yea,
tho they were all married, and had attained the Name of their Father, yet were
they not affected with the least Ambition amongst themselves; nor was there
ever any Breach of Love betwixt them. When the eldest of them died, the other
yielded the Power of Command to him that was next in Age; in all things else
they were alike, in such manner, that it is a difficult thing to find such
another example of brotherly Love and Concord.

CXXVI. Darius, King of the Persians, extremely provoked by Crimes of an
extraordinary Nature, had pronounced a Sentence of Death upon Ithaphernes, his
Children, and the whole Family of them at once; the Wife of Ithaphernes went to
the King's Palace, and there, all in Tears, was so loud in her mournful
Lamentations, that her Cries coming to the King's Ears, moved him in such
manner to Compassion, that the King sent her word, that with her own he gave
her the Life of any single Person whom she would make choice of among the
condemned: The Woman begged the Life of her Brother. Darius wondered that she
should rather ask his Life than the Life of her Husband or any of her Children;
and therefore asked the Reason; who replied, That since her Father was dead she
could never hope for a Brother more if she should lose this, but that her self
being but young as yet, might hope for another Husband and other Children.
Darius was moved with this answer, and being himself repleat with brotherly
Love as well as prudence, he gave her likewise the life of her elder Son.

CXXVII. In the division of the Norman Empire, Robert promised to his Brother
Roger the half of Calabria and all Scicily, but when it came to sharing and
dividing, Robert would give his Brother nothing in Calabria but Meto and
Squillaci, and bade him the purchase of the Realm which he already began to
possess, meaning Scicily, and in the end resolved (as Artaxander wrote to
Darius) that as the World could not endure two Suns, so one Realm could not
endure two Sovereign Lords. Roger being much displeased herewith, made War upon
him, and after many adventures, having taken him Prisoner; in a Castle where
Robert was, unwisely entered in the habit of a Peasant, with a purpose to bring
it to his own Devotion; Roger, of a Brotherly love and pity, not only saved his
life, but also restored him to his Estate, which by right of War and bring a
Prisoner he had lost.

CXXVIII. there was a Soldier in the Camp of On. Pompeius, who was in the War
with Scitorius, perceiving a Soldier on the other side to press hard upon him,
he fought with him hand to hand, and having slain him, he went about to strip
him of his Arms: here it was that he found it was his Brother who had fallen
under him, which when he discerned, having long and much reproached the Gods
for their gifts of so impious a Victory to him, he carried his dead Brother
into the Camp, and having covered the Body with a precious Garment, he laid the
Corpse upon the Funeral Pile and put fire to it, which done, he immediately drew
the same Sword, wherewith he had slain his Brother, he thrust it into his
Breast, and so falling prostrate upon the dead Body of his Brother, they were
both burned together.

CXXIX. And now an Example or two of the singular love of some Servants to
their Masters, and for that purpose, tell how Grimoaldus Duke of Benevento was
invited by Gondibert King of the Lombards to assist him against Partharis, his
Brother, he came accordingly, and having ejected the one, he slew the other
Brother he came to defend, and so made himself King of the Lombards; and when
he knew that Partharis was retreated to Cacanus Duke of Bavaria, he wrought so
that he was expelled from thence. Partharis not knowing wither to betake
himself in safety, comes as a Suppliant, and commits himself to the Faith of
Grimoaldus. But he, observing that Numbers of the Scicinensians flocked daily
to him; and fearing lest by the favor of the People, he should some time or
other recover the Kingdom, not regarding his Oath, he resolved to make him
away, and that he might perform it with less noise and tumult, he intended
first to make him Drunk, and then send his Guards to cut his Throat while he
lay baried in Wine and sleep. This counsel of his, was not so privately
carried, but that it came to the Ear of Partharis, he therefore commands his
Gup-bearer to give him Water in stead of Wine, (knowing then he could not
indulge his Genius) lest his troubled head should prove unmindful of the danger
he was in; nor could he abstain altogether from drinking, lest, Grimoaldus's
Spies should discover that he had intimation of his intentions. The better
therefore to color the matter, after large drinking he caused himself to be
carried by his Servants into his Chamber, as to sleep out his Debauch. There he
consults with Hunnulphus, his most faithful Servant, who thought it not safe to
go forth, since the Servants of Grimoaldus stood at the Gate. But in regard
necessity compelled, and that there was no other way of escape he orders it
thus; he covers his Head and Shoulders with the Skin of a Bear, which was there
by chance, after the manner of a Rustic, and lays upon his back a Mattriss
as if he was a Porter to carry it away, and then with good Blows of a Cudgel,
drive him out of the Chamber: by this artifice he passes unknown thorough the
Guards, and accompanied with one Servant, got safe into France. When about
Midnight the Guards came to kill Partharis, they were opposed by Hannulphus,
who besought them not to disturb his Masters rest, now sleeping, but to suffer
him to sleep his large competation he had that Night. Twice they were put back,
but the third time they broke by force into the Chamber, and not finding
Partharis, whom they had determined to kill, they inquire of Hannulphus what
was become of him, who told them plainly he was fled, and confessed that he was
himself conscious to his flight. Grimoaldus admiring his Fidelity, who, to save
his Master, had cast himself into such manifest danger of his life, freed him
from the punishment that all cried he was worthy of, with many promises;
alluring him, that from thenceforth he would change Masters, and serve him with
the like Fidelity as he had done the former.

CXXX. The Babylonians sought to recover their lost Liberty and shake off the
Persian Yoke, whereof Darius being advertized, prepared an Army to recover that
City and State revolted, but finding the same a difficult Work, he used the
Service of Gopyrus, who for the Love he bore to Darius, did cut off his own
Ears and Nose, and with other Wounds fresh bleeding, he seemed to fly to the
Babylonians for Succor, to whom he accused the cruelty of Darius, who, for
having given him advice to give over the Siege of their City, had in this sort
dismembered and deformed him; wherefore the Babylonians gave him that credit, as
they trusted him with the disposition and commandment of their greatest Forces,
which, when Gopyrus had obtained, after some colorable overthrows given to the
Persians upon Sally, he delivered the City into Darius's hand, who had lain
before it twenty Months, and used to say, that he had rather have Gopyrus
unhurt, than twenty Babylonians besides, that he had gained.

CXXXI. Strange and wonderful were the Prodigies that foretold the Invasions
and Downfall of that vast Empire of Mexico. For, it so happened, that the King
of Tescuco (who was a great Magician, and had Conference with the Devil) came
one day at an extraordinary hour to visit Montezuma, the great Emperor of
those mighty Dominions, assuring him, that his Gods had told him there were
great Losses preparing for him and for his whole Realm: Many Witches and
Sorcerers went and declared as much; amongst which there was one did very
particularly foretell what should happen: and as he was with him, he told him
the Pulse of his Hands and Feet failed him. Montezuma, troubled with these
News, commanded all those Sorcerers to be apprehended; but they vanished
presently in the Prison; wherewith he grew into such a Rage that he might not
kill them, as he put their Wives and Children to Death, destroying their Houses
and Families. Seeing himself importuned and troubled with these Advertisements,
he sought to appease the Anger of his Gods; and for that cause, he labored to
bring a huge Stone, thereon to make Sacrifices: for the effecting whereof, he
sent a great number of People with Engines and Instruments; to bring it; which
they could by no means move, although, being obstinate, they had broken many
Instruments. But as they strove still to raise it, they heard a Voice joining
to the Stone, which said; They labored in vain, and that they should not raise
it, for that the Lord of things created would no more suffer those things to be
done there. Montezuma understanding this, commanded the Sacrifice to be
performed in that place; and, they say, the Voice spoke again, Have I not told
you that it is not the pleasure of the Lord of things created that it should be
done? And that you may well know that it is so, I will suffer my self to be
transported a little, then after you shall not move me. Which happened so indeed;
for presently they carried it a small distance with great Facility, then
afterward they could not move it, till that after many Prayers it suffered it
self to be transported to the Entry of the City of Mexico, where suddenly it
fell into the Lake, where seeking for it, they could not find it, but it was
afterward found in the same place from whence they had removed it, wherewith
they remained amazed and confounded. At the same time, there appeared in the
Element a great flame of Fire, very bright, in the form of a Piramid, which
began to appear at Midnight, and went still mounting until the Sun rising in
the Morning, where it stayed at the South, and then vanished away. It showed it
self in this sort the space of a whole Year, and ever as it appeared the People
cast forth great Cries, as they were accustomed, believing it was a Presage of
great Misfortune. It happened also that fire took the Temple, when as no Body
was within it, nor near unto it, neither did there fall any Lightning or
Thunder: whereupon, the Guards crying out, a number of People ran with Water,
but nothing could help, so as it was all consumed; and, they say, that the Fire
seemed to come forth of pieces of Timber, which kindled more by the Water which
was cast upon it. There was a Comet seen in the day time, running from the West
to the East, casting an infinite number of Sparkles; and, they say, the form
was like to a Tail, having three Heads. The great Lake betwixt Mexico and
Tescuco, without any Wind, Earthquake, or any other apparent sign, began
suddenly to swell, and the Waves grew in such sort, as all the Buildings near
unto it fell down to the Ground. They say, at that time they heard many Voices,
as of a Woman in Labor, which said sometimes, O my Children, the time of your
Destruction is come: and other whiles it said, O my Children! Whither shall I
carry you that you perish not utterly? There appeared likewise many Monsters
with two Heads, which being carried before the King, suddenly vanished. There
were two that exceeded all other Monsters, being very strange; the one was, the
Fishermen of the Lake took a Bird as big as a Crane, and of the same color,
but of a strange and unseen form. They carried it to Montezuma, who at that
time was in the Palace of Tears and Mourning, which was all hanged with black;
for as he had many Palaces for his Recreation, so had he also others for times
of Affliction, wherewith he was then heavily charged and tormented, by reason
of the Threatenings his Gods had given him by these sorrowful Advertisements.
The Fishers came about Noon, setting this Bird before him, which had on the top
of his Head a thing bright and transparent, in form of a Lookingglass, wherein
he did behold a Warlike Nation, coming from the East, armed, fighting and
killing; he called his Diviners and Astronomers, (whereof there was a great
number) who having seen these things, and not able to yield any reason of what
was demanded of them, the Bird vanished away, so as it was never more seen:
whereupon Montezuma remained very heavy and sorrowful. The other which happened
was, a Labourer, who had the report of a very honest Man, he came unto him,
telling him, that being the day before at his work, a great Eagle flew toward
him, and took him up in his Talons, without hurting him, carrying him into a
certain Cave, where it left him, the Eagle pronouncing these Words, Most mighty
Lord, I have brought him whom thou have commanded me: This Indian Labourer
looked about on every side, to whom he spoke, but he saw no Man; then he heard
a Voice which said unto him, Do thou not know this Man whom thou see lying
upon the Ground? And looking then, he perceived a Man to lie very heavy asleep,
with royal Ensigns, Flowers in his Hand, and a Staff of Perfumes burning, as
they are accustomed to use in that Country; whom the Labourer beholding, knew
it was the great King Montezuma, and answered presently, Great Lord, this
resembles our King Montezuma, The Voice said again, Thou say true, behold
what he is, and how he lies asleep, careless of the great Miseries and
Afflictions prepared for him. It is now time that he pay the great number of
Offenses he has done to God, and that he receive the Punishment for his
Tyrannies and great Pride; and yet thou see how careless he lies, blind in
his own Miseries, and without any feeling. But to the end thou may the
better see him, take the staff of Perfumes he holds burning in his hand, and
put it to his Face, then shall thou find him without feeling. The poor Labourer
durst not approach near him, nor do as he was commanded, for the great fear
they all had of this King. But the Voice said, Have no fear, for I am without
Comparison greater than this King; I can destroy him and defend him: do
therefore what I command thee. Whereupon, the Labourer took the staff of
Perfumes out of the King's hand, and put it burning to his Nose, but he moved
not, nor showed any feeling. This done, the Voice said unto him, that seeing he
had found the King so sleepy, he should go awake him, and tell him what he had
seen. Then the Eagle, by the same Commandment, took the Man in his Talons, and
set him in the same place where he found him; and for accomplishment of that
which he had spoken, he came to advertise him. They say, Montezuma looking on
his Face, found that he was burned, the which he had not felt till then,
wherewith he continued exceeding heavy and troubled.

CXXXII. It will not perhaps be an ungrateful Undertaking, to give the Reader a
Compendium of the Fall and Destruction of Jerusalem, which was ushered in by
prodigious Presages and Comets.

And amongst other Presignifications of it is Fall, there was one Jesus, the Son
of Ananias, a Countryman, of mean Birth, four Years before the War against the
Jews, at a time when all was in deep Peace and Tranquillity, who coming up to
the Feast of Tabernacles, according to the Custom, began of a sudden to cry
out, and say, A Voice from the East, a Voice from the West, a Voice from the
four Winds of the Heavens, a Voice against Jerusalem, a Voice against the
Temple, a Voice against the Bridegroom, a Voice against the Bride, and a Voice
against the whole People. Thus he went about all the narrow Lanes, crying Night
and Day, so that they of Jerusalem hated him, and said unto him, Why cryest
thou always this Cry? But the Governor of the City forbad them to wrong him,
supposing he was mad; therefore for four Years space he never left crying out,
Woe to Jerusalem and the Sanctuary thereof. Whereupon being apprehended and
scourged, he continued the same Language under the Blows, without any other
Word. And they upon this supposing (as it was) that it was some Divine Motion,
brought him to the Roman Prefect; and by his Appointment being by Whips
wounded, and his Flesh torn to the Bones, he neither entreated nor shed Tear,
but to every Blow, in a most lamentable mournful Note cried out, Woe, Woe, to
Jerusalem. This he continued to do till the time of the Siege, seven Years
together; and at last, to his ordinary note of Woe to the City, the People, the
Temple, adding also, Woe to me, a Stone from the Battlements fell down upon
him, and killed him.

The Year before the coming of Vespasian, there was seen a Star on the Temple,
so bright as if a Man had so many drawn Swords in his hands. And the same time
this Star appeared, which was at the solemn Passover, that whole Night the
Temple was light and clear as Midday, and continued so seven Nights together.
Understanding Men knew well enough that this was an ill Augury, tho others
thought it good. The same time also they brought a Heifer for a Sacrifice,
which, when she was knocked down, she calved a Lamb.

Besides, there was a certain Gate, called the Eastgate, that was never opened
nor shut, but twenty men had enough to do about it, and the creaking of the
Hinges might be heard afar off; this Gate was found open without any Man's
help, and they could not shut it, till a great number joined their Strength.

Moreover, there was discerned on the Sanctum Sanctorum, a whole Night long,
the face of a Man wonderful terrible.

There appeared also the same time, four Chariots with Horsemen, and great
Blasts in the Sky, coming toward Jerusalem. In the Feast of the Weeks, the
Priests likewise heard a Man walking in the Temple, and saying with a great and
wonderful terrible Voice, Come let us go away out of this Temple, let us hence
away.

At that time also, there was a Writing found graven in an old Stone, What time
the Building of the Temple should be brought to a four square, then it shall be
destroyed. Now when Antiochi^ was taken, and razed by the Romans, and the Walls
of the Temple were all bruised, the Jews making speed to repair the Ruins and
Dilapidations, without Remembrance of the old Writing, they made the Temple
apiece. Besides these Words, were found in the Walls of the Sanctum
Sanctorum, When the whole Building of the Temple shall be apiece, then
shall a King reign over Israel, and that King and Ruler shall reign over all
the Land of Israel. Some interpreted this of the King of Israel, but the
Priests said it is the King of the Romans.

But besides these Presages, it is Ruin might be foretold from their Divisions
amongst themselves. For, there reigned at that time a Spirit of Dissension in
that Town, which divided the People into three parts; whereof the first and
best followed Ananias the Priest, who at that time had stained, unhallowed, and
suspended his Office of Priesthood. Another Party followed seditious
Jehochanan; the third was for Schimeon; so that in the midst of Jerusalem were
Civil Wars while that the whole Roman Empire under Vespasian and Titus, were
levying all it is Forces for the levelling that renowned City to the Ground: for
the Emperor being provoked and incensed against them by their perpetual
Rebellions, and by the slaughter of a vast number of Romans, whom they had
inhumanely butchered and sacrificed to their Fury. Now Ananias being perfectly
a godly Man, and seeing the Commonwealth of Jerusalem governed by the pleasure
of the Seditious, gave over his third part that stuck to him, to Eleazer his
Son, who was the first Author of Sedition, and he that gave the first occasion
and the cause of all the Mischief that befell to Jerusalem, and the whole Land
of Judaea: for, he began a Conspiracy against the Roman Garrisons, and provoked
Israel to take away their Lives.

Wherefore, there assembled to the seditious Eleazer, Jehuda, Chezron,
Schimeon, and Chiskihu, young Men of the Nobles of Jerusalem. Eleazer, with his
Company, took the Temple and the Courts about it, appointing to his Men some to
be Spies, and some to keep Watch and Ward about the Temple of the Lord.

But Jehochanan, who because of the great Resort of the People unto him, was
stronger than Eleazer, he took the Marketplace and Streets, and the lower part
of the City.

Then Schimeon, the Jerusalemite, took the highest part of the Town; so as that
his men annoyed Jehochanas's part sore with Slings and Cross-bows,

Between these three was also most cruel Battles in Jerusalem for the space of
five days, without ceasing or any breathing, and every day were very many
slain, so that the Blood of the Jews that were then slain ran in every place
most abundantly through the Market places and Streets, even to the Temple of
the Lord, like unto a Flood that had come of great Showers; and unto the
Thresholds of the Gates of the Temple, the dead Bodies overwhelmed one another
by heaps, for no man buried them. Jehochanan having the middle part of the
Town, had Schimeon on the one side of him, and Eleazer on the other.

But Schimeon had the best place; from whence he might annoy both Jehochanan
and Eleazer. The Slaughters did daily increase and re-double, and many of the
Priests and Elders assembling to the Temple, to bescech that these domestic
and intestine Enemies might not pollute and defile the Temple with their
Slaughters, were almost all slain for their Pains. Amongst others, was slain
the Priest Ananias, and Joshua a Priest; but of the chiefest Priests,
Sechariahu also, the most faithful Prophet of the Lord.

Then had the continual Sacrifice ceased thirty six days: for, ever until that
time were there some good Men or other of Jerusalem that always offered
Sacrifice to the Lord. And Daniel foretold, in Chap. 12. And from the time that
the continual Sacrifice shall be taken away, and Abomination shall be put into
Desolation, a thousand two hundred and ninety days.

But now, when they would have continued it, and the Priests laid the Sacrifice
upon the Altar, the Seditious would run upon them, and kill them, so that the
Priests Bodies and their Cattle which they would have sacrificed, should fall
dead to the ground together. They that resorted also out of the Country to
Jerusalem, for Devotions sake, the Seditious slew, and utterly destroyed them,
that few of them were left alive.

Moreover, the dead Bodies of the Men lay cast in the Temple, and that without
number trod under foot: and the dead Body of the Priest that was offering
Sacrifice, lay upon the Earth, together with his Offering. And when any Man
would offer any Sacrifice, streightway one or other of the Seditious would step
to him and kill him, that the Blood of the Sacrifice and Sacrificer should be
mingled together; insomuch, that the Pavement of the Temple being all of
Marble, was made so slippery with the Blood and Fat of those that were slain,
that no Man could go upon it without falling. And the Priest should no sooner
lay hold on the Srcrifice, but straight another dead Body should fall upon him;
Stranger or other they spared none: so thus the dead Bodies of the good and
bad, clean and unclean, wicked and virtuous, Thief and True-man, lay one upon
another, and their Blood mixed together in the midst of the Temple, without
respect of any Man, of what Degree or Condition soever he were. Wherefore the
Fight and Slaughter was great, both in the Town, and in the Temple. Nay,
whomsoever the Soldiers overcame, they set fire on their House also, whereby
the Fire took into the great Men's Houses that were nigh the Temple, and into
the Storehouses, whereas against times of Necessity, and besieging of the
Town, were laid up in store, Corn, Wine, and Oil, to the number of a thousand
and four hundred Storehouses, all filled full of Victuals; for the Elders and
other godly Men, what time as Vespasian was in Galilee, they made up the doors
of those Garner-Houses, and laid in Victuals into them, sufficient for two
hundred thousand Men twenty Years: and now in this one Battle of the Seditious
they were burned every one, which was a speedy cause of Famine, and Hunger in
Jerusalem.

At the same time also, the Seditious pulled down and razed all the fair Houses
and goodly Buildings, that there should be no Monument of any noble House left
to any in the City of Jerusalem. So thus you see at that time the Lord visited
the Citizens of Jerusalem with four kinds of Plagues, Sword, Pestilence,
Hunger, and Fire; besides this, a fifth was added, the ruin and decay of all
beautiful and glorious Buildings. And wheresoever a Man turned him, there was
nothing but Desolation, Pollution, (namely of the Temple and all holy things)
Uproars, without all Rest and Refuge; no Help, no Succor, but every Corner of
Jerusalem was full of howling and yelling, wailing and weeping, sobbing and
sighing of Women and Children: here should ye hear the roaring and groaning of
wounded Men, not yet thorough dead; there the Mourning and Lamentation of the
Elders; younger Children crying out for Hunger; to be short, most sorrowful
Oppression of them that lived, done by the Seditious, such lamentations were
made every where, that happy was he, that before this day died, and unhappy and
in a woeful case were all such as remained alive to see this day.

In the mean while, Titus was at Alexandria in Egypt, making all manner of
preparations for the laying Siege to this unhappy Town, and he received these
instructions from his Father Vespasian, by Joseph a great man of the Jewish
Nation,

I send unto thee here, my beloved Son, Joseph a Prince of the Jews, a man of
experience, trained in War, in whom is great Wisdom; he shall be thy Father,
and faithful Counselor, thou shall not do against his Counsel, neither one way
nor other, for he is a Wise man, wherefore thou shall reverence and honor him
according to his Merits, for the Lord is with him, and believe not rashly any
man that defames Joseph unto thee; rather put them to Death streightway, that
will accuse him, for Joseph is a faithful Man, and a good Counselor; and who
is so ruled by his Counsel shall have a prosperous success in that he goes
about; therefore when Joseph shall come unto thee, after he has refreshed
himself a few days of his Labor and Travels at the Sea; then shall thou
prepare thy Expedition against Jerusalem, to besiege it. And if the Jews
receive thee peaceably, and will submit themselves under the Roman Empire, then
beware thou indamage them in nothing, but rather repair their Cities, and let
them be free from all Tribute for the space of two years; yet on this
condition, that thrice every year they set a Flag with the Arms of the Romans
upon their Walls, that is to say, at their three solemn Feasts, when as all the
Israelites were wont to resort unto Jerusalem, and to appear before the Lord
their God. Moreover, they shall offer for us every Feast a Sacrifice, upon the
most Holy Altar that is in Jerusalem, And if they refuse to make Peace with
thee, thou shall utterly raze their Town, and whosoever are left alive, and
escape the Sword, those shall thou carry away captive. If they desire to have
Joseph for their King, we are content therewith. In any wise do not forget to
be ruled by Ioseph's Counsel, he shall be thy Father and thou his Son.

Joseph being arrived at Alexandria, stayed with Titus there a whole month
after he arrived from Rome. Then consulted they together, to go to Jerusalem
and besiege it; for Joseph understood well enough, that this came of the Lord,
and that his Word could not be hindered. Titus therefore and Joseph with him
departed from Alexandria with all their Army, and pitched their Tents at
Nicopolis; from thence they came by water to Thanisa, so forth to Traclea, and
leaving that, came to Pelieis, from thence they traveled thorough the Desert
to Baal-Iavin, after that to Dieron, so to Gaza, next to Ascalon, then to
Iabuam, after to Iapho, and so to Caesarea. In these Journeys he won Asam,
Ascalon and Iapho, with all their Towns and Castles lying about them.

In the first year of the reign of Vespasian, the tenth Month, and the seventh
day of the same, came Titus with Joseph and his Army to Caesarea, a famous
City, built by King Herod. In this City he sojourned until all his forces were
rendevouzed, as well Romans, as other Nations that were under the Dominion of
the Romans, and came to aid them in the Siege of Jerusalem. Therefore Titus's
Army was wonderfully numerous and puissant, wherewith he abode at Caesarea
until the Season was fitting for a Campaign; and then taking his march from
thence to Samaria, the Citizens of that place received him with great joy, and
much honored him, wherefore he spared them and did them no harm.

From thence he came to Apilona, thirty Furlongs from Jerusalem, where he
pitched his Tents, and leaving them there, he took six hundred Horsemen with
him, and came to Jerusalem to view the Town, to know what height the Walls were
of, what strength there was in the Town, especially of the Seditious, of whom
every where great rumor was; finally, to receive peaceably all such as were
desirous of Peace. But when he came to the Wall, he saw no man neither go out
nor in, for the Gates were shut up, and the Seditious had laid an Ambush
without the City to trap Titus, who went somewhat before accompanied with a few,
the rest following a pretty way behind. While therefore he was a viewing the
Walls, the Seditious issued out of the Ambush that they had laid nigh unto
Apilona, and set upon the back of Titus's his Men behind. Then issued another
party out of the Town, so that they had Titus between them, and running upon
him, separated him from his Men, and environed him on every side; where they
slew sixty of his men, and might have slain him also, save that they coveted to
take him alive. Titus seeing himself beset, and abandoned of his own men, who
thought that it was impossible for him to escape, perceiving also that they
went not about to kill him, but to take him alive; moreover, that he could in
no wise escape, except he would make an irruption, and run through their bands;
he took heart, and valiantly brake thorough; slaying whomsoever came in his way
to lay hands on him, and so escaped. If they had intended to have slain him,
they might have done it, but being desirous to take him alive (as he said) they
abstained from striking him and so they lost him: and God did not deliver him
into their hands, that by him he might scourge Israel. But the Jews seeing him
to be thus escaped, repented that they had not killed him; saying one to
another, what meant we that we killed him not while we might? It was ill done
of us: therefore they persued him, hurling and shooting after him with Engines
of War, but they could not overcome him, for God preserved him, that he might
afterward deliver Jerusalem into his hands; so he returned to Apilona.

The next morning brought Titus all his Army to Jerusalem, determining to
incamp himself upon the Mount Olivet, where he accordingly pitched his Tents,
right over against the Brook Cedron, that ran between the City and the Wall,
and many times ran very shallow. Titus's Camp was about six Furlongs from the
Town.

The next morning, they of the Town seeing Titus to be encamped on the Mount
Olivet, the Captains of the Seditious with their Companies assembled together,
and fell to agreement every man with another, intending to turn their cruelty
upon the Romans, confirming and ratifying the same atonement and purpose, by
swearing one to another, and so there was Peace among them. Wherefore joining
together those that before were three several parties, they set open the Gates,
and all the best issued out of them with a horrible noise and shout, that they
made the Romans afraid withal, in such wise that they fled before the
Seditious, who suddenly did set upon them at unawares. But Titus seeing his men
flee, rebuked and encouraged them to withstand manfully the Jews, so that very
many were slain on both sides. But the Romans were not able long to abide the
force of the Jews, albeit that Titus with his choicest and most valiant
Soldiers did manfully keep their ground, and never retreated. Titus labored
and encouraged the rest to fight; but they were so dismayed, that they wist not
what to do. Nevertheless Titus and his men sustained their efforts with that
bravery and courage, that the Jews at length left the Field, and withdrew
themselves into the Town.

The next day, Titus took all his Army save a few that he left in his Camp to
keep his Baggage, and went down the Mount Olivet, setting his men in Battle
array against the Gates of the City.

Then exhorted he them to play the Men and although they were come down the
Hill, yet they should not fear the Jews, concerning their Camp they had left
behind them, for the Brook Cedron, says he, is between our Camp and the
Israelites. With these words they were encouraged, and determined to encounter
with the Jews under the Walls, hard by the Gates of the City, trusting to the
safeguard and defense of the Brook Cedron.

The Captains of the Seditious likewise used Policy, for they, dividing their
men, sent one Company to pass suddenly the Brook Cedron to invade and spoil
the Roman Camp that was left in the Mount. These therefore went and fought with
the Romans upon the Mount, and drove them out of there Camp.

Titus looking behind him, and perceiving that the Jews had gotten over the
Brook, and were engaged with his Men, he was in some kind of Consternation,
seeing himself environed with Battles on every side.

They within the Town, when they saw their Fellows once at the Mount Olivet,
they opened their Gates, issued out with all their Power that was left in the
Town, and encountered with Titus, where he had set his men in array over against
the Gate, where they made a great slaughter of the Romans, so that at length
they betook them to flight over against Mount Olivet, and in their flight many
of them were slain by the Jews that pursued the Chase. Upon this, diverse of
Titus's Soldiers (seeing themselves beset both before and behind) counseled
Titus to flee with them to the Mountains to save his Life, lest he should be
slain by the Jews, and they altogether with him: for thou, say they, art a
great Lord of many Kingdoms, and God shall one day bring thee to the Imperial
Crown of our Lord thy father. Now therefore, if thou should be slain by the
Jews, we are all but dead; and what good should thy Death do either to thy self
or to others, to be slain like one of us? Titus would not be ruled by them, nor
receive their Counsel, but kept his Ground boldly, without once turning his
Face, saying, I will choose rather to dye with Honor than to live with Shame.
And with that he rushed upon the Jews that were nigh him, and compelled them to
recoil.

When the Jews that had environed the Roman Camp saw that, they left the
Romans, and came flocking about Titus by Routs, assailing him on every side,
endeavoring also with all their Might, to over-charge him; where in that place
was a sore and vehement Fight, and much People slain on both sides: Titus
escaped narrowly from being slain in that Fight, and had died indeed if certain
of his valiant Soldiers had not rallied and returned unto him, and rescued him
out of the Jews hands. That day were the chief of Titus his Soldiers slain:
then the Jews retired to their place at the Walls side.

They also who went to the Mount Olivet returned homeward by the Brook Cedron:
the Romans seeing that, pursued them; whereupon, the Jews returned again upon
the Romans, who fled by and by: Thus the Jews put the Romans to flight thrice
upon one day.

It came to pass then, that the external Wars ceased, and intestine Civil Wars
returned most terribly amongst the Seditious at Jerusalem: for, upon the first
day of the high solemn Feast of Passover, Captain Jehochanan and his Men, came
into the Temple of the Lord, where he was honorably received of the Priests
and Elders, with the rest of the Commonalty. And when they were within, they
cast off their upper Garments, under which they were armed with Coats of Mail,
and Swords tied to their Thighs. After that, they beset the doors, and laid
hold of the Priests, slew them and the People also, their Hearts were so
cruelly bent against their Brethren, neither regarding the reverent
Countenances of the Men, nor inclining to the Prayers of them that besought
them, without sparing Women or Children, no not the sucking Babes.

This done, Jehochanan stood up, and openly protested, That neither Schimeon,
nor Eleazer, nor any of the rest of the Captains of the Seditious, nor any Man
else, should have Sovereignty in that City but he. The other hearing that
Jehochanan had wrought such Displeasure to the People of God in the Temple,
rose together, and slew very many of Jehochanan's Party: but in the mean
season, what of the one part and what of the other, the Israelites went to
wrack, and were slain in great Numbers.

Tidings came to Titus, how the Jews were at odds among themselves, and slew
one another daily; whereat he rejoiced greatly, and came with his whole Host to
the Town, where he found certain Jews without, that had fled because of the
Rage of the Civil Wars. When they saw Titus, they came and besought him to
enter the Town, and deliver them from the Cruelty of the Seditious, and they
would be his Servants: for these Wars had made them almost weary of their
Lives. Yet Titus gave little credit to their Tale, although they used many
words to persuade him it was true. For he remembered that within three days
before he saw the Jews fight against him eagerly, all with one accord, so
earnestly rescuing and defending one another, that no discord appeared to be
among them: Wherefore he would not trust their words, in that they required
Succor, and offered to yield. And as they were thus debating the matter,
suddenly they heard an uproar in the Town, and wonderful hurly burly, some
crying, Open the Gates, and let Titus come in, others cried, Shut the Gates,
and let not the Romans come in. Then certain upon the Walls called to the
Romans, speedily to come unto the Town, and they would then open the Gates,
that they might enter in; requesting the Romans to deliver them from the
Tyranny of the Seditious, lest (said they) we should be all slain by the hands
of these ravenous and seditious Persons. The Romans therefore ran to the Gates,
and Strange Apperitions that appeared in the Clouds at ye Siege of Jerusalem
Page 133.

when they approached nigh to the Walls, and were come within danger, the Jews
hurled Stones from the Walls, and shot Arrows at them, slaying very many of the
Romans. The other Jews also that were without the Town, and had besought Titus
to deliver them from the hands of the Seditious, began again to assail the
Romans that were gone to the Walls, with much force, that many of them they
slew, the Residue they put to flight, and the Jews followed the Chase almost to
Ajilona.

Then the Jews mocked and flouted the Romans, calling them Fresh Water
Soldiers, Men of no Experience, and innocent Fools, that never saw the Trains
of War before; clapping also their Targets, and shaking their Swords against
them in Mockage. The Roman Captains seeing these things, they took great
Disdain, and in great Anger would have turned back upon the Jews again, had not
Titus commanded the Retreat to be sounded.

After that Titus had given Caution to his Officers for the preventing being
any more deceived by the Wiles and Stratagems of their Enemies, considering how
earnestly the Ierusalemites were bent against one another, how they were become
such cruel Enemies, that each of them conspired the other's Death, he caused
the Pits, Cisterns, and Trenches, that were about Jerusalem to be damned up, and
stopped with Earth, that the Ways might be levelled for his Army. This done, he
encamped himself nearer the Walls: against which Attempt the Jews issued not
out of the City after their accustomed Manner, to put them back from the Walls.
For Schimeon was otherwise busied; he had entertained ten thousand Men of the
Seditious Jews, and joined himself to Jacob the Edomite, Captain of nine
thousand Edomites, with whom he had made a Conspiracy utterly to destroy
Captain Jehochanan; and setting upon him, they compelled him to flee into the
Court of the Temple, where he remained in the Gate of the entrance of the
Temple, with eight thousand and four hundred good Men of War, all well
appointed in Armor.

Eleazer also was against him, and joined with Schimeon, becoming an Enemy to
him that before had saved his Life; and so they both together assail
Jehochanan, neglecting the defense of the Town. By this means the Romans
encamped themselves about the Walls at their Pleasure, raising Towers, and
casting Trenches to plant their battering Rams to beat down the Walls.

The common People of the Jews that were under the Rule and Government of the
three Seditious Captains, namely, Schimeon, Eleazer, and Jehochanan, far passed
Schimeon, and Schimeon was far worse than Eleazer (tho Eleazer was the head
Author and first Beginner of Sedition in all Israel) were amongst them as a
Sheep ready to be killed: for, the foresaid Seditious Captains slew the People
at their Pleasure, and divided them into Bands, casting Lots upon them, who
should have which, so that one had another's Men, and another his Men: and thus
did they not only with their own Men, but also with all the rest of the People,
in such wise, that when the Romans made any Assault, then joined they together
as one Man, to resist the Romans; to whom, when they had given a Repulse, then
would they return to their Civil Wars, and fall together by the Ears among
themselves.

Extreme and dreadful was the Civil Conflict at that season between the
foresaid Captains, and so sore, that the Blood streamed down the Channel out of
the Gates of Jerusalem, like as a Brook that runs out of a Fountain and
Wellspring,

Hereupon, Titus went to view what way he might best assault the City; and as
he devised with himself, he espied a Plain on that side where the Sepulcher of
Jehochanan the High Priest was; where he stayed a while, and sent one of his
Captains that were then with him, called Nicanor, to parley with the Jews that
were upon the Walls, to move them to Peace; willing him to say thus unto them,
Friends, My Lord Titus is desirous to spare you, and to make a League with you,
that you might be at quiet, and out of this Danger and Destruction; and if you
be so disposed to consent thereunto, Titus shall make a League with you before
it be yet Night. Nicanor went and spoke unto the People in such wise as Titus
had willed him. The Jews gave him no Word of Answer, but held their Peace;
wherefore Nicanor spoke to them again, and as he was talking to them, one from
the Walls shot him with an Arrow, and killed him: whereat Titus was exceeding
wroth, that they should shoot at his Captain, offering them Peace, and his
Death grieved him much. Wherefore he commanded Ladders, Brakes, Slings,
battering Rams, and other Engines of War to be brought to assault the Town. So
the Soldiers brought a battering Ram to batter the Walls, and planted it upon
a Mount accordingly.

The Jews seeing that were sore afraid; wherefore, the three Seditious Captains
joined themselves in Friendship, and forthwith opening the Gates, issued out,
and beat the Romans from their Pieces and Engines, that were now ready
addressed, setting fire on the Ram, Slings, and all the other Engines, a few
excepted, which Titus and his Men saved from the Fire.

In this Conflict the Men of Alexandria that served Titus, behaved themselves
like brave men, in the reserving of the Slings from the Jews: yet the Jews
prevailed, and got the upper hand of them, till Titus came with a strong Power
of choice Men to succor the Alexandrians, where twelve of the stoutest Jews
were slain.

In the same Skirmish, Jehochanan, a Captain of the Edomites that came to aid
the Jews, was slain by an Arabian that came behind him and shot him with an
Arrow while he was talking with the Romans that entreated him to come to them,
for whom the Edomites mourned and lamented; for he was a good Man of War. The
next Night certain of the Seditious, chiefly of Jehochanan's and Schimeon's
Company, issued out, and came to the three wooden Towers that Titus had erected
before the Walls, to view out of them the Town, and to see what the Jews did
within, which were there placed, and without also a strong Party of able
Soldiers for their Defense; upon those without fell the Jews, and slew many;
the others fled to Titus's Camp. The Romans that were in the Towers knowing
nothing of the matter, and trusting to them that were set about the Towers for
their Safeguard, slept all the Night. After the Jews had thus slain the Roman's
Watch, and put them to flight, they came to the Towers with Saws, and cut the
Feet asunder, so that they fell suddenly, together with them that were within,
which were very many, and slew them every one. Titus hearing the Allarm, and
the crashing of the falling of the Towers, was sore afraid, and all the whole
Army; and not knowing what the matter was, they durst not stir toward it. So
the Jews returned safe into the Town.

On the morrow Titus brought his whole Power to the Walls, and while the Jews
were at Contention in the Town, he addressed another Ram, where with he
suddenly struck the outer Wall, and battered it through. Whereupon, the People
that warded that Wall were forced to withdraw themselves within the Safeguard
of the second Wall: then Titus commanded his Soldiers to raze to the Ground
that Wall that he had pierced, and to carry away the Stones thereof, that there
should be no Let nor Hinderance to his Men. This was the most substantial and
strongest Wall of all, thicker than both the other, and was builded by Herod:
the Romans laboring earnestly in defacing of the outer Wall, were slain in
great numbers by the Jews, from the middle Wall, before they could finish their
purpose. The chief of the Jews perceiving that Titus had not only taken, but
also quite pulled down the outer Wall, and how there was now but two Walls left
about the Town, it went to their Hearts, and made them look about them;
therefore the Seditious began now earnestly to think of Unity and Concord among
themselves, so that they divided the Town among them into three Wards.
Jehochanan was appointed to that Ward that is on the North part of the Temple,
beside the Antochia; that part of the Town that was toward the Tomb of
Jehochanan the High Priest, was assigned to Schimeon; to Eleazer was committed
the keeping the Well. These exhorting one another to act after a courageous.
Manner, did valiantly resist the Romans; so that the Conflicts then began to be
sore and hard. The Romans, for their Renown and Fame, laid on stoutly, and the
Jews again struck stiffly to their Defense, seeing their End at hand if they
were slack. Titus now and then exhorting his Soldiers to act like Men,
promising them that would valiantly make any Enterprise upon the Jews,
abundance of Gold and Silver, and much Honor withal. Then stepped forth one of
the Soldiers, named Longinus, and put himself among the Routs of the Jews that
were issued out of the Town, where he slew a couple of the chief of them, and
presently recovered himself again within the Array of the Romans, but the Jews
shrunk not from the Romans, for they were in a fervent Rage and wonderful
Disdain; and to further their Courage, Schimeon came to his Men, and cried unto
them with a loud Voice, saying, For the reverence of God's Friends, flee not
this day; whosoever does flee, let him be sure he shall dye for it, and his
House be destroyed.

Titus also admonished his to keep their Array, and not to give back to
Schimeon. Then went he himself to that part of the Town where Jehochanan's Ward
was, there he caused a battering Ram to be planted, and bent against the Wall,
(for there was a very fair Plain.) There was at that time in Jerusalem one
called Kantor, who got him a Company of the Seditious, and shot from the Walls
into the Romans Army, where he slew very many, and compelled the rest to
retire. This Kantor, with nine other lusty Men, whereof he was the Decurion,
defended one part of the Town. Now as the Romans bended the Ram to batter the
Wall, Kantor cried unto Titus, I beseech thee, My Lord Titus, be merciful unto
this most famous City that is almost beaten down already, do not deface it
utterly, but take Pity of the Sanctuary that is in it, and destroy not the
Habitation of the Lord God. Titus at his request commanded his Men to stay, and
to leave off battering the Wall. Then said he to Kantor, Come forth hither to
me, and thou shall save thy self; I will pardon thee, thou shall not be
destroyed. Kantor answered, I will see if I can persuade these my Fellows to
come with me. But he did it upon color, for none other cause, than craftily to
trifle out Time, whereby he might cause Titus to leave off the Assault for a
while, so he spoke unto his Fellows which knew his Mind, that the Romans might
hear, Let us go down and flee to the Romans Army; then they drew out their
Svvords as tho they would kill him, and striking upon his Harness, he fell
down to the Ground in the sight of the Romans, which were ignorant of his
Deceit. Then one of the Romans let fly an Arrow that wounded Kantor upon the
Face, and glancing from him slew another that stood by him. Then Kantor cried
out, What do ye? Will ye shoot at us that desire to be at Peace with you, which
ye granted your selves, and now will ye break your Promise that ye made unto
us? Is this the Revvard, My Lord Titus, that thou renderest me for going about
to flee unto thee, that thy Soldiers shoot at me, hearing me require
Conditions? Now therefore, My Lord, may it please thee to send hither some Man
of Honor to me that I may come down and receive Assurance of thy Promise to be
as one of thy own Men: Titus thinking he meant good faith, spoke unto Joseph,
willing him to go and make peace with the Jews in his name, then to bring him
unto him, that he might find safeguard of his life from the common Destruction;
Joseph answered, why will thou send me: what have I offended thee in? have not
I ever done thee true and faithful Service; therefore if thou bear me any good
will or favor, send me not unto him whom I cannot trust. For Joseph mistrusted
some subtilty, knowing Kantor before. So Titus sent one Jarus, who said unto
Kantor, come down and let us go together to Caesar's Son.

Kantor desired him to hold abroad his Cloak-lap, that he might hurl him down
his Money that he had there (lest the Jews perceiving it would take it from
him) and then he would come down: and Jarus held up his lap to receive the
Money that Kantor spoke of, Kantor with all his might cast down a great stone,
which Jarus espying, leapt aside and avoided: but it lighted upon one of his
Fellows, and slew him. Titus was wonderful wroth at this, and forthwith planted
yet another Ram against the Walls, and at length laid it flat upon the gronnd.

Then commanded Titus to make Fires about the Walls, where the Jews should
think to escape: Kantor seeing that, would have fled, and as he made haste to
escape the Fires, the weight of his Armor bare him down into the Fire, and
there he died, more desirous of death than life.

Then entered the Romans within the second Wall, against whom the Seditious
issued, and fought with such vehement force, that they prevailed against their
Enemies, slew many of the Romans, and forced the rest to retire unto the first
Wall that they had beaten down before.

In this Skirmsh Titus himself took a Bow, and shot at the Jews in such wise,
that not one of his Arrows were spent in vain, but that it did some annoyance
unto to the Jews. The Jews notwithstanding gave them the Repulse from the Town,
and they were not able to make their Party good with them. Within four days
after came unto Titus a new supply of Soldiers, out of all Quarters, for aid
to the Romans, by whose help they prevailed against the Jews, at such time as
they issued out of the Town, and constrained them to withdraw themselves within
the Walls.

Yet Titus pitying the miserable state of the City, Temple, and the People of
the Lord, at that time commanded his People to withdraw themselves from the
Walls, and to leave off the Assault for a while, that he might offer Peace to
the Jews, to see if they would be now content to submit themselves unto the
Romans, to have quietness and rest without danger of Destruction. Wherefore he
gave them Truce for five days: and upon the fifth day he came to the Gate of
the City, where he espied Schimeon and Jehochanan together preparing Fire to
destroy the Roman Engines of War: for all the Jews had agreed together with one
mind still to withstand the Romans. Wherefore Titus perceiving the Jews to be
so desperately bent, that they had even vowed their Lives to Death, he began to
offer and propose unto them conditions of Peace, and sharply to reprove and
blame their obstinate Stubborness, saying, I have won two of your Walls, and ye
have but one left: therefore, if ye will continue still in this self-willed
frowardness, what will you do (most miserable creatures) when as I shall also
gain the third Wall and quite destroy your City, pulling down the Temple and
all? why do you not rather favor and spare your own lives, your Wives and
Children? but the Jews, set upon a sullen Obstinacy, would in no wise hear
Titus speak.

Therefore Titus sent Joseph to declare his mind unto them in Hebrew, that they
might safely credit his promises, and the Peace that was offered, Joseph
therefore went and stood over against the Gate, keeping himself a loof off, for
he was afraid to come nigh the Wall, knowing that the People hated him, because
he had yielded himself to the Romans; he called therefore unto them aloud and
told them in a very pathetick speech, the whole History of all former
distresses and sufferings of their Nation, and what perpetual Calamities this
obstinacy of theirs might bring upon them. But the return they made to all his
good Counsel and advice was gnashing of their Teeth, hurling of Stones and
Darts at him from the Walls to have killed him; whereupon he began to rebuke
them, and represented to them, with all the tenderness imaginable, how fatal
this Stubborness of theirs would prove to them, and he did it to that purpose,
that the People hearing him, wept wonderfully, for they could have been content
to have followed his advice. At this time Titus gave command unto all the
Romans, to send again the Jews that were Prisoners and Slaves into the City: by
which means he strikes from himself the Blood of the Jews, and laid it upon the
Necks of their Masters, for Titus took pity of them thorough Ioseph's Oration
and good Counsel. The common People of the Jews desired nothing more than to
have come forth, and fall to agreement, to make peace with Titus; but Schimeon,
Eleazer, and Iehochanan, Captains over the Seditious, set strong Watch and Ward
at every Gate, charging them to kill all that should go forth. Thus were many
killed which would have fled forth to Titus, and the City of Jerusalem was
closed up, and no man could get out or in. In the mean season fell a great
Dearth and Famine in Jerusalem, insomuch that the Seditious searched every man's
house and Cellar for Food.

And because a certain Householder withstood them they killed him: thus they
dealt with all them that dwelled in Jerusalem, till the Victuals in the Town
was all spent, that Men began to seek Dung, and even Man's Excrements, to eat;
by which means, much of the People died for Hunger. Whosoever at that time
could get any Herbs or Roots, Mice, Serpents, or other creeping Worms
(whatsoever they were) to eat, he was counted happy, because he had found Meat
to sustain and save his Life withal in that hard Famine and terrible Hunger.
Moreover, Whosoever had any Corn in store, that no man knew of, he was afraid
to send it to the Mill, or bake it, because of the Wickedness of the Seditious,
lest they should take away from them their Sustenance; wherefore many did eat
the dry Corn unground in their Cellars privily.

At that time also were many exceeding rich Men in Jerusalem, who stole Meat
from each other; so that the Father snatched Meat from the Son, and the Son
from the Father; the Mother snatched from the Children, the Children likewise
from their Mother; and such as fled out of the Gates, or otherwise, let
themselves down over the Walls in the night Season; who being suspected to be
the Seditious Persons, the Romans killed them without. This Evil therefore and
Distress increased so long, that the People had devoured all that ever crept on
the Earth, from the Mouse to the Spider, from the Nevvt to the Weesel, whereby
a most grievous Pestilence followed, that innumerable of the People of the Land
died, and there was no Man to bury them.

When they chanced to find any dead Horse or other Beast in the Town, a Man
should see many Israelites strive and fight for it; in all Points like to
famished Ravens lighting upon a dead Carcass, so that in such Contentions very
many were slain. Therefore, when diverse Men, with their Wives and Children, got
out of the City to gather Herbs to eat, and chanced among the Romans, the
Romans laid hold on the little Children and killed them; saying, we will
dispatch these, lest when they grow once to man's Estate, they make War upon us
as their Fathers do at this day. So many as came out of the Gates of the City
now and then the Romans killed and hanged them upon Gallows, over against the
Gates of Jerusalem, to the number of five hundred: After the same manner,
Schimeon, Iehochanan, and Eleazer dealt with those Romans whom they could by
any Train catch, and hanged them upon the Walls. Whosoever also they could
perceive would flee unto the Romans, they hanged them likewise over the Walls,
to the number of five hundred. But Titus gave command to all his Soldiers,
that no man upon pain of Death should kill any of them that fled out of
Jerusalem, for he took pity of the Israelites, and ceased to speak friendly
and lovingly to the Ierusalemites; so that he went once again to the Walls, and
spoke unto the Jews in this sort.

Hear I beseech you the Counsel of Joseph, and come unto me that you may live,
and not perish utterly. Spare your People: why will you oppress them, vexed
with hunger, thirst, pestilence, and besieging? But the Seditious hearing Titus
speak, were wonderfully incensed, and intended to add mischief upon mischief,
handling yet more cruelly the People of God. Moreover, they railed at Titus, to
provoke him to anger, that he might leave off speaking to the People, which had
now almost lost their obedience and fear of the Seditious.

Wherefore the Seditious spoke unto the Romans, It is better for us to die with
Hunger, and to be killed in this affliction, so to come to the Bliss and Light
we hope for, than to live and see the most holy Temple of God defiled and
destroyed. When Titus saw this he commanded an Iron Ram to be set to the Wall
to batter it, that he might deliver those poor wretches out of Schimeon,
Eleazer and Iehochanan's hands, who held them in as Captives.

At the same time as they erected that Engine to the Wall, it happened there
was in the Camp a certain young man whose name was Meriganin, Son of Antiochus
of Macedonia, one of the Kings of the Grecians, who came at Vespasian's command
to aid Titus. This same young man was very swift, a good Runner, and a hardy
Soldiers, but he lacked Discretion. He came to Titus, and said, I cannot but
marvel at thy Soldiers that vanquish all Nations and dare not set upon the
Jews to kill them.

Titus hearing the young King say so, smiled, and said; How chances it, that
being of this Judgment, thou arm'st not thy self, and make thee ready to do
like as thou say; why drawest thou not out thy Sword to declare thy manhood
upon them.

Wherefore the young King encouraged himself, and called together all his
Macedonian Soldiers, then approached to the Jews, and began Skirmish with
them, shooting with their Bows and Arrows apace. But at length the Jews handled
them, that not one of the Macedonians escaped, save only the young King, which
by his good footmanship and swift running, got away and returned to Titus.

This Memaganin was of the kindred of Alexander the great, King of Macedonia,
who had the Dominion of the whole World, and when all Nations and People stood
in awe of Josephus, the Priest demanded of him whose Son he was; he answered, I
came of the seed of Alexander, I am the tenth from him. Joseph said, it may
well be as thou have said, that thou art of the succession of Alexander, for
the valiantness of thy heart which thou have showed declares no less. Howbeit
thou shall understand, that the Romans have done wisely to abstain from the
assault at this time, because they knew they should have to do with a most
valiant Nation, which thou having so well tried, may report and testify
when thou art asked the Question.

After this, Titus divided his whole Army, and laid them privily in ambushes
round about the Walls. He prepared moreover Rams of Iron to batter the Walls.
Of these four, one he planted upon the side of the place called Antochia, the
Engine was thirty Cubits long. The same night, Captain Iehochanan with his
Company issued forth, and undermined the ground, under the Wheels of the
Wagons that bare the Rams, putting pitched Boards, oyled, and done over with
Brimstone, in the Trenches under the wheels; and under the Boards they spread
Leather, which likewise was smeared and done over with Pitch, Oil, and
Brimstone.

Then they set fire upon the Boards, which burned till they came to the feet of
the Rams; and they being set on Fire and burned, the Engine fell upon the Watch
that was appointed to keep it, being asleep, and killed them: whereat the
Romans were dismayed, and said, It is not possible we should assault this City
hereafter, for they have burned all our Engines of War, wherewith we have
subdued all other Kingdoms; so that now of fifty Iron Rams we brought with us,
we have but six left, and the Seditious Jews have burned three of them, What
shall we now do? How shall we batter the Walls hereafter? The Jews upon the
Walls hearing their Words, flouted them, and laughed them to scorn; Wherefore
Titus incensed with Anger, commanded the other three Rams to be addressed in
the place of those which were burned. In the mean season, while the Romans
were at work, four young men, moved with great Zeal, whose names were, first
Theopatius Galileus, the second Magarus Chebronitu, the third Jorminas
Schomronitu, the fourth Arius Jerosolymita. These, all armed, issued out into
the Camp of the Romans, that then stood about their three Engines and Iron
Rams, devising how to batter the Walls of the City, some of whom these Men
killed, the other fled. Then two of them stood at Defense, to keep off all
those that approached nigh the Engines, while the other two, Jerosolymitanus
and Schomronitu daubed the Timber with a certain matter which they had prepared
to make it take fire, and straightway set fire on them; so that suddenly the
Rams were on a light fire: then they all four joining together withstood the
Romans, that they should not come at the Engines to quench the Fire. Shortly
the Rams fell down, and the Romans stood aloof, hurling Stones, and shooting
thick at them; for they were afraid to come nigh them, because of their great
fierceness, although they were three thousand Men that kept the Rams; yet these
four set nothing by them, nor yet ever went off the Ground till the Rams were
clean burnt up, though the Romans shot never so thick at them. Titus hearing
the Valiantness of these Young Men, and the Harms they had done unto the
Romans, made speed with his whole Host to save the Rams from the fire, and to
apprehend those Young Men. Then forthwith issued out Schimeon, Jehochanan, and
Eleazer, Captains of the Seditious, with their Soldiers, sounding their
Trumpets, and made the Romans retire, that they could not come nigh the Fire,
and so rescued the four Young Men from the Romans that had environed them round
about.

In that Skirmish were killed ten thousand and five hundred Men. Then gathered
together all the whole Army of the Romans to assault the Jews at once,
approaching hard to the Walls of Jerusalem, where they cried unto the Jews,
saying, What, are you Oxen or Goats, that you fight on this Fashion upon the
Walls? Will you be taken in the midst of the City, like as Oxen or Goats are
taken in their Folds? If ye be men, come forth, and let us try our Manhood here
in this Plain. But you by stealth and unawares set upon them that keep our
Engines, snatching them up like as they were Wolves should snatch Sheep, then
run away into the Town as the Wolves run into the Wood. If there be any Manhood
in you, behold we are ready here, come forth to us, so many for so many, and
then we shall see what end will come thereof. When the Captains of the
Seditious heard that, they spoke unto the Warriors that were in Jerusalem,
Which of you will go out with us to those Dogs, to show our Force and
Stomach for the Sanctuary and City of the Lord? Then five hundred tall Fellows
of their own Accord, issued out upon the Roman's suddenly, and slew eight
thousand Men, and compelled the rest to retreat from the Walls, The Romans then
felt what Valiantness the Jews had; for the Romans were in number forty
thousand fighting Men, and the Jews were only five hundred, whereof not one
of them was killed at that Skirmish.

The Romans afar off shot at the Jews, and hurled Stones, to whom the Jews
said, Come hither to us; are you not they who called us forth, and provoked us
to come to you? Why come you not now nearer? You go about to drive us away with
Arrows and Stones. What, Do you think us to be Dogs, and that we are afraid of
your Stones? Are we not Men? Yea, we are of your Masters and Betters, for you
run away from us as Servants flee from their Masters when they follow them to
beat them. Titus seeing his Army to be part of them fled, and part to be slain,
he cried to his People, saying, Is it not a shame for you, ye Romans, and a
wonderful great Dishonor, to flee from the Jews, so hunger-beaten, famished,
almost dead for Thirst, and besieged? Alas! How shall ye put away this Rebuke
and Ignominy, when as all Nations whom ye have heretofore valiantly subdued,
shall hear that ye flee from these dead Jews, whose whole Land we have in
possession, so that they have nothing left but this only Town, which we have so
battered that they have but one only Wall to defend themselves. Besides this,
they are very few, we are innumerable; they have no Nations to aid them, we
have help of all Lands: Why then do you flee from their sight, like as small
impotent Birds flee from the Eagle? What though the Jews vow and hazard
themselves desperately for their Temple and Land, why do you not the same also
in these Wars, to get you a Renown of Valiantness.

But the Jews prevailed that day, and had the upper hand: wherefore they
returned into the Town with great Glory, having put the Romans to so great a
foil. Titus commanded his men to address and prepare the other two Rams that
were left, to batter the Walls of Jerusalem withal; wherefore the Roman
Carpenters cast a Trench, to prepare and set up the Rams, in such places as
Titus had assigned them.

The Jews were aware of it well enough, but winked at that matter as yet,
until they had planted the Master-beams between the standing Posts: so when
the Work was finished, even to the hanging up of the Engines betwixt the
standing Posts, to shake the Wall withal, the Romans being secure and void of
Care, nothing mistrusting that the Jews would stir, because they had been quiet
a few Nights, and never issued forth of the City, upon a certain Night, a
pretty while before day, the three principal Captains of the Seditious came and
laid their Heads together, to devise what they should do. Eleazer gave this
Counsel, and said, You two the last time burned the Rams, and got you Renown,
and I kept the Gates the while; Now keep ye the Gates, and I will issue out
with my Men against the Romans to get me Fame also,

The other answered, Go then on God's name unto them, the Lord God of the
Sanctuary which is in Jerusalem shall be present with thee, but beware thou be
not slain, and in any wise thou be not taken alive: to whom he answered, The
Lord God shall keep me, for upon the trust of the Righteousness of my Father
Ananias the High Priest, and his sincere Service unto God, I will set upon them.

Eleazer therefore chose a hundred valiant Soldiers, and with them he issued
out of the Town before day: the same Night the Romans had made Fires about
their Engines where they watched because of the Cold; the Artificers and
Soldiers that kept the Ward and the Watch about the Romans, were a hundred and
fifty. The day was the twenty seventh of the Month of September, which was the
ninth Month that Titus had besieged Jerusalem, Eleazer and his Company thus
being issued out, came and found some of the Romans snorting about the Fires,
others watching in their Wards, and killed them all, that not one remained.
Then some of Eleazer's Company set fire upon the Rams, burned the standing
Posts, Ropes, Chains, and other Instruments of War; the Artificers that were
there they apprehended alive, and burned them, so that not one Man escaped.

When it was day Titus observed the smoke of the Fire mounted up very foul, and
stinking of the Wood and Men together; he drew toward the place therefore with
his Host to see what the matter was: Eleazer in the mean Season, and his
Companions, took, as they might get, every man a piece of the Engines out of
the Fire, or some of their Heads that they had killed, and returned with great
Joy, flouting the Romans, and laughing them to scorn by the way, till they came
to the Gates of Jerusalem, where they were received of Schimeon and Jehochanan
with great Honor.

Soon after this came many Soldiers and great bands of Men out of all Nations,
that were subject to the Empire of the Romans, to aid Titus; to whom Titus
declared what happened him in that Siege. The Stoutness of the Jews, and how they
had annoyed many vvays the Roman Army; adding moreover, and asking them, Did
you ever see four Men withstand ten thousand and five hundred, so that they
being all together, could neither overthrow them nor take them Prisoners; but
the four slew them like as it had been the tops of Cucumbers smitten off with
most sharp Swords? When they heard this, they vvondred all very much. Then
Titus spoke unto his Host, and them who were newly repaired unto him, to show
their Advice and best Counsel what was to be done, lest we should be ashamed,
said he, before all them that shall hereafter hear of our Wars.

The gravest and most ancient of the Nations which were newly come to his
Aid, ansvvered, If it please Your Majesty, let the Romans breath a while, and
take their Rest, which are now vvearied with the sundry Battles of the Jews,
and we, who are not so broken with labor, but fresh and lusty, shall try what
the Jews can do, we cannot think that they are able to withstand so great a
multitude.

But the Princes of the Romans desired Titus that he should not permit them
this, lest he should increase their own sorrows, if peradventure they should be
discomfited (said they) by the Jews, and the matter redown'd unto their own
shame: for if we who are acquainted with their Stratagems, and know their
manner of fighting, cannot sustain their violence, how shall they do it that
never had proof of the force and strength of the Jews? they shall be to them
like hyssop which grows upon the Walls, in comparison of the Cedar Trees of
Lebanon.

The others said nay, they should do well enough with them. And they urged
Titus so instantly that they constrained him to grant their desires. Then Titus
gave them leave to set upon the Jews, thinking with himself, peradventure the
Jews may be put to the worst by these men, who will fight without fear, not
knowing the force of the Jews: for the Romans that have had trial of their
strength fight fearfully and warily. So the Lords of the strange Nations, chose
out of their Army eighty thousand men; ten thousand Macedonians, twenty
thousand Britains, five thousand Aramites, ten thousand Africans, ten thousand
valiant Burgundians, five thousand Redarans; last of all ten thousand Persians
and Chaldeans. These therefore went into the Plain which is by the Sepulcher of
Jehochanan the High Priest, and from thence made an Assault upon the Jews that
were upon the Walls, setting up their scaling Ladders. Jehochanan said to
Schimeon and Eleazer, his two companions; if you think good I will issue forth,
and Skirmish with these uncircumcised, to let them see what I can do; Schimeon
answered, let two of us do it, and the third keep the Gates and the Walls; for
thou alone art able to do nothing against them, they are so many. Eleazer
allowed this advice, offering himself to bear Jehochanan company. Schimeon bad
them go, saying, the Lord of the Sanctuary give them into your hands, and deal
not with you at this time according to your Works.

Then Iehochanan and Eleazer sallied out with one thousand five hundred good
men of War, the ninth day of the Month Tebeth, which was the tenth Month that
Titus had besieged Jerusalem, and overthrew of the Gentiles of that Host, fifty
seven thousand and five hundred men, besides three thousand whom they took
Prisoners: but of the Jews were no more slam in that Fight than only seven,
whose Bodies with much rejoicing and great Triumph they carried with them into
the Town, and buried them there, lest peradventure the uncircumcised should
have misordered them. The Gentiles that were left with great shame and
dishonor returned unto Titus, who reprehended them because they would not
believe the Romans. The next day following, the Jews brought forth the three
thousand Nobles and Gentlemen that they had taken Prisoners, and plucked out of
every one of them an Eye, and out off every man the one hand, after sent them
back with shame and reproach to Titus's Camp.

Then Titus consulted with all his Princes what they were best to do with the
Israelites: and when every man had said his mind, he liked never a man's
Counsel, but said unto them, Well, I have devised this with my self, which I
will follow, and no man shall bring me from my purpose: we will keep the Siege
without any Assault or Skirmish, for their Victuals failed them long ago, and
so they shall be famished. Besides this, when they shall see us cease to fight
with them, they will fall at variance amongst themselves, and kill one another.

This Counsel was thought good of all Titus's Princes, wherefore they besieged
the Town, as Titus had commanded, and closed up all the ways of the City round
about, lest the Jews should, as they had done before, come upon them unawares.
They appointed moreover Watch Day and Night, to take heed that no man should
come out of the Town to gather Herbs for their sustenance.

Then increased the hunger in Jerusalem, which if it had not been so grievous,
the City had never been won: for the Soldiers of the Town are lighter than
Eagles, and fiercer than Lions. There died therefore of the Famine a wonderful
many of the Ierusalemites, so that the Jews could not find place to bury them
in they were so many in every place of the Town. Many cast their dead folks
into their Wells, and tumbled afterward in themselves and died. Many also made
themselves Graves, and went into them alive, where they tarried Day and Night
and died, unmourned for, for all mourning and accustomed lamentation for the
dead was left off, because of the unmeasurable Famine, which was so great, that
it cannot be told, and I cannot relate the thousandth part of the mischief that
followed of the hunger. Titus, seeing the innumerable Carcasses; of the dead,
that were cast into the Brook Cedron like dung, was wonderfully amazed with
fear.

At that time certain wicked Persons of Jerusalem slandered Amittai the Priest
falsely, saying to Captain Schimeon, Behold, Amittai the High Priest, who did
let thee into the City, goes about to flee to the Tents of the Romans. Thou
have Experience of his great Wit and Wisdom, how he also knows the secret
ways into the Town, Temple, and Sanctuary, and who can tell whether he will
bring the Romans some Night at Midnight into the City? therefore Schimeon sent
certain Persons to fetch Amittai and his four Sons unto him.

They that were sent, brought Amittai and but three Sons, for one was fled to
the Romans and come to Joseph. When Amittai and the others were brought to
Schimeon's Presence, he besought him he might not live, but be put to death
immediately, lest (said he) I should live to see the death of my Children. But
Schimeon was hard-hearted, and would not be entreated; for it was God's Will
that Amittai should be punished, because he was the Bringer of Schimeon into
Jerusalem; and therefore fell he into his Hands, which for good rewarded him
with evil. Schimeon commanded a sort of Murderers to place Amittai upon the
Walls, in the sight of the Romans, and said unto him, See thou Amittai? Why
do not the Romans deliver and rescue thee out of my Hand? Thee, I say, who
would have fled unto them? Amittai answered nothing to this, but still
besought him before his Death, he might kiss his Sons, and bid them farewell:
but Schimeon utterly denied him his Request.

Wherefore Amittai wept aloud, saying to his Sons, I brought (Dear Children)
this Thief into this Town, wherefore I am counted now for a Thief my self;
all the Mischief which is come upon me and you, it is mine own doing, because
I have brought this seditious Villain into this Holy City: I thought then,
peradventure he will be a help to the Town, but it is proved contrary; for he
has been a most cruel Enemy to the same. It was not enough for us to keep one
seditious Person, Jehochanan I mean, who took unto him Eleazer, the first
beginner of Sedition, but I must bring in also this wicked Schimeon, who
conspires with our Foes to our Destruction. Indeed I never brought him in for
any Love I bear unto him, but all the Priests and the whole Multitude of the
People, sent me to fetch him; notwithstanding I am worthy of this Judgment of
God because I took upon me such an Embassage.

What should I speak of thee, thou most wicked Schimeon? for whithersoever thou
turnest thee thou bring all things out of frame: I indeed, thou dealest
justly with me, because I have sinned unto God, to his People, and his City, in
that I have brought thee in to be a Plague to it, wherefore I am worthy to be
stoned, notwithstanding it had been thy part, thou wicked Murderer, to deliver
me and my Sons from the hands of the other Seditious, for I have done good:
howbeit, our God will not alter nor change his Judgment, which is, that I
should fall into the Sword of thy hand, for that I made thee to enter into this
City, wherein I offended God grievously. If I had purposed to flee unto the
Romans, could not I have done it before I brought in thee? For at that time
beared'st thou no Rule over us; and before we called in thee, Jehochanan with
his Sedition was an offense to this City; wherefore we persuaded all the
Ancients of the Town that thou should be an Aid unto us, to drive out our
Foes; but thou, in whom we put our trust, art become our Enemy; yea thou have
been worse than they, for the other put Men to death privily, but thou do it
openly. Who is he that has strengthened the Power of the Romans? Art not thou
he who killed the Soldiers of God in the midst of the City of Jerusalem? For,
few have been slain without. Titus would have made Peace with us, taking pity
upon us, but thou did let and hinder it, every day moving new Wars, and
stirring new Battles.

Titus gave charge to his Soldiers, to lay no hand upon the Temple; but thou
have defiled and polluted the Temple of the Lord, shedding Blood without
measure, in the midst thereof. Titus went back from us from the holy day of the
Lord, and so Amittai went on in a very pathetick and touching Harangue,
exclaiming against the Cruelty of the Seditious, and animating his Sons to
suffer patiently; after which, Schimeon gave Commandment to four Cutthroats of
his, that three of them should kill Amittai's three Sons before their Father's
Face, and the fourth should kill Amittai himself, and so the blood of the Sons
was mixed with the blood of their Father. Afterward Schimeon's Servant took
the Body of Amittai, and laid it upon the Bodies of his Sons, as his Desire
was, then tumbled them over the Walls: after that, Schimeon commanded, that
Chanachus the High Priest should be put to Death, whose Body was cast to the
Bodies of Amittai and his Sons.

Aristus also the Scribe, one of the Noblemen of Jerusalem, was killed at the
same time, and ten just Men more of his Kindred and House, because they mourned
for the Death of Aristus. It happened, while Schimeon was killing of those Men,
certain substantial rich Men passed by, and were wonderfully amazed when they
saw the thing, saying one to another, How long will God suffer the Malice of
Schimeon, and will not search out the Blood of just Men, nor revenge them?
Certain seditious Persons hearing this, told it unto Schimeon, who commanded
them to be apprehended and murdered the same day.

After this, there passed by eleven of the Noblemen of Jerusalem, which seeing
forty two Innocents put to death by Schimeon, they lift up their Eyes to the
Heavens, and said, O Lord God of Israel, How long will thou hold thy hand, and
not execute Anger against these Transgressors of thy Will? Which when Schimeon
heard of, he commanded them to be apprehended, and killed them with his own
hand.

Eleazer, the Son of Ananias the Priest, seeing the Malice and Wickedness of
Schimeon to be great, and that he destroyed the just and godly Men of the City,
and that there was no hope left, he betook himself to the Tower of Jerusalem,
remained in it, and kept it with his. Jehudas also, a Captain over a thousand
men, which kept a Turret that Schimeon had made to put just and good Men in,
got him up upon the top of the Walls, and cried to the Romans, if peradventure
they would deliver him, and the rest that were at Jerusalem. Wherefore he went
about to escape with his own thousand men that he had with him, and came
toward the Romans. But the Romans trusted them not, thinking he had spoken
this for Deceit, wherefore they came not to help him. Schimeon upon this
killed Jehudas, and the thousand men which he had with him, and commanded
their Bodies to be tumbled over the Walls, in the sight of the Romans.

Then Schimeon cried to the Princes and Captains of the Romans, saying: Lo,
these are Jehudas Company, these would have come forth unto you, take their
Carcasses to you, and revive them again if you can, or else deliver the rest
which yet live out of our hands.

There were certain Men of Jerusalem at that time that came to the Gates,
overcame the Wards, and got out with their Wives and Children, and so escaped
to the Romans because they could no longer abide the Famine, and the iniquity of
the Seditious. They were faithful Citizens and of great Authority; whom when
Joseph heard of, he so prevailed, that Titus spared them and received them to
mercy,

For Joseph bare vvitness, and reported of them that they were Noblemen of
Jerusalem; wherefore the Romans received them, and gave them Food and
Sustenance; but certain of them could not brook nor take it, because of their
great Hunger, vvherevvith they had been long pined, and when the Meat
descended down into their Bellies they died straight. Their little Children
also, when they savv Bread, they fell upon it, and received it indeed with
their Teeth, but they were not able to chevv it, and died holding the Bread
betvveen their Teeth, These Jews which escaped thus out of Jerusalem to the
Camps of the Romans had svvallovved their Gold and Silver, and precious Stones,
to hide them, lest they should be found by the Seditious.

They therefore which recovered, and brooked meat, when they would satisfy
nature, they went alone out of the Camp, and after sought their Gold, and
Silver, and precious Stones, which were digested in their Excrements, and so
did they every day. At length certain A Woman Roasting her own Child in The
time of ye Famine at Jerusalem Page 178

Aramites and Arabians espying the Jews to use this fashion, told it amongst
their Fellows one to another, and made a Conspiracy to lay wait for the Jews,
and whomsoever they got, they ripped their Bellies to find the Gold and other
Jewels which the Jews had hid there: and by this means the Aramites and
Arabians had murdered two thousand Jews. But when Titus heard of this, he was
wonderful wroth, and commanded them to be apprehended that had done this wicked
Deed, and to be put to death, whose Goods were given to the Jews that remained
alive. They that were put to death for this Fact were two thousand Aramites and
Arabians together: all the rest of which Nations he caused likewise to be
banished the Camp; who nevertheless, when they encountered the Jews at any
distance from the Army, they slew them. Some few of the Romans too having
learned of the Aramites and Arabians, they killed any Jew they met alone from
the Camp, and took away his Gold and Silver that lay hid in his Bowels: which
Titus having notice of, what by Proclamation and other Scrutiny, he caused
three hundred and twenty Romans to be apprehended, who confessed themselves
guilty of this heinous Crime: all whom Titus commanded to be cast into hot
Ovens, and to be burned.

There was a certain Scribe of Jerusalem at that time, a faithful Man, whose
Name was Menachen, Son of Seruke the Scribe, of worthy Memory in Babylon; and
being a Keeper of the Eastgate which was in Jerusalem, upon that side toward
the Brook Kidron, noted the number of the dead that were carried forth to
burying by that Gate, and found that they came to a hundred and fifteen
thousand eight hundred and eight Persons, which were all of the Nobles and
Gentlemen, or at least, of the substantiallest Men of the Jews.

Titus upon a time ( Joseph being present) asked the question of those Princes
of the Jews which were fled unto him, saying, I charge you upon your sidelity,
to show me how many Jews, since the time I besieged you unto this day, have
died. They gave him the number therefore, every Man as far as they knew of the
dead that were carried forth at all the Gates to be buried, and the Sum
amounted to seven hundred thousand five hundred seventy five, besides them that
every where lay dead in their Houses and Streets; and besides them also that
were slain in the Temple, and they that lay here and there unburied: which,
when Titus heard, he marvelled greatly, and said, It is well known to the Lord
God of Heaven, that I am not the cause of these Evils; for I desired to be at
Peace with them oftener than once, but the Seditious evermore would have nothing
but War.

At the time the Hunger began to wax very great in the Town amongst the
Seditious, who never lacked before, for they took it always from other Men by
force, till now at length they were distressed with Hunger themselves, so that
after they had eaten up all their Horses, they eat also their Dung, and the
Leather of their Chariots; neither were there left any green Boughs on their
Trees, nor any Herbs that the Seditious might get to eat; For, the Romans had
hewn down all the Trees, and cut down all the Bushes from about Jerusalem by
the space of thirteen miles; so that the whole Field and Territory of Jerusalem
was spoiled, which heretofore was replenished with mavelous goodly Gardens,
and most pleasant Paradices.

After that, the Romans made up another iron Ram, very terrible; this they
bended against the Walls, to see if there were any Soldiers left in the Town
so stout as they were in times past. When the Captains of the Seditious saw
that, they issued out with their Companies against the Romans, and slew very
many of them in that Skirmish: wherefore Titus said, It is not Wisdom to fight
with them any more, but rather with the Rams to shake and batter the Wall; for
they have no more but this Wall left, and so we may bring our whole Army at
once upon them, and subdue the Seditious.

But the Captains of the Seditious mistrusting what the Romans intended, began
to build a Countermure within, over against the place where the Romans wrought
with their Ram. And now the Romans began most earnestly to set upon the Wall,
and make a Battery, so as that they suddenly beat down a great part of that
inner Wall which the Jews had newly erected, and gave a great Shout, saying,
Jerusalem is won, we have gotten the Town. But, when they looked a little
further, they saw another Fort raised over against the Breach; wherefore the
Jews thorough the Town gave also a great Shout, and sounded their Trumpets,
rejoicing that they had another new Countermure for that which was broken down.
The same was in Captain Jehochanan's Ward. The Romans seeing the Countermure,
and hearing the Jews make such Triumphs in the Town, were much astonished, all
their Joy was dashed, and turned into Damps; so that they could not tell what
they should do with that stubborn People of Jerusalem, which had done them such
Damages. The Romans set upon the Town again another way; when Titus willed to
remove the Engine, and to bend it to the new Wall whiles it was yet green and
unsettled, saying, Let us batter it, and we shall see it fall by and by, and
then shall we enter into the Town. The Roman Captains followed not Titus his
Counsel, but scaled the Walls which they had battered. The Jews therefore
descending the Countermure, fought with the Romans within the Breach, repulsed
them from the Wall and the Town; and so having abated much the Strength of the
Romans, returned to their Quarters.

Then said some of the Romans, We will never besiege this Town any longer, for
we shall not be able to get it while we live: whereupon, Titus assembled all
his Army, and in a very pathetick Oration re-encouraged the Hearts of his Men.
After which, a certain valiant man, named Sabianus, said unto his Companions,
who so dare go to assault the Jews, let him come hither to me, that he may
fulfill the Command of Caesar's Son, our Lord and Captain: and forthwith he
took his Targe^ and his drawn Sword in his Hand, made toward the Town with
eleven tall Fellows following him, whose Valiantness and Courage Titus wondered
at greatly.

When the Jews saw Sabianus and his Company draw fast toward them, they began
to assail them with Stones and Arrows; but Sabianus setting light of them,
charged home upon the Jews. Shortly, one of the Jews met with him, and gave him
such a Blow that he felled him to the ground, yet he got up again, and fought
for all that mansully: and as one that had rather leave his Life than the
Reputation of his Valor, he did fight till another Israelite came and slew him
outright. Now other Romans seeing Sabianus his Act, and studying to do the
like, the next Night they took Counsel, about twenty of them, and agreed to
assault the Town.

This their Enterprise, when they declared to the Standard Bearer of Titus, he
and many other of the Romans went with them. They all scaling together, and
clambering up the Breaches, got up upon the Wall, sounding a Trumpet, and gave
a great Shout. The Jews being at their rest, as men oppressed with Hunger and
Weariness, and hearing this Allarum and Huzzah of the Romans, were wonderfully
amazed, not knowing what the matter was, or how they should defend themselves.
Titus also heard the Shout, and when he had enquired the matter, he chose out
certain valiant men, and drew toward the Breaches with them. In the mean
season, the day was broken, and the Jews rising from their Sleep, espied Titus
upon the Walls, and marvelled thereat greatly. The Romans therefore gathering
toward Titus, came very thick upon the Town, some by the Breaches of the Wall,
and other some through the Vault, whereby the Jews were wont now and then to
make Irruptions, and to recover themselves within the Town again. The Jews set
themselves in Array against the Romans, in the very Entry of the Temple; upon
whom the Romans ran with their drawn Swords, for they had no other Armor, nor
the Jews neither, being hastily taken at such a sudden. The Battle waxed very
hard, and wonderful vehement on both Parties; the like was never seen in
Jerusalem, for every Man clave hard to his next Fellow, and no Man could flee
on any side: wherefore the Battle waxed strong, with Clamours and Shouts on
both Parties, now the joyful Shout of the Vanquishers, now the wailing on the
other side: the Romans encourage their Companions, and the Jews exhorting one
another to dye manfully for the Glory of the Lord and his Temple, as necessity
constrained them, and so doing that, thought they should be counted for
Sacrifices and Offerings: Which earnestness on both sides filled the Court of
the Lord with Blood, that it stood like unto a Pool or Pond. And the Fight
continued from the Morning till that time four days, but the Jews at length
prevailing, Titus took with him Joseph, a Prince of the Jews, and went into the
House of the Sanctuary, and represented by him, to Jehochanan and the rest of
the Seditious; that notwithstanding all this opposition of theirs, it was
impossible for them to escape his Fury in case they provoked it by any further
Resistance, with all other specious Reasons for the bringing them to a
Compliance, if they had not been obstinately bent upon their own Ruin; but
their wilful Stubbornness made them refuse all his gracious Offers. Whereupon,
Titus departed out of Jerusalem again, and pitched his Tents without the City,
in the same place where he encamped at first; for he was afraid both for
himself and his Army, lest they should be circumvented and closed in, and slain
cruelly in so great a City as that was.

Certain of the Priests of that time and of the Nobles of the Town, with other
godly men, did wisely provide for themselves, and come forth to Titus,
submitting themselves to his Mercy, and were received of him peaceably with
great Honor; whom Titus commanded to be conducted into the Land of Goshen, to
sustain and succor them, and to see that no Roman or other should do them
harm, or annoy them by any manner of means. Many other also of the Jews coveted
to go forth of Jerusalem, but they were disappointed by the Seditions, that
they could not do as they intended. Which Titus hearing of, he went again to
the place where he was before, and the People seeing him, expressed a desire to
submit themselves to his mercy, which the Seditious taking notice of, they run
upon them with their drawn Swords to kill them, who calling out for help to the
Romans, these last made speed to free them out of the hands of the Seditious;
so rose there a Fray in the midst of the Temple, between the Romans and the
Jews; the Romans fled into the place called Sanctum Sanctorum which was the
holiest of all, and the Jews followed after, and slew them even there.
Whereupon Titus represented unto them their abominations in so polluting the
Temple, and would have persuaded them to have accepted of Peace and Repose. But
seeing the Seditious obstinate, and not giving any regard to his words, he
chose out of the Romans thirty thousand valiant sighting men, and gave them
command to take and possess the entry of the Temple. Whereupon these Romans
thought to have set upon the Jews when they were asleep, but the Jews having
intelligence of the matter, kept diligent watch, and withstood the Romans all
the night. But the Romans were not hasty to fight in the dark, lest it might
turn to their own harm. As soon therefore as it was day the Jews divided
themselves, and bestowed their Companies at the Gates of the entrance, and
sought like men.

The Roman Generals beset the Temple round about, that not one of the Jews
might escape out, and so Battle increased between them for the space of seven
days; sometimes the Romans getting the upper hand of the Jews, driving them
from the entrance: sometimes the Jews encouraging themselves, made the Romans
retire, and pursued them to the Walls of Antochia; in this manner fought they
these seven days.

The Famine in the mean season grew more grievous, so that no more Food was
left. For the Jews now began to issue out, and to steal Horses, Asses, and
other Beasts, whatsoever they could catch, even out of the Romans Camp, that
they might dress them some meat, and sustain their lives, but the Romans
perceiving it, prevented that Relief. Nevertheless the principal Youths of the
Jews made a sally out, and drove in a great many Cattle of the Romans, fighting
so desperately for their Sustenance, that all the power of the Romans could not
hinder them, but returned with great prey and shouts to the Temple.
Nevertheless, the Romans took a young Boy of the Jews Prisoner, which with his
Brother, who was of the party, had escaped to the Town, was of a vile
Personage, evil-favoured, and of a low stature; perceiving he came forth again,
and challenged any man of the Romans to fight him, saying, he was only one of
the meanest and outcasts of the Jews; though the Romans despised him, yet they
durst not fight with him, for that they considered they should get no honor
though they should kill him, and yet they ran a hazard of being killed
themselves. But at length, being provoked by the insulting Language of the Jew,
one Pornus, one of the most valiant Soldiers of the Romans, came no sooner to
the Jew than that he was by him killed streightway, to the shame and reproach
of the Romans.

Now the Jews seeing the Walls of the Temple, and three Walls that compassed
the Town to be razed and pulled down, they consulted what was best to be done.
There was a great house joined upon the side of the Temple that King Solomon
had builded, of a great height, whose Walls also the Kings of the second Temple
had raised on high, and decked it with Timber of Firr and Cedar Trees; the Jews
went and anointed every where the Cedar Timber of the house with Brimstone
abundantly: so when the Romans came to assault the Temple again, the Jews
retired into that Palace, and went out another way. But the Romans not dreaming
of this Stratagem, some climbed up to the Battlements of the house, others set
up Ladders to scale it, and with shouts thought that the Palace was now taken,
and that the Jews had no place left to flee unto for refuge. Thus when the
Palace was full of the Romans, a certain Jew, a young man, vowing himself
desperately to die, went and shut up the Palace, and set fire on the Gates
anointed before with Brimstone and Pitch, and straightway, the side Wall of the
House, and the whole building began to be on a light fire, and of the Romans
most were burnt, some killed themselves, and the rest we killed by the Jews, as
they would have made their escapes.

There was a great Roman Commander in this fire, whose name was Artorius, who
looking forth from the top of the house, saw one of his dear Friends called
Lucius standing by Titus, to whom Artorius called, saying, My dear friend
Lucius, get on thy Armor and come hither, that I may leap down upon thee, and
thou may receive me. If I die, I make thee my Heir, if thou die, thy Children
shall inherit my Goods. Wherefore Lucius ran and held up his lap open at the
house side, and Artorius leapt down and light upon him with such weight, that
they both died therewith. Titus commanded the Covenant they made before their
death, to be written on a Sword with blood, and their Friendship to be noted in
the Chronicles of the Romans, that it might be an example to all men to learn
true Friendship by.

There was a certain rich Woman in Jerusalem, of a Noble House also, whose name
was Miriam: Her dwelling was beyond Jordan; but when she perceived the Wars to
grow more and more in the time of Vespasian, she came up with her Neighbors to
Jerusalem, bringing with her not only her Man-servants, and Women-servants, and
all her Family, but also her Goods and Riches which were very great.

When the hunger was grievous at Jerusalem, and the Seditious went from House
to House to seek meat; they came also to this Woman's House, and took away from
her by force all that ever she had, and left her nothing remaining. By this
means she was oppressed with very great hunger, so that she wished her self out
of the world, but her time was not yet come to dye: wherefore, that she might
slack her hunger, and sustain her self, she began to scrape in the Chaff and
dust, for Beasts dung, but could find none. She had one Son; and when she saw
the Famine was greater and greater upon her, she laid aside all Womanhood and
mercy, and took upon her an horrible Cruelty; for when she heard her Boy weep,
and ask for meat, which she had not to give him, she said unto him, what shall
I do, my Son? for the wrath of God has environed the whole City, in every
corner thereof the Famine reigns, without the City the sword kills up all;
within we stand in fear of the Seditious, our enemies prevail without, in the
Town are fires, burning and ruins of Houses, Famines, Pestilence, spoiling and
destroying, so that I cannot feed thee, my Son. Now therefore, my Son, if I
should dye for hunger, to whom should I leave thee being yet a Child? I hoped
once, that when thou should come to man's estate, thou should have
sustained my age with meat, drink, and cloth, and after, when I should dye, to
bury me honorably, like as I was minded to bury thee, if thou should have
dyed before me. But now, my son, thou art as good as dead already, for I have
no meat to bring thee up withal, because of this great Famine, and Cruelty of
the Enemies both within and without: If thou should dye now among others,
thou should have no good nor honorable Tomb, as I would wish thee;
wherefore I have thought good to choose thee a Sepulcher, even my own body, lest
thou should dye, and Dogs eat thee in the Streets; I will therefore be thy
Grave, and thou shall be my food: and for that, if thou had lived and grown
to man's estate, thou ought by right to have nourished me, and fed me with
thy flesh, and with it sustain my age; before that Famine devour thee, and thy
Body be consumed, render unto thy Mother that which she gave unto thee, for
thou come of her, and thou shall return into her. For I will bring thee unto
the self same shop, in the which the breath of life was breathed into thy
Nostrils, forasmuch as thou art my well-beloved Son, whom I have loved always
with all my strength: Be therefore meat for thy mother, and ignominy and
reproach to the Seditious, that by violence have taken away our food.
Wherefore, my Son, hear my voice; and sustain my Soul and my Life, and go to
the end that is determined for thee by my hands, thy lot be in the Garden of
Eden, and Paradise. Be thou meat for me, and rebuke and shame for the
Seditious, that they may be compelled to say, Lo, a Woman has killed her Son,
and eaten him.

So when she had thus spoken to her Son, she took the Child, and turning her
face away lest she should see him dye, she killed him with a Sword, and after
cut his Body into certain pieces, whereof some she roasted, some she sod, and
when she had eaten of them, she laid up the rest to keep.

The savor of the Flesh roasted, when it came into the Streets to the People,
they said one to another: See, here is the smell of roast-meat. Which thing
came to the knowledge of the Seditious at length, who went into the House of
the Woman, and spoke roughly unto her, why should thou have meat to live
with, and we dye of hunger? The Woman made them answer, and said unto them, Be
not displeased, I beseech you, with your Handmaid for this, for you shall see
I have reserved part for you: sit ye down therefore, and I will bring it to
you, that ye may taste thereof, for it is very good meat. And by and by she
covered the Table, and set before them part of the Child's Flesh, saying, Eat,
I pray you, here is a Child's hand, see, here is his Foot, and other parts; and
never report it was another Woman's Child, but my one only Son that ye knew with
me? him I bare, and have also eaten part, part have I kept for you. When she
had spoken, she burst out and wept, saying, Oh, my Son, my Son, how sweet wast
thou to me whilst thou yet lived, and now at thy death also thou art sweeter to
me than Honey! for thou have not only fed me in this most grievous Famine, but
have defended me against the wrath of the Seditious, wherewith they were
incensed toward me, when the smell of the meat brought them into my house, now
therefore are they become my friends, for they sit at my Table, and I have made
them a Feast with my Flesh.

After, she turned to the Seditious, and bade them eat, and satisfy
themselves: for why (says she) should you abhor my meat which I have set
before you? I have satisfied my self therewith, why therefore do not you eat of
the flesh of my Son? taste and see how sweet my Sons Flesh is, I dare say, you
will say, it is good meat, what needs pity? ought ye to be more moved
therewith than a Woman, than a Mother? if you will in no wise eat of the
Sacrifice of my Son, when as I have eaten thereof my self, shall not this be a
shame for you that I should have a better heart and a greater courage than you?
behold, I have prepared a fair Table for you, most valiant men, why eat you
not? is it not good fare that I have dressed for you? and it is your will that I
should make you this Feast; it had been my part rather to have been moved with
pity of my Son, than you, and how chances it therefore, that you are more
merciful than I? did you not spoil my house, and le^^ me no kind of Food for me
and my Son? did you not constrain me to make you this Feast, notwithstanding
the greater hunger that I have? why then eat you not thereof, when as you were
the authors and causers that I did this deed; the Jews hearing of this matter,
were wonderfuly smitten in sadness; yea, even the Governors of the Seditious
began to stoop when they heard of this, so that they all in a manner desired
death, they were so amazed at this horrible Act. Many therefore of the common
people stole out in the night forth of Jerusalem with all their substance to
the Romans Camp, and showed Titus of this, who wept thereat, and was sorry for
the matter exceedingly.

After which, Titus commanded to bring an Iron Ram, and to bend it against the
new Wall which the Seditious had raised, that they might batter it down; but
many of the Nobles among the Seditious came forth unto Titus and made Peace
with him, whom he placed among his chief men.

Shortly after the Romans set on fire one of the Gates of the Temple, that was
shut, whose door was covered over with Silver, and while the Timber of it
burnt, the Silver melted and ran upon the ground: so when the Gate was open,
the way appeared which leads to the Sanctum Sanctorum.

As soon as Titus saw it, he honored it with great Reverence, and forbade his
people that none should come nigh it. Wherefore he commanded a Proclamation to
be published throughout all his Camp to this Tenor, whosoever comes near the
Sanctuary, shall suffer death for it.

He appointed also a strong band of men to keep the Temple, that it might not
be profaned and unhallowed by any of his: but his Princes and Captains
answered, unless this house be set on fire thou shall never subdue this People,
in regard that to preserve it they ^ow to die.

Notwithstanding Titus would not hearken to their ^^unsel, but appointed some
of his own Soldiers, and ^^ch Jews as had come in to him to keep ward, giving
them charge to preserve the Temple, and Sanctum Sanctorum, lest it should be
polluted.

The Seditious Jews that remained in Jerusalem, seeing the Romans depart from
the Temple, and leaving Guards behind, they came upon them with their Swords
drawn, and slew every soul of them: which Titus hearing, he brought his whole
Army thither against the Seditious, and killed many of them, the rest fled by
Mount Sinai.

The next day the Romans set fire on the Sanctum Sanctorum, laying wood to the
doors that were covered over with Gold, and then firing it; so after the Gold
waxed hot, and the Timber burnt, the Sanctum Sanctorum was open, that men might
see it in the ninth day of the 5th Month: the Romans thereupon rushing into the
Sanctum Sanctorum, gave a great shout while it burnt, which when Titus heard,
he hasted to quench the fire, and save the Sanctum Sanctorum, but he could not
do it, because it was set on fire in so many places: Thereupon Titus cried unto
them, that they should forbear, but they would not hear him: for as a vehement
flood of waters breaks thorough all things and drives them before; with such
a furious violence the Gentiles rushed upon the Lord's Temple, the fire flaming
every where out of measure.

When Titus saw he could not restrain them from the Sanctum Sanctorum with
Words, he drew out his Sword, blaming the Captains of his own People, and
others that were not Romans he killed; and he cried out so long and so loud
upon them that he was grown hoarse.

The Priests that were within the Sanctum Sanctorum withstood the Romans
stoutly, till they were no longer able to lift up their hands; wherefore, when
they saw there was no other safeguard left, they leaped into the Fire, and
diverse other Jews with them, and so burned all together, saying, What, should
we live any longer now there is no Temple? Yet Titus ceased not to strike the
People, and chase them from the Temple; and being grown so weak that all his
Strength failed him, he fell upon the ground, and forbore crying to them any
more.

After that the Sanctum Sanctorum was burned, Titus arose, and entering
thereinto, he saw the Glory and Magnificence thereof, and believed it was the
House of the Lord; for as yet the Fire had not consumed all.

The Seditious that yet remained at Jerusalem seeing the Sanctum Sanctorum to
be burned, they set the rest of the Temple on Fire themselves, with all the
Houses that were filled with Treasure, and all sorts of precious Jewels; and
where they knew there remained yet some Victuals, they set it also on fire,
lest the Romans should receive benefit thereby.

After this, the Romans quenched the Fire, and set up their Idols and Images in
the Temple, offering burned Offerings unto them, and blaspheming, mocking, and
railing at the Jews and their Laws in the presence of their Idols. About that
time arose one who prophesied a Lie unto the Seditious that remained yet in
Jerusalem, exhorting them to play the Men, and oppose their Enemies; for now,
said he, shall the Temple be built by it self, without humane Hands, that God
may declare his Power unto the Romans, who now glory in themselves to have
overcome the Jews: therefore, if you fight stoutly this day, the Temple shall
erect it self. Hereupon the Seditious set furiously upon the Romans, and slew
many of them, which made the Romans, who had favored them formerly, to kill
them like Sheep.

The whole Roman Army being now come into the Temple, and the Jews fled to
Mount Sion, the Romans set up their Idols in the Lords Temple, and railed at
the Jews. Nevertheless the Seditious continued in their Pride and Obstinacy;
but a certain Man, of Royal Blood, whose Name was Serack, accompanied with all
his Brethren and Sons that were there with him of the King's Blood, came down
from Mount Sion to Titus, who received them honorably, and gently ordered them.

When Jehochanan and Schimeon understood that Serack and the rest were gone,
and had yielded themselves to Titus, they went and set fire upon all that was
in the Kings Palace, that the Romans should have no Commodity thereby.

From thence they went to the Temple, where they found certain Commanders and
Captains whom Titus had put in Authority about the Temple, whom they either
killed or used after such a despightful Manner, that Titus commanded all the
Jews should be slain that should be found in the Streets of the City. Whereupon
Jehochanan and Schimeon fled, and hid themselves in certain Caves; most of the
rest submitted themselves to Titus, and were gently received. Then Titus went
up to Mount Sion, took it, and razed the Walls thereof. Three days after,
Jehochanan, sore vexed with Hunger, left his place where he lurked, and came to
Titus, fell down before him, and kissed his Feet, saying, Save me, O Lord,
King. Titus commanded him to be fettered with iron Chains; and when he had
caused him to be carried about the Camp so bound, and to be mocked of all men
for the space of seven days, he commanded to hang him, and so got he a just
reward for his cruelty.

Afterward came Schimeon forth of his Den being driven to it by Famine. He had
put on Kingly apparel; but being brought before Titus, who commanded him to be
fast bound, and to be led about the whole Host, that he might be derided and
mocked: afterward he was put to a sore death; first his head was stricken off,
then he was cut in pieces and cast unto the Dogs; so he died an abominable
death, being punished for his Iniquity.

The number of the Jews as well Citizens as others, that came unto the Feast of
Jerusalem, that were slain partly by the Romans, partly by the Seditious,
during the whole time of these Wars, was known to be eleven hundred thousand,
besides them whose number was not known; only they were counted which were
slain and burled. Besides them, they also are not reckoned, that after the
death of Jehochanan, died with Eleazer the Son of Anani the Priest: they that
were led Prisoners by Titus to Rome, were sixteen thousand men.

Eleazer having made his escape from Jerusalem, got into Mezirah, a fortified
place, whither many Jews flocking to him, he defended it for some time against
the Romans. But the Walls being battered down, and finding it impossible to
make any longer resistance, they all, upon Eleazer's remonstrances, resolved
rather to die than live. Whereupon, the day before they expected the Romans
would enter the Town, Eleazer's companions killed their Wives and Children, and
cast their Bodies into Cisterns and Wells that were in Mezirah, covering and
stopping them with earth. Afterward issued Eleazer the Priest out of the Town
with all his men, and forced a Battle upon the Romans, of whom the Jews killed
a great number, and fought so long, till they all died manfully for the Lord
God.

After this, Titus returned to Rome, where he reigned two years after the
taking of Jerusalem, and then died. He was a very eloquent man, expert in the
Latin and Greek Tongues, and he writ diverse Books in both Tongues. He loved
most entirely Justice and Equity; for he wasted the City of Jerusalem against
his will, being compelled thereunto, yea, all the mischief that came upon it,
happened thorough the malice and naughtiness of the Seditious, as was before
mentioned.

CXXXIII. I will proceed to give some Instances of barbarous Cruelty, and begin
with Mahomet the Great, first Emperor of the Tarks; after the winning of
Constantinople, fell in love with a most beautiful young Greekish Lady, called
Irene, upon whose incomparable Perfections he so much doated, that he gave
himself up wholly to her love. But when he heard his Captains and chief
Officers murmured at it, he appointed them all to meet him in his great Hall,
and commanded Irene to dress and adorn her self in all her Jewels, and most
gorgeous Apparel (not acquainting her in the least with any part of his Design)
taking her by the hand, he led this miracle of Beauty in the midst of the
Bassa's, who, dazzled with the Brightness of this Illustrious Lady, acknowledged
their Error, professing that their Emperor had just cause to pass his time in
solacing himself with so peerless a Paragon: but he on a sudden twisting his
left hand in the soft curles of her hair, and with the other drawing out his
crooked Semiter, at one blow struck off her Head from her Shoulders; and so at
once made an end of his Love and her Life, leaving all the Assistants in a
fearful amaze, and horror of an act of that cruelty.

CXXXIV. Strange and Prodigious was the Cruelty in the Island of Amboyna, near
Seran; the chief Town of it also has the same name, and is the Rendezvous for
the gathering and buying of Cloves: the English lived in the Town, under the
Protection of the Castle, held and well manned by the Dutch. In February 1622,
a Japoner Soldier, discoursing with the Dutch Sentinel of the Castle, was
suspected, tortured, and confessed diverse of his Contrymen contrivers with
him, of surprising the Castle; Also one Price an Englishman, and Prisoner with
them, accused other Englishmen of the Factories, who were all sent for, and
put to horrid torture, the manner thus; First, they hoised up the Examinant by
the hands with a Cord on a large Door, fastening him upon two Staples of Iron
on the top, as wide as the Arms could stretch, his feet hung to the ground,
stretched out at length and wideness, fastened beneath the Door; then they
wrapped a cloth about his Neck and Face, so close that no Water could go by;
this done, they poured Water leisurely upon his Head, and filled the Cloth up
to his Mouth and Nostrils, that he could not draw Breath but that he must suck
in Water, and so continued till it forced his inward Parts to come out at his
Nose, Eyes, and Ears, stifling him, and choking him into a Swoon, or Fainting:
but being taken down, they made him vomit out the Water, and so somewhat
recovered, they torture him again four or five times, his Body swollen three
times bigger, his Cheeks like Bladders, his Eyes staring out beyond his Brows.
One Colson thus tortured, did still deny the accusation, whereupon they burned
him under the Paps, Arm-holes, Elbows, Hands and Feet, till the Fat dropped out
their Torches; then they lodged him in a Dungeon, where his Flesh putrefied,
and Maggots engendered in it, to a horrid and loathsome condition, till at the
end of eight days they were executed, March 1623. At which instant there was a
sudden Darkness, and a Tempest, which forced two Dutch Ships out of the
Harbor, which were hardly saved. The Dead were all buried in one Pit, and one
Dunkin (their Accuser) stumbled at their Grave, and fell stark mad, and died so
within three days after; also a Sickness followed at Amboyna, of which diverse
Dutch died. The names of the English thus inhumanely dealt with, were Captain
Towerson, Thompson, Beaumont, Collins, Colson, Wibber, Rampsey, Johnson, Ford,
and Brown.

CXXXV. In the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, (upon the alteration of
Religion) there was an Insurrection in Cornwall, and diverse other Countries,
wherein many were taken, and executed by Marshal Law; the chief Leaders were
sent to London, and there executed. The Sedition being thus suppressed, it is
memorable what cruel Sport Sir William Kingston made by virtue of his Office
(which was Provost Marshal) upon Men in Misery. One Boyer, Mayor of Bodmin in
Cornwall, had been amongst the Rebels, not willingly, but enforced; to him the
Provost sent word that he would come and dine with him; for whom the Mayor made
great Provision. A little before Dinner, the Provost took the Mayor aside, and
whispered him in the ear, That an Execution must be that day done in the Town,
and therefore required that a pair of Gallows should be set up against Dinner
should be done. The Mayor failed not of his Charge: presently after Dinner, the
Provost taking the Mayor by the hand, entreated him to lead him to the place
where the Gallows was; which when he beheld, he asked if he thought them to be
strong enough? Yes, said the Mayor, doubtless they are. Well then, said the
Provost, get you up speedily, for they are provided for you. I hope, answered
the Mayor, you mean not as you speak? In faith, said the Provost, there is no
Remedy, for you have been a busy Rebel; and so without respite or defense he
was hanged to death. Near the same place dwelt a Miller, who had been a busy
Actor in that Rebellion; who fearing the approach of the Marshal, told a sturdy
Fellow, his Servant, that he had occasion to go from home, and therefore bad
him, that if any came to enquire after the Miller, he should not speak of him,
but say that he was the Miller, and had been so for three Years before. So the
Provost came and called for the Miller, when out comes the Servant, and says,
He was the man. The Provost demanded how long he had kept the Mill? These three
Years, answered the Servant. Then the Provost commanded his men to lay hold on
him, and hang him on the next Tree: at this the Fellow cried out, that he was
not the Miller, but the Miller's Man. Nay Sir, said the Provost, I will take
you at your Word. If thou be'est the Miller, thou art a busy Knave; if thou
art not, thou art a false lying Knave: and howsoever, thou can never do thy
Master better Service than to hang for him; and so without more ado he was
dispatched.

CXXXVI. King John of England was a great Oppressor. On a time, a Jew refusing
to lend this King so much Money as he required, the King caused every day one
of his greatest Teeth to be pulled out, by the space of seven days, and then
the poor Jew was content to give the King ten thousand Marks of Silver that the
one Tooth which he had left might not be pulled out.

CXXXVII. To which, I will add an Instance or two of cruel Massacres. In the
Year 1506. in Lisbon, upon the tenth day of April, many of the City went to the
Church of St. Dominick's to hear Mass. On the lest side of this Church there is
a Chapel, much reverenced by those of the Country, and called Jesus Chapel.
Upon the Altar there stands a Crucifix, the Wound of whose side is covered over
with a piece of glass. Some of those that came thither to do their Devotions
casting their Eyes upon this Hole, it seemed to them, that a certain kind of
gilmmering light came forth of it; then happy he that could first cry a
Miracle; and every one said, That God showed the Testimonies of his Presence. A
Jew that was but lately become a Christian there, denied that it was any
Miracle; saying, It was not likely that out of a dry piece of Wood there should
come such a Light. Now albeit many of the Standers by doubted of the Miracle,
yet hearing a Jew deny it, they began to murmur, calling him wicked Apostate, a
detestable Enemy to Jesus Christ; and after they had sufficiently reviled him
with Words, all the Multitude, foaming with Anger, fall upon him, pluck off the
Hair of his Head and Beard, tread upon him, trail him into the Churchyard,
beat him to Death, and kindling a great Fire, cast the dead Body into it. All
the residue of the People ran to this mutinous Company: there a certain Friar
made a Sermon, wherein he eagerly egged on his Auditors to revenge the injury
our Lord had received. The People, mad enough of themselves, were clean cast
off of the Hinges by this Exhortation. Besides this, two other Friars took and
held up a Cross as high as they could, crying out, Revenge, Revenge, Heresy,
Heresy, down with wicked Heresy, and destroy the wicked Nation. Then, like
hungry Dogs, they fall upon the miserable Jews, cut the Throats of a great
number, and drag them half dead to the Fires, many of which they made for the
purpose. They regarded not Age or Sex, but murdered Men, Women, and Children;
they brake open Doors, rush into Rooms, dash out Childrens Brains against the
Walls; they went insolently into Churches, to pluck out thence little Children,
old Men, and young Maids, that had taken hold of the Altars, the Crosses, and
Images of Saints, crying, Misericordia, Mercy; there they either so murdered
them presently, or threw them out alive into the Fire. Many that carried the
port and show of Jews found themselves in great danger, and some were killed,
and others wounded, before they could make proof that they had no Relation to
them. Some that bare a Grudge to others, as they met them did but cry Jews, and
they were presently beaten down, without having any liberty or leisure to
answer for themselves. The Magistrates were not so hardy as to oppose
themselves against the fury of the People; so that in three days the
Cutthroats killed above two thousand Jewish Persons. The King understanding
the News of this horrible hurley-burley, was extremely wrath, and suddenly
dispatched away Jaques Almida and Jaques Lopez, with full power to punish so
great Offenses, who caused a great number of the Seditious to be executed. The
Friars that had lift up the Cross, and animated the People to Murder, were
degraded, and afterward hanged and burned. The Magistrates that had been slack
to repress this Riot, were some put out of Office, and others fined. The City
was also disfranchised of many Privileges and Honors.

CXXXVIII. In the Year 1572. was the bloody Parisian Matins, wherein was spilt
so much Christian Blood, that it flowed through the Streets like Rainwater, in
great abundance: and this Butchery of Men, Women, and Children, continued so
long, that the principal Rivers of the Kingdom were seen covered with murdered
Bodies? and their streams so dried and stained with humane Blood; that they who
dwelt far from the place where this Barbarons Act was committed, abhorred the
Waters of those Rivers; and refused to use either it, or to eat of the Fish
taken therein for a long time after. This tragedy was thus cunningly plotted. A
Peace was made with the Protestants, for assurance whereof a Marriage was
solemnized between Henry of Navarr, chief of the Protestant party, and Margaret
the King's Sister. At this wedding there assembled the Prince of Conde, the
Admiral Coligne, and diverse others of chief note; but there was not so much
Wine drank as Blood shed at it. At midnight the Watch-bell rung, the King of
Navarre and the Prince of Conde are taken Prisoners, the Admiral murdered in
his Bed, and thirty thousand at the least of the most potent men of the
Religion sent by the way of the red Sea, to find the nearest passage to the
land of Canaan.

CXXXIX. In the year 1311. and in the time of Pope Clement the fifth, all the
order of the Knights Templers being condemned at the Council of Vienna, and
adjudged to die; Philip the Fair, King of France, urged by the Pope, and out of
a covetuous desire of store of Confiscations, gave way for men to charge them
with Crimes; and so these innocents were put to death. The great master of the
order, together with two other of the principal Persons, one whereof was
Brother to the Dolphin of Viennais, were publicly burnt together.

CXL. The Massacre of French Protestants at Merandol and Chabriers, happened in
the year 1544. the instrument of it being Minier the President of Aix; for
having condemned this poor People of Heresy, he mustered up a small Army, and
set fire on the Villages: they of Merandol seeing the flame, with their Wives
and Children flew into the Woods, but were there butchered or sent to the
Galleys. One Boy they took, placed him against a Tree, and shot him to death
with Calivers. Twenty five which had hid themselves in a Cave, were in part
stifled, in part burnt. In Chabriers they so inhumanely dealt with the young
Wives and Maids, that most of them died immediately after; the men and Women
were put to the Sword, the Children were rebaptized; eight hundred men were
murdered in a Cave, and forty men put together in an old Barn and burnt: yea,
such was the cruelty of these Soldiers to these poor Women, that when some of
them had clambered to the top of the Barn, with an intent to leap down, the
Soldiers beat them back again with their Pikes.

CXLI. King Ethelred, the younger Son of Edgar, and half Brother of Edward the
second, enjoyed the Crown unquietly which he got unjustly. Oppressed and broken
by the Danes, he was fain to buy his peace of them, of the yearly Tribute of
ten thousand pounds; inhaunced to forty thousand pounds within a short time
after. Which Moneys were raised upon the Subjects by the name of Danegelt.
Weary of this Exaction, he plotted warily with his Subjects to kill all the
Danes as they slept in their Beds, which accordingly was put in execution on
St. Brices night, November 13. Anno 1012.

CXLII. But to divert the reader, after so sad an entertainment as is this
mournful subject, it will not be improper to give him a prospect of the diverse
Customs of several Nations in the Universe. The Custom of the Ethiopians is,
not to punish any Subject with death though he is condemned; but one of the
Lictors is sent to the Malefactor with the sign of Death carried before him:
which received, the Criminal goes home and puts himself to death. To change
death into banishment is held unlawful; and it is said, that when one had
received the sign of death, and had intentions to fly out of Ethiopia, his
Mother being apprehensive of it, fastened her Girdle about his Neek, and he not
offering to resist her with his hands, lest he should thereby fasten a reproach
upon his Family, was strangled by her.

CXLIII. In the greater India, in the Kingdom of Var (in which St. Thomas is
said to be slain and buried) he amongst them who is to undergo a Capital
Punishment, begs of the King that he may rather dye in honor of some God, than
an inglorious death by the hands of the Hangman. If the King in mercy grant
him it, by his Kindred, with great Joy, he is led through the City with mighty
Pomp; he is placed in a Chair, with sharp Knives all hung about his Neck. When
he comes to the place of Execution, with a loud voice he affirms, he will dye
in honor of this or that God: then taking one of the Knives, he wounds himself
where he pleases, then a second, then a third, till his strength fail, and so
he is honorably burned by his Friends.

CXLIV. The Spartans, when they brought home with them any Friends or Guests,
showing them the Doors, they used to say, Not a Word that is spoken passes out
here. Plutarch also tells us, that by the Institution of Lycurgus, when they
invited any to feast with them, he who was the elder stood at the door of the
dining Room, and pointing to it, said to all that entered, Nothing that is
spoken passes these doors to be told abroad; expressing thereby, that all the
Guests had a full freedom and liberty to speak without any constraint upon
them. The same Spartans, in those Feasts of theirs that are called Phiditiae,
have their Prefects or Stewards, who bring in two or three of the Helotes (that
is, their Slaves) drunk and intoxicate with Wine, and expose them publicly in
that posture to their Youth, that they may see what it is to be drunk, and that
by their unseemly and uncomely Behavior they might be brought into a
detestation of that Vice, and to a love of Temperance and Sobriety.

CXLV. The Aegpptians at their feasts use to carry about the dried Anatomy of a
Man in a Coffin; not so much in memory of Osyris, slain by Trypho, and in a
Chest cast into the Sea, but that being inflamed with Wine, they might mutually
exhort one another to the use and enjoyment of these present good things,
because e're long all of them would be as that Skeleton.

CXLVI. The Massilienses have standing before the Gates of their City two
Coffins; one wherein the Bodies of Freemen, the other wherein those of
Servants are carried in a Cart to Burial, which they do without weeping; their
mourning is finished upon the Funeral day with a Feast among their Friends;
there is also a public Poison kept in that City, which is delivered to that
Person who has made it appear to the Magistrates, of six hundred (that is,
their Senate) that he has sufficient Causes to desire to die: also they suffer
no Man to enter into the Town with any Weapon, but there is appointed at the
Gate one to receive them at their Entrance, and to deliver them back at their
Departure. Thus, as their Entertainments to others are humane, so to themselves
they are safe.

CXLVII. There is a memorable Custom of the Athenians, That a freed man,
convicted of Ingratitude toward his Patron, shall forfeit the Privilege of
his Freedom: as who should say, We refuse to have thee a Citizen who art so
base a valuer of so great a gift; nor can we ever be brought to believe that he
can be advantageous to the City whom we perceive to be villainous at home: go
thy way then, and be still a Servant, seeing thou know not how to esteem of
thy Freedom.

CXLVIII. The Romans, when they went into the Country, or traveled sar, at
their Return used to send a Messenger before them to their Wives, to let them
know, that they are at hand; and upon this reason they did it, because Women,
in absence of their Husbands, are supposed to be detained with many Cares and
much Employment, possibly they have Brawls and Discontents in the Family; that
therefore all these might be laid aside, and that they might have time to
receive their Husbands in Peace, and with Cheerfulness, they send before them
the News of their Arrival.

CXLIX. It was a Custom in Alexandria, that upon a certain stated and appointed
day, some particular Persons were carried about in a Chariot, to whom it was
given in charge, that they should pass throughout the whole City, and making a
stand at whose door they pleased, they should there sing aloud the faults that
the persons in that house were guilty of: they might not causelessly reproach
any, but publish the very Truth: to which purpose they were studiously before
hand to inquire into the manner of the life of each Citizen. The end of this
Custom was, that Men might be moved to return by the consideration of that
Shame which was publicly provided for a dishonest Life.

CL. The black People or Caffares in the Land of Mosambique, have a Custom
among them, That when they go to War against their Enemies, he that takes or
kills most men is accounted the best and bravest Man, and most respected. As
a Proof of his Gallantry to his King, of as many as he has slain or taken
Prisoners he cuts off the Privy Members, dries them well, because they should
not rot: with these thus dried, he comes before his King with great Reverence,
in the presence of the principal Men of the Village; where taking these Members
one by one into his Mouth, he spits them on the ground at the King's feet,
which the King with great Thanks accepts; and the more to reward and
recompense their Valor, he causes them all to be taken up, and given him
again for a sign and token of Honor. Whereby, from that time forwards, they
are accounted as Knights; and they take all those Members wherewith the King
has thus honored them, and tie them all upon a string like a Bracelet or
Chain: and when they marry, and go to any Wedding or Feasts, the Bride or Wife
of such Knights do wear the foresaid Chain about their Necks, which amongst
them is as great an honor as it is with us to wear the golden Fleece or the
Garter in England; and the Brides of such Knights are therewith as proud as if
they were the mightiest Queens in all the World.

CLI. The manner of making War amongst the Romans, and the recovery of such
things as were injuriously detained, was this. They sent forth Feciales, or
Heralds, whom they also called Orators, crowned with Vervain, that they might
make the Gods Witnesses, who are the Revengers of broken Leagues. He that was
crowned with Vervain carried a Turf with grass upon it out of the Tower; and
the Ambassador, when he came to their Borders who were the Offerers of the
Injury, covering his Face with a woollen Veil; Hear, O Jupiter, says he, hear
the Borders (and then naming the People whose Borders they were) hear ye that
which is right: I am the public Messenger of the People of Rome, and justly
and piously come as their Ambassador. Then he speaks all their Demands, and
calls Jupiter to witness. If I unjustly or impiously demand those men or those
things to be yielded back to the People of Rome, do thou then never suffer me
to return in safety to my own Country. This he does when he is entered upon
their Borders, when he meets any man, when he enters the Gates of the City,
when he comes into the Market place: then if that which he demands is not
restored, at the end of thirty three days, he thus declares War, who is the
Father of the Fatherhood, the chief Herald, and who is crowned with Vervain.
Hear Jupiter, and Juno Quirinus, celestial, terrestrial, and infernal Gods, I
call you to witness, that this People (and names it) is unjust and will not do
right: but of these matters the elder of us will consult in our own Country how
to regain our Right. Then he being returned to Rome, they enter upon the
Debate: and if it is decreed as Right, then the Herald returns with a Spear in
his hand pointed with Iron. Upon their Borders (before three Children at least)
he pronounces that such a People have offered force to, and injured the People
of Rome; that the People of Rome have commanded that War be made with them: for
which cause I and the People of Rome declare and make War with such a People;
and when he has said this, he throws the Javelin or Spear upon their Borders.

CLII. The Jews before they entered Battle, by public Edict commanded them to
depart from the Army, who were newly married, and had not brought home their
Wives; also all those that had planted a Vineyard, and had not yet eaten of the
Fruits of it: and those who had begun to build a House, and had not finished
it, together with these, all such as were cowardly and fearful; lest the
desires of those things, which the one had begun, or the faint-heartedness of
the other, should occasion them to fight feebly; and also by their fears
possess the hearts of such as were Bold and Valiant.

CLIII. It was a common use among the Romans, and diverse other Nations, as well
amongst Princes as Private Persons, that if there had happened any difference
of an extraordinary Character amongst them, they used to send a public Officer
or private Messenger to let them know (whom they conceived they had Injury by)
that they did solemnly renounce all friendship with them, and that they did
forbid them their House, and all expectations of any Rites of Hospitality. And
they thought it unreasonable to hear him by Word or deed, who had been their
Friend, till they had sent him this Declaration, that he might stand upon his
Guard. Thus Badius the Campanian, betwixt both Armies, renounced friendship
with Crispinus a Roman, that so he might have the freedom to assault him as an
Enemy: and thus dealt King Amasis with Polycrates, not that he had dissobliged
him, but that he feared his misfortune.

CLIV. Amongst the Persians, they had this custom, that when any one was
accused in the Court for the breach of the Laws, though it did plainly appear
that he was guilty, yet should he not be immediately condemned, but first there
should be an exact inquiry made into the whole course of his life, and a strict
account should be taken, whether his evil and unhandsom actions, or his gallant
and commendable ones were the most: and then if the number of his base and
unworthy doings were found to be the greatest, he was condemned; if otherwise,
he was absolved. For they thought it was beyond human power perpetually to keep
that which was right, and that they were to be accounted good, not who never
did amiss, but who for the most part did that which was honest.

CLV. The custom of establishing a mutual and lasting Friendship betwixt two,
and also of Princes when they entered into inviolable Leagues or Alliances, was
this; they joined their right Hands, and then both their Thumbs were hard bound
about with a string; as soon as the Blood came into the Extremities of them,
they were lightly pricked that the Blood came, and then each licked some of the
others Blood. The Friendship or League contracted by this ceremony was held
most sacred, as being signed with their own Blood. In this manner the
Inhabitants of the Island Palmaria, the Scythians, Georgians, and diverse other
Nations, begin their Friendship, and as we read in Athenaeus, the Germans
themselves.

CLVI. The Corinthians were wont, without much examination, to hang up such as
were suspected of Theft, and upon the third day after, the matter was strictly
examined of the Judge, then if it was found that they had really committed the
Theft, whereof they had been accused, they left them hanging upon the Gallows,
but if they were judged to be innocent, they were taken thence, and buried,
with a Preface of Honor at the Public charge.

But for the Readers greater Diversion, after a draught of such variety of
Customs, I will give him the Life of George Castriot, alias Scanderbeg, King of
Epirus, especially since Hungary, and other it is bordering Countries, do now
daily afford us matter of Discourse. This George was descended of an ancient
Family, which had long reigned in Epirus, or Asbania, a part of Macedonia; his
Father surmounted his Predecessors in Prudence, Gravity, and Magnanimity, in
corporal Beauty and comeliness of Person: his Mother was Voisava, Daughter of
the King of the Tribullians, a Woman for Beauty, Wisdom, and Excellency of
Spirit, surpassing most of her Sex. God blessed these Persons with nine
Children, four Sons and five Daughters; whereof this George was the youngest,
upon whose Arm, when he was born, appeared the form of a Sword, as naturally
imprinted as if it had been engraven by the most dexterous Artificer.

Then it was the Turks extended their Conquests into Europe: John Castriot,
amongst other Princes, was constrained to sue for Peace; which he obtained,
upon Condition of delivering up his Sons in Hostage; who being in the Grand
Seignior's hands, he caused them to be circumcised, (giving to George, in whom
something more than ordinary appeared at his Circumcision, the name of
Scanderbeg, i. e. Lord Alexander;) he was about nine years old at this time,
and Amurath taking a liking to him, appointed him good Masters and Instructers,
under whom he quickly learned the Turkish, Arabian, Greek, Italian, and
Sclavonian Languages; and as his Strength increased, he acquired all those
Exercises as might fit him for the War; and sometimes with his Sword and
sometimes with his Bow, on Horseback and foot, he gave incredible testimonies
of agility and readiness of Body, and of an undertaking courageous Spirit:
hereupon the Sultan made him a Sunziack and Colonel of five thousand Horse.
His Brethren also proving very good Soldiers, he employed them in several
parts of his Empire.

Scanderbeg, when he was eighteen years old, was sent by Amurath into Natolia,
where in his first Enterprise his Virtue and good Success in War appeared, and
he returned victorious: and afterward he, with his Regiment, always made one
in all Enterprises; and the good Success was, by the common Consent of all the
Soldiery, still cast upon him. And now Troubles arising in Asia, he, at those
Years, was chosen General of the whole Army; by which means, and the quick and
speedy defeat of his Enemies, he surmounted all the glory of his former
Performances.

About this time, there came a Gyant-like Scythian to the Court, demanding if
there were any that durst encounter him in Arms, and prove himself in fight
against him. Amurath the Sultan proclaimed and promised to the Conqueror a
great Reward, to encourge his Men to undertake the Combat. But when every one
dreaded the purchase of Honor upon such desperate Conditions, (for they were
to fight in their Shirts in a narrow place, with their Swords only) Scanderbeg
stepping to him, said, Either shall thou not, O Scythian, bear away this Prize
and Glory, or else being made more glorious by my Death, thou shall be enriched
with these Spoils and Ornamenas. In the Duel Scanderbeg slew the Scythian,
without receiving the least Wound from him; and presenting his Head to Amurath,
received the reward of his Victory.

Afterward, two Persians of a fair and goodly Stature, came and made the like
Challenge to fight on Horseback; and when all refused, he took up the Gantlet
against them: and whereas (contrary to the Agreement) after his first Course,
they both assaulted him together, he so acquitted himself that he slew them
both, and presented their Heads to Amurath.

About this time died John Castriot, his Father, in Epyre: upon notice whereof,
Amurath seized upon his Kingdom, put Garrisons into all the Cities and strong
Holds, and poisoned all the Brethren of Scanderbeg. Now, though Scanderbeg
dissembled his Resentment of this Conduct, yet the Sultan growing jealous of
him, put him upon all the desperate Service; yet notwithstanding his
forwardness upon all Occasions, Providence preserved him to be a Scourge to the
Enemies of his Name.

Not long after, Amurath made War upon Vladislaus King of Hungary, for
assisting the Despot of Missa; and thereupon raising an Army of eighty thousand
Men, he sent Carambey, the Bassa of Romania with Scanderbeg, and an Army of
twenty thousand Men, to invade the Hungarians. Vladislaus, with the great
Hanniades, that famous Captain, prepared an Army of five and thirty thousand
men to encounter him. The Bassa encamped by the River of Moravia: Hanniades not
enduring this Bravado, with ten thousand Men, leaving the King in his Camp,
passed the River to encounter with the Barbarians; who contemning his small
number, began the Fight. Castriot seeing an opportunity to accomplish what he
had before resolved on, in the beginning of the Battle began to retreat with
his Troops, and afterward fled, thereby putting the other Turks into a
Consternation, who made use of their Heels in like manner. Scanderbeg having
before imparted his Design to his Friends, especially to his Nephew Amase, as
they fled through a Wood, he laid his hands upon the Turk's Secretary, and
caused him with Threatenings to write Letters in the name of Amurath, to the
Governor of Croia, (the Regal City of Epirus) to deliver up his Command into
the hands of Scanderbeg, as deputed by him to have the Command thereof: and
then killing the Secretary, he posted by very long Journeys into the upper
Dibria, where, sending for some of the principal men of the Town, he discovered
himself and his purposes to them, who unanimously assented to what he desired,
presenting to him their Estates and Lives for the settling of him in his
Kingdom; and so taking good order for all his Affairs, he hasted toward Croia,
sending Amase before to carry News to the Governor, and to certify him, that
Scanderbeg, with his Train was not far behind: he took with him his Friends,
and a select Number of Dibrians, and so coming into Croia, he delivered the
Packet, which being opened and read was easily believed, and the Governor
prepared to depart.

The Night after, his Men at Arms, which he had left secretly near the Town,
were let in, with whom many of the Citizens joined, who setting first upon the
Watch, and then on the Garrison, put most of them to the Sword; and so having
made himself Master of Croia, he presently sent to Dibria to give his Friends
notice of his Success, and to stir up that Country and their Allies, to lay
hold of the opportunity for the Recovery of their Freedom. He also gave notice
to all the Country about Croia, stirring them up to take Arms to free
themselves from the Turkish Yoke; who readily, and with much Joy, received him,
and many good Officers flocked to him; so that having got together pretty
considerable Forces, he routed and put to the Sword an Army of the Turks that
were upon the march for the opposing these Progresses. And then he besieged and
took Petrella, Petra Alba, and Stellisa, all extraordinary strong Towns; after
which, all the weaker Garrisons casily yielded to him.

Then leaving some Forces under his Lieutenant General Moses, an excellent
Soldier, he returned to Croia and disbanded his Army; but upon notice that the
Turks were rendezvouzing, taking his Followers and a hundred Horse, he straight
marched to the place, upon which the Turks scattered and dispersed themselves:
then with a thousand Horse he made an Inroad into Macedonia, spoiling all the
Country, and returned laden with the Prey.

Amurath having notice of all these Occurrences, made Peace with the
Hungarians, and bent all his Thoughts against Scanderbeg.

The Spring coming on, Scanderbeg took the Field with six thousand men,
conquered Morea, a Pleasant and Fruitful Country, and added it to his
Dominions, and then, after some time Siege, had Sfetigrade surrendered to him,
being a place of great importance.

These Successes highly incensed and alarmed Amurath, so that he caused an Army
to be raised of forty thousand Horse, which he committed to the leading of Hali
Bassa, one of his most valiant and experienced Captains. Whereupon Scanderbeg
leavied an Army of eight thousand horse and seven thousand foot, and though
many more flocked to him, he dismissed the rest; with them he went into the
lower Dibria, where he heard daily of the approach of his Enemies. Hereupon he
detached Gree Musach and Amase with three thousand horse, for to lie in
Ambuscado, which he had no sooner done, than the Turks began to approach,
pitching their Camp near Scanderbeg, yet knew not that he was so night them.
Scanderbeg having appointed good Watch, bade the rest of his men to betake
themselves to their rest. The Turks having discovered him, grew very Insolent,
and coming near the Christians Camp, began to revile them, and challenge them
to the Battle; Scanderbeg made his men to be quiet till the rising of the Moon,
then he caused them to refresh themselves with Food, and so some of them to
issue forth to skirmish with the Turks, in the mean time he ordered his Battle:
Halli Bassa contemning the small number of his Enemies, gave the first charge
with a small Troop of horse, who after they had charged, retired, hoping that
the Christians with eager pursuit, would disorder their Battle: but Scanderbeg
finding their Policy, kept his men in good order, so both Armies coming on, the
Wings began the Battle afresh; Scanderbeg, bringing on the main Battle in the
face of the Bassa, valiantly charged him. No sooner were the Battles thoroughly
joined, but the Ambuscado broke out, and charged the Rereward of the Turks,
making such a slaughter, that some of them began to fly. Thus was the Bassa's
great Army distressed by a few. But he having placed his best Soldiers nearest
to himself, with them renewed the Fight, so that Scanderbeg's fortune was at a
stand, till Heranocontes coming on with some fresh Troops from the Rear, brake
thorough the Bashaw's Army, with incredible Slaughter of his Men: so that the
Turks seeing their Fellows lying by heaps, wallowing in their own Blood, betook
themselves to flight, whom the Christians fiercely pursuing, slew two and
twenty thousand of them, took two thousand prisoners, and four and twenty
Ensigns of the Turks: and so horsing all his foot Soldiers, with the horses of
the slain Turks, he made a Road into Macedonia, laying all waste before him,
and returned with a Rich Booty, besides all the Spoils gotten in the Turks
Camp, and with it went back to Croia, where he was received with great Triumph.
Halli Bassa with the remainder of his men returned to Adrianople, where he had
much ado to make his Peace with the Sultan, who was almost ready to die for
despair thorough his great losses before in Hungaria, and in Epirus.

In the mean while the Pope's Legate persuaded the King of Hungary to break the
League lately made with Amurath, saying, that Faith was not to be kept with
Insidels and Miscreants, and he absolved the King and his Nobles from their
Oath to the great Turk, and thereupon great preparations were made, a great
Army raised, whereof Hunniades was made the Lieutenant General. The King of
Hungary also wrote to Scanderbeg, who after a Council held with his Princes,
assented to it, and raising a potent Army, and seeking to God by Prayer, for a
prosperous Journey, he marched toward Hungary. But God intending to chastize
the Perjury of the Hungarians, and to preserve Scanderbeg from having had a
hand in so horrid a Sin, stirred up the Despot of Missa (a Person of no
Religion) to deny him passage thorough his Country. Whereupon Scanderbeg
resolved to force it, though it was like to prove a difficult work: and indeed
before he could do it, the Turks and Hungarians had fought a dreadful Battle,
wherein many were slain, and amongst others, Vladislaus with his perjured
Nobles, and the Christian Army was wholly overthrown. The news whereof coming
to Scanderbeg, he was so grieved and enraged also at the Despot, that he
spoiled his Country with fire and sword, and so returned home again.

Amurath being informed of the Extraordinary spoil and havoc that Scanderbeg
had made in Macedonia, resolved he should next feel the effects of his
resentment, and first thought to have undermined him by the artifice of a
proffered Peace and Amity, which being warded by Scanderbeg, the Sultan was
extremely incensed, and sent for Feressay Bassa, a Captain of a fierce and
ready Spirit, and loading him with promises if he returned Victor, he gave him
nine thousand Horse, all chosen men, commanding him in all haste to go surprise
the Enemy in Epirus, who having dismissed his Army, kept the Field only with a
few Horse. The Turks promising themselves a certain Victory, marched on merrily
till they came to a narrow Valley called Mocrea, which Scanderbeg and his men
having seized on, upon notice of the Enemies designs, where Scanderbeg put the
Bassa to flight, cut most of his men to pieces, and the rest he took Prisoners.

This news incensed Amurath to a high degree, and thereupon sent one Mustapha,
a bold and politic Captain; with a new supply of six thousand Soldiers to
take Feresaye's charge, which joined with other Forces made up an Army of above
twenty thousand men, but he was in like manner incountred by Scanderbeg, his
Forces routed, five thousand of the Turks slain, three hundred taken, and
Scanderbeg lost but twenty Horsemen and fifty Footmen.

Mustapha obtained afterward another mighty Army of Amurath, with which he
marched against Scanderbeg, who lying at the Siege of Duyna against the
Venetians, upon notice of the Enemies approach he detached five hundred Horse,
and a thousand five hundred Footmen, wherewith he hasted to the relief of his
Garrisons, leaving the rest with Amase to continue the Siege: Scanderbeg at his
return having drawn some Forces out of his Garrisons, had got together a Body of
Men consisting of four thousand Horse, and two thousand Foot, with which he
prepared himself for Battle. Mustapha did the like; but before the Battle
began, there came from the Turks a man at Arms in rich and gallant furniture,
challenging any one of the Christians to fight hand to hand with him. Paul
Menessi thereupon stepped to Scanderbeg, desiring leave that he might accept
the challenge, and chastize the proud Turk, which Scanderbeg assenting to, and
praying for his Success, he presently mounted on Horseback, rode forth to the
Turk, bidding him to prepare himself to the Battle; both Generals agreed upon
the Laws for Combat, and so the Champions taking their course, ran each at
other with their Spears, and Menessi ran the Turk thorough the head, and so
slew him, and there alighting, he struck off his head, took his Armor, and
returned to the Camp laden with his Spoils.

This good Omen did so encourage Scanderbeg's men, that they charged the Turks
with such fury that they forced them to retire. Mustapha seeing that, put Spurs
to his Horse, resolving to win the Field or die; most of his chief Captains did
the like, which a little renewed the Battle; but presently Mustapha and twelve
of his chiefest men were taken Prisoners, the rest slain and scattered. There
were in the Turks Camp killed ten thousand men, and fifteen Ensigns taken. The
Christians lost but three hundred, and they found a rich Prey.

Then did Scanderbeg make an Inroad into Macedonia, spoiled and took a great
Booty; after which, he left two thousand Horse and one thousand Foot for the
guard of his Frontiers, and so returned to the Siege of Duyna. But shortly
after he made Peace with the Venetians, Amurath too sent him rich Presents,
with five and twenty thousand Ducats for the Redemption of his Captains:
nevertheless, Scanderbeg having divided the Money amongst his Soldiers, made
another Inroad into Macedonia, and dividing his Army into three parts, he laid
all waste, and brought away a rich Prey, that he might leave nothing for the
relief of his Enemies when they returned again.

This put Amurath into such a Rage, that he resolved to go in Person with such
an Army as might fill every Corner of Epirus, and make an easy Conquest of it.
Scanderbeg having notice of the great Preparations that the Sultan was making
for an Invasion, did likewise put all things in the best posture of Desence
that was possible. Amurath in the mean while came with an Army of a hundred and
fifty thousand Horse and Foot into Epirus, but Scanderbeg having laid an
Ambuscade for a detachment of forty thousand that were going to besiege
Sfetigrade, his Men killed two thousand of the Turks, took a thousand Horse,
and the Christians lost but two and twenty Men.

During the Siege of the forementioned Town, Scanderbeg, with his handful, was
perpetually beating up and alarming the Turk's Quarters, and set so furiously
and so unluckily upon them one Night, that he slew two thousand of them: the
Soldiers too within the Town made a brave Defense, and beat off several
general Attacks with great Slaughter of the Turks. And Scanderbeg having
gathered nine thousand Soldiers, resolved to assault the Camp; but Feri Bassa
despising his small number, sent several thousand Horse to encompass him in
behind; but all to his own Disadvantage, for fighting with Scanderbeg hand to
hand, he was slain by this latter, and in that days work were seven thousand
Turks killed by the Wounded. But Amurath seeing he could not prevail by force,
used means to corrupt some of the Garrison; which having effected, the Town was
delivered to him; the Traitors received their promised Reward, but within a few
days after were secretly, at his Command, made away, as a just Recompense for
their traiterous Wickedness.

Amurath having lost thirty thousand of his Soldiers in this Expedition,
returned home, being followed at the heels by Scanderbeg, who slew many more of
his Men in narrow Passages, which more and more provoked Amurath to the making
extraordinary Preparations against the ensuing Campaign; by which time, having
gotten together an Army of a hundred and sixty thousand men, with which he
again invaded Epirus, and laid Siege to Croia, the Capital City thereof. And
after many Artifices and Endeavors to suborn the Governor and the other
Officers, finding that could not be effected, after having battered it with
great Mortar-pieces, the Sultan made a general Assault. But just as the Turks
began it, Scanderbeg with five thousand men brake into one of their Quarters,
and at the first Encounter slew six hundred of them, yet engaged himself so far
in the Fight, that he was in much danger to be slain or taken Prisoner, but at
length resolutely breaking through them, he escaped, and came to his Camp, to
their great Joy and Comfort.

Whereupon Amurath renewed the Assault, wherein he lost eight thousand Men
without any considerable damage to the Garrison. And Scanderbeg in the night
broke in again upon their Quarters, making a much greater slaughter of the
Enemy than the Garrison had done.

After the Turks had still made several Attacks in vain, wherein they lost many
thousands more of their Men, Amurath laid it to heart that so small a Town
should eclipse all his former Glory, that he died in the Army, of Grief, Rage,
and Despair; but charging his Son and principal Officers not to leave his Death
unrevenged, and so gave up the Ghost.

After the Death of Amurath, Mahomet his Son presently raised the Siege, and
offered Peace to Scanderbeg if he would pay him a certain Tribute; but
Scanderbeg scorning the Motion, made an Inroad into the Turkish Dominions,
which he grievously wasted, and returned home laden with spoil. To revenge
this, Mahomet sent an Army into Epirus, under one of his principal Bassa's; but
being re-encountred by Scanderbeg, he slew seven thousand of them, took the
Bashaw and principal Officers, Prisoners, whom Mahomet ransomed with thirteen
thousand Ducats, and other rich Presents which he sent to Scanderbeg.

Hereupon one Debreas, one of the Turk's best Generals, undertook, with such an
Army, to conquer Epirus, and bring Scanderbeg's Head to Mahomet. Accordingly,
he marched with such and as many Men as he desired, and a Battle was so
valiantly fought, that Scanderbeg's Fortune seemed to be at a stand; yet
Scanderbeg having at last encountered Debreas, fought with him hand to hand, and
slew him, with whose Death the whole Enemies Army was discouraged and fled; and
of the Turks were slain four thousand one hundred and twenty, but of the
Christians very few.

The Grand Seignior finding by these Defeats, that it lay not in his Power to
prevail by Force, had Recourse to Artifice, and sought to corrupt, by mighty
Offers and Promises, the principal Officers of Scanderbeg, and at length found
the means to seduce Moses Galome, a great Commander, who had treacherously
assured Scanderbeg of Success if he would besiege Belgrade, which having done
upon his Advice, he brought the Town to great distress before it could be
relieved; but Moses having given the Turks warning of his Designs, they came
upon him unawares, slew many of his Men, and raised the Siege: nevertheless,
Scanderbeg fought their Army, slew three thousand of the Misereants, and with
his own hand two brave Champions, who had before sworn to Mahomet to kill him
if they met with him. The poor Christian Captives taken by the Turks, were some
sold for Slaves, others impailed alive upon sharp Stakes, others hanged on iron
Hooks, and others cruelly tortured to death at the Victor's Pleasure.

Moses threw off the Mask, and went to Mahomet, of whom having obtained, upon
assurance of Conquest, a great Army, with all things necessary, went against
Scanderbeg. When the two Armies were ready to join, a Messenger came from the
Turks, to see if any durst prove his Valor against a Champion of the Turks,
hand to hand; the Challenger was accepted, and the Turk appearing, Zachary
Groppa having obtained leave of Scanderbeg, went out against him, and after a
short Parley, they ran with their Lances each against other with such Fury,
that both Horses and Men were overturned; then nimbly recovering themselves,
they drew their Semiters, and encountered each other with such sturdy Strokes,
that at last both their Swords fell out of their Hands; then grapling together,
they wrestled so long till Groppa overthrew his Adversary, and with his Dagger
thrust him into his Throat, and then taking a Sword, he cut off his Head, and
returned to Scanderbeg with great Honor. Then the Signal of the Battle being
given, it was obstinately fought on both sides, and Scanderbeg ran great danger
of his life,; for a courageous Turk, with his Horse-man's Staff, bare him quite
backward upon his Horse, so that the Turks shouted for Joy, hoping that he had
been slain: but Scanderbeg, chafed with such an unwonted Disgrace, suriously
assailed the Turk and slew him, and pursued his Victory with that Eagerness,
that the Turks were defeated, eleven thousand of them slain, and not above one
hundred of the Christians, and eighty wounded.

After this, Moses being tormented in Conscience, stole from the Turks,
returned to Scanderbeg, obtained Pardon and his former Trust and Offices.

In the mean while Amase, Scanderbeg's Nephew, was inveigled by Mahomet, so
that he abandoned his Uncle, and went to the Grand Seignior. Hereupon in the
Spring following, he and Isaac Bassa, were sent the Spring following with a
mighty Army, and Amase was proclaimed King of Epirus in Mahomet's name. After
several Skirmishes between the two Armies, wherein the Turks had always the
worst; at length Scanderbeg and his Army descended from the Mountain with such
horrible Shouts and noise of Instruments of War, that the Turks were in a kind
of Consternation, and thought the Enemy to be much more numerous than they
were: nevertheless, Amase rallied, and made a brave Defense, but at length was
forced to yield to his Uncle's Bravery and Conduct, so that the whole Turkish
Army was routed, many of them were slain, and many taken Prisoners, together
with twenty of the Turks fairest Ensigns, of whom were slain about twenty
thousand, and of the Christians about sixty; Amase being likewise taken and
condemned to perpetual Imprisonment. Then a Peace was concluded between Mahomet
and Scanderbeg; after the expiration of which, Mahomet sent Synanbeg with an
Army of twenty thousand into Epyrus, with which Scanderbeg forthwith
encountered and overthrew, so that few escaped by flight. Then sent he Asambeg
with thirty thousand, with whom Scanderbeg in plain Battle vanquished at
Ocrida, and took Asambeg Prisoner, and used him honorably, and afterward
dismissed him.

Jussumbeg came after with eighteen thousand, was set upon by Scanderbeg, had
many slain, and himself hardly escaped by flight. Then Carafabeg, an old and
expert Captain, desired Mahomet to let him try his Fortune, who sent him with
an Army of almost forty thousand. Scanderbeg fearing him more than any of the
former, and therefore raised more Forces; yet he was too cunning as well as too
brave for the Bashaw, for he slew many of his Men, and had routed all his
Forces had not the Armies been separated by a Storm. So that the old General
was constrained to return back to Constantinople with the remainder of his
Army, and was well derided by his Master for having promised so much and
performed so little.

After this a Peace was again concluded, upon expiration whereof, Scanderbeg
entered with an Army into Macedonia, made much Spoil, and returned with great
Booty. Hereupon Mahomet sent a new Army to defend the Borders, but this was
likewise routed by Scanderbeg, ten thousand of the Turks slain, twelve of their
principal Officers taken Prisoners, for whom he had forty thousand Ducats in
Ransom.

Then was another Bassa called Bartabanus sent with a new Army, who had several
Skirmishes with Scanderbeg, but had still the worst. But at length, some of the
principal Officers in the heat of the Fight engaging too far, quite contrary to
his orders, were taken Prisoners, and Mahomet refused to suffer them to be
ransomed, and knowing them to be Scanderbeg's best Captains, he flayed them
alive by degrees, so that they were fifteen days a dying.

Nevertheless, though the Turks had corrupted Scanderbeg's Scouts, yet he was
so well upon his Guard, that when they came upon him above two to one, he put
them to the worst, and slew them almost all. But as he was fighting in the
midst of his Enemies, his Horse was slain under him, and in the fall sorely
bruised one of his Arms; the Turks pressed on vehemently to have slain him; but
God delivered him, his Soldiers rescuing and re-mounting him, and he forthwith
incountring one of the Turks great Commanders, slew him hand to hand, which so
terrified the Turks, that they fled and such slaughter was made of them, that
few returned with Bartabanus, who advised the Sultan to invade Epyrus with two
Armies at a time, which advice being liked off, one Bassa Jacup invaded it on
one side with sixteen thousand brave men, and Burtabanus on another with four
and twenty thousand good Soldiers. Scanderbeg having got together twelve
thousand choice Soldiers, challenged Bartabanus, who had fortified his Camp to
the Combat, which he refusing, the Turks were so derided and provoked by
Scanderbeg's men, that the Turks, enraged at the affront, forced their General
to hazard the Battle, which proved dangerous and doubtful; yet Scanderbeg and
his men so pressed upon them on all sides, that at last they were broken in
pieces, most of them slain, only Bartabanus with some few escaped. Scanderbeg
had scarce divided the Spoil, when a Post brought him News, that Jacup was
burning all in another part of the Country, whereupon he presently marched
thitherward, and his men went as to an assured Victory. Jacup hearing of his
coming, retired into a corner of the Plain, Scanderbeg coming near him, rested
one whole day, and then brought forth some of his Prisoners before his Enemies
Camp, who before knew nothing of Bartabanus's overthrow. Then the Battle
beginning, it was fiercely fought on both sides, the Turks were beaten and most
of them slain: In all there were slain in the two Battles four and twenty
thousand men, and six thousand Prisoners. Jacup escaped with a few: after which
Scanderbeg entered into the Turks Territories, made havoc of all, and so
returned with his Victorious Army to Croia, where he dismissed them every man
to his own home.

Then Mahomet employed two Assassianates to murder him, but being discovered,
they were upon their own confession justly executed according to their Merit;
Then Mahomet failing too that way, raised an Army of two hundred thousand men,
with which he likewise invaded Epirus, whereof Scanderbeg having intelligence,
he put his Town in the best posture of defense that was possible, by which time
Mahomet with those vast Forces sat down before Croia, but Scanderbeg did so ply
him with continual allarums, and was so perpetually beating up his Quarters,
that he grew weary of the Expedition, and returned to Constantinople, leaving
his Bassa, still to maintain the Siege of the Town. In his way home he
corrupted the Governor of a Fort called Chidna, in which were eight thousand
of Scanderbeg's Soldiers, promising them liberty and safety to depart: but
when he had prevailed, and had them in his power, the Tyrant caused them
cruelly to be cut in pieces, sparing neither Soldiers nor Inhabitants, Man,
Woman nor Child. Scanderbeg, disdaining to have his Capital City besieged by
Bartabanus, with fourteen thousand choice Soldiers he marched to endeavor its
relief, but by the way, hearing that Janima was coming with a fresh supply to
the Turks, he detached a party of his men, and routed this new Army, and took
Janima and his Sons Prisoners, whom the next day he showed to Bartabanus, and
then with plain force drove the Turks from a Mountain near the City. The Turks,
discouraged with these and other such like things, rose in the silence of the
Night, and retreated eight miles from the City. Scanderbeg the next morning
found in their Tents great store of Corn and other Provision, which he conveyed
into Croya in great Triumph.

The Spring following, Mahomet with a mighty Army again entered Epyrus, and
having besieged several places, did at length again lay Siege to Croia, but
with the same fortune as formerly, for many of his men being day by day out off
by Scanderbeg being in want of provisions, he was forced to return to
Constantinople covered with shame and rage.

But as Scanderbeg was now busy in putting his Kingdom into good order, he
fell sick of a Fever, and perceiving his end to draw nigh, he sent for his
Wise, his Son, and the confederate Princes, and discoursed to them of his
troublesome Life, forewarned them of the dangers were like to ensue, to
persevere in Unity, made the Venetians Protectors of his Son and Kingdom, and
so after he had with most fervent Prayer commended his Soul into the hands of
the Almighty God, he quietly left this Life Jan. 17. Anno Christi 1466. and of
his age sixty three, and of his Reign twenty four. He was royally buried in the
Cathedral in Lyssa; yet nine years after, the Turks having taken the City, with
great Devotion dug up his Bones, reckoning it some part of their heppiness,
if they might see or touch the same; such as could get any part thereof set it
on Silver or Gold, and hung it about their Necks, persuading themselves, that
it would make them Valiant and prosperous.

He was a man of rare Parts, and of an indefatigable Spirit: during all the
time of his Wars, he never slept above two hours a Night; he ever Fought
against the Turks with his Arm bare, and that with such fierceness, that the
Blood did oft'times burst out of his Lips. He with his own hands slew at least
three thousand of the Turks. What his strength was, may appear by these
Examples. There was in a part of Epyrus a mighty wild Bull, that had murdered
many, and committed a thousand outrages: him Scanderbeg incountred with on
Horseback, and with one only blow of his Semiter he cut his Neck clean from
his Shoulders.

Also a Monstrous Boar in Apulia that had wounded many of King Ferdinand's
Courtiers, Scanderbeg being hunting with the King, incountred with this Beast,
and soon severed his head from his Body.

CLVIII. Strange is the Story of Macamat, Sultan of Cambaia, he kept an Army of
20000 Horsemen. Every Morning resort to his Palace fifty men sitting on
Elephants, their office is, with all Reverence to salute the Sultan, the
Elephants also kneeling down. As Soon as he waketh, is heard a great Noise of
Trumpets, Waits, and Drums, with other musical Instruments, in rejoicing that
the Sultan lives, and the like at Dinner. His Mustanchoes are so long, that he
bears them up with a Filler, as Women do the hair of their heads. his Beard
was white and long, to the very Navel. He was so accustomed to Poison from his
Infancy, that he daily eat some to keep it in use; and though he feel no hurt
himself thereof by reason of Custom, yet does he so venom himself, that he is
Poison to others; for when he is disposed to put any of his Noblemen to Death,
he causes him to be brought to his Presence and stand naked before him, then
he cateth certain Fruits like Nutmegs, and also the leaves of some Herbs,
adding thereto the Powder of beaten Oyster Shells, chewing them a while in his
Mouth, he spitteth it upon him he designs to kill, who being sparkled
therewith, dies bp the force of it within the space of half an hour. He
entertains about four thousand Concubines, for whenever he has lain with any
of them at Night she that lies with him is dead on the Morning: or when he
changes his Shirt or other Apparel, no man dares wear it. The Reason of his
being so venomous, is, because his Father brought him up so of a Child with
Poison little by little, with Preservatives so accustoming him thereto.

CLIX. Captain Hawkins tells in his Voyage at the Mogul's Court; it happened to
a great Friend of mine (a chief man having under his Charge the King's
Wardrobe, all sorts of Mercery, and his China dishes) that a fair China dish
(which cost forty five Rials of Eight) was broken by a Mischance, (when the
King was in his Progress) being packed amongst other things, on a Camel, which
fell and broke all the whole Parcel. This Nobleman knowing how dearly the King
loved this Dish above the rest, presently sent a Servant to China Machina to
seek another, hoping that he would return with another like this, before it
would be missed: but his evil Luck was contrary; for the King two years after
remembered this Dish, and his Man was not yet come. Now when the King heard the
Dish was broken, he was in a great Rage, commanding him to be brought before
him, and to be beaten by two Men, with two Whips made of Cords, and after that
he had received a hundred and twenty Lashes, he commanded his Porters to beat
him with their small Cudgels till a great many of them were broken; at last
twenty men were beating of him, till the poor man was thought to be dead, and
then he was haled out by the Heels, and commanded to Prison. The next day the
King demanded, whether he was living? Answer was made, he was. Whereupon, he
commanded he should be carried to perpetual Prison. The King's Son being his
Friend, freed him of that, and obtained of his Father that he might be sent
home and there cured: so after two Months he was reasonable well recovered, and
came before the King, who presently commanded him to depart the Court, and
never come again before him until he had found such a little Dish, and that he
traveled for China Machina to seek it; the King allowing him 5000 Rupies for
his Charges; and besides, returning one fourth part of his Living that he had
before to maintain him in his Travel. He being departed, and fourteen Months on
his Travel, was not yet come home; but News came of him, that the King of
Persia had the like Dish, and for pitties sake has sent it him, who at my
Departure was on his way homeward.

CLX. In Japan three were executed, viz. two Men and one Woman; the cause this:
the Woman, none of the honestest (her Husband traveled from home) had
appointed these two their several Hours to repair unto her. The latter man not
knowing of the former, and thinking the time too long, coming in before the
hour appointed, found the first man with her already, and enraged thereat, he
whipped out his Cattan, and wounded them both very sorely, having very nigh hewn
the Chine of the man's back in two, but as well as he might he cleared himself
of the Woman, and recovering his Cattan, wounded the other; the Street taking
notice of this Fray, forth with seized upon them and led them aside, and
aquainted King Foyne therewith, who presently gave order that they should cut
off their heads: which done, every man that listed came to try the sharpness of
their Cattans upon the corpse, so that before they left off, they had hewed them
all three into pieces as small as a man's hand, And yet notwithstanding did not
then give over, but placing the Pieces upon one another, would try how many of
them they could strike through at a blow: and the Pieces are left to the Fowls
to devour.

CLXI. At the City of Fess, their manner of proceeding against a Malefactor is
thus; having given him a 100 or 200 stripes before the Governor, the
Executioner puts an Iron Chain about his neck, and so leads him
stark-naked (his Privities only excepted) through all parts of the City: after
the Executioner follows a Sergeant, declaring to all the People what Fact the
Guilty Person has committed, till at length, having put on his Apparel again,
they carry him back to Prison, sometimes it falls out that many Offenders
chained together are led through the City and the Governor for each Malefactor
thus punished, receives one Ducat, and also at their first entrance into the
Goal, he demands of each one a certain Duty, which is paid to him by diverse
Merchants and Artificers, appointed of purpose.

CLXII. At Grand Cairo in Egypt, upon Malefactors they inflict most horrible
punishments, especially upon them that have committed any heinous Crime in the
Court. Thieves they condemn to the Halter. A Murder committed treacherously
they punish in manner following: The Executioner's assistants take the
Malefactor one by the head, another by the feet, and then the chief Executioner
with a two-handed Sword cutteth his Body in twain, the one part whereof
adjoining to the Head, is put into a Fire full of unslacked Lime: and it is a
most strange and dreadful thing to consider, how the same dismembered half Body
will remain alive in the fire for the space of a quarter of an hour, speaking
and making answers to the standers by. But Rebels or Seditious Persons they
flea alive, stuffing their Skins with Bran till they resemble man's shape,
which being done, they carry the said stuffed Skins upon Camels backs through
every street of the City, and therein publish the Crime of the Party executed:
but if the Tormentor once touches his Navel with the Knife, he presently
yields up the Ghost: which he may not do until he be commanded by the
Magistrate standing by. If any be imprisoned for Debt, not having wherewithal
to satisfy the same, the Governor of the Prison pays their Creditors, and
sends them poor wretches, bound in Chains, accompanied with certain Keepers,
daily to beg Alms from street to street, all which Alms redound to the
Governor, and he allows the said Prisoners very bare maintenance to live
upon.

CLXIII. In Zant the Inhabitants of the Island are generally Grecians; in Habit
they imitate the Italians, but transcend them in Revenges; they will threaten
to kill a Merchant that will not buy their commodities, and make more
Conscience to break a Fast than to commit a Murder. One of them (as our Author
George Sandys says) at our being there, pursued a poor Saylor (an English man)
for offering to convey a little bag of Currants aboard unaccustomed, and killed
him, running up a pair of Stairs for succor: but cowardice is joined with
their cruelty, who dare do nothing but suddenly, upon advantages; and are ever
privately armed, encouraged to villainies by the remisness of their Laws: for
none will lay hands upon an Offender until fourteen days after that he be
called to the Scale, (a place of Public Justice) who in the mean time has
leisure to make his own peace, or else to absent himself; if then he appear
not, they punish him; and propound a reward, according to the greatness of his
offense, to him that shall either kill or take him alive: the Laborers do go
into the Field with Swords and Partisans, as if in an Enemies Country, bringing
home their Wikes and Oils in Hogs-skins, the In-sides turned outward. It is a
custom among them to invite certain men unto Marriages, whom they call
Compeers, every one of these do bestow a Ring, which the Priests do put upon
the Bride and Bridegrooms finger, interchangeably shifting them; and so he does
the Garlands on their heads. Of these they are never Jealous. The Bridegroom
entering the Church, strikes his Dagger in the door: held available against
Enchantments, for here is a common practice to bewitch them: made therefore
impotent with their Wives, until the Charm be burnt, or otherwise consumed:
insomuch, that sometimes (as they say) the Mothers of the betrothed, by way of
prevention do bewitch themselves and again unloose themselves as soon as the
Marriage is consummated.

CLXIV. The Mamalukes, who were accounted the best Horsemen of their time, by
the command of the Sultan they were to exercise before the Turkish Ambassador.
Beneath a Castle was a long Plain prepared for that purpose, in the midst
whereof was three heaps of Sand, fifty paces distant, and in each a Spear
erected with a Mark to shoot at, and the like over against them, with space
between for six horses to run a breast: here did the young Mamalukes, gallantly
adorned, upon their Horses running a full Career, yield strange experiments of
their Skill, not one missing the Mark, first with casting Darts, and after with
their Arrows, as they ran; and lastly trying their Staves; others after this,
in the like race of their running horses, shot with like Dexterity diverse
Arrows backwards and forwards; others in the midst of their race alighted three
times, and (their Horses still running) mounted again, and hit the mark
nevertheless: others did hit the same standing on their Horses thus swiftly
running; others three times unbent their Bows and thrice bent them, again
whilst their Horses ran, and missed not the Mark. Neither did others, which
amidst their Race, lighted down on either side, and again mounted themselves;
no nor they which in their swiftest course leaped and turned themselves
backward on their Horses, and then (their Horses still running) turned
themselves forward: there were them, which whilst the Horses ran, ungirt their
Saddles thrice, and each time shooting, and then again girding their Saddles,
and never missing the Mark, some sitting in their Saddles leaped backwards out
of them, and turning over their heads, settled themselves again in their
Saddles, and shot as the former three times; others laid themselves backwards
on their running Horses, and taking their Tails, put them into their Mouths,
and yet forgot not their Aim in shooting: some after every shot, drew out their
Swords and flourished them about their heads, and again sheathed them: others
sitting between three Swords, on their right side, and as many on their left,
thinly clothed, that without very great care, every motion would make way for
death, yet before and behind them touched the Mark: one stood upon two Horses
running very swiftly, his feet loose, and shot also at once three Arrows
before, and again three behind him: another sitting on a horse neither bridled
nor saddled, as he came at every Mark arose and stood on his Feet, and both
hands hitting the Mark, sat down again three times: a third sitting on the
bare Horse, when he came to the Mark lay upon his back and lifted up his Legs
and yet missed not his shoot; one of them was killed with a fall, and two sore
wounded in these their feats of Activity: they had an old grave man which was
their teacher. If I have long detained thee in this spectacle, remember that
the Race of Mamalukes should not be forgotten, the rather, because their name
is now razed out of the World, and this may seem an Epitaph to their Sepulcher,
after whom none are left perhaps able to do the like.

CLXV. But now I shall take occasion to speak of Death and the gallantry
wherewith some Persons have received it. And begin with the story of
Sophonisba, who was the Queen of Syphax the Numidian. He being made Prisoner to
the Romans, she came, yielded her self to Massanissa, and vehemently besought
him, that he might not be delivered into the hands of the Romans. Her youth and
excellent beauty so commended her suit, that he forthwith granted it, and to
make good his promise, married her himself that very day, having been
contracted with her before her Marriage with Syphax. But Scipio the Roman
General gave him to understand that the Romans had title to her head, and that
she was a mischievous Enemy of theirs, and therefore advised him not to commit
a great offense upon little reason. Massanissa blushed and wept; and finally
having promised to be governed by Scipio, he departed to his Tent; where, after
he had spent some time in Agony, he called to him a Servant, and tempring a
potion for Sophomiba, sent it her with this message; that gladly he would have
her to live with him as his Wife, but since they who had power to hinder him
would not yield thereto, he sent her a Cup that should preserve her from
falling alive into the hands of the Romans; willing her to remember her Birth
and Estate, and accordingly to take order for her self. At the receipt of this
Message and Present she only said, that if her Husband had no better present
for his new Wife, she must accept this: adding, that she might have died more
honorably, if she had not wedded so lately before her Funerals; and herewithal
she boldly drank off the Poison.

CLXVI. Dr. Fecknam was sent to the Lady Jane Gray, that she must prepare her
self to die the next day; which message was so little displeasing to her, that
she seemed rather to rejoice at it. The Doctor being earnest with her to leave
her new Religion, and to embrace the old, she answered, that she had now no
time to think on any thing, but of preparing her self to God by Prayer: Fecknam
thinking that she had spoken this, to the end she might have some longer time
of life, obtained of the Queen three days longer, and then came and told so
much to the Lady Jane, whereat she smiling said, You are much deceived if you
think I had any desire of longer life: for I assure you, since the time you
went from me, my life has been so odious to me, that I long for nothing so
much as Death; and since it is the Queens pleasure, I am most willing to
undergo it.

CLXVII. Queen Anne, the Wife of Henry the eighth, when she was led to be
beheaded in the Tower, she called one of the King's Privy-Chamber to her, and
said unto him; commend me to the King, and tell him, he is constant in his
course of advancing me; for from a private Gentlewoman he made me Marchioness,
and from a Marchiones to a Queen; and now that he has left no higher degree of
worldly honor for me, he has made me a Martyr.

CLXVIII. Calanus the Indian, of great fame and name for Philosophy, and held
in great reverence by Alexander the Great, when he had lived seventy three
years in perfect health, and was now seized upon by a Disease, accounting that
he had arrived at that term of Felicity, which both nature and fortune had
allotted him, determined to depart out of life: and to that purpose desired of
Alexander a Funeral Pile to be erected, and that as soon as he had ascended to
the top of it, he would appoint his Guard to put fire to it. The King not able
to divert him from his purpose, commanded the Pile to be erected, an
innumerable multitude of People flocked together to behold such an unusual a
spectacle. Calanus, as he had said, with a mavelous alacrity ascended the top
of the pile, and there laid him down, wherein he was consumed to Ashes.

CLXIX. But now it is time to bring them to their Graves, and give an account
of the Customs of several Nations in the Burial of their dead, and begin with
the Inhabitants dwelling near the River Nile, who not satisfied with Natures
Treasures, as Gold, Precious Stones, Flesh in variety and the like; the
Destruction of Men and Women neighboring them better contents them, whose dead
Carcasses they devour with a Vultures appetite; whom if they miss, they serve
their Friends (so as they miscall them) such scurvy sauce, butchering them, and
thinking they excuse all in a Complement; that they know no better way to
express Love, then in making (not two Souls) two Bodies one by such an Union:
yea some, as some report (worn by age or worm-eaten by the Pox) prosser
themselves to the Shambles, and accordingly are disjoynted and set to sail
upon the Stalls.

CLXX. The Funerals of the Bannyans are of the old stamp, sacring the Corpse to
Ashes in a holy fire, compounded of all sorts of Wood and Aromatic Spices; the
Wife also in epectation to enjoy her Husband amongst incomparable pleasures,
invelops her dainty Body with the merciless Flames, for which Affection she
obtains a living memory.

CLXXI. The Inhabitants of the Canary Islands washed their dead, and kept them
erected in a Cave, a Staff in one hand, and a Pail of Milk and Wine set near
him to support and comfort him in his Filgrimage to the Elizian Fields.

CLXXII. The Indians that dwell near the River Ganges have likewise the liberty
to burn with their dead Husbands: so that death having cut in two their Union,
the Relict conceits her self a loathed Carcass, and resolves to make her self
an Holocaust, robes her Body with a transparent Lawn, her Arms, Legs and Thighs
are also fettered with Chains, expressing Love; but her Ears, Nose and Fingers
are adorned with Pearls and precious Stones: with one hand she holds a Nosegay
of Flowers, in the other a Ball; both which are emblems of Paradise. She is
attended with a great number, some accompanying her for Love, others for
Civility, but most for her encouragement and honor of the Ceremony: the
Priests all the way she goes describe the Joys she is to possess, and the
assurance she has to enjoy her Husband speedily in the blessed shades below:
she returns a modest Smile, trips on chawing something in her Mouth that
intoxicares her Brains, and upon sight of the Flames, seems transported with
satisfaction. So soon as she sees the Carcass of her Husband laid upon a Pile,
and the fire burn, like a mad Lover she whirles about the Pit, and having bid
farewell to Parents, Children and Friends, willingly incorporates with the Fire;
which quickly makes them one in Ashes: Music of sundry sorts, and acclamations
of the Spectators yell aloud at the same instant, both for the greater honor
of the obsequie, and that the screeches of the poor wretch may not be heard,
whereby others may be discouraged. Now albeit some Women of this persuasion
living under a Mohammedan Prince being denied this liberty to burn with the
Bodies of their Husbands Corpse, have been known of late years to make
themselves away; yet others more Wise, and less valuing a place in the
Catalogue of those fiery Zealots, do refuse to burn: but in such wise by way
of Ignominy they are commanded to shave their heads and to sequester,
themselves from company; which is a punishment. Howbeit this custom of burning
is much more ancient with men amongst the Brachmans than with the other Sex:
for with the latter it came not in practice until several of their Husbands
were made away by Poison, which their lascivious Wives would frequently
minister upon giving them distaste, or other slight provocations, for
prevention whereof this Law was devised, and enjoined the Relict: and though in
its institution it seemed severe, it was to deterr them from that wicked
practice, which long custom had made familiar and reputable; whereof amongst
many other instances we find that of Mandanis the Gymnosophist, who, as Strabo
reports, was courted by Alexander the Great, to accept of a rich Present he
made the Philosopher; but contemning it and his glory, it (at least seeming) so
incensed the King, that the Brachman for his arrogance was condemned to death:
and being told he might be pardoned, so he would but desire it, with no less
morossity answered, he would indeed petition Alexander not for life, but
liberty to burn himself; giving this reason, that death was in no wise
terrible, where it is only an inlet unto immortality in exchange of his old
perishing Flesh, expecting a more durable and excellent condition.

CLXXIII. The Funerals of the Chinezes are after this sort; When any dies, they
first wash, then perfume and lastly apparel the Corpse, and put his best Clothes
on, then cover his head; and having set him a Chair, his Wife entering the Room,
first gives him a respect and then kisses him; After that, she takes her
farewell, with as much sorrow as can be imagined: she is no sooner gone, but his
Children enter in order according to their Seniorities; they first kneel, and
then kiss the dead mans's hand, yea strive to outvie each other in their
ejaculations, expressing their Love by sorrowful countenances and gestures, as
beating their Breasts, and pouring out tears in abundance: being withdrawn,
next his kindred act their parts, and lastly his Friends, and other more remote
acquaintance: the third day they lay him in a Coffin of precious Wood, which
they cover with a Silk Cloth, and over it place his Picture; for fifteen days
in that sort the Corpse rests, and each day a Table is spread with meat, which
nightly the Priests have the liberty to eat, for it is they who burn the Incense
and offer Sacrifice. When they carry it to the Grave, Women are hired to howl,
the better to move others to compassion: sometimes upon his Coffin they place
the Image of a dead man, whom they expect should show him the surest and
readiest way to Elizyum: that done, the Women and Children for some days
seclude themselves, and when abroad, go dolourously habited, for they put
course Sackcloth near their Skin; have their Clothes made long and plain and
for three years are not seen to laugh or joy in any thing; but to the utmost of
their Power, exercise their Love by their continual lamentation, abstinence
from Feasts, and Pastimes, and in all their Letters subscribe themselves such
one's disobedient and unworthy Widow, Child, or what may best set forth
Observance.

CLXXIV. The Gowers being such as follow the old Religion of the Persians,
differ in their Funeral Ceremonies from the Persees who live at present in the
Indies: for in reverence to the Fire, these not only forbear to burn the dead,
fearing to offer it an unclean thing; but even hold it a Crime to spit into the
Fire, which yet they repute Sacred. But whereas the Egyptians powder the dead
with Salt and Spices to preserve them from putrefaction, the Perse in India
expose the dead to the Sun's rage, till he have eaten them. And these Gowers
often times put them in the hollow of a Tree, standing upright, supported by the
Bole, till observation release them: For if the Vultur pick out his right Eye
first, then they conclude that he is in Paradise; if the left, then a
Cacodaemon vexes him; and they feast or fast by that observation, as Joy or
Sorrow is occasioned. Contrary to the Persian Satrapae, who had their Graves so
deep in the sides of Rocks and Mountains, that they were usually let down by
cords or other like device many Fathoms, the Corpse being first embalmed.

The Burials of the Persians revive some Ceremonies that of old were used
amongst the Jews and Gentiles: at his farewell to the World the next of Kin
close the Eyes, as did Joseph in the 46 cap. of Genesis, and Telemachus in
Ovid, Ille meos Occulos comprimat ille tuos. The nobler sort of People had
their Sepulchers in the sides of Mountains or Hills about Persepolis: howbeit,
some used to embalm, the Brains being exhausted by a silver Engine, the Belly
(so soon as dissected and the Bowels extracted) cleansed with Wine, farced with
Cassica, Myrrh, and other Spices, was then closed, and buried in extraordinary
deep Pits or Vaults, or in places boarded in the sides of Mountains. But the
poorer sort used only Bitumen or else the Juice of Cedars, which resists
Putrefication. Howbeit, the most useful way of Burial is this; first, They wash
the Corpse with clean Water, (as we find practiced to Tabitha in Act. 9.) they
carry it orderly and with Silence to the Grave, then lodge the Carcass, not in
Machits or Churches, but Churchyards, and where none lay formerly, supposing
it a vile part to disturb the dead, whom in the Grave they think sensible of
Torment: they place his Head toward Medina, and for seven days the next of Kin
watch, to keep, if possible, the evil Angel from his Grave, incessantly
warbling out Elegiac Threnodies, as the last expression of Love they can show.
Others thus; In the first place go those of his Blood, next them, his Varlets
naked to the Waste, the rest in Trouses, who to express their Zeal burn or
scratch their Arms and Breasts, and cut and print Circles in their Flesh, (a
Mode borrowed from the Jews, prohibited by Moses) Levit. 19.28. Deuteronomy. 14.1. so
that the Blood often trickles down in many places; next them are ranked Youths,
whose Shoulders bear some Texts out of the Alcoran, mixing with them Eulogies
of the Defunct which they ingeminate: next these follow many Persons of best
rank, each putting his hand to the Cord that draws the Hearse, and on every
side throng the Multitude, some bearing in their hands Laurel or Cypress,
others Garlands of Flowers, Fruits, and what best befits the Season: some
seminated Horsemen play along, and often times, to demonstrate their Love, spare
not to wound their Carcasses: in the last place go the Preficae or Women hired
to weep and howl, who tear their false Hair, probably smell to Onions for the
procuring of Tears, and use such impostures as did the Antic Romans, who made
it an Art to mourn, and by their counterfeit Tears and Shricks to provoke
others to Passion and like Lamentation.

But the Funerals of the Persees is in this Manner; They neither burn nor bury
their dead, but having first put the Body into a Winding Sheet, all the way
they pass toward the Grave his Kindred beat their Breasts, but with little
noise, till they come within fifty or a hundred Paces of the Burial place;
where the Herbood meets them, usually attired in a yellow Scarf, and on his
head wearing a thin Turband. The Necessilars or Bearers bear the Corpse upon an
iron Bier (for Wood is forbidden, in that it is dedicated to the Fire) to a
little shed, where (so soon as some Mistiques are acted) they hoise up to the
top of a round Building, some of which are twelve foot high and eighty in
circuit; the entrance is for the most part at the North-east side, where
through a small Grate they convey the Carcass into a Monument; good men into
one, bad into another. it is flat above, open to the Air, plastered with white
Loam, hard and smooth like that of Paris: in the midst thereof is a hole
descending to the Bottom, made to let in the Putrefaction issuing from the
melted Bodies, which are thereupon laid naked in two rows or Ranks, exposed to
the Sun's rage and appetite of ravenous Birds, who spare not to devour the
flesh of these Carcasses, tearing asunder and deforming them in an ugly sort;
so that the abominable stink of those unburied Bodies (in some places three
hundred) is so loathsome (that did not a desire to see strange Sights allure a
Traveller) they would prove much worse seen than spoken of.

FINIS.
There is lately Printed for H. Rodes next the Bear Tavern near Bridelane in
Fleet Street.
1. THE History of the Glorious Life, Reign, and Death of the Illustrious Queen
Elizabeth. Containing an Account by what Methods the Reformation of the Church
of England and Scotland were promoted and established; and what Obstructions it
met with. The many Propositions of several great Princes to marry her, and her
Answers to them: with a perfect Relation of the several horrible Attempts of
the Papists against the Sacred Life of her Majesty, by Conspiracies,
Rebellions, Assassinates, and poisoning. The whole Affair of the Queen of
Scots, the several Commotions of England, Scotland, Ireland, France, and the
Low Countries, during her Reign. Sir Francis Drake's Voyage round the World,
with his several Expeditions into America. Her aiding and assisting the
Protestants of France and the Low Countries. Her Alliances with several
Protestant Princes, The Defeat of the, so called, Invincible Armado, in Eighty
Eight; The taking and burning of Cadiz, by the English; with all the other
remarkable Occurrences of that Time. By S. Clark. Illustrated with Pictures of
some considerable matters; curiously engraven on Copper Plates. price 1 s.

2. The History of the Life, Victorious Reign, and Death of King Henry the
Eighth. Containing his Glorious Expeditions into France, and taking several
considerable Places in that Kingdom. His Victories over the Scots. His putting
down of Popish Monasteries and Superstitious Houses. The many Paces that were
made toward a Reformation in his Time: the Obstructions it met with from the
subtle Practices and Stratagems of it is Popish Adversaries; who, by Rebellions
and Persecutions, endeavored to stiflle, and put a stop to all proceedings
that tended toward a Discovery of the Cheats and Falsities they put upon the
World. Many Instances of their barbarous Cruelties upon several of the
Asserters of the Truth of the Gospel: with an Account of their horrid Designs
against Queen Ann Bullen, and other Favorers and Countenances of the True
Religion. A Relation of the Rise and Fall of those two great Ministers of
state, Cardinal Wolsey, and the Lord Cromwell; as likewise, of the Divorces and
Death of the King's several Wives: with all other remarkable Transactions of
his Reign.

To which, is likewise added, a Narrative or Compendium of the Reign of his Son
and Successor, King Edward the Sixth: Containing an Account of the Wars with
the Scots, during his Minority. The Commotions and Rebellions in several
Counties of this Kingdom, with their Suppression, and the Execution of the
Chief Rebels. The Condemnation and Execution of the Duke of Somerset, by means
of the Accusations and secret Practices of the Duke of Northumberland. With a
particular Account of the Advance, and considerable Progress which was made in
the Reformation during the short Reign of this most Excellent and Pious Prince.
Illustrated with Pictures of the most Considerable Occurrences. Curiously
Engraven on Copper plates. Price 1 s.

3. A new Voyage to the East Indies; Containing an account of several of those
Rich Countries, and more particularly of the Kingdom of Bantam; giving an Exact
Relation of the extent of that Monanch's Dominions, the Religions, Manners, and
Customs of the Inhabitants; their commerce and the product of their Country;
and likewise a faithful Narrative of the Kingdon of Siam, of the Isles of Japan
and Madagascar, and of several other Parts; with such new Discoveries as were
never yet made by any other Traveller; with the Effigies of the late Bantam
Ambassador at full length. The second Edition carefully Corrected and much
enlarged; by Mr. Glanius. price 1. s.

4. Conversations upon several Subjects. Newly written in French by the
excellent Pen of Mademoiselle de Scudery. Englished by Mr. Ferrand Spence.


