THE HISTORY OF Oliver Cromwell: BEING AN Impartial Account

Of all the Battles, Sieges, and other Military Achievements, wherein he was
Engaged, in England, Scotland and Ireland.

AND LIKEWISE, Of his Civil Administrations while he had the Supreme Government
of these Three Kingdoms, till his Death.

Relating only Matters of Fact, without Reflection or Observation.

By R. B.

Licensed and Entered.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultrey, near Cheapside.
1692.

TO THE READER.
THere have been few Persons upon whose actions so many different Sentiments
have passed, as upon those of Oliver Cromwell; some advancing his Courage and
Reputation to the height, others on the contrary, depressing them as low, and
not allowing that he had any thing praiseworthy in his Conduct, in those great
Employments and Offices, even the Government of the Three Nations which he
passed through: Yea, they invade the Almighties Province of judging the Hearts
and Thoughts of Men, attributing all to Hypocrisy and Ambition, asserting that
he had Hopes and Expectations of raising himself to that Grandeur whereto he
after arrived, many years before he attained it; nay, so early as when he was
but a Colonel, and can hardly be thought to have had the least prospect
thereof. But to leave every Man to his Opinion in this matter, I thought it
might not be unacceptable to my Countrymen, to give a plain and Impartial
Account of Matters of Fact performed and acted by him, both in his Military,
and afterward in his Civil Capacity, without Reflections on Parties, which
ought to be the care of a faithful Historian, if he expects to be believed by
Posterity. It is a Maxim, That great Virtues have been often mixed with great
Vices in many great men in the World, neither is Cromwell excused from this
Censure, who had several worthy and blameable Qualities in him; but since he is
out of the reach either of good or bad Report, I shall leave him, and refer you
to read his Achievements, which are briefly related in the following Manual.

R. B.

THE HISTORY OF Oliver Cromwell.
OLiver Cromwell was descended of an Ancient Family in Huntington-shire, who had
a very plentiful Estate; his Grandfather was Sir Henry Cromwell, a Person of
good Reputation, and had issue five Sons, Sir Oliver his Eldest, Henry, Robert,
Richard and Philip. This our Oliver Cromwell was Son of the third Brother
Richard, who was likewise in much esteem in his Country, and Married Elizabeth
Steward, Peace of Sir Robert Steward, a Gentleman of a considerable Estate in
that Country, by whom he had this Oliver, who was born in the Town of
Huntington, April 25. 1599. and had his Name given him by his Uncle Sir Oliver.
When he was a Child, he seemed to delight in Manlike Exercises, and by the care
of his Father was sent to the Free School of that Town, and afterward to
Sydney-Colledge in Cambridge, where while he was a Student, there were several
Omens of his future Grandeur, and he was observed more to be inclined to the
Military than Contemplative Life: During his continuance here his Father died,
upon which he returned home, and spent hi^ time in the Youthful Follies and
Extravagancies incident to persons of his age and temper, whereupon his Mother,
by the advice of her Friends, sent him up to London, and placed him in
Lincoln's Inn, thereby to qualify him for a Gentleman, and to put him into a
Capacity to be serviceable to his Country.

Having continued here for some time, and not being able to confine himself to
this Sedentary Employment, he again returns into the Country, and there
proceeds in the same lewd courses as before, but as he grew in years he became
more solid and considerate, insomuch that in a while he was as remarkable for
his Sobriety, as before for his Rudene^s and V^nity, which so much pleased and
obliged his Uncle Sir Robert Steward, that he left him his Heir to a very fine
Estate of four or five hundred pounds a year. But before this came into his
hands by the Death of his Uncle, the reputation of it, and the remarkable
alteration in his disposition, recommended him to Elizabeth, the Daughter of
Sir James Boucher, whom he Married, and though at first, when this notable
reformation was perceived in him, he adhered to the Church of England,
frequenting the most famous Preachers with much seeming warmth and zeal, yet
afterward, when those called Puritans grew popular, he began to have a good
opinion of them, inviting the Ministers to his House, and entertaining them
with much kindness; and to demonstrate the reality of this change of his mind,
there is an instance of his freely returning a considerable sum of Money to a
person from whom he had won it some years before by Gaming.

Such actions, and the seeming sincerity of his Conversation, raised his esteem
yet higher with all persons of that Party, who had such an opinion of his
Wisdom and Abilities, that when King Charles I. called that Parliament in 1640.
which for its duration was afterward Named the Long, he was by the Interest of
his Friends elected Parliament Man for the Town of Cambridge. Soon after this
the War began between the King and Parliament, one Party declaring they took
Arms for defending the Prerogatives of the Crown, and the other the Privileges
of Parliaments, and Liberties of the People.

As soon as ever this fatal division happened, wherein so many Thousands
afterward lost their Lives and Estates, Cromwell, whose inclination was always
Martial, presently engaged in the quarrel, and having obtained a Commission
from the Parliament, quickly raised a Troop of Horse for their service, of the
most promising men he could choose; and to try their Valor in jest, before
they came to exercise it in earnest, he secretly ordered a dozen of them to
issue out suddenly upon the rest, with a Trumpet sounding a Charge, as if they
came from some of the Kings Garrisons that were not far off, which they
performed with so much briskness, that about twenty of the new Troopers fled
away with all possible speed, whom Cromwell having reproached for their
Cowardice, dismounted and cashiered, mounting their Horses with persons of a
more courageous temper.

He was likewise nominated a Commissioner in the Ordinance for settling the
Militia, whereby the Eastern Countries associated themselves together,
declaring that they would stand by the Parliament against all Opposers, and
Cromwell being sensible that the University of Cambridge was most inclined to
the Royal Interest, he had a particular regard to the place of his Education,
and very dexterously secured both the Town, and a great quantity of the
College Plate, even at the very instant when it was upon the point of being
conveyed to the King at Oxford. After this he forms a Garrison at Whitlesea,
where a Bridge joins the County of Norfolk with the (...) of Ely, and is the
only passage from thence into Li^^colnshire, the greatest part whereof was
possessed by the Kings party; and by this means he cut off all communication
between the Loyal Gentlemen of both Counties, wherein he had the assistance of
Coll. Ireton, with whom he here became first acquainted.

The King in opposition to the Association which the Parliament had settled,
issued out his Commission of Array, which was first designed to be put in
Execution by Sir Henry Connisby, High Sheriff of Hartford-shire at St. Albans,
who thereby intended to have raised the County for the aid of the King, but
(...) about to proclaim the Par^l^^^ (...) he was prevented in his purpose, who
coming suddenly into the Town with a party of Horse, surprised Sir Henry, and
some other Gentlemen of his Assistants, whom he sent to London Prisoners, to
the great satisfaction of the Parliament, who were somewhat disturbed that such
an attempt should be made so near the City, and thereupon they returned him the
th^nks of the House, and from this time looked upon him as a person of Meric and
Conduct: After which he soon angmented his Troop to a Thousand, many being
willing to adventure their lives with such a fortunate Commander, and about
this time hearing that some Knights and Gentlemen were met together at
Lowers-Tost in Suffolk, the chief of whom were Sir John Petus, Sir Edward
Baker, etc. designing to have made a Counter Association in that County and
Norfolk for the Kings service, with indefatigable diligence he marches thither,
seizing and securing them all, which was a fatal blow to the Kings Interest,
and Lyn Regis, which the Royalists maintained, being soon after surrendered, was
so great a discouragement to them, that during the whole War they could never
after find any opportunity to show their affection to the Kings Cause.

The Associated Counties being thus firmly settled for the Parliament, Cromwell
was made Lieutenant General to the Earl of Manchester, who had a separate
command of those Associated Counties, and was now ordered to march Northward
with those Forces, and join with General Lesly and the Scots, assisted by Sir
Tho. Fairfax, for reinforcing the Siege before York, then beleaguered by Lesly:
In his march he blocks up the Garrison of Newark, and meeting some of their
party at Grantham, he charged them with such fury, that though much superior
to him in number, yet himself marching in the Van, he soon put them to flight.
Having thus made a quick dispatch at Newark, he proceeded to York, in which the
Marquess of Newcastle had put the best part of the Kings Forces.

The King having had an advantage against the Earl of Essex at Lestichell in
Cornwall, sent away Prince Rupert as General, with a very powerful Army to
raise the Siege of York, which he judged to be of great Importance; the three
Generals, Lesly, Manchester, and Fairfax, drew off their Forces from the City
to fight him, as knowing if they got the day, it must surrender to the Victor
without blows. The Prince having notice of their raising the Siege, sent some
of his Troops toward Hassam-More, to face General Lesly and his Scots, but in
the mean time enters into York with two thousand Horse, and all Provisions for
their relief; after which, he resolved to fight the Parliamentarians, though
much dissuaded by the Marquess of Newcastle, knowing what hazard the Estates of
the Kings Friends would run if he should miscarry, and that upon the fate of
this Battle the gain or loss of the North depended. However, the Prince
pretending to march to Tadcaster, Lesly with his Army followed him, but
returning again suddenly to Marston-Moor, he takes what advantages of ground he
thinks fit, and Lesly soon coming up, the Generals Marshalled their Army in the
best order they could for the shortness of time, Fairfax and Leslies Horse
making the Right Wing, and the Scot^h Troops and Manchesters the Left, under
the command of Cromwell, which charge was that day committed to him, the Foot
making up the main Body. The Armies being drawn up in this form, the first
Onset was performed by Prince Ruperts Left Wing, with such fury as they broke
the Parliaments Right, and persuing their advantage with much Vigor, the Earth
was soon covered with the slain.

In the mean while Cromwell being in the Left Wing, and ignorant of the
misfortune of the Right, with much Courage ingages the Princes Right Wing,
which quickly altered the Scene of Affairs, and snatched the Victory out of the
Princes Hand, who seemed in probability to have obtained it, for the Lord
Fairfaxes Forces were totally dissipated, and beaten out of the Field, when
Cromwell with his Troops fell on with such Resolution, that he routed the Prince
and his reserves, and with the same Violence charged the Marquess of Newcastles
Foot, who yet stood till the Field was almost cleared, and then were forced to
give way to the number of their Enemies; there were many slain, especially in
the persuit, and Cromwell he obtained the Name of Ironsides, from the
Impenetrable firmness of his Troops, which no force could separate or break. It
is thought to be the bloudiest Fight that happened during the War, it being
judged near ten thousand men were slain on both sides. Upon this defeat, Prince
Rupert and his Followers charge the miscarriage upon the Marquess of Newcastle,
and he again upon them, who thereupon left the Kingdom. The consequence of this
Victory was the rendition of York, which being now afresh besieged, and
despairing of succor, Sir Thomas Glemham, the Valiant Governor was obliged to
deliver it up.

This success raised Cromwels reputation higher still, and the Parliament at
Westminster were extremely pleased with his Courage and Prudence, that when he
saw part of the Army routed, yet with an undaunted presence of mind, he took
occasion from thence to animate his Soldiers to the more vigorous recovery of
the Victory, even when the Scots had timorously left the Field, and of whom for
this and other reasons, he had no great opinion afterward. Several other
Exploits he was engaged in both in the North and West, even before he had any
considerable command, for while he was in the same quality under the Earl of
Manchester, he was ordered to return to the North, to oppose the King then
marching triumphantly from the West after the defeat of Essex, who having been
unfortunate in his Enterprises, Cromwell this successful Commander was joined
with him, who at the second Battle at Newberry, about four months after that at
Marston-Moor, was favored, though not with a complete Victory, yet with such
good fortune, that where his Troops were, the Royalists gave back with so much
precipitation, as greatly endangered the Kings person, had not the Earl of
Cleveland interposed, and with much hazard prevented the persuit.

The War still continuing with much bloodshed, and no period in probability
like to be put to it, the Parliament apprehended want of Conduct in some of
their chief Commanders, and therefore resolved to new model their Army, and
that no offense might be given to any of their own Members by being discarded,
they pass the self-denying Ordinance so called, whereby they declare, That no
member of Parliament should bear Office in the Army, or Garrisons, but
altogether attend the service of the House, unless they had leave for so doing;
and that within forty days from the publishing thereof. By which proceeding,
the Earls of Essex, Manchester and Denhigh, Sir William Waller, Sir Philip
Stapleton, and diverse others, were dismissed; after which they took care to
recruit their Forces, which were much diminished by sickness, and the late
defeat in the West, and in a short time they mustered a complete Army of twenty
one thousand; that is, fourteen thousand Foot, six thousand Horse, and one
thousand Dragoons, over whom they constituted Sir Tho. Fairfax General, who
gave out diverse Commissions to them who were then newly called Independants,
and among others, Ireton was raised to be Commissary-General of the Horse; who
had newly married one of Cromwels Daughters, and was as great a Politician as
himself.

Upon publishing the forementioned Ordinance, which was in the year 1645,
Cromwell who was then in the West-country, in obedience thereto, immediately
returns toward London, and having notice that General Fairfax was at Windsor,
he went to wait upon him by the way, and take his leave of him; but the
Parliament were too sensible of his usefulness and conduct to discharge him,
and therefore the next morning, as soon as he was risen, a Commission was sent
him to be Lieutenant General of the Horse to the whole Army. This alteration
gave great hopes to the Royal party, of future success against this new Army,
so many principal Commanders being laid aside and discontented, and such a
number of unexperienced Youths Listed; but these expectations soon vanished,
for Cromwell by virtue of the dispensing power of the Parliament, being still
continued and advanced to so great a command, to make it appear that they were
not mistaken in their choice, he instantly proceeds to action, being sent by
Fairfax with a flying party of Horse and Dragoons to intercept a convoy of two
thousand Horse, consisting of the Queens, the Earl of Northamptons, and
Colonel Palmers Regiments, who with some other Troops, were marching to
Oxford, with a design to bring off the King, and the Train of Artillery, and to
procure Recruits for the Army, and so join with the Kings main mid-land Forces
under Prince Rupert, then about Worcester, and the borders of Wales, and then
take the field. In this exploit Cromwell was so extreme diligent, that with
extraordinary celerity he met with, surprised and routed them at Islip-bridge,
taking five hundred Horse, and two hundred prisoners, with the Queens Standard,
and many persons of Quality; and pushing on his success, having notice that Sir
William Vaughan, with three hundred and fifty Foot, were marching toward
Radcot-bridge, he followed them, taking their commander, Lieutenant Coll.
Littleton, and two hundred other prisoners, persuing the rest to
Blechingdon-house, where Colonel Windebank was Governor, and in the height of
his Victories summoned him to an immediate surrender, or else to expect the
utmost vengeance of an enraged Soldiery. The Governor terrified with these
threats, and being over persuaded by some Ladies, who were there come to visit
his Bride, he being newly married, and having little hopes of relief from
Oxford, delivered up the House with all the Arms and Ammunition therein; for
which, when he came to Oxford, he was shot to death by sentence of a Council of
War.

This Enterprise was reckoned as a happy Omen of his future success in his new
honor, and the prudence of the Parliament magnified in continuing so deserving
a commander in the Army; who to secure his reputation, resolved upon a more
dangerous attempt, to reduce Faringdon-House, of which Sir George Lisle, a
person of Invincible courage, was Governor, and a Garrison which had been of
great advantage to the King. To effect this considerable service, he took six
hundred of M. Genesis Browns Foot at Abington, with which he instantly stormed the
place, but was as stoutly repulsed, and forced to retire with the loss of fifty
of his Soulders, and in his retreat was attackt by a party of L. Gorings Horse,
lately come from the siege of Taunton, who gave Cromwell the first check he had
yet met with, taking three colors, and Major Bethel prisoner, and then
returned to the siege at Taunton.

At this time Fairfax had order to march to the relief of Taunton, and Cromwell
was left behind with Brown, to watch the motions of the Kings Army at Oxford,
who were then ready to take the field, and to prevent them from joining a brave
body of Horse that were coming out of Worcestershire, under the command of the
Princes Rupert and Maurice: But the Royal Army was grown so potent, that
Cromwell durst not attempt either to fight, or hinder their march, so that
Fairfax was presently remanded and ordered to lie before Oxford, to oblige the
King to secure that place, and upon advantage to fight him; when Intelligence
came that the King having joined the two Princes, and raised the siege of
Chester, beleaguered by Sir William Brereton, was now marching toward the
Associated Counties, wherein lay the strength of the Parliament, whereupon
Cromwell was ordered with all speed to secure the Isle of Ely, as being a
Frontier to the rest of the country: But the King went and sat down before
Leicester, and soon took it, which so alarmed the parliament, that they
instantly dispatched Orders to Fairfax to rise from Oxford, and seek out and
fight the Kings Army, who (as he writ to his Queen) was then in a more hopeful
condition than during the War. Fairfax obeyed this Order, and Cromwell being
recruited with six hundred Horse of the Association, came to join the Army then
marching toward Northampton.

The General had information that the King had Quartered his Foot and Carriages
upon Burrough-Hill near Daventry, as if he intended there to expect him, but it
was only to tarry till the twelve hundred Horse, sent as a Convoy to the Cattle
taken within Leicester and Northamptonshire, for relief of Oxford, were
returned, designing afterward the reduction of Pomfret-castle in the North, and
all the other places lost since Marston-Moor, and if Fairfax followed him, to
have fought him with the first advantage, which he could not do so conveniently
where the Parliament had their Garrisons. But Cromwell soon disappointed this
project, by whose counsel Ireton was dispatched with a Detachment of Horse to
take an account of the posture of the Kings Army, with Order that if they
marched Northward, he should skirmish and employ them in the Rear, till the
whole Army could arrive and engage. The day before the Battle, the General
marched to Gilsborough, five miles from Burrough-hills, from whence the
Royalists, their H^^^e being come back from Oxford, were bending their course
Northward; and the next Night the King was extremely surprised to find Ireton
give an alarm to his Quarters at Naseby, from whence, about eleven a clock, the
King departed, speeding to Harborough, where Prince Rupert and the Van of the
Army were, and a Council of War being summoned, it was resolved on, as being
the Kings opinion, that to secure his rear, they should march no farther North,
but presently give the enemy battle, depending much upon the Valor of the
Foot, who were lately animated by the plunder of Leicester.

This advice was followed, though most of the Officers were for staying till
the Lord Gorings Forces came up, but the King being much stronger in Horse
doubted not of success, and the other were as ready to engage, so that both
agreeing in discord, a large Field near Naseby was the place chosen by both
parties for the Stage of this woeful Tragedy, wherein Fathers fought against
Sons, and Brothers gave death to each other, all obligations of kindred and
friendship being laid aside, occasioned by that unnatural spirit of division,
which Heaven for our crimes had sent amongst us. The King had Intelligence that
Fairfax for fear was retreating to Northampton, but found it a mistake, he
being then employed in marshalling his Army in Naseby field, and waiting for
his coming, Cromwell and Whaliey commanding the right wing, and Ireton the left.
The Kings front was composed of a gallant body of Horse, the foot made a second
body, the right wing commanded by Prince Rupert and Maurice, the left wing by
Sir Jacob Astley, and the Lord Langley commanded the Northern Brigade of Horse,
other ancient commanders who having been in the Low Countries having their
several posts, the King himself being Generalissimo. These being drawn out with
the reserves, took up the whole breadth of the field: The Parliaments foot made
a firm body in the midst, commanded by Major General Skippon, secured by the
Horse on each side. Prince Rupert charged first with such fury upon Ireton,
notwithstanding their valiant resistance, that the left wing which he commanded
was utterly routed, and his men put to flight, and driven upon the Kings foot,
of which Ireton was wounded in the Thigh with a Halbert, and kept prisoner
during the fight, and the field eleared on that side, the Prince persuing them
through the Town, and then sell upon the Wagons, where being repulsed, he lost
so much time, that Cromwell and Fairfax who had not yet stirred from their
ground, but with short speeches and ejaculations were encouraging their men,
came up, and Cromwell clapping spurs to his Horse, charged clear through three
bodies of Langdales Brigade, and utterly routed them, never ceasing till he had
beat that whole wing of the Kings Army from their ground, without any
possibility of rallying; so that having as it were raked the field before him,
dividing the Horse from the Foot, they were rendered useless to each other. In
this encounter, one of the Kings commanders knowing Cromwell, advanced briskly
before the head of his Troops, to exchange a single bullet with him, and was
with the like gallantry encountered by him, both sides forbearing to come in
till their Pistols being discharged, the Kings Officer with a slaunting back
blow of a broad sword, happened to cut the ribbon that tied Cromwels Murrion,
and with a draw threw it off his Head, and now ready to repeat his stroke,
Cromwels party came in and rescued him, and one of them ^lighting threw up ^
ing, and a little (...) at the chance, (...) the wrong way on his head, and so
fought the rest of the day, which proved highly fortunate to his side, though
the King managed the fight with much magnanimity and expertness, and exposed
himself to several threatening dangers in the Field.

The Horse being separated from the Foot, as you heard, fled toward Leicester,
Cromwell sent some few Troops in persuit, to prevent their rallying, and himself
in the mean time joining with his own foot, so encompassed the Kings Infantry,
that notwithstanding the courage they had showed that day, so that their very
enemies admired them, yet being tired and hopeless of relief, seeing death on
every side, they laid down their Arms, and begged for Quarter.

This memorable Battle was fought June 14. 1645. The Parliamentarians word was,
God with Us. The Royalists, God and Queen Mary; and the success of it gave an
absolute and undoubted Victory to the Parliament, there being almost five
thousand prisoners carried to London, the Kings Standard, and a hundred other
colors were taken, with all the Ordnance, and a very rich Booty, a great
quantity of gold and silver, and all the secret Letters of the King, which were
carried to London, and publicly read before a great Assembly of Citizens,
where many Members of Parliament were present, and leave was given to as many
as pleased, or knew the Kings hand, to refute them if they were counterfeit.
But so few were slain in this fight, that a Reader may justly wonder how so
many prisoners should be taken, and so much wealth gotten with the loss of so
little blood, for on the Kings side scarce four hundred were slain, and on the
Parliaments not an hundred, and herein particularly the Kings damage appeared
very considerable, that he had lost a brave Army, lately heightened with success
by the taking of Leicester, and that there seemed no possibility of raising
another, the Victors prosecuting their advantage with so much vigilance and
impetuosity, for marching to Leicester it was soon delivered to them, where
Fairfax leaving a Garrison, resolved to hinder the King from recruiting
himself, and followed him so close, marching Westward, both in persuit of him,
and to raise the siege of Taunton, which had been a great while blockt up by
the Lord Goring, and held out to admiration, but upon the approach of the
Parliaments Army, the siege was raised to their great joy, who still pursue
Goring, and overtake him near Lampert, where they engage and put them to
flight, but Cromwell would not suffer part of the Horse to pursue, till being
all come-up together, he himself led them on with such notable conduct, that
most of the foot were made prisoners, and almost all the great Guns taken. From
hence he marched to Bridgwater, which though of considerable strength, and
defended with much courage, yet is soon taken by storm, for Sir Tho. Fairfax
sits down before it, and after summons, assaults the Town very desperately,
gaining the lower part thereof, and then sends a second summons, telling them,
That their denial wrought no other thoughts of compassion in him, but only to
Women and Children, who might suffer by the Governors obstinacy. Whereupon
diverse Ladies, Gentlewomen and Children, came out of the Town, and then a
second assault was made so effectually, that the Governor capitulated, and
surrendered it, there being a thousand Officers and Soldiers prisoners, forty
four barrels of powder, fifteen hundred Arms, forty four pieces of Ordnance,
and four hundred weight of match.

About this time a sort of people armed themselves in the West, and took upon
them the Name of Clubmen, declaring that they would permit no Armies to Quarter
within their bounds, and were so hardy as to make terms with the General, as if
by Club-Law they would force him out of their Country, though flusht with
Victory, imagining that with their Clubs, they were able to force their swords
from those who had so lately deprived so many gallant men of theirs. But
Cromwell doubting the event of such riotous proceedings, having Intelligence of
the place of their assembling, marches toward them with a party of Horse,
though they were four thousand strong, and Encamped on the top of a Hill, with
their Ensigns displayed, and this Motto on them: 'If you offer to plunder, and
take our Cattle,
'You may be sure we'll give you Battle.


But Cromwell resolves to venture it, and presently charging up the Hill, he
utterly routs and puts them to flight, making four hundred prisoners, whom he
carried to Sherburn, Sir Lewis Dives being Governor of the Castle, which was
then besieged by Fairfax, and in a short time taken by storm.

Bristol was reckoned a place of Importance, as being the greatest and most
wealthy City in all the West, wherein Prince Rupert was at that time with near
five thousand Horse and Foot, and all necessary provisions. When the
Parliaments Army came before it, the General sends a summons to the Prince to
deliver the City, which being rejected, Cromwell and some other chief Officers
advised the storming part of it, whereupon the Prince proposed to surrender,
Upon condition every man should march away in the height of honor, with their
Arms, Colors flying, Trumpers, Drums beating, and as much Powder and Match as
they could carry about them, with Baggage, Horse, Arms, ten pieces of Cannon,
and fifty Barrels of powder. Lastly, the Lines and Fortifications to be
slighted, and the City to be no more a Garrison. But these conditions being
thought too favorable, they proceeded to storm it so warmly, that the Prince,
though he used ^ (...), Wherein were found one hundred and forty pieces of
Cannon mounted, one hundred Barrels of powder, and Victuals in the Royal-Fort
for one hundred and fifty men for three hundred and twenty days, the Castle
Victualled for near half so long, the Prince had in Garrison two thousand five
hundred Foot, one thousand Horse, besides above one thousand of the Trained
Bands and Auxiliaries, so that the gaining this place was of great consequence
to the Parliament.

After this, Cromwell marches without delay with a Detachment of four Regiments,
to besiege the strong Castle of the Devizes, to the natural Fortifications
whereof, Sir Charles Lloyd the Governor, had made several Ingenious additions,
so that judging it almost impregnable, he sent no other return to the summons
but, Win it and Wear it. Yet the fortune of Cromwell prevailed against all
difficulties, and his Name brought terror wherever he came, so that he
quickly forced the Governor to comply, and deliver the place upon terms.
Winchester ran the same Fate, after the Governor had been mortified by the
battery of some Cannon and Mortars; where Cromwell, who was constantly punctual
to Articles, having notice that some of his men had Infringed them, he caused
one of them to be hanged for example to others, and sent the rest to Oxford, to
the Governor Sir Tho. Glenham, that he might inflict what punishment upon them
he pleased.

The next Exploit wherein our Hero was concerned, was the reducing of
Basing-house, which seemed to defy all attempts that should be made against
it, being the Mansion House of the Marquess of Winchester, built upon a rising
ground, and surrounded with a brick Rampart which was lined with Earth, and all
encompassed with a dry Ditch: The Marquess was resolved to defend it, though at
first there was none but his own Family, and one hundred Musketeers from
Oxford, but afterward the King supplied him as occasion required. This was not
the first time this Garrison had been attackt without success, at first the
Colonels, Norton and Harvey, and afterward by Sir William Waller, with seven
thousand men, and though some termed him William the Conqueror, yet he
received here such rude treatment, as only encouraged the besieged to defend it
with the greater vigor, who in several gallant sallies did him very great
damage, so that the place seemed Impregnable for some time; but Cromwell having
settled all matters at Winchester, with the late Governor Sir William Ogle, he
marches next day to Basing, and no sooner arrived, but he immediately raises a
strong battery, that quickly made it capable of being assaulted: Which
advantage he instantly perceiving, orders a storm to be made from the several
Posts, which though it seemed full of danger, and might have shockt an ordinary
courage, yet Cromwell, who thought no place Invincible, and that the more danger
there was, the more honor would accrue from it, leads on his men with such
fury, that the besieged soon found themselves incapable to make any further
resistance, and so were forced to yield upon Articles. The gaining of Basing
was reckoned a great piece of service to the Nation, whereby the Road was
opened for Trade from London to the West, which had been long obstructed by
this Garrison. He goes from hence to Longford-house near Salisbury, but the
Governor despaired of preserving that, after Basing had been forced to
surrender to Cromwels victorious arms, and therefore upon the first summons
delivered it up.

He then marches with the Army, commanded by Fairfax, toward the West, and in
December they took Tiverton, and with strange success stormed and took
Dartmouth, and afterward drove the Kings Armies into Cornwall, and at
Torrington gave Hopton a great overthrow. In February they entered Cornwall, and
obliged Prince Charles to retire from thence, and fail to the Isles of Scilly,
and soon after Hoptons Forces were Disbanded and sent away, and
Pendennis-Castle being surrendered to Coll. Forrescue, the whole County of
Cornwall, and the West, were by Fairfax and Cromwell reduced to the Obedience of
the Parliament, and nothing remained in the North but the Garrison of Newark,
so that the Royalists hopes were very low, only they had some expectations from
a party still remaining under Sir Jacob Astley, but Coll. Morgan encountering
him near Stow in the holds, utterly Routed him, and took himself and sixteen
hundred of his men prisoners, so that this hope soon vanished like the rest;
when he was seized, he spoke aloud these words, You have done your work, and
wholly vanquished the Kings party, unless your own dissentions raise them again.

After this, Newark, the strongest Garrison in the North, was close besieged by
Leven, Point and Rossiter, while Fairfax hastened to besiege Oxford it self,
which was the Head Quarters. The King having now no Garrisons left but this,
Banbury, Wallingford, Worcester, Ragland, and Pendennis, all which in a short
time were also taken, and could only glory in this, That they had held out
after Oxford. The besieged Newarkers, though the plague raged in the Town, and
they began to want provisions, yet sustained themselves upon hopes of some
differences between the English and Scots, for now the Scots began to complain
of want of pay, of the neglect of Church Government, and the Covenant. The
Parliament answered, That in two years space they had received above two
hundred thousand pounds for pay, besides a vast sum of money which had been
extorted from the weeping Inhabitants of the Northern Counties, and that their
Army had not answered expectation, lying idle the best time of the year, and if
they were so precise in observation of the Covenant, why contrary thereto, had
they put Garrisons into Newcastle, Tinmouth and Carlisle? Neither ought they to
mention Religion, being unsettled, since the Parliament were consulting about
it, being a matter which requires time and mature deliberation.

From these dissentions the King expected some advantage, but yet Oxford was
already blocked up by Fleetwood and Ireton, and Fairfax was daily expected to
come and turn it into a close siege, therefore before this should happen, the
King resolved to go out of the City, and consulting with some of his inward
Counselors, it was concluded he should go to the Scots Camp, then lying before
Newark; the King sent Montruel the French Ambassador before, and himself soon
after, as Coll. Ashburnhams man (who had a pass from Fairfax to go out of
Oxford, about some private business) with a Cloak-bag behind him, escaped
unknown, and came to Newark, which when the besieged Newarkers had notice of,
being in great streights, they upon conditions surrendered the Town. The Scots
seemed amazed at the Kings unexpected coming to them, and so signified the
matter to the English Commissioners then on the place. Letters were instantly
written to London and Edinburgh, and the Parliament at Westminster required the
Scots to detain the King at Southwell near Newark, but contrary to this Order,
they carried him to Kelham, where a greater part of their Army lay, and soon
after without further Order, removed their Camp Northward, and carried him away
to Newcastle with them, excusing their departure by alleging, Newark being
yielded, no work was left for them, but that as the King came to them of his
own accord, unexpected, so he followed their Army, neither being entreated nor
forbidden by them; but they seemed to hasten their departure, by reason of a
rumor that Cromwell with all his Horse was marching toward them. This action
much offended the English Parliament, and they complained both of the Scots and
the King.

In the beginning of May, General Fairfax with his whole Army came before
Oxford; the City was very strong, having been fortified according to the most
exact rules of Art to make it Impregnable, environed with regular Forts, and
provided with a potent Garrison of five thousand valiant Soldiers, having
great stores of all manner of provisions, and the Governor Sir Tho. Glemham, a
person who had sufficiently demonstrated his courage and conduct, in holding
out York and Carlisle to the last extremity. The General disposing his Quarters
round about the City, summoned the Governor to surrender, who returned, That
he would send to know the Kings mind, and then act accordingly. This answer was
not satisfactory, yet Fairfax and his Commanders doubting it would be a tedious
Siege, were put in hopes by some spies, that it could not hold out long, by
reason of the divisions between the Nobility and Soldiers, the first being for
treating now, and so obtain honorable conditions, which they did accordingly,
and the Parliament decreed, That the besieged should have the best conditions,
rather than waste their Army, which might be more useful elsewhere, for they
designed to send them into Ireland, against the Rebels there.

Thus was Oxford surrendered, and the Garrison marched out in sight of Fairfax's
Army, with great quiet and modesty on both sides: The D. of York was honorably
conducted to London, where two of the Kings Children remained; thither also
went all the Noblemen; neither were any of the besieged denied to go to
London, but the Princes Rupert and Maurice, who being commanded to go out of
England, prepared for their departure. Prince Charles about this time, sailed
from Scilly with a few of his inward Counselors to Jersey, in order to go to
his Mother in France, which the King having advice of, sent him this short
Letter from Newcastle.

Charles, I write to you only that you should know what I am, and that I am in
health, not to direct you, at this time, in any thing for what I would have you
do: I have already written to your Mother, to whom I would have you obedient in
all things, except Religion, (about which I know she will not trouble you) and
go no whether without her or my command. Write often to me. God bless you.

Your loving Father, C. R.


Soon after the surrender of Oxford followed the end of this fierce War, for
Worcester, Wallingford, Pendennis and Ragland, yielded to the Victors. Peace
now seemed to be restored to England, but they had no security, the Parliament
being grievously troubled with factions among themselves, and divided under the
Names of Presbyterians and Independants, not only in matters of
Church Government, but often in their Votes, and in transacting almost all
other business, and this humor spread it self into the City, Country, and
Camp; and the Parliament doubting Coll. Masseys Forces might muriny, upon that
account sent Fairfax to Disband them, being two thousand five hundred Horse;
which was quietly done in eight days time, though they did not then receive
their pay.

The Scots, as you have heard, carrying the King into the North, the parliament
Voted, That the person of the King should be disposed of by the Authority of
both Houses of the parliament of England: But the Scots denied to deliver him
up, alleging, That he was no less King of England than Scotland, which caused
great dissension between the two Nations. But at length, upon paying the Scots
two hundred thousand pounds, they agreed to deliver up Berwick, Carlisle, and
Newcastle, to the parliament of England, and the Kings person also, to the
English Commissioners, to be carried into the South, who was received with
great respect and honor by the Earls of Pembroke and Denbigh, and the other
Commissioners, and by them waited on with much observance, and an honorable
Guard to his palace at Holmby in Northamptonshire.

But the Civil Wars being ended, a dissension more than Civil arose among the
Conquerors, which still increased under the Names of Presbyterians and
Independants, and extremely imbittered the minds of men against each other, one
party complaining, That the Covenant was broken: The other, That it was not
rightly Interpreted by them. And on both sides were men of Reputation; and
several petitions were drawn up against the Army, (lately so much admired) as
maintainers of the Independent party, who then lay about Saffron-Walden in
Essex. Yea, it was debated in parliament, whether they should be Disbanded or
not, which Cromwell, who sided with the Independents, having notice of, he
thereupon, with Ireton, insinuated into the common Soldiers, That the
parliament intended to Disband them without their Arrears, or else to send them
into Ireland, to dye of Sickness or Famine, which caused the Soldiers to use
contumelious speeches against the two Houses; and thereupon a Council of
Officers was set up, consisting of two Commission-Officers, and two private
Soldiers out of every Regiment, to meet and consult for the good of the Army,
and to draw up and present all their Grievances to the General, and these were
called Adjutators: Who having met, by the Instigation of Cromwell, and some
others, that made them sensible of their own strength, they resolved upon
seizing the King at Holmby-House, under pretense of freeing him from that
narrow restraint under which he was kept by the parliaments Order. To effect
which, Cornet Joyce is sent thither with five hundred Horse, who took the King
out of the parliaments Commissioners hands, and carried him along with them in
the Army. This the General certifies in a Letter to the parliament, affirming
it to be done without his consent, and that the reason alleged by the Actors
was, Because certain persons had designed to take away his Majesty, thereby to
gather strength to make a new War, which they were able and ready to prove.

When this was known, an Order passed both Houses of Parliament, and was sent
to the General; 1. That the King should reside at Richmond. 2. That he should
be attended by the same persons he was at Holmby. 3. That Roffiters Regiment
should Guard him. And the Presbyterians, who were the greater number in
Parliament, being further alarmed by these proceedings, resolved to divide the
Army, and send part of it to Ireland, and presently to cashiere Cromwell and his
Assistants: And they publish a Declaration, forbidding the Soldiers to
Petition the Parliament as being under their command: Likewise they had
privately resolved to seize upon Cromwell, then in London, who having notice of
it, got secretly and hastily out of Town, and with full speed rid to
Tripoly-Heath, so that his Horse was all in a foam, and was received with the
acclamations of the whole Army, to whom he discovered the intentions and
actions of the Parliament; whereupon, they entered into an Engagement, Not to
Disband till the proposals they had drawn up for regulating all matters were
answered, and then marching to New-Marker, they subscribed thereto, Cromwell
putting his Name first, and the rest of the Officers generally followed, so
that several parchment Rolls were filled with their Names. The next day was
brought from the General, and his Council of Officers, an Impeachment of eleven
Members of the House of Commons, who were counted the chief of the Presbyterian
party, namely, Sir W. Waller, Coll. Massey, Sir John Clothworthy, Sir Denzil
Hollis, Coll. Long, Mr. Anthony Nicholas, Sir Ph. Stapleton, Mr. Glyn, Sir John
Maynard, Sir William Lewis, and Coll. Edward Harley, charging them with
hindering the relief of Ireland, obstructing of Justice, and acting somewhat
against the Army, and the Laws of England. The Members declared themselves
ready to answer, but the Army would have them secluded from their seats in
Parliament, till they had brought in their answer; whereupon they withdrew
themselves by consent for six months. After which the Army marched nearer to
London, and came to Bedford, the King going to the Earl of Bedfords-House, near
Wouborn.

And now the Citizens being for the Presbyterian party in the House, and the
Independents for the Army, great divisions happened in London, for the changing
that Parliament having ordered the Militia of the City, which had been
established the 4th. of May, and put others better affected to the Army in
their rooms, the Presbyterian party were extremely incensed thereat, and came
two days after to the House with a petition, accompanied by a multitude of
Citizens and Apprentices, who coming to the door of the Commons, cried out,
That they must grant their petition before they rose. Whereupon the House
beginning to rise, they took the Speaker, and held him in the Chair, detaining
him and the rest of the Members, till they forced another Order from them,
'That the King should come to London. After which they adjourned to July 30.
but then both Speakers were absent, having withdrawn themselves to the Army,
whereupon two new Speakers were chosen, the Lord Hunsdon, and Mr. Henry Pelham,
Barrister, by whom the following Orders were made that day. 1. That the King
should come to London. 2. That the Militia of London should have power to raise
Forces for defense of the City. 3. They should also have power to choose a
General for those Forces; and that the eleven impeached Members should return
to their feats. The Citizens armed with these Orders, presently proceed to
raise Forces, choosing Massey their General.

In the mean time, the Lords and Commons which had left London, consulting with
the General, and chief Commanders of the Army, made an Order, That all Acts and
Decrees that had passed on July 26. and since, should be accounted null and
void, and that they did adhere to the Declaration of the General and Council of
the Army. It was likewise decreed, That the General with his Army should march
to London. Upon whose approach the Citizens, who made some semblance of
opposition, meeting in Common Council, and finding it impossible suddenly to
raise Forces to oppose them, they sent to the General for a pacification, which
by the consent of the Members of Parliament, was granted them on these
conditions: 1. That they should desert the Parliament now sitting, and the
eleven Impeached Members. 2. To recall their late Declaration. 3. To relinquish
their present Militia. 4. To deliver up to the General all their Forts, and the
Tower of London. 5. To Disband all the Forces they had raised. All which, not
daring to deny, were instantly ratified, and so August 6. 1647. the Army
marched triumphantly through London to Westminster, with the two Speakers, and
the Members of Parliament, whom they restored to their former Sears, and the
eleven secluded Members left London, some going beyond Sea, and others with
passes to their Houses in the Country. Both Speakers, in the Name of the whole
Parliament, gave thanks to the General, and made him Commander of all the
Forces in England and Wales, and Constable of the Tower of London; a months pay
was likewise given to the Army for a gratuity. The next day Fairfax, Cromwell,
Skippon, and the other Commanders, marched from Westminster through London to
the Tower, where some commands, and the Militia, were altered; and to curb the
City, her Militia was divided, Westminster and Southwark having power to
command their own Trained Bands. And thus was the Presbyterian party depressed,
and all things managed according to the Inclination of the Independents and the
Army.

After this Fairfax marched out of London, quartering his Soldiers in the
Towns and Villages adjacent, only leaving some Regiments about White hall and
the Mewse, to guard the Parliament, his head Quarters being at Putney; and the
King about the middle of August, after diverse removes, was at length brought to
Hampton Court, where he seemed not at all restrained, but lived like a Prince
in all the splendour of a Court, all sorts of people being freely admitted to
kiss his hands, and wait upon him; yea, his servants from beyond Sea, even
those who had been Voted Delinquents, as Ashburnham, Barkley, and the rest,
were permitted by the Army to have safe recourse to him, which was generally
wondered at. About this time a disturbance arose in the Army by a party called
Levellers, some of whom were seized at Ware, and the principal sticklers shot
to death; others Imprisoned, and all their favorers cashiered, twenty being
discarded out of one Troop.

And now propositions were sent to the King at Hampton Court, agreed upon by
both Houses, and with the concurrence of the Scotch Commissioners but the King
refused to comply with them; for London and Lancrick, newly come out of
Scotland, having privately discoursed with the King, sent Letters to the
Parliament, requiring, That the King may come to London, and there personally
treat with the Parliament about the matters in controversy: Though not long
before they denied it to be just, that before the King had given satisfaction
and security to the people, he should be admitted to London, or to any personal
Treaty with the Parliament, and refused to receive him into Scotland, lest he
might raise commotions there; but they alleged in their defense, That the King
had been taken from Holmby against his will, and without the consent of
Parliament, and still remained under the power of an Army, not in that freedom
proper for treating of matters of so great concernment. But while the
Parliament were framing propositions, they were suddenly surprised with the
news that the King was secretly withdrawn from Hampton Court, Letters coming
from Cromwell about midnight to the Speaker: For Nov. 12. whilst the
Commissioners of Parliament, and Colonel Whaley, who commanded the Guard,
expected when the King would come out of his Chamber to supper, and wondered at
his long stay, at last, about Nine a clock, some going in, missed the King,
finding his Cloak, and a Letter written with his own hand to the Commissioners,
to be communicated to the Parliament, wherein having discoursed about
captivity, and the sweetness of liberty, he protested before God, He did not
withdraw to disturb the public peace, but for his safety, against which he
understood there was a Treasonable Conspiracy, etc. and that if he might be
heard with freedom, honor, and safety, he should instantly break through this
cloud of retirement, and show himself the Father of his Country.

The Parliament startled at his departure, sent some persons to the Seacoasts,
to prevent his going beyond Sea; and when it was reported he was concealed in
London, Ordered, That if any man should closely detain the Kings person, he
should be punished with loss of Estate and Life. But this cloud soon dissolved,
Letters coming from Coll. Hammond, Governor of the Isle of Wight, that the
King was come thither, and had delivered himself into his pro^ection, and that
he would dispose of him as the Parliament should appoint, who commending
Hammond, ordered, That he should Guard the King with diligence, and wait on
with respect and honor, and that all necessaries should be sent him.

The King sent a long Letter from thence to the Parliament, wherein he desired
to come to a personal Treaty at London, which was also vehemently pressed by
the Scots Commissioners: Whereupon, after a long debate, Nov. 26. they drew up
four propositions in the form of Acts, to be signed by the King in the Isle of
Wight, and then he should be admitted to a personal Treaty, which were, 1. To
pass an Act for settling the Militia of the Kingdom. 2. An Act for calling in
all Declarations, Oaths and Proclamations, against the Parliament and their
adherents. 3. For Incapacitating those Lords who were made after the Great-Seal
was carried to Oxford, from sitting in the House of Peers thereby. A power to
be given to the two Houses to adjourn as they shall think fit. The
Commissioners of Scotland declared against these Bills, however, Dec. 24. they
were presented to the King, who understanding the minds of the Scots, and the
Factions in London, absolutely refused to sign them. Which deni^l was sharply
debated in the House, and it was affirmed, That the King by this denial, had
denied his protection to the people of England, for which only subjection is
due to him: And therefore, Jan. 17. a Declaration and Votes passed both Houses
of Parliament, That they will make no further Addresses to the King, nor any
other to make application to him, without their Order, under penalty of
High Treason: That they will receive no more Messages from him, to both or
either Houses of Parliament, or any other person. This was seconded by a
Declaration of the General and Officers of the Army, which was presented to the
House, and thanks returned them for their Resolutions to adhere to the
Parliament in their proceedings concerning the King, and against him or any
other that shall partake with him.

The Parliament likewise, by their Declaration, did endeavor to appease the
minds of the people, many of whom were extremely discontented with these
proceedings, Tumults and Insurrections being daily feared, so that the
Parliament, though victorious, and guarded with a conquering Army, no Forces
visibly appearing against them, yet were never in more danger, and every man
began to foresee Slaughter and War, as Mariners observe a rising Tempest.

'The threatening Waves in Tracts voluminous
'Boil up: The Seas by blasts uncertain blown,
'Betoken many Winds conception.
The Kings party, though conquered, had great hopes of retrieving their Cause,
and the same thing seemed to be the wish of many of those called Presbyterians,
out of their strong aversion to the Independents; so that the King, though set
aside, and confined within the Isle of Wight, was more formidable this Summer
than in any other, when he was followed by his strongest Armies. The Name of
King had now a farther operation, and the pity of the vulgar gave a greater
Majesty to his person: Prince Charles also by his absence, and the Name of
banishment, was more desired of them, and by his Commissions, privately sent
from his Father, and Commands under his Name, he was able to raise not only
Tumults but Wars.

The Parliament for their security, Quartered part of the Army about
Westminster, the Mewse, and other places of the City, and some Lords and
Commons were chosen out of the House, and called A Committee of Safety, and
sat at Derby-House, with power to suppress Tumults and Insurrections, and to
raise Forces upon occasion; which were the Earls of Northumberland, Kent,
Warwick and Manchester, the Lords Say, Wharton and Roberts, and thirteen of the
H. of Commons, among whom was Lieutenant General Cromwell: And it was not long
e're they had occasion to make use of their Authority, for upon Sunday; April 9
1648. some Apprentices, and other loose people, playing in Moorfields, set upon
a Company of the Trained Bands, and with s^ones beat the Captain out of the
Fields, taking away his Colors, with which they marched in the head of a
disorderly Rout, increasing continually by the way to Westminster, crying out,
They were for King Charles, but by a Troop of Horse out of the Mewse were soon
dispersed; yet running back into the City, and others joining them, they
remained all Night in a body, to the great terror of the Citizens, so that the
Lord Mayor, who was for the Parliament, escaped privately out of his House, and
went to the Tower. In the morning, Fairfax sent part of his Army into the City,
who drove them into Leaden Hall, taking some prisoners, and scattered the rest,
so that this Tumult was instantly suppressed, for which service he had the
thanks of the Parliament, and some of the principal Citizens, and a thousand
pound gratuity to his Soldiers.

May 26. about three hundred came out of Surry to Westminster, with a Petition
to the Parliament, wherein they demand, That the King should be presently
restored to his former Dignity, and come to Westminster with honor, freedom,
and safety, to treat personally there about all Controversies: That the Army
should presently be Disbanded, and the free people of England be governed by
their known L^ws and Statutes. These Petitioners were so earnest for an answer,
that they would not stay ^^ll the Parliament could debate it, but set upon the
Soldiers that guarded the House; of whom, some they hurt, and killed one.
Whereupon, some Horse and Foot were sent from the Mewse, who gave them a
feeling answer, killing some, and scattering the rest, so that they were
utterly vanquished. At the same time the Kentish-men were coming with a
Petition, and a formidable Army to back it, being enraged at the death of their
Companions, who raised a Tumult at Canterbury; to prevent their arrival, Genesis
Fairsax was sent with seven Regiments to Black Heath.

In the mean time some small Insurrections happened in Suffolk, at Stamford,
and in Cornwall, but were soon suppressed by Coll. Wait, Sir Hardrefs Waller,
and others. Sir Thomas Glemham had seized upon Carlisle, and Sir Marmaduke
Langdale upon Berwick, and fortified it, and the Royalists had taken the strong
Castle of Pomfret. To manage these Wars in the North, Coll. Lambert was left
with some Regiments of Fairfaxes Army, but the most formidable danger seemed to
be in Wales, where Poyer, Powel and Langhorn, three Parliament Colonels, had
raised an Army of eight thousand men, by a Commission from Prince Charles, but
Colonel Horton, with three thousand engaged them near Peterstone, and totally
routed, and put to flight their whole Army. A great slaughter was made, and
about three thousand prisoners taken, equal to the number of the Victors; among
whom were one hundred and fifty Officers, many Colors, a great quantity of
Arms, with all their Cannon, Langhorn and Powel escaped with Poyer into
Pembrook-castle. Cromwell himself, about the beginning of May, was sent into
Wales with some Regiments, who coming to Chepstow-castle, resolved to besiege
it, but hastening to Pembroke, he left Coll. Ewer at Chepstow, who within
fifteen days took that Castle, and klled Kemish, to whom the Governor had
treacherously surrendered it.

May 20. Cromwell came to Pembrook, of which Colonel Poyer was Commander, who
relying on the great strength of the place, refused all conditions, being
sensible that time was very precious with the Parliament, who were surrounded
with so many difficulties at once; but Cromwell, to whom despair was altogether
a stranger, prepared for the Siege, being much furthered in his work from the
Sea, by the great Industry of Sir George Ayscough, who continually furnished
him, by the assistance of a Squadron of Ships, with great Guns and Provisions
of all sorts from Bristol. Having taken a full survey of the strength of the
Castle, he resolves to batter it with his Cannon, because he had notice their
Powder and other provisions would soon be spent, and that the divisions he
heard were among them, might occasion them to yield, and so save the loss of
his men, of whom he was very careful, since so much Work lay upon their hands:
In the mean time he strictly guarded the Trenches, to prevent them from coming
out, which had the effect he expected; Hunger, if not breaking through stone
Walls, yet occasioning them to deliver up the Town and Castle, the Soldiers
upon Quarter, but Langhorn, Poyer, Powel, and some others, upon mercy, which
the rest found, but Poyer was shot to death.

While Cromwell was acting these things in Wales, Fairfax, with his seven
Regiments, marched from Black Heath toward Rochester, and about Gravesend a
great number were got together, and among them above twenty Knights, Esquires
and Gentlemen, of the County, with several of the Kings old Commanders, but
they durst not engage Fairfax, though more numerous, some marching to
Maidstone, a few to Rochester, others to Dover, to besiege that Castle, but
were soon removed by Coll. Rich, and Sir Mich. Livesey. About two thousand were
got to Maidstone, and resolved to defend it, which they did with such
obstinacy, that the valor of Fairfax and his Soldiers were never tried so
much before, nor a Victory got with greater danger; for after they had broke
into the Town with much difficulty, they found a War in every Street, and
Cannon planted against them, so that they were forced to fight for every corner
of it, but at length, with the loss of forty men, it was taken, two hundred of
the Royalists being slain, and fourteen hundred made prisoners, four hundred
Horse, and two thousand Arms taken; and it was remarkable, that at the same
time another Army of many thousand Kentish-men, coming from Rochester to aid
their Friends, yet when they came near durst not assist them, but stood in
sight while Fairfax took the Town. Kent seemed now to be quiet, when the Lord
Goring, with the remains of the Kentish-men, being about two thousand, marched
as far as Greenwich, sending to see how the Citizens stood affected to the
business, but while he staid, expecting an answer, some Troops of the Army came
in sight, upon which Goring and all his company fled, the Horsemen persuing
took some Booty, and the Kentish-men generally went home to their own Houses,
but the Lord Goring, with about five hundred Horse, coming to Greenwich, they
got Boats, and passed over into Essex, and the Lord Capel, with Forces out of
Hartford-shire, and Sir Charles Lucas, with a body of Horse, joined him at
Chelmsford, with several of the Kings Soldiers, and many Londoners who flocked
to them. The General followed them, crossing the Thames at Gravesend, and at
length drove them into Colchester, where after near three months Siege, being
reduced to that extremity as to live several VVeeks upon Horseflesh;
despairing of relief, they at length yielded themselves prisoners, Sir Charles
Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, being shot to death.

At this time Cromwell marches Northward, to endeavor to prevent the danger
from Scotland, from whence D. Hamilton was marching with a potent Army. Lambert
was sent before to suppress Glemham and Langdale, who with their Forces being
about three thousand, retired into Cumberland and Westmoreland, expecting to
join with the Seets, which they did, and fell upon Lambert at Appleby, forcing
him to retire out of the Town, but Cromwell having received all necessary
supplies from the Parliament, came and joined him, and observed the motions of
D. Hamilton, being both but eight thousand six hundred men, against the Scots
and English Army of twenty one thousand, who were marched into England as far
as Preston in Lancashire, where Cromwell resolved to fight them, his forlorn
engaging them first with two hundred Horse and four hundred Foot, and he
himself leading up the main body in the best posture the place would admit,
being a dirty lane, and inconvenient for Horse, where after four hours dispute,
he put them to the rout, whom the Conquerours persued through Preston, and
having cleared the Streets, followed them as far as Warrington, about twenty
miles, killing many in the chase, and taking Lieutenant General Baily prisoner,
with the greatest part of the Scots Army, granting them only Quarter for their
Lives. Three thousand Scots were slain, and ten thousand taken prisoners, with
above one hundred colors, and all their Baggage. Duke Hamilton finding the
service too warm, retreats over the Bridge with a good party of Horse and Foot,
but Cromwell ordered his men to fall in among them pellmell, with their swords
drawn, at which desperate courage the Scots being amazed, betook themselves to
flight, and the Duke with a body of Horse got to Utox^^^r, where he was taken
prisoner by the Lord Gray, and about three thousand Horse with him; Langdale
was also taken by a Parliament Captain.

Conspiracies by land, though over the whole Kingdom, seemed not enough, but
the Sea likewise revolted from the Parliament; diverse of the chief Ships in the
Royal Navy, in June 1648. set the Vice Admiral Rainsborough ashore, declaring
they would serve the King and P. Charles, now coming from Holland with twenty
sail of Ships, and two thousand men. The Parliaments Vice Admiral joined with
them, and the D. of York, who had made his escape from London, being also
aboard. At which the Parliament were much disturbed, and sent to the E of
Warwick to command the remaining Navy, which he readily undertook, but his
brother, though no soldier, by commission from the Prince, assembles five
hundred Horse and Foot about Kingston-Heath, depending on the affections of the
Citizens, having with him the D. of Buckingham, his Brother L. Francis
Villiers, and the E. of Peterborough, but Sir Michael Livesey, and others, soon
dispersed them. The L. Francis Villiers was slain, and the L. Holland flying
with the remainder of his Horse to St. Needs, was altogether subdued, Dalbeer,
and some other Gentlemen slain, and himself taken prisoner. At the same time
Rossirer obtained a great Victory over one thousand Horse, who were pillaging
the Country, out of Pomfret-castle.

About the end of August, Warwick was with a good Fleet in the River of Thames,
when P. Charles with a great Navy of twenty stout Men of War came up the River,
and commanded him to take down his Flag, and yield Obedience to him as chief
Admiral by the Kings Commission. Warwick refused, yet declined fighting in that
narrow channel, expecting to be joined by the Portsmouth Fleet, commanded by
Sir G. Ayscough, which the Royalists reported was revolted also; but though
most of the Mariners were inclined to the Prince, yet Sir George, by his
prudent managery, at length confirmed them in their Obedience to the
Parliament, and failing by P. Charles in the Night, brought all his Ships safe
to the E. of Warwick, who now resolved to engage the Prince, but finding he was
gone back to Holland for want of provisions, he followed him soon after with
the whole Fleet to Goree, upon that coast.

Cromwell, after he had given that great defeat to Hamilton, following his
Victory, marches toward Scotland to assist Argyle and Levens, against the
Forces of Monroe and Lanerick, and to give them an account what was become of
Hamilton, but upon his approach, without effecting any thing, they withdraw
their Forces back into Scotland, and Cromwell in his way reduced Berwick and
Carlisle into the Parliaments power. Before he entered Scotland, he Rendevouz'd
his. Army on the banks of the Tweed, and caused proclamation to be made at the
head of every Regiment, That no man, upon pain of death, should take from the
Scots either Cattle or Goods without Order. He then marches directly toward
Edinburgh, to consult about the affairs of both Kingdoms; many of the Scots
Nobility and Gentry were sent from the Committee of Estates to meet him, who
after congratulatory Orations made, conducted him to Edinburgh, where Argyle,
Leven, and other Lords, treated him and the rest of the English commanders,
with a magnificent banquet in the Castle. Thanks were given by the Ministers to
Cromwell, who was by them styled, The preserver of Scotland under God; many of
these having denounced the wrath of God against that Army of Hamilton, which by
the success they now thought fulfilled. Such also was the Testimony of the
Committee of Estates, written to the English Parliament, concerning Cromwell.
Presently after the Forces of Monroe and Lanerick were disbanded, and all
others, except fifteen hundred Horse and Foot, under the command of Leven, for
settling the Kingdom. It was also decreed by the Committee of Estates, and
Assembly of the Hirk, for preservation of Religion, and brotherly love with the
English Nation, That no man who had joined with Hamilton, in the late Invasion
of England, should be chosen for the new Parliament, which was then called, or
into the Assembly of the Kirk, as being enemies to Religion, and both the
Kingdoms.

A strange and sudden alteration this was, That the English Army, which but a
year before were by the Kirk party of Scotland called a bundle of Sectaries,
and reviled by all manner of opprobrious names, should now be acknowledged by
the same Scots to be the Instruments of God, and Vindicators both of the Church
and Kingdom of Scotland. And this great change in the Council of Scotland, had
been more to he wondered at, if the change that then happened in the English
Parliament were not much more surprising, for who can imagine that Cromwell, for
vanquishing a Scotch Army, by which the Nation was delivered from plunder, and
many other mischiefs, should be acknowledged there the preserver of Scotland,
and that the same Victory of his against the Scots, should please the
Presbyterian Scots for Religion sake, and for Religions sake displease the
Presbyterians in England, for the face of the English Parliament was now
suddenly changed, and the Vo^es that had passed the year before of making no
more addresses to the King, were annulled and made void; upon which they had
published a Declaration of the reason and necessity of their proceedings. New
addresses are now made to the King, with more submission than ever was before
resolved on; the eleven Impeached Members were restored to their seats, and the
Houses debated of treating with the King upon his own security personally, at
London, with honor, freedom and safety. But this was not carried, only a
Treaty was Vored to be in the Isle of Wight, and that the King should choose the
place in that Island. In persnance whereof, the E. of Midd^esex, and two of the
H. of Commons, were sent to the King, who answered, That he was very ready to
treat of peace: Upon which, five Peers and ten Commoners were immediately
chosen and sent to Newport. During this Treaty, the King found all kind of
respect and observance from the Commissioners, being attended with a Royal
Retinue, the D. of Richmond, Marquess of Hartford, the Earls of Southampton and
Lindsey, with a number of other Gentlemen of Quality who waited in his Train;
his own two Chaplains, and diverse of his Lawyers, to advise him in the Treaty,
being likewise allowed him.

While these things were Transacting at Westminster, Cromwell having finished
matters in Scotland prepares for his return, and October. 16. 1648. leaves
Endenburgh, being conducted some miles on his way by Argyle, and other Scotch
Noblemen, who took their leaves with mutual demonstrations of kindness, and
marching toward Carlisle, when he came into Yorkshire, he was defired by the
Committee to reduce the Castles of Scarborough and Pomfret in his way; the last
of which was defended by Coll. John Maurice with great courage, not by the
strength of the place, but the valor of the Defendants: The Garrison consisted
of four hundred Foot, and one hundred and thirty Horse, but all daring fellows,
who daily performed some notable Exploit by their sallies, as one time by
seizing Sir Arthur Ingram with a Troop of Horse, and obliging him to pay
fifteen hundred pounds to obtain his liberty. Soon after they took Captain
Clayton, and most of his Troop, and brought into the Castle two hundred head of
cattle, and many Horses, though Sir Hen. Cholmly at that time beleaguered it to
keep them in. One morning before day, forty Horse sallied out, and speeding to
Doncaster, where Coll. Rainsborough, who had a commission to command the siege
in chief, then Quartered, three of them went into the Town, and inquired for
Coll Rainsboroughs Quarters, to which being directed, they went thither
pretending to deliver him letters from Lieutenant General Cromwell; the Colonel
little suspecting their business, considently opens the door to receive the
letters, but one of them instantly stabbed him to the heart, and though his
Forces guarded the Town, yet they got back into the Castle at midday. To
reduce this place, Cromwell having settled the Northern counties, now comes and
orders the siege to be straightened, leaving a strong party under Lambert, who
was come from Scotland, to prevent their ranging abroad, and in a while it was
surrendered.

Cromwell marches up to London, and takes his place in parliament, who in his
absence had recalled their Vote of Non-addresses, and were treating with the
King at Newport, but while this Treaty proceeded, and some months were spent in
debates, concessions and denials, another sudden alteration happened, which
threw the King from the height of honor to the lowest condition, for some
fearing they might be in danger if the King were restored to his Throne,
contrived to take him away quite, while others were as earnest for re-advancing
him, so that things were brought to no issue before Cromwels return, who had
now the thanks of the House given him by the Speaker, for his prudent conduct
of affairs in Scotland. At the same time several petitions were presented to
the Parliament, and some to General Fairfax, That whoever had offended against
the Common wealth, no persons excepted, might be brought to speedy Jnstice,
that the same fault may have the same punishment in the person of K. or Lord,
as in the person of the poorest Commoner: That such as speak or act on the
Kings behalf, till he be acquitted of shedding innocent blood, be proceeded
against as Traitors, etc.

The first petition of this kind was presented to the parliament, Sept 11. the
Title was, To the most Honorable the Commons of England assembled in
Parliament, The humble petition of many thousands of well-affected men in the
Cities of London and Westminster, in the Borough of Southwark, and the
neighboring Villages Inhabitants. This petition which broke the Ice, was in a
month followed by several others, from diverse Counties in England, and from
several Regiments of the Army, as from Oxford, Leicester, from many commanders
in the Army, from Iretons and Ingolsbys Regiment; the design of all being the
same, That Justice might be done on the chief Authors of so much Bloodshed in
England, and that those who had been raisers of this second War, and were now
in the Parliaments custody, Hamilton, Holland, Capel, Goring, and the rest,
might be punished, and especially the King himself, etc. These petitions were
daily presented to the Parliament during the Treaty, and by them laid aside;
but at last these desires prevailed, especially after the Remonstrance of
Fairfax, Cromwell and the General Council of Officers at St. Albans, of Nov. 11.
1648.

At the same time Cromwell sent Coll. Ewer to the Isle of Wight, to take the
King out of the custody of Coll. Hammond at Newport, and to confine him to
Hurst Castle till further Order, and this without consent of the Parliament;
and thus the Treaty was violently broken off, though the House of Lords Voted,
That the Kings Concessions were a sufficient ground of peace, and the major
part of the Commons did the same. But Cromwell and the Army being now come to
London, resolve to hinder the same, and discharge the Trained Bands from
guarding the parliament, Colonel Prides and Riches Regiments supplying their
rooms, by whom above forty Members of the House of Commons, as they were coming
to the House, were seized and made prisoners. Nay further, they accuse M. G.
Brown, and above Ninety Members, for inviting the Scots into England the last
Summer, and therefore desired they might be excluded the House, which being
done, and the House new modelled, they Voted, That no message be received from
the King upon pain of High Treason: That Fairfax and the Army take care of the
King, and that the Council of War draw up a charge against him, Dec. 13. 1648.
The King is brought from Hurst Castle to Windsor, and the Commons declare the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance to be void, and that it is Treason for the
King to levy War against the Commonwealth, but the Lords deny that the King
can commit any Treason against the Commonwealth, and reject the Ordinance for
his Trial by a new Tribunal, which they had erected to consist of one hundred
and fifty Commissioners, six whereof were of the Lords House, the rest Officers
of the Army, and some few Citizens. And the Commons further declare, That the
people, under God, are the original of all just power, and that the Commons of
England being the peoples Representative, have the supreme Authority, and what
they Enact has the force of a Law, though the House of Lords do not consent
thereto. Upon these and several other new political principles, they proceed to
Try, Judge, Condemn and Execute the King, before his own palace-gate at
White Hall, Jan. 30. 1648.

But having already published a Book, called, The Wars of England, Scotland and
Ireland, wherein is an exact relation of the Kings Trial, with the Reasons he
would have offered against the pretended Jurisdiction of their Court of
Justice, and his last speech at the time of his suffering; I shall refer the
Reader to that, and wholly omit it here.

The fatal blow being given, the remainder of the House of Commons, and the
Army, made it evident, that they were not only for cutting off the King, but
Kingship it self, and thereupon the House Voted, That Kingly Government is
unnecessary burdensome and dangerous, and that whereas several pretenses might
be made to the Crown, that any person who should proclaim Charles Stewart, Son
of the late King, or any other, King of England, should suffer as in case of
High Treason. And soon after the House of Lords was likewise Vored useless and
dangerous, at which the Lords were so highly Incensed, that a Declaration was
suddenly published in the Name of all the Peers and Barons of England, against
the proceedings of the Commons, and in definance of all Votes, Acts and Orders
to the contrary, Charles the second was proclaimed King, in the Name of all the
Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty of the Kingdom; but they still proceed,
assuming new Ensigns of Sovereignty, and cancelling the old, causing all Writs,
Commissions, etc. to issue out under a new style and title, that is, The
Keepers of the Liberties of England by the authority of parliament, causing the
old Great Seal to be broken, and a new one made with this Inscription, In the
fifth year of freedom, by Gods blessing restored. And soon after they pulled
down the Kings Arms in all places, and his Statue at Guild Hall, and the Royal
Exchange. A Council of State was constituted of forty, and Bradshaw made
president, and the Council of Adjutators of the Army, who had been so
Instrumental in the late Revolutions, was now dissolved, who soon after
petitioned the Lord Fairfax, but those that subscribed it, were by a Council of
War Ordered to ride with their fa^es to the Horses Tails before their
Regiments, with their crimes on their breasts, to have their swords broken over
their heads, and to be cashiered the army, which much provoked their fellow
soldiers, so that a while after, the Army Rendevouzing at Ware, several
Regiments, in persuance of the former petition (wherein they complain of
erecting Illegal Courts of Justice, and trying the free people of England by
Martial Law, with diverse other grievances) wore white colors in their Ha^s, to
distinguish themselves; among whom was Cromwels own Regiment of Horse, who
having notice of it, ordered two other Regiments, from remote Quarters to be
there, who knew nothing of the Intrigue, and being all drawn up in Battalia,
Cromwell with a frowning countenance rides round, and suddenly commands those
two Regiments to surround a Regiment of Foot, and then calls four men by their
Names out of the body, and with his own hands put them in custody of the
Marshal, instantly summoning a Council of War, while their adherents secretly
put their white colors in their pockets, and were astonished at the action:
These four were tried and found guilty, but had the favor to cast lots for
their lives, whereby the two principal Mutineers escaped, and the two ignorant
fellows were shot to death upon the place, in the view of the whole Army. These
now had the Name of Levellers given them, and one Lockier was afterward shot to
death for promoting a paper, called, The Engagement and Agreement of the
people, etc. in St. Paul's Churchyard, and his Funeral was attended by above
one thousand of the Lilburnian Faction, all wearing black and Seagreen
Ribbons, the Army being now in a violent ferment, and even ready to destroy one
another, which humor was cherished by John Lilburn, not without encouragement
from the Royal party, who from their divisions hoped to reap advantage.

In persuance hereof, Colonel Scroops Regiment of Horse dismissed their
Officers at Salisbury, and with colors flying marched to join Harrisons,
Iretons and Skippons Regiments, who by the contrivance of the Agitators, were
all engaged in the same designs. This defection seeming of very dangerous
consequence, Genesis Fairfax and Cromwell, with his own Regiment, marched to Alton,
and had advice the Mutineers were gone to Abington, after whom Cromwell made
such haste, that in one day he marched forty miles, and having met with them,
he politickly proposed a Treaty before Harrisons Regiment should join them,
wherein all parties should receive satisfaction, and that neither of them
should keep at ten miles distance; upon which, the Levellers went to Burford,
and being opposed by the Soldiery at New-bridge, to prevent Quarrels they went
a little lower, not doubting but they should all join upon Treaty, and then put
most of their Horses to grass, they being in all above nine hundred, consisting
of twelve Troops entire, of the best in the Army, and leaving a guard of about
sixty men, some of their companions, who were brought over to Cromwell, giving
Intelligence of their posture, Coll. Reynolds, about midnight, rusht into their
Quarters, they ^^tt^e expecting such rough treatment, and seizing the Guards,
took the greatest part of the rest either asleep or drinking, together with
nine hundred Horse, and four hundred prisoners, whereof Thompson, and two more,
only were Executed, Cornet Don declaring such sorrow, that he was reprieved at
the place of Execution, which their fellows beheld from the Leads of the
Church, and were told, That every tenth man of them should die, but Cromwell
proposed the pardoning of them, which was agreed to, and they sent to their own
Houses. This proved the utter suppression of that Faction, and rendered the Army
wholly at the devotion of Cromwell.

About this time another illegal High Court of Justice was erected, wherein
Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, Lord Capel, and Lord Goring, were brought
to their Trial, the three first were condemned and beheaded at the Palace-yard
in West^minster, and a proclamation was published, declaring the Kingdom of
England to be a free State, and Alderman Reynoldson was commanded to proclaim
it in the City, which he refusing, was committed to the Tower, and a new Lord
Mayor was chosen by a ^ommon Hall, who attended with several other Aldermen of
the same temper, readily proclaimed the Edicts of this new Republic in several
places in the City.

England being thus subjected to the power of the House of Commons and the
Army, and Scotland not yet ripe for Invasion, and the Nation full of Soldiers,
who having for so long a time led a Military, life, could hardly be reduced to
their former Employments: Our new Statesmen, to prevent any ill humors that
might gather among them, resolved to make them serviceable to their Country in
the reduction of Ireland, all that Kingdom, except Dublin and Londonderry,
being in possession of the Irish, which neither were able to hold out without
speedy assistance from England. This Rebellion, the most barbarous and bloody
that ever happened upon earth, acted by Devils in humane shape, rather than
men, butchering two hundred thousand protestants in eight weeks space, without
the least offense or provocation given, or without sparing of age or sex, was
perpetrated Oct. 23. 1641. and though contrived so secretly, and acted so
furiously, yet was Dublin wonderfully preserved to be a refuge to those poor
protestants who escaped the rage of their bloody persecutors. Many of them fled
to England, but found little relief, for here all things seemed to forebode the
re-acting the same Tragedy, yet in the midst of the differences between the
King and parliament, it was agreed to send some Regiments thither, if possible,
to hinder the progress of those Assassines; but this relief was so small that
it had no effect, for the King finding the parliament prevail against him,
recalled those Troops from Ireland, many of the Rebels coming along with them
to his assistance, so that this Kingdom lay more exposed to these bloody Wolves
than ever, and thus they continued for some years.

But this new state having renounced Monarchy and Episcopacy, resolve now to
use the same Instruments to recover Ireland, and to that end they ordered an
Army to be sent thither. The Marquess of Ormond was made Lord Lieutenant by the
late King, and the Rebels had made a confederacy among themselves, and upon
condition to have the free Exercise of their Religion, and diverse other ample
privileges and advantages, which the necessity of affairs obliged him to yield
to, they joined their Forces to his, being also assisted by a considerable
number of others, raised by the Earls of Castlehaven, Clan^ickand, and the Lord
Inchiquin, so that they were the greatest united strength in that Kingdom; but
the confederates having broken their Articles with the Lieutenant, and being
ready to besiege Dublin, which he was not able to defend, rather than it should
fall into the hands of the Irish papists, he surrendered it to Colonel Jones
for the parliament, and came over to the King, who was then carried from one
place to another by the Army, and from thence he went over to Prince Charles
then at Paris. But the Confederates, surprised at the great preparations made
against them in England, sent Letters to the Prince, humbly entreating him to
send back the Marquess of Ormond, with an absolute promise to submit entirely
to the Kings Authority, and to obey his Lieutenant. At their request, he
returned into Ireland about a year before Cromwell came over, and with their
united Forces they had reduced the whole Country, except Londonderry,
commanded by Sir Charles Coot, and Dublin, the principal City, wherein was
Colonel Jones with no great strength, and who was very jealous of the sidelity
of his own men, that often deserted and went over to the other party.

The Irish confederates, with an Army of twenty two thousand men, lay under the
very Walls of Dublin, and sent diverse threatening summons into it, requiring a
speedy surrender, but they had no effect upon the valiant Governor Jones, who
yet not insensible of the great danger he was in, sent many earnest Messages to
the parliament of England to aid him with all speed, with Men and Ammunition,
or else all would be quickly lost, and they knowing the difficulties of his
condition, hasten their assistance to him, gave order for sending thither
Iretons, Scroops, Hortons, and Lamberts Regiments of Horse, with Hewsons,
Deans, Ewers, and Cooks Regiments of Foot, and five Troops of Dragoons, all old
tried Soldiers, that feared no Enemy, and led by victorious commanders, with
some other Regiments new listed, to make a number sufficient to effect the
business. Nothing was now wanting but a General to command this gallant Army,
which the parliament being sensible of Cromwels conduct and fitness, desired
him to accept, which he readily did, declaring at the same time, That he did
not doubt but God would use him as an Instrument to execute his vengeance upon
the bloody Irish; with which answer the parliament were so pleased, that
instantly they give him a commission to be General of all their Forces, and
Lord Governor both in the Civil and Military affairs of Ireland, and Colonel
Jones was made Lieutenant General of the Horse. After which, they march to
their Rendevouz at Milford in Wales, and July 10. 1649. Cromwell set forward
from London in a Coach and six Horses, attended with many of the House of
commons, council of State, and principal Officers of the Army, with a
Lifeguard of fourscore who had been lately commanders, very gallantly
accoutred. In this state he marched to Brainford, where these Gentlemen took
their leaves, with wishes for his happy success; from thence he rides post to
Bristol, to put his men and Train of Artillery into the Transport-ships, and
afterward goes into Wales, having sent Reynolds Regiment of Horse, and
Venables, and Monks Regiments of Foot before from Chester, who with a fair wind
soon arrived at Dublin, to the great joy of the Inhabitants, being about three
thousand in all, who were very careful to recover them from the fatigues of the
Sea, in hopes by their means to recover their Liberties.

And in this they found themselves not mistaken, for Colonel Jones, much
animated with these recruits, resolved to attack the besiegers with the first
opportunity, and accordingly, Aug. 2, when the Irish, with a strong party of
Horse and Foot, marched with much assurance to Baggor-field, a little way
Eastward from the city, toward the Sea, from whence they designed to run their
Trenches toward the Works of the city, to prevent the landing any more
supplies from England, the besieged sound a necessity to prevent them, and with
twelve hundred Horse, and four thousand Foot, fell upon the Enemies new Works,
and rout their Horse at the first encounter, most of the Foot being also either
killed or slain, consisting of fifteen hundred, besides their Horse, which so
encouraged the English, that they pursued their victory to Rathunines, where
the Marquess of Ormond with his whole Army of nineteen thousand men were
Encamped, who hearing of it, wished they would come, that he might have some
sport with them; he soon had his wish, but the sport was somewhat rude, for in
a short time his Army was utterly put to the rout, four thousand being slain
upon the spot, and in the pursuit; and two thousand five hundred and seventeen
prisoners, most persons of Quality, with the Marquesses own brother, all their
Cannon and Ammunition, with a wealthy Camp, became the reward of the conquering
Soldiers, who made themselves Gentlemen with the spoils of the vanquished. It
is remarkable, that not above twenty of the English were slain in this great
action. The Marquess perceiving all was lost, fled with a considerable party to
Kilkenny, and from thence to Drogheda, whither Colonel Jones, with some Horse,
was marched with all speed, in hopes that the news of this defeat might cause
them to surrender, but when he heard that Ormond, with three hundred Horse, was
come to reinforce it, he went back, while the Marquess fortifies Dundalk,
Trim, and some other places adjacent to Tredagh, hoping to preserve what he had
by the strength of his Troops, and to have an Army of Foot ready before
Cromwels arrival: But he having Intelligence of this great Victory, being then
at Milford-Haven in Wales, he instantly sailed thence with the Van of his Army
in thirty two Transportships, and Ireton with the main body in forty two more;
Hugh Peter's with about twenty sail following them, and having a fair wind, they
all soon arrived at Dublin, and were received with all signs of joy and
satisfaction, and especially the new Lord Governor Cromwell, whom the people
crowded to behold, and who observing their zeal and kindness, putting off his
Hat, he spoke to them to this effect, That as God had brought him thither in
safety, so he doubted not, but by the divine assistance, to restore them to all
their just Rights, Liberties and Properties, and that all those whose hearts
and affections were real for carrying on the great work, against the barbarous
and blood-thirsty Irish and their adherents and confederates, and that were for
prepagating the Gospel of Christ, the establishing of truth and peace, and
restoring this bleeding Narion to its former happiness and tranquillity, should
find favor and protection from the Parliament of England and himself, and
should likewise receive such endowments and gratuities as were seitable to
their meries. This speech was received with the approbation and acclamations of
the people, many of whom declared, That they would live and dye with him.

The Army being all landed and refreshed, Cromwell publishes a proclamation
against swearing, cursing, and drunkenness, under the most severe penalties,
and having settled matters in Dublin, he musters his Army, which then consisted
of fifteen thousand Horse and Foot well accoutred, out of whom he made a
detachment of about ten thousand, with whom, and a sine Train of Artillery,
Ammunition and provisions, he marches to Drogheda, commanded by Sir Arthur
Ashton, formerly Governor of Reading and Oxford, and an expert and valiant
soldier, the Garrison consisting in about three thousand Horse and Foot, most
English. After summoning the Town, which was slighted, Cromwell prepares all
necessaries to besiege it, Sir G. Ayscough and his squadron in the mean time
blocking it up by Sea, and the white flag was taken down, the red denouncing
blood and destruction being displayed in its stead, which yet did not much
discourage the besieged, who expected relief from Ormond, and had likewise
absolutely determined among themselves to conquer or dye, which they did
quickly after; for Cromwell without making Trenches or Ditches, raised a strong
battery of Cannon against it, which soon beat down a Church-steepie and a
Tower, on the South of the Town, and upon throwing two or three hundred Balls
more, the corner Tower between the South-east Wall was levelled, and such a
breach made, that three Regiments of Foot entered, it not being large enough for
the Horse, but met with such surious opposition from the besieged, that they
forced them back faster than they came on, which Cromwell observing from the
battery, he with a fresh supply of Colonel Ewers Foot, enters in person into
the Town, whose presence so encouraged the soldiers, that nothing was able to
stand before them, so that having secured the Town, to revenge their late
repulse, they cut off all they met with, yet Ashtons soldiers desperately
opposed them at every corner, and when not able to defend the streets,
retreated to the Churches-steeples, and other securities, but the assailants
persued them with utmost rage, and with Gunpowder blew up an hundred of them
who were got into St. Peter's steeple, only one escaping, who by the fall broke
his leg, and had Quarter given him. Others refused to yield upon summons, and
were thereupon kept so long from Victuals, that they were forced to surrender;
after which, most of the Officers, with every tenth soldier, was put to the
Sword, and the rest sent to Barbados, Sir Arthur Ashton being slain among the
rest, Cromwell by these severe executions designing to terrify other places from
making any opposition, which had such effect, that in a short time he wholly
conquered the Kingdom. And thus was this strong Garrison reduced and plundered
in seven days, which the Irish were three years e're they could take.

Dundalk and Trim expecting no better Quarter, the Soldiers deserted them with
such precipitation, that they left all their cannon behind: In the last, fixed
upon their carriages; and the English revolted so fast to the conqueror, that
Ormonds Forces increased very little, so that he durst not engage Cromwell, but
endeavored to hinder them from having provisions. Upon which, the General
resolved to march Westward, and assault Wexford, putting a Garrison into
Killingkerrick near Dublin, which had been deserted by the Enemy, together with
Arkloe-castle, one of the seats of the Family of Ormond, and several other
small places which surrendered to him; at length he came before Wexford, and
summoned it, but the Governor Colonel Synno^ politickly treated about terms,
till he was reinforced with five hundred Foot, under the Earl of Castlehaven,
and then seemed to defy any attack: Whereupon, Cromwell presently plants a
battery against the castle at the South-east end of the Town, as being of great
consequence to the gaining it, and had not played long upon it, before the
Governor surrenders it, of which the soldiers having possession; and showing
themselves to the Town, affrighted them from the Walls, which they soon
perceiving, in an instant scaled the Walls without much resistance, and entering
into the Town, cut off all that were in Arms, till they came to the
Marketplace, where the enemy made a stand, and fought it out to the last, but
at length were subdued, and all in Arms put to the Sword.

This Seaport being taken, which was convenient for supplies, the Victors
march to Ross, another Sea Town, considerable for strength and trade, and
situate on the River Barrow, where a Ship of seven or eight hundred Tun might
ride by the Wall; the Lords of Ormond, Castlehaven and Ards were there in
person, having brought fifteen hundred men in Boats to reinforce it, in sight
of the English, who could not prevent it: Cromwell summons the Governor M.
General Twaff to a rendition, by assuring him, That since his coming into
Ireland, he ever avoided the effusion of Blood, having been before no place
where he did not first send them such Terms as might have preserved them, and
that upon the same account he required him to surrender the Town to the
parliament of England. He received no return, till a battery of six or seven
great cannon, which played furiously upon the Town, mollified the Governor, so
that to prevent the danger other places had incurred, he delivered it up upon
condition to march away with bag and baggage to Kilkenny, which fifteen hundred
of them did, but six hundred being English, joined with Cromwell. At which time
Bandon-bridge, Youghal, Cork, Kinsale, and other Garrisons, freely declared for
the parliament; and in the North Sir Charles Coot, and Colonel Venables,
succeeded as well, and so did L. Broghill, and Colonel Hewson in other parts.

Cromwell having taken Ross, by a bridge of boats over the River marched his men
to besiege Dungannon, a strong Fort commanded by Coll. Wogan, but having little
hope of reducing it quickly, they rise and march to Kilkenny, where the
Marquess of Ormond and L. Inchiqueen declare they would fight him, being much
stronger than Cromwell, yet upon his approach retreated without action;
whereupon Enisteoge and Carrick were taken without loss of a man, and the
General marches to Waterford (taking Passage-Fort by the way) hoping to reduce
it before Winter, but it being December, and very wet, the Soldiers were put
into Wiater-Quarters till the Spring. During which, the Irish attempted to
regain Passage Fort, by a party from Water o^d, but Colonel Zankey meeting
them, put them to the rout, killing many, and making three hundred and fifty
prisoners. At this time Lieutenant General Jones dyed of a violent Fever at
Dungannon, and though it were Winter, yet Cromwell visited all the Garrisons in
Munster, and received great Recruits from England, many of his Soldiers and
Officers dying by sickness, and put a new Mayor into Kinsale, the former being
an Irish papist. The latter end of February, Cromwell again mar^^^^ three
thousand of his men out of Youghall to ^large their Quarters, and (...) in
(...) near (...), with Cloghen-house, and Rog^^-castle, and (...) the River
Tower with much dancer, comes ^o ^^^ther'd, where one Eutler was Governor of
the Garrison, and about ten at Night summons the To^^ with a Trumpet, which was
discourded at first, but searing a storm. It was surrendered upon condition they
should march out with their Arms. From hence, after being refreshed, they march
to Call^^^, about six miles off Kilke^ny, which had three Castles in the Town,
and were stormed and taken one after another, and all in arms put to the sword,
which so affrighted them that defended a House near the Town, that they desired
liberty to go to Kilkenny, which was granted. The soldiers ^ell furnished with
provisions here, returned to Feathered, taking the castles of ^noctover and
Bullyward by the way, Kiltermon, Arfermon, Cober, and Dundrum, places of good
strength, soon after running the same fate; (in taking of the last of which,
Coll. Zanchey was shot through the hand) so that there remained nothing
unconquered but Kilkenny, Galloway, Clonmell, Waterford and Lymerick.

These were places of considerable strength, but Cromwell resolves to attack
Kilkenny first, and having sent for more Forces, he came to the Town of Govan,
which was populous and fortified with a strong castle, but the Governor
refusing to obey his summons, was forced to surrender upon hard Terms, the
soldiers to have their Lives, and the Officers to be at discretion: Hammond
the Governor, his Major, and all the other Commission-Officers, were shot to
death, and the popish chaplain hanged. Cromwell next proceeds to the siege of
Kilkenny, which was full of Officers and Soldiers from other places, and the
Governor Sir Walter Butler refusing to surrender, the Lord Governor caused
the cannon to play, which had not thrown one hundred shot e're a breach was
made, and Colonel Ewers with a thousand Foot, though at first repulsed, gained
the Irish Town, and the Suburbs on the other side the River, which caused the
Governor to Treat upon Terms, since he could not hope for relief; and the
Garrison in Cautnell-castle, whom he had sent to assist him, desired passes of
Cromwell to go beyond Sea, so that the capitulation was quickly finished, and
that considerable City of Kilkenny, which had been the seat of the supreme
council, was reduced in six days time.

The Marquess of Ormond, and other chief commanders, observing the
unsuccesfulness of their designs, consulted with the Gentlemen of Westmeath at
Baltemore, how to manage their affairs with more advantage for the future, but
finding their own Inability, some were for an accommodation with the English,
but others doubting whether they might obtain pardon or good terms, it was
concluded to do the greatest mischief they could to the English in their
Quarters, till they had opportunity to escape out of the country.

Cromwell after this besieges Clonmell, a strong Garrison, wherein were one
handred and twenty Horse, and two thousand Foot: During which, coll. Reynolds
and Hewson besiege Trim, and the Lord Broghill defeats the Bishop of Ross, who
with five thousand designed to relieve Clonmell, killing seven hundred, taking
twenty Officers, and the Bishop himself, with the Standard of the church of
Munster, and carrying him to a castle defended by the Bishops Forces, hangs him
before the. Walls in their fight, which so terrified them that they soon
surrendered. These successes encouraged the besiegers of Clonmell, wherein were
many gallant soaldiers and commanders, and great unanimity; but Cromwell to lose
no more time, presently batters it with his cannon, which opened a breach
whereat the soldiers enter, but were repulsed with the utmost fury, so that
the fuccess was doubtful for four hours, and a great carnage made, till at
length the Irish are forced to quit the place, and betake themselves to flight,
whom the victorious soldiers persued with revengeful minds, and made a
dreadful slaughter. Thus was this considerable place reduced, though with
greater loss than ordinary to the English, wherein they found the stoutest
enemy they ever met in Ireland.

Cromwell having thus in ten months time, performed more than any Prince before
was able to do in ten years, in subduing an obstinate bloody enemy that
despaired of pardon, and therefore fought with the greater animosity; and there
now remaining unreduced only Lymerick, Waterford, and some few other
inconsiderable Garrisons, to which service Ireton was appointed, whom the Lord
Governor made Lord Deputy. He takes his leave of Ireland, and after a stormy
passage lands at Bristol, where he was received with acclamations, and the
discharging of the cannon, and hastens from thence to London, being met at
Hounslow by General Fairfax, several Members of parliament, and Officers of the
Army, with multitudes of spectators, who came to see him of whom they had heard
such great matters; where after mutual salutations and congratulations he
proceeds, and is saluted near Hyde-park with some Field-peces, and Volleys of
small shot, by Colonel Barksteads Regiment, drawn up in the Highway for that
purpose, and after conducted to the Cockpit near St. James's, prepared for his
reception, where he is visited by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, and
other persons of Quality, all expressing the sense of their obligations. Soon
after he took his place in parliament, and received the thanks of the House
from the Speaker, and then gave them a full account of the present condition of
Ireland.

At this time Virginia, and the Caribbee Islands, revolt from the parliament,
and cry up the Monarchy and Liturgy, who thereupon prohibit all Nations to
Trade with them, and in a few months they are wholly subdued by a Fleet sent
thither under Sir G. Ayscough. Prince Rupert infests the English Coasts from
Scilly, Jersey, Ireland and France, with the States revolted Ships, to the
great loss of the Merchants, whereupon a Fleet well equipt is set forth against
him, who block him up in Kinsale, which Town being taken by Cromwell, they were
forced to hasten away, leaving three Ships behind, and sailed to Lisbon, where
they were protected by the King of Portugal, which caused a difference between
that King and the English Republic. About the same time, that is, May 3. 1649.
Dr. Dorislaus, who drew up the charge against King Charle^ being sent as an
Envoy to the States of Holland, was treacherously murdered at the Hague by
persons in disguise that broke into his Lodgings, and afterward made their
escape. And not long after, Mr. Anthony Ascham, the English Agent in Spain, was
stab^d in his Inn in his way to Madrid, and the murderers taking sanctuary in a
church, the King of Spain, by all his authority, could not bring them to
Justice.

But the greatest danger to this new Commonwealth, though victorious in
Ireland, seemed to be from Scotland, for King Charles II. being in the Isle of
Jersey, and having notice of the great factions and differences in that
Kingdom, between the Covenanters and the Royalists, he gives a commission to
the Marquess of Montross (who in the year 1645. was so successful for a time,
that the whole Kingdom of Scotland may be said to have been won and lost in one
month) by which commission he was to raise Forces in Holland, and other parts,
wherewith, if possible, to abate the power of the Covenanters, so that the King
might be able to treat with them upon better terms. He accordingly, in a short
time, sends some Forces into the Isles of Orkney, and a few more under Sir
James Mongomery, to the North of Scotland. These the Committee of Estates
resolve to oppose, though raised for the Kings service, and send propositions
to him to Jersey, which being granted, they would enter into a Treaty to
restore him to that Kingdom; the substance whereof were, That he would sign the
solemn league and covenant, and oblige all persons to take it: To confirm all
Acts of parliament in the two last Sessions, and to have no Negative voice in
their parliament, and would appoint some place about Holland to treat in. The
King consented, and promised in the word of a Prince, to perform them, and
Breda, a Town in Holland, belonging to the Prince of Orange, was the place
appointed, where the Scots Commissioners meet him, and the Treaty in a short
time was fully concluded, wherein one Article was, That the Marquess of
Montross, and his adherents, be prohibited access into that Kingdom. During
this Treaty, Montross being commissioned by the King, fearing he should have an
express command to desist, and himself be banished his country, landed as you
heard at Orkney, and in the North, with some inconsiderable supplies of men and
money, against whom the parliament, then sitting, send an Army of seven
thousand Foot, and three Troops of Horse, who utterly defeat his Forces, which
were only twelve hundred, of whom two hundred were slain, and all the rest
taken except one hundred, who made their escape; and Montross himself, who
being three or four days in the open Fields without meat or drink, with only
one man, discovered himself to the L. Aston, but the pronused reward, or fear
of concealing him, caused this Lord to send him to Edinburgh and he was soon
after condemned and hanged upon a Gallows thirty foot from the ground, and a
few days after Sir John Urrey, Sir Francis Hay, Colonel S^bald, and Colonel
Spotswood, were beheaded for the same cause, the last at his death confessing
he was an actor in the death of Dr. Dorit^a^s. The King was somewhat startled
at these proceedings, but the Scots Commissioners desired him nor to stumble at
these matters, since they were all designed to promote his Interests; so that
finding it could not be redressed, he was forced to conceal his resentments,
and the Treaty being finished, the King prepared for his Voyage to Scotland.

The parliament of England having exact Intelligence of all these proceedings,
it was debated whether the War which was inevitable between them and the Scots,
should be Offensive or Defensive; at length, being sensible what desolations
they brought along with them when they came in as Friends, and afterward as
Enemies in Duke Hamiltons Invasion, it was concluded to make Scotland the seat
of the War, and accordingly they Order the Army to march Northward, but General
Fairfax, as well as some others, being dissatisfied about the obligation of the
National Covenant entered into between both Kingdoms, which he conceived would
not permit us to make War on Scotland, desired to be excused, and delivered up
his commission, which at first was a little startling, but the parliament soon
found another General, of whose valor and conduct they had large experience,
which was Cromwell, who accepted of the charge, and had a commission to be
General of all the Forces that now were, or hereafter should be raised by the
Commonwealth of England, and all commissions formerly granted to Sir Tho.
Fairfax were made void.

June 28. 1650. Cromwell with his Army marched toward Scotland, and was received
at York by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen with great respect: The report of his
coming, surprised the Committee of Estates, who sent a Letter to the
Parliament, That they admired the English should advance toward them, and that
many of their Ships were seized contrary to the Act of pacification, which
allowed three months warning, and that the Forces they had raised, were only in
their own defense, defiring to know whether those of the English were designed
to guard their own borders, or to invade Scotland. The parliament by their
Declaration declare the reasons of their proceeding, and among others, That the
Scots endeavor to seduce the people of the Commonwealth of England from their
affection and duty to the parliament, and to promote the laterest of the late
King under pretense of the Covenant, and though they could claim no authority
or dominion over us, yet in Scotland they proclaimed Charles Stewart to be King
of England and Ireland, and since that promised to assist him against the
Commonwealth; and had declared against the English parliament and Army,
ranking them with malignants and papists. These with many others, were such
intolerable provocations, and no satisfaction being to be had but by the sword,
the parliament resolve to vindicate the Nations honor, and to secure it from
the like Insolences for the future.

The Army likewise publish a Declaration, wherein taking notice of the
practices of some in that Kingdom, who endeavor by unjust reproaches and false
slanders, to make the Army odious, and render them rather monsters than men,
they to clear themselves, desire them to remember what their behavior was when
they were there before, or what wrong or injury was then done either to the
persons, Goods or Houses of any, and therefore they had no reason by false
reports to affright the people from their Habitations: Further, assuring all
persons who were not active against the parliament, that they should not have
the least injary done them, either in Body or Goods, but upon complaint should
have present redress, and that they might securely continue in their
Habitations.

Copies of these Declarations were given to the country people at
Berwick-market, and others sent into Scotland, which afterward had good effect.
After which Cromwell marches from York to North-Allerton, and thence to
New Castle, where he was nobly treated by Sir Arthur Haslerig the Governor, and
after imploring the blessing of Heaven, and having provided for future
supplies, he posts to Barwick, and July 20. 1650. Rendevouzed his Army upon
Hagerstone-moor, four miles from thence, where appeared a gallant body of Horse
of five thousand four hundred and fifteen, with valiant Riders to manage them,
ten thousand two hundred forty nine Foot, with a Train of Artillery consisting
of six hundred and ninety. In all sixteen thousand three hundred forty five.
After which, they were Quartered on the banks of River Tweed.

In England, John Lilburn about this time was tried at Guild Hall, a man of a
restless and invincible spirit, who is charged with publishing Books, wherein
the parliament are termed Tyrants, Traitors, Conquering Usurpers, etc. and
though it was generally thought they were of his writing and publishing, yet he
made such a subtle defense, that the Jury brought him in Not Guilty, and so he
was released. Not long after, Colonel Eusebius Andrews being found with a
commission from King Charles H. was condemned by an High Court of Justice, and
beheaded at Tower Hill. And one Benson, who was condemned with him, was
executed at Tyburn. At the same time an Insurrection happened in Norfolk, an
Undisciplined company, assembling and roaring about, pretending they designed
the abolishing of popery, the restoring the young King to his Crown, and to
revenge his Fathers death, and to suppress Heresy and Schism: But two hundred
Horse being sent against them from Lyn, and three Troops from the Army, soen
dispersed them, twenty of whom of no eminency were hanged. Sir Henry Hyde being
sent Ambassador from King Charles the Second, to the Grand Seignior at
Constantinople, had some concest with Sir Tho. Bendish the parliaments
Ambassador there, whereupon they had a hearing before the Vizier Bassa, and the
result was, That Sir Tho. Bendish should dispose of Sir Henry Hyde as he
thought fit, who presently sent him to Smyrna, and thence to England, where he
was condemned, and beheaded before the Royal Exchange in London.

Prince Rupert and his Fleer lying in the Haven of Lisbon, as you have heard,
General Blake came before the City with the parliaments Fleet, and after having
destroyed several French Privateers, and some rich Sugar-ships of the King of
Portugals, he was forced by storm, and to re victual, to go to some other Port;
upon which, P. Rupert took the opportunity to sail thence with his Fleet to
Malaga, where they burnt and spoiled several Merchants Ships. Whereupon, Blake
reduced his Fleet to seven stout nimble Sailors, sending the rest home with the
Prizes, and with these sailed with all speed after Prince Rupert to Malaga, but
they being gone to Alicant, he still followed them, taking in his way a French
ship of twenty Guns, with the Roe-buck, a revolted ship; and the Black Prince,
another of Prince Ruperts Fleet, to avoid being taken, ran ashore and blew her
self up. Next day, four more of the Princes Fleet ran ashore at Cartagena, and
were cast away, the rest making their escape, and so Blake returned again to
England.

The Scots had now finished their Treaty with King Charles the Second, he
having promised to confirm the Presbyterian Government in Scotland for three
years, provided that himself might have always three Chaplains of his own
Election: As also to confirm the Militia in the hands of the Estates for five
years, provided it afterward should return to himself. It was now resolved a
Message should be sent to invite him to make all possible speed to his Kingdom
of Scotland, though it was opposed in the parliament at Edinburgh, and put to
the Vote whether any more addresses should be made to the King, and thirty two
were for the Negative, but the Affirmatives being the major part, the message
was sent accordingly, with a protestation, That they would assist him with
their Lives and Fortunes, to establish him in all his Dominions; yet withal,
forbore not to advertise him, they had Testimonies to produce of his
tramactings, by Letters with Montross (of which they had intercepted three or
four) contrary to his promise at Breda, however they were willing to dispense
with him for what was passed, so that he would, without delay, according to the
Articles of agreement, come over into Scotland, and comply with the Parliament
and the Kirk.

After which they prepared for his reception, but prohibited Duke Hamilton, the
Earls of Lauderdail and Seaforth, with many other persons of Quality, who had
constantly attended him in Jersey and Holland, from returning into Scotland.
About the beginning of June, 1650. he left the Hague, and after a tedious
storm, and narrowly escaping some English Ships, landed in the North of
Scotland, whither some Lords were sent to receive and accompany him to
Edinburgh, being entertained by the way with the acclamations of the people. At
Dundee, new propositions from the Parliament and Kirk were sent him, which with
some seeming reluctance he signed. The Town of Aberdeen presented him with
fifteen hundred pounds, but the Committee of Estates sent to other places that
designed the like, enjoining them to bring whatever money and plate they had to
bestow, into the Treasury which they would appoint.

While they were in expectation of the Kings arrival, the Committee of Estates
and Parliament consulted about forming an Army for his service as they
pretended, and an Act was passed for Training every fourth man, capable to bear
Arms, throughout the Kingdom, and for raising sixteen thousand Foot, and six
thousand Horse, the Earl of Leven to be General of the Foot, Holborn
Major General, David Lesley Lieutenant General of the Horse, and Montgomery
Major General, the supreme command being reserved for the King; who arriving at
Edinburgh, was complemented with many congratulations, and July 15. proclaimed
King at the Cross, and had a strong Guard to attend him and observe his motions.

We left Cromwell and his Army upon the very edge of Scotland, who upon July 22.
1650. drew them forth to a Rendevoz, upon an Hill within Berwick bounds, from
whence they had an exact view of the bordering parts of Scotland, where they
were to act their parts; to whom the General made a short speech, exhorting
them to be faithful and courageous, and then they need not doubt the blessing
of Heaven, and encouragement from himself: Which they received with shouts of
approbation. After which he marches into Scotland, quartering in the Field that
Night near the Lord Mordingtonshouse, where proclamation was made, That none
upon pain of death, should offer any violence to the persons or goods of any in
Scotland not in Arms; and no soldier should dare to straggle half a mile from
the Army without special license. From hence they marched to Dunbar, where they
received some provisions from the Ships, sent on purpose to supply them, the
people having left their Habitations, and nothing behind them. Thence they came
to Hadington, twelve miles from Edenborough, without any opposition or sight of
an enemy; next day hearing the Scots would meet them at Gladsmeer, they
endeavored to possess the Moor before them, but no considerable party
appeared, whereupon M. Genesis Lambert, and Colonel Whaley, with fourteen hundred
Horse, were sent as a Vanguard to Mustleborough, to attempt something upon the
Scots; and Major Hains, commanding the Forlorn, faced them in less than a mile
of their Trenches. Cromwell, with the residue of the Army, drew up before
Edinburgh, and some skirmishes happened about possessing King Arthurs Hill,
within a mile of the City, which the English gained, and likewise a Church, and
other Houses, but the Scots not enduring the shock, that Night the English
withdrew and lay close Encamped at Muscleborough, being wearied with constant
duty and continual rain: The Scots were within four miles of them, Entrenched
within a line which flanked from Edinburgh to Leich, and lay so strong, that
the English lay still that day in the rain without covert, but were encouraged
with hope of a sudden Engagement. Next day the ground being very wet, and
provisions scarce, the English resolve to draw to their Quarters at
Muscleborough, which while they were doing, the Scots fell upon their Rear, and
put them into some disorder, but some bodies of English Horse coming up,
charged and beat them to their very Trenches: Lambert in this encounter was run
through the arm with a Lance, and had his Horse killed under him, and was
wounded in his body, and taken prisoner, and rescued. The Scots had several
killed, some of Note, and a Lieutenant Colonel, a Major, and some Captains
taken prisoners. After which, the English marched quietly to Muscleborough that
Night, but so harrassed with dirt, and watching that they expected the Scots
would fall upon them, which accordingly they did, for about four next morning,
fifteen select Troops of Horse, and others, to the number of fifteen hundred,
armed with Backs, Breasts, Head-pieces, Pistols, Swords and Lances, commanded by
Major General Montgomery, and Colonel Stranghan, came on with such resolution,
that they beat in the Guards, and disordered a Regiment of Horse, but the
English being alarmed, instantly fell upon them with such courage, that they
routed, pursued, and did execution upon them, till within a quarter of a mile
of Edinburgh, taking and killing about two hundred, with several Officers of
Quality; Cromwell to discover his generosity, released the principal prisoners,
and sent them to Edinburgh in his own Coach, which did very much rectify the
opinions of many, who by reports were persuaded he was very cruel.

The Army having again spent their provisions, marched for a supply to Dunbar,
where the parliaments Ships constantly attended them with all Necessaries, and
then returning toward Edinburgh, they understood the Scots were keeping a
solemn Thanksgiving for their deliverance, supposing they were quite gone, and
would have come no more, but found themselves much disappointed: Whereupon the
General Assembly sent Cromwell, by David Lesley their General, a Declaration of
the state of the Quarrel wherein they were to fight, which he desired might be
published, That the General Assembly considering their must be just grounds of
stumbling from the Kings Majesty's refusing ^o subscribe the Declaration
concerning his former carriage, and resolutions for the future, in reference to
the Cause of God, the enemies and friends thereof does therefore declare, That
the Kirk and Kingdom will not own any malignant party their Quarrel or
Interest, but that they will fight upon their former principles, for the Cause
of God and their Kingdom, and therefore as they disclaim all the sin of the
King and his House, so they will not own him nor his Interest, any further than
he shall disclaim his and his Fathers opposition to the work of God, and the
enemies thereof; and that they would with convenient speed, consider of the
papers sent to them from Oliver Cromwell. To whom the English General returned
this answer, That the Army continued the same they had professed themselves to
the honest people of Scotland, wishing to them as to their own Souls, it being
no part of their business to hinder them in the worship of God according to
their own Consciences, as by his Word they ought: And that they should be ready
to perform what obligation lay upon them by the Covenant, but that under the
pretense of the Covenant mistaken, a King should be taken in by them, and
imposed on the English, and thus called. The cause of God and of the Kingdom,
and this done for the satisfaction of Gods people in both Nations, as alleged;
Together with a disowning of Malignants, although the head of them be received,
who at this very instant has a party fighting in Ireland, and Prince Rupert at
Sea upon a malignant account, the French and Irish Ships daily making
Depredations upon the English Coasts, and all by virtue of his Commissions, and
therefore the Army cannot believe, that whilst malignants were fighting and
plotting against them on the one side, and the Scots declaring for him on the
other, it should not be the espousing of a malignant Interest or Quarrel, but a
mere fighting on former grounds and principles. If the state of the Quarrel be
thus, and you resolve to fight the Army, you will have opportunity to do that,
else what means our abode here: And our hope is in the Lord.

Having thus stated the cause of the War in disputing with the pen, they next
resolve to try the force of steel, and fight it out, for the month of August
was near done, and little action performed, save the taking of Collington-house
and Red-hall by storm, and in it the Lord Hamilton, Major Hamilton, and sixty
Soldiers, sixty Barrels of powder, one hundred Arms, great store of Meal,
Malt, Beer, Wine, and other rich plunder. The body of the English Army removed
forthwith from Pencland-hills, till they came within a mile of the whole Army
of the Scots, and both marched in sight of each other, a great Bog between only
hindering their Engagement, though the Cannon played on both sides. Cromwell drew
forth a forlorn to charge them, leading them on in person, and coming near
their body, one that knew the General fired at him with a Carbine, but
timerously, which Cromwell observing, called out and told him, That if he had
been one of his Soldiers, he would have cashiered him for firing at such a
distance. This action of his was thought to have more of courage in it than
discretion; the Scots unwilling to engage, returned back to their Quarters.
Next day, Aug. 28. the great Guns from the English Camp played hard upon the
Scots, and greatly annoyed them, all which could not provoke them to fight, but
still kept within the protection of their Bog; the English being in some want
of provisions, marched to their old Quarters at Penclandhills, and from thence,
with much difficulty, to Muscleborough to recruit, and then drew off their
Forces, quitted their Garrisons, and marched to Hadington. The Scots attending
on their right wing, fell into their Quarters with a resolute party, and were
as valiantly repulsed by a Regiment of Foot, commanded by Colonel Fairfax.

Sept. 1. The Scots being advantagiously drawn up at the West End of the Town,
the English drew Eastward into a fair and Champion ground, fit for both Armies
to engage in, but after several hours expectation of the Scots approach,
finding they would not follow them, but only watched their advantage, they
marched toward Dunbar, the Scots moving apace after them, and at a pass
attempted (...) fall upon the Rear, which the English perceiving, faced about
to fight them, whereupon the Scots drew off to the Hills, to endeavor to
hinder the English at the pass at Copperspeth, which they accordingly effected,
and then boasted they had the English in Essex's pound, as King Charles the
First had that General at great disadvantage in Cornwall, in 1644. this pass
being a place where ten stout men may obstruct the passage of forty, thereby to
hinder them from any relief from Berwick, or perhaps to keep the English from
running away; so confident were they of victory, being lately reinforced with
three Regiments, and from the Hills that encompassed this sickly remnant,
looked down on them as their sure prey: And indeed, the English were environed
with all manner of apparent dangers, their Forces were lessened, their Bodies
weakened with Fluxes, their strength wasted with Watchings, in want of drink,
always troubled with wet and cold weather, and much impaired in point of
courage, two thousand at least, being disabled for present service, were sent
to Berwick. On the other side, the Scots were stout and hearty, in their own
Country, and upon advantageous ground, and double the English in number, they
being six thousand Horse, and sixteen thousand Foot, whereas the other were but
seven thousand five hundred Foot, and three thousand five hundred Horse.

General Cromwell, and his Council of Officers, finding the Army unfit for
further delays, resolved the next morning, Sept. 3. to force a passage through
the Scots right wing, or perish in the attempt, and being in Battalia by break
of day, they fell unanimously upon the enemy with Horse and Foot, who to hinder
the English at a pass, drew up all the Horse upon their right wing, and
valiantly received the Onset. The word of the English was, The Lord of Hosts;
that of the Scots, The Covenant. The English pressed forward vigorously, and
resolved to vanquish or dye. After one hours dispute, the Scots were wholly
routed, the Horse fled and left the Foot exposed to all dangers, who were most
of them slain or taken prisoners, the pursuit continuing eight miles from the
Field of Battle. Of the Scots were slain about three thousand, and ten thousand
taken prisoners, (many desperately wounded) among whom were ten Colonels,
twelve Lieutenant-Collonels, nine Majors, forty seven Captains, seventy two
Lieutenants, eighty Ensigns, besides Cornets and Quarter masters, with two
hundred Colors, twenty two Cannon, several Fieldpieces, and fifteen thousand
Arms. Those of Quality taken were the Lord Libberton and his Son, the Lord
Cromstown, Sir James Lansdale Lieutenant General of the Foot, and diverse
others; and the Purse to the Great Seal of Scotland. The prisoners were so
numerous, that it seemed troublesome to keep as to take them, so the General
discharged near five thousand most sick and wounded, the rest being about the
same number, were conveyed to Berwick by four Troops of Colonel Hackers Horse.
General Lesley escaped by flight to Edinburgh, by Ten a Clock that morning the
fight happened, and carried the news of his own defeat to his Masters, which so
daunted them, that Edenborough was presently deserted by its Garrison, and
Leith resolved to receive the Conquerors, because they could not keep them out.

Sept. 7. Four Regiments of Foot marched into Leith, where they found thirty
seven Guns mounted on Platforms, some Shot and Ammunition, with store of
Wealth. The same day Cromwell drew the rest of his Army, both Horse and Foot,
into Edinburgh, without any loss, save the Arm of a soldier taken off by a
Cannon bullet from the Castle. After which, the Lord General sent a Trumpeter
into the Castle, to invite the Ministers to come and preach in their Churches,
which they refusing, the English supplied their places. He then caused a
protection for Markets, and liberty of Trade in Edinburgh and Leith, to be
proclaimed by Drum and Trumpet, and marehed thence with his Army to Linlithgow,
leaving Colonel Overton with his Brigade behind, and came within a mi^e of
Sterling, from whence Cromwell sent a Letter to that Garrison, expressing the
Armies constant affection and tenderness to the people of Scotland, which
though hitherto ineffectual, yet being so far advanced into their country,
desired them to consider of it, and deliver up that place to the Commonwealth
of England. The Trumpeter that carried the Letter, was met by a Gentleman on
Foot, with a pike in his hand, who told him, They would not let him come into
the storm, nor receive his Letter. In the Afternoon came a Trumpeter from the
Scots, desiring release of prisoners; to which Cromwell answered, That they came
not thither to make Merchandise of men, or to make gain to themselves, but for
the service and security of the Commonwealth of England. The same day a storm
was designed upon Sterling, but it not being thought practicable, the Army
marched back to Linlithgow, which they fortified and made a Frontier Garrison,
being in the heart of the country, leaving there five Troops of Horse, and six
Companies of Foot, and Cromwell with the rest returned to Edinburgh, where the
General and Officers kept a Fast. The Kirk party also about this time,
appointed a solemn Fast, declaring the occasion of it to be, 1. To humble
themselves for their too much confidence in the arm of flesh. 2. For the
malignity and profaneness of their Army. 3. For the plundrings and wickedness of
their Army when they were in England. 4. For their not sufficient purging their
Army. 5. For their Commissioners unlawful and surreptitious manner of
prosecuting the Treaty with the King, and their crooked ways in bringing him
home. 6. For their not sufficient purging the Kings House. 7. For their just
grounds they have that the Kings Repentance was not sound, nor from the heart.

After this, Cromwell took order for the effectual reducing of the Castle of
Edinburgh, which the Scots accounted Impregnable by situation, and having a
Garrison of four hundred soldiers, and all manner of Ammunition and
Provisions, Colonel William Dundass being Governor: But the General,
notwithstanding all seeming difficulties, employed many Scotch and English
Miners, who went so near the Works of the Castle, that they carried off one
Scots Colors, three hundred Muskets, and other Arms, without any loss, though
the Scots sent many great and small shot among them, so that the fortifications
of Leith, and the Mining at Edinburgh, went on prosperously. October. 2. The
English searched the great Church at Edinburgh, where they found one great Iron
Gun, two hundred new Muskets, sixteen Barrels of powder, sixty five bundles of
Bandileers, and Swords, two hundred new Halberts, three hundred new Pikes, and
two load of Match.

And now let us consider the calamitous condition of Scotland, that when an
Enemy was in the very bowels of their country, there should be so many
divisions among themselves, even to the destroving of each other; for one party
in the North was for the King without the Kirk; these with Middleton keep the
Highlands. Another were for the Kirk against the King, whose chiefs were
Colonel Ker. Stranghan, and their Adherents in the West. At third party were
for King and Kirk, as David Lesley, Holbourn, and those of Fife; these were
then at Sterling, and most considerable, having the authority of the Committee
of Estates, and General Assembly, to countenance them. All these had their
Swords drawn against each other. Things being in this posture, Cromwell sends a
Letter both to the Committee of Estates, and to Ker and Stranghan^ declaring,
What amicable ways they had hitherto used to prevent the effusion of Christian
Blood, before and since their coming into Scotland, which though it succeeded
not, yet they should still endeavor the same; assuring them, their arms were
still stretched out to embrace them, when ever God should incline them to come
in, and that they sought not domination, nor to inslave them, or depress their
Church Government, nor sought their Goods or Estates, but to carry on the Lords
Work; and that if they would still be blinded, and persist in gainsaying and
opposing, then what further misery befell their Nation by Famine or Sword, would
lie heavy on them.

This Letter was sent by Colonel Whaley, who soon after received an answer
from Colonel Ker, wherein they inveigh severely against the proceedings of the
Army, and That no Cessation or Treaty was to be made till the English were gone
out of the Kingdom, which they had unjustly Invaded: So that there being no
likelihood of an accommodation, Major Brown with a party of Horse, took in a
strong place called Dalhouse, and in it fifty Muskets, fifty Pikes, four
Barrels of Powder, with store of provisions, supposed to be the Magazine of the
Moss Troopers (who killed diverse English straggling for provisions) some of whom
were taken at Darlington Castle, seven miles from Edinburgh. Soon after,
Lambert with two thousand Horse, marched toward Damfreize, Colonel Ker being
then about Pebles, and Whaley in his march toward the Enemy, took in Dalkeith
Castle with a threatening summons, wherein were store of Arms, Cannon, Powder,
March and Ball, the Wall of it was thirteen foot broad at the top: Lambert
having with difficulty passed Hambleton River, the next morning Ker resolved to
surprise him, and attempted it with much courage, but the English being timely
alarmed, suddenly surrounded most of the Scots Horse, of whom they killed one
hundred, and took one hundred, besides four hundred Horse and Furniture
deserted by their Riders, pursuing the rest to Air, Ker himself being taken
prisoner in the flight, with several other Officers. Colonel Stranghan, and
Captain Griffen, with some others of the Western party, came in to Lambert, who
brought them to the Head Quarters at Edinburgh.

Cromwell observing that the Mining of the Castle would be very tedious, he
raises a Mount upon a rising ground, whereon to plant a Battery,
notwithstanding the utmost endeavors of the besieged, and having mounted four
Mortar-pieces, and six Battering Cannon upon it, he sent one summons more to
the Governor, That for preventing further mischiefs, he would surrender the
place to him upon proper conditions. The Governor answered, That he was
entrusted by the Committee of Estates of Scotland to keep the Castle, and
desired two days time to acquaint them with his condition; but this was denied.
Whereupon the Cannon and Mortars began to play, and the Scots hung out a Flag
of defiance in contempt of them, but they had not played long e're they took it
in, so that it was judged some great damage was done by four or five shells
that fell among them, and presently put out a white Flag on the top of the
Castle, sending forth a Drummer, the Governor desiring once again That he
might have leave to send to the Committee of Estates, which being again
refused, two Commissioners of each side concluded a Treaty, whereby it was
agreed, That the Castle of Edinburgh should be surrendered to his Excellency the
Lord General Cromwell, on December 24. 1650. with all the Cannon, Arms, Magazine
and Furniture of War thereto belonging: That the Governor, with all the
Officers and Soldiers, should then march forth with their Arms, Colors
flying, Drums beating, Matches lighted, and Bullet in mouth, to such place as
they shall choose; that such Inhabitants as have any Goods in the Castle, shall
have them restored.

There were taken in this strong Castle five French Cannon, five Dutch half
Cannon, two Culverings, two Demi-culverings, two Minions, two Falcons, twenty
eight brass Drakes, two Petards, seven thousand Arms, eighty Barrels of Powder,
store of Canson sh^t, and other provisions proportionable. It was much admired
that this strong Hold, the most Impregnable in all Scotland, should be so soon
surrendered, considering its situation and advantages being built upon a very
high Rock or Precipice, having only one entrance, and that very steep and
narrow, so that not above three can go abrest, overlooking and commanding all
places about it, insomuch that by the Cannon the English were often galled in
their Quarters, though at a considerable distance. It was the common discourse
at that time, that it was assaulted with silver Engines, but whether
Coverousness, Cowardice or Treachery, were the cause, it was of very great
consequence and advantage to Cromwell, and the further proceedings to his Army.

The sharpness of the Winter, in that Northern Climate, was so extreme about
this time, that the War seemed almost at a stand, and the Scots were employed
in Crowning the King, who had been some time before at St. Johnstons, where he
received the news of the loss of the Scots at Dunbar, and of the death of his
Sister the Princess Elizabeth, who died about the same time at Carisbrook
Castle in the Isse of Wight. The Town of Scoon was appointed for his
Coronation, where one hundred and fi^ty Kings of that Nation had been Crowned
before; thither therefore, Jan. 1. 1651. the King with the Nobility, Barons and
Burgesses, in their Robes removed, the whole Scotch Army standing all the way
as a Guard from St. Johnstons thither, having heard the Sermon preached by Mr.
Robert Douglas, fitting upon a Scaffold erected in the Church, he took the
ordinary Coronation Oath, and subscribed the National Covenant, and likewise
the solemn League and Covenant: After which he ascended upon a Stage a little
higher, and sat down on the Throne, when the people being demanded four times,
by the King at Arms, Whether they were willing to accept of King Charles for
their King, and become subject to his Commandments: They expressed their
consent with loud acclamations, God five King Charles the second. Then the
Crown was set upon his head by the Marquess of Argyle, and the Nobility
touching it with their right hands, swore Allegiance to him in these words, By
the eternal and almighty God, who lives and reigns for ever, I shall support
thee to the uttermost. The people also holding up their hands, swore obedience
according to the usual Oath. Then the King and Nobility departed in the same
pomp as they entered, and after a stately Dinner returned to St. Johnstons.

This being over, the Scots consulted how to raise such an Army as might drive
the English out of Scotland; to which parpose, after they had Excommunicated
Colonel Stranghan, Smeton, and others, who came into the English, they gave
out Commissions for raising more Forces, and many new commanders were made,
Midleton being Lieutenant General of the Horse. Soon after which, David Lestey
their Lieutenant General, with a party of eight hundred Horse, made an attempt
upon Lithgow, where was Colonel Sanderson with a Regiment of Horse, who
received them so warmly, that the Scors retreated without entering the Town.
Cromwell about this time being willing to gain all those Garrisons on the South
side of the Frith, he ordered Colonel Fenwick, with two Regiments of Horse and
Foot, to endeavor to reduce Hume Castle, who coming before it, sent in this
summons to Cockburne the Governor:

Sir, His excellency the Lord General Cromwell, has commanded me to reduce,
this castle you now possess, under his Obedience, which if you now deliver into
his hands, you shall have fit terms for your self and those with you, and ease
the adjacent parts of a great charge; if you refuse, I doubt not in a short
time, by the Lords assistance, to obtain what now I demand. I expect your
answer by seven of the Clock to morrow morning. Your Servant George Fenwick.

To the Governor of Hume Castle.

To whom the Governor returns the following concesited Answer:

Right Honorable, I have received a Trumpeter of yours, as he tells me,
without the pass, to render Hume-castle to the Lord General Cromwell, please you
I never saw your General, nor know your General; as for Hume-castle it stands
upon a Rock. Given at Hume-castle this day, before seven a Clock. So rests,
without prejudice, to my Native Country, Your most humble Servant, Thomas
Cockburne.

For the Governor of Berwick.

After which, to show his confidence in the strength of the place, he sent
Colonel Fenwick the following Verses:

'I William of the Wastle,
'Am now in my Castle,
'And awe the Dogs in the Town,
'Shan't gar me gang down.
But notwithstanding this resolute and quibbling answer, when the English with
their Culverin and Mortar-piece had made a small breach, the besieged bear a
parley, and having formerly refused the conditions offered, were compelled now
to surrender upon mercy, and the Governor and Garrison consisting in seventy
eight Officers and Soldiers, gang'd out of the Castle. After which, colonel
Monk with three Regiments of Horse and Foot, laid Siege to Timptallon castle,
which had much molested the country with their excursions, against which they
played their Mortar-pieces forty eight hours together without success: They then
battered the castle with six large cannon, which did such notable execution,
that the Scors desired a Truce, and terms to march away, but none would be
granted, save to have their lives saved, which was at last accepted; and the
castle yielded, with all the Guns, Arms, Ammunition and Provision therein; the
taking this castle was of great concern to the English, the passage from
Edinburgh to Berwick being now almost clear. But notwithstanding all the care
that was used, the English were daily surprised and killed in small straggling
parties, which occasioned General Cromwell to publish the following Proclamation:

Finding that diverse under my command are not only daily spoiled and robbed,
but also sometimes barbarously and inhumanely stain, by a sort of Outlaws and
Robbers, not under the discipline of any Army; and finding that all our
tenderness to the country produces no better effect than their compliance
with, and protection of such persons, and considering that it is in the power
of the country to detect and discover them, many of them being Inhabitants of
those places where commonly the Outrage is committed, and perceiving that their
motion is ordinarily by the invitation, and according to the intelligence given
them by Countrymen, I do therefore declare, That wheresoever any under my
command, shall be hereafter robbed or spoiled by such parties, I will require
life for life, and a plenary satisfaction for their goods, of those Parishes
and places where the Fact shall be committed, unless they discover and produce
the Offender: And this I wish all persons to take notice of, that none may
plead Ignorance. Given under my hand at Edinburgh, Nov. 5. 1650. O. Cromwell.


In pursuance hereof, several sums of money were levied, upon such Parishes
where any Robberies and Murders were committed, and all abettors and assisters
were condemned and executed. General Cromwell with his Army, after this, marched
from Edenbargh, and often attempted to pass over into Fife, but the season and
difficult passage not permitting it, they retire to their Winter Quarters, and
received all manner of provisions from the English fleet newly arrived at
Leith, which was a great encouragement to the soldiers, in the midst of the
hardships and diseases to which they were exposed, and of which the General had
a great share, by many violent fits of the contagious distemper of that
country, which brought him to the very brink of the Grave, so that it was
reported he was dead, to the great joy of the Scots, who were so pleased with
the news, that they would hardly suffer themselves to be better informed: for a
Scotch Trumpeter coming out of Fife to Edinburgh, to treat about restoring a
ship which the English had taken near Burnt Island; after he had delivered his
message, he confidently told the soldiers their General was dead, and that
they did well in concealing it, but he would never believe otherwise, nor could
he be convinced, till the General ordered him to be brought into his presence,
who was now somewhat recovered, so that upon his return this false rumor
vanished. But the Parliament of England hearing that he had a relapse
afterward, and a violent Ague, they sent him two eminent Physicians, Dr. Wright
and Dr. Bates, to use their utmost Art for his re^overy, with an Order that
gave him liberty to repair into England for recovering his health: To which he
made a return of Thanks, by a Letter to the Lord President, in which among
others, are these unusual expressions: My Lord, my sickness was indeed so
violent, that my Nature was not able to bear the weight thereof, but the Lord
was pleased to deliver me beyond expectations, and to give me cause to say once
more, He has plucked me out of the Grave. So that now, by the goodness of God,
I find my self growing to such a stare of health and strength, as may yet, if
it be his good will, render me useful, according to my poor ability, in the
station wherein he has set me. I wish more steadiness in your affairs here,
than to depend, in the least, upon so frail a thing as I am; indeed they do
not, nor do they own any Instrument; this Cause is of God, and it must prosper.
Oh, that all that have any hand therein, being so persuaded, would gird up the
loins of their minds, and endeavor in all things to walk worthy of the Lord.
So prays, my Lord, Your most humble Servant, O. Cromwell.
Edinburgh, June 3.



At this time Ambassadors came to the Parliament of England, from Spain,
Portugal, and Holland; the first was reminded of delaying execution on the
Assassinates of the English Resident at Madrid: The second, not having full
power to give satisfaction for the expenses of the state and loss of the
Merchants Goods, by means of that King, was quickly dismissed. The Hollander
kept at a distance, rather wishing prosperity to the Royal party, than heartily
desiring peace with the Commonwealth of England: Soon after, Oliver St. John,
and Walter Strickland, were sent Ambassadors Extraordinary to the States, and
were received with great splendour, and having audience of the States General at
the Hague, the Lord Ambassador St. John made a learned and elegant speech,
declaring, That they were sent over to the High and Mighty States of the
Netherlands, from the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to make a firm
League and Confederacy between the two Republics, if they think fit,
notwithstanding the many injuries the English have received from the Dutch
Nation, Likewise to renew and confirm the former Treaties and Agreements of
Trade and Commerce, made between the two Nations, wherein he showed them the
notable advantages of England, in respect of its commodious situation for
advancement of Trade, and all other benefits. Lastly, That he was commanded to
let them know how highly the Parliament resented the murder of Dr. Dorislaus
their Agent, not doubting but they would do their utmost to discover the
Authors thereof. After which, the Ambassadors Gentlemen receiving several
affronts from the Royal party there, the States published a Proclamation to
prevent it; yet these abuses continued, and no punishment being inflicted on
any, though the common people often swarmed about the Ambassadors Gates, and
assaulted their Servants; and the States evading any Treaty till they saw how
matters would succeed in Scotland, the Parliament highly resenting these
proceedings, suddenly recalled their Ambassadors, to the great surprise of the
States: Who thereupon endeavored; by frequent visits to them, to insinuate
their amicable Intentions, but the Ambassadors returned to England. And that
which gave some jealousy to the Parliament of their designs, was, Because
Admiral Van Trump, with a Fleet of Ships, lay hovering upon the Coasts of
Scilly, as though he would attempt something against it, and the occasion of it
being demanded of the States, they replied, They had no other intent but to
demand the restitution of such Ships and Goods as the Pirates thereof had taken
from their people. With which answer the Parliament were somewhat satisfied,
yet to prevent the worst, April 18. 1651. Sir George Ayscough, with a Squadron
of ships, designed for reducing the Caribbee-Islands, was sent thither, and
landed three hundred Seamen besides soldiers, and soon became masters of the
Islands Tresco and Briers, taking therein one hundred and fifty prisoners, and
killing twenty. They took also two Frigates of thirty two and eighteen Guns,
and secured the best Harbor belonging to those Islands. Hence the Enemy fled
to St. Mary's, their chief strength, which yet was soon surrendered.
Cornet-castle, in the Isle of Guernsey, was at this time attempted, but through
misinformation of the weakness of the place, the design miscarried, with the
loss of many Officers and soldiers. About this time Brown Bushel, a very
earnest stickler for the Royal party, both by Sea and Land, and who when in the
service of the Parliament had delivered up Scarborough to the King, was taken
and beheaded at Tower Hill.

The Parliament of Scotland having adjourned during the Coronation of the King,
met again in March, and some differences arose about restoring several Lords of
the Royal party to their seats in the House, which yet the Assembly would not
admit of, till they had passed the stool of Repentance, which Duke Hamilton did
with some kind of splendour, having a Table placed before him with a black
Velvet cover, and a Cushion of the same, and making a great Feast that day. The
King having now got some power, endeavored to regain reputation among his
subjects, by putting all the Garrisons of Fife into a posture of defense,
against the landing of the English, drawing what Forces he could spare, both
Horse and Foot, from Sterling, and joining them with the new Leavies, which for
better security he Quartered on the Water side, and then goes to the Highlands
to compose all differences there, and to incite them to rise and join with him;
from whence Midleten soon after brought a considerable body of Horse and Foot,
and the Town of Dundee raised a Regiment of Horse at their own charge, and sent
them with a stately Tent, and six fine brass cannon, for a present to the King
then at Sterling, whose Army now consisted in six thousand Horse, and fifteen
thousand foot, but the Earl of Eglington being sent to the West, with some
other commanders, to raise more forces, coming to Dunbarton, Colonel Lilburn,
upon notice, sent a party of Horse, who suddenly seized the Earl, his Son
Colonel James Montgomery, Lieutenant Colonel Colborn, and some others, whom
they carried prisoners to Edinburgh.

At the same time a design was discovered, the English Covenanters intending a
general rising in Lancashire to join with the Scots, the chief Agent herein
being Thomas Cook of Gray's Inn, Esquire who was taken and committed. After this, a
ship bound from the North of Scotland to the Isle of Man, being by Tempest
driven into Air, was searched, and many papers seized that gave light into the
business. And a party of Horse and Dragoons marching to Grenoch, seized Mr
Birkenhead, another Agent for the Royal designs, about whom they found such
Letters, Commissions and Instructions, as the whole Intrigue was discovered;
upon which Major General Harrison was sent with a Detachment of Horse and Foot
to Carlisle, to prevent Insurrection, or oppose the Inroads of the Scots. At
London several were taken up, viz. Mr. Christopher Love, Major Alford, Major
Adams, Colonel Barron, Mr. Blackmore, Mr. Case, Mr Cawton, Dr. Drake, Mr.
Drake, Captain Far, Mr. Giobons, Mr. Haviland, Major Huntington, Mr. Jenkyns,
Mr. Jequel, Mr. Jackson, Lieutenant Colonel Jackson, Captain Mussey, Mr.
Walten, Captain Potter, Mr. Robinson, Mr. Sterks, Colonel Sowton, Colonel
Vaughan, and others; of all whom, only Mr. Love and Mr. Gibbons suffered, being
both beheaded on Tower Hill, Aug. 22. 1651. The rest (among whom were seven or
eight Ministers of London) upon their humble petitions and acknowledgments,
were released and pardoned. There happened about this time an Insurrection of
two or three hundred in Wales, who declared for King Charles, upon a report
that the English Army, under Cromwell, was defeated in Scotland, but they were
soon suppressed.

Colonel Monk was now sent by Cromwell to set down before Blackness, which had
sheltred some that had much annoyed their Quarters: After the Batteries were
made, and some shot spent, they required Quarter, which was given, and the
place surrendered. Yet the Scots grew very formidable, and made many Infals upon
the out Quarters and Garrisons of the English, with much success, by having the
advantage of knowing the country, so that several were slain; whereupon, Orders
were given for contracting their Quarters, by slighting the remote Garrisons,
and the Army was put into a marching posture for Fife, Blackness being made
their Magazine; Captain Butler at the same time arriving in the Success Frigate
at Leith, with eighty thousand pounds for paying the soldiers, which being
distributed among them, infused fresh courage into their hearts.

June 24. The Army being ready for a Campaign, General Cromwell ordered them to
march to Redhall, and thence to Peneland-hills, where they Encamped, and the
General in his Tent treated the Lady Lambert, General Deans, and other English
Ladies and Gentlewomen, who came from Leith to view the Camp, and then returned
again. The Army hearing the Scots were at Falkirk, marched to Lithgow, from
whence they might see the Tents of the Scotch Army at Torwood, four miles on
this side Sterling, and hoped to come to a Battle; but the King having drawn
his foot into Torwood, fortified his camp, which with the River and Bogs,
prevented any assault, though Cromwell marched in sight of them, and stood from
twelve to eight at Night, expecting the Scots approach; but they only played on
the English with their cannon at a distance, so that the Army drew off to
Glasgow, and from thence to Hamilton, but not being able to engage them, he
attacked Kalender-house, where part of their forces were, which denying to
yield upon fummons, the soldiers with Faggors passed over the Mote, and in
half an hour possessed the house, putting the Governor and sixty two soldiers
to the sword, and this in sight of the whole Scotch Army, who did not once stir
to relieve their friends.

Cromwell finding the Scots would protract the War, resolves once more to
attempt the taking of Fife, whereby to prevent them from having any further
supplies: Whereupon, there were drawn out sixteen hundred foot, and four Troops
of Horse, who under the command of Colonel Overton were designed for this
service, and being embarked in the twenty seven flat bottomed boats sent from
England for this purpose, early in the morning they attempted to land at
Queens-ferry, which with the loss of six men was effected, and presently fell
to entrench themselves. While this was doing, Cromwell, with his Army, marched
up close to the Scots, that if they had gone toward Fife, he might have engaged
them before they could have reached Sterling. The Scots receiving the alarm the
same day, sent four thousand horse and foot under Sir John Brown, to force the
English out of Fife; upon which, Cromwell sent Lambert with two Regiments of
Horse, and two of Foot, to reinforce the other party, who in twenty four hours
were ferried over and joined. Whereupon, colonel Okey with his Regiment fell
in among the Scots, whereby they were forced to draw up in Battalia, and so did
the English, who were superior in number, but had the disadvantage of ground.
In this posture they continued, facing each other, about an hour and half, when
the English resolved to attack the Scots by ascending an Hill, and thereupon
Lamberts right wing falling furiously upon the Scots left, they endured the
shock with much resolution, after a while the whole body engaging, in a very
short time the Scots were utterly routed, two thousand being slain, and
fourteen hundred taken prisoners, with their commander Sir John Brown, Colonel
Buchan, and many others of Quality. Of the English, few were killed, but many
wounded. After which, other Detachments were sent over to Fife, so as to enable
them upon occasion, to engage the whole Scots Army. Immediately after the
strong Castle of Innesgarrey, situate on a Rock, in the midst of the Fryth,
between Queens-ferry and North-ferry, was surrendered to the English, the
Garrison being so terrified, that they were content to march out only with
their swords by their sides, to show what profession they were of, leaving
behind all their Ammunition and Provisions, with sixteen pieces of cannon.

July 27. The whole English Army appeared before Burnt-Island, and the General
sent a summons for the rendition thereof; to which the Governor returned a
modest answer, and the next day desired a parley: Commissions on both sides
were chosen, and after some debates it was agreed, That all the Provisions,
Guns, and Shipping of War, should be delivered to the English, etc. and all the
Officers and Soldiers to march out with Drums beating, etc. Thence they
marched instantly to St. Johnstons, a place of great strength and importance,
into which the King had lately put a Regiment of foot, and therefore they made
some difficulty at first to surrender, but finding that Cromwell had ordered the
draining of the Moat round about the Town, the courage of the Scots failed them
so, that they soon delivered it up.

The King finding his affairs in Scotland grow very desperate, he mustered his
Forces, and finding them to be about sixteen thousand Horse and Foot, with
these, and hopes of further supplies from his friends, he resolves to return
for England it self, and accordingly the Scotch Army began their march from
Sterling, July 31. 1651. and the sixth day after entered England by the way of
Carlisle; which news coming to London, very much startled the Parliament, and
Cromwell was a little surprised thereat, who by staying to reduce St. Johnstons,
had suffered the Kings Arm^ to get three days march before him, which he
excuses in a Letter to the Parliament, and shows, That the Army acted to the
best of their Judgments. Cromwell presently orders Lambert to march in the Rear
of the Scots, with a party of three thousand Horse and Dragoans; Harrison was
likewise commanded to attack them, if possible, in the Van, and the General
himself followed with about sixteen Regiments of Horse and Foot, leaving the
prosecution of the War in Scotland to Lieutenant General Monk, with seven
thousand Horse and Foot, who presently took in the Town and Castle of Sterling,
with Aberdeen, Abernethy, Dundee, Dimottercastle, Dunbarton-castle, and several
others, so that all Scotland was subdued to the Republic of England.

The King marched forward with his Army, being proclaimed in all Towns as he
went along, and published a Declaration, with a promise of pardon to all
persons, for all crimes, except Cromwell, Bradshaw, and Cook. A copy of the same
Declaration was sent by the King, in a Letter to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
London, but was by Order of parliament burnt by the Hangman at the Royal
Exchange. And a day or two after, at a muster of the City Trained Bands at
Bunhil-fields, consisting of fourteen thousand men, Lenthal, the Speaker of the
House, came thither, and caused a fellow, with a Link, to burn a copy of the
Declaration at the head of every Regiment. On the other side, the Parliament
pass an Act to make it High Treason to correspond with, or assist Charles
Stewart, with any relief whatsoever. At length, after many halts and
skirmishes, long and tedious marches, of three hundred miles in three Weeks,
the Scots entered into Worcester, Aug. 23. 1651. from whence the King sent his
Letters Mandatory to Sir Tho. Midleton, and Coll. Mackworth, Governors of
Shrewsbury, to raise Forces for him, but without success. In the mean time, the
Parliament raised the Militia of the Counties, and Cromwell and the rest of
their Army coming up together, they surrounded them on every side with their
numerous Host, it being never known before in England, that so great Forces
should be assembled in so short a time, which in the whole were judged to be
above fifty thousand, and the Scots in Worcester no more than thirteen
thousand. The Earl of Derby, about this time, being landed, as was expected, at
Wyewater in Lancashire, with about three hundred Gentlemen and others,
endeavored to raise the Country, while the English were busied at Worcester,
and in a little time they increased to fifteen hundred. Colonel Lilburn was
sent thither to observe his motions, and Cromwels Regiment of foot being at
Manchester, was appointed to join him at Preston. To prevent which, the Earl
marched toward Manchester, whereupon Lilburn endeavored to flank them in their
march, so to join the foot; which the Earl perceiving, pressed to engage, and
Lilburn being over-match'd in foot, the dispute proved tedious and difficult,
yet in an hour the Earl was totally routed, and many persons of Quality taken,
and five hundred common soldiers, with all their baggage, arms and ammunition,
the Earl of Derbys George, Garter, and other Robes with the badges of the
Order, but he himself escaped, and recovered Worcester. There were slain the
Lord Widdrington, Sir Tho. Tildesley, Colonel Matthew Boynton, and other
inferior Officers, with about sixty private soldiers. Of the parliaments
party, ten were slain, but many wounded.

Cromwell having disposed the whole Army round about Worcester, in order to a
Siege, the first remarkable attempt was possessing a pass upon the Severne, at
a place called Upton, which was done by a party led by Lambert and Fleetwood,
who marched toward the River Teame, over which was made a bridge of boats, and
another over Severn, on the Generals side, upon which the Kings party took the
alarm, and drew our Horse and Foot to oppose the Lieutenant Generals passage,
to whose relief Colonel Ingolsbys, and Fairfaxes Regiment of foot, the
Generals Lifeguard, and Hackers Regiment of Horse, were all led on by Cromwell
himself: Then Colonel Goffe and Deans Regiments fell to scowring the Hedges,
which the Kings party had lined, and beat them from Hedge to Hedge, so that
being seconded by a fresh supply, they were forced to retreat to Powick-bridge,
where three Regiments of Scots more maintained another hot dispute, but at
length all retired into Worcester, except some that were taken. After which,
the Royalists renewing their courage, drew out what Horse and Foot they could
on Cromwels side, the King leading them on, they imagining most of his Army had
been on the other side, so that by this bold and resolute salley, Cromwels men
were forced a little to retire, but after a fight of four hours, wherein the
King had his Horse twice shot under him, the Works and Fort-Royal were taken,
and their cannon turned upon themselves, and the English entered the Town; upon
which, many of the foot threw down their arms, which the King perceiving, rode
up and down among them, sometimes with his Hat in his hand, entreating them to
stand to their Arms, adding, I had rather you would shoot me than keep me
alive, to see the sad consequences of this fatal day. But all proving
ineffectual, the Earl of Cleveland, and some others, rallying some Forces, put
a small check to the Victors, whereby the King had the opportunity to make his
escape out of the Town, which he did about seven a clock at Night in the dark,
with sixty Horse, out of St. Martinsgate.

The whole Army now entering the City, the soldiers furiously fly through all
the streets, doing such execution, that nothing could be seen for some time but
blood and slaughter, till at last the plunder of the Town, and the prisoners,
having a little satisfied their appetites, they think of securing the rest.
Most of the Scots Foot were slain or taken, but three thousand Horse made their
escape. The number of the slain and prisoners was about ten thousand. Those of
Quality taken were Duke Hamilton, the Earls of Lauderdale, Rothes, Carnworth,
Shrewsbury, Cleveland, Derby and Kelby, and several other Lords and Gentlemen;
six Colonels of Horse, thirteen of Foot; nine Lieutenant Colonels of horse,
eight of foot; six Majors of horse, thirteen of foot; thirty seven Captains of
Horse, seventy two of foot; fifty five Quarter Masters of Horse, eighty nine
Lieutenants of foot; seventy six Cornets of horse, ninety nine Ensigns of foot;
thirty of the Kings servants, nine Ministers, nine Surgeons; one hundred fifty
eight Colors, the Kings Standard, Coach and Horses, with other rich plunder,
and his Collar of SS. Many parties were taken in Warwickshire, Shropshire, etc.
so that few of that great body but were killed or taken. M. General Massey
being wounded surrendered himself, and after made his escape. M. General
Midleton, Lieutenant General Lesley, were taken in another place; and soon
after most of the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland were taken at a place called
Ellet in that Kingdom, where they were assembled to propagate the Royal cause,
namely, Old General Lesley, Earl Marshal, Earl of Crawford, the Lords Keith,
Ogilby, Burgoiny, Huntley, Ley, with many Knights, Gentlemen and Ministers,
which soon after were shipped and sent for England.

Such was the sudden change of the condition of the Scots and the King, that he
who a few days before was proclaimed King of Great Britain, had now neither
Camp nor Garrison to retire to, five hundred pounds sterling being offered to
discover him; so that after traveling in disguise, and through many dangers
about England, he at length found an opportunity to imbark at Shoreham in
Sussex, for Newhaven in France, where he arrived October. 2. following. Of the
great number of prisoners taken, none of Quality suffered but the Earl of
Derby, who was beheaded at Bolton in Lancashire, and Sir Tim. Fetherstone:
Others of less note suffered at Chester, Shrewsbury, and other places. Nor did
many of the Royalists themselves expect any better fortune in this expedition
than what happened, as appears by Duke Hamiltons Letter to Sir William Crofts,
taken among other papers a few days before the fight, to this purpose: We are
all laughing at the ridiculousness of our condition, who having quit Scotland
being scarce able to maintain it, yet we grasp at all, and nothing but all will
satisfy us, or to lose all. I confess I cannot tell, whether our hopes or
fears are greatest, but we have one stout argument, and that is despair, for we
must now either shortly fight or dye. All the Rogues have left us, I will not
say whether for fear or disloyalty, but all now with His Majesty, are such as
will not dispute his commands. So that we see this undertaking was not the
product of deliberate counsel, but of necessity and desperation.

This battle put a period to the Kings hopes of getting the Government by Arms,
and on the other hand, secured to Cromwell all his former Conquests; the
influence whereof, though acted in England, was great in Scotland, for their
principal Nobility and soldiery being cut off, they were no longer able to
bear up, but were soon reduced to the obedience of England. And Cromwell giving
an account to the Parliament of this great success, he concludes his Letter by
telling them, That this was a crowning Victory, which was afterward thought to
proceed from the foresight of his future Greatness. This fight happened Sept.
3. 1651. that very day twelvemonth wherein the Scots received that fatal blow
at Dunbar aforementioned. After the battle, Cromwell stand no longer than to
see the Walls of Worcester levelled to the ground, and the Ditches filled up
with earth, to discover his aversion to the Inhabitants for receiving his
Enemies into it, and Sept. 12. came to London, being met at Acton by the
Parliament and their Speaker, the Lord Mayor of London, Aldermen and Recorder,
and hundreds of others; to whom Steel the City Recorder made a Congratulatory
Oration, extolling all his Victories and Exploits with the highest flights of
Rhetoric, and applying to him the words of Psalm 149, Let the high praises of
God be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hand, to execute
vengeance upon the Heathen, and punishments upon the people, to bind their
Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of iron, to execute upon them
the judgment written; this honor have all the Saints, praise ye the Lord.
After which, he was conducted in triumph to his House near White Hall, great
number of Scotch prisoners coming after him, through Tuthill-fields to
Westminster, as Trophies of his Victories, and the Colors taken there, with
those at Dunbar, Westminster, Preston, were hung up in Westminster Hall. After
a short repose, General Cromwell, and Lieutenant General Lambert, went to take
their places in Parliament, where they were entertained by the Speaker with a
second Congratulatory Oration, magnifying their courage and gallantry, and
acknowledging the great obligation which the people of England were under
toward them. The same day the Lord Mayor feasted the General and his Officers,
where mutual returns of kindness passed between them, to the satisfaction of
both parties.

Oct. 14. 1651. Colonel Hayn with two Regiments of foot, and two Troops of
Horse, were shipped at Weymouth for reducing the Isle of Jersey, in eighty
Vessels, under the command of General Blake, who came to St. Owens Bay, where
the ships running aground, the men leapt out, some to the middle, others up to
the neck in water, and ran ashore, the enemy playing hard upon them with great
and small shot, and gave a hot charge with their Horse; yet after half an hours
dispute they fled, and left behind them twelve cannon and some colors. After
which, the English marched further into the Island, within sight of Elizabeth
Castle, under which was a Fort called St. Albans Tower, where were fourteen
Guns, which upon summons was delivered, and so was Orgueil castle, and soon
after Elizabeth castle, upon very good terms to the Garrison, and Governor Sir
George Cartaret, because of its great strength. The Isle of Man was likewise
reduced in a short time, with the castles of Peele and Rushen, both very
strong, and almost impregnable (as well as Cornet castle in the Isle of
Guernsey) if the besieged had had resolution to defend them. About this time
died Admiral Popham, and Henry Ireton, Son-in-law to Oliver Cromwell, at
Lymerick, which Kingdom in a little while after was wholly subdued, and brought
under the obedience of the Government of England.

The Parliament now passed two or three considerable Acts, one for
Incorporating Scotland into one Commonwealth with England; another of Oblivion
and free pardon; a third to determine the Session of this Parliament on Nov. 3.
1654. a fourth for the increase of shipping, and encouragement of Navigation,
wherein was enacted, That no Goods or Commodities of the growth or manufacture
of any places, in Asia, Africa, America, or Europe, should be imported into
England, Ireland, or any of the Territories thereof, but only in English ships,
under the penalty of forfeiting the Goods and Ships: And that no Goods
whatsoever shall be brought in, unless they be shipped from the places of their
growth and manufacture only. Also that no Fish, or Oil made of Fish or
Whale-bone, shall be imported, but only such as shall be caught in Vessels
belonging to the English. Lastly, that no kinds of salted fish, from Feb. 1.
1653. shall be exported in any other save English Vessels, with several other
exceptions and provisoes, in reference to East India Goods, and of commodities
from Turkey, Spain and Portugal.

This last Act was very grateful to the Merchants and Seamen, but did extremely
surprise and disturb the Holl inders, as judging it would cause a vast
diminution in their Trade, which with so much advantage they had long driven,
to the loss and detriment of the English Nation; who thereupon sent Ambassadors
to desire it might be repealed, but not succeeding herein, they began to
dispute our ancient right of the Flag in the British Seas, by refusing to
strike sail to our Men of War, which occasioned a breach between the two
Republics, for in May 1652. Admiral Trump, with about forty two sail of Dutch
ships, was discovered on the back of the Goodwin Sands, bearing toward Dover
Road: Major Brown being near with a squadron of English ships, sent the
Greyhound frigate to speak with them, to whom they struck their Topsail,
saying, They came with a message from Admiral Trump, to our commander in chief,
and coming aboard, said, That the great North winds had forced them farther
South than they intended, being compelled to ride some days off Dunkirk, where
they had lost diverse Anchors and Cables, professing they intended no injury to
the English Nation. General Blake, who was Westward with the rest of the
English Fleet, having speedy advice of this passage, hastened toward them, and
next morning, May 19. saw them at Anchor in Dover Road, and being within three
Leagues of them, they stood Eastward, and received an Express from the States,
upon which they bore directly up to our Fleet, Van Trump being headmost;
whereupon, Blake shot three Guns without Ball at his Flag, and Trump answered
with a Gun on the averse side of the ship, signifying a disdain, and instead of
striking his Topsail, hung out a red flag, which was the signal for his whole
fleet, and gave General Blake a broadside. The fight continued four hours, till
Night parted them, in which one Dutch ship was funk, and another of thirty Guns
taken, with the Captains of both, and about one hundred and fifty prisoners. Of
the English about ten were slain, and forty wounded; the English Admiral was
much damaged in her Masts, Sails, Rigging, and Hull, but the rest of the Fleet
had inconsiderable loss.

This attempt of the Hollanders, while we were upon Treaty, so incensed the
Parliament, that all the Addresses and Overtures of their Ambassadors, and the
sending hither two more, could not appease them; yea, though they by several
papers endeavored to excuse it, alleging, That the unhappy fight between the
ships of both Commonwealths, happened without the knowledge, and against the
wills of the States, taking God the searcher of men's hearts to witness the
same, and that with grief and astonishment they received the fatal News of that
unhappy rash action, and thereupon consulted about a remedy to this raw and
bloody wound, by appointing a solemn meeting of all the Provinces, whereby they
doubted not (by Gods favor) to remove not only the outward, but inward cause
of all further differences, for the benefit of both Nations, and to avoid the
detestable shedding of Christian blood, so much desired by their Enemies, and
therefore beseech the Council of State, by the pledges of common Religion and
Liberty, to do nothing out of heat, which afterward with vain wishes can never
be recalled; which they desire the more because their ships of War and
Merchandise are detained in the English Ports.

To this the Parliament replied, That calling to mind the demonstrations of
friendship and good correspondence, which they have always discovered toward
the States General, during all the troubles in England, they are much surprised
at such unsuitable returns, especially at the acts of Hostility, lately
committed in the very Roads of England, upon the ships of this Commonwealth;
and though they would willingly believe that the late Enga^ements of the Fleets
happened without their knowledge or consent, yet when they consider how
disagreeable the actions of that State, and their Officers at Sea have been, in
the midst of a Treaty offered by themselves, and managed here by their
Ambassadors, and the extraordinary preparation of one hundred and fifty ships,
without any visible occasion, and the Instructions given by the States to their
commanders at Sea, they have too much cause to believe that the Stares General
design, by force, to Usurp the known Right of England in the Seas, to destroy
the Fleers that are (under God) their Walls and Bulwarks, and thereby expose
the Nation to be Invaded at pleasure, as by their late action they have
attempted to do: Therefore the Parliament think themselves obliged to endeavor
(by Gods assistance) to seek reparations for the wrongs already suffered, and
security against any such attempts for the future, yet still desining that all
differences, if possible, may be peaceably and amicably composed.

This answer quite broke off the Treat^, and the Ambassadors having had
audience of the Parliament, took their leaves and departed.

And now these mighty States prepare to engage each other, and accordingly
General Blake, with a gallant Fleet, advanced North toward the Isles of
Orkney, to seize all Vessels that were fishing there, who took twelve Dutch Men
of War that were guarding the Busses, but discharged most of the Busses; and
Sir George Ayscough with his squadron, being left to guard the narrow Seas,
discovered about thirty Dutch ships between Dover and Calice, of which ten were
taken and burnt, the rest run ashore on the Coasts of France. Many other Dutch
and French Prizes were daily taken. Thence Sir George Ayscough sailed West, to
seek out the Dutch Fleer, and Convoy home some Merchaur-men from Plymouth; and
being within seven or eight Leagues of Plymouth, he had advice of them,
whereupon he resolved to stand over to the Coast of France, and next day, Aug.
16. 1652. had sight of them, being about sixty sail of Men of War, and thirty
Merchant men; the English were but thirty eight fail, four Fireships, and four
Advice-ships, yet they resolved to engage the Enemy: Sir George Ayscough and
six other Frigates, charged through the whole Dutch Fleet, receiving much
damage in their Masts, Hulls, Sails and Rigging, yet they tacked about, and
charged them all again till dark Night, and had not some English Captains been
deficient in their duty, they had probably destroyed their whole Navy. In this
Engagement some few English were slain and wounded, and three Captains; a
Fireship of theirs was sunk, with two other ships, but the darkness of the
Night concealed their other losses, who stood away for the Coasts of France,
and the English for Plymouth to repair.

During this fight, Blake came from the North into the Downs, and took six rich
Dutch Prizes, sending some Frigates to reinforce Ayscough, and soon after
Captain Pen, with his squadren, hovering on the Coasts of France, surprised six
stout Men of War more, now returned from the Venetian service, and richly
laden. Sept. 5. General Blake riding in the Downs, had notice of a French Fleet
in Calice Road, to whom he made up and chased them as far as they durst for the
sands of Dunkirk, taking most of them, being ten Men of War between thirty one
and twenty eight Guns, and six Fireships: This Fleet was to take in provisions
at Calice, for the relief of. Dunkirk, then besieged by the Spaniards, who
being prevented of this succor, soon after surrendered, as also Graveling.
Sept. 27. General Blake discovered about sixty sail of Dutch Men of War on the
back of Goodwinsands, commanded by Admiral de Wit; next day, Blake with his
Fleet bore in among them, but being upon a sand called the Kentish knock, under
which the Dutch had purposely secured themselves, four of our chief Ships were
on ground, but soon got off, and resolved to engage them, but the wind
prevented them from coming up, yet with much ado, got next day within shot,
upon which the Dutch set up their main sails and ran for it, whom ten Frigates
chased till Night, and next day pursued them till they had fight of West Gabel
in Zealand, and saw them run into Goree; upon which, the English fearing to
sail further upon the Holland coast, returned back. In this skirmish, the Dutch
Rere-Admiral was lost, with a Fly-boat that towed her, and many men killed;
about forty English were slain, and as many wounded.

The War between these two States reached to the Mediterranean Sea, whither the
English had sent several Frigates to secure the Merchants ships from the
Privatcers of Toulon and Marseilles, and a squadron of four sail, with three
Smyrna ships under their convoy, happened to meet with eleven Dutch men of War,
who having such great advantage, presently fell upon them, but met with flout
resistance, two of their main-top masts being shot down, and one of their ships
fired but quenched again. The Phoenix, a stout ship of forty five Guns, was
taken by the Dutch, the Paragon lost twenty seven men, and had about sixty
wounded; the Elizabeth had only two Barrels of powder left, yet in despite of
the enemy, they brought their Merchants safe into Porto Congone, near the Isle
of Corsica, where the fight was. The Dutch much gloried in this small success,
though they obtained it dearly, and more by their number than valor, the
English never giving over while they had men or ammunition.

The Hollanders extremely concerned at the continual loss of their ships, used
their utmost industry in fitting out a Fleet, though it were in December, and
the twentieth of that month, appeared on the back of the Goodwin with Ninety
men of War, and ten Fireships. The English under General Blake were but forty
two, and not half Manned, most of the great ships being laid up, yet they
resolved to engage them, and accordingly, December 30. both Fleets met, the
English having the Weather-gage, and as few as they were, several of them never
came up pretending want of men, so that the stress of the fight lay upon a few
who were to encounter the whole Dutch Fleet. The Vanguard and the Victory,
engaged twenty of the Hollanders, from first to last, and yet got clear of them
all. The Garland and Bonadventure were taken, and Blake going to relieve the
first, had his foremast shot by the board, was twice boarded, and yet got off,
as did all the rest but those two aforementioned; and soon after, two
Merchant-ships fell into the enemies hands. Blake with his Fleet withdrew into
Lee-Road to repair, and the Dutch boasted of this Victory, by their
Ambassadors, in all the Courts of Christendom.

But this small loss did only rouse and awaken the English courage, who thought
on nothing but Revenge; and to encourage them, the Parliament ordered the
Seamens wages to be raised, from eighteen to twenty three shillings a month,
and that for every Prize taken, they shall have ten shillings for every Tun,
and six pound ten shillings and four pence for every great Gun, whether Iron or
Brass, to be divided among the Ships crew, according to their Offices, and all
upon or above the Gun-deck to be prize. Likewise to have ten pound a Gun for
every man of War they shall sink or destroy, to be divided as aforesaid, with a
months pay gratis to all Volunteers that shall list themselves within forty
days; and care taken for paying and curing the sick and wounded, with several
other advantages: Which being printed and published, the Seamen came in apace,
so that in February following, the English had a stout Fleet at Sea, though the
Dutch endeavored to hinder all Mations from supplying us with Pitch, Tar, or
Masts.

Feb. 18. 1653. The Dutch Navy, of about eighty fail, with one hundred and
fifty Merchant men from Roan, Nants and Bordeaux, were discovered between the
Isle of Wight and Port and, and about eight in the morning, the headmost of the
English Fleet came up and engaged them, which was General Blake in the Triumph,
General Dean, and three or four more, the rest being to the Leeward, and not
able to come up; yet these few held thirty of the Dutch men of War in play,
from eight till two in the afternoon, when about half the English Fleet came up
and engaged the enemy till Night parted them. In this fight the English lost
only the Sampson, a Dutch prize, which being unserviceable, themselves funk,
the men being all saved, which ship sunk the adversary that maimed her. Next
day the English chased the Dutch a good while, whereby some of the Enemies
ships were brought to the Lee and destroyed. The day after they engaged again,
and the dispute grew so hot, that the Hollanders began to fire out of their
stern-most ports, and make away; so that fifty Merchant ships fell into our
hands, and nine men of War, several others being sunk, besides what they
themselves sunk as unserviceable, and it was writ from France, that above two
thousand dead bodies of the Dutch were seen about their shoars; fifteen hundred
were taken prisoners and brought to London; General Blake was wounded, and
several English Captains slain.

The Dutch deeply sensible of this loss, sent a Letter to the Parliament of
England, signed only by the States of Holland: To which the parliament returned
answer, signifying their desire of a friendly compliance to avoid further
mischiefs; but it had no effect. But the English, to aliay their joy for this
Victory, me with a great check in the Streights, for having by a stratagem
regained the Phoenix frigate from the Dutch, as she lay in Legorn-Haven, they
prepared for another encounter with them: Captain Boddily, with nine men of
War, sailed from Porto Congone, to assist Captain Apleton at Legorn, where he
had been kept in for several months by twenty two Holland frigates; upon his
approach, Caprain Apleton weighed out of the Mole a little too soon with his
ships, and was instantly engaged by the whole Dutch Fleet, who having the wind,
their Admiral and two others b^arded the Leopard, a stout ship of above fifty
Guns, who fought bravely five hours, but at length was overpowered. The
Bonadventure, by a shot in her powder-room, took fire and was blown up. The
Peregrine was engaged with four or five Dutch at a time, and having her
mainmast and mizen-mast shot away, was also taken. The Levant-Merchant was
first boarded by one of the Enemies ships of thirty six Guns, and after two
hours fight, by another as big, the first of which she sunk presently after,
and yet was also possessed by the Dutch. The Sampson was boarded by young Rere
Admiral Trump on one side, and a Fireship on the other, and so was soon burnt.
The loss of these five Ships, was the greatest damage the English sustained
since the War began, and was done in the sight of Captain Boddily and nine
English frigates, who did not in the least assist them; for which they were
branded with Cowardice and Treachery.

At this time the King of Portugal, unable to resist the power of the English
at Sea, sent over an Extraordinary Ambassador to conclude a peace, and to give
satisfaction for the Merchants losses. An Agent was likewise sent from the
French King, desiring the release of his Ships taken going for the relief of
Dunkirk, and to have a right understanding between the two Republics. And on
the other side, four Deputies were sent from the Prince of Conde, to crave aid
against Cardinal Mazarine and his party, who had strictly besieged the City of
Bordeaux, but all mediation proved ineffectual, the breach being too great
between the two States to be easily cemented. Other Nations likewise
endeavored to be Mediators between England and Holland, as the Queen of
Sweden, the Cantons of Switzerland, the Imperial Cities of Lubeck and Hamburgh,
but all was fruitless.

This was the posture of the Civil and Military affairs of this Nation, when
General Cromwell, with Major General Lambert, Harrison, and seven or eight
Officers more, came to the House of Commons, April 23. 1653. with about twelve
fouldiers, whom he ordered to wait at the door, and being entered, spoke to this
purpose: You have sufficiently deluded the people, and provided for your own
and your Relations benefits, possessing these seats under a pretense of forming
a Commonwealth, of reforming the Laws, and prom^^ing the public Good, whereby
you have imposed upon the Kingdom, whilst in the mean time you have only
Invaded the goods of the Commonwealth, have thrust your selves and Relations
into the gainfullest, and most honorable Offices, only to nourish Luxury and
Impiety. Then stamping on the ground, which was a sign to the soldiers at the
door, For shame (says he) rise quickly hence, and give place to those that are
honester, and will better perform their Trusts. Upon which, they all began to
move, some by force or fear, others murmuring; but the Speaker not rising
readily out of the Chair, Major General Harrison lent him his hand, and gently
listed him out. General Cromwell also commanded that bauble, as he called the
Mace, to be taken away. When the Members were all departed, the doors were
locked up, and Guards set upon them, and all the Avenues of the House. And thus
was this mighty parliament dissolved or dismissed (after near twelve years
sitting, and after having transacted so many great affairs) and this without
opposition or disturbance; their powers transferred into the hands of the
Soldiery, and their Names reprogched and vilified by the common people: But to
satisfy the Nation, General Cromwell, and his Officers, published a Declaration
which they had prepared the day before, of the Reasons of their proceedings, as
follows:

Our intention is not, at this time, to give an account of the grounds which
first moved us to take up Arms, and engage our lives, and all that was dear
unto us in this Cause, nor to mind in this Declaration the various
dispensations through which Divine Providence has led us, or the Witness the
Lord has born, and the many signal Testimonies he has given to the sincere
endeavors of his unworthy Servants, whilst they were contesting with many and
great difficulties, as well in the Wars, as other Transactions in the three
Nations, being necessitated in the defense of the same Cause, they first
asserted, to have recourse unto extraordinary actions, the same being evident
by former Declarations published on that behalf. And after God was pleased, not
only to reduce Ireland, and give in Scotland, but so marvelously to appear for
his people at Worcester, that these Nations were reduced to a degree of peace,
and England to perfect quiet, whereby the parliament had opportunity to give
the people the Harvest of all their labor, blood and treasure, and to settle a
due liberty, in reference to Civil and Spiritual things, whereunto they were
obliged by their duty and engagements, and those great and wonderful things God
has wrought for them, yet they made so little progress therein, that it was a
matter of much grief to the good people of the Land; who thereupon, applied
themselves to the Army, who (though unwilling to meddle with the Civil
Authority) agreed that such Officers as were Members of Parliament, should move
them to proceed vigorously in reforming what was amiss in the Commonwealth,
and in settling it upon a foundation of Justice and Righteousness: Which being
done, it was hoped the Parliament would have answered their expectations,

But finding the contrary, they renewed their desires in an humble Petition in
August 1652. which produced no considerable effect, nor was any such progress
made therein, as might imply their real intentions to accomplish what was
Petitioned for, but rather an averseness to the things themselves, with much
bitterness and opposition to the people of God, and his spirit acting in them,
insomuch that the Godly party in Parliament were rendered of no further use than
to countenance the ends of a corrupt party, for effecting the desire they had
of perpetuating themselves in the Supreme Government. For which purpose, the
said party long opposed, and frequently declared themselves against having a
new Representative, and when they saw themselves necessitated to take this Bill
into consideration, they resolved to make use of it to recruit the House with
persons of the same spirit and temper, thereby to perpetuate their owe sitting;
which intention, diverse of the activest among them did manifest, laboring to
persuade others to a consent therein, and the better to effect this, diverse
petitions preparing from several Counties, for the continuance of this
Parliament, were encouraged, if not set on foot by many of them.

For obviating these evils, the Officers of the Army obtained several meetings
with some of the Parliament, to consider what remedy might be applied to
prevent the same, but such endeavors proving ineffectual, it became evident
that this Parliament, through the corruption of some, the jealousy of others,
and the non-attendance of many, would never answer those ends, which God, his
people, and the whole Nation expected from them, but that this Cause which God
had so greatly blessed, must needs languish under their hands, and by degrees
be lost, and the lives, liberties, and comforts of his people, be delivered
into their enemies hands.

All which being sadly and seriously considered by the honest people of the
Nation, as well as by the Army, it seemed a duty incumbent upon us, who had
seen so much of the power and presence of God, to consider of some effectual
means whereby to establish Righteousness and Peace in these Nations.

And after much debate, it was judged necessary that the supreme Government
should be by the Parliament devolved upon known persons, fearing God, and of
approved Integrity; and the Government of the Commonwealth committed to them
for a time, as the most hopeful way to encourage and countenance all Gods
people, reform the Law, and administer Justice impartially, hoping thereby the
people may forget Monarchy, and understanding their true Election of successive
Parliaments, may have the Government settled upon a true Basis, without hazard
to this glorious Cause, or necessitating to keep up Armies for the defense of
the same.

And being still resolved to use all means possible to avoid extraordinary
courses, we prevailed with about twenty Members of Parliament to give us a
conference, with whom we freely and calmly debated the Necessity and Justice of
our proposals in that behalf, and did evidence that those, and not the Act
under their consideration, would most probably bring forth something answerable
to that work, the foundation whereof God has laid, and is now carrying on in
the World.

The which notwithstanding, found no acceptance, but instead thereof it was
offered, that the way was to continue still this present Parliament, as being
that from which we might reasonably expect all good things. And this being
vehemently insisted upon, did much confirm us in our apprehensions, that not
any love to a Representative, but the making use thereof to recruit, and so to
perpetuate themselves, was their aim.

They being plainly dealt with about this, and told, That neither the Nation,
the honest Interest, nor we our selves, would be deluded by such dealings, they
did agree to meet again the next day in the Afternoon, for mutual satisfaction;
it being consented to by the Members present, that endeavors should be used,
that nothing in the mean time should be done in Parliament, that might exclude
or frustrate the proposals beforementioned.

Notwithstanding this, the next morning the Parliament did make more haste than
usual in carrying on their said Act, being helped on therein by some of the
persons engaged to us the Night before, none of them which were then present
endeavoring to oppose the same, and being ready to put the main Question for
consumating the said Act, whereby our foresaid proposals would have been
rendered void, and the way of bringing them into a fair and full debate of
Parliament obstructed.

For preventing whereof, and all the sad and evil consequences which must upon
the grounds aforesaid have ensued, and whereby at one blow the Interest of all
honest men, and of this glorious Cause, had been endangered to be laid in the
dust, and these Nations imbroiled in new troubles, at a time when our Enemies
abroad are watching all opportunities against us, and some of them actually
engaged in War with us, we have been necessitated, though with much reluctance,
to put an end to this parliament, which yet we have done, we hope, out of an
honest heart, preferring this Cause above our Names, Families, Lives or
Interests, how dear soever, with clear intentions, and real purposes of heart,
to call to the Government persons of approved fidelity and honesty, believing
that as none wise will expect to gather Thistles of Thorns, so good men will
hope, that if persons so qualified be chosen, the fruits of a Just and
Righteous Reformation, so long prayed for, and wished for, will, by the
blessing of God, be in due time obtained, to the refreshing of all those good
hearts who have been panting after these things.

Much more might have been said, if it had been our desire to justify our
selves by aspersing others, and raking into the mis-government of affairs, but
we shall conclude with this, That as we have been led by Necessity and
Providence to act as we have done, even above and beyond even our own thoughts
and desires, so we shall and do, in that of this great work which is behind,
put our selves wholly upon the Lord for a blessing, professing we look not to
stand one day without his support, much less to bring to pass one of the things
mentioned and desired without his assistance; and therefore do solemnly desire
and expect, That all men, as they would not provoke the Lord to their own
destruction, would wait for such an issue as he should bring forth, and to
follow their business with peaceable spirits, wherein we promise them
protection by his assistance.

And for those who profess their fear and love to the Name of God, that seeing
in a great measure for their sakes, and for righteousness sake, we have taken
our lives in our hands to do these things, they would be instant with the Lord
day and night on our behalfs, that we may obtain grace from him: And seeing we
have made so often mention of his Name, that we may not do the least dishonor
thereto, which indeed would be our confusion, and a stain to the whole
profession of godliness.

We beseech them also to live in all humility, meekness, righteousness, and
love toward another, and toward all men, that so we may put to silence the
Ignorance of the foolish that falsely accuse them, and to know that the late
great and glorious Dispensations, wherein the Lord has so gloriously appeared,
in bringing forth these things by the travel and blood of his Children, ought
so to oblige them, so to walk in the wisdom and love of Christ, as may cause
others to honor their holy profession, because they see Christ to be in them
of a truth.

We do further propose before it be long, more particularly to show the grounds
of our proceedings, and the reasons of this late great action and change, which
in this we have but hinted at.

And we do lastly declare, That all Judges, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace,
Mayors, Bailiffs, Committees, and all other Civil Officers, and public
Ministers whatsoever, within the Commonwealth, or any parts thereof, do
proceed in their respective places and Offices, and all persons whatsoever are
to give Obedience to them, as fully as when the Parliament was sitting.

Signed in the Name, and by the appointment of his Excellency the Lord General,
and his Council of Officers.

William Malyn, Secret.
White Hall, April 22, 1653.

This Declaration being published throughout the Nation, was assented to by
most of the chief Officers both by Sea and Land, but for satisfaction of the
Civil Magistrates, and to prevent disturbance, this second Declaration was soon
after published.

Whereas the Parliament being dissolved, persons of approved fidelity and
honesty, and according to the late Declaration of the 22d. instant, to be
called from several parts of this Commonwealth, to the supreme Authority, and
although effectual proceedings are, and have been had for perfecting those
resolutions, yet some convenient time being required for the assembling of
those persons, it has been found necessary, for preventing the mischiefs and
inconveniences which may arise in the mean while to the public affairs, that a
Council of State be constituted to take care of, and intend the peace, safety,
and present management of the affairs of the Commonwealth; which being settled
accordingly, the same is hereby declared and published, to the end all persons
may take notice thereof, and in their several places and stations demean
themselves peaceably, giving obedience to the Laws of the Nation as heretofore,
in the exercise and administration whereof, as endeavors shall be used, that
no oppression or wrong be done to the people; so a strict account will be
required of all such as shall do any thing to endanger the public peace and
quiet, upon any pretense whatsoever.

O. Cromwell.
April 30. 1653.

The Hollanders hoped to reap advantage from these Revolutions, but found
themselves mistaken, the Naval affairs being still managed with as much
application as before, as they soon felt to their cost; for the Dutch having a
great Fleet of Merchants ships Outward bound, durst not venture through the
channel, but with a Fleet of about Ninety Men of War, convoyed them by the
North of Scotland toward the sound, and there met with another Fleet of
Merchant men Homeward bound, from Russia, East India, and France, whom they
brought home safe, and hearing the English Fleet was Northwards came into the
Downs, taking two or three small Vessels, and made some shot into Dover Town,
boasting the English Fleet was lost, and that they would send a Hue and Cry
after them, when on a sudden, the English Navy arrived from the North, and came
into Yarmouth-Road.

June 1. Being at Anchor in Sole-Bay, they discovered two Dutch Galliot Hoyses,
to whom chase was given till the whole Dutch Fleet was discovered, but the
weather proving dark, they lost sight of them. June 3. Our Fleet being at
Anchor off the Gober, discovered the Enemy about two Leagues to Leeward, being
about 100 sail, and weighed toward them; about Noon both Fleets were Engaged,
which for some hours were very sharp, so that in the Evening the Dutch bore
right away before the wind. Next day at Noon they engaged again, and after four
hours dispute, the Hollanders would have got away, but the wind freshing
Westerly, the English bore in so hard among them, that they took eleven Men of
War, two water Hoys, six Captains, fifteen hundred prisoners, and sunk six men
of War more; the rest escaped by the darkness of the Night and the Flatts. The
English lost General Dean one of their Admirals, who was killed with a great
shot the first day, with one Captain, and bout one hundred and fifty men more,
and two hundred and forty wounded, but not one ship was lost. The English were
much encouraged by General Blakes coming in, during the fight, with sixteen
sail of stout men of War. The Dutch having in the Night got into the Wielings,
the Fly and Texel, it was resolved to sail as near the Coast as was safe,
where the English lay for some time, taking many prizes, to the great damage of
the Hollanders, whose ships could neither go in or out, from any one Port, to
join together to oppose them.

General Cromwell, and his Council of Officers, having considered of the
qualifications of the next Parliament, and made a List of those persons in
England, Scotland and Ireland, to whom they designed to commit the Legislative
power, Warrants were issued out for them to appear at the Council Chamber at
White Hall, July 4. 1653. to this effect:

Forasmuch as upon the dissolution of the late Parliament, it became necessary
that the peace, safety, and good Government of this Commonwealth should be
provided for, and in order thereunto, diverse persons fearing God, and of
approved fidelity and honesty, are by my self, with the advice of my Council of
Officers, Nominated, to whom the great charge and trust, of so weighty affairs
is to be committed; and having good assurance of your love to, and courage for
God, and the Interest of his Cause, and the good people of this Commonwealth,

I Oliver Cromwell, Captain General, and Commander in chief of all the Armies
and Forces raised, or to be raised within this Commonwealth, do hereby summon
and require you, being the persons Nominated, personally to be, and appear, at
the Council Chamger, commonly called or Known by the Name of the
Council Chamger at White Hall, within the City of Westminster, upon the fourth
day of July next, ensuing the date hereof, then and there to take upon you the
said Trust, unto which you are hereby called and appointed, to serve as a
Member for the County of (...) And hereby you are not to fail. Given under my
Hand and Seal the eighth day of June, 1653.

O. Cromwell.


July 4. The persons summoned to the number of an hundred forty four, out of
the three Kingdoms, met accordingly at the Council Chamger at White Hall, where
was General Cromwell and several of his Officers, who made a Speech to them,
recounting, The many wonderful mercies of God to this Nation, and the continued
series of Providence by which he had appeared in carrying on this Cause, and
bringing affairs into the present condition; with their progress since the
famous victory at Worcester, and the actings of the Army thereupon, after
diverse applications to the Parliament, and waiting upon them, with the grounds
and necessity of their dissolving, which he declared to be for the preservation
of this Cause, and the interest of all honest men, who have been engaged
therein. He then told them of the clearness of the Call given to the Members
then present, to take upon them the supreme Authority, and from the Scriptures
exhorted them to their duty, desiring that a tenderness might be used toward
all conscientious persons of what Judgment soever.

After which, General Cromwell produced an Instrument under his own Hand and
Seal, whereby he did, with the advice of his Officers, devolve and entrust the
supreme Authority and Government of the Commonwealth, into the hands of the
p^^^ons there met, who, or any forty of them, were to be held and acknowledged
the supreme Authority of the Nation, unto whom all persons within the same, and
the Territories thereto belonging, were to yield obedience and subjection, and
that they should sit no longer than Nov. 3.1654. and three months before their
dissolution, they were to make choice of other persons to succeed them, who
were not to sit above twelve months, an^^chen to provide for a succession of
Government. Which Instruction being delivered them, the General commended them
to God, himself with his Officers withdrew. From thence the Members forthwith
adjourned to the Parliament House at Westminster, and first considered what
Title to take to themselves, and after three days debate, they resolved they
would be called, The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, and chose Mr.
Rous for their Speaker.

About this time John Lilburn, being a few months before banished by an Act of
the last Parliament, for certain crimes he was charged with, took occasion,
upon this change of Government, to return into England, and cast himself upon
General Cromwell, craving his protection in several public Addresses, who
declining to meddle in this affair, left him to the Law, and he was committed
to Newgate, and the next Sessions being brought to the Old Bailey, he first
demanded Council, which was granted him: Next day he refused to put in his
Plea, unless he might have a Copy of his Indictment, which was likewise
admitted. Next day he delivered in his Bill of Exceptions to the Indictment;
after that he demanded a Copy of the Judgment given against him in Parliament,
together with the Act: Then he joined issue, and made his defense for several
hours, and about twelve at Night, the Jury brought him in Not Guilty; but he
was sent back to Newgate, and thence to the Tower, where he continued some
time, and then turned Quaker, and dying soon after, was buried from the Bull
and Mouth Meeting place near Aldersgate, with a numerous company of that party
attending him to his Grave.

As to the condition of Scotland at this time, the English had taken most of
their strong Towns, Forts, and Castles, in the Low-lands, yet the High-landers
made diverse Incursions upon them, robbing and killing many, and then returned
to their inaccessible Fastnesses, where they could not be pursued, being
commanded by the Lords Glencarn, Athol, Seaforth, and others; the last of whom
sent a summons to a Ship that lay at Anchor at Lewis-Island, (having before
surprised seven or eight men that went ashore for provisions) a Copy of which
follows: Being incited, not only by conscience, but honor, to stand firm to
the principles of loyalty; but also disdaining, even in rational Interest, to
stoop to such a wavering and servile power as now Rules, I have laid hold on
those men come ashore as promoting the same: Wherefore I summon you to deliver
your Vessel for His Majesty's service, and being certainly persuaded that all,
or most part of you, are with grief of heart employed in such service, I assure
all that will voluntarily shun the unnecessary effusion of blood by that
surrender, shall have such fair Quarter as is fitting for me to grant, and as
your several conditions do require; and according to your demeanours herein,
you may expect to find me your friend accordingly.

Seaforth.

For the Captain, Master and Mariners of the Fortune.



But the Captain did not think fit to obey this summons, sailing away, and
leaving his men behind. And thus they continued awhile in expectation of
supplies of men from Lieutenant Genesis Midleton, and the Low Countries; but in
the mean time, a considerable party under the E. of Glencarn were defeated,
himself hardly escaping, and afterward several other parties by the English, so
that they could not join. At length Midleton arrived from Holland with the
expected provisions of War, and a Commission to be General, and Monroe
Lieutenant General; which so incensed Glencarn, that he who had employed his
utmost interest in raising men, must now be commanded by others, that they
quarrelled among themselves. Glencarn was contented to be Lt. General, but
Monro would not agree to it, whereupon a Duel was fought between them, in which
Monro being wounded and disarmed, deserted the service with about 500
Gentlemen, and agreed with the Governor of Dunbarton to live peaceably at
home; others did the like, yet Midleton stood out still, till first in Argyle,
and then at Loughary, he was by Genesis Monk, and Coll. Morgan, wholly overthrown,
and afterward returned to Holland; the Assembly of the Kirk was likewise
dissolved by Coll. Morgan, and the Clergy subjected.

As for Ir^land, it was by the English arms brought to such a condition, as
there was no fear of disturbance for the future, only some few Tories kept
themselves in some inaccessible places, and sometimes made irruptions to steal
and plunder. An high Court of Justice was erected there, of which Cook was
President, by whom many Irish, and some of their ancient Nobility, were
sentenced and executed for the bloody Massacre committed upon the Protestants
in 1641. and about 14000 sold to the King of Spain, and many transported into
other Countries, the rest being driven into the Province of Connaught, out of
which, upon pain of death, they were not to stir without leave. The other three
Provinces, Ulster, Munster, and Lenster, were allotted to the English, and all
forfeited Lands divided among such Adventurers as had advanced money toward the
management of the Irish affairs, and for satisfaction of the soldiers arrears.
General Fleetwood succeeded Ireton as Lord Governor of Ireland, by order of
Genesis Cromwell who had married his eldest Daughter Bridget, the Widow of Ireton.

The Hollanders finding little advantage by the war with the English, sent four
Commissioners hither to begin a Treaty; during which there was no cessation of
arms, for at the same time a remarkable battle happened between the two Navies,
July 29. 1653. The Scouts discovered a Dutch Fleet from the Wielings of about
95 men of War, upon which the English made what sail they could after them,
which the enemy perceiving stood away, yet about five in the evening, near 30
of the English engaged, the rest of the Fleet being astern, so that they bore
the whole brunt of that days fight till Night parted them; the Dutch were
observed to send away their maimed Ships in the Night, and in the dark got by
with their whole Fleet, in order to join 25 sail of stout ships more from the
Texel, which the English could not prevent because of the foul weather. Next
morning the Dutch, with these new recruits, fell upon the English Fleet in a
gallant posture, and fought courageously from five in the morning till one
after noon, both Fleets passing through, and endeavoring to burn, sink, and
destroy each other. At length, the Dutch went off with the loss of some ships,
either sunk or burnt; the Garland, a stout man of War, taken formerly by the
Dutch from us, was burnt by the Worcester: The Triumph and the Andrew were
boarded by three Dutch Fireships, and had some damage in their sails, but were
quickly cleared. The Dutch observing themselves decline, made away directly for
the Texel, and the English being somewhat disabled, and not daring to venture
too near the Holland Coasts, it was resolved that the whole Fleet should sail
for Sole Bay: The English Admirals in this fight were Gen Blake and Genesis Monk;
Pen was Vice Admiral, and Lawson Rere-Admiral. When Monk with the English
Fleet set sail, and stood out to Sea, the Dutch supposed they fled for fear,
which made one of the Captains desire Van Trump to pursue, For, says he, these
Skellums dare not stand one broadside from your Excellency, you may see them
plainly running home, and therefore, my Lord, miss not the opportunity. But
Trump, who understood better, gave this short reply, Sir, look to your charge,
for were the enemy but 20 sail they would never refuse to fight us. The English
had 300 slain in this battle, whereof seven were Captains, and 700 wounded,
five of them Captains. The Dutch had about 30 ships sunk and burnt, and their
renowned Lord Admiral Van Trump was slain in the midst of the fight, and out of
the Dutch maimed ships that lay floating on the Sea, the English took six
Captains, and about 1000 other prisoners. This was the bloudiest Engagement
that had yet happened between the two Nations, and for their valor and
conduct, the Parliament ordered Gold chains to be given to Blake, Monk, Pen and
Lawson, as a mark of their favor, and other chains were bestowed on the Flag
Captains, and Medals of silver to the Officers of the Fleet. It was after known
by Letters from Holland, that they lost near six thousand men in this battle.

The Parliament having sat about five months, in which they made several Acts,
one for Marriages before a Justice of Peace, another for relief of Prisoners,
another against the High Court of Chancerv, another for a Tax for six months,
at 120000 l. per month, at length they were consulting of an Act for taking
away Tithes, a Committee was appointed to consider of the matter, who brought
in their report Dec. 10. 1653. That they thought it convenient that
Commissioners be sent into all the Counties, and enabled to eject scandalous
and unable Ministers, and also be empowered to settle able Ministers in all
void places: That such as are, or shall be approved for public preachers of
the Gospel, shall have and enjoy such maintenance as is already settled by Law.
That upon hearing and considering what has been offered to the Committee
touching propriety in Tithes, it is their opinion that they have a legal
propriety in them.

The Parliament having spent several days in this report, put the Question,
Whether the House does agree with the Committee, which was carried in the
Negative; whereupon, several heats and divisions arose, insomuch that Dec. 12.
a Gentleman stood up and moved, That the sitting of the Parliament, as then
constituted, would not be for the good of the Commonwealth, and that therefore
it was requisite to deliver up to the L. Genesis Cromwell the powers which they
received from him. This motion being seconded by several others, the House
rise, and the Speaker Mr. Rouse, with the Majority of the Members, did, by a
writing under their hands, resign their powers to Genesis Cromwell, at White Hall,
by their Speaker, who thanked them for the pains they had taken for the service
of the Commonwealth, though by a strange spirit and perverse principle in some
of the Members, they had missed of their good intentions. Some of the Members
continued still sitting in the House, to whom Coll. White was sent with a Guard
of soldiers, and required them in the Name of the General to depart, for the
Parliament was dissolved, who replying the contrary, and that they were upon
business, and ought not to be interrupted, he at length compelled them, though
unwillingly, to leave the House.

The Parliament having thus resigned the power given them, the whole Authority,
both Civil and Military of the three Nations, was concluded to be devolved into
the hands of O. Cromwell, who calling a Council of Officers, with some others,
to consult of the settlement of the Government, they at length resolved to have
a Commonwealth in a single person: That the person should be O. Cromwell,
Captain General of all the Forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland, alleging,
That it was not Monarchy which was quarreled at, but the Male administration
and abuses therein, by its prerogative being unlimited and arbitrary; all which
would be avoided by circumseribing it in a Protector and his Council; a new
Instrument of Government, and the supreme power of a Triennial Parliament, in
whom, during their sitting, the Sovereign Authority should reside. In pursuance
whereof, a Council was appointed him to consist of twenty, but fourteen only
were named at present: Lord Lambert, L. Viscount Lisle, General Desborough, Sir
Gilbert Pickering, Major Genesis Skippon, Sir Anth. Ash. Cooper, Walt. Strickland,
Esquire Sir Chapter Woolsey, Coll. Phil. Jones, Francis Rouse, Esquire Rich. Major, Esquire
John Lamence, Esquire Coll. Ed. Montague, Coll. Will. Sydenham.
And the Instrument of Government designed to be the foundation of this new
settlement, was to this effect: That the Title of O. Cromwell should beford
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging: That all proceedings shall run
in the name and style of the Protector, and all Honors, Offices, and Titles to
be derived from him: That he may pardon all offenses but Treason and Murder:
That the Militia, during the Parliament, shall be in his, and their hands, but
in the intervals, only in his and his Councils, that he and his Council may
make War and Peace with Foreign Princes: No new Laws to be made, nor old ones
abrogated without confent of Parliament: A Parsiament to be called within six
months, and afterward every third year, and if need be oftener, which the
Protector shall not dissolve without consent of Parliament till after five
months: The Parliament of English to consist of 400, to be chosen by more equal
distributions in Counties and Buroughs: Of Scotch, thirty to be elected, and
of Ireland as many: The Writs for Election to pass under the Seal of the
Commonwealth to the Sheriffs, and if the Protectoromit, or deny it, then the
Commissioners of the Seal shall be obliged, under pain of High Treason, to
issue out such Writs, and in case of failure in them the High Sheriffs then to
do it: That such as are elected be returned into the Chancery by the chief
Magistrates, Mayor, Sheriff or Bailiff, twenty days before the Session: If the
Sheriff, Mayor or Bailiff, make a false return, or any way procure an undue
Election, he shall be fined 2000 l. That none who have born arms against the
Parliament, Irish Rebels or Papists, shall be capable of being elected, and in
case they be elected, to forfeit two years Revenue, and three parts of their
Goods: None are to be elected under the Age of 21 years, nor unless he be a man
of good conversation: None to have Votes in Elections not worth 200 l.: That
sixty shall make a Qaorum: The Protector, if need be, may call Perhements in
the intervals of the Triennial ones: Those Bills they make to be offered to the
Protector, who refusing to sign them in 20 days, they are to pass into Acts
without his consent: The Protector, with advice of his Council, in case of
death, or breach of trust, is to substitute new Privy Counselors: A competent
Revenue shall be settled for maintaining 10000 Horse and 15000 Foot, and the
Navy not to be altered or lessened without the advice of the Council, and upon
the disbanding of them, the money to be brought into the Exchequer for sudden
occasions: No new Taxes nor ^aws to be made without consent in parliament: All
forfeited Lands unsold to belong to the Protector: The Protectorate to be
Elective, but the Royal Family to be excluded: Oliver Cromwell to be present
Protector: All the great Offices of the Commonwealth, such as Chancellor,
Keeper of the Seal, Governor of Ireland, Admiral, etc. if they become void in
parhament time, to be supplied by their approbation, or in intervals of
parliament, with the approbation of the Council: The Christian Religion, as it
is contained in the Holy Scriptures, to be the public profession of the
Nation, and those that administer it to be maintained by the public, but by
some way more convenient, and less liable to envy than Tithes: None are to be
compelled to consent to the public profession by fine, or any punishment ever,
but only by persuasion and arguments: None that profess Faith in Jesus Christ
are to be prohibited the exercise of their Religion, provided he do not quarrel
with, nor disturb others, except the papists and prelatists, who are debarred
that License: All Sales of Estates, made by parliament, to stand good: All
Articles of War to be made good: And lastly, the protector and his successor,
upon entering that charge, to swear to procure, by all means, the peace, quiet,
and welfare of the Commonwealth, to observe these Articles, and to administer
all things in his power, according to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs of
England.

After this, Dec. 16. 1653. the protector came from White Hall to the Chancery
Court at Westminster, attended by the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal of
England, the Barons of the Exchequer, and Judges in their Robes, the Council of
the Commonwealth, the L. Mayor, Aldermen, and Recorder of London, in their
scarlet Gowns, and many of the chief Officers of the Army. A Chair of State
being set, the Protector stood on the left hand thereof uncovered, till the
Instrument was read, which he subscribed in the face of the Court, and then
swore to perform as follows: I promise, in the presence of God, not to violate
or infringe the matters and things contained in the Instrument, but to observe,
and cause the same to be observed, and in all things to the best of my
understanding, will govern these Nations according to the Laws, Statutes, and
Customs, and to seek their peace, and cause Justice and Law to be equally
administered.

Hereupon he sat down covered in the Chair, the Lords Commissioners then
delivered him the Great Seal of England, and the Lord Mayor his Sword and Can
of maintenance, which he instantly returned: Then the Court rose, and the
Protector was attended back as before, to the Banqueting House at White Hall,
the Lord Mayor bare headed carrying the Sword before him, where an exhortation
being made by Mr. Nicholas Lockier, one of his Chaplains, the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Judges departed. And thus was the Protector confirmed in this
high Dignity, though many of his Officers, and former admirers, were much
discontented thereat, but to command obedience, the Council emitted the
following Proclamation, which was published in England, Scotland and Ireland.

Whereas the late Parliament dissolved themselves and resigned their powers and
Authorities, the Government by a Lord Protector, and successive elective
parliaments is now established: And whereas Oliver Cromwell, Captain General of
all the Forces of this Commonwealth, is declared Lord protector of the said
Nations, and has accepted thereof, We have therefore thought it necessary, as
we hereby do, to make publication of the premises, and strictly to charge and
command all and every person and persons, of what quality and condition soever,
in any of the said three Nations, totake notice hereof, and to conform and
subject themselves to the Government so established: And all Sheriffs, Mayors,
Bailiffs, etc. are required to publish this proclamation, to the end that none
may have cause to pretend Ignorance in this behalf.

The Protector began his reign with seeming serenity, and when the different
parties in Religion made their complaints to him against each other, he usually
told them, That his power was no greater in the Nation than a Constables, which
was to keep peace and quietness among all parties. And persuant to the power
given him by the new Instrument, he supplies the several Courts at Westminster
with the ablest Judges and Lawyers; and the City of London, to show their
concurrence to this great change, invite the Protector to Dinner at
Grocers-Hall, Feb. 8. being Ashwednesday, the Streets were railed to Templebar,
the Livery men standing in their Gowns; he was met at Temple Bar by Alderman
Vyner Lord Mayor, who delivered him the Sword, and receiving it again, bore it
on Horseback bare-headed before him all the way. After a Noble enterrainment,
he was served with a Banquet; in the conclusion whereof, he Knighted Sir Tho.
Vyner, and would have done the same to the Recorder Steel, but he declined it.

The Hollanders being weary of the Wars which they had maintained with such
little success, and so great cost, send commissioners to treat with the
pretector for a peace between both Nations, which at length was concluded both
with the King of Denmark and the Dutch, who were to pay the charge of the War,
money being very necessary in his new Government; and in April following, it
was proclaimed with great solemnity in London, the two Dutch Ambassadors making
magnificent Treatments and Fireworks to demonstrate their satisfaction therein.

The Protector now sends his eldest Son Henry into Ireland, of which he was
made Lord Deputy soon after, and General Monk was sent into Scotland: Likewise
the Lord Whitlock, who was sent Ambassador, by the last parliament, to the Q.
of Sweden, had now a new commission sent him from the Lord protector, in whose
Name he continued the Treaty with that Crown, and afterward finished it. In
March following, Monsieur Bordeux was sent Ambassador to England from the
French King, and Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper, Coll. Sydenham, and Mr. Strickland,
were appointed Commissioners by the protector to treat with him, so that he was
owned abroad as well as at home, King Charles was then in the French Court, who
finding, that notwithstanding his own and his Mothers endeavors to the
contrary, the Treaty between France and England was vigorously prosecuted by
Cardinal Mazarine, and foreseeing that if the peace were concluded, he and his
party must be obliged to depart France, he thought it more Honorable
voluntarily to leave that Kingdom than to stay till he were forced out by a
complement; so the King, with his Brother the Duke of York, and his Cousins
Prince Rupert and Edward, retired to Chattillon, a House of the Prince of
Condes, from whence soon after, the King and Prince Rupert went into Germany,
and indeed it happened as they suspected, for one of the Articles of the French
King with the protector was, That none of the Royal Family of England should
reside in the Dominions of France.

In Feb. 1654. several persons were committed to the Tower, about a conspiracy
against the protector, the chief whereof Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Coll. John
Gerrard his brother, the E. of Oxford, Mr. Philip Porter, Mr. Vowell a
Schoolmaster at Islington, and in June following, an High Court of Justice
being erected, they were brought before them, and charged to design the
Assassination of the Lord protector, and thereupon Coll. Gerrard, and Mr.
Vowell, were sentenced to be hanged, which was accordingly executed upon Mr.
Vowell at Charing Cross, and Coll. Gerrard was beheaded at Tower Hill, who
expressly denied the intention of the fact. With him, upon the same Scaffold,
but not upon the like account, suffered at that time Don Pantalion Sa, brother
to the Portugal Ambassador then Resident in England, who upon conceit that he
had received some affront upon the New-Exchange in the Strand, came thither one
evening with a crew of idle fellows, Lacquies and Servants to himself and his
brother, armed with pistols swords, and Hand-Granadoes, and firing a pistol,
killed one ^^r. Greenway standing quietly at a Stall, and had done further
mischief, if this Coll. Gerrard had not stopped their fury, and with his sword
drawn driven them all down stairs; upon hearing the matter, the Protector
resolved the murderers should suffer without respect of persons, and it
appearing, that though the person who committed the murder was a Knight of
Malta, and had made his escape, yet that this Nobleman and the rest were
accessaries, he and four more of the Ambassadors were tried and found guilty,
with an Irish youth: Don Pantalion was beheaded with Coll. Gerrard, the Irish
boy was hanged at Tyburn and the other four pardoned; and peace being soon
after concluded with the K. of Portugal, the Ambassador sorrowfully departed.

In the same month a ship fell accidentally on fire on Southwark side, as she
lay at Anchor, which being cut away, the ship was driven by the flowing tide
upon a shelf near the bridge, where she stuck, and blew up her powder; there
were eight persons killed, one a Draper upon his Leads by the plank of the
Ship, and had the blow been any nigher, it might have endangered the bridge it
self.

The Lord Protector, in pursuance of the late Instrument, resolved now to call
a parliament, and Writs were sent out for their meeting, Sept. 3. 1654. at
Westminster: Being assembled accordingly, the Protector went by Water from
White Hall to the Parliament House, and sending for the Members into the
Painted-Chamber, he desired their company to hear a Sermon at the Abby-Church
the next day, and afterward he would impart his mind to them. About Nine next
morning, His Highness rode in his Coach to Church, with whom sat his Son
Henry, and the Lord Lambert: The Pages went before, and his Gentlemen in rich
Liveries marched bare-headed: On one side of the Coach walked Mr. Strickland,
one of the Council, and Captain of the Guards, together with the master of the
Ceremonies: On the other side was Capt. Howard Capt. of the Lifeguard: These
were followed by the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal, the Commissioners
of the Treasury, and the Privy Council, in their Coaches, and in the rere came
the protectors Ordinary Guard. As he entered the Church, four maces, the purse,
and a sword born by the Lord Lambert, were carried before him: Dr. Tho. Goodwin
preached the Sermon, which being ended, the Protector and the Parliament went
to the painted-chamber, where there was an appearance of a number of grave
judicious persons, to whom the Protector spoke to this effect:

Gentlemen, The parliament that are here met this day, are such a congregation
of wise, prudent, and discreet persons, that England has never scarce seen the
like, and few could have thought of such a door of hope not many years ago, and
therefore it would have been very necessary and worthy such an Assembly to give
a relation of the series of Gods providence all along to these very times, but
that being very well known to most of you, I shall at present omit it, and
proceed to declare to you in what condition these Nations were when the present
Government was erected: It was apparent that every man's heart was against
another, and every man's interest divided against each other, and we had then
such different humors, that every thing almost was grown arbitrary. There was
also grown up a general contempt of God and Christ, and the grace of God was
turned into wantonness, and his spirit made a cloak for all manner of
wickedness and profaneness: Nay, the Ax was laid to the root of the ministry,
and the fifth monarchy was highly cried up by persons who would assume the
Government, but that desired thing wants greater manifestation than has yet
appeared, before men ought to change the Authority to make way for it. While
these things were in the midst of us, and nothing but confusion in the hearts
and minds of some men, swarms of popish Priests and Jesuits daily arrived
here, to raise and foment divisions against the peace and quiet of the Nation:
And at the same time the Nation was likewise engaged in a deep War with
Portugal, Holland and France, so that we were in a heap of confusion, and it
was absolutely necessary that a speedy remedy should be applied thereto, and
this has been in a great measure done since the settling of this Government,
which is clearly calculated for the peoples Interest, let malignant spirits say
what they will, and therefore with humbleness toward God, and modesty toward
you, I will recount something in the behalf of this Government. For, first, It
has endeavored to reform the Law: It has put into the seats of Justice men
of known Integrity and Justice: It has settled a way for trial and probation
of ministers to preach the Gospel: And besides all this, It has called a Free
parliament; blessed be God that this day you see a Free parliament. As for the
Wars, a peace is made with Sweden, Denmark, the Datch and Portugal, and one
likewise very near concluding with France; yet these things are only entrances,
and open door of hope. But now, Gentlemen, I make no question to enable you to
lay the top stone of this work, and I shall recommend this maxim to your
consideration, That peace, though it be made, is not to be trusted farther than
it consists with Interest; and one great work that at present lies before this
Honorable Assembly, is, That the Government of Ireland may be settled in terms
of Honor, and that you would avoid confusions, lest Foreign States should take
advantage by them. And as for my self, I assure you, I do not speak as one that
would Lord it over you, but as one that would be a fellow servant to you in
this great affair; and so to conclude, I desire you to repair to your House,
and use your liberty in choosing a Speaker.

The Protector having concluded his Speech, the members immediately repair to
their House, and there choose William Lenthal, Esquire master of the holls to be
their Speaker; after which, they begin upon the Instrument of Government, and
the question is in the first place proposed, Whether the Legislative power
should be in a single person or a parliament. Those of the protectors party
endeavor by all means possible to persuade them, That it should be no
Question, but be absolutely carried in the affirmative. This was as rigorously
opposed by the majority of the House, and among the rest, a Gentleman who had
all along stron ly opposed Monarchy as disagreeable to his Interest, stood up
and said, The parliament cannot but discern the snares that are laid to entrap
the privileges of the people, and for my own part, as God has ma^e me
Instrumental in cutting down Tyranny in one person, so now I cannot endure to
see the Nations liberties shackled by another, whose Right to the Government
can be measured out no otherwise than by the length of his Sword, which was the
only thing that emboldened him to command his Commanders. Many others seconded
this motion, confirming what he had said, and directly against a single person.

These debates and divisions upon the protectors Instrument, which continued
eight days successively, did much disturb him, fearing they would produce
irreconcilable differences, and therefore to remedy it in time, and put the
parliament into a milder temper, he goes from White Hall to Westminster, and
sending for the members then sitting into the painted chamber, he thus
addresses them:

Gentlemen, The God of Heaven knows what grief and sorrow of heart it is to me
to find you falling into heats and divisions, but I would have you take notice
of this, That the same Government made me protector which made you a
parliament, and that as you are entrusted with some things, so am I with
others, and that in the Government there are certain Fundamentals which cannot
be altered, As 1. That the Government should be in a single person and a
parliament: 2. That parliament should not be perpetual: 3. That the militia
should not be trusted into one hand or power, but so that the parliament should
have a check upon the protector, and the protector on the parliament: 4. That
in matters of Religion there ought to be Liberty of Conscience, and that
persecution in the Church was not to be Tolerated. The rest of the things in
the Government are examinable and alterable as the state of affairs do require,
and for my own part, my heart is even overwhelmed with grief, to fee that any
of you should endeavor to overthrow what is settled, contrary to the Trust
received from the people, and which cannot but bring very great inconveniency
upon your selves and the Nation.

This was the substance of his persuasions, but doubting that this would not
sufficiently bring them over to his Interests, he contrived a Recognition and
acknowledgment, which was to be signed by every member before he should be
admitted to sit in the House, as follows:

I do hereby promise and engage to be true and faithful to the Lord Protector
of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and shall nor (according
to the tenor of the Indenture whereby I am returned to serve in parliament)
propose or give any consent to alter the Government as it is settled in one
person and a parliament.

This was subscribed by several of the members, though the greater number at
first refused, especially those of the late long parliament, so that of 400
there appeared only 200, but afterward were made up 300, who fell afresh upon
the same disputes, and run over all the Articles of the Instrument of
Government, resolving to have the Judgment of the whole House upon them in one
entire Bill, and so present it, thereby to waste time, and hinder the Protector
from having money which he much wanted, so that after five months dilatory
proceedings, and that they had not yet settled him in the Government, the time
being expired wherein the Instrument gave him leave, without losing one day,
nay scarce an hour, he dissolved the parliament.

This dissolution encouraged the most opposite parties to conspire against the
Protector, that is, the fifth Monarchy men and Royalists, the first expected
King Jesus, or the erecting of a fifth Kingdom, the second longed for the
Restoration of King Charles, and the Protectors Favorites desired King Oliver,
and every party manifested their impatience, but none of them could attain
their wishes, and when Oliver might afterward, yet he thought it not safe. The
protector was not ignorant of their designs, and resolved first to deal with
the weakest, for finding this Millionary principle spread in the Army, he
discarded Major General Harrison and coll. Rich, and after sent them, with coll
Carew, and Courtney, prisoners to remote Castles, and General Monk had order to
seize Major General Overton, and Major Bramston, Holmes, and other Officers,
and cashier them. Overton was sent up prisoner to the Tower, and his Regiment
given to coll. Morgan. coll. Okeys Regiment was given to the Lord How^^d;
Cornet now colonel Joyce, was likewise dism^st, having reproached Cromwell to
his face with his services. And thus the danger from the Army was quickly
suppressed.

But the design of the Royalists, or Cavaliers, would have been more
formidable, had not the whole contrivance thereof been discovered to the
Protector by one Manning, who was with King Charles in Germany, and a Spy upon
all his actions; so that Cromwell knew the rise and progress, and first
appearance of those Arms against him, without being surprised, though all the
Gentlemen of that party in England were one way or other engaged, or at least
privy to i^^ but the seizing the principal of them throughout the Kingdom, a
little before the execution, much frus^^^ted the probable effects of that
Insurrection. The L. Mayor was sent for and acquainted with it, and (...)
militia settled, Skippon being made Major-Gener^^ All Horse Races forbidden,
and several dissol^^^ ^^^sons were seized upon suspicion: Counter ploes (...)
used, all sorts of Ammunition being sent down ^^^veral Gentlemen's Houses, with
Letters without N^^^^, and the Gentlemen for not discovering them s^^^^^. Yet
notwithstanding all these discouragements, (...) Western Association thought
themselves engaged in honor to rise upon the day appointed, and which they had
signified to K. Charles, who was come from Colen to the Sea coasts, in order to
have passed over to his friends with the first opportunity; accordingly, March
11. 1654. a party of 200 under Sir Joseph Wagstaff, coll. Penruddock and Grove,
marched into Salisbury, where the Judges, Rolls and Nichols, were sitting at
the Assize, and seized all their Horses, declaring the cause of their
appearance without further injury, or taking any money, which lay in Sergeant
Maynard and other Lawyers chambers, promising to return and break their fasts
with the Judges provisions, which they did, and increased their number to four
hundred, the whole City being well affected to them. Thence they marched to
Blanford, where coll. Penruddock himself proclaimed the King in the
Marketplace, and so marched Westward. Captain Butler, with two Troops of
Cromwels Horse, following at a distance in their Rere, to give them opportunity
of increasing; but by the Protectors taking up so many before, very few came
in, and many deserted when they saw no hopes of the number of four thousand
which was promised and expected.

Coll. Penruddock finding his affairs desperate, resolved to try Devonshire and
Cornwall, and in this condition about 100 of the most resolute, without staying
any where, came hungry, sleepy and weary, to Southmolton in Devonshire, hoping
at worst to get away by Sea, but that Night their Quarters were beaten up by
Capt. Crook about ten a clock, and some Houses forced, but coll. Penruddock
maintained his Quarters till he had Articled with the Captain, and then
surrendered himself; with him were taken coll. Jones a Kinsman of Cromwels,
coll. Grove, and sixty other prisoners, with 120 Horse, but Sir Joseph
Wagstaff, Mr Robert Mason, Esquire Clark, and Mr. Tho. Mompesson, escaped beyond
Sea, and so this rising was quickly suppressed. There were some appearances of
the like at Rustord-Abby in Nottingham-shire, at Hessummoor in Yorkshire, and
in the Counties of Montgomery and Cumberland, for which some few were executed;
but those weak efforts, with some others, came to nothing, and the Kings
Restoration which was mightily expected at this time, proved unsuccesful. After
which, the King discovered the Treachery of Manning to him upon this occasion;
Some Gentlemen going for England, came to take leave of the King at Colen, to
whom the King wished a good Journey, and prosperity to their Design; when they
arrived in England, they were seized, and examined before the Protectors
Council whether they did not speak with the King such a day, repeating what
past between them. Advice hereof being sent the King, he recollected that none
but coll. Tuke and this Manning, who held the candle, were present at this
passage: He declared the whole matter to the colonel, who much surprised
protested his innocence, and by the Kings command went directly to Mannings
chamber, and not staying opening the door, forced it, and found him chewing of
papers, and a packet by him newly come from Thurloe the Protectors Secretary:
at which, Manning was so much astonished, he could not speak a word. His Father
was killed in the Kings service, and himself had been Secretary to the E. of
Pembroke, and upon that account was entrusted with the Kings secrets. At the
instance of the whole Court, the King ordered him to be shot to death in one of
the Castles of the Duke of Newburg. The Protector had drawn 4000 foot from
Ireland, and 600 Horse from Scotland, but upon quelling this Rising, they were
remanded. Coll. Penruddock, and coll. Grove, were beheaded, and seven others
were hanged at Exeter.

The Protector had a great while been preparing a mighty Fleet, with all
necessary provisions, for some notable Enterprise, and every one fearing their
own States, could not guess whither this design tended: At length, those vast
preparations produced two mighty Fleets, one under the command of General
Blake, which was fitted only for the Sea, and sent to the Streights; the other,
about two months after, was committed to the charge of Genesis Pen, who was to
take abroad him an Army under General Venables. These Land Forces being about
3000, were divided into the several Ships, which were thirty sail of men of
War, but had not necessary provisions for so great an Army, the Commanders not
knowing whither, nor how far they were to go.

Dec. 19. 1654. This Fleet set sail from Portsmouth directly to the Barbados,
where the Generals had order to break open their Commissions, this being the
appointed place of Rendevouz, whither having a fair wind, they arrived Jan. 29.
following, and landed all their men in Carlisle-Bay.

The sudden departure of these two great Fleets, caused the King of Spain, who
doubted they were designed against him, to send the Marquess de Leda, Governor
of Dunkirk, into England as Extraordinary Ambassador, to penetrate into this
grand Court secret, but having spent several days after his arrival, without
receiving that satisfaction he desired, he returned back again.

Whilst the Fleet was at Barbados, the Officers were very diligent in their
charges, and caused the Shallops which they had brought from England ready
framed, to be set up, and the water Casks to be trimmed: Two Frigates are sent
to St. Christophers and Nevis, to raise men to complete their Regiments, and
form Regiments out of the Seamen to serve upon occasion. At length, they shipped
6000 men, and a Troop of Horse raised by the Barbadians at their own charge,
and sailing thence, March 31. 1655. in six days arrived at St. Christophers,
where they had a Recruit of 1300 Volunteers, most servants to the planters, who
willingly engaged, because during the time their service went on, and they
might afterward be as free as their masters, so that though the Fleet was
strengthened by seizing twenty Dutch ships, trading there contrary to Articles,
yet they were all full, though there were scarce provisions for half the number,
if any accident should happen. From hence they steered directly for Hispaniola,
and April 13. 1655. came in sight of St. Domingo, the principal Town, and
against which they chiefly designed. A Council of War being called, it was
unanimously concluded, That General Venables should land with his Forces; and
accordingly, next day he sent ashore seven thousand Foot, a Troop of Horse, and
three days provision, about ten or twelve Leagues Westward of the Town; the
Soldiers were even ravished with the hopes of the mountains of Gold they
should obtain, which seemed to put universal courage through the whole Army, so
that there appeared a certainty of Victory. But the General, whether by order,
or to engross all to himself, soon quelled their expectations by making
proclamation, That upon the taking St. Domingo, no man should presume to
plunder either money, plate, or Jewels, or to take or kill any tame Cattle
whatsoever, upon pain of death. This it was judged defeated the whole design,
the Soldiers being unwilling to endanger themselves when there was no prospect
of advantage; howsoever they were obliged to march forward, though with much
difficulty, passing through such thick Woods that they were forced to cut their
way, and could not find a drop of fresh water, so that with the drought caused
by the excessive heat of the Sun, which even pierced their Brains, and their
discontent of mind, (for sorrow is dry) most of them were faint and disabled.

Having in two days got through the Woods, without opposition from the
Spaniards, they at length joined coll. Bullards Brigade, consisting of three
Regiments of foot, whom Admiral Pen had landed on the side of the Bay, about
two Leagues from the Town, near a River of fresh water, being the appointed
rendevouz of the whole body, which now consisted in nine or ten thousand men,
but most of them so weak as hardly able to go, much less to fight, yet being
joined they marched on, not doubting but to take the Town quickly. A Forlorn
Hope of 500 men, under Capt. Cox, the chief guide to this place, advanced
first, after whom followed the whole Army; being within four miles of the Town,
a small party of Horse suddenly encounter the Forlorn Hope, and in an instant
routed them, forcing them through the next Regiment, which they likewise put to
flight, and had slain most of them, but that the whole Army came up to their
relief. After which, the Spaniards marched back to their Fort in good order,
and with little loss, but near fifty English were slain, besides Captain Cox
their Guide.

The General hereupon retreats to the River to refresh his men with water,
which caused their weakness, resolving once more to attempt carrying the Town,
causing Scaling ladders to be made, and two small Drakes, with a Mortar-piece,
to be landed from the Fleet, and conveyed by water near the Town: All things
prepared, they march forward, some guides undertaking to carry them a private
way out of danger of the Fort, but missing it, they fell into the same path,
and into worse mischief than before, for the Spaniards having notice of their
march by the Negroes and Molattoes, resolved to entertain them in their
passage, and April 25. the whole Army approaching near a brick Fort built by
the Spaniards, having nine good Cannon, and 300 men, they were suddenly charged
by a party hid among the Trees, who though not above seventy, first fired a
Volley of shot upon the Forlorn, and th^n flew in upon the English, already
weary, and near choked with thirst, and with their Steel Lances routed, in a
moment, both them and the Generals Regiment, with near half the Army, who
flying back into the Rear, possessed them with such a pannick fear, that every
one shifted for himself, the Spaniards pursuing with great slaughter, finding
no resistance but from M. Genesis Haines, who sold his life at a dear rate,
fighting in the midst of his Enemies; at length, the Spaniards weary of
killing, retreated with seven English Colors. Of the English 600 were slain on
the place, 300 wounded, and 200 fled into the Woods to save themselves, and
were there knocked on the head by the Malatto's and Negro's.

Upon this disaster, the Army that Night drew up to the Spanish Fort, and
planted a Mortar conveniently against it, all things being in readiness for a
battery, when on a sudden the Army was commanded to draw off, and without doing
any damage, marched to their old watering place the Bay, where being arrived,
and wanting Victuals, they were forced to go out in patties to fetch it, some
never returning, being (...) by the Negroes, till at last they were forced, by
famine, to eat the Horses of their own Troop. In this miserable state they
continued some days, at length it was resolved, that May 3. they should all go
aboard, and in ten days they arrived in the chief Port of Jamaica, called
Oristano, where they had better success, soon possessing the Town, and then the
Army began to take up their Habitations, and to plant. This was the first
planting of this gallant Island by the English, which has since grown so rich
and populous, and of so great advantage to this Kingdom, and they gained it the
more easily, because at their landing it was resolved by a Council of War, that
if any man turned his back to the enemy, his bringer up should kill him: And
the Spaniards having no Intelligence of their late overthrow at Hispaniola, nor
indeed suspecting any Hostility, fled away at the approach of this formidable
Army, and withdrew their Goods into the Woods, by a pretended Treaty with the
English, whither parties were sent to follow them, and to kill Cattle for the
Army, of which they found store of very good, without fighting, to their great
relief. Soon after, the Generals Pen and Venables arrived in England, and the
protector in reward of their Services, committed them both prisoners to the
Tower.

A little to alleviate this misfortune, Genesis Blake, about this time, being sent
to the Streights with a gallant Fleet, to scour the Seas of Turkish pirates,
who had taken and destroyed many English Ships, and enslaved their persons; he
first seeks them out at Sea, but not finding them, resolves to go home to them,
and March 10. 1655. arrives at Algiers, and Anchored without the mold, sending
a messenger to demand satisfaction of the Dey, for the depredations committed
on the English, and required the delivery of the Captives of our Nation
immediately. The Dey having provided a large present of Beef and Mutton, and
other fresh provisions alive, returns the ^essenger with them, and this answer
to the General, That the Ships and Captives already taken, belonged to
particular men, and therefore it lay not in his power to restore them withou
the general discontent of all his subjects; yet as for the English Captives
that were there, if he pleased to redeem them he should, and he would set a
reasonable and indifferent price upon their heads, and that if the General
thought good, they would conclude a peace with him, and for the future offer no
Acts of Hostility on their part, to any of the English Ships or Natives. This
answer seemed satisfactory to the General, and accordingly the captives were
redeemed, and a peace concluded.

Having thus dispatched the affair of Algiers, General Blake sails next to
Tunis, where sending a summons to the Dey, he received a very disobliging
answer; for having secured their ships, as they imagined, under their Castles,
they in scorn and contempt sent him word, Here are the Castles of Goletta, and
our Ships and Castles of Porto Ferino, do your worst, but do not think that we
are affrighted at the sight of your Fleet. This resolute reply exasperated both
the General and Seamen, who resolved to be revenged, and a Council of War being
called, it was resolved to burn the nine ships that were in Porto Ferino, which
they accordingly effected; for every ships Boat being manned with stout and
resolute Mariners, were sent into the Harbor to assault and fire the ships,
whilst the Admiral, Vice Admiral, and Rere Admiral, play broad-sides
continually on the Castle, to prevent their sinking the boats, who after a
brave assault, burnt the ships, and return back again only with the loss of 25
men, and 48 wounded. This daring action of General Blake, resounded to the
honor of the English Nation, as far as the Grand Signiors Court at
Constantinople.

But to digress a little, about this time Christians, Queen of Sweden, to the
admiration of all Europe, resigned up the Crown and Kingdom to her Kinsman
Carolus Gustavus, being contented, from a mighty Princess, to put her self into
the condition of a Lady Errant, desiring only these conditions might be granted
her from her successor: 1. That she retain a good part of her Kingdom, and the
customs, to her self. 2. That she will be no subject, but absolutely free
without control. 3. That she will Travel whether she pleases. To these Prince
Charles made this reply: 1. That he would not be a King without a Kingdom. 2.
That he will have no Rival nor Superior. 3. That he will not hazard himself
about her designs abroad. However, these differences were so accommodated, that
soon after she resigned her Kingdom, leaving to her self only the bear Title of
Queen, but to him both the Title of King and possession of a Kingdom. With this
new King, the Lord Whitlock, who had been some time Ambassador there, soon
concluded a firm League Offensive and Defensive between these two Nations, the
effects whereof had soon appeared in Christendom, had Cromwell lived much longer
than he did.

The horrible massacre committed at this time upon the protestants in Piedmont
and Savoy, by the Forces of that Duke, under the Marquess of Parella,
occasioned the protector to appoint a public Fast, and great sums of money
were gathered in England, and remitted to Sir Samuel Morland for their relief.

And now the Lord protector, to secure himself from Insurrections, constitutes
new kind of Officers, called Major Generals of Counties, dividing the Kingdom
into eleven parts; the Names of whom are these: For Kent and Surrey coll.
Kelsey; for Sussex, Hamshire, and Berkshire, coll. Goff; for Wilts, Gloucester,
Dorset, Somerset, Devon and Cornwall, coll. Desborow; for Oxfordshire, Bucks,
Hartford, Cambridge, Isle of Ely, Essex, Norfolk and Suffolk, Lt. Genesis
Fleetwood; for the City of London M. Genesis Skippon; for Lincoln, Nottingham,
Derby, Warwick and Leichestershire, Commissary Genesis Whaley; for Northampton,
Bedford, Rutland and Huntington, Maj. Butler; for Worcester, Hereford, Salop
and North Wales, coll. Berry; for Cheshire, Stafford and Lancashire, coll.
Wortley; for Durham, Cumberland, York, Westmoreland and Northumberland, Lord
Lambert; for Westminster and Middlesex, coll. Barkstead Lieutenant of the
Tower. The greatest service they did was to oblige Delinquents to pay in the
Tenths of their Estates for old offenses, and influence Elections of Parliament
men, but in a short time he dismissed them again.

Another design of the protectors was the admission of the Jews into England,
for which it was said they offered 200000 l. whereupon he proposes it to
several Judges and Ministers for their approbation; many arguments were used
for and against it, and several places of Scripture cited, and diverse
conferences held about it, with Dr. Manton, Mr. Jenkyns and others, who yet
were not satisfied with the arguments of Manassch Ben Israel the Jewish Agent,
though the Irotector alleged, That since there was a promise for their
conversion, means must be used to that end, which is the preaching of the
Gospel, and that cannot be had unless they be permitted to reside where the
Gospel is preached; but no conclusion, the public readmission of them was
laid aside, as a thing decried both by the Clergy and Laity.

The Spaniards having certain Intelligence of the attempt and repulse of the
English at Hispaniola, and their possession of Jamaica, thought this a
sufficient breach of the peace, though there was never any peace made with that
King beyond the Line, he always taking all English ships he could meet with and
master that Traded there; and hereupon, he makes a seizure of all the Merchants
persons and Goods then in Spain, so that the War begins to grow hot both in the
old and new World. The Protector thereupon, orders the Generals Blake and
Montague, to block up Cadiz, the chief Port Town of that Kingdom, and whither
the Plate Fleet used yearly to come. He likewise concludes a peace with France
(which was at Wars with Spain a long time) by the Interest of Cardinal
Mazarine, the French King (as you have heard) banishing all the Royal Family of
England (except the Queen mother) out of his Dominions, at the desire of
Cromwell, and by the Instigation of that Cardinal.

The English Fleet under Montague and Blake, had for some months, in a manner,
besieged Cadiz by Sea, but could by no provocation oblige the Spaniard to fight
them, who hoping that the English having suffered the fatigues of the Sea,
would be forced to depart for want of provisions, thought it better policy to
lose a little honor, rather than to venture either men or ships, against those
who had maintained such terrible Sea fights against the Hollanders; but the
English found in Wyers Bay in Portugal, a convenient supply of water and
provisions, which was much nearer than the Spaniards imagined. Hither were the
Generals gone for fresh water and provisions, having only left a squadron of 7
ships under Capt. Stainer, before the port of Cadiz, to observe all ships
passing in or out; as they were thus plying for some days, it happened that a
stiff gale of wind forced Capt. Stainer to stand out to Sea, where he espied
part of the K. of Spains plate Fleet coming from the West Indies, and making
directly for Cadiz, he was somewhat to the Leeward, but made up toward them
with all the sail they could possible, and after some hours with much labor,
the Captain in the Speaker, with the Bridgwater and Plymouth Frigates, got up
to them, the other four ships not being able to come up, and presently engaged
them; the Spanish Fleet consisted in 8 tall ships or Galleons, yet in a short
time they were wholly spoiled, one was sunk, three burnt, two ran ashore and
were bulged, one escaped, and two fell into the hands of the English, one
whereof had a great quantity of plate and Cockeweal in her, the other were
chiefly laden with Hydes. In these ships, many persons of Quality were taken,
and among others the two Sons of the Marquess of Badajo^, who had been
Governor of Peruand, having gained a great Estate in New England, was now
returning to live the remainder of his days in his own country; he, and his
Wife and Daughter, were burnt in one of the ships, of which, and the War with
Spain, with the present Victory, hear what the Poet Laureat of that Age
elegantly sings: Now for some Ages had the pride of Spain
Made the Sun shine on half the World in vain;
Whilst she bid War to all that durst supply
The place of those her cruelty made dye.
Of Natures bounty men forbore to taste,
And the best portion of the Earth lay waste;
From the New World, her Silver and her Gold,
Came like a Tempest to confound the Old,
Feeding with these the bribed Electors hopes,
Alone she gave us Emperors and Popes:
With these advancing her unjust designs,
Europe was shaken with he^ Indian Mines,
When our Protector, looking with disdain,
Upon this gilded Majesty of Spain,
And knowing well that Empire must decline,
Whose chief Support and Sinews are of Coin,
Our Nations solid Virtue did oppose,
To the rich Troublers of the Worlds repose.
And now some months Incamping on the Main,
Our Naval Army had besieged Spain;
They that the whole Worlds Monarchy designed,
Are to their Ports by our bold Fleet confined,
From whence our Red-cross they triumphant see,
Riding without a Rival on the Sea.
Others may use the Ocean as their Road,
The English only make it their abode,
Whose ready sail^ with every wind can fly,
And make a Covenant with the unconstant Sky.
Our Oaks secure as if they there took root;
We tread on Billows with a steady foot:
Lords of the Worlds great waste, the Ocean we
Whole Forests send to reign upon the Sea,
And every Coast may trouble or relieve,
But none can visit us without our leave:
Angels and we have this Prerogative,
That none can at our happy seat arrive,
While we descend at pleasure to invade
The Bad with Vengeance, and the Good to Aid.
Mean while the Spaniards in America,
Near to the Line the Sun approaching faw,
And hoped their European coasts to find,
Cleared from our ships by the Autumnal wind.
Their huge capacious Gallions stuffed with Plate,
The laboring winds drive slowly to their fate.
Before St. Lucar they their Guns discharge,
To show their Joy, or to invite a Barge:
This heard some ships of ours (though out of view)
As swift as Eagles to the Quarry flew.
So harmless Lambs; that for their Mother bleat,
Wake hungry Lions, and become their meat.
Arrived, they roon begin their Tragic play,
And with their smoaky Cannon banish day;
Night, horror, slaughter, with confusion meets,
And in their sable arms embrace the Fleets:
Through yielding planks the angry Bullets fly,
And of one wound hundreds together dye:
Born under different Stars, one fate they have,
The Ship their Coffia, and the Sea their Grave.
Bold were the men, that on the Ocean first,
Spread their new Sails, when shipwreck was the worst.
More danger now from men alone we find
Than from the Rocks, the Billows and the VVind.
They that had failed from near the Antartick Pole,
Their Treasure safe, and all their Vessels whole,
In sight of their dear country ruined he,
Without the guilt of either Rock or Sea:
What they would ^ave our fiercer art destroys,
Surpassing storms in terror and in noise.
Once Jove from Ida did both Hosts survey,
And when he pleased to Thunder part the fray.
Here Heaven, in vain, that kind retreat would sound,
The louder cannon had the thunder drowned.
Some were made prize, while others burnt and rent,
With their rich lading to the bottom went;
Down sinks at once: So Fortune with us sports,
The pay of Armies, and the pride of Courts.
Vain man, whose rage buries as low that store:
As Avarice had dug for it before,
What Earth in her dark bowels could not keep
From greedy hands, lies safer in the Deep,
Where Thetis kindly does from mortals hide;
Those seeds of Luxury debate, and pride.
And now, into our hands, the richest prize
Falls with the noblest of our eremies;
The Marquess, glad to see the fire destroy
Wealth the prevailing Foe were to enjoy,
Out from his flaming ship his children sent,
To perish in a milder Element,
Then laid him by his burning Ladies side,
And since he could not save her, with her died:
Spices and Gums about them melting fry,
And ^hoenix like, in that rich Nest they dye;
Alive in flames of equal love they burned,
And now together into Ashes turned,
Ashes more worth than all their Funeral cost,
Than the huge Treasure which with them was lost.
These dying Lovers, and their floating Sons,
Suspend the Fight, and filence all our Guns.
Beuaty and youth, about to perish, finds
Such noble pity in brave English minds,
That they the spoil neglecting, and the prize,
All labor now to save their Enemies.
How frail's our passion? How soon changed are
Our wrath and fury to a friendly care?
They that but now for honor and for plate,
Made the Sea blush with blood, forget their hate;
And while their Foes from perishing they retrieve,
With greater danger than they fought they dive.
With these returns Victorious Montague,
With Laurel in his hands, and half Peru:
Let our brave Generals divide that bough,
Our great Protector has such wereaths enough;
His conquering Head has no more room for Bays:
Then let it be as the whole Nation prays,
With purple clothed and Ermine; let him hold,
A Royal Scepter made of Spanish Gold.


The Protector was highly pleased at this succesns and great booty, and a
particular day of Thanksgiving was appointed by him for it; and soon after,
Genesis Montague, with the young Marquets, and part of the Fleet to convoy the
silver, which amounted to two millions of pieces of Eight, returned into
England, and delivered the Bullion into the Mint, and the young Marquess and
his Brother were set at liberty. But the Spanish War being like to prove
chargeable, notwithstanding this present supply, the protector being still
necessitated for money, and desiring to have his power confirmed to him by the
people, in hope the new Representative might grant him what the former denied,
he issues out Writs for the Election of a new parliament, wherein much
circumspection was used, if possible, to prevent some of the former House from
being chosen.

Sept. 17. 1656. This parliament met at Westminster, and had a Sermon preached
before them at the Abbey Church, by Dr. John Owen, Dean of Christs-Ch^rch, upon
those words in Isaiah, What shall one then answer to the messengers of the
Land? That the Lord has founded Sion, and the poor of his people shall
rejoice. After Sermon, the members went to the House, but found at the door a
Guard, and an Officer standing with a List in his hand demanding the Names of
every one of them, and such as were marked for non-admittance were turned back,
and a promise imposed upon every individual member before he should be
permitted to fit in the House, That he would not act any thing prejudicial to
the present Government; which many refused, and returned home, but the major
part assenting to it, entered the House, and chose Sir Tho. Widdrington Speaker,
and not minding those that were excluded, referred the approbation of them to
the Protectors Council. They then proceed according to the protectors desire,
making an Act for disanulling the Title of Charles Stewart to the Government of
these three Nations, nemine contradicente; another for making it Treason for
any to attempt, compass, or imagine the Protectors death, and appointing such
Offenders to be tried not by a Jury of twelve sufficient men, but by a High
Court of Justice; a third for an assessment upon England, Scotland and Ireland,
of seventy thousand pound a month for three years; an Act for preventing
multiplicity of buildings, in, and ten miles about London, a whole years
Revenue to be paid for all dwelling or Outhouses, raised upon any new
foundation since 1620. An Act for Excise of merchandise imported: An Act for
punishing such as live at high rates, and have no visible Estates; and lastly,
for the observation of the Lord's Day. When these Arts were ready for signing,
the Protector came to the painted chamber and sent for the parliament, where
the speaker tendering them to him, at the signing them he speak thus:

Mr. Speaker, I perceive that among these many Acts of parliament, there has
been very great care had by the parliament to provide for the just and
necessary support of the Commonwealth, by these Bills for levying of money now
brought to me, which I have given my consent unto; and understanding it has
been the practice of those who have been chief Governors, to acknowledge with
thanks to the Commons, their care and regard of the public, I do very heartily
and thankfully acknowledge their kindness herein.

But leaving the parliament awhile, let us relate a most daring attempt
performed under the conduct of Genesis Blake about this time. This valiant
commander lying with his Fleet near Cadiz, had advice that the Spanish
VVest-India Fleet was put into the port of Sancta Cruze in Teneriff, the chief
Isle of the Canaries, whereupon the Fleet weighed, and April 20. 1657. came to
the mouth of Sancta Cruze Bay, where they saw sixteen Spanish ships lying in
order almost like an half moon. At the North of the Haven is a castle well
fortified with cannon, besides seven Forts more, with three, four, and six Guns
apiece, so that the en^erprize seemed dangerous, if not desperate: And Don
Diego D' aquies, had caused all the smaller ships to be moared along the shore
to secure them, and the six great Gallions lay further off at anchor, with
their broad-sides toward the Sea. Blake perceiving all this, calls a Council of
War, where it was resolved to attack them instantly, without any thought of
danger; Capt. Stainer in the Speaker, presently falls upon the ships,
disregarding the number of shot which came thundering from the Forts on every
side as thick as hail, and maintains near an hours fight, till the Generals,
blake and Montague, having ordered some Frigates to ply the Forts and
Breast-words, with continual broad-siees, came up, and with all their force
attacked the Spaniards, who after four hours gallant resistance, were driven
out of their ships, which the English could not easily bring away, and were
therefore forced to burn to the number of sixteen small and great. This gallant
attempt cost the English but 48 men, and 120 wounded. The Spaniards, besides
the loss of their whole Fleet, had several hundreds of men slain on the shore,
and in the Forts and Works, besides those killed in the ships. For this
notable exploit, the Protector, by order of parliament, sent a Diamond Ring
worth 500 l. as a present to G. Blake, and capt. Rich. Stainer, who led on the
first squadron, was at his first coming into England, for this and his former
services, Knighted by the protector.

At this time one Miles Syndercomb, an Officer formerly in Scotland, under M.
Genesis Overton, was seized, and accused to design to take away the life of the
protector, in combination with a disguised person, said to be a Priest^sent
from Don Alonso in Flanders, who was engaged as principal. It was alleged that
several proper houses were taken to shoot the protector, with Engines,
Blunderbusses, and other fire Arms at his going to the parliament, or in the
way to Hampton Court, and that the chapel at White Hall was to be fired with
a strong combustible matter. This account Secretary Thurloe delivered to the
parliament, in moving terms, that the House ordered a day of Thanksgiving, and
a Narrative of the plot to be published, and went in a body to congratulate His
Highness happy Deliverance, where Sir. Tho. VViddrington, their speaker, made a
speech, wherein he declared, 1. The danger and ruin of the Reformed Churches
abroad, and three Nations at home, who were struck at by this blow: 2. The
cunning secrecy of it, that no more than two should be privy to this wicked
design: 3. The extensiveness of it, resolving if they failed in one place to do
it in another, so that if Cicero were living, he would want expression to set
out the danger and the mercy, and it being so unparalleled and unpresedented a
deliverance, the parliaments Hymn ought to be, O Cantemus, Cantemus, Canticum
Novum, Other us sing a new song to the Lord, bless his Name, hew forth his
salvation this day, for he has done marvelous things, his right hand, and his
holy arm, has gotten him the Victory. As the members were ascending the stairs
of the banqueting house, a press of people crowding with them, the stairs
broke under them, and Richard, the protectors Son, was much bruised, and Mr.
Ellis, solicitor General, broke his leg.

Syndercomb, the next Term, was by the direction of the parliament, tried for
this Treason at the Kings Bench Bat: He denied the plot, but the evidence
swearing positively against him, he was convicted upon the statute of 25 Edw.
3. Justice Glyn upon his condemnation declaring, that by the King was
understood any chief magistrate of the Nation. He was carried tkence to the
Tower, where the Night before his execution, it was supposed he poisoned
himself, as the Coroners Jury gave their Verdict: He went well to bed, desiring
before half an hours privacy for his prayers, which being clapsed, he opened
the door, and rubbing his hands together, and his Nose with them, he briskly
bid them good Night, and being found dead next morning, his body, awhile after,
was tied with his head to the Horses Tail, and drawn to the s^^ffold at
Tower Hill, where he was buried, and a stake, covered with Iron a top, driven
into his body.

The sect of the Quakers were now grown numerous, among whom one called James
Naylor, resembling, in his proportions and complexion, the picture of Christ,
and setting his beard and locks in the same fashion, pretended to counterfeit
our blessed Savior, and had Dilciples and Women ministering to him, who
blasphemously applied several expressions of scripture relating to our Lord
Jesus, to this man. He first appeared at Bristol, where a man leading an Horse
before him, and Dorcas, Erbury, and Martha Symonds, going up to the knees in
dirt by his Horse side, sung aloud, Holy, Holy, Holy, Hosanna to the highest,
etc. For this they were seized, and brought up to the parliament: They entered
the House singing their blasphemies, and a Committee being appointed to
consider of their punishment, he was sentenced to be set in the Pillory twice,
and whipped twice, and his forehead to be stigmatized with a letter B. for a
Blasphemer, and bored through the Tongue with an hot Iron, with which he used
to answer to every question, Thou have said it; and the like. He was likewise
whipped at Bristol, and thence returned to Bridewell, to be kept close prisoner,
and to eat no more than he earned. In Newgate, after his punishment, one Mr.
Rich, a merchant of credit, that held him by the hand while he was in the
Pillory, with diverse others, licked his wounds; the Women were observed, some
to lay their heads in his lap, lying against his Feet, others to lean upon his
shoulder, and as soon as any Quaker came into his company, they would first
take him by the hand, and in a strange note say, Holy, Holy, etc. but being
removed to Bridewell, after three days wilful fasting, having weakened himself
even to death, he begged some Victuals, and then was set to work, which he
performed, and came by degrees to himself, and his understanding; after
Cromwels death he had his liberty, and soon after died.

fore the pretector might be desired to assume the style of King, as the most
known, and most agreeable Government. This motion was seconded by several of
the protectors Courtiers, and April 9. the parliament having desired a meeting
with him, came to the Banqueting House at White Hall, where-the speaker Sir
Tho. Widdrington, commended the Title and Office of a King, as being settled in
this Nation with Christianity it self, approved by our Ancestors, and
consistent with our Laws and the temper of the people, and then presented him
the model of their humble petition and advice to that purpose: His Highness, in
answer hereto, said, Mr. Speaker, this is a weighty matter, and therefore I
desire space to seek God, the charge that you would lay upon me being too heavy
for me to bear without his assistance, for the ENglish are the best people in
the World, and require all tenderness and consideration whatsoever, to be used
for preserving their liberties and properties.

The next day a Committee was appointed to wait upon him, and receive his
scruples, and to offer reasons for his satisfaction. The objections the
protector made, were, First, That the Title of a King is a Name of Office, and
any Name that may imply the supreme magistrate has the same signification, and
therefore there is no necessity of a change. To this they reply, That the Name
of a King is only equal to, and comprehensive of the Office of the supreme
magistrate: It is a rule, That the King; of England cannot alter the Laws by
reason of their Name, and that there is no obligation upon any other, that the
very Title was declared necessary in the 9th. of Edw. 4. in the controversy
betwixt him and Hen. 7. and every action done by the King in possession was
valid, and that the Name King had beginning with our Laws, and that new Laws
must be made for settling the Government in a protector.

The other objection was the danger and difficulty of altering the same
Government to a Commonwealth, and the refusal of some Judges, and acting of
others, upon that ground: That another parliament might change those
resolutions: The dislike of the good people and Army; that providence had laid
aside the Title of King after seven years War, and many of the chief of those
who were Instrumental therein were dissatisfied. These scruples the Committee
endeavored to remove, by alleging, That providence had now brought about
affairs so, that it seemed necessary for His Highness to comply with it; and as
for discontented persons, they have been always found in the best of
Governments. But because this was a matter of consequence, I shall repeat the
speech made by the Lord Whitlock, one of the Committee, sent to the protector,
with his answer thereto; who after several others had offered their sentiments,
summed up the most material reasons as follows:

Sir, I have but very little to trouble your Highness with, so much has been
already spoken and so well, that it will be hard for me, or any other, to
undertake to add to it, only the duty of my Employment, and something due to
your Highness, occasions me to speak a few words, to acknowledge, with very
humble thanks, the Honor and Right which you have done this Committee, by the
clear and free discourses and conferences which they have had with your
Highness, and for your frequent expressions, and testimonies of affection and
respect to the parliament, whose-sense in this, I may presume to speak, That
never any persons met their supreme magistrate with more love, duty and honor,
than the parliament have met your Highness with in their addresses; which
argument of love, deserves that esteem and force which I doubt not but your
Highness will put upon it. I am fearful to be too tedious at any time,
especially at so late an hour, and therefore shall speak but short to some
things which I remember not to have been mentioned: Your Highness was pleased
at the last meeting to say, That the original Institution of the Title, King,
was by common consent, and that the same common consent might institute any
other Title, and make it as effectual as that of King: This must be
acknowledged, but withal, you may be pleased to observe, That the Title of King
is not only by an original common consent, but that consent also approved and
confirmed, and the Law fitted thereunto, and that fitted to the Laws, by the
experience and industry of many Ages, and many hundreds of years together,
whereas any other Title will be only by present common consent, without that
experience and approbation: For that experience which your Highness mentioned
to have been of other Titles, and the due administration of Justice under them,
this experience is far short of the other; and for the course of Justice, we
have cause to thank that care which placed so good Judges and Officers over us.
Yet give me leave to say, That in private causes, between party and party, and
in public matters in nominal causes, it was not easy to find Justice to be
done by some Jurors, and many questions have risen upon the occasion of those
new Titles: Concerning that tender point of good men's satisfaction, I think it
requires a very great regard from us, and I doubt not but those good people
will be fully satisfied, if they consider the covenants, promises and precepts,
which in the scripture are annexed to the Name of King; and although some have
alleged, that they belong to any chief magistrate, as well as to King, yet no
man did ever read the original word translated otherwise than King: Neither do
I find the Title of Protector once mentioned in the holy Text. If the present
Authority be a lawful Authority, which I hope none of us will deny, surely
those good men who are so well principled in Godliness, will not forget that
precept of submission to Authority, and to be satisfied with that which lawful
Authority shall ordain; their Rights and Liberties are the same with ours, and
the parliament cannot advise any thing for the preservation of the peoples
Rights, but these good men are included, which I hope will be no
dissatisfaction to them. In all the changes which we have seen, there has been
a dissatisfaction to some, yet still the blessing of God has gone a long
through all these changes, with those who carried on his Interest; and the
cause being the same, the same mercies have been continued. And I doubt not,
but if the intended change and restitution be made, as I hope it will, I doubt
not but the same God will continue his blessings to that Good Old Cause wherein
we are engaged, and that good men will receive satisfaction by it. Your
Highness has been told, That the Title of King is upon the foundation of Law,
and that a new Title must have a constitution to make the Laws relate unto it,
and that unto the Laws; I shall only add this, That a Title by Relation is not
so certain and sale as a Title upon the old foundation of the Law, and that a
Title upon a single present constitution, as any new Title must be, cannot be
so firm as a Title built upon the present constitution, and upon the old
foundation of the Law likewise, which the Title of King will be. If any
inconvenience should ensue upon your acceptance of this Title which the
parliament advises, your Highness's satisfaction will be that they did advise
it.

On the contrary part, if any inconvenience should arise upon your Highness
refusal of this Title which the parliament has advised, your burden will be
the greater, and therefore whatsoever may fall out, will be better answered by
your Highness complying with your parliament then otherwise; the Question is
not altogether new, some instances have been given of the like, to which I
shall add two or three. The Title of the Kings of England, in the Realm of
Ireland, was, Lord of Ireland; and the parliament in the 33 year of Hen. 8.
relating, That inconveniences did arise there, by reason of that Title, did
enact, That Hen. 8. should assume the Style and Title of King of Ireland, which
in the judgment of the parliament was preferred before the other.

In the State of Rome new Titles proved fatal to their Liberties; their case
was not much unlike ours, they were wearied with a Civil War, and coming to a
settlement, some would not admit the Title of Rex to be used, but were
contented to give the Titles of Caesar, Perpetual Dictator, Prince, Senate,
Emperor: So that at length, the will of Caesar was their Law, who said, I am
not a King but Caesar. The Northern people were more happy among themselves; a
private Gentleman, of a Noble Family, took up Arms with his countrymen against
a Tyrant, and by the blessing of God, rescued the Native Liberties and Rights
of their country, from the oppression of that Tyrant: This Gentleman had the
Title of Marshal given unto him, which continued for some years; afterward
their Parliament judging it best to resume the old Title, Elected this
Gentleman King, and with him was brought in the liberty of Protestant Religion,
and the establishment of the Civil Rights of that people, which have continued
in a prosperous condition ever since in Sweden, unto this day. Sir, I shall
make no other application but in my prayers to God, to direct your Highness and
the Parliament, as I hope he will, to do that which will be most for his
honor, and the good of his people.

This speech was made April 26. 1657. but the Protector finding the
inclinations of some of the people, and especially of many Officers and
Soldiers of the Army, to be very averse to the Title of King, which they had
lately renounced, and likewise doubting, as it was then discoursed, that they
would fortify his Title, but weaken his Revenue, who required Nineteen hundred
thousand pound a year, for the support of his Government, besides the charge of
the Spanish War, he thereupon sent for the Parliament to the Banqueting House
at White Hall, May 8. following, where he gave them his last, and positive
answer to this purpose:

Mr. Speaker, I am come hither to answer that which was in your last paper to
your Committee you sent me, which was in relation to the desires which were
offered me by the House, in that they called their petition. I confess that
business has put the Parliament to a great deal of trouble, and spent much
time: I am very sorry that it has cost me some, and some thoughts, and because
I have been the unhappy occasion of the expense of so much time, I shall spend
little of st now: I have, the best I can, resolved the whole business in my
thoughts, and I have said so much already in testimony of the whole, that I
think I shall not need to repeat any thing that I have said. I think it is a
Government, that the aims of it seek much a settling of the Nation on a good
foot, in relation to Civil Rights and Liberties, which are the Rights of the
Nation; and I hope I shall never be found to be of them that shall go about to
rob the Nation of these Rights, but to serve them what I can to the attaining
them: It has also exceeding well provided for the safety and security of
honest men, in that great, natural, and religious liberty, which is Liberty of
Conscience. These are great fundamentals, and I must bear my Testimony to them
(as I have, and shall do still, so long as God lets me live in this World) that
the intentions of the things are very honorable and honest, and the product
worthy of a Parliament; I have only had the unhappiness, both in my conferences
with your Committees, and in the best thoughts I could take to my self, not to
be convicted of the necessity of that thing that has been so often insisted
upon by you, to wit, The Title of King, as in it self necessary, as it seems to
be apprehended by your selves; and I do with all honor and respect, to the
judgment of the Parliament, testify that (ceteris paribus) no private judgment
is to lie in the balance with the judgment of a Parliament, but in things that
respect particular persons, every man that is to give an account to God of his
actions, he must in some measure be able to prove his own work, that is, To
have an approbation in his own conscience of that he is to do or forbear: And
whilst you are granting others liberties, surely you will not deny me this, it
being not only a liberty but a duty (and such a duty as I cannot without
sinning forbear) to examine my own heart and thoughts, and judgment, in every
work which I am to set my hand to, or to appear in for.

I must confess therefore, that though I do acknowledge all the other, yet I
must be a little confident in this, that what with the circumstances that
accompany humane actions, whether they be circumstances of time or persons,
whether circumstances that relate to the whole, or private or particular
circumstances that compass any person that is to render an account of his own
actions, I have truly thought, and do still think, that if I should (at the
best) do any thing on this account to answer your expectation, it would be at
the best doubtingly, and certainly what is so, is not of faith; whatsoever is
not of faith is sin to him that does it, whether it be with relation to the
substance of the action, about which the consideration is conversant, or
whether to circumstances about it, which make all indifferent actions good or
evil to him that does it. I lying under this consideration, think it my duty,
only I could have wished I had done it sooner for your sake, for saving time
and trouble, and indeed for the Committees sake, to whom I must acknowledge
publicly, I have been unseasonably troublesome; I say, I could have wished I
had given it sooner, but truly this is my answer, That although I think the
Government does consist in very excellent parts in all, but in that one thing
the Title, as to me: I should not be an honest man if I should not tell you
that I cannot accept of the Government, nor undertake the trouble and charge of
it, which I have a little more experimented than every man, as to what troubles
and difficulties do befall men in such Trusts, and in such Undertakings: I say,
I am persuaded to return this answer to you, That I cannot undertake this
Government with the Title of a King, and this is mine answer to this great and
weighty business.

The Protector having refused the Title of King, the Committee of Settlement
was ordered to prepare an Explanatory Act to the humble petition and advice, in
respect of the Protectors Oath, his Councils, the Members of Parliament; the
other House, which was to consist of about sixty Lords of the Protectors
Electing, and having Voted, That Protector should be the Title of the chief
Magistrate, and the Petition and Advice being allowed accordingly, the House
desired a conference with His Highness, who accordingly meets them, May 25.
1657. in the painted Chamber, where Sir Tho. Widdrington presents him with the
humble Petition and Advice, the substance whereof was,

1. That His Highness Oliver Cromwell, under the Title of Lord Protector, would
be pleased to execute the Office of chief Magistrate over England, Scotland and
Ireland, and the Territories thereunto belonging, and to govern according to
all things in this Petition and Advice; and also, that he would in his life
time, appoint the person that should succeed in the Government after his death.
2. That he would call a Parliament consisting of two Houses, once in three
years at farthest. 3. That those persons who are legally chosen by a free
Election of the people to serve in parliament, may not be excluded from doing
their duties, but by consent of that House whereof they are Members. 4. That
none but those under the Qualifications therein mentioned, shall be capable to
serve as Members in Parliament. 5. That the power of the other House be limited
as herein prescribed. 6. That the Laws and Statutes of the Land be observed and
kept, no Laws altered, suspended, abrogated or repealed, or new Laws made but
by Act of Parliament. 7. That the yearly sum of a Million of pounds sterling be
settled for the maintenance of the Navy and Army, and three hundred thousand
pounds for support of the Government, besides other temporary supplies as the
Commons in Parliament shall see the necessities of the Nation to require. 8.
That the number of the Protectors Council shall not be above twenty one,
whereof the Quorum to be seven. 9. The chief Officers of State, as Chancellors,
Keepers of the Great Seal, etc. to be appointed by Parliament. 10. That his
Highness would encourage a godly Ministry in these Nations, and that such as do
revile and disturb them in the worship of God, may be punished according to
Law, and where Laws are defective, new ones to be made. 11. That the Protestant
Christian Religion, as it is contained in the Old and New Testament, be
asserted and held forth for the public profession of these Nations and no
other, and that a Confession of Faith be agreed upon, and recommended to the
people of these Nations, and none be permitted by words or writing, to revile
or reproach the said Confession of Faith, etc.

The Petition and Advice being read, was by the Protector passed into a Law,
though with much seeming reluctance, as the following Speech declared.

Mr. Speaker, I am not come hither this day as to a Triumph, but with the most
serious thoughts that ever I had in my life, being to undertake one of the
greatest burdens that ever was laid upon the back of any humane creature, so
that without the support of the Almighty, I must necessarily sink under the
weight of it, to the damage and prejudice of these Nations: And this being so,
I must ask the help of the Parliament, and the help of all those that fear God,
that by their prayers I may receive assistance from the hand of God, seeing
nothing but his presence can enable me to the discharge of so great a Trust.
And seeing this is but an Introduction to the carrying on the Government of
these Nations, and forasmuch as there are many things which cannot be supplied
without the help of a Parliament, I think it my duty to desire your help, not
that I doubt of it, for I believe that the same spirit that led the Parliament
to this, will easily suggest the rest to them, And truly, nothing could have
induced me to undertake this intolerable burden to flesh and blood, had I not
seen that it was the Parliaments care to answer those ends for which they have
engaged; and I call God to witness, that I would not have undergone it, had I
not seen it to be determined by the Parliament to make clearly for the Liberty
and Interest of the Nation, and preservation of such as fear God, and if these
Nations be not thankful to you for your care therein, it will fall as a sin on
their heads. To conclude, I would recommend to you the Reformation of the
Nation, by discountenancing Vice, and giving encouragement to Good men and
Virtue, desiring that you would not be wanting in any thing that may make for
the good of the Nations, wishing the Lord to prosper all your aims and
endeavors.

This Speech ended, the Members return to their House, and soon after the
Protector sends them a Letter, desiring their Adjournment till the Inauguration
of the Lord Protector could be performed, and accordingly they passed a Bill
for adjourning from June 26. to Jan. 20. following, June 26. being appointed
for his Highness solemn Investiture; and the same day a place being prepared in
Westminster Hall, there were two Chairs set, one for the Protector, with a
Canopy of State over it, and another for the Speaker, with seats built
Scaffold-wise, for the Parliament, on both sides, and places below for the
Aldermen of London, and others; all which being ready, the Protector came out
of a Room adjoining to the Lords House, and in this order proceeded into the
Hall: First went his Gentlemen, then an Herald, the Attorney General, then the
Judges, after them Norroy King at Arms, the Lord Commissioners of the Treasury,
the Seal carried by Commissioner Fines, then Garter, and after him the Earl of
Warwick with the Sword born before the Protector bare-headed, the L. Mayor
Tichburn carrying the City Sword by his left hand: Being seated in the Chair,
on the left hand stood the L. Mayor, and the Dutch Ambassador, and on the right
the E. of Warwick, and the French Ambassador, next behind him stood his Son
Richard, L. Fleetwood, and L. Cleypool, and the Privy Council, upon a lower
descent stood the Lords Montague and Whitlock with drawn Swords.

Then the Speaker Sir Tho. Widdrington, in the Name of the Parliament,
presented to him several things that were laid on the Table, which were a Robe
of purple Velvet, a Bible, a Scepter, and a Sword, on each of which the Speaker
made a short Comment as he delivered them.

1. The Robe of purple: This is an Emblem of Magistracy, and imports
Righteousness and Justice; when you have put on this Vestment, I may say you
are a Gown-man. This Robe is of a mixed color, to show the mixture of Justice
and Mercy; indeed a Magistrate must have two hands, Plectentem and
Amplectentem, to Cherish and to Punish. 2. The Bible is a Book that contains
the Holy Scriptures, in which you have the happiness to be well versed: This
Book of Life consists of two Testaments, the Old and New, the first shows
Christum Velatum; the second, Christum Revelatum, Christ Veiled and Revealed:
It is a Book of Books, and does contain both Precepts and Examples for good
Government. 3. Here is a Scepter, not unlike a Staff to the weak and poor, it
is of ancient use in this kind. It Is said in Scripture, That the Scepter shall
not depart from Judah; it was of the like use in other Kingdoms, however the
Greek Poet calls Kings and Princes Scepter bearers. 4. The last thing is a
Sword, not a Military but Civil Sword; it is a Sword rather of Defense than
Offense, not to defend your self only, but your people also. If I might presume
to six a Motto upon this Sword, as the Valiant Lord Talbot did upon his, it
should be this, Ego sum Domini Protectoris ad protegendum populum meum, I am
the Lord Protectors to protect my people.

After this the Speaker returned again to the Chair, and administered the Oath
to the Protector in these following words,

I do in the presence, and by the Name of Almighty God, promise and swear, that
to the uttermost of my power, I will uphold and maintain the true Reformed
Protestant Christian Religion in the purity thereof, as it is contained in the
Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, to the uttermost of my power and
understanding, and encourage the profession and professors of the same: And
that to the utmost of my power, I will endeavor, as chief Magistrate of these
three Nations, the maintenance and preservation of the peace and safety, and
Just Rights and Privileges of the people thereof; and shall in all things,
according to my best knowledge and power, govern the people of these Nations
according to Law.

The Oath administered, Dr. Manton made a Prayer, and then an Herald stood up
aloft, giving signal to a Trumpet to sound three times; after which, he did by
Authority and Direction of Parliament, publish and proclaim his Highness Lord
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, requiring all
persons to yield him due obedience. This Proclamation ended, the Trumpets again
sounded, and some Soldiers and other cried out, God save the Lord Protector:
Then was he again proclaimed by an Officer at Arms, standing on the Stairs. The
Ceremonies ended, the Protector attended by all the Officers of State, went
into the Palace-Yard in his Robes, where entering his Coach, he returned in
State to White Hall.

This year an Insurrection was designed by those called Fifth Monarchy men, who
had diverse meetings in an House in Shore-Ditch, several of them being
discontented persons, who had been formerly of the Army; they had appointed to
have Rendevouzed on Mile-end-Green, and so have marched into other Countries to
augment their party. At length they were seized, and some Arms and Ammunition
taken with them, and a Standard with a Lion Couchant, with this Motro, Who
shall rouse him up. The Men taken were Venner, a Wine-Cooper, with their Scribe
Gray, Jailer Hopkins, Ashton, and others: About them was sound a Declaration in
print, called, The principle of the Remnant; they were committed to prison, but
after released without prosecution. Likewise M. Genesis Harrison, Vice Admiral
Lawson, Coll. Rich, and Coll. Danvers, were secured as Discontents. About this
time the victorious General Blake returning from the Coasts of Spain, fell sick
of the Scurvy and Dropsy, and dyed just entering into Plymouth Sound, where he
passionately inquired for Land; he was buried with an handsome Funeral from
Greenwich, and interred in Hen. 7. Chapel at Westminster.

The Protector to keep the Spaniards employed every where, makes a private
agreement with France to fend a Brigade of his best Infantry, (which the French
extremely wanted, to Flanders) consisting of 6000 men, and about May 4. 1657.
they arrived in Picardy, and joined with those Forces commanded by the Marshal
Turein, to which the protector was the more induced because the K. of Spain had
invited K. Charles into his Dominions fince the breach with England, and he was
then at Bruges full of expectation of being restored by the power of that King;
and the Marquess of Ormond, the Lord Wilmot, the Lords Gerrard and Wentworth,
the Lord Twaf, and General Middleton, had their several Regiments Quartered
about the Sea coasts in order to a Descent, and the Dukes of York and Gloucester
had likewise commands in Flanders. Sir John Reynolds, one of Cromwels Knights,
formerly Commissary General of the Army in Ireland, was General of the English
Forces, and coll. Morgan Major Genesis Before their embarquement they Rendevouzed
at BlackHeath, where Mr. Hugh Peter's gave them a Sermon for encouragement, and
were shipped with a months pay in hand, and all new red coats.

About the middle of September, the French and English Forces advance into the
Spanish Territories, and according to agreement sat down before Mardike, a
strong Fortress, and put themselves between it and Dunkirk: General Montague
riding before the Splinter with a Fleet of War, it was not long before a
continued Battery made the besieged quit the wooden Fort, which so incommoded
them when taken by the English, that they were obliged to yield to mercy,
Turenne not allowing them better terms because they had refused his first
offers: Mardike was presently put into the hands of the English according to
agreement, in consideration of our assistance, and coll. Morgan took possession
thereof with several Regiments, whom the Spaniards soon after endeavored to
remove, by a sudden and fierce assault, after the Armies were drawn into Winter
Quarters, since being only two miles from Dunkirk, they were very fearful it
might endanger that Town also. Whereupon, Don John of Austria resolved to
hazard a Scalado and Attack by Night; the Duke of York, and the Marquess of
Caravene managed the business, and K. Charles, and the D. of Gloucester, had
conveyed themselves into Dunkirk to observe the success of it, Oct. 22. About
4000 English, Scots, Irish, and some Spaniards, about Ten a Clock at Night,
began the storming of Mardike with Hand-Granadoes, and all other Engines proper
for an assault, and were got into the Trenches, and had mounted the Scaling
Ladders, but the English within being ready to receive them, commanded by
Reynolds, Morgan, and Lillingstone, who were there at that time, the Assailants
were with great slaughter repulsed and beaten down; the Cannon in the mean
time, from the English Fleet in the Splinter, firing their broadsides upon
them, being directed by four great Torches set up at the four corners of the
Fort, how to avoid damaging it. Yet about four a Clock in the morning, the D.
of York commanded the assault to be renewed, which was done with greater fury,
but to as little purpose or advantage as before, so that day light approaching
they were forced to retreat, carrying away the dead in Wagons, which were
judged to be some hundreds, though the number was not certainly known.

Since force would not prevail, the Duke designed to attempt the regaining this
important place by stratagem, to which purpose he employed a Scotch Knight, who
was well acquainted with General Reynolds, to represent to him the advantages
he might obtain by serving the King, and promoting his Interest and
Restoration, which it seems so far prevailed, that Reynolds agreed to give the
Duke a meeting betwixt Dunkirk and Mardike, with a party of Horse on either
side. At their approach, Reynolds showed much respect to the Duke, and some
private discourses passed between them which were never made public, and then
the General returned to the Fort, and (...) Duke to Dunkirk. The Protector
having Intelligence of this Enterview, dispatched away a messenger to command
General Reynolds instantly to London, which he, with Coll. White, and the
Generals Secretary, readily obeying, and taking the first ship that was ready,
and would venture to go off, which was a Dutch Pink of 100 Guns, in a stormy
Night, Dec. 12 (a Frigate offering to wait upon him the next morning) he was
cast away the same Night on the back of the Goodwin-sands, his Chest, Sword,
and Belt, being found thereabout, and Coll. Morgan commanded in his place.

About this time there happened Wars between the two Northern Crowns, and the
Danes having attacked Bremer-warden, a very strong place, and soon after
mastered it, the Protector sent Sir Philip Medows Envoy to the K. of Denmark,
and Coll. Jephson to the K. of Sweden, then journying out of Poland, (where he
was engaged in War likewise) to meet this new Enemy: They were both well
received, and during this Mediation the Protector sent supplies of 2000 men and
arms to his Ally the K. of Sweden.

Mean while the protector at home was swearing his Privy Council, persuant to
one of the Arricles of the humble petition and advice, and his Son Richard was
made one, and also Chancellor of the University of Oxford: His Son Henry was
constituted Lord Deputy of Ireland; and his Son-in-law, the Lord Fleetwood, was
designed to be Lord Commissioner of Scotland, where General Monk at present
commanded. He likewise, in this interval of Parliament, made choice of several
persons to fill up the other House or House of Lords (according to the fourth
Article of the Petition and Advice) being sixty two in number, many of whom
refused to appear or act with them; their Names were these: Lord Rich. Cromwell,
L. Henry Cromwell, L. Commissioner Lisle, L. President Lawrence, Lt. Genesis
Fleetwood, Robert E. of Warwick. Edw. E of Manchester, L. Say and Seal, L.
Viscount Lisle, L. Viscount Howard, Philip L. Wharton, L. Falconbridge, L.
Ewers, John Cleypool, John Desborough, General Montague, Bulstrode Whitlock,
William Sydenham, Sir Charles Woolsey, Sir Gilb. Pickering, Maj. Genesis Skippon,
Walter Strickland, Francis Rous, John Jones, Sir Will. Strickland, Sir Francis
Russel, Sir Tho. Honeywood, Sir Arth. Haslerig, Sir John Hobard, Sir Rich.
Onslow, Sir Gilb. Gerrard, Sir William Roberts, John Glyn, Oliver Sr. John's,
Will. Pierepoint, John Crew, Alex. Popham, Philip Jones, Sir Christopher Pack,
Sir Robert Tichbourn, Edward Whaley, John Berkstead, Sir John Hewson, Sir
Thomas Pride, Sir George Fleetwood, Richard Ingoldsby, James Berry, William
Goff, Thomas Cooper, Edmund Thomas, General Monk, David Earl of Cassills, Sir
William Lockhart, Lord VVarreston, William Steel, Roger Lord Broghill, Sir
Matt. Tomlinson, William Lenthall, Richard Hamden.


He likewise made three Commissioners of the Great Seal: Nath. Fiennes, John
Lisle, William Lenthall, Master of the Rolls.


Judges of both Benches.

Of the Hoper Bench: John Glyn, L. C. Justice, Philip-VVarlinton, Richard
Nudigate, Oliver St. John.


Of the Common Bench: Edward Atkyns, Matchew Hale, Hugh Windham.


Barons of the Exchequer: Attorney General, Robert Nicholas, John Parker, Roger
Hill, Erasmus Earl. Edmund Prideaux: Solicitor General, William Ellis.


The time of the prorogation of the parliament being expired, they make their
appearance again, and the persons abovenamed met in the House of Lords, where
the protector coming, he sends to the Commons to tell them, that he desired
their attendance in the House of Peers, wither the Speaker and the Members go,
to whom he makes a very pleasing speech, concluding, That if they would go on
to prosecute what they had begun, they should be called the blessed of the
Lord, and the Generations to come would bless them. After which the Lord
Commissioner Fiennes spoke to them, declaring what occasions the Government had
for money, and that the money already granted, though it was thought
sufficient, yet fell much beneath the expense and necessity of the state;
especially that Tax upon the new buildings, falled altogether of what was
expected and intended by it, and so recommended the whole affair to their
consideration.

Being sat in their Houses, the other House sent to the Commons, by two of
their Members, a message for a day of Humiliation, and were returned with this
answer, The House will consider of it; and then, they Voted, that for two
months time liberty should be given to exhibit any petitions against undue
Elections, and consented to a Fast, which was kept within the walls of both
Houses, by Dr. Reynolds, Mr. Caryl, Mr. Calamy, and Mr. Griffith.

The parliament, according to the fourth Article of the Petition and Advice,
which says, That no Members legally chosen should be excluded from performance
of their duty but by consent of parliament, immediately proceed to the calling
over, and re-admitting those members which had formerly been secluded by the
Protector, to His Highness great discontent. The House being now full, began to
flight the other House, which they said, being a power created by a part of a
parliament, ought not to have a Negative Voice over a full House, and at length
they proceeded to question the protectors power in calling and authorizing them
to sit as an House of Peers. The protector doubting to what height these
debates might arise, Feb. 4. 1657. he goes to the House of Lords, and by the
Usher of the black Rod sends to acquaint the Commons of his being there; so the
speaker and members coming to the Bar, His Highness sitting under a Chair of
State made a long speech, and in conclusion told them, That it did concern his
Interest, as much as the public peace and tranquillity of the Nation, to
dissolve this parliament, and therefore he did now put an end to their sitting:
So the House in obedience to his commands dissolved. This was the fourth
parliament he had dissolved, having turned out the Long parliament, the Little
parliament, the Recognition parliament, and the present Juncto. It was said of
the three latter, which was summoned by Cromwell himself, That the first was
called but not chosen: The second did just nothing: And the third did nothing
Just.

The Royalists now make another attempt for restoring King Charles, of which
the protector had Intelligence by his Emissaries, so that when the design was
just ripe for execution, he published a Proclamation for all Cavaliers to
depart twenty miles from London and Westminster, and the Marquess of Ormond,
who was personally concerned in the Intrigue, with much difficulty escaped in a
small Boat from Sussex to Flanders; but several others were seized, as coll.
Russel, Sir Will. Compton, Sir Will. Clayton, Mr. Mordam brother to the Earl of
Peterborough, Dr. John Hewit preacher at St. Gregory's by St. Paul's, Mr.
Woodcock, Mr. Mansel, Mr. Mallory, Sir Henry Slingsby, and many more; most of
them were kept close prisoners till some were prevailed upon to be Witnesses
against others. The design was laid in Kent, Essex, Surrey and Sussex, the King
being ready to have passed over from Flanders with an Army, under the conduct
of Count Marcin the P. of Cond^'s General, and Portsmouth, Hull, and other
Maritime Fortresses, were treated for. The Protector sent for the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen of London, acquainting them with what discoveries he had made, and
the danger they were in, who thereupon chose a new Lieutenancy, and changed the
Officers of the Trained Bands, and the Protector doubled his Guards, and an
alarm was given, that on May 16. the Cavaliers had appointed for their rising,
and firing the Town, and all the Soldiers about the City were to be murdered,
whereupon all the six Regiments were raised at once, and diverse Citizens seized.

Soon after another High Court of Justice was erected, before whom Dr. Hewit,
and Sir Henny Slingsby, were brought and charged with High Treason upon these
Articles: 1. That they had traitorously and maliciously endeavored to raise
force, and Ievy War against his Highness and the Government, and to subvert and
alter the same. 2. That they had traitorously declared, published, and promoted,
Charles Stuart, eldest Son of the late K. Charles, to be King of England,
Scotland and Ireland. 3. That they had held Intelligence with the said Charles
Stuart. Dr. Hewit would not own the Court, but pleaded several cases against
it, and was therefore condemned as mute: Mr. Mordant was next set to the Bar,
who argued so very plainly and fully against the Evidence, that he was
acquitted by one voice only. Sir Henry Slingsby defended himself by alleging.
That what was said by him about seducing the Governor of Hull, and persuading
him to surrender that Garrison to the King, was but only in Jest and discourse:
He was found guilty and condemned. Mr. Mallory pleaded guilty and was saved.
Mr. Woodcock cleared-himself so well, that they could fasten nothing upon him.
June 8. 1657. Dr. Hewit and Sir Henry Slingsby were Beheaded on Tower Hill,
though many endeavors were used, and much solicitation made to save their
Lives. Some other persons of inferior quality were likewise Tried and Executed
upon this account, as Coll. Edw. Ashton, who was Hanged and Quartered at
Mark-lane-end, in Tower-street, Edmund Stacy against the Royal Exchange, and
John Bettely in Cheapside.

About this time a great Whale of sixty foot long came up as far as Greenwich,
to the admiration of all that saw his vast bulk, being persued with Guns, and
other weapons, with great danger, and at length was brought dead to the shore.

The French and English Armies being joined, now sat down before Dunkirk,
resolving to take it before they stirred, which hotly alarmest the Spaniards in
all their Quarters; whereupon Don John of Austria, considering the importance
of this place, as being the Key of Flanders, and a Frontier of France, so that
if the English possessed it, they might have an opportunity to conquer all
Flanders, by the Forces that might be continually landed from England, with the
supplies of money which this Town, by their Booties, brought into the Treasury.
Upon these and the like motives, he resolved to attempt its relief, though with
the hazard of his whole Army, but whilst he is getting them together, the
English and French Forces had in a short time run their Trenthes to the Spanish
Counterscarp, and still approached nigher the wall, which the Spaniards having
notice of, and fearing their relief might come too late, he made all possible
half to its assistance; the better to effect which, Don John their General
dreins most of the Garrisors, and compleats a body of sixteen thousand men,
with which he marches with all speed through Fuernes, and Incamps within a wile
and half of Marshal Tureins Quarters, of which the Confederates having advice,
immediately dislodge with a body of about fifteen thousand, leaving still
enough to Guard the Trenches, and make good the approaches, if the Townsmen
should attempt a Sally. With this Detachment of men, and ten pieces of Cannon,
T^rem faces the Spaniard: The English Foot were drawn up in four great
Battalions, and were ordered to give the first assault upon four other
Battalions of Spanish Foot, who had the advantage of the ground, being placed
upon three rising Hillocks, and were seconded by Don John himself.

The English were commanded by the L^ Lockhart, who having first ordered a
Forlorn Hope of 300 Musketeers to mount the Sand Hills, together with his own
Regiment of Foot, under Coll Fenwick, they stoutly maintained their ground,
though the Spaniards played down continual Volleys of shot among them, and the
French refused to second them: He then sent another considerable Brigade to
their relief, who instantly fell in with the But end of their Muskets among the
Spanish Foot, and they not being used to such Club Law, left the Field and
fled; whereupon the French Horse seeing the good fortune of the English Foot,
fell in upon the Spanish Horse, few of whom stood the charge, except those
under the command of the Dukes of York and Gloucester, who after some
resistance, were forced by the number of the assailants to follow the rest.

In this Battle a great part of the L. Lockharts Regiments were either slain or
wounded, and Lt. Coll. Fenwick was killed by a Mnsket Bullet. The slaughter was
great, the French Horse being very severe in the pursuit, so that near 3000
were slain, and many Spanish Noblemen killed, wounded, and taken Prisoners.
This total rout of the Relievers Army put despair into the Dunkirkers, who
could now expect no relief either by Sea or Land, the English Fleet blocking
them up by Sea, and Don John of Austria not being able to recruit his Army by
Land: Yet the Marquess of Leda, their Governor, to demonstrate some courage,
made frequent strong Sallies upon the French Quarters, which seemed to proceed
rather from Despair than Valor, for he who was the life of the business
received a wound in one of them, of which he shortly dyed, and with him the
Spaniards lost possession of the Town of Dunkirk, for after the French and
English had played 14 days successively with their Mortar-pieces upon the
place, the Besieged grew weary of the sport, and beat a Parley, and the Town
was delivered up to them.

Dunkirk being established in the hands of the English, the French Army, after
about a months Siege, possess themselves of Graveling, a strong Fortress not
far from Dunkirk, so that the English and French had now in their hands all the
Frontier Towns on this side Flanders.

Amidst these Triumphs and Successes, the Lady Claypool, the Protectors only
Daughter, and whose image she was said to be, Dyed, Aug. 6. at Hampton Court,
from whence she was conveyed by Water four days after, with a great many
Mourning Barges, to Westminster, and there laid in the Painted-Chamber, where a
stately Hearse was prepared for her, and about Twelve at Night was carried into
K. Henry VII. Chapel, and there Interred in a place purposely provided for
her. Her death was said to beso grievous to her Father, that it was thought the
cause of his own soon after, for having been very melancholy from that time,
till about the end of August, his distemper at length appeared to be a Tertian
Ague, which together with other malignant humors, so depressed his Vitals,
that it brought him to his end, though with many strivings and strugglings, he
often falling into Swouns and Trances. He could not be persuaded at first that
his Distemper was mortal, saying, That as God had carried him to that height,
he did firmly believe he had some further Work for him to do; and some of his
Chaplains were of the same opinion. But his Fits increasing, and causing him to
talk delitious, and to faint often, the Privy Council concluding he could
scarce endure another Fit, repaired to him, and earnestly pressed him,
according to the first Article of the Petition and Advice, to Nominate his
Successor; and though he was hardly sensible, yet they demanding if he did not
appoint his Eldest Son Richard to succeed him, he answered YES. The Night
before his departure, he was observed to pray as follows:

LORD, I am a miserable Creature, yet I am in Covenant with Thee through Grace,
and I may, I will come unto Thee for thy people: Lord, thou have made me,
though very unworthy, a mean Instrument to do them some good, and thee service,
and many of them had too high a value for me, though others would be glad of my
fall. But Lord, howsoever thou do dispose of me, do good to them: Give
consistency of Judgment, one heart and mutual love unto them: Let the Name of
Christ be Glorious throughout the World: Pardon such as delight to trample upon
the Ashes of a Worm, and pardon the folly of this short Prayer, even for Jesus
Christ his sake.

This was on Thursday Night, and on Friday Morning, Sept. 3. 1658. his twice
Victorious day at Dunbar and Worcester, there appeared all the signs of a dying
person, and about Three a Clock in the Afternoon he expired. A day or two
before his Death, a very great Tempest happened, which was thought to forbode
it.

Thus you have a full account of the end of Oliver Cromwell; Lord Protector of
England; Scotland and Ireland, whose Valor mounted him to that height by which
he raised his Family almost equal to the best of the Kingdom, and the Nation to
that Glory, that Foreign Princes feared and envied him. He had two Sons,
Richard who succeeded him, and Henry, who from fixteen years of Age, was by his
Father bred a Soldier, and was at his Death Lord Deputy of Ireland: And four
Daughters, Bridget first Married to the Lord Deputy Ireton, and afterward to
the Lord Fleetwood. Elizabeth his second Daughter, Married to the Lord
Cleypool, Master of his Horse. Mary his third, Married to the Lord
Falconbridge. Frances his youngest, Married to the Lord Rich, Grandson to the
Earl of Warwick.

After his expiration, the Corpse was Imbalmed, and wrapped in a sheet of Lead,
and Sept. 26. about Ten at Night, removed from White Hall in a Mourning Hearse,
where his Effigies was with great Magnificence exposed publicly to the view of
multitudes, who came daily to see it, till November 3. following, and then in
great State it was conducted from Somerset House to Westminster, and placed in
the Abbey-Church, under a stately Monument Erected for it, with the Banners and
six Ensigns of Honor placed about it, the Corpse having been some days before
Buried in a Vault purposely provided for it, in King Henry the Sevenths Chapel.

Sic Transit Gloria Mundi.

A Catalogue of Books Printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultrey,
near Cheapside.
History.
1. ENglands Monarchs: Or, A Compendious Relation of the most remarkable
Transactions, from Julius Caesar to this present; adorned with poems, and the
picture of every Monarch from K. William the Conqueror, to the third year of K.
William and Q. Mary. With a List of the Nobility, the Knights of the Garter,
the number of the Lords and Commons, who have Votes in both Houses of
Parliament; and many other useful particulars. Price one Shilling. 2. THE Wars
in England, Scotland and Ireland, containing a particular and Impartial Account
of all the Battles, Sieges, and other remarkable Transactions, Revolutions and
Accidents, which happened from the beginning of the Reign of King Charles I.
1625. to His Majesty's happy Restoration: The illegal Trial of K. Charles I.
at large, with his last speech at his suffering; and the most considerable
matters till 1660. with pictures of several accidents. Price One Shilling. 3.
THE History of Oliver Cromwell, being an Impartial Account of all the Battles,
Sieges, and other Military Achievements, wherein he was engaged in England,
Scotland and Ireland; and particularly all the Sea Fights with the Dutch and
French; and likewise of his Civil Administrations, while he had the Supreme
Government of these three Kingdoms, till his Death. Relating only matters of
Fact, without Reflection or Observation. By R. B. Price One Shilling. 4.
HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancrent and Present State of London
and Westminster, showing the Foundations, Walls, Gates, Towers, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Schools, Inns of Courts, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with an
account of the most remarkable accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and other
occurrences, for above 903 years past, in and about these Cities, to the year
1681. Illustrated with pictures, and the Arms of 65 Companies of London, and
the time of their Incorporating. Price One Shilling. 5. ADmirable Curiosities,
Rarities and Wonders in England, Scotland and Ireland, or an account of many
remarkable persons and places; and likewise of the Battles, Sieges, prodigious
Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Thunders, Lightnings, Fires, Murders, and
other considerable occurrences and accidents for many hundred years past:
Together with the natural and artificial Rarities in every County in England,
with several curious Sculptures. Price One shilling. 6. THE History of the
Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, containing, 1. An account of the most
remarkable Transactions and Revolutions in Scotland for above 1200 years pasts,
during the Reigns of 68 Kings, from 424. to K. James I. in 1602. 2. The History
of Ireland, from the Conquest thereof to this time, with the miraculous persons
and places, strange accidents, etc. And a List of the Nobility and great
Officers of State in both Kingdoms. Plustrated with several pictures of some
extraordinary observables. Price One shilling. 7. THE English Empire in
America, or a prospect of His Majesty's Dominions in the West Indies, namely,
New Foundland, New England, New York, New Jersey, Pensylvania, Maryland,
Virginia, Catolina, Bermudas. Barbuda, Anguilla, Monserrat. Dominica, St.
Vincent, Antego, Mevis or Nevis, St. Christophers, Barbados, and Jamaica; with
an account of their Discovery, Situation and Product: The Religion and manners
of the Indians, and other excellercies of these Countries: To which is prefixed
a relation of the first discovery of this New World, and of the remarkable
Voyages and Adventures of Sebastian Cabot, Sir Martin Frobisher, Captain
Davies, Capt. Waymouth, Capt. Hall, Capt. Hudson, Sir Tho. Cavendish, the E.
of Cumberland, Sir Walter Rawleigh, and other English Worthies, to diverse
places therein. Illustrated with Maps and pictures of the strange Fruits,
Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Insects, Serpents, and Monsters found in those parts of
the World. Price One shilling. 8. A View of the English Acquisitions in Guinea
and the East Indies: With an Account of the Religion, Government, VV^rs
strange Customs, Beasts, Serpents, Monsters, and other observables in those
Countries. And among others, the Life and Death of Mahomet the Grand Impostor,
with the principal Doctrines of the Turkish Religion as they are displayed in
the Alcoran. Two Letters, one written by the Great Mogul, and the other by the
King of Sumatra in the East Indies, to our K. James I. of an unusual and
extravagant style. The cruel Executions in those parts, with the manner of the
Women's burning themselves with their dead Husbands. Together with a description
of the Isle of St. Helena, and the Bay of Souldania, where the English usually
refresh in their Voyages to the Indies; intermixed with pleasant Relations, and
enlivened with pictures. Price One shilling. 9. THE English Hero: Or, Sir
Francis Drake Revived. Being a full account of the dangerous Voyages, admirable
Adventures, notable Discoveries, and Magnanimous Achievements of that Valiant
and Renowned Commander. As, 1. His Voyage in 1572. to Nombre de Dios in the
West Indies, where they saw a pile of Bars of silver near seventy foot long,
ten foot broad, and twelve foot high. 2. His incompassing the whole World in
1577. which he performed in two years and ten (...) gaining a vast quantity of
Gold and Silver. 3. (...) into America in 1585. and taking the Towns of St.
Jago, St. Domingo, arthagena, and St. Augustine. 4. His last Voyage into those
Countries in 1595. with the manner of his Death and Burial. Revised, Corrected,
very much enlarged, reduced into Chapters with Contents, and beautified with
pictures. By R. B. Price One shilling. 10. TWO Journies to Jerusalem;
containing, first, An account of the Travels of two English Pilgrims some years
since, and what admirable accidents befell them in their Journey to Jerusalem,
Grand Cairo, Alexandria, etc. 2. The Travels of 14 English Merchants in 1669,
from Scanderoon to Tripoly, Joppa, Ramah Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Jericho, the
River of Jordan, the Lake of Sodom and Gomorrah, and back again to Aleppo. To
which is added, a Relation of the great Council of the Jews, assembled in the
plains of Ajayday in Hungary, 1650. to examine the Scriptures concerning
Christ. By S. B. an Englishman there present: With the notorious delusion of
the Jews, by a counterfeit Messiah, or false Christ at Smyrna, in 1666. and the
event thereof. Lastly, The Extirpation of the Jews throughout Persia in 1666.
Epistle of King Agbarus to our Savior, with our Saviors answer: Beautified
with pictures. Price One shilling. 11. EXtraordinary Adventures of several
famous men; with the strange Events, and signal mutations and changes in the
Fortunes of diverse Illustrious places and persons in all Ages, being an account
of a multitude of stupendous revolutions, accidents, and observable matters in
diverse States and Provinces throughout the whole world: With pictures. Price
One shilling. 12. THE History of the Nine Worthies of the World: Three whereof
were Gentiles; 1. Hector Son of Priamus King of Troy. 2. Alexander the great
King of Macedon, and conqueror of the World. 3. Julius Caesar first (...) of
Rome. Three Jews. 4. Joshua Captain (...) and Leader of Israel into Canaan. 5.
David King of Israel. 6. Judas Maccabeus a valiant Jewish commander, against
the Tyranny of Antiochus. Three Christians. 7. Arthur King of Britain, who
courageously defended his country against the Saxons. 8. Charles the Great, K.
of France, and Emperor of Germany. 9. Godfrey of Bullen King of Jerusalem.
Being an account of their Glorious Lives, worthy Actions, renowned Victories
and Deaths. Illustrated with poems, and the picture of each Worthy. By R. B.
Price One shilling. 13. FEmale Excellency, or the Ladies Glory, Illustrated in
the worthy Lives, and memorable Actions of Nine Famous Women, who have been
renowned either for Virtue or Valor, in several Ages of the World: As. 1.
Deborah the Prophetess. 2. The valiant Judith. 3. Queen Esther. 4. The virtuous
Susanna. 5. The chaste Lucretia. 6. Voadicia Queen of Britain, in the reign of
Nero Emperor of Rome. Containing an account of the original Inhabitants of
Britain. The History of Danaus and his fifty Daughters, who murdered their
Husbands in one Night: Of the arrival of Brute. Of the two Giants Corineus and
Gogmagog: Of K. Lear and his three Daughters: Of Belin and Brennus who took the
City of Rome: Of the manner of Julius Caesar's invading Britain, and of the
Valor of Voadicia, under whose conduct the Britains slew 70 thousand Romans,
with many other remarkable particulars. 7. Mariamne Wife to K. Herod. 8.
Clotilda Q. of France. 9. Andegona Princess of Spain. The whole adorned with
poems and pictures to each History. By R. B. Price One shilling. 14. WOnderful
Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy, discovered in above 300 memorable Histories;
containing, 1. Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists, Blasphemers, and perjured
Villains. 2. The miserable ends of many Magicians, etc. 3. Remarkable
predictions and presages of approaching Death, and how the event has been
answerable. 4. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants, Murderers, etc. 5.
Admirable Deliverances from imminent dangers and deplorable distresses at Sea
and Land. Lastly, Divine goodness to penitents, with the dying thoughts of
several famous Men, concerning a future state after this life. Imbellished with
diverse pictures. Price One shilling. 15 Unparalled Varieties, or the
matchless action; and passions of Mankind; displayed in near 400 notable
instances and examples, discovering the transcendent effects: 1. Of Love,
Friendship and Gratitude. 2. Of Magnanimity, Courage and Fidelity. 3. Of
Chastity, Temperance, and Humility: And on the contrary, the Tremendous
consequences. 4. Of Hatred, Revenge and Ingratitude. 5. Of Cowardice,
Barbarity, and Treachery. 6. Of Unchastity, Intemperance and Ambition.
Imbelished with proper Figures. Price 1 s. 16. THE Kingdom of Darkness. Or the
History of Demons, Specters, Witches, Apparitions, Possessions, Disturbances,
and other wonderful and supernatural delusions, mischievous feats, and
malicious impostures of the Devil. Containing near fourscore memorable
relations, Foreign and Domestic, both ancient and modern. Collected from
Authentic Records, Real Attestations, Credible Evidences, and asserted by
Authors of undoubted Verity. Together with a preface obviating the common
objections and allegations of the Sadduces and Atheists of the Age, who deny
the Being of Spirits, Witches, etc. With pictures of several memorable
Accidents. Price One shilling. 17. Surprising Miracles of Nature and Art, in 2
parts, containing, 1. The Miracles of Nature, or the wonderful Signs, and
prodigious Aspects and Appearances in the Heavens, Earth and Sea, with an
account of the most famous Comets, and other prodigies, from the Birth of
Christ to this time. 2. The Miracles of Art, describing the most Magnificent
Buildings, and other curious Inventions in all Ages, as, the seven Wonders of
the World, and many other excellent Structures and Rarities throughout the
Earth. Beautified with pictures. Price One shilling. 18. MArtyrs in Flames, or
popery in its true Colors, being a brief relation of the horrid cruelties and
persecutions of the Pope and Church of Rome, for many hundred of years past, to
this present time, in Piedmont, Bohemia, Germany, Poland, Lithuanja, France,
Italy, Spain, portugal, Scotland, Ireland, and England, containing among many
other particulars, The original and practices of the Spanish Inquisition; the
Massacre at paris; the bloody Massacre in Ireland 1641. wherein above two
hundred thousand innocent protestants were barbarously murdered, and the
prophecy thereof, by Archbishop Usher, 40 years before it happened: The
Spanish Invasion: The Gunpowder Treason, with the several plots and
contrivances of the Priests and Jesuits, for Extirpating the protestant
Religion, ti^l the time of our Glorious Deliverance from popery and slavery, by
the accession of Their most excellent Majesty's, King William and Q. Mary, to
the Throne of these Kingdoms; with an abstract of the cruel persecutions lately
exercised upon the protestants in France and Savoy, in the year 1686, and 1687.
Together with a short account of Gods Judgments and popish persecutors.
Published for a seasonable warning to all protestants, to inform them what they
must expect from that bloody Generation of Antichristians. Price One shilling.
Miscellanies.
19. DElights for the Ingenious, in above fifty select and choice Emblems,
Divine and Moral, Ancient and Modern, curiously Engraven upon copper plates,
with 50 delightful poems and lots, for the more lively illustration of each
Emblem, whereby instruction and good counsel may be promoted and furthered, by
an honest and pleasant recreation; to which is prefixed, An incomparable poem,
entitled, Majesty in misery, or an imploration to the King of Kings, written
by His late Majesty K. Charles I. with his own hand, during his captivity in
Carisbrook castle in the Isle of Wight, 1648. with a curious Emblem. Collected
by R. B. Price 2 s. 6 d. 20 EXcellent contemplations Divine and Moral, written
by the magnanimous and truly loyal A. L. Capel Baron of Hadham; together with
some account of his life, and his affectionate Letters to his Lady the day
before his death, with his Heroic behavior and last speech at his suffering.
Also the speeches and carriages of D. Ham. and the E. of Holl. who suffered
with him; with his pious advice to his Son. Price One shilling. 21. WInter
Evenings entertainments in two parts, containing, 1. Ten pleasant Relations of
many rare and notable accidents and occurrences, with brief remarks upon every
one. 2. Fifty Ingenious Riddles, with their explanations, and useful
observations, and morals upon each. Enlivened with above 60 pictures, for
illustrating every story and riddle. Excellently accommodated to the fancies of
Old or Young, and useful to cheerful society and conversation. Price One
shilling. 22 DElightful Fables in Prose and Verse, none of them to be found in
Aesop, but collected from diverse ancient and modern Authors, with pictures and
proper morals to every Fable. Several of them very pertinent and applicable to
the present times.: published as a means which in all ages has been found for
pleasure, and likewise for instruction in the prudent conduct of our lives and
actions. By R. B. Price bound One shilling.
Divinity.
23 THE Divine Banquet, or Sacramental Devotions, consisting of morning and
evening prayers, contemplations and Hymns, for every day in the week, in order
to a more solemn preparation for the worthy receiving of the Holy Communion,
representing the several steps and degrees of the sorrow and sufferings of our
blessed Savior, till he gave up the Ghost: As, 1. His agony in the Garden. 2.
His being betrayed by Judas. 3. His being falsely accused, sinitten, buffetted
and spit upon before Caiaphas the High priest. 4. His condemnation, scourging,
crowning with Thorns, and being delivered to be crucified by Pontius Pilate. 5.
His bearing his cross to Golgotha. 6. His crucifixion and bitter passion. 7.
Our Saviors Institution of the blessed Sacrament. Together with brief
resolutions to all those scruples and objections usually alleged for the
omission of this important duty. With eight curious sculptures proper to the
several parts, with Graces. Imprimatur, Z. Isham, R.P.D. Hen. Episc. Land. a
sacris. Price One shilling. 24. A Guide to eternal Glory: Or, brief directions
to all Christians how to attain everlasting salvation: To which are added
several other small Tracts: As 1. Saving Faith discovered in three heavenly
conferences between our blessed Savior and 1. A publican. 2. A pharisee. 3. A
doubting Christian. 2. The threefold state of a Christian, 1. By Nature: 2. By
Grace: 3. In Glory. 3. The scriptures concord, compiled out of the words of
scripture, by way of question and answer, wherein there is the sum of the way
to salvation, and spiritual things compared with spiritual. 4. The character of
a true Christian. 5. A brief Directory for the great, necessary, and
advantageous duty of self-examination, whereby a serious Christian may every
day examine himself. 6. A short Dialogue between a Learned Divine and a Beggar.
7. Beams of the spirit, or cordial meditations, enlivening, enlightening, and
glanding the soul. 8. The seraphick souls triumph in the love of God; with
short remembrances and pious thoughts. 9. History improved, or Christian
applications and improvements of diverse remarkable passages in history. 10.
Holy breathings in several Divine poems, upon diverse subjects and scriptures.
Price One shilling. 25. YOuths Divine pastime, containing forty remarkable
scripture histories, turned into common English Verse; with forty pictures
proper to each story, very delightful for the virtuous, employing the vacant
hours of young persons, and preventing vain and vicious divertisements Together
with several scripture hymns upon diverse occasions. Price 8 d. 26. THE young
man's calling, or the whole duty of youth, in a serious and compassionate
address to all young persons to remember their Creator in the days of their
youth. Together with remarks upon the lives of several excellent young persons
of both sexes, as well ancient as modern, who have been famous for virtue and
piety in their Generations, namely, on the lives of Isaac and Joseph in their
youth. On the martyrdom of seven Sons and their mother. Of Romanus a young
noble man, and of diverse holy Virgins and martyrs. On the lives of King Edw.
VI. Queen Jane, Queen Elizabeth in her youth, Prince Henry eldest Son of King
James, and the young Lord Harrington, etc. with twelve curious pictures,
illustrating the several histories. Price 1 s. 6 d. 27. THE vanity of the life
of man represented in the seven several stages thereof, with pictures and poems
exposing the follies of every age; to which is added, verses upon several
subjects and occasions. Containing, the history of the cruel death of
Cassianus, Bishop and Schoolmaster of Brescia in Italy, who suffered martyrdom
for the profession of the Christian Faith, by the hands of his o^n Scholars, in
the bloody Reign of Dioclesian an he (...) Emperor of Rome; with diverse other
poems (...) by Mrs. Ann Askew, and Mr. John Rogers, which they were prisoners
in Newgate, and afterward burnt in Smithfield, in the (...) reign of Queen
Mary. By R. B. Licensed and Entered. Price Eight pence. 28. MOunt Sion, or a
draught of that Church that shall stand for ever; together with a view of that
world which shall be broken in pieces and consumed. By William Dyer, Author of
Christ's famous Titles, and a Believers Golden chain. Price 1 shilling. 29.
DIstressed Sion relieved, or, the Garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness. A poem. Wherein are discovered the grand causes of the Churches
trouble and misery under the late dismal dispensation; with a complete history
of, and lamentation for those renowned Worthies that fell in England, by popish
rage and cruelty, from the year 1680 to 1688. As the Lord Russel, Colonel
Sydney, Alderman Cornish, and diverse others, with a relation of the cruel
proceedings of the late Lord Chancellor Jefferies in the West. Together with an
account of the late admirable and stupend^ous providence which has wrought
such a sudden and wonderful deliverance for this Nation, and Gods Sion therein.
Concluding with the Trial and Condemnation of Mystery Babylon the great Whore,
and diverse hymns of praise and Thanksgiving, with sighs for Ireland. Humbly
dedicated to their present Majesty's. By Benj. Keach, Author of a book called,
Sion in distress, or the groans of the true protestant Church. Price One
shilling. 30. ANtichrist stormed, or the Church of Rome proved to be mystery
Babylon the Great Whore, Reval. 17. by many and undeniable arguments answering
all the objections of the papists, and all others. Together with the Judgment
of many ancient and modern Divines, and most eminent writers about the mystical
Numbers in Daniel and Revelations, concerning the rise and final ruin of the
Beast and Babylon, proving it will be in this present Age. Together with an
account of the two witnesses, who they are, their slaying, Resurrection and
Ascension, with the probibility of their being (...) showing also what their
Ascensi^^ (...) effects thereof. With an account of many strange predictions
relating to these present Times. By Benjamin Keach. Price One shilling. 31. THE
devout souls daily Exercise in (...) contemplations and praises, containing
Devotions for Morning, Noon; and Night, for every day in the week, with prayers
before and after the holy Communion: And likewise for persons of all
conditions, and upon all occasions: with Graces, and Thanksgivings (...) and
after meat. By R. P. D. D. Price bound six pence. 32. SAcramental Meditations
upon diverse select places of Scripture, wherein Believers are assisted in
preparing their hearts, and exciting their affections and graces when they draw
nigh to God in that most awful and solemn ^rdinance of the Lords Supper. By Jo
(...) Price One shilling. 33. JACOB wrestling with GOD, and prevaill^^ (...), a
Treatise concerning the Necessity and Efficacy of Faith in prayer: Wherein
(...) weighty Questions and Cases of Conscience about praying in Faith, are
sta^ed and resolved: (...) the comforting and satisfying of weak and scrupulous
consciences: The convi^^^^^ of formal Hypocrites, awakening of all Saints, both
weak and strong, great and small, to this great duty of prayer. By Thomas
Tailor, formerly at Edmonds Bu^y, now Pastor to a Congregation in Cambridge.
Price One shilling.
All Printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.

FINIS.

