AN ESSAY Toward Settling a NATIONAL CREDIT.

AN ESSAY Toward the Setlement of a NATIONAL CREDIT, In the Kingdom of
ENGLAND, Humbly presented to the two Honorable Houses of Parliament.

By John Carry, Merchant in Bristol.

LONDON: Printed by Freeman Collins, and are to be sold by S. Crouch at the
Corner of Popes-head-Alley in Cornhil, and E. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall.
1696.

To the Right Honorable the LORDS Spiritual and Temporal, and to the
Honorable the Commons of England in Parliament Assembled.
HAVING lately presented your Honors with An Essay on Coin and Credit, the
chief Design whereof was to show the Necessity of Settling a well-grounded
Credit in this Nation, for Support of the Government and carrying on its Trade;
I do now with all Humility lay before you Proposals to answer that end, which I
have not clogged with Compulsion to the Subject, supposing nothing of this
Nature can be good, where a Common Consent, grounded on Interest, does not make
it valuable.

BANKS, as I humbly conceive, ought chiefly to be Calculated for the Use of
Trade, and modeled so as may best content the Traders. What gives them
Satisfaction will answer all other Occasions of the Kingdom. Money passes
through the Hands of the Nobility and Gentry, only as Water does through
Conduit-Pipes into the Cistern, but Centers in the Hands of Traders, where it
Circulates, and may be said to be used; and among these, Ease, Profit, and
Security, are Arguments strong ennough to keep a Bank always full; Besides,
when the Streights of the Government are taken off, greater Sums will come into
Trade, which are now drawn out in order to make Advantages above what the
Profits of Trade will bring in.

The Heads whereon I propose to build this National Credit, are these which
follow:

That a Bank be Erected on the Credit of the Parliament, the Profit or Loss
thereof to redound to the Nation, whose chief Chamber shall be settled in
London, but lesser Chambers in other Places of this Kingdom, at such Distances
as may best Answer the Occasions of the Country; which Chambers to account with
that of London, and that to Commissioners appointed by Parliament.

That this Bank shall take in what running Cash shall be offered, and shall
give their Notes for it; and shall also allow Interest after the Rate of (...)
3 per Cent. per Annum after the first (...) 14 days till those Notes be paid,
and shall also pay it again to the Proprietors, or any part thereof, when
demanded.

That if any Man puts in his Money for a time certain, not less then (...) 6
Months, he shall receive Interest from the time of paying it in, to the time he
is repaid.

That this Bank shall let out any Sum again on reasonable Security, either
Real, Personal, or Goods, receiving Interest after the Rate of (...) 4 per
Cent. per Annum, till the Borrower shall think fit to pay it in, which he shall
do by such Parts as will best suit his Occasions, and be discharged from the
Interest of what he so pays, and only pay after the Rate aforesaid for so much
as does remain in his hands.

That if any one desires to take up Money on such Security for a time certain,
not less then six Months, he shall have it after the Rate of (...) 4 per Cent.
Interest per Annum.

That Lombards be Erected to attend this Bank for the benefit of Traders, under
Regulations which may encourage Trade.

That for the benefit of Returns, the Notes given in any one Chamber of this
Bank shall be demandable in any other, together with the Interest due till
payment, the Receiver allowing for such Returns after the Rate of (...) 5s. for
each Hundred pounds in the Chamber where he receives his Money.

That to prevent Counterfeits, all Notes given out at any Chamber, shall be
made payable to A. B. or Order, and Assigned from one to another, each Assigner
to be Warrantee for the Note, both to the Bank, and also to every later
Assignee.

That these Notes shall be taken by the King in all Payments, which will make
them current among the Subjects.

That this Bank do supply the King with all Loans at (...) 4l. per Cent.
Interest per Ann. from the time of borrowing, to the time the Money is paid in
again, and that it has the Taxes, or Funds settled by Act of Parliament, for
its Security.

That all Debts Contracted to this Bank, shall be of the same Nature with Debts
Contracted to the King, and be first paid out of the Estates of the Debtors;
and that Extents shall lie accordingly.

That an Account be kept of Profit and Loss in each Chamber, together with the
Charges of the Officers, etc. And that it be returned up every Three Months, as
also Account Current, to the Grand Chamber in London, where the whole shall be
Examined by the Commissioners, and they be liable to the inspection of the
Parliament; by which means it will appear whither the Nation gets or looses by
it. And Note, That if the Nation does loose One hundred thousand Pounds per
Ann. by the Charge of its Management, yet 'twill get many Millions in the
increase of its Trade, though there is no doubt but this Bank will very much
more than support its Charge.

That Registers for Lands be erected in all Counties, etc. where desired, by
Act of Parliament.

That Bills be past on the Bank by such as are appointed to buy for the Public
Use of the Nation, payable at the time of their Agreement; by which means every
one will endeavor to Furnish the Government Cheapest, when their payments
shall be punctual, the King will save a great deal of Moneys paid now for
Procuration, Excessive Interest, etc. and the Fleet and Army will be well paid.

That the Commissioners do once every Year at least make up the Accounts
depending between the Public and the Bank, allowing (...) 4l. per Cent.
Interest as before; and make application to the Parliament for its
Reimbursement.

That Bills and Bonds be made Assignable by Law, and the Property be thereby
transferred to the Assign.

That Trustees may put the Money belonging to Orphans into this Bank, which
shall be a discharge to them for so much of their Trust, the Interest to be
duly issued out for the maintenance of the said Orphans; and that all Plate and
Bullion belonging to the said Orphans be by the Trustees Coined up at the next
Mint, and the Money put into the Bank for the use of the said Orphans.

That the Money in this Bank be freed from Taxes.

Concerning which Credit I shall briefly speak to these Four Things.

I. First, Its Security. II. Secondly, Some of those Advantages the Nation will
reap by it. III. Thirdly, I shall make some Comparison between this Credit, and
the present Bank of England. IV. Fourthly, I shall set forth the necessity of
settling the Nations Credit in this present Sessions.
I. As to the First, It has the Legislative Power of the Kingdom of England
for its Foundation, a Security strong enough, and nothing else can be so, to
build this Great Superstructure upon, the well Moddeling whereof, will keep it
from being subject to the Designs of Private Persons; This will last so long as
the Peoples Liberties last, for no Change can weaken it, so long as the People
of England have a hand in making their own Laws, whose Common Interest will be
so rivited and made up with the Security of this Bank, that they will in a
short time become one thing, so that nothing less than a Conquest will be able
to shake it; This we cannot fear from any Nation besides the French, nor from
them neither till Holland is first subdued, therefore as those States must
first truckel, so far will our Bank be more secure than theirs; France cannot
Erect a Bank on any sort of Security, because the Will of that Prince being his
Law, alters according to his present Occasions; Nor can Spain do it; where, not
only the Government, but also the Profits thereof, are divided amongst its
Ministers; As for Sweden, Denmark and Portugal, the Princes of Italy and
Germany, few believe their Circumstances to be such as to render them capable
of Erecting a Bank which may draw the Eyes of Europe to look toward it;
England only can do it, for as an easy Government is its own Security, so that
Security encourages Trade, and these two, accompanied with the Profits offered
to a running Cash, will make all Europe desire to settle their Moneys here.

Seeing then that nothing but the same Power which first Constituted this Bank
can destroy it, (a Power with whom we entrust our Lives, Liberties, and
Estates) I cannot see the least room left for distrust; for what advantage can
any future Parliament expect by a design of seizing this Bank, when the
Treasure thereof may be drawn out whilst they are framing the Law; and the
Consequence will be the ruining their own Estates, for which they can promise
nothing to themselves, save the being possessed of Empty Papers:

What farther Hazard the Nation can run, must proceed from the Neglect of the
Managers, or the Fraud of under Officers, which, Care in the First, and
Security for the Last, will prevent.

II. The next thing is to show the Advantages which England will reap by
settling the Credit here proposed; whereof some do immediately attend it, others
are Consequential.

Those which immediately attend it are,

1st, The Rate of Interest will hereby be brought lower, to the advance of our
Lands, and Encouragement of our Trade, by Methods altogether as profitable to
the Usurer, who will be willing to let his Money Cheaper, when it shall never
lie dead without his Consent, his Security be unquestionable, and freed from
the Charges of Litigious Suits, which so frequently accompany doubtful
Mortgages.

2dly, Both Gentlemen and Traders will hereby be supplied with Money to serve
their Occasions on such reasonable Security as they are able to give, when that
Security shall be strengthened by having the Pre-eminence above all other
Obligations; They may also have liberty to pay it in by such Proportions as
they can best spare it, when it shall be equally the Interest of the Bank to
receive it so, which will never want new opportunities to let it out again.

3dly, This Credit will give us an Esteem in Foreign Parts, Draw their Moneys
hither, and consequently their Trade, and thereby their People, all which will
be an Advantage to England.

4ly, It will supply the Government with Money to carry on the War on moderate
Interest, and make its Credit good; whereby the Public Revenues will reach
farther to serve its Occasions, and the Ministers of State be freed from many
anxious Thoughts which now make them uneasy.

5ly, It will make Returns from place to place in England both cheap and
certain, which will help our Inland Trade, and prevent Robberies, now too much
encouraged by traveling with Money; It will also be profitable to our Foreign
Trade, by bringing Exchanges low in our favor.

6ly, The Frauds put on the Country by Counterfeit Notes will be prevented; for
though the method of Indentures and Stained Paper now used by the Bank of
England may be a Security to it self, yet it is not so to any one else, seeing
Art is able to Counterfeit every thing, at least so like, as not to be easily
discovered; Now what Satisfaction will it be to those who have received their
Notes instead of Money, to be told by the Managers that they are Counterfeit,
when they know not where, nor from whom to get Reparation; whereas being
Assigned from Man to Man, they are taken on the Credit of the Assignor, who
runs no other risque thereby, save his Warrant that they are truly what he pays
them for.

7ly, This Bank will be free from Stock-Jobbing, the Bane of all good Designs,
which will find no room here, because it cannot be divided into private and
particular Interests.

The Consequential Advantages will be these,

1st, By this means the Taxes for carrying on the War the ensuing Year,
together with the Twenty five hundred and sixty four thousand Pounds which fell
short on the Salt Fund, may be raised, by Methods wherein the Kings Revenue and
the Peoples Profits shall go hand in hand, without Anticipations.

2ly, The Funds now settled on our Manufactures, which discourage our Trade, and
ruin our Poor, may be sunk and taken off; such are those on the Glass-makers,
Tobacco-pipe-makers, Distillers, and others, many whereof have yielded little
to the Government above the Charge of Collecting, and the best of them have
done great mischief to our Trade; Now seeing these are only so many several
Modus's of raising Money, those methods must doubtless do best, which least
injure our Trade.

3ly, The Debt due to the Transport-Ships may be paid off, and those People, to
whose early Loyalty the Reduction of Ireland is very much owing, be contented.

4ly, The Mints may be kept employed, and the Kingdom thereby filled with Coin.

5ly, Our Wool may be kept at home, which I humbly conceive can never be done
till a good Credit be settled, any thing less will not be large enough to cover
the Sore intended to be Cured.

6ly, The Plantation Trade may be better secured, especially that of Tobacco,
and Methods may be proposed to render it more profitable, both to the King, and
also to the Subject.

7ly, The Bank of Englands Notes may be brought to Par, and Tallyes of all
sorts in a short time be paid off at their full Value, which I humbly conceive
will be difficult to be done any other way; the settling a Credit on either, or
grafting them both together, seem improbable Methods to answer those ends.

I humbly hope to make Proposals in this present Sessions for putting these
into Practice, if a good Credit be timely settled.

Besides these, many other Advantages will accrue to the Nation, many of which
I have set forth in my before recited Essay on Coin and Credit. Page 27, 28, 29.

III. The Third thing is to make some Comparison between the Credit here
proposed, and the present Bank of England; which I Humbly conceive is so shaken
in its Reputation, as has rendered it incapable to be made the Foundation of a
National Credit; and whilst we labor to recover it, we may run the hazard of
destroying our Trade, disturbing the Government, and keeping our selves under a
lingering War, whilst we encourage the French King to try his utmost Efforts,
hoping that our Difficulties at home will force us to accept of a dishonorable
Peace.

It Is certain nothing can be the support of a National Credit, which is not
better, or at least so good as Money; and this is not to be found in the Bank
of England, whose Notes whilst they are One per Cent. worse then Specie will
always keep their Coffers empty, because no Man will put into it a Hundred
Pounds in Money, when he can have a Note of the same Value for Ninety Nine; and
the Consequence will be this, that the Lender, or rather the Jobber, will never
rest till he is repaid, that so he may be making advantage by a New Purchase;
And if this will be the effect of a Credit worse only by One per Cent. than
Money, what will it be when it is sunk to Sixteen? Whereas on the other side,
when a Credit is better than Money, the Coffers will ever be full, because all
Men will endeavor to put in their Money, and be impatient till it is done; And
thus it will be, when the Lender thinks himself secure, and makes more profit
by having his Money in the Bank then in his Chest, who will therefore receive
out no more at a time then his necessities shall require, and for the same
Reason, those to whom he pays it, will endeavor to return it thither again so
soon as they can.

IV. As to the Fourth thing Proposed, The necessity the Nation lies under to
have its Credit settled this present Sessions. it will appear, if we consider
how London now stands in Competition with all England besides as to the Specie
of Money, and how it will stand before another Sessions; It Is generally agreed,
that about One Moiety of the Money of England is already Centered in that great
City, and the rest is not enough to pay the Debts owing to it, together with
His Majesty's Revenues, Bonds already entered into, and Taxes now to be given,
for Six Months longer, besides the Foreign Bills, which are generally made
payable there, all which must be returned in Specie; for though by an Act of
this present Sessions: Entitled, An Act for the farther remedying the ill
State of the Coin of this Kingdom, it is among other things Provided, That all
Money that shall be brought in upon Account of Taxes, or Revenues, or Loans, at
Five Shillings and Eight Pence per Ounce, shall be carried to the next adjacent
Mint, in order to be Recoined, yet this will no way be Serviceable to the
Country, unless a Credit be settled, it must otherwise be sent up to London
after Coined for want of Returns, the Debts due to the Country being paid there
in Bank, which is Sixteen per Cent. worse than Money, and those due from the
Country demanded in Specie, so that the Money of England is every Week brought
up thither; and then, if it be next considered what Methods are left to the
Country to draw it back again, viz. by Provisions and some few other things,
'twill be reasonable to believe, that seeing the supply made from that City to
the Country is greater then what is made from the Country thither, all the Cash
of England will Center there in a short time, to the Ruining of the other
Trading Cities, and disabling of the Country to pay future Taxes; And this will
make the dependence on London still greater, till by its own Bloatiness it must
at last burst, when the Estates of the Traders shall consist only in Debts due
from the Country, which must still lie out, for want of a Specie to pay them
in; so that all the advantage London will receive is, that it will be last
Ruined.

Now if a good Credit be settled out of Hand, and the Mints continued in the
Country, the Money that is now there may be still kept there, and Methods found
out to increase it, and the Trade of England carried on with an equal
Circulation in all places; this will keep up the Rents of the Lands of England,
which must otherwise fall in their Values, suitable to the distance they stand
in from that great Metropolis.

If it be Objected, That the Management of this Credit will be very costly to
the Nation; I humbly conceive, that the Profits thereof will not only support
its Charge, but also bring in a great Overplus, which may be usefully employed
to the Nations advantage; yet were this Objection true, nothing can be termed
good Husbandry which spoils our Trade, the stopping whereof but for one Month
will be many Millions lost to the Kingdom; therefore, whatever Charge is
necessary to keep it on foot, 'twill be the Nations Interest to be at,
especially such a Bank as this is, whose Profits or Losses are Compatible with
the Interest of the Subject, for, if the Bank looses it is because the Subject
gets, and if the Bank gets, the Nation has the Profits, whilst at the same
time the Government is supported, and our Trade carried on.

If by rectifying this, or any better Proposal from a more thinking Head, the
Credit of the Nation may be settled in this present Sessions, I have reaped the
end I aimed at, the Good and Welfare of my Native Country; which I Humbly
submit to your Honors great Wisdom, and shall be ready to explain any thing
that may seem doubtful, when I am thereto Commanded.

Your Honors Most Obedient Servant, John Carry.
January 5 th, 1696.

