depiction of coastal town struck by earthquake: damaged and destroyed
buildings, sinking ships, people drowning in water and being swallowed up by
earth, circle of people praying; undamaged buildings in background; mountains
in distance The Dreadful Earthquake in Jamaica. June 7. 1692


The General HISTORY OF Earthquakes BEING

An Account of the most Remarkable and Tremendous Earthquakes that have
happened in diverse parts of the World, from the Creation to this time; As they
are recorded by Sacred and Common Authors; And perticularly those lately in
Naples, Smyrna, Jamaica and Sicily.


With a description of the famous burning Mount, Aetna, in that Island; And a
Relation of the several dreadful Conflagrations and Fiery Irruptions thereof
for many Ages.

Likewise the Natural and Material Causes of Earthquakes, with the usual Signs
and Prognostics of their approach; And the Consequents and Effects that have
followed several of them.

By R. B.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.
1694.

TO THE READER.
THE several dreadful Earthquakes that have happened in diverse parts of the
World within a few years past, and among others that in the Island of Jamaica,
and another in England, wherein the People of this Nation is particularly
concerned, seem to call aloud for Repentance and Reformation of the horrid
Enormities that are boldly committed amongst us; for the Almighty executes his
Judgments upon Mankind that the People of the Earth might learn Righteousness.
Therefore the collecting and publishing the terrible Relations of Earthquakes,
needs no Apology, and may I hope be influential upon the minds of men, who
appear affected with the dismal accounts that have been lately given of these
terrible Visitations of God.

I have been the more encouraged to proceed in Printing these small Manuals by
the acceptance that others of this nature have already met with, which, I find,
has occasioned many, (especially young people) to lay aside those vain and idle
Songs and Romances wherewith they were formerly Conversant and to divert their
vacant hours with reading the real Transactions, Revolutions and Accidents that
are recorded by Authors of the greatest Veracity, to have happened in diverse
Ages and Countries. And this being of that kind, I have no cause to doubt, but
it may meet with as civil Treatment as as those that have already been made
public by

R. B.

The General HISTORY OF Earthquakes.
I. AMong the several Plagues and Judgments wherewith the Almighty visits,
and punishes the Enormities and Sins of Mankind, that of Earthquakes may be
accounted the most Dreadful and Tremendous, which in an instant swalloweth up
thousands of people of all Qualities and Ages, together with the most superb
and stately Edifices that Pride and Ambition can raise, in a moment, even in
the twinkling of an Eye, to convince men of the Greatness and Power of the
Supreme Creator, and how vain it is to value themselves upon any mundane
enjoyments; Of which we have lately had very astonishing Instances in several
parts of the World.

II. But before I proceed to give a Relation of them, it may be necessary to
discover the Natural Causes of this dreadful Concussion of the Earth, which the
God of Heaven makes use of to signify his Displeasure for the provoking Crimes
of Nation and People; Of which a Learned Divine gives the following account.

III. An Earthquake is a shaking of the Earth, occasioned by Wind and
Exhalations enclosed within the Caves and Bowels of the Earth, which can find
no passage, or at least none long enough to discharge themselves, and therefore
breaking forth with great force and violence, it sometimes shakes the Earth,
another while rendeth and opens the same, sometimes casting up Earth a great
height into the Air, otherwhile causing the ground to sink down a great depth,
swallowing Cities, Towns, Palaces, Castles, yea prodigious high Mountains,
leaving in the place nothing but deep holes, or long and unfathomable Lakes of
Water.

IV. Authors Write differently of the several kinds of Earthquakes, but they
usually comprehend them under four; The first kind is when the Earth is shaken
laterally or to one side, the whole force of the enclosed Wind and Vapors
driving to one place, and there is no contrary motion to hinder it. This Wind,
if it be not great, causes the Earth to tremble like a man in an Ague Fit, and
does no more harm, but if it be strong and violent, it loses the Foundations
of all Buildings though never so firm, overthrows whole Cities, and sometimes
throws down great Hills, so that they overwhelm all the Valleys under them. The
second kind is, when the Earth is lifted up with great violence so that the
Buildings are like to fall, and instantly sink down again, and this is caused
by the force of the Winds which strive to get upward like Gunpowder, and
finding some deliverance from confinement, the Earth falls down to its former
place. The third sort is the opening rending or gaping of the Earth, which
sinking down swallows up Cities, Towns, yea Rocks, Rivers and Floods, and so
that they never appear again; Nay the Sea in some places has been drunk up, so
that People have gone over on foot, till the returning Tide has covered the
place with Water again. The last kind is, when great Mountains arise out of the
Earth, or else when some part of the Land sinketh down, and instead thereof
arise Rivers, Lakes or Fires, breaking out with Smoke and Ashes; Sometimes the
bottom of the Sea is lifted up, whereby many Islands are made that were never
seen before; Of which History gives large accounts.

V. If it be asked how such mighty Winds come to be under the Earth, the
Philosophers answer, that the great Caves and Dens of the Earth being always
full of Air, when the heat of the Sun resolves the moisture of the Earth many
Exhalations are generated, both within and without the same: and the places
being full before, can receive no more, unless some part be let our, so that in
those Countries where the Earth has but few Pores, or where they are stopped
with moisture, it must necessarily happen, that these Exhalations striving to
get out, must needs rend the Earth, or lift it up, either to get free passage,
or to make room enough to abide within.

VI. It has been observed That there are usually several Signs and Presages of
this terrible Calamity. As first the raging of the Sea when there are no
Tempestuous Winds to move it, yea in the greatest Calm, which is occasioned by
the Winds laboring to get passage that way, but being repelled, soon after
shakes the Earth. Again the Water in the bottom of deep Wells is troubled and
infected with a Sulphurous smell, from the pestilent Exhalations long enclosed
within the Earth, which now begin to spread abroad; And hereupon, in diverse
places an Earthquake has caused abundance of Smoke, Flame and Ashes to issue
forth, by reason that the vast quantity of Brimstone under ground is by the
violent motion set on Fire and bursteth out, so that it is a wonder if after an
Earthquake some grievous Pestilence does not follow, the whole Mass of the
Poisonous Minerals within the Bowels of the Earth being by this furious shock
blown abroad into the Air. Another presage is the calmness and coldness of the
Air, by reason the Exhalation that should be abroad is within the Earth.
Another is said to be, a long thin struck of Cloud seen when the Sky is clear
after Sun set, which, they say, is caused by the Vapor or Exhalation which is
the matter of Clouds, being gone into the Earth. Others affirm that it is the
Exhalation which issues from some narrow passage out of which the rest of the
Wind cannot come, and therefore soon after by a sudden Eruption makes a broader
way to deliver it self out of Prison. Likewise the Sun appears dim certain
days before, because the Winds that should purge and dissipate the gross Air,
which causes this dimness, is enclosed within the Bowels of the Earth. Also
the Birds perceiving a certain trembling and shaking at the Roots of the Trees,
forsake them, and fit trembling on the ground. Lastly, there are heard before,
at, and after an Earthquake great noises and sounds under the Earth, with
terrible groanings and thunderings; Yea sometimes when no Earthquake follows,
the Wind without any other effect finding a way to vent it self; Some of these
are the general prognostics and forewarnings of a dreadful Earthquake to
follow.

VII. And certainly no other Calamity produces greater terror and astonishment
in Mankind than this. For to have the Earth rock under one with that singular
kind of motion which no humane art nor force can imitate, must needs be extreme
surprising; For though death may be familiar to some men in any other form, yet
it appears very horrible to be buried alive, and to sink on a sudden into an
unknown Grave they know not whether, perhaps they may fall into some dark Lake
of Water, or it may be drenched in a River of fire, or be dashed on a Rock; for
who can tell the dispositions of the Caverns below, or what sort of the
Apartments there are under the Surface of the Earth? We walk on the Battlements
of a mavelous structure, a Globe full of Tremendous secrets.

VIII. But though we have given some account of the Natural Causes of
Earthquakes, yet it is very apparent that many have been supernatural, and
caused by the immediate hand of God, of which we find several instances in holy
Scripture, that we might dread and tremble before the Almighty who needs
neither Vapors nor Exhalations to Execute his Vengeance upon incorrigible
Offenders.

IX. The first of this kind that we read of was at the Promulgation of the Law
at Mount Sinai, Exodus 19, 20. And the Lord said unto Moses, go unto the People
and Sanctify them to day and to morrow, and be ready against the third day, for
then the Lord will come down in the sight of all the People upon Mount Sinai,
and thou shall set bounds to the People round about, saying, Take heed to your
selves that ye go not up into the Mount, or touch the border of it, whosoever
touches the Mount shall surely be put to death; There shall not an hand touch
it, but he shall surely be Stoned or Shot through, whether it be Man or Beast,
it shall not live, when the Trumpet sounds long they shall come up to the
Mount. And it came to pass on the third day in the Morning that there were
Thunders and Lightnings and a thick Cloud upon the Mount, and the Voice of the
Trumpet exceeding loud, so that all the People in the Camp trembled. And Mount
Sinai was altogether on a Smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in Fire,
and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a Furnace, and the whole Mount
quaked greatly. And all the People saw the Thundering and the Lightnings, and
the noise of the Trumpet, and the Mountain smoking, and when the People saw it
they removed afar off. And they said unto Moses speak thou with us and we will
hear, but let not God speak with us least we dye. And Moses said unto the
People Fear not; for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before
your Faces that you Sin not. Thie happened in the year from the Creation of the
World, 25 13.

X. Another terrible Earthquake we find recorded Number 16. Now Korah, Dathan
and Abiram, with certain of the Children of Israel, two hundred and fifty
Princes of the Assembly, famous in the Congregation, Men of Renown rose up, and
gathered themselves together against Moses and against Aaron, and said unto
them, Ye take too much upon you seeing all the Congregation is Holy, every one
of them, and the Lord is among them, wherefore then lift you up your selves
above the Congregation of the Lord. And when Moses heard it, he fell upon his
Face. And he spoke unto Korah and unto all his Company, saying, Even to Morrow
the Lord will show you who are his, and who is holy; and will cause him to come
near to him, even him whom he has chosen will he cause to come near to him.
This do; Take ye Censers, Korah and all his Company. And put Fire therein, and
put Incense in them before the Lord to Morrow! and it shall be that the man
whom the Lord does choose, he shall be holy, Ye take too much upon you, ye Sons
of Levi; seems it a small thing unto you that the God of Israel has
separated you from the Congregation of Israel, to bring you near unto himself,
to do the service of the Tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand before the
Congregation to Minister unto them? And he has brought thee near unto him, and
all thy Brethren the Sons of Levi with thee: and seek ye the Priesthood also?
For which Cause both thou and thy Company are gathered together against the
Lord: and what is Aaron that ye murmur against him? And Moses sent to call
Dathan and Abiram the Sons of Eliab: which said, we will not come up. Is it a
small thing that thou have brought us up out of a land that flourishes with
Milk and Honey to Kill us in the Wilderness, except thou make thy self
altogether a Prince over us? Moreover thou have not brought us into a Land that
flows with Milk and Honey, or given us Inheritance of Fields and Vineyards;
will thou put out the Eyes of these men? we will not come up. And Moses was
very wrath, and said unto the Lord, Respect not thou their offering: I have not
taken one Ass from them, neither have I hurt one of them. And Moses said unto
Korah, Be thou and all thy Company before the Lord, thou, and they, and Aaron
to Morrow. And take every Man his Censer, and put Incense in them, and bring ye
before the Lord every Man his Censer, two hundred and fifty Censers; thou also,
and Aaron each of you his Censer; and put Fire in in them, and lay Incense
thereon, and stand in the Door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and the
Glory of the Lord appeared unto all the Congregation. And the Lord spoke unto
Moses, and unto Aaron saying, separate your selves from among this Congregation
that I may consume them in a moment, And they fell upon their faces and said, O
God, the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, shall one Man sin, and will thou be
wrath with all the Congregation? And the Lord spoke unto Moses saying, speak
unto all the Congregation saying, Get you up from about the Tabernacle of
Korah, Dathan and Abiram. And Moses rose up, and went unto Dathan and Abiram;
and the Elders of Israel followed him. And the spoke unto all the Congregation
saying, Depart I pray you from the Tents of these Wicked Men, and touch nothing
of theirs least you be consumed in all their Sins. So they gat them up from the
Tabernacle of Korah, Dathan and Abiram on every side: and Dathan and Abiram
came out, and stood in the Door of their Tents, and their Wives, and their
Sons, and their little Children. And Moses said, Hereby shall ye know that the
Lord has sent me to do all these works: for I have not done them of my own
mind. If these men dye the common Death of all men, or if they be visited after
the visitation of all men; then the Lord has not sent me. But if the Lord make
a new thing, and the Earth open her Mouth, and swallow them up, with all that
appertain unto them, and they go down quick into the Pit; then ye shall
understand that these Men have provoked the Lord. And it came to pass as he had
made an end of speaking all these words, that the ground clave asunder that was
under them: And the Earth opened her Mouth, and swallowed them up, and their
Houses, and all the Men that appertained unto Kerah, and all their Goods. They
and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the Pit, and the Earth
closed upon them: and they perished from among the Congregation. And all Israel
that were round about them, fled at the cry of them: for they said, Lest the
Earth swallow us up also. And there came out a Fire from the Lord, and consumed
the two hundred and fifty men that offered Incense.

Josephus in his History of the Antiquities of the Jews gives the following
account of this dreadful Judgment; That Moses making a large Prayer, intermixed
with Tears, while he was speaking, the Earth instantly trembled, and shaking
began to move like a Billow of the Sea raised by the violence of Wind; at which
all the People were sorely amazed, after which an horrible and shattering Noise
was made about their Tents, and instantly the Earth opened and swallowed up
both them and all that belonged to them, insomuch that nothing which was theirs
remained to be seen; And the Earth in a moment closing again the vast gaping
immediately was shut, so that there was not the least appearance of what had
happened; Thus perished they all, leaving behind them an example of Gods Power
and Judgment, and this accident was the more miserable in that there were none,
even of their Kinsfolks and Allies that had compassion of them, so that the
whole People forgetting what was passed, allowed Gods Justice with joyful
Acclamations; esteeming them unworthy to be bewailed, but to accounted as the
Plague and Perverters of the People. After this, says he, there suddenly
appeared so bright a Fire that the like was never kindled by the hand of man,
nor ever broke forth from the Bowels of burning Mountains, nor could proceed
from any natural cause, but such as seemed to be kindled from Heaven, exceeding
light and flaming, by the fury and violence of which those two hundred and
fifty, together with Korah, were so consumed that there scarce appeared any
relics of their Carcases; Only Aaron remained untouched, to the end that it
might appear this Fire came from Heaven. This was in the year of the World,
2515.

XI. A third tremendous Earthquake caused by the immediate Power of God without
any apparent or natural Cause, and whereby the Israelites gained a great
Victory over the Philistines, is in 1 Samuel 14. And it came to pass on a Day
that Jonathan the Son of Saul said unto the Young Man that bare his Armor,
come and let us go over to the Philistines Garrison that is on the other side,
but he told not his Father. And between the passages by which Jonathan sought
to go over to the Philistines there was a sharp Rock on the one side, and a
sharp Rock on the other side. And Jonathan said to the young man that bare his
Armor, come and let us go over unto the Garrison of these uncircumcised, it
may be that the Lord will work for us, for there is no restraint to the Lord to
save by many or few; And his Armor-bearer said unto him, Do all that is in
thine Heart, turn thee, behold I am with thee according to thy Heart; Then said
Jonathan, behold we will pass over unto these Men, and we will discover our
selves unto them, if they say unto us, Tarry until we come to you; then we will
stand still in our place, and will not go up unto them. But if they say thus,
Come up unto us then we will go up, for the Lord has delivered them into our
hand and this shall be a sign unto us. And both of them discovered themselves
to the Garrison of the Philistines, and the Philistines said; Behold the
Hebrews come forth out of their holes, where they had hid themselves, And the
men of the Garrison answered Jonathan and his Armor bearer, and said, Come up
to us, and we will show you a thing. And Jonathan said unto his Armor bearer,
Come up after me, for the Lord has delivered them into the hand of Israel. And
Jonathan climbed up on his Hands and upon his Feet, and his Armor bearer after
him, and they fell before Jonathan, and his Armor bearer slew after him. And
that first slaughter which Jonathan and his Armor bearer made was about twenty
men within as it were an half Acre of Land, which a yoke of Oxen might Plow.
And there was trembling in the Host, in the Field, and among all the People:
the Garrison and the Spoilers they also trembled, and the Earth quaked so that
it was a very great trembling (a trembling of God.) And the Watchmen of Saul in
Gibeah of Benjamin looked; and behold the multitude melted away, and they went
on, beating down one another. Then said Saul unto the People that were with
him, Number now and see who is gone from us. And when they had numbered, behold
Jonathan and his Armor-bearer were not there. And Saul said unto Ahiah, Bring
hither the Ark of God; (for the Ark of God was at that time with the Children
of Israel.) And it came to pass that while Saul talked unto the Priest, that
the noise that was in the Host of the Philistines went on, and increased; and
Saul said unto the Priest, withdraw thine hand. And Saul and all the People
that were with him assembled themselves, and they came to the Battle: and
behold every man's Swords was against his fellow, and there was a great
discomfiture. Moreover the Hebrews that were with the Philistines before that
time, which went up with them into the Camp from the Country round about, even
they also turned to be with the Israelites that were with Saul and Jonathan.
Likewise all the men of Israel which had hid themselves in Mount Ephraim when
they heard that the Philistines fled, even they also followed hard after them
in the Battle. So the Lord saved Israel that day: and the Battle passed over
unto Beth-haven. This was about the year of the World, 2940. And Josephus thus
describes this Battle; The Philistines had pitched their Tents on an pointed
Rock which extended it self in length with three Angles, and was on each side
begirt with a Bank, like a Wall or Fortification against the incursion of their
Enemies; The place was fortified by Nature so that no man might ascend or
attack them without much hazard; yet only Jonathan and his Armor-bearer,
climbing upon their Hands and Feet invaded their Camp, and slew about twenty of
them which filled their whole Army with terror and amazedness, who throwing
away their arms, fled amain. Others being ignorant who were their Friends or
Foes, invaded one another as Enemies, for imagining with themselves that only
two Hebrews durst never ascend and enter their Camp, they addressed themselves to
their mutual murder and slaughter, so that some of them were slain, others fled
to escape the Sword, and fell headlong down the Rocks; The terrible trembling
and quaking of the Earth at the same time, being doubtless very contributary to
their destruction.

XII. A fourth terrible Earthquake happened from an immediate Divine Power, in
the days of Uzziah King of Judah, of whom we read in the 2 Chronicles 26. (and
this Earthquake is likewise mentioned by the Prophets Amos and Zachariah) And
Uzziah did that which was right in the sight of the Lord. And he sought God in
the days of Zechariah who had Understanding in the Visions of God, and as long
as he sought the Lord, God made him to prosper. And he went forth and Warred
against the Philistines, and God helped him against them, and against the
Arabians, and the Ammorites gave him gifts, and his name spread abroad even to
the entering in of Egypt, for he strengthened himself exceedingly. Moreover
Uzziah had an Host of fighting men, and the whole number of the Fathers of the
mighty men of valor, were two thousand and six hundred. And under their hand
was an Army, three hundred thousand, and seven thousand and five hundred, that
made War with mighty power to help the King against the Enemy. But when he was
strong his heart was lifted up to his destruction, for he transgressed against
the Lord his God, and and went into the Temple of the Lord to burn Incense upon
the Altar of Incense. And Azariah the Priest went in after him, and with him
fourscore Priests of the Lord that were valiant men: and they withstood Uzziah
the King, and said unto him, It appertains not unto thee Vzziah to burn
Incense unto the Lord; but to the Priests the Sons of Aaron that are
consecrated to burn Incense: Go out of the Sanctuary, for thou have trespassed,
neither shall it be for thine honor from the Lord God. Then Uzziah was wrath,
and had a Censer in his hand to burn Incense, and while he was wrath with the
Priests, the Leprosy even rose up in his Forehead before the Priests in the
House of the Lord from beside the Incense Altar. And Azariah the Chief Priest,
and all the Priests looked upon him, and behold he was Leprous in his Forehead
and they thrust him out from thence, yea he himself hasted also to go out
because the Lord had smitten him. And Uzziah the King was a Leper unto the Day
of his Death.

Now though here is no mention made of the Earthquake that happened in his
Reign, which is recorded by Amos and Zachariah as aforesaid, particularly by
the last in Chapter 14. And ye shall flee like as ye fled before the Earthquake
in the days of Uzziah; yet Josephus in his History of the Jews makes it very
evident that it was at this time, and upon this occasion; Uzziah, says he, upon
a certain solemn Feast day, wherein all the People were assembled together,
attired himself in the High Priests Vestmente, and entered into the Temple to
offer Sacrifice unto God upon the Golden Altar, notwithstanding the High Priest
Azariah, accompanied with fourscore Priests prohibited the same, telling him,
that it was not lawful for him to Sacrifice, since it was only allowed to those
that were of the Posterity of the High Priest Aaron, whilst after this manner
Azariah expostulated with him, commanding him to go out of the Temple, and not
to invade the Ordinances of God; The King waxed wrath, and threatened to take
his life from him, unless he kept himself quiet. Whereupon there fell a great
Trembling and Earthquake, and the Temple cleft in twain, and a great light of
the Sun entered thereinto, and reflected on the Kings Face in such manner that
all his body was covered with a Leprosy: And before the City, in a place called
Eroge, the half of a Mountain that stood to the Eastward brake and fell, and
rolled and removed for the space of four Furlongs, toward the Oriental Mountain
where it rested; So that the public ways were stopped and choked up, and the
Kings Gardens of Pleasure were wholly ruinated and disfigured. When the Priests
beheld the Kings Face covered with a Leprosy, they told him what inconvenience
had happened to him, and enjoined him to depart out of the City, according to
the custom of men that were polluted; Whereupon he wholly confused at so
grievous an accident, and having no farther courage to reply, obeyed the
commandment that was given him, enduring a pitiful and lamentable punishment
for being proud and presumptuous, in committing such Impiety against God.
Finally he died through grief and discontent, and was Buried in his own Garden.
In the year of the World, 3194.

XIII. The next Earthquake that we read of, is that which happened at the death
of our blessed Lord and Savior, and was a very convincing demonstration of his
Deity and that he was the Son of God. As we find in St. Matthew 27. Now from
the sixth hour there was Darkness over all the Land until the ninth hour. Jesus
when he had cried again, gave up the Ghost. And behold the Vail of the Temple
was rent in twain from the top to the bottom, and the Earth did quake, and the
Rocks rent. And the Graves were opened, and many Bodies of Saints which slept
arose. And came out of the Graves after his Resurrection, and went into the
Holy City and appeared unto many. Now when the Centurion and they that were
with him watching Jesus, saw the Earthquake and those things that were done,
they feared greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of God.

And these prodigious effects that were produced upon our Savior's
Crucifixion, were acknowledged and attested as well by Heathens as Christians.
At the time of his Death a very great darkness happened in the Day time, which
continued from six a Clock till nine, and yet there was no Eclipse of the Sun,
for it was at a Full Mood; so that it was Miraculous, and contrary to the Order
of Nature, and only by the immediate Power of God, who deprived the Sun of its
Light for that space of time. And therefore Dyonisius the Arcopagite being that
Day in Athens, and seeing the Sun so darkened; and also knowing, as a Man
learned in the course of the Heavens, that such an Eclipse must needs be
contrary to the Rule of Nature, spoke with a loud voice, saying, Either the
World is at an end or the God of Nature Suffers.

We like wise read of another Supernatural Earthquake at the Resurrection of
Christ St. Matthew 28. In the end of the Sabbath as it began to dawn toward the
first day of the Week, came Mary Magdalen and the other Mary to see the
Sepulcher. And behold there was a great Earthquake; for the Angel of the
Descended from Heaven, and came and rolled back the Stone from the Door, and
sat upon it. His countenance was like Lightning, and his Raiment white as
Snow. And for fear of him, the Keepers did shake, and became as dead men. This
was in the year of the World 4036.

XIV. Lastly, We read of two Earthquakes in the Acts of the Apostles, which can
be attributed to no other cause but that of the Power of God, for the
confirmation of the Gospel, and the Resurrection of his Son Jesus Christ our
Lord. The first is in Acts 4.31. And when they had prayed the Earth was shaken
where the Apostles were assembled together, and they were all filled with the
Holy Ghost, and they spoke the Word of God with boldness. The second is in Acts
17. And at Midnight Paul and Silas Prayed and Sang Praises to God, and the
Prisoners heard them. And suddenly there was a great Earthquake, so that the
Foundations of the Prison were shaken; and immediately all the Doors were
opened, and every ones Bands were losed. And the Keeper of the Prison awaking
out of his sleep, and seeing the Prison Doors open, he drew out his Sword and
would have Killed himself, supposing that the Prisoners had been fled. But Paul
cried with a loud voice saying, Do thy self no harm; for we are all here. Then
he called for a Light, and sprang in and came trembling and fell down before
Paul and Silas. And brought them out and said, Sirs, what must I do to be
saved? and they said believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved and thy
House. And they spoke unto him the word of the Lord, and to all that were in
his House. And he took them the same hour in the Night, and washed their
stripes, and was baptized he and all his straightway. And when he had brought
them into his House, he set meat before them, and rejoiced, believing in God
with all his House. This was in the 55 year after our Saviors Incarnation.

XV. These are all the Earthquakes that we find mentioned in Holy Scripture, to
have actually happened, but there are others spoken of, which may be termed
Metaphorical Earthquakes, and may signify great Alterations and Commotions in
the several States and Kingdoms of the World; wherein, by the shaking, moving,
removing, breaking down and dissolving the Earth, we may understand the
Inhabitants of the Earth, and the punishments that God would inflict upon them
for their repeated Sins and Provocations; such as these we find Isaiah
threatening the Narion of the Jews withal, in the 29th Chapter of that Prophecy.
Thou shall be visited of the Lord of Hosts with Thunder, and with Earthquakes,
and great noise, with Storm and Tempest, and the flame of devouring Fire. And
in Chapter 24. And it shall come to pass, that he who flees from the noise of
the fear shall fall into the Pit: and he that comes out of the midst of the
Pit shall be taken in the snare, for the Windows from on high are open, and the
Foundations of the Earth do shake. The Earth is is utterly broken down, the
Earth is clean dissolved, the Earth is moved exceedingly. The Earth shall real
too and fro like a Drunkard, and shall be removed like a Cottage, and the
transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it, and shall fall and not rise again.

XVI. And our blessed Savior foretelling the destruction of the Temple, and
what great Earthquakes shall be before it, and of the Signs of his coming to
Judgment. St. Mat. 24. he says; And ye shall hear of Wars and Rumors of Wars,
For Nation shall rise against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom; and there
shall be Famines, and Pestilences, and Earthquakes, in diverse places, and the
Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her Light, and the Stars
shall fall from Heaven, and the Powers of the Heavens shall be shaken. And then
shall appear the Sign of the Son of Man, and he shall send his Angels with a
great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather together his Elect from the
four Winds, from one end of Heaven to the other.

XVII. Such Metaphorical Earthquakes are those thought to be, which are
Prophesied of in several places of the Revelations, as Chapter 6. And I beheld
when the Lamb had opened the sixth Seal, and lo, there was a great Earthquake,
and the Sun became black as Sackcloth of Hair, and the Moon became as Blood.
And the Stars of Heaven fell unto the Earth, even as the Fig Tree casts her
untimely Figs, when she is shaken of a mighty Wind. And the Heaven departed as
a Scrowl when it is rolled together, and every Mountain and Island were moved
out of their places. And the Kings of the Earth, and the great men, and the
rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty Men, and every Bondsman, and
every Freeman hid themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks of the Mountains;
And said to the Mountains and Rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the Face of
him that sits on the Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb; For the great
day of his Wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand. So in Chapter 8. And
the Angel took the Censer and filled it with Fire of the Altar, and cast it
into the Earth: and there were Voices, and Thundrings, and Lightnings, and an
Earthquake. And again in Chapter 11. And they heard a great Voice from Heaven
saying unto the Witnesses, Come up hither, and they ascended up to Heaven in a
Cloud, and their Enemies beheld them. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there
were great Voices in Heaven saying, The Kingdoms of this World are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall Reign forever and ever.
And the four and twenty Elders which sat before God on their Seats, fell upon
their Faces and Worshipped God, saying, We give thee thanks O Lord God
Almighty, which art and wast, and art to come; because thou have taken; to thee
thy great Power and have Reigned, ver. 18. And the Nations were angry, and thy
Wrath is come, and the time of the Dead that they should be Judged, and that
thou should give reward to thy Servants the Prophets, and to the Saints and
them that fear thy name small and great, and should destroy them which
destroy the Earth. And the Temple of God was opened in Heaven, and there was
seen in his Temple the Ark of his Testament; and there were Lightnings, and
Voices, and Thundrings, and an Earthquake, and great Hail. Likewise in Chapter
16. And the seventh Angel poured his Vial into the Air, and there was a great
Earthquake, and there came a great Voice out of the Temple of Heaven from the
Throne, saying, It is done. And there were Voices, and Thunders, and
Lightnings, and there was a great Earthquake, such as was not since men were
upon the Earth, so mighty an Earthquake and so great. And the great City was
divided into three parts, and the Cities of the Nation fell, and great Babylon
came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the Cup of the Wine of the
fierceness of his Wrath, And every Island fled away, and the Mountains were not
found. And there fell upon Men a great Hail out of Heaven, every Stone about
the weight of a Talent: and men Blasphemed God because of the Plague of the
Hail; for the plague thereof was exceeding great. These and such other
Scriptures may denote the future Calamities that will befall the Inhabitants of
the Earth about the end of the World, and do also demonstrate the great power
and alsufficiency of Almighty God, who as Job says Chapter 9. Is wise in
Heart, and mighty in Strength, who removes the Mountains, and overturneth them
in his anger. Who shakes the Earth out of her place, and the Pillars thereof
tremble

XVIII. Having given an account of the Supernatural and Metaphorical
Earthquakes recorded in Holy Writ; I shall now relate those that are mentioned
by other Historians of the former and latter Ages, and likewise of some of the
Consequents which have succeeded them as to Wars, Pestilence, Famines and other
dreadful Calamities, and were judged to be the effects of them; wherein I shall
be obliged to repeat some of those already published in a Book called,
surprising Miracles of Nature, etc.

XIX. Before the birth of Savior Plato mentions a wonderful Earthquake,
whereby in a Day and a Night a vast Island without the Streights of Gibralter
called Atlantis, and bigger than Asia and Africa together, was wholly
overwhelmed, and afterward covered by a great Inundation of Waters, insomuch
that on the Atlantic Ocean for a great while after no Ship could Sail, by
reason that the same huge Sea by resolution of the Earth of that mighty Island
was all turned into Mud. He also Writes, that by another terrible Earthquake
the Continent of Africa was rent asunder, from Europe and Asia, as it is at
this day, being now only connected by a little Neck of Land at the Red Sea. The
famous Isle of Sicily was likewise formerly a part of Italy, and by an
Earthquake divided from it. And our Island of Great Britain is supposed to be
broken off from the Continent of France by that means. Herodotus says that
Egypt in ancient time was a Gulf of the Sca, and by an Earthquake made a dry
Land. The River Indus in Asia which receives fifteen others Rivers into it,
altered its Channel and the neighboring Country was turned into a Wilderness
by a lamentable Earthquake. Before the Peloponesian, or Civil Wars among the
Grecians, one of their Islands called Delphos famous for the Oracle and Temple
of Apollo situated therein, was wholly ruined by an Earthquake, which was
thought to portend those remarkable alterations which soon after happened in
Greece. A little before the Wars between the Lacedaemonians and the Ilotae, who
were their Slaves and Bondmen in the Country of Laconia, there happened in the
City of Sparta a most terrible and fearful Earthquake, for the Earth in many
places of the Country opened and fell in as into a bottomless Pit. The
Mountain Taygetum shook so terribly that parts of Rocks fell down from it, and
Sparta with two other Cities with the violence of it were thrown to the ground,
five hundred Houses only exceptcepted; And great floods of Water following it,
the Country was almost utterly destroyed thereby. Tire and Sydon suffered
exceedingly by Earthquakes, and an infinite number of People were buried under
the ruins. And Strabo mentions a City situate about Sidon that was wholly
swallowed up thereby. Pliny writes of twelve Cities ruined in one Night, and
St. Augustine is cited for what is more strange, That in a samous Earthquake a
hundred Cities in Lybia were destroyed. In the Veliternean Fields the Earth
rent asunder in such huge and frightful breaches, that Trees and whole Houses
were swallowed up in them, and it Rained Blood for two whole days together,
about which time Hannibal received that notable overthrow by Scipio, which was
the destruction of the famous City and Republic of Carthage, and the Conquest
of that Country to the Romans. Tit. Livius. Hist. Josephus records that about
twenty nine years before the birth of Christ, there happened a tremendous
Earthquake in the Country of Judea, whereby diverse Beasts were slain, and many
People overwhelmed in the ruins of their Houses, and perished, to the number as
some write of about thirty thousand.

XX. I now proceed, in a Chronological Order, to relate all the Earthquakes
that have happened since our Saviors Birth, as I find them mentioned by
several Authors, of which that which happened at his Crucifixion is said to be
the greatest that ever was, which shook not only one part of the Earth as in
other cases, but the whole Would trembled at once, if some famous Authors are
to be credited. In the tenth year of Christ was a great Earthquake in Cyprus,
that overthrew many Cities, and in his sevententh year thirteen Cities in Italy
were destroyed, and the River Tyber overflowed Rome. The effects whereof were
thought to be, That Sejanus the Favorite to Tyberius was executed for his
Ambition, his Son strangled, his Daughter first Deflowred by the Hangman, then
put to death. Drusius is Poisoned; Tyberius turned Tyrant. In 59. was a
terrible Eclipse of the Sun, so that the Stars were seen, Nero's Supper was
burned with Lightning, and a great Earthquake happened at Rome. At this time
the Britains slay seventy thousand Romans, and Suetonius destroys eighty
thousand Britains as he comes from Anglesey. Rome is fired by Nero who
rejoices in that Villainy, he commits Incest with his own Mother, afterward
Murders and Rips her up to view the place where he lay before he was born.
Cartismunda Queen of the Britains rejects her Husband, the King of Scots
takes her, and baries her alive.

XXI. In the reign of Trojan the Emperor 105. there happened a most terrible
Earthquake at Antioch which destroyed many Cities and People, and extended it
self very far; Frightful Lightnings which made the Night as light as Day,
preceded with dreadful Thunderbolts that threw down stately buildings, killed
many men; Also strong and unusual Storms of Wind, after which were heard great
and sudden Noises, the Sea wrought, the Waves swelled, the Earth was shaken,
buildings trembled, others were lifted up and fell down, whereby so thick a
dust and darkness was raised that People could not see nor hear one another,
nor scarcely breath: Trees were plucked up by the Roots, and multitudes buried
in the Ruins of their own Houses. After which came such violent heats that
People not being able to endure it, stripped and hid themselves naked under
ground, where many were famished, by reason the continual shaking of the Earth
so distracted them that they durst not come forth for relief. In 107. A very
great Earthquake happened in Asia, with many Prodigious sights in the Air, as
sighting of Men, etc. Another in Galatia and Rome where Lightning from Heaven
consumed the Temple of their Gods, with strong unwonted Winds, and horrible
Noises in the Earth. In 120. A great Earthquake in Nice; and two terrible ones
in Palestina. Milk in a Prodigious manner rained in Rome, and a great Fire
destroyed two hundred and forty Houses. In 162. A very great Earthquake in
Bithynia; The Waves of the Mediterranean Seas in a Calm elevated themselves to
the top of a Mountain far distant from it, and cast the foam a great way upon
the main Land. At this time Mogul King of Scots growing odious to the Nobility
for his Tyranny they Murder him. Smyrna in Asia is quite destroyed. The Emperor
Commodus grows rediculous, and the People taking notice thereof, he executed
many of them, he is strangled by Martia his Concubine, and Pertinax succeeding,
after having Reigned only eighty seven days is slain by the Soldiers.

XXII. In 244. The Sun was totally Ecclipsed, and there was so horrid an
Earthquake, the Earth gaped so extremely that certain Cities, together with
their People, were swallowed up, and exceeding great darkness happened for many
days together. Now the tenth Persecution began wherein one hundred forty four
thousand Christians were put to Death in Egypt and seventy thousand banished,
and many burned in an House in Nicomedia. In the year 300. there were great
Earthquakes, by one whereof thirteen Cities in Campania were overthrown, and
another in Asia. A hand was seen in the Church of Lateran in Rome without a
Body, which in the sight of many men writ upon the Wall these words, Hodie
venenum in Ecclesia infusurus. To day is Poison poured into the Church; Which
was thought to intend the extraordinary indulgence of Constantine the Great,
and first Christian Emperor upon the Bishops, and his heaping Honors and
Estates upon them, whereby they degenerated from their Primitive simplicity and
humility. Soon after many Cities in the East fell to the ground by an
Earthquake, and Neo-Caesarea was overturned and all its Inhabitants perished,
except such as were saved by the Bishop in the Church. Dyracchium was
demolished by an Earthquake, and Rome trembled for three Days and Nights
successively, and Antioch was endangered by an Earthquake of a whole years
continuance. Rhodes and Sicily were likewise endamaged thereby, and likewise
Cilicia, and indeed it was so general that all Europe and Asia were shaken at
once.

XXIII. In 366. in the reign of Julian the Emperor, who was first a Christian
and afterward revolted to Paganism, for which he was named the Apostate, and
became a bitter Enemy to the Christians, and in despite and contempt of our
blessed Savior, who had Prophesied that the Temple of Jerusalem should be
destroyed and never rebuilt, He impiously resolved to invalidate the same, and
designed to build it Magnificently with excessive cost and charges, committing
the care thereof to one Alypius, who did vigorously apply himself to the Work,
being assisted therein by the Governor of the Province. But there brake out
dreadful Balls of Fire near the Foundation of the Walls, which with their
frequent Irruptions, made the Place unapproachable, several Workmen being
consumed by the Fire, and in this manner a full period was put to their further
proceeding therein; But Niciphorus Calistus gives a more large and full
Narrative thereof as follows. The Jews, says he, having got together as many
as were skilful in the Art of Building, and having provided Materials for it,
and fully cleansed the place, they prepared Spades made of Silver, their
charges being allowed out of the public stock: with such Earnestness and
Alacrity did they labor herein, that the very Women carried away the Rubbish
in their Laps, and whatsoever Jewels, or precious Ornaments they had, they
expended on the business. When they had dug up the remainders of the old
Building from the lowest Foundations, and had cleared the ground, so that there
was not a stone left upon a stone, according to our Blessed Lords Prediction,
The next day coming to the place, there was a great Earthquake, insomuch that
the stones were cast our of the Foundation, so that many of the Jews were
slain, who either came to see the work, or had the oversight thereof. The
Public buildings which were nearest the Temple, were likewise loosned, and
falling down with great violence, buried those who were in them in their
ruins; some who attempted to fly away, were found half dead; others lost their
Legs, Arms, Hands, and other Members, according as the force of that sudden
accident seized upon them. The Earthquake was scarce over, but those who
remained fell to work again. But when they attempted it the second time, sudden
flashes of Fire violently issued out of the Foundations, and other Fire fell
furiously from Heaven, and destroyed more than before, consuming to Ashes the
Hammers, Graving Tools, Saws, Hatchets, Axes, and all other Instruments which
the Workmen had brought for their Service; the flames continuing a whole day
together. When Cyril, who was at that time Bishop of Jerusalem, saw these
things, he considered in his mind the words of the Prophet Daniel, to which
Christ also had set his Seal in the Holy Gospel, and then told them all; That
now was the time, when the Oracle of our Savior had its accomplishment, which
said, That a Stone should not be left upon a Stone in the Temple; which when he
had said, a dreadful Earthquake assailed the remaining Foundations, and casting
out all the rest of the Stones, dispersed them abroad, and a fearful Storm
arose, which whirled in the Air many Thousand Bushels of Lime and Plaster, and
sudden flames of Fire flashing from beneath, burnt up in a moment an
innumerable Company of People, who were either laboring in the work, or coming
to behold it. Thus did the wicked Julian fulfill Christ's Predictions concerning
Jerusalem, by the same means whereby he designed to make them void.

XXIV. In 367. in the Reign of Valens and Valentinian Emperors of Rome, there
happened such horrible Earthquakes throughout the Western Empire, as neither
True Historians have related the like, nor Fables themselves represented to us.
A little after the day dawned there was a great Tempest of Thunder and
Lightning, which was followed by such a dreadful trembling of the Earth, that
the Sea also was shaken therewith, and deserted the shore and its ancient
bounds for a great space, and the depths of its Channels were discovered;
multitudes of Fish were seen to stick in the Mud, and many plowed Fields became
Navigable, the inequality of the Seas bottom appeared, here Hills, and there
Valleys which had never before seen the Sun, since, at the original of all
things, they were first overwhelmed with the Floods. Many Ships were left on
the dry ground, and swarm of People flew thither to catch Fish; when suddenly
the Sea, as disdaining to be imprisoned, returned to its former station with
such impetuosity, that it overran its former bounds, and with the fury thereof
overthrew a multitude of Towns and Houses, with many thousands of People, and
great numbers of Ships were overwhelmed, some of which, with the violence
thereof, were blown upon the tops of Houses. Soon after a great Rebellion
happened, and the Northern Nations came in like a Flood, and overran the Roman
Empire, which was thought to be presaged by this lamentable accident.

XXV. In 430. A great Earthquake raged in diverse places, and overturned many
Cities, the Wall of Constantinople, though but new built, it threw to the
ground with 57 Turrets; Also Stones of great bulk, lately placed there, fell
down, many Town, were ruined. Yea some Authors affirm that it was so terrible
as to affect almost the whole World, the Earth gaped and swallowed up many
Villages; Fountains were dried up, and Waters brake forth in places formerly
dry. Great Trees were torn up by the Roots; Heaps of Earth were so shaken
together that they were raised into Mountains. The Sea threw up dead Fishes,
many Islands were sunk and overwhelmed, Ships sailing on the Sea were suddenly
left on dry ground. In short many places of Bythinia, the Hellespont, and both
the Phrygin's were grievously distressed thereby. This disaster continued six
months without intermission, and the People of Constantinople not daring to
stay in the City for fear of the fall of their Houses, continued together with
their good Emperor, and their Patriarch, in the Fields, instant in Prayers to
the Almighty for the removal of so dreadful a Judgment. After the danger was
over, the Emperor repaired the Walls of Constantinople which were much
endamaged thereby. This was judged a Sign of the Death of Theodosius which soon
after followed, and of several changes which happened at the same time in
diverse parts of the World.

XXVI. In 454. A great Earthquake at Rome, another at Vienna, Wolves and other
Beasts wander all the year through the City and devour men. An Earthquake in
Russia, and at Constantinople, with two wonderful Blazing Stars. About this
time the Britains beat the Saxons, and drive them into the Isle of Thanet. The
Jews Rebel in Egypt and Kill two hundred thousand Men, and forced those that
survived to eat the dead. They slay two hundred and forty thousand in Cyprus,
and at last are slain themselves. A great Famine in Constantinople. The Goths
wast Thrace, Thessaly and Epirus: Gratian kills thirty five thousand Germans;
Maxinius slays Gratian treacherously, and possesses Britain, France, Spain
and Africa. The Temple of Apollo Daphneus is burnt. The Heathen Temples are
shut up by the Christian Emperors, and their Idols destroyed. In 458. A great
Earthquake happened at Antioch which the Citizens had sad cause to remember.
Before it began some of the Inhabitants were seized with an extraordinary
madness, such as seemed to exceed the fury of Wild Beasts, and to be the
presage of that Calamity which followed soon after; For about the Fourth hour
of the night in September, almost all the buildings of the new City were
overturned, which was well peopled and none of it forsaken or empty, being
curiously built by the Magnificence of diverse Emperors, who strove to exceed
each other in the adornment of it. The first and second Fabrics in the Palace
were also cast down, the rest standing together with a Bath, which having
formerly been neglected now when by the Earthquake the rest were choked up
stood the Citizens in very good stead.

XXVII. In the first Century was a terrible Earthquake in Arabia, and another
in Palestina and a third at Constantinople for six weeks together. It rained
Blood in Piedmont, and at York the Fountains ran Blood: a Dragon and many
Serpents were seen in the River Tyber. After this so terrible a Famine raged in
Britain that the People assembled in great numbers to cast themselves into the
Sea; A Plague so great in Rome that 800 men fell dead in an hour in the time of
Procession. Brunchild, a Daughter of France, being found guilty of the death of
ten Kings; She is tied by the Hair of the Head and the Arms to Wild Horses, and
torn to pieces. The Jews and Samaritanes Persecute the Christians, and burn
their Churches in Caesaria.

XXVIII. In the sixth seventh and eighth Centuries, an Earthquake at Antioch;
Another in Palestina, another in England and Normandy; a fiery Dragon was seen
in the Skies, and diverse other dreadful Prodigies. About the same time there
was a violent Earthquake at Constantinople which lasted many days, and every
hour the City suffered extraordinary shocks. Many houses were thrown down, but
the People betook themselves to Prayer, Fasting and Repentance, and the
Almighty had compassion on them; Many Cities in the East were ruined by it, and
the City of Alexandria was sore shaken therewith, which was the more
astonishing because it seldom happens in those parts. Some years after,
Constantinople was again shaken so violently that not only the Walls and
Churches but all Greece trembled therewith. The Saracens about this Age,
Besieged Constantinople for seven years and at last thirty thousand of them
were slain. The King of Scots is slain by the Picts. A Pestilence in
Constantinople, for three years, which devoured so many that the living were
not sufficient to bury the Dead. Alphonsus King of Portugal kills seventy
thousand Moors and takes, Lisbon from them. The Danes Invade England, but all
of them almost perished. The Britains Invade Scotland, Constantine their King
was killed. The Saracens take Armoricum and many Captives; Lothair Wars with
his Brethren, and an hundred thousand men are slain. In 801. while Charles the
Great was in Italy there was an Earthquake with great noises, which shook all
France and Germany, but especially Italy; it overthrew several Towers and even
Mountains; and the Church of St. Paul at Rome was destroyed by it, whereupon
Pope Leo III. appointed solemn Feasts and Processions. These Prodigies were
followed with furious Tempests and Contagious Diseases which affected the
Cattle throughout Italy; so that most of their Beasts died. A great Famine and
Pestilence in France. The King of England is slain by the East Angles. The
Danes enter the Thames with two hundred and fifty Ships, they take Canterbury
and London, and expel the King.

XXIX. In the Ninth, Tenth and Eleventh Centuries, an Earthquake happened in
Scotland, another in France, a very great one in Asia, and several terrible
ones with mighty Whirlwinds in Germany; Also a great Earthquake in England,
where five Suns appear at one; and afterward four Moons at once. Horrible
groans and noises in the ground at Rome. Syracuse in Sicily was extremely
shaken with an Earthquake; A wonderful Hail at Oxford in England, with many
other terrible appearances, as Fire rising out of the River Rhyne, and many
places in Germany the Sun appears for certain days as if it bled. In the Reign
of King William the Conqueror. 1086. happened an Earthquake with a dreadful
noise. In 1100 in the Reign of King Henry I. the Earth moved with so great
violence in England, that many buildings where shaken down; and Malmesbury the
Historian writes, That the House wherein he sat was lifted up with a double
remove, and at the third time settled again in its proper place. In diverse
places a hideous noise was heard, and the Earth through several rifts cast
forth Fire for many days together, which neither by Water, nor any other means
could be suppressed. In Lumbardy in Italy about the same time was an Earthquake
which lasted above six weeks, and removed a Town from the place where it stood
a great distance. Matthew Paris mentions another Earth, quake, and a great
Darkness in England about twenty years after; And another in the Reign of King
Henry II. in the Eastern parts of England, which threw down many Persons who
were standing or walking, and made the Clocks to strike and Bells to ring in
the Steeples. In 1179. on Christmas day at Oxenhall near Darlington in the
County of Durham, the Earth was lifted up aloft like a Tower, and so continued
all that day, as it were immovable till Evening, and then fell with so
horrible a noise that it affrighted the Inhabitants thereabout, and the Earth
swallowing it up, made in the same place three Pits of a wonderful depth, which
were afterward called Hell-Kettles. It is reported that Bishop Tonstal put a
Goose into one of these Pits, having first given her a mark, and the same Goose
was found in the River Tees, which if true, these Kettles have passages under
Ground.

XXX. In 1180. an Earthquake ruined a great part of the City of Naples. Great
Stones were Rained from Heaven, and a Hill of an immense magnitude is removed
out of his place. The City of Catania in Sicily is destroyed with nineteen
thousand People by an Earthquake. A multitude of Snakes were seen at Rome, a
fiery Dart ran up and down in the Heavens, Women appeared in the Heavens of
admirable shapes to the great amazement of the Spectators. About this time the
Hungarians Invade the Empire of Germany, but are reconciled. The Bishop of
Saltsburg calls an hundred thousand Hungarians into Bavaria, which are all
slain there and the Emperors Eyes plucked out. A great Famine in Germany and
France. The Prussians Invade Poland, and fifteen thousand of them are slain,
and twenty thousand made Prisoners. The Saxons Rebel against the Emperor,
twenty six thousand of them are Drowned in a Pitfall by the Stratagem of two
Bishops in Holland as they came against the Earl of Flanders. Gonsalmus King of
Spain Poisons King Sancho with an Apple. The Danes Land in Scotland and wast
diverse places, the Scots put them to flight. They Land in Kent and spoil the
Isle of Thanet. The King of Denmark is slain by one of his Servants; The Danes
being defeated at Oxford fly to the Church, and are there burnt. Otho Emperor
of Germany is Poisoned with a pair of Gloves. Pedro King of Spain takes Oscu,
and kills thirty thousand Moors. The English Invade Normandy. Harold Earl of
Caithnes in Scotland cuts out the Bishops Tongue for which the King puts out
his Eyes, hangs him, and causes his Male Children to be Gelt. The K. of
Ioenium is swallowed up by an Earthquake, and in England many Buildings are
thrown down by the same means, amongst which the Cathedral Church of Lincoln
was rent in pieces.

XXXI. In 1222. There were such Earthquakes in Italy and Lombardy, that the
Cities and Towns were forsaken, and the People kept abroad in the Fields in
Tents; many Houses and Churches were thrown down, much people thereby crushed
to Death. The Earth trembled twice a day in Lombardy for fourteen days
together; besides two Cities in Cyprus, and the City of Brescia were this year
destroyed by Earthquakes. In 1176. About the time that Adrian the Fourth was
made Pope, was a dreadful Earthquake at Millain, and all the Country round
about. A noise like Trumpets in the Air was heard in Italy, where was likewise
a great Earthquake, another in England; and a third in Germany. The Consequents
were thought to be, the slaying of two hundred thousand Moors by the Spaniards
about that time. The Pope gives the Kingdom of England to Philip King of
France, Excommunicating King John. The French strive to take possession of it,
but the Flemish with the English take three hundred sail of Ships from them,
and burn an hundred more. The King of Arragon is slain. The King of Bulgaria
plucks out the Emperors Eyes. The Infidels take Jerusalem and slay many
Prisoners. The Turks win all the lower Asia from the Greeks. The Pope is slain
by a Fall. The Emperor Kills fourteen thousand Bohemians. The King of England
brings the Welsh under entire subjection.

XXXII. Remarkable is what is related by diverse Authors, which happened in a
Town called Hamel in the Duchy of Brunswick in Germany in 1248. June 26. This
Town being very grievously troubled with Rats and Mice, there came to them a
Pied Coat Piper, who agreed with the Burgers that for so much Money he would
quite clear them from those Vermin, nor would he demand it till a year and a
day after. The agreement being made, he began to play on his Pipes, going from
one Street to another, and all the Rats and Mice followed him, whom he led to a
great Lake hard by, where they all went in and were drowned, so that the Town
was Infected no more. At the end of the year the Pied Piper returned for his
reward. The Burgers put him off with slightings and neglect, offering him some
small matter, which he refusing, and staying some few days in Town; On Sunday
Morning at High Mass when most People were at Church, he fell to Play on his
Pipes, and began another Tune, whereupon there followed him one hundred and
thirty Boys out of the Town to a great Hill called Koppen, situate on the Road
hard by, when they approached the Mountain, it rent in twain and opening let
him and the Children in, and then closed again, so that he nor they were ever
seen after. This History is writ and religiously kept by them in their Annals
at Hamel to this day, is read in their Books, and painted in their Windows, and
their Churches; they date their Bills, Bonds and other Instruments in Law, From
the year of the going out of the Children; Besides there is a great Pillar of
Stone at the Foot of that Hill whereon the Story is Engraven. It is also
observed in the memory thereof, that in the Streets the Children passed out of,
no Piper is admitted to live ever since, and if a Bride live in that Street,
till she is come out of it no Dancing is to be suffered. Howel's Epistles, page
272.

XXXIII. In 1300. When the Turkish Empire began to be considerable, there was
such an Earthquake at Rome as never was before, and forty eight Earthquakes
happened in one year, whereby all Lombardy was shaken. A great Earthquake in
London, which was especially felt on the Banks of the River Thames, which shook
and threw down many buildings, and was the more terrible because the Western
parts are less accustomed to Earthquakes, and there was little ebbing or
flowing of the Sea observable as at other times, for about three months after.
Another Earthquake did much mischief about Bath and Bristol, and two more
happened in England not long after. Also two in France and one in Savoy. An
Earthquake at Rome in the time of Pope Boniface the eight, who fainted away for
fear, and afterward published a Jubilee. In 1348. a terrible Earthquake
happened at Constantinople, which endured six weeks, and reached in the extent
of it as far as Hungary and Italy; Twenty six Cities were overthrown by it;
Mountains were torn up by the Roots, and several Men, Women and Beasts by that
strong Exhalation were turned into Statues of Salt. In Persia five hundred
Houses were thrown by an Earthquake in the City of Lair. In England for six
hours together the Sun appeared as Blood. In Germany was a very great
Earthquake. Grasshoppers cover Switzerland like Snow. At Oxford the Image of a
Head spoke thus, Caput decidetur, Caput Elevabitur, Pedes elevabuntur super
Caput; The Head shall be cut off; The Head shall be lift up; The Feet shall be
elevated above the Head. Which was thought to presage the Deposing and Death of
King Richard II. At this time fifty thousand Christians were slain by the Turks
in the Plains of Casovia. Scotland is wasted by the English. The Emperor
Sigismond executed thirty two of the Nobles in Hungary. The Pope is imprisoned
by the French King. A great Battle between King Henry the V. and the French,
wherein they lost twenty thousand men, ten thousand being killed upon the
place, and as many made Prisoners. The French burn Rye and Hastings in Sussex,
and Plunder the Isle of Wight. In Gaunt five thousand Houses were burnt; and
seventeen Towns drowned in Flanders. A very great Earthquake in France, and
Grasshoppers destroy almost every green thing there. The World was shook with
terrible Earthquakes, Cities, Castles, Villages and a multitude of People were
swallowed up in the Caverns of the Earth: Many at Liege destroyed by Thunder,
while they were paying their Veneration to the Saints for safety. Mountains
were cleft, and Rivers were dried up.

XXVIV. In 1456. There arose upon the Sea of Ancona in Italy, together with a
thick Gloomy Cloud that extended above two Miles, a Tempest of Wind, Water,
Fire, Lightning and Thunder, which peircing to the most deep Abysses of the
Sea, forced up the Waves with a most dreadful fury, and carried all before it
upon the Land, which caused so horrible an Earthquake some time after, that the
Kingdom of Naples was almost ruined, and all Italy carried the dismal marks of
it; A Million of Houses and Castles were buried in their own ruins, and above
thirty thousand People crushed to pieces, and a huge Mountain overturned into
the Lake de la Guard. Soon after was a dreadful Earthquake in Millain another
in Hungary. In Poland there was seen (says my Author) an Image of Christ
crucified with a Sword to pass along the Air from West to South for two hours.
In Germany Hailstones fell as big as Goose Eggs. At this time the Hungarians
defeat the Turks, and take thirty thousand Captives from them. The Spanish
Inquisition is first instituted in Castile against the Moors and Jews. The Jews
are expelled Spain. The Turks expel the Christians from Adrianople. King Henry
VI. is taken Prisoner at North-hampton: Great Inundations in England. The Sun
is darkened without an Eclipse.

XXXV. In 1509. Sept. 14. There happened a terrible Earthquake at
Constantinople and in the Country thereabout, Bajazet II. being Emperor, by
the violence whereof a great part of that Imperial City with many stately
Buildings both Public and Private were overthrown; and thirteen thousand
People overwhelmed and slain; The terror thereof was so great that the People
generally forsook their Houses, and lay abroad in the Fields; Yea Bajazet
himself, though very Aged, and sore troubled with the Gout, for fear thereof
went from Constantinople to Adrianople, but finding himself in no more safety
there than before, he left the City, and lay abroad in the Fields in his Tent.
This Earthquake endured by the space of eighteen days, or as the Turks relate,
for a month with little intermission; which was then accounted ominous, as
portending the miserable Calamities which afterward happened in the Ottoman
Family. After this Earthquake ensued a great Plague, wherewith Constantinople
was grievously Visited and almost depopulated; After the Earthquake ceased, the
Emperor employed eighty thousand Men to repair it, who in four months time
re-edified the ruins thereof with much Beauty and Magnificence. It is strange
to Relate (says my Author) that in this year 1510, there fell twelve hundred
stones from Heaven, some weighing Sixty pound, others more. An Earthquake in
Apulia whereby above Sixteen thousand Persons were overwhelmed, after which
ensued a War betwixt the French and the Duke of Savoy which devoured above a
Million of Men. In Holland four hundred and four Parishes are drowned with all
their People and Cattle. The Turks take Buda in Hungary. King Henry VIII.
writes against the Pope; Cardinal Woolsey dies: The English Clergy are fined
and pay the King an hundred thousand pound for diverse Misdemeanors. In 1531. In
the City of Lisbon in Portugal about fourteen hundred Houses were overthrown by
an Earthquake, and Six hundred more so sorely shaken that they were ready to
fall and many of their Churches were cast to the ground.

XXXVI. In 1538. Mr. George Sandys gives the following Relation of a most
remarkable Earthquake and Burning which happened near the City Puteoli with the
new formed Mountain; For the famous Lake Lucrinus hard by, extended formerly to
the deadly Sulphurous Lake Avernus, supposed the entrance into Hell by ignorant
Antiquity, where they offered Infernal Sacrifices to Pluto their God of Hell,
and to the Manes or Ghosts of their deceased Friends, who were there said to
have returned answers to what they have demanded of them: This place is now
only a little watery plash choked up by the horrible and astonishing eruption
of a new Mountain, whereof as often as I think, I am apt to give credit to
whatsoever is wonderful; For who is there in this place but knows, or who
elsewhere will believe, that a Mountain should arise partly out of a Lake, and
partly out of the Sea, in one day and anight to such an height, as to contend
in altitude with the highest Mountains adjoining, yet so it was: For Sept. 29.
1538. the Courtrey hereabout having for several days before been tormented with
perpetual Earthquakes, that no one House was left entire, but all Men expected
an immediate ruin; After the Sea had retired two hundred Paces from the Shore,
leaving abundance of Fish and Springs of fresh water rising in the bottom, this
Mountain visibly ascended about the second hour of the Night, with an hideous
roaring noise, horribly vomiting Stones, and such store of Cinders, as
overwhelmed all the buildings thereabout, and the healthful Baths of Tripergula
celebrated for so many Ages, consuming the Vines to Ashes, and killing Birds
and Beasts; The fearful Inhabitants of Puteoli flying away in the dark, with
their Wives and Children, naked, defiled, crying out and detesting their
Calamities, Manifold mischiefs had they suffered by the Turks and Barbarians,
yet none like that which Nature inflicted. This Mountain is to be seen at this
day, the top whereof is above a Mile from the Foundation, the stones upon it
are so light and pory, that they will not sink when thrown into Water; when it
was newly raised, it had a vast number of Vents or Issues, some of them
smoking and likewise flaming, others disgorging little Rivers of hot water,
keeping a dreadful rumbling, and many miserably perished who ventured to go
down into the hallowness above; But that hollow on the top is now an Orchard,
and the Mountain throughout is bereft of its Terrors, no more smoke, fire or
flames issuing therefrom.

XXXVII. In 1571. Feb. 17. A prodigious Earthquake happened in the Eastern
Parts of Herefordshire near a little Town called Kinaston: About Six in the
Evening the Earth began to open, and an Hill called Marcley Hill with a Rock
under it, made at first a mighty bellowing noise which was heard afar off, and
then lifted up it self a great height and began to travel; bearing along with
it the Trees that grew upon it, the Sheepfolds and Flocks of Sheep abiding
thereon at the same time; In the place from whence it first moved it left a
gaping distance forty Foot wide and eighty Else long, the whole Field was about
twenty Acres. Passing along it overthrew a Chapel standing in the way, removed
an Ew^-Tree growing in the Church yard from the West to East. With the like
violence it thrust before it Highways, Houses and Trees, it made Tilled ground
Pasture, and again turned Pasture into Village. Having thus walked from Sunday
in the Evening till Monday Noon it then stood still, and moved no more;
mounting to an Hill twelve fathoms high. The like prodigy happened about the
same time at Blackmore in that County, where a Field of three Acres with the
Trees and Fences moved from their place, and passed over another Field,
traveling in the Highway that goes to Herne and there stayed. A great
Earthquake fell out at Constantinople about this time, a while before a
terrible Fire in that City which burnt the Gaol, and consumed seven hundred
Prisoners. An Earthquake and Bowls of Fire in Carinthia. The Sun seemed to
cleave in sunder. Corn rained from Heaven. An Earthquake and Inundation in
Holland. At this time was the Swearing Sickness in England. Nine thousand
French were slain at Dreux in Normandy, among whom the King of Navar. The
Turkish Pirates carry Six Thousand Captives out of the Isle of Gaul, near to
Malta. A great Plague in England. Very great Thunder and an Earthquake in Spain.

XXXVIII. In 1580. April 6. being Easter Wednesday about six a Clock in the
Afternoon happened a great Earthquake in England, which shook all the Houses,
Castles and Churches every where as it went, and put them in danger of utter
ruin; yet through the Divine Clemency it overthrew few or none, save certain
Stones, Chimneys, Walls and Pinacles of high Buildings both in London and
diverse other places; and a Boy and a Girl being at Sermon among a great number
of People at Christ-Church in Newgate-Street the Boy was killed outright with
the fall of a Stone from the Roof of the Church; and the Girl so fore bruised
by another that she dyed soon after. At York it made the Bells in the Churches
jangle. This Earthquake had such influence upon the mind of the People. That a
Prayer was Published by Queen Elizabeth to be used of all Householders with
their whole Family, every Evening before thy went to Bed, that it would please
God to turn his wrath from us, threatened in the last terrible Earthquake. In
1581. Josephus Acosta relates, That in Peru in America there happened an
Earthquake which removed the City of Augnangum two Leagues from the place where
it stood without demolishing it, in regard the Situation of the whole Country
was changed. The same Author gives an account of another Earthquake in the same
Country that reached three hundred Leagues along the Seashore, and seventy
Leagues in Land; and levelled the Mountains all along as it went, threw down
Citys, turned the Rivers out o^ their Channels, and made an Universal ^avock
and confusion. All this he says was done within the space, of seven or eight
Minutes. Some time before this, above forty thousand People perished in an
Earthquake about Puel and Naples.

XXXIX. In 1590. The Election of Pope Urban VII. was signalized by an
Earthquake which made Austria, Bohemia and Moravia to tremble, and was followed
by an extraordinary Dearth; Gregory XIV. quickly succeeded and died in ten
months. There was such a Famine and Plague in Italy that year that above
threescore thousand Persons died. In 1591. In St. Michaels Island in the West
Indies, there happened an Earthquake which continued about sixteen days, to the
extreme terror of the French who inhabit there, especially when by the force
thereof they perceived the Earth to remove from place to place, and Villa
Franca their principal Town overthrown, the Ships that then road at Anchor in
the Bay, trembled and quaked; insomuch that the People thought the Day of
Judgment was come. In 1593. Another terrible Earthquake happened in Persia,
which overturned three thousand Houses in the City of Lair crushing to Death
above three thousand Persons in their ruins; yea the Castle though built upon a
solid Rock groaned under the like affrighting downfall. In 1614. there was a
great Earthquake in Vercer, one of the largest of the Islands called Azores,
belonging to the King of Portugal, overturning in the City of Agra, eleven
Churches, nine Chapels, besides many private Houses: and in the City of Praga
hardly an house was left standing. Not long after so horrible an Earthquake
happened in another of the Islands of Azores called St. Michael aforementioned,
that not far from thence the Sea opened, and thrust forth an Island above a
League and half in length at a place where there was above a hundred and fifty
Fathom Water.

XL. In 1618. The Town of Pleurs in Switzerland was overwhelmed by an
Earthquake of which we have the following account in the late Travels of a
Reverend Divine in that Country. This place consisted in about two thousand
two hundred Inhabitants and magnificently built, for besides the great Palace
of the Francken that cost some Millions, there were many other Palaces, erected
by several Rich Factors both of Milan, and other Parts of Italy, who liked the
Situation and Air as well as the freedom of the Government of this place; so
they used to come hither during the Heats, and here they gave themselves all
the Indulgences that a vast wealth could furnish; By one of the Palaces that
was a little distant from the Town, which was not overwhelmed, one may judge of
the rest; It was an Out-house of the Family of the Francken, and yet it may
compare with many Palaces in Italy, and certainly House and Gardens could not
cost so little as one hundred thousand Crowns. The Voluptuousness of this Place
became very crying, and Madam de Salis told me, says my Author, that she often
heard her Mother relate some Passages of a Protestant Ministers Sermons, who
Preached in a little Church which those of the Religion had there, and warned
them frequently of the terrible Judgments of God, that were hanging over their
heads, and that he believed would suddenly break in upon them. On the 25 of
August 1618. an Inhabitant came and persuaded them to be gone, for he saw the
Mountains cleaving, but he was laughed at for his pains; He had a Daughter whom
he prevailed with to leave all and go with him, but when she was gone out of
the Town with him, she called to mind that she had not locked the Door of a Room
in which she had some things of value, and so she went back to do that, and was
buried with the rest; for at the hour of Supper the Hill fell down, and buried
the Town and all the Inhabitants, so that none escaped. The fall of the
Mountains did so fill the Channels of the River that the first news those of
the Chavennes had of it, was by the failing of the River, for three or four
hours there came not a drop of Water, but the River wrought for it self a new
course and returned to them. I could hear no particular Character of the Man
who escaped, so I must leave the secret reason of so singular a preservation to
the great discovery at the last day, of those steps of Divine Providence that
are now so unaccountable. Some of the Family of the Francken, got some Miners
to work underground to find out the Wealth that was butied in their Palace; for
besides their Plate and Futniture, there was a great Cash and many Jewels in
the House: the Miners pretended they could find nothing: But they went to their
Country of Tirol and built fine Houses, and a great Wealth appeared, of which
no other visible account could be given but this, that they had found some of
that Treasure.

XLI. In 1622. Was a great Earthquake in Italy; The shape of an Elephant was
seen in the Air, and three Suns. Armies fighting, Monstrous births, Waters
turned into blood, unusual and impetuous Tempests which overthrew several
Towers. At this time began the third Civil War in France, the Prince of Conde
is taken and shot to Death with a Pistol. The Earls of Northumberland and
Westmorland rebel. The Popish Clergy are expelled Antwerp by the People. The
Emperor Prohibiteth the Protestant Religion at Atken. The Spaniards Invade
Ireland but are beaten thence. The Turks lose Alba Regalis and threescore
thousand men. The Persians Invade Babylon and kill twenty thousand men. The
King of France is slain. Nine hundred thousand Moors are expelled Spain. The
Hollanders beat the Spaniards in the South Sea. The Tartars Invade Podolia,
they burn four Cities and four hundred Villages, and carry from thence a vast
booty. The Jesuits and Papists are expelled the Netherlands. In 1627. An
Earthquake happened in England and a great fiery Beam was seen in the Air in
France. Six Suns in Cornwall at once, and five Moons in Normandy. In 1627. July
31. happened an Earthquake in Apulia in Italy, whereby in the City of Severine
alone ten thousand Souls were taken out of the World, and in the horror of such
infinite ruins, and sepulcher of so many Mortals, a great Bell thrown out of
the Steeple by the Earthquake fell so fitly over a Child that it enclosed him,
and doing him no harm made a Bulwark for him against any other danger. Strange
and wonderful were the Prodigies that were seen in Germany both in the Heavens,
Earth and Waters, before the beginning of that Bloody War in those Countries,
and which plainly presaged the ensuing miseries and desolations which happened
there, and began about 1631. In which year, not long before the troubles of
Naples, there happened a terrible Earthquake in and about that City; and the
Mountain of Soma after many terrible bellowings, vomited out burning streams of
Fire which tumbled into the Adriatic Sea; and cast out an huge deal of Ashes.
The like happened the year following with great damage and loss to the
Neighboring places both in Houses, People and Cattle. And in Apulia seventeen
thousand Persons were destroyed by the same.

XLII. In the year 1638. Six Suns were seen at once in Cornwall, and several
Apparitions of men in the Heavens preparing to fight with each other; Also
Navys of Ships were visible in the Sky. The Scots at this time make an
Insurrection, the King goes in Person to appease them, they renounce the
Bishops and Prelacy, and set up Presbytery in Scotland. In this year 1638.
happened a Terrible Earthquake in the Island of St. Michael one of the Azores,
or Tercera's belonging to the Spaniards in the Atlantic Ocean Westward. Upon
June 26. this Island began unversally to quake and tremble, which continued
eight days, so that the People leaving the Cities, Towns and Castles, were
forced to live in the open Fields: After which this Prodigy succeeded; Six
miles distant from the Hill or Pick of Camerine, at a place called Ferriera;
where Fishermen with their Boats use to fish in Summer, they at this time
caught such a multitude, that no Boat returned with less than Ten Thousand
Fish. At this very place in July this very year, Fire broke forth with such
unexpressible violence, notwithstanding the depth of the Ocean, which had been
fathomed one hundred and twenty foot deep, that the very Sea it self was not
sufficient to extinguish such mighty flames; The space of this boiling Fire was
about two Acres, and the Fire arose with such mighty force, that it reached
even to the Clouds, carrying with it Water, Sand, Earth, Stones and much other
matter, which like Feather-Beds flew into the Air to the terror of the
Beholders afar off, and falling down again into the water, resembled a kind of
Pultis or Frumentie; and had not the Wind by Divine Providence blown off from
the Isle into the Sea, and thereby driven back this outrageous Fire, without
doubt the whole Country had been utterly burnt up and destroyed by this
formidable Combustion; soon after it cast forth stones of so vast a bigness, to
the height of above three lances, that they seemed rather like entire Mountains
than Stones, which in their fall meeting and dashing against others they broke
into a Thousand pieces, with a terrible noise and rattling, which afterward
being taken up mouldred into a black Sand. Moreover out of this vast quantity
of matter thrown out, a new Island arose, even in the midst of the deep Ocean.
In the beginning it was not above five Acres, but increasing continually in
four days after, it took up the length of five mile; so vast a multitude of
Fish perished by this burning, that eight Ships of India could hardly contain
them, and being dispersed about all parts of the Island were gathered together,
and buried in deep Ditches by the Inhabitants for eighteen miles round about to
prevent any Contagion which might arise from them, but the Sulphur or Brimstone
was smelt Twenty four Miles. This year the Hollanders beat the Spanish Fleet
upon the Coast of England.

XLIII. The same year 1638, the Learned Rircherus made a search and discovery
into the burning Mountain of Vesuvius in the Kingdom of Naples, so famous for
fiery irruptions for many Ages, which being one of the most tremendous Miracles
of Nature I shall relate in his own words; After so great dangers sustained by
Sea and Land in diligently searching out the incredible power of Nature working
in Buroughs and Passages under ground, I had a great desire to inform my self
concerning Vesuvius. I went therefore to Porticus (the Porch or Entrance) a
Town situate at the Foot of of the Mountain, where hiring an honest
Countreyman for a true and skilful Companion, and Guide in the way, not without
a considerable reward, I ascended the Mountain at midnight through difficult,
rough, uneven, and steep Passages; when I came to the top or mouth I saw what
is horrible to be expressed; I saw it all over of a light Fire with a dreadful
combustion, and stench of Sulphur and burning Bitumen; whereat being
astonished, methoughts I beheld the habitation of Hell, wherein nothing seemed
to be wanting but the Apparitions of Ghosts, Devils and Damned Spirits; I then
observed horrible bellowings and roarings in the Mountain, and unexpressible
stink, smoaks mixed with darkish Globes of Fire, which both the bottom and sides
of the Mountain continually belched forth from eleven several places, and made
me belch and ready to vomit; O the depth of the riches of the Wisdom and
knowledge of God! How incomprehensible are thy ways! If thou show thy power
against the the wickedness of mankind in such formidable and potentous
Prodigies and Omens of Nature: What shall it be in that last day wherein the
Earth shall be destroyed by thy wrath, and the Elements shall melt with fervent
heat? In the morning as soon as it was light, that I might with the more
diligence search into the Bowels of the Mouutain, I chose a place to set my
feet secure upon, which was an huge Rock, plain on the top, where taking forth
my Pantometer (or Universal Measure) I took the dimensions of the Mountain, and
found by Geometrical Computation, the compass of the Mouth to be almost three
hundred paces; The Mountain was every where up and down cragged, and broken,
yet no gradual declining, for any passage to the inward parts, but descended in
its compass of an equal bigness like a Well, and although the bottom seemed
narrower, yet I judged it only to proceed from the exceeding great depth and
distance from our sight. In the very middle of the bottom Nature seemed to have
made a Shop or Workhouse of Fire with everlasting gushings forth and streamings
of Smoke and Flames, which seem to be employed for boiling of Sulphur, Bitumen
and other Minerals in preparation for deadly ruins and slaughters afterward to
be committed, since the Vapors contained therein not having room, endeavored
to free themselves with such great force and violence, accompanied with
horrible cracklings and noise, that the Mountain seems to be tossed with an
Earthquake or trembling, upon which the higher and softer parts of the Mountain
that are clung together of Ashes, Cinders, Rains and other refuses of Minerals
being shook in pieces, and loosned by this quaking, and so falling like Hills
into the bottom of this Hellish Gulf, cause such terrible noises as are often
heard, which are so great and fearful as may daunt the most stout and
courageous Spirit. The matter which was continually belched forth from the
center or bottom of the Mountain made as it were a new Mountain, which had
wonderful variety of Furrows or hollow Channels, with various kinds of melted
Minerals, formed as it were by the ingenious Pencil of Nature, sometimes of a
greenish color from Brass; then yellow from Sulphur, Arsnick, and Sandarack;
presently after Red from Cinabar, Read Lead and Vermilion; afterward Black from
Vitriol mixed with Water, or of an Ashy color from the very Cinders. Thus far
the laborious Kircher.

XLIV. Hear now what our ingenious Countryman Mr. G. Sandys relates of this
fiery Mountain Vesuvius, it is situate in Campania Faelix, about eight miles
from Naples, which City has received great injuries and prejudices by its
Cinders, and violent throwing out of Stones even to its Walls and Houses; This
Mountain has vast Fountains of Fire, and was heretofore high on every side
before the inward parts were consumed; it usually utters smoke by day, but by
night, Flames; its manner is to send forth a loud sounding or roaring noise and
bellowing first, and then to belch forth a huge quantity of Cinders to the
great danger of those who pass by, but if a vehement wind blow upon it, the
Ashes or Cinders are raised so high and driven so far in length, that it is
certain they have sometimes been carried as far as Constantinople, though many
hundred miles distance, and so affrighted them that they have all ran to their
Prayers to implore the averting of Divine Wrath. The Mountain has a double
top, that toward the North ends in a Plain, the other toward the South aspires
higher, which when covered with Clouds, prognosticates rain to the Neopolitans,
in the top there is a large deep hollow in form of an Amphitheater, in the
midst is a Pit which leads into the Entrails of the Earth, the matter thrown up
is ruddy, light and soft, the uttermost brow of the Hill flourishes with Trees,
and excellent Pasturage, the midst is shaded with Chestnut Trees and others,
bearing diverse fruits; The lower parts are admirably clothed with Vines which
afford the best Greek Wines in the World; It has at diverse times made dreadful
Eruptions and Devastations which (as well as Mount Aetna of which hereafter)
have been accounted ominous, and to portend some woeful Calamities to ensue.

But never any thing appeared so horrible (says my Author) as what happened in
the Reign of the Emperor Titus eighty years after Christ, For then it disgorged
such boiling Waves and Floods of Fire as consumed the Neighboring Cities; And
then it was that Pliny the Second, that great searcher into Nature, and the
famous Author of the Natural History, and then Admiral of the Roman Navy, being
desirous to discover the reason thereof, was choked and suffocated in
approaching too near to discover so great a mystery of Nature, yet not wilfully
I suppose, though some Authors assert that he threw himself into it, because he
could not understand the natural cause of this mighty Conflagration; At that
time there issued forth so great a smoke that the very Sun seemed to be in an
Eclipse, and likewise huge Stones, and such plenty of Ashes, that Rome, Africa,
and Syria were even covered with them, and besides, Beasts, Fish, and Fowl
which were destroyed, it overwhelmed Herculanum and Pompeios two adjoining
Cities with Pumice Stones, together with all the People sitting in the Theater;
There were also heard dismal noises all about the Province, and Giants of
incredible bigness were seen to stalk up and down the top and edges of the
Mountains (if the Peoples fancies were not imposed upon by their astonishment)
which extraordinary Accident was judged either a cause, or presage of a
terrible Pestilence which reigned in Rome and Italy long after; Marcellinus the
Roman Historian relates, That the Ashes of Vesuvius transported in the Air,
obscured and darkened all Europe, and that the Inhabitants of Constantinople
were wonderfully affrighted therewith, insomuch that their Emperor Leo forsook
the City, and that in memorial of the same they celebrated yearly the 12 of
November. It likewise burnt in the six year of Constantine the Fourth, and
groaned, but ejected no Cinders; Platina, writes, that it flamed in 685.
prognosticating the Death of Pope Benedict II. with the ensuing Slaughters,
Rapines, and Deaths of Princes; During the Papacy of Benedict VIII, and IX. it
is said to have done the like, and though it has made dreadful devastations,
yet the fruitful Ashes thrown about did seem to repair the foregoing losses
with a quick and mavelous fruitfulness; At the foot of the Hill there are
diverse holes and vents, out of which exceeding cold wind, do continually issue,
and which at Padua they let into their Rooms at pleasure, to qualify the heat
of Summer; In the year 1610. in February, Vesuvius began to flame, to the great
affrightment of the Neapolitans, and solemn Prayers and Supplications being
ordered, they went in Procession with the Head of Januarius their Patron, and
the defender of their City carried before them; whereby the deluded people were
persuaded that the destruction which hung over their heads was prevented. In
1631. was a new Eruption, and again in 1635. was an Earthquake in Messina.

XLV. In the year 1638. likewise the industrious Kircher made a discovery of
the Phlegrean, or Fiery Plains in the Fields of Puteoli near Naples, which
being another wonderful Prodigy of Nature, may be worth relating; Passing by
Naples (says he) I could not let slip the opportunity of inquiring and looking
into those Sulphurous Plains so much celebrated in all Ages; Having therefore
gone through a Passage under ground, called the Groote, arched and made hollow,
to the Mountain Pausilippus; not far from Puteoli, between the Jaws of the
Mountains, a large Plain presents it self to view, altogether dreadful and full
of horror, in length about twelve hundred Foot, in breadth a thousand; The
whole Plain is surrounded with Hills of high and steep Rocks, which were
formerly very lofty, but are since devoured by perpetual Fires; In the bottom
little hills are seen to burn and flame, with a strong smell of Brimstone which
is carried by the Winds through all the Neighboring Regions, even as far as
Naples; some parts of the Plain have an infinite number of holes, and are
yellow with a Sulphurish matter; the ground wheh it is touched by those who
walk thereon, sounds and rattles like a Drum by reason of the hollowness
thereof: and you may feel as it were, not without astonishment, boiling Waters
under your feet, and thick fiery fumes to hiss and flow from one place to
another with a great crackling noise through the Pipes and Passages under
ground which are made by these fiery Exhalations; the force of this is very
great as you may experience by stopping any of these holes with an heavy stone,
or the like; for then you shall observe the violence of the smoke presently to
throw it up, and belch it forth again; But an huge Laky Ditch in the same plain
did wonderfully affect me; It is full of boiling Waters, very frightful for
their blackness, that one would imagine it were a Kettle, or Caldron boiling
with Pitch and Rosin; It is likewise admirable that the swallowing Gulf casts
forth these boiling Waters eight or ten foot above a Man's height, in the
fashion of a spire Steeple, or Pyramid; In the Mountains and Rocks wherewith
this Vulcanian Plain is encompassed, there are Passages like Chimneys, some
whereof breath out a continual Wind, with a terrible sound and rattling, and
also with such strength, that if you cast a stone thereinto, it is struck back
again to your hand with great fury; some of their breathing holes dart forth
smoke mixed with flames; you would here think your self almost in the midst of
Hell, where all things appear horrid, sad and lamentable, and you are even
struck breathless with the stench of Sulphur, Bitumen, Napthe, and other
Earths, Clays, Marls and Minerals, In 1640. all the Low Countries and a great
part of Germany were shaken by a sudden Earthquake.

XLVI. In 1650 about five a Clock in the Afternoon in the Countys of Cumberland
and Westmorland was a general Earthquake wherewith the People were so
affrighted, that many of them forsook their Houses, and some Houses were so
shaken that the Chimneys fell down. The same year, 1650. the Island of
Santorin, at the bottom of the Streights in the Mediterranean Sea, not far from
Candia, had formidable Fires and Earthquakes. This Island was formerly called
Thera, but now Santorin, and started up out of the Sea, for Baronius out of
Pliny thus writes; In the year 726. a Vapor was seen to bubble forth out of a
Chimney of Fire, between the Islands of Theresia, or Santorin from the very
bottom of the Sea, which continued some days and the Fire and Smoke growing
thicker by degrees, spread it self abroad with mighty flames, and with the
vastness of its strength, it cast out huge Rocky Pumice Stones, and great heaps
of other matter, which it carried through all Asia, Lesbos, and Abydus, and the
Seacoasts of Macedonia, so that the whole Surface of the Sea was covered with
these Pumices; But in the middle of so great a Fire, there was an Island made
from the heaping up of that matter, and and joined to the Island, called The
Sacred, which never was in being before; There was likewise another Island next
to this formed in 1670. not without great terror to those of Santorin; since
the burning lasted for a year, as some ancient People who saw it with their
Eyes did lately testify; But in the middle of this smaller new Island which is
now called little Camena, there is to be seen at this very day an huge deep
Ditch, which being narrow toward the bottom, grows bigger by degrees like a
Funnel, out of which as out of a Chimney those mighty Stones and Rocks did
burst forth, which being mixed with Cinders and Ashes composed the rest of that
Isle.

XLVII. But if ever these Fires pent up in the Bowels of the Earth exercised
their force, it was most remarkable upon September 24. 1650. which shook the
Island till the ninth of October, with such mighty and frequent Earthquakes
that the People of Santorin fearing that their immediate ruin was approaching,
were on their Knees night and day before their Altars; It cannot be expressed
what an horror invaded all men; especially when those victorious Flames
breaking through all Obstacles, strove to make themselves a way through the
midst of the Waters of the Ocean about four miles Eastward from Santorin; For
the Sea all on a sudden swelled Thirty Cubits upward, and extending it self
wide through the Neighboring Lands, overturned all in its way; Insomuch that
it broke in pieces several Ships and Galleys in the very Haven of Candia, with
its extraordinary violence, though fourscore miles distant from thence; The Air
being darkened with those sulphurous stinking Vapors, put on innumerable Forms
and Appearances, as of Fiery Lances, and Swords brandished and shaken, bright
and glittering Arrows darting forth; Here terrible Serpents and Dragons seemed
to be flying, There hideous Thunderclaps, Lightnings and Thunderbolts; And yet
they could scarce see, for the Peoples Eyes were so hurt with those sharp,
pricking sulphurous smoaks, and vapors that almost all became blind for three
days, with such grievous pains in their Eyes, that they wept continually, and
bewailed their most miserable Fate; But when their Eyesight returned, they saw
all their Silver and Gold, both Vessels and Garments, and Pictures, spread over
with a yellow color; and such a vast multitude of Pumice stones, did this
fiery Gulf vomit forth, that it covered the Sea, so that they could scarce
pass in a Vessel; It is most certain that they were carried many hundred Miles,
even to Smyrna and Constantinople, and all the Shoars and Coasts were filled
therewith. The fury of this Burning was greatest for the first two months,
which caused the Neighboring Sea to bubble like a boiling Pot, and night and
day huge Globes and Flakes of Fire, and exceeding thick Smoke mounted up to the
Heavens; which if at any time it was carried by contrary winds to any places
near at hand, besides a most grievous stink, it brought certain destruction
upon Birds and Beasts, yea, upon men themselves. As it happened in October and
November this year, that fifty Husbandmen miserably perished thereby, besides
an innumerable multitude of Birds, Sheep, Oxen and Asses; The like happened to
nine Mariners, who passing that way in their Ship by night, after three days
were all found half burnt, and were buried in the Island Nio threescore Miles
from Santorin; But the other four months (for it flamed six in all) though that
Hellish Hearth or Furnace abated much of its vigor and fierce heat, and could
scarce lift it self above the waves, yet it still seemed to cast out Pumice
stones, and to be laboring to form a new Island, which though it does not yet
appear above Water, yet in a calm Sea it is observed to be very shallow
thereabout, the Water being in that place not above eight Cubits deep.

XLVIII. In 1657. The Spaniards felt a terrible blow in Peru, which if it were
not a Mark of the Wrath of Heaven, (says my Author,) was at least a Sign that
the Earth is weary of them, especially in those parts where they have stained
it with so much innocent blood. The City of Lima was swallowed up by an
Earthquake, and Calao another City not far from it, was consumed by a shower of
Fire out of the Clouds, eleven thousand Spaniards lost their lives in this
calamity, and the Earth devoured an hundred Millions of refined Silver, which
the lucre of the Spaniards had forced out of its Bowels. All the Mountains of
Potosi from whence they dug their choicest metal were levelled with the Plain,
and no more hopes of Gold was left to their insatiable avarice.

XLIX. In 1660 an Earthquake happened at Paris in France, and at the same time
they had news that part of the Pyrenean Mountains had been overthrown some days
before; They are certain Mountains that divide France and Spain; it did great
mischief there, overwhelming some Medicinal Baths, many Houses, and destroying
hundreds of People, only one Church which sunk into the Caverns below was
thrown up again, and stands very firm, but in another place. This was looked
upon as a great Miracle, especially by the French, who have disputed with the
Spaniard about this Church as standing on the Frontier Line, but now is removed
near half a League within the acknowledged limits of France.

L. In 1665. There was a great Tempest accompanied with Thunder, Lightning and
an Earthquake in diverse places in England, at which time the stately Spire of
Trinity-Church in Coventry fell down and demolished a great part of the Church.
The next year Sir Rob. Holms destroyed above one hundred and fifty sail of
Dutch Ships at the Vly in Holland, and burnt the Town of Bandaris in the Island
of Schelling, containing at least a thousand Houses. Sept. 2. about One a Clock
in the Morning a sudden and lamentable Fire broke out in the City of London,
beginning in a place called Puddinglane, near New-Fish-Street which in four
days time burnt down thirteen thousand two hundred Houses.

LI. In 1668 in Autumn, a great part of Asia, and some parts of Europe were
infested with extraordinary Earthquakes; The Cities of Constantinople and
Adrianople felt its sad Effects, but not with that violence and continuance as
in other Places. In some parts of Persia it continued for above fourscore days;
Torqueto and Bolio two considerable Cities, were by its great violence laid
even to the ground, and all or most of the Inhabitants buried in the Ruins,
above six thousand Persons perished in the first of them, and above eighteen
hundred in the latter; And in all the adjacent Cities it raged with
extraordinary fury, destroying and ruining the Buildings, killing many of the
People, and the rest were forced to quit the Towns, and take up their Lodgings
in the Fields. About the beginning of August 1669. there came two Whales and a
Grampas up the River of Thames, whereof one of the Whales, and the Grampas were
killed, and the other Whale which was the bigger, returned back into the Sea.

LII. In 1669. there happened a most dreadful Earthquake and Irruption of Mount
Aetna in Sicily, of which before I give a particular Account, it may not be
unproper to describe the Mountain itself, as it has been related by diverse
famous Historians; Aetna or Mount Gibello, called by Pindar the Celestial
Column or Pillar, is the highest Mountain in Sicily, from whence all the Island
may be seen at once, and in a clear day the Eye may even reach Africa; it rears
up its Top or Spire thirty miles into the Sky, and may be seen forty or fifty
miles at Sea, but its compass is sixty, others say an hundred miles space, it
appears Eastward with two shoulders, having an eminent head in the middle, The
lower parts are luxuriously fruitful, and the abundance of fat oily matter
which is cast out of it, makes the Soil thereof as well as of the whole Island
Incredibly fruitful in the best Wine, Oil, Honey, Saffron, Minerals also of
Gold, Silver, Silks and Allom, with variety of excellent and delicious Fruits,
and abundance of all sorts of Grain, so that it was called in old time, The
Granary of the Roman Empire; The middle of the Mountain is woody and shady, the
upper part rocky, steep, and almost covered with Snow; yet smoking in the
midst like many conjoined Chimneys, and vomiting intermitted flames, usually
discernable only of a night, as if heat and cold had left their Contentions,
and embraced one another, for though it continually burns, with most fervent
smoke and fire, yet round about the top are seen perpetual and most deep snows,
the uppermost top is broken and cragged with unstable Cinders and Pumice
stones, and cleaves open with a most vast Crater or mouth twelves miles in
compass, which in a steep descent streightens it self narrower even to the
bottom of Hell as it were; A most horrible precipice it is, exceeding
formidable with flames and fumes from the very bottom and sides of the
Mountain, with an horrendous roaring and bellowing not unlike the bursting
forth of Thunders, so that the very imagination and thoughts of the Fire and
Ruins so nigh at hand, cannot but at first sight amaze, and afright any humane
Creature, and make him start from it, as from the Infernal Gulf of Hell; On
one side within are most dark and dreadful Dens, one whereof is so vast, as to
be capable to contain thirty thousand Men; In many places you may see the
tracts and paths of huge Torrents of melted matter; in the very top, Snow and
Ashes, or Cinders, as if they had concluded an Eternal Wedlock, are seen to
overwhelm all things with a sad and doleful countenance, which are very
dangerous to unwary Visitors, because under them there lie concealed deep
holes, and devouring Gulphs, without bottom or end, which have swallowed up
very many, coming unadvisedly too near without a Guide, and by their ruin have
left warnings to others not rashly to venture upon these hidden deceits which
have cheated mortals of their Lives; in the utmost bottom of this Hellish Gulf
the Fire is at no time extinguished, but always sends forth either boiling
heat, smoke or flame, yet outwardly it begins to grow fierce and terrible only
at certain intervals of time more or less according to the combustible matter
heaped together; and by how much longer it has ceased, by so much it bursts
forth with greater violence, and together with the Flame sends forth huge heaps
of Sands, and Prodigious Stones of wondrous weight.

LIII. These Fires have broke forth in several Ages of the World, to the great
terror and destruction of the Inhabitants, and all the adjacent Countries; As
in the year of the World 2600. when the Posterity of Janus went to seek new
Colonies, they first entered Sicily, where at that time there was so great a
burning of the Mountain, that the new Planters leaving the Island for fear of
Desplation, went to seek new habitations in Italy; after them followed the
Sicaneans, who were likewise driven away from these Eastern Parts, to the
Western by these dreadful Aetnean burnings. In the year 3180. and for above
four hundred years after, this Mountain was all on fire with three huge
burnings. A little after the Mountains raging anew, it is said to have drawn
Pythagoras himself into the highest admiration; Also in the Reign of Hiero, at
which time Histories deliver that Empedocles an Observer of the Mountain was
destroyed. In the time of Julius Caesar, about fifty years before Christ,
Diodorus relates, That Aetna, raged most violently, which they said portended
the Death of Caesar; It is reported to have been so great, that the Sea, with
its fervor and boiling heat burnt the very Ships, even as far as the
Vulcanello's All the Fish being destroyed and boiled to death; yea within
twenty years, the Mountain burnt four times. In the Reign of Caius Caligula
forty nine years after Christ, the Mountain raged so, that the Emperor at that
time in Sicily was so affrighted, that he betook himself to safer stations; yet
they relate, that the Emperor Adrian out of the greatness of his mind did
ascend the Mountain very far, to consider more nearly such great Miracles; In
several Ages after, it made woeful irruptions, as from the year 1160. to 1169.
all Sicily was shaken with huge Earthquakes, and the Mountain Aetna foaming
mightily, overthrew all the circumjacent places with incredible Desolation,
with the ruin of the Cathedral Church of Catania about ten miles distant, in
which Abbot John and his Monks were overwhelmed; Many other fearful burnings
have happened since time, but none more horrible for its mighty devastations
than that in the year 1669. The Earl of Winchelsea late Ambassador at
Constantinople, in his return from thence, visiting Catania, was an Eyewitness
of this Prodigious Judgment, whereof he gave the following Account to King
Charles the second, as soon as he came to Naples.

May it please Your Majesty,
In my Voyage from Malta to this place, I touched at the City of Catania in
Sicily, and was there most kindly invited by the Bishop to lodge in his Palace,
which I accepted, that so I might be the better able to inform your Majesty of
that extraordinary Fire which comes from Mount Gibel, fifteen miles distant
from that City; which for its horridness in the aspect, for the vast quantity
thereof, (for it is fifteen miles in length, and seven in breadth) for its
monstrous devastation and quick progress, may be termed an Inundation of Fire,
a Flood of Fire, Cinders and burning Stones, burning with that Rage as to
advance into the Sea six hundred yards, and that to a mile in breadth, which I
saw; and that which did augment my admiration was, to see in the Sea this
matter like ragged Rocks, burning in four fathom Water, two fathom higher than
the Sea it self; some parts liquid and moving, and throwing off, not without
great violence, the stones about it, which like a crust of a vast bigness, and
red hot, fell into the Sea every moment, in some place or other, causing a
great and horrible noise, smoke, and hissing in the Sea; and thus more and more
coming after it, making a firm foundation in the Sea it self. I stayed there
from nine a Clock on Saturday morning, to seven next morning, and this Mountain
of Fire and Stones, with Cinders, had advanced into the Sea twenty yards at
least, in several places; in the middle of this Fire, which burned in the Sea,
it has formed a passage like to a River, with its Banks on each side very
steep and craggy, and in this Channel moves the greatest quantity of this Fire,
which is the most liquid, with stones of the same composition, and Cinders all
red hot, swimming upon the Fire of a great magnitude;

From this River of Fire (under the great Mass of the Stones which are
generally three fathom high all over the Country, where it burns and in other
places much more,) there are secret Conduits or Rivulets of this liquid matter,
which Communicate Fire and Heat into all parts more or less, and melts the
Stones and Cinders by fits in those places where it touches them, over and
over again; where it meets with Rocks or Houses of the same matter (as many
are) they melt and go away with the Fire; where they find other compositions
they turn them to lime or ashes, as I am informed. The composition of this
Fire, Stones and Cinders, are Sulphur, Nitre, Quicksilver, Sal-Armoniac, Lead,
Iron, Brass, and all other Metals. It moves not regularly, nor constantly down
hill; in some places it has made the Valleys Hills, and the Hills that were
not high are now Valleys. When it was night I went upon two Towers in diverse
places, and could plainly see at ten miles distance, as we judged, the Fire to
begin to run from the Mountain in a direct line, the flame to ascend as high
and as big as one of the highest and greatest Steeples in Your Majesty's
Kingdoms, and to throw up great Stones into the Air; I could discern the River
of Fire to descend the Mountain of a terrible fiery or red color, and stones
of a paler Red, to swim thereon, and to be some as big as an ordinary Table. We
could see this fire to move in several other places, and all the Country
covered with Fire, ascending with great Flames; in many places, smoking like
to a violent furnace of Iron melted, making a noise with the great pieces that
fell, especially those which fell into the Sea. A Cavalier of Malta, who lives
there, and attended me, told me, that the river was as liquid where it issues
out of the Mountain, as water, and came out like a Torrent with great violence,
and is five or six fathom deep, and as broad, and that no stones do sink
therein. I assure Your Majesty, no Pen can express how terrible it is, nor can
all the Art and Industry of the World quench, or divert that which is burning
in the Country. In forty days time it has destroyed the habitation of twenty
seven thousand persons, made two Hills of one, a thousand paces high apiece,
and one is four Miles in compass. Of twenty thousand persons which inhabited
Catania, three thousand did remain; all their Goods are carried away, the
Cannons of Brass are removed out of the Castle, some great Bells taken down,
the City-Gates Walled up next the Fire, and preparation made all to abandon the
City.

That night which I lay there, it rained Ashes all over the City, and ten Miles
at Sea it troubled my Eyes. This Fire in its progress met with a Lake of Four
Miles in compass, and it was not only satisfied to fill it up, though it was
four fathom deep, but has made of it a Mountain. I send also to Your Sacred
Majesty the following Account in Print which the Bishop gave me, as it is
collected out of diverse Relations from Catania.

LIVE. Mount Aetna, or Monte Gibello, a Mountain so Renowned throughout the
World for its height and greatness, but more for those Prodigious Flames,
Smoke, and Ashes which it has cast out from the top of it, whilst the other
parts are continually (even in the midst of Summer) covered with Snow, has been
for many Ages observed once, or sometimes oftener, in the space of about fifteen
years to throw up more than ordinary Flames with much Smoke and Stones, and
great quantities of Ashes; which (though terrible to the Neighboring Towns and
Villages) was yet wont, in little time to abate of its fury, and prove but
seldom more injurious to the Country near it, than by communicating largely its
ashes, which though for the present it did somewhat incommode them, they had
afterward a considerable compensation in the product of their Lands, which by
this means was rendered more fruitful. But on Friday the 18th of March 1669. the
Sun was observed before its set-setting to appear of a pale and dead color,
which (being contrary to what it ever before appeared to us) struck no small
terror into the Inhabitants, all Objects appearing also of the same color,
with a paleness received from that of the Sun: The same night happened in this
City as well as the whole Country hereabouts, a terrible and unusual
Earthquake, whose strong and unequal motions joined with horrible Roarings from
Monte Gibello exceedingly frighted the the Inhabitants, but was so
extraordinary violent in the Country adjacent, that the People were forced to
abandon their Houses, and to fly into the Fields to avoid the danger threatened
them from the falling of their Houses. The Village of Nicolosi was of all
others the most dreafully handled by this furious Earthquake, the Houses and
other Buildings being shaken all in pieces, and buried in their own Ruins; the
poor People (who had preserved their Lives by a timely flight, with such little
of their goods as their hasty fears would permit them to carry out with them)
continued a Night or two in the Fields, beholding with grief and astonishment
the ruin of their habitations: but observing that by these violent concussions,
the Earth began to open in several places, and to threaten them with inevitable
ruin, they fled, though with much trouble and amazement to this City. These
shakings of the Earth being so frequent and violent, that the the People went
reeling and staggering, with much difficulty supporting one another from
falling, insomuch as what with their want of sleep, the pains they were forced
to take in traveling, and the great terrors imprinted on them by what they had
seen and suffered, they appeared at their arrival in this City as so many
destracted People wholly insensible of what they did.

This dreadful convulsion of the Earth was immediately followed on Monday March
11. about Ten at Night by Three Terrible Eruptions, much about the same time,
and a little distance one from the other.

These said Eruptions were observed to be on the side of Monte Gibello, about
two Miles beyond the Mountain called Montpileri, from whence with a terrible
noise it threw up its flames with much fury and violence about a hundred yards
in height; its noise not roaring only inwards from the belly of the Mountain as
before, but violently cracking like peals of Ordinance or Thunder, from the
side of it, throwing out vast stones, some of them 300, pound weight, which
being (as it were) shot through the Air, fell several miles distant from the
place, whilst the whole Air was filled with Smoke, burning Cinders, and Ashes,
which fell like a fiery rain upon the Country. In the mean time issued from
the side of this Prodigious Mountain a vast Torrent of Melted and Burning
Matter, which like an Innundation, Drowned, as in a Flood of Fire, the Country
on this side of it. This Burning River ran down upon the Mountain Mentpileri.
which, opposing its direct course, it divided it self into two streams, which
encompassed the said Mountain; one of them taking its way by La Guardia, the
Convent of St. Ann and Malpasso: the other by the Towns of Montpileri, and
Falicchi which in few hours were wholly destroyed and lost, not so much as any
sign of them remaining, with several lesser Villages and Farms, and with them
the famous Image of the bessed Lady of the Annunciata; which, though highly
Reverenced throughout the whole Island, esteemed the wonder of Sicily and the
whole World; and to which the People with much Devotion resorted in Pilgrimage
from the remotest parts, was also swallowed up and consumed by this dreadful
Torrent.

This Fiery and Burning Deluge immediately spread it self to above six Mile in
breath, seeming to be somewhat of the color of melted and burning Glass; but,
as it cools, becomes hard and Rocky, and every where in its passage leaves
Hills and Pyramids of that matter behind it.

At the same time Monte Gibello from its top raged with dreadful Flames, which
with its noise and Concussions of the Earth which still continued, added not a
little to the Terror of the People, who ran with Cries and Lamentations about
the City and Country, expecting nothing but to be swallowed up or consumed by
Fire, having no other apprehensions but of Death, and a General Conflagration.
The two Torrents of Fire came forward, destroying all things in their way, and
by Wednesday, March 13th. had on the West side branched it self into several
Streams, and overran Campo Rotundo, St. Pietro, and Mostorbianco, with La
Potielli, and Sr. Antonino; and on the East-part rained the lower part of
Mascalucia, and Le Placchi, taking its way toward this City.

On Thursday the 14th, the Wind came Eastwards, on which fell abundance of
Rain, which abated not the Progress of the Fire; which on the East Side had
from Mascalucia made its way to St. Giovanni di Galermo, the lower part whereof
it destroyed; and passing on, seemed to threaten this City on one side, as did
that on the West Side the other. As the Fire approached, the Religious every
where appeared with much Devotion, carrying in Procession their Relics,
especally those of St. Agatha, the famous Martyr of Catania, in which they
reposed no small confidence, followed by great multitudes of People, some of
them mortifying themselves with Whips, and other signs of Penance, with great
Complaints and Cries, expressing their dreadful expectation of the Events of
those Prodigious fiery Inundations.

Whilst the People were thus busied in their Devotions, and astonished by their
Fears, News was brought to the Magistrates of the City, that a considerable
number of Thiefs and Robbers had taken the opportunity of this general
destraction, to make a Prey of the already distressed People, and that they had
murdered several of them for their Goods; and that it was to be feared, that
the City of Catania it self, might run some danger from the great numbers of
them which were about the Country, and from thence took their opportunities to
get into the Town. Whereupon, Consultation being had for the prevention of
farther mischief from them, the Commander of the Castle was ordered with a
considerable number of Horse, and a Party of Spaniards, to secure the Country
and City against these Robbers; who immediately sent out several Parties with
his Provost-Marshal, with Order to seize upon all suspected Persons, and such
as were not able to give a good account of themselves: And for such as were
taken in the Fact Robbing, to Execute them by Martial-Law, without any farther
Trial; and accordingly caused three pair of Gallows to be set up for their
speedy Execution; one before the Gate Di Aci, a second in the Marketplace, and
a third before the Gate Della Decima, setting strong Guards upon the Gates of
the City, and causing all suspected Houses to be searched, an Account to be
given in of all Lodgers, and such Persons to be secured as could any ways fall
under a Suspicion. The poor People out of the Country being by this Prodigious
Calamity stripped out of all their Estates, and reduced to great extremity, fled
most of them for refuge and relief to this City, with great Lamentations,
moving the Charity of the Magistrates, who were readily inclined to give them
the best assistance they were able; and the Citizens moved by their Complaints
and Sufferings, freely opened their Doors, filling their Houses with as many of
those distressed People as they could possibly receive; the Bishop and all
Persons of Quality and Estate, contributing largely for their support, till
better Order could be taken for the disposing of them.

The City of Messina also, and several other Cities (informed of this
extraordinary Calamity) sent hither large Supplies of Provisions offering their
best assistance to this place, in case of extremity. All the Elements seemed at
this time to make War upon us, and to conspire together for the punishment of
the Inhabitants; The Air was continually darkened with Clouds and Smoke,
agitated by great and violent Winds, and oftentimes showred down great Rains,
insomuch as the Sun from the beginning of these Eruptions, very seldom appeared
to us, and when it did, (with extraordinary paleness,) for a little time only
and (as it were abhorring so dreadful a Spectacle) soon hid its face again
under a thick Cloud.

The Sea ran much higher than it was wont to do, and by its extraordinary
Roaring, and in some places overflowing its Banks, added not a little to our
Consternation. The Land every where infested with Thieves, insomuch, that till
by the extraordinary care taken by the Magistrates and Officers, severe
execution was done upon such as were apprehended in the Fact, no person was
able to stir abroad without danger of his Life; whilst the Fire by this
prodigious overflowing of the Mountain, threatened to take possession of all.

On Friday the 15th. the stream of fiery Matter which destroyed the lower part
of St. Giovanni di Galermo divided it self into two parts, one of its branches
taking its way toward Mosterbianco, the other threatening the City of Catania,
but this last was observed to move with more slowness than before, having in 24
hours time scarcely gained 20 paces.

On the 18th. being Monday, the Torrents being still seen to draw nearer and
nearer to this City, the Senate with Monsegnior Cambuchi the Bishop of this
place, followed by all the Clergy Secular and Regular, and an infinite number
of People went in a solemn Procession out of this City to Monte de St. Sofia,
carrying out with greatest Devotion their choicest Relics, and upon an Altar
erected in view of the Mountain, exposed them, where they celebrated Mass and
used the Exorcismes accustomed upon such extraordinary occasions, all which
time, the Mountain ceased not as before with excessive roaring to throw up its
Smoke and Flames with extraordinary violence, and and abundance of great
stones; which were carried through the Air, some of them falling within their
view, though at ten miles distance from the Eruption; the Ashes which proceeded
from thence were scattered in great abundance, as well on this City as on the
Country adjacent, every where in the Fields with Cinders, and the heat of the
said Ashes destroying the Grass, which obliged the People to drive away their
Cattle to a farther distance, which would otherwise have perished for want of
food.

These streams of ruin daily crept nearer and nearer to this City, but by
uneven and irregular motions, according as it was more or less supplied from
its fountain; but on We dnesday the twentieth we perceived that that branch of
it which seemed most to threaten this City from St. Giovanni di Galermo was
wholly extinguished, and the other which bent its course toward Mosterbianco ran
but slowly, and gave us some hopes that its fury was also near spent, but the
other Torrent which had before overflown Mosterbianco, continued its motion
with as much violence as ever, being in breath above a Musket shot over; but
in probability could not easily overflow to the Westward which was defended by
its Rocky situation; another branch which ran by Santo Pietro was observed to
be much larger than the rest, and its stream more quick and active, but meeting
with some opposition in its way, it made some stop, only sending out a Rivulet
toward the Eastwards about three or four yards wide, of its most subtle or
active matter, which directed its course toward a small Village about a
Furlong distant from its main stream; another Branch threatened Campo Rotundo,
but bent its course Westwards toward the Farm of Valcorrente, where its Fiery
body was scattered into several deep and rocky places, without any considerable
damage.

About this time we had hopes that the violence of this Eruption had been over,
the Mountain not throwing out its flames with that violence as before, and its
noise and roaring in a great measure ceased.

Those who at nearest distance took a view of the Mountain, informed that the
top of it, was fallen in, and the Mountain supposed to want near a Mile of its
former height; that the largest of the Mouths from whence these fiery streams
were vented, was about half a mile in compass; but the view of this dreadful
Inundation carried so much terror in it as they were not able to express; from
all these Mouths were vomited Rivers of a thick and fiery substance of stone
and metals melted, whose depth was various according to the several places it
filled in its passage, in some places four, in others eight, twelve or fifteen
yards and upwards; its breadth in some places six miles, in others much more;
its flame like that of Brimstone, and its motion like that of Quicksilver;
advancing ordinarily very slowly, unless where it was provoked by the addition
of a fresh Torrent or some considerable descent. Wheresoever it passed, it left
large heaps of its congealed matter, with which it covered and burnt the Earth,
melting the Walls of Cistles and Houses, throwing down and consuming all before
it, nothing being yet found able to resist its force, nor any thing able to
quench its burning, water being observed rather to add to its fury; wheresoever
it has passed, it has left its dreadful marks behind it, levelling some hills
and raising others, so much changing the situation, that not the least trace
of any Place or Town remains, nothing being to be seen but confused heaps of
ragged stone, which yielding a noisome fume, strikes terror and astonishment
into all that behold it.

On Friday the 22. the Mountain again roared with much loudness, and threw up
from its Mouth a vast quantity of matter, which formed two large hills higher
and larger than that of Menpileri, with a large bank of the same matter to the
Eastward, sending down a violent stream of its liquid matter toward Malpasso,
much enlarging the former Current, and passing thence to Campo Rotundo and
Santo Pietro completed the ruins of those Towns, driving furiously toward
Mosterbianco; the other stream by Santo Giovanni de Galermo being wholly
diverted and extinguished. From this time till the 25th, the Mountain continued
silent, but then it burst out again with more force than ever before, its noise
much louder, like Peales of Ordnance, and so forcible and lasting, as for
twenty four hours it caused a shaking and trembling in our Buildings, the Air
so filled with Smoke and Ashes, as darkened the Face of the Sky. The Birds and
Fowl about this time, either through want of Food, or illness of Air, which was
corrupted with the noisome smells arising from these Burnings, were observed to
lie dead in all places.

On the 28th. the Grand Current was advanced near the City as far as the old
Capuchins, which struck so great a Terror into the People, that most of them
left the City, only some Officers remaining with such persons as were under
their command, who have secured and sent away the Magazine, and all the
Artillery from the Castle.

LV. A Latter Relation from Catania, of April 27. gives this further Account,
The dreadful Inundation from Monte Gibello having destroyed many Castles and
Towns, with an infinite loss, and utter ruin to the Inhabitants, arrived lately
with a renewed Force at Mostor-bianco, which it has wholly ruined, from thence
passing on to Albanelli, in four days space destroyed all the Gardens and
Vineyards with sixty three thousand Vines. On Wednesday April 16. With an
Impetuous Fiery Torrent it came toward Sardanello, where all the remainder of
the Inhabitants of this City were Spectators of it, which resembled a River of
melted and burning Brass, about ten Else wide, running with swiftness to the
Arch of Marcus Marcellus, a famous Piece of Antiquity, and passing under it,
ruined about six Else of it, which was the breadth of the Current in that
place: from thence it ran to Madonni di Monserrato, which it wholly destroyed:
then falling down to Madonna delle Gratie, it entered in at one Gate, and passed
through another, without any considerable hurt, and running through the Gate
Della Decima, filled all the Plain Di Schiara Viva, where it was above six Else
deep. Then taking its way toward the Bulwark, on the Seaside, under the Castle
of this City, it ran by, two Else deep into the Sea; in which, (to the great
wonder of all that saw it) it has made its Progress a mile in length, and as
much in breadth, and is drawing toward the Gate of the Channel, which gives us
great Apprehensions, least it may that way Invade the City it self: Nor is
there less danger on the side Del Tindaro, where there runs a great Torrent of
the same Active matter, which draws near, and seems to threaten the Walls, and
is in that place about a mild in breadth, having overflowed and destroyed all
the Gardens, from the Gate Della Decima, as far as Madonni delli Amellati.

The names of the most considerable Towns and places ruined and destroyed by
the dreadful Earthquakes and Irruptions were, The Town of Nicolosi, wholly
ruined; Badara and Tree Castagne the greatest part destroyed; The Towns of La
Guardia, Malpasso, Campo Rotundo, Potielli, St. Antonino. St. Pietro,
Masterbianco, Montpileri, La Anunciata, Falicchi, Placchi, all wholly
overflowed consumed, and lost in this fiery Inundation with all the Lands
belonging to them, no footsteps of them remaining; The Towns of Masculucia,
and St. Giovanni de Galermo ruined in part; The large Gardens and Vineyards of
Albanelli overflown and destroyed: The famous piece of Antiquity of Marcus
Marcellus, much ruined; Madonna de Monferrato destroyed, besides many Castles,
Farms, and other Places, which have run the same Fortune, whose names we for
brevity pass over.

LVI. West of the Isle of Sicily in the Tuscan Sea, within sight of Messina,
and one hundred and fifty miles distant from Mount Aetna are the Aeolian
Islands, so called from Aeolus King thereof, who first taught the use of the
Sail, and by observing the Fire and Smoke which ascended from these Islands,
(for heretofore they all flamed) was from thence fabled to be the God of the
Winds; These were anciently seven, but are now eleven Islands, of which Liparis
is the greatest, being ten miles in circuit, the Fire went out here about an
Age ago, So that at this day Strombolo only burns, (though another called
Vulcaeno smoaks continually) It was formerly called Strongile, but by
corruption Strombolo from the roundness thereof, for it seems like an high
round Mountain in the Sea, out of the top whereof issues continually a flame
like a burning Beacon, and exceeding clear, so that by night especially it is
to be discerned a wonderful way, A place so full of horror to the neighboring
Islanders, that the more ignorant Papists are made to believe it is the very
Jaws of Hell it self; The aforenamed Kircher made Observation of this Mountain
likewise, which he thus relates; That on a certain day viewing Strombolo very
curiously, about threescore miles distant, he observed it to be more than
ordinarily furious, for it appeared wholly overwhelmed with Fire in so great
plenty, that it seemed to belch out flaming Mountains, a most horrendous
Spectacle; And then, says he, I heard a strange kind of dull murmur from the
Mountain so far off, which seemed to come toward us under the Earth, till it
reached the subterrancous place where we stood, and there uttered such horrible
Thundrings within the Earth, with such formidable Earthquakes, that none of
them were able to stand on their Feet; After the violence was over, getting up
again with unspeakable Consternation, they beheld the destruction and
lamentable subversion of the famous Town of St Euphemia three miles off, which
happened at that instant, the City being wholly swallowed up, for seeking for
the Town, they found instead thereof, what is wonderful to be related, nothing
but a dark stinking Lake sprung up in its place, they could find no men nor
Inhabitants; Thence passing on their Journey, they found nothing else for Two
Hundred miles, but the Carcases of Cities, horrid ruins of Castles, Men
straggling up and down in the open Fields, and through horror and famine pining
and withering away.

LVII. In April 1669. The Mountain Vesuvius aforementioned cast up more Smoke
and Ashes than formerly, and for several Nights the neighboring places were
much affrighted with the great Flames which issued from it, accompanied with
unusual noises; At the same time they write, That the Viceroy of Sicily having
compassion upon the miserable condition of above thirty thousand poor People,
who by their Flight had saved themselves from the Fire of Mount Aetna
aforementioned, which had destroyed seventeen or eighteen Towns or Villages,
and by the daily approaches to the City of Catania, seemed to threaten it with
inevitable ruin, so that the Inhabitans were leaving the place; And that he
thereupon sent one of his Officers to take order for the maintenance of those
distressed Creatures, and disposing of them into places of safety. June 20.
this year at Jnspurg in Germany, a little after Noon, there was a very violent
Tempest with extraordinary Hail, Rain, Thunder and Lightning, accompanied with
an Earthquake, which had such terrible Effects at Schnatz a Town about three
miles distant from Jnspurg, where the Emperor of Germany had some Silver Mines,
that the River which runs through it overflowing, drowned all the adjacent
Fields, driving down, and destroying above thirty Houses, endamaging many more,
and drowning above two hundred People.

LVIII. In 1682. Aug. 25. The Mountain Vesuvius did cast out Fire accompanied
with a most terrible and hideous noise, which from an hour after Sunset on
Saturday, till three a Clock next morning was so great, that it caused a kind
of Earthquake, the houses in that City being plainly observed to shake; The
Mountain likewise cast out Ashes in great abundance, which were dispersed many
miles by the Wind, and the Sunday, all the Streets of Naples were covered with
them, as if it had been a deep Snow. These Prodigies very much terrified the
People, and Public Prayers were made for appeasing the Wrath of Heaven; It is
added, That many great Coals of Fire fell also, the dread whereof wrought so
much upon the Inhabitants, that they removed to other Cities; That the terrible
Earthquakes have thrown down near three thousand Buildings all about the foot
of the Mountain, and it roared so loud as to be heard forty miles distance in a
still night. The same year an Earthquake happened in France and Switzerland,
which affected all the Cities and places for many hundred miles about.

LIX. In 1685. a very wonderful Prodigy happened in France, which though it may
not seem so properly inserted among these Relations of Earthquakes, yet the
strangeness and reality thereof, may excuse the account I shall give of it; and
not being generally known may be the more acceptable. It is notorious to all
Christendom that the French King, after a multitude of Infractions of his most
solemn Edicts, Oaths and Protestations for securing to the Protestants of his
Kingdom the free exercise of their Religion, began about the year 1684. openly
and without the least provocation, to use all manner of Cruelties toward them,
to oblige them if possible to renounce their Faith and Profession, declaring,
That he would no longer suffer any Protestants in his Kingdom, but that they
must resolve either to change their Religion or else to suffer the utmost
Torments that could be inflicted upon them. In prosecution of this inhumane
resolution, Dragoons were employed, first to seize the Goods of those that
continued constant in their Religion, after which they proceeded to further
cruelties, hanging some Men and Women up by the Hair of the Head or the Feet
within their own Chimneys, smoking them with Wisps of Wet Straw; Others they
threw into the Fire, and plucked them thence half roasted; They tied them on the
Rack, and poured Wine down their Throats till the same had deprived them of
their reason, and then made them say, They would be Catholics. They stripped
them stark naked and Larded them all over with Pins from Head to Foot. They
kept them from sleeping seven or eight days and nights together. They tied
Parents to Bed-posts and ravished their Daughters before their Eyes. They
plucked off the Nails from the Hands and Toes of others, with most intolerable
pains, and after these and a thousand other indignities, if they still refused
to abjure the Truth, they threw them into close, dark, and stinking Dungeons,
exercising upon them all manner of Barbarities. Their Ministers were banished,
their Churches demolished, their Houses plucked down their Wives and Children
seized and put into Monasteries, and several suffered most cruel Deaths.

Among the banished Ministers was the famous Monsieur Jurieu, who retiring into
Holland, writ several Pastoral Letters to the Poor Persecuted Protestants in
France for the strengthening and confirming them in the True Faith of Christ,
and for reducing those who through fear of trouble and danger had seemingly
reconciled themselves to the Romish Church, and were afterward termed New
Converts. In one of these Letters Monsieur Jurieu gives a very surprising
Relation of Songs and Voices which were heard in the Air, the year 1685. of
which I shall give an account in his own words.

The Historians of all Ages have been of opinion that the great Revolutions
which have happened in the Societies of men have been preceded by the
extraordinary Events, such as Earthquakes, Signs in Heaven, and Prodigies on
Earth, of which I could give an infinite number of matters of Fact, very well
attested, which have been Presages of Events little less considerable than
those at present in the World; and though it seems to me that Earthquakes have
their Natural Causes, and so have Famines Pestilences and Wars; nevertheless
Jesus Christ puts these among those things which are to presage his coming; Not
that I believe all Ecclipses and all Earthqukes are Presages, but there are
such circumstances of time and place and concomitant signs in some, that no man
I think without rashness can deny but the providence of God does dispense them
to strike the minds of Men with astonishment, and make them attentive to his
Judgments; and among other times this year 1685 has been as abundant in
Prodigies as any for a long while; wherein we have heard of nothing but
extraordinary Storms, Fires falling from Heaven, others coming out of the
Earth, of Signs in the Air, and Insects of unknown shaps which have been
believed to have fallen from Heaven; And particularly the Singing of Psalms and
Voices in the Air.

It is near a year since we first heard any Speech concerning it, and they told
us that these Singings had been heard in Bearns, the first Province whether the
Dragoons were sent. Behold our Witnesses, every one will judge of what worth
they are Monsieure Magendy Pastor of the Church of Orthez having been
questioned concerning this Affair has interrogated diverse Persons, according as
it appears by his Cirtificate.

I do declare that Mosieure Bazin a younger Brother, and an Inhabitant of
Orthez in Bearne has told me, that walking with some of his Friends after
midday near the City of Orthez, he heard voices which Sung Psalms; and as he
imagined that it might be some Women that washed Linen, he ran to demand of
them whither it was they that Sung; they told him no, and that they themselves
had for a long time heard the same Singing of Psalms. This happened some Months
before the Interdiction of our Church. The said Monsieur Bazin is a very honest
man, very judicious, and of integrity; I add that Mademoisselle de Casenaue of
Orthez said to Persons worthy of credit, That being not able to believe that
which was said concerning this Singing of Psalms, a Woman said to her, That if
She had the curiosity to hear them Sing, She would call on her at her own House
at a time convenient, which she did; for this Woman being at a eleven at night
in the uttermost part of the City, with multitudes of other Persons, to hear
these voices which Sung in the Air the Praises of God; having heard this
singing of Psalms, She ran to Mademoiselle Casenaue, who immediately gets out
of her Bed, causes one of her Neighbors to rise; and they ran to that quarter
of the City which was far removed from her House, where they found multitudes
of Persons who were ravished with that pleasant melody which they heard in the
Air; they themselves returned to their Houses with this great consolation to
have heard those Psalms Sung in the Air which they could no more Sing in their
Church, which had been interdicted for some months past: They added, That they
seemed to hear them Sing after the same manner which they used to Sing in their
Church, and after the Singing ceased, there was a Voice which spoke but after a
manner inarticulate and confused, so that they could not distinguish what was
said. This Gentlewoman is very well worthy of credit. Moreover I attest that an
infinite number of Persons of Orthez do say, that they heard the Singing of
Psalms, which they call the Singing of Angels; and that they exhorted each
other in the day to be present in the night in certain places of the City to
satisfy this Holy Curiosity, which was the reason that the Magistrates of
Orthez published an Ordinance, whereby they forbad all Persons from going out
of their Houses, or assembling themselves by night to hear these Voices; which
filled this poor afflicted People with joy, and extraordinary consolation. This
is that which has heen told me concerning this Singing of Psalms, to which I
find no difficulty to give a full consent because the Persons that have
reported it are of great sincerity.

Given at Amsterdam November 23. 1686. Signed Magendie, heretofore Minister of
Orthez in Bearne.



Monsieure Garsin another Minister of the said Church of Orthez, declares what
follows. I whose Name is hereunder written, heretofore Pastor of the Reformed
Church of Orthez in in Bearne, Do certify to all those whom it may concern,
that my Brother-in-Law De Roux a Lawyer told me that between the hours of
Eleven and Twelve at night, being on the backside of his House in the City of
Orthez; he heard the Singing of Psalms above him, and then a little after he
heard the same Singing come from a place at a greater distance; After which he
was fully convinced of the truth of this Singing of Psalms so much discourst of
all the World over: Moreover he thought sometimes during the whole night when
his Gout hindered him from sleeping, that he he heard the same Singing after a
manner less distinct and unintelligible. I am informed by Monsieur Clarier a
Lawyer of the same City of Orthez, that the Curate of the place and a certain
Priest called Dusan, and Monsieur Lichigarai another Lawyer, as also a Brother
of the Curate called Monsieure De la Roque sent to search out a certain Popish
Damosel to know of her if it were true that she had said, that she had heard
this Singing of Psalms, and that she told them, Yea. And having demanded of her
how she knew it was the Singing of Psalms, she replied, That she had heard the
same Singing in the Church of those of the Reformed Religion; And being asked
how she came to hear Singing there, answered, She had been once there at
Baptism: But that going to a certain Fountain she had often heard this Singing
as she passed by the Church at the hours of Preaching and Prayer. After this
Monsieur Clarier told me, that the Curate and others strictly forbad her to say
any more that she had heard the said Singing of Psalms.

Given at Amsterdam, September. 23. 1689. Signed Garsin Minister.



One Peter Mauperg of the said City of Orthez Signed the following Certificate.
I whose Name is underwritten certify to all whom it may concern that in the
year 1685. about the Months of August or September, I heard in the Air the
Singing of Psalms, with different Voices and very melodious; and this at two
several times; The first time before the House of Poye, where I was lying upon
a Bank half asleep, I was awakened by this Singing of Psalms, which continued
almost half an hour. Afterward I went into the House of Monsieur de Poye a
Merchant-Draper, with whom I wrought in that Employment; Having told this to
Mademoiselle du Poye and her Daughters, they were much offended at me, that I
had not given them notice of it at the time I heard the same Singing: The
second time I and many others about an hour after midnight, having gone on
purpose to a place most high and raised in the City named the Posterle, I heard
many Voices in the Air, sometimes on one side and sometimes on the other:
Withdrawing my self a little I found Mademoiselle des Pagnon an eminent
Merchants Wife accompanied with many other Women of the Neighborhood; I asked
them from whence they came; They told me from the bank of the River Le Gaur,
which passes by this City near the New Mill. I asked if they had heard the
Singing of Psalms, they replied yea, and that it seemed to come from the place
called Posterle. I told them I came from thence, and had heard those Voices in
the Air which seemed to me to go from one side of the New Mill, and we all
agreed that they were in the Air, and that they never had heard voices so
pleasant and charming. My Father who had changed his Religion about two years
before, accompanied with a Papist called Marshal Maresque, inquired of those
Women the truth of it, they replied yes, and I heard it too said my Father, the
Marshal added, That he had never heard better singing, Let men say what they
will, for my part, said he, I am persuaded that it is a true singing of Psalms.
They heard it in another place called De Part, near to Orthez. I also add that
I heard a Prohibition published to all sorts of Persons, at the sound of a
Trumpet by the Crier of the City called Mouleres, forbidding any to go out at
night to hear the finging of Psalms, under the penalty of Imprisonment, In
witness whereof I have Signed the present Certificate, as it was desired of me.

Given Nov. 22. 1686. Signed Peter Mauperg of Orthez in Bearne aged 23 years.



One Monsieur Bergerit has declared under his Signet this which follows. About
the Month of September last 1685. being in my Mothers House, she told me that
the Evening before they had heard singing of Psalms in the Air. I believed
nothing thereof, but went away to Bed because I was weary, this was about eight
at night; about half an hour after, some of the Neighbors came to inquire
whether I was so great a Fool to sing Psalms, considering the strict
Prohibition against it, and at the same instant my Mother came to tell me that
Psalms were sung in the Air. I awaking heard this singing, and thought it had
been in the Garden belong to the House, I arose and went into the street
Moncade at Orthez, where all the Neighborhood were come together, and we heard
the singing of Psalms repeated two or three several times.

Signed Bergerit.
1686.


John de la Bordette has declared under his Signet that which follows. About
September last 1685. being in my own house at Orthez, and having heard that
Psalms were sung, I went into the street about eight in the Evening, and heard
in the Air Voices which formed a Vocal Music perfectly like the singing of
Psalms, but was not able to distinguish what Psalm it was, and many Persons of
the Neighborhood were Witnesses of the same; Another time about ten as Night,
I, with several other Persons heard the same singing among the Vines.

Signed John de la Bordette.



Mademoiselle Deformalagues has declared under Signet in these words. I
underwritten do declare in the presence of God, that being at Orthez in Bearn
the place of my Habitation. I heard clearly at three several times in October
1685. this which follows. On a Friday in that month, about eight or nine at
night, being in my Chamber, some Neighbors called me with earnestness saying
that I must hasten to hear the Angels singing Psalms. I hastily went out of the
house, and going to the street St. Gill I there found a great number of People
who had ran from all parts to hear this Heavenly Music; And at that instant my
Ears were entertained with a melody so ravishing that I never heard any thing
like it. I could very well discern it to be in the Air and Tune of our Psalms,
which were sung admirably well, I heard many Persons say they could plainly and
distinctly hear the first verse of the 42 Psalm,

Like as the Heart does breath and bray
The Well Springs to obtain,
So does my Soul desire always
With thee Lord to remain, etc.
There were others that confirmed the same, and assured us moreover, that they
had heard the whole Psalm sung.

Less grief it is to be exiled
From mine own House than thine.
Oh! how I wish t'approach the place
Where all thy Glories shine.
This makes my sorrow to increase,
And Tears become my Food,
To hear my Foes reproach my Faith
And say, Where Is now thy God?
Past joys renew my grief, to think
How to thine House we came
In Troops to Feast and Praises sing
In Consort to thy name, etc.
I consess I only heard a charming Music which represented a great number of
Voices that agreed exceeding well, but I could not distinguish the words. There
was one that raised his Voice above the rest, and made himself observed when
the rest had done. After I had a long while heard this Melody with ravishment,
I perceived that these Voices drew off, and abated by little and little till
they were insensibly lost in the Air. The same Evening returning to my own
House, and discoursing at the Gate with many of my Neighbors of the mavelous
things we had heard, on a sudden the same Voices again saluted our Ears, and
filled us with new delight for a quarter of an hour, and then withdrew as
before. The Tuesday following in the Evening being with one of my Relations at
the Door of my own House, we both heard a great number of Voices in the Air,
which resou^^ (...), and made themselves heard with the greatest clearness;
Upon which I ran hastily to a Popish Physician who lodged in my House, and was
that year one of the Magistrates of Orthez, to invite him to hear this Divine
Melody, who following me, pretended to hear nothing, though the night being
calm and serene the singing sounded clearly. A while after the Voices
reinforced themselves, whereupon I pressed him to tell me whether he heard
them, It is true, said he aloud, I hear very lovely singing, I think I hear the
voice of such and such a one, naming several Persons in Orthez that sung very
well; I replied, Monsieur if men hold their peace the very Stones will speak;
But he as if troubled at the confession he had made, complains, Alas I observe
here a crafty Wile of the Devil, he causes these Voices to be heard in the Air
to keep the World in Error, and hinder this poor People from Converting and
Embracing the Catholic Faith. I asked him, whether he had ever heard the Devil
sung the Praises of God; he smiled, and retired hastily to his lodgings;
Nevertheless we bless God for his great goodness toward us in admonishing us
of our duty by these heavenly voices, who melodiously sung those Holy Hymns
that we were wont to sound forth in our Church, which was then laid wast and
destroyed. I protest before God that these things are so as I have reported
them, and I am very glad to make known these truths for the edification of all
those that fear the Lord,

In Testimony whereof I subscribe my self
at Amsterdam, Sept. 4. 1686. V. Deformalagnes.



I shall next insert the Memorial of Monsieur de Brassalay, a Gentleman of
Honor, and acknowledged such by all that know him. Some days before the
Interdiction of the Churches of Bearn, there were many Persons that heard the
singing of Psalms in the City of Orthez. The first that heard it was Lichagaray
Brunier a Lawyer, revolted some years since, the most malignant of the
Persecutors, and who continually stirred up troubles to those of the reformed
Religion. He rose from his Bed to tell the Curate that there was an Assembly of
People who sung Psalms without the City. He also went to a Sergeant named
Gowlan to conduct him to the place where he thought to surprise them, but this
Popish Sergeant having laid his Ear to the Window, said there was nothing to be
done, for he plainly perceived the singing was in the Air. Afterward it was
often heard for above a month by diverse Persons, both by night and day, Among
others M. Canneille an Elder of the Church of Orthez protested to me that
sitting reading on the Rivers Bank about a mile from the City, he heard a great
singing of Psalms on that side the Church stands, which is in the midst of the
City, and not at all doubting but it was an ordinary Assembly met together to
Evening Prayers, which was then very numerous because of the hazardous
conjuncture, and consisted at the least of two or three thousand Souls, he
hastened thither, and heard a great singing of Psalms all along till he was
entered into the City, but finding the Doors shut, the Neighbors told him that
it was not yet the hour of Prayer. It is to no purpose to allege that they
sung in some Cavern or Cave, for there is nothing but Houses, Vineyards, Meadow
and Fields thereabout, and the strict prohibition against the Protestants
singing of Psalms, under very severe penalties, makes it highly improbable.
Moreover this Elder told me that he never heard more lofty singing in the
Church. This Monsieur Brassalay declared as a most certain truth in the
presence of many honest men.

After the Church of Orthez was razed to the Ground this singing ceased till
about October following, and then was again heard by most of that City, and by
many that came out of the Country to Market and staid till night on purpose.
It ordinarily happened about the same hour, between eight and nine at night,
some heard the words others the Tune of the Psalm, and there is scarce a House
in Orthez of which some of the Family has not heard it. Monsieur Brunier
aforementioned went one night with two or three others to the usually place
without the City, and they all three heard the singing for a long time over
their heads the Tune of the 138 Psalm, whereof they could hear distinctly these
words.

Toward thy Holy Temple I
Will look and worship thee,
And praised with my thankful voice
Thy Holy name shall be.
Even for thy loving kindness sake,
And for thy Truth withal,
For thou thy Name have by thy Word
Advanced over all.
Dr. Faur a Physician and Magistrate of the City another Papist, heard it
diverse times, but their malice made them say they were Sorcerers and Devils. A
young Damsel of Moncade heard this singing being in her Bed; She arose and
caused above 50 persons to go out, who having heard it, fell on their Knees,
and wept through the joy they conceived to hear such incomparable melody in the
Air, which continued above half an hour. The place of this singing was raised
above the City, even as a very high Mountain, and the People heard this singing
over their heads, as if it had been in the Clouds. I have heard an honest man
make this Relation, who poured out tears when he spoke of it. The same thing I
heard from other places. To conclude it is impossible to doubt of a truth which
the far greatest part of the Inhabitants of Orthez are able to certify. And to
which the Parliament of Bearn have also given their Testimony by a Decree which
forbids men to go hear these Psalms, or to say they have heard it on the
forfeiture of 500 Crowns, and the Consuls of Orthez published these Ordinances
in their City.

The same thing has happened in Cevennes. As this Country is full of
Mountains where there are Eccho's which multiply and return the voice, and as
Night Assemblies have continually been made there, where they sing Psalms with
aloud voice, therefore the relations of singings may seem the more doubtful.
But the Affair of Orthez which is a Country close and without Mountains being
well proved, I see no reason (says Monsieur Juvieu) to question that of
Cevennes, and shall therefore without scruple produce the Certificates which
come from that Country.

The first runs thus. I Certify that one of my Sisters wrote to me on Feb. 8.
last, from a place called Collet in Cevennes where she then was, in these
words. My dear Brother, you would be informed touching the singing of Psalms,
which men have told you they hear in this Country, there is nothing more true.
Monsieur the late Baron of Cedorve heard it two or three hours in the Night
with his whole Family. I my self, and almost all the World in this Country have
heard this Voice, but we have not been able to discern whether they were Psalms
or no, It seems to us that it is a complaint, and even now at the hour I write
to you I hear and am sensible of it.

La Roquette Minister of Manoblet in Cevennes.
Given at Lausanna March 30. 1686.


The second Ceatificate. I attest that Monsieur of the Dark Valley, a Gentleman
of Cevennes, living near Sir John de Gardonengue writ to me Sept. 17. 1685.
this which follows. We see strange things in all the places of the Cevennes, we
hear singing of Psalms in the Night as if it were in the Church. Wednesday last
I was lying alone in my Chamber, and about midnight I heard upon the Roof a
voice very shrill which awoke me, and afterward five or six other voices that
assisted it, and they sung five or six verses of the fifth Psalm.

O Lord unto my words give ear,
My Meditation weigh,
My King, my God, my crying hear
For unto thee I pray.
Thou will destroy them that are proud
To utter Tales and Lies,
God will abhor the Bloody one
And such as fraud devise.
But to thy House I will draw near
In thine abundant Grace,
And Worship in thy holy fear
Toward thy holy place.
Lord lead me in thy Righteousness*
Because of all my Foes,
And thy strait paths, least I transgress
Before my face disclose.
For in their mouth no truth appears,
Their Heart with mischief throngs,
Their Throats are open Sepulchers,
They flatter with their Tongues.
Destroy them Lord, destroy them all,
Let them be overthrown
And into just destruction fall
By Counsels of their own.
And let them be cast out and queld
For their excessive sin,
For they have wickedly rebelled
Against the Lord therein.
But let O Lord all those rejoice
That put their Trust in thee,
Let them with shouts lift up their voice
And ever joyful be.
Let them likewise that love thy name,
Which is their confidence,
Be ever joyful in the same
Since thou art their defense.
For to the Righteous man no doubt
Thou will thy blessing yield,
And ever compass him about
With favor as a shield.
All those of the House heard it many times. The said Monsieur of the Dark
Valley confirmed me in this belief by a second Letter Jan. 27. 1686. that this
singing does continue constantly. The said Monsieur adds, Now the beating of a
Drum is heard, as if Soldiers were marching, and this is heard at midday in
many places.

Signed Barjune Minister of St. Marselle in Cevennes, now fled to Lausanna in
Switzerland.



The third Certificate. Toward the end of September last being with Monsieur
d'Esperies a Gentleman of merit, who is of Vigan in Cevennes, and we flying to
the Castle of a Gentleman of our friends, named M. de Montualian, we heard in
the Air a considerable number of Drums. Five or six days after being with the
same Gentleman at Ablataz in Cevennes, whither my Family was Fled for refuge;
we heard in the Air a Holy Harmony, Singing the Holy 'Praises of God. This I
certify to be true, forasmuch as I heard it.

Signed Saligne de Marnis in Cevennes.



The fourth Certificate is the Extracts of two Letters written to Lansunna to
Mademoiselle Louise des Vignoles, by her Cousin M. Jane des Vignoles. Dated
Jan. 3. 1686. How happy are you my dear Cousin that you can Pray and Sing the
Praises of God in Public, when in the mean time so many good Souls have their
Souls stopped, and dare not discover what passes in their mind; But as to the
Business of Singing the Praises of God, it is necessary that I speak to you of
the Miracle which makes so much noise in this Country, which is that since the
entire loss of our Churches and our Pastors, there has been heard in the Air
Voices and Sounds of Instruments very melodious, and that which is most
extraordinary is, that many Persons distinguish the Tunes of the Psalms; and I
can assure you of the truth thereof, since I my self have distinguished more
than thirty; It has been told me that my Brother (M. de Mont Vaillant)
distinguishes them all perfectly well. Can you imagine that we hear these
Voices Night and Day, and that we can so much as doubt that they are Troops of
Angels which God sends to us for our consolation, to assure us that he has not
utterly forsaken us, and that our deliverance is at hand; God grant that we may
make profit by these things. I had forgotten to tell you that the noise of a
Drum is here heard so clearly that no Body can doubt thereof, no more then
about the Singing of Psalms; for there are so many Persons of good
understandings convinced thereof, that we ought to give up our selves to the
power of Truth. I do avow that the thing passes all imagination, but be assured
that all care imaginable has been taken to prevent delusion.

To conclude, says my Author, how ought we distressed Protestants to give
thanks to God that he approves our Worship by a sign so considerable? Let not
our Enemies tell us that all this is nothing but delusion, for all Illusions
come from the Father of Lies, and who has the Praises of God in in horror and
detestation; In short, behold this Event as a happy Presageope, God will not
suffer our Voices nor our. Songs to die: The Angels have taken them up, and
will shortly restore them that we our selves made sound them forth in the Air:
The time of our deliverance is at hand, and the Spirit of Life will return,
when the Spirit of Repentance and Piety is re-entred into our Souls.

LX. In 1687. October. 20. The London Gazett gives a sad Relation of another
Earthquake in the Kingdom of Peru in America, whereby the City of Lima was
totally overthrown, and not one House left standing, burying many of the
Inhabitants units ruins; At the same time Callao, Fanette, Pisco, Chancay, Los
Florillos, etc. Most of them Seaport Towns were destroyed by an Inundation of
the Sea, which carried several Ships above nine Miles into the Country; and
great numbers of People and Cattle were drowned, there being found when the
water fell, at one place near the Seaside above five thousand People, dead, and
every dry more were found; so that no account could be given of their number.

LXI. In 1688. A dreadful Earthquake happened at Naples in Italy, which was
attended with the rage and roarings of Mount Vesuvius; of which the London
Gazett gives likewise the followinwing Account in a Letter from that City;
Dated June 8, On Saturday June, 5. about the twenty second hour happened here a
terrible Earthquake, though it lasted not long, which frightning the
Inhabitants out of their Houses with the terror of an inevitable destruction,
they betook themselves to the Plazza's and open public places of the City. The
old College of the Jesuits was ruined by it, also the great Chapel of their
New College, together with three other Chapels adjoining, Three of the
Fathers were killed there, besides manness hers whose numbers are not yet
known: The Front of another great Church of the Jesuits opened in many cracks,
and the great Tower or Steeple seemed ready to fall. In the Theatins Convent of
the Holy Apostles, a whole Dormitory fell down, besides other considerable
damage they received: And the magnificent Arch erected before the Church of St.
Paul, belonging to the said Fathers fell, together with those great and ancient
Columns that formerly made part of the Temple Castor and Pollux; there there
remaining only four of them standing, and those in a tottering condition; Out
of these ruins there have been already dug 19. Persons that were dead, and
there was reason to fear that the mischief might have been much greater, it
being so near to a public Market where there were great throngs of People. The
Walls of the great Church of St. Dominick opened in many places; and great part
of the Refectory fell down, as also part of adjoining Palace, where many were
killed; several other Churches of Augustins, etc. were ruined; and in short
there is scarce a Palace or House that has not received some considerable
damage. This occasioned very devout Processions of Persons of all Ranks. The
next day was another great Shock which threw down many of the Houses that were
before the most weakened; and Yesterday there was another perceived, but without
much damage; but this day we have felt nothing of it; However the Processions
continue in great numbers, and the Persons of Quality are all retired from
hence. In the Neighborhood of Vdico, a City sixteen Miles distant from hence,
a mountain opened, and a Courier from Benevento a City belonging to the Pope,
brings an Account that it was all ruined, and that of Six thousand Inhabitants
there were but few left alive; The Archbishops Palace there was thrown down,
and the Archbishop himself drawn out of the ruins, being hurt in his Head and
Arm. And there are Accounts of the like damages in several other places.

In a Letter from Rome June 12. 1688. There was this further Account; We have
had nothing considerable to entertain us here this Week but the sad Relations
of the terrible Earthquakes at Naples, and several places about it. It happened
at Naples on Sunday last about 21. hours and a half (which at the same instant
was perceived by a great many here) On Sunday too it returned. Several
Churches, Palaces, and Houses are ruined, among the rest the famous Church of
the Jesuits, reckoned the finest in Italy, is all tumbled down, except the
Walls and the High Altar. The particular number of those killed and buried in
the ruins is not known. The last Letters say, many of the Inhabitants sie
abroad under Tents, in Couches, etc. and continually Prayers, Processions,
public Penances, etc. are performed; and every one runs about crying
Miserecordia, Mercy, Mercy, Mercy; Three Ships were Sunk in the Harbor, and
the Water in the Wells rose many handfuls. Benevento is almost totally ruined
and of ten thousand Inhabitants, they say there remains scarce six hundred
alive. Cardinal Vrsini their Archbishop was taken out of the Ruins alive, but
hurt. Several other Places and Seats are quite ruined and most of the
Inhabitants swallowed up. This City and the Country hereabout just felt the
Shock but received no harm. The damage is said to be above fifty Millions.

LXII. In the same year and Month, 1688. The London Gazett gave an Account of a
dreadful Earthquake and Fire at Smyrna; In a Letter from an English Gentleman
at Constantinople, Dated July 8. 1688. As follows. On June thirty between 11.
and 12. at Noon there happened at Smyrna a violent Earthquake, which in a
Minute threw down many, and shattered all the Houses in that City; It reached
all the adjacent Parts, and Motelone and Scio, where it did some small harm:
and at the same time that day it was felt here, though the force of it being
spent by the distance, it was not generally taken notice of. About four hours
after the Earthquake, a Fire broke out in the Frank-Street from an House called
the Genovese-House, which by the strength of the Wind, and in that
Consternation, having no opposition soon consumed the Frank-Street and all the
Town, except the Skirts and the Houses on the side of the Hill, which stand
scattering and not contiguous. The most moderate computation of People
destroyed is 5000. Some make it double the number, of which 400. Jews, and one
of the most famous Chaccham Rabbis of the East, Aaron Aben Haim, who as he was
much reverenced by them in his life, so particular lamentations are made here
for his Death. The Metropolite of Smyrna with some Papa's, went to the Church
to Prayers, and were killed by its falling on them. The Patriarch also of
Alexandria had the same Fate. And many poor People were buried in the ruins
before they could get help. Of the French Nation, only the Consul was killed.
Of the Dutch one Merchant: And of the English three, and several others were
bruised and hurt, but not dangerously. The Consul and half of the Nation, it
being Saturday, were abroad, but perceiving the Earthquake came immediately to
the City, and all went aboard their Ships in Port. In the interim betwixt the
shock of the Earthquake, and the breaking out of the Fire, great quantities of
Goods were saved. So that the English as to their loss in Merchandise have
escaped much better than the Dutch, who had no Ships in Port. All the lower
Warehouses in Viserchan are saved, but those above Stairs, either by Windows
left open, or by the Fire getting in at the Clefts of the Walls suffered much
and are most fallen. The Castle at St. Giacomo-Point is quite sunk under
ground. A Capigee Bassa is sent from hence to Smyrna to look after the Grand
Seigniors Interest in taking the Estates of those dead without Heirs, which
will add affliction to affliction, but the public necessities here are great.
And the Lord Ambassador of England has sent down an Officer, with command from
the Grand Vizier to be assisting perticulary to our. Nation in looking after
their concerns.

LXIII. In December following several Earthquakes happened about Naples and
Beneventum, but without such unfortunate Accidents as attended them some months
before. Nevertheless that accident being fresh in memory, it is not to be
imagined in what a consternation the People were, and how they fell to their
Prayers in several Churches. The Monks in those quarters made use of the
opportunity to preach, That the end of the World was at hand, and for that
reason endeavored to a waken the People to give Alms. But in regard (says my
Author) that the People are not now to be imposed upon as formerly, when they
used such ways to rear those costly Foundations that are scattered over all
Europe, they resolved to keep what they had; not finding the Monks made better
use of their Money than they themselves could do.

I suppose it will not be deemed presumption to assert, that these dreadful
shakings of the Earth, did seem plainly to presage those Convulsions that
happened soon after, and may presignify good as well as bad Events; Not only
the happy Revolutions in these three Kingdoms, but also the horrid ruins,
devastations, and miseries which the ambition and barbarity of the French King
has occasioned lately in Christendom, and which do still continue.

LXIV. Dismal was the Calamity and Judgment which befell the Inhabitants of the
Island of Jamaica in the West Indies upon Tuesday June 7. 1692. by a dreadful
Earthquake. For about eleven a Clock in the morning the Earth suffered a great
Trepidation, which in a minutes time was increased to that degree that several
Houses began to rumble down, and in six or seven minutes or a quarter of an
hour at the most, made terrible havoc and devastation. It threw down almost
all the Houses, Churches, Sugar-works, Mills and Bridges through the whole
Country. It tore the Rocks and Mountains, and threw them into the Sea, but Port
Royal had much the greatest share in this astonishing Judgment of God. The
Minister of that place relates, That the same Morning he had been at Prayers in
the Church, which he never neglected, to keep up some show of Religion amongst
a most ungodly, debauched People, and was gone to a place hard by the Church
where the Merchants use to meet, and where the President of the Council was,
designing to dine with one Captain Ruden, but his House upon the first
concussion sunk first into the Earth and then into the Sea, with his Wife and
Family and some others that were come to dine with him, but the Minister
staying some time with the President, escaped the danger, yet soon after they
found the ground rolling and moving under their feet; Lord Sir, says the
Minister, What Is this? He replied very composedly, being a sober grave man, It
is an Earthquake, be not afraid it will soon be over, but it increased, and
they heard the Church and Tower fall, upon which they ran to save themselves.
The Minister quickly lost the President and made toward Morgans Fort, which
being a wide open place he thought to be securest from falling Houses, but as
he came near, he saw the Earth open and swallow up a multitude of People, and
the Sea mounting in over the Fortifications; He then laid aside all thoughts of
escaping, and resolved to make toward his own Lodgings, and there to meet
death in as good a posture as he could, and in his way was forced to run
through two or three very narrow streets, where the Houses and Walls fell on
each side of him, and some Bricks came rolling over his Shoes, but none hurt
him. When he came to his Lodgings he found all things safe, not a Picture, of
which there were several fair ones in his Chamber, displaced. He went to the
Balconey to view the street in which his House stood, and saw never an House
down there, nor the Ground so much as cracked. The People seeing him there,
cried out for him to come down and pray with them. When he came into the street
every one laid hold on his Cloths and embraced him, so that with their fear and
kindness he was almost stifled. He persuaded them at last to kneel down and
make a large ring, which they did, he prayed with them near an hour, when being
almost spent with the heat and the exercise, they brought him a Chair, the
Earth working all the while with new motions and tremblings like the rolling of
the Sea, insomuch that when he was at Prayer he could hardly keep himself upon
his Knees. By that time he had been about half an hour with them, aggravating
their sins and provocations, and feriously exhorting them to repentance, there
came some Merchants of the place who desired him to go aboard some Ship in the
Harbor and refresh himself having got a Boat to carry him off, so when he came
to the Sea, he saw it had swallowed up the Wharf, with all those goodly brick
Houses upon it, most of them as fine as those in Cheapside, and two entire
Streets beyond that. He walked upon the tops of some houses that lay level with
the surface of the Water, from whence he gotfirst into a Canoo, and then into a
Longboat, which put him a Board a Ship called the Siam Merchant, where he
found the President safe, who was overjoyed to see him, they could not sleep
that night for the returns of the Earthquake, almost every hour, which made all
the Guns in the Ship jar and rattle. The next day he went from Ship to Ship to
visit those that were bruised and dying, and to pray with them, and likewise to
do the last Office at the sinking of several Corpse that came floating from the
Point. The shakings of the Earth still continued with Thunder and Lightning and
foul Weather, and the People continued still as desperately wicked as before,
for that very day this terrible Earthquake happened, as soon as night came on,
a Company of lend Rogues called Privateers fell to breaking open Warehouses and
Houses deserted. To rob and rifle their Neighbors whilst the Earth trembled
under them, and some of the Houses fell on them in the Act, and those audacious
Whores that remained upon the place were as impudent as ever. He went again
ashore to pray with the bruised and dying people, and to Christen Children,
where he met too many Drunk and Swearing, he did not spare them, nor the
Magistrates neither, who had suffered wickedness to grow to such a height. In
the last Sermon he preached in the Church, he plainly represented to them the
danger of their impenitence and wickedness, with so much zeal and earnestness
that many now confessed, It was more like a Prophecy than a Sermon. He says he
had many times before, an impulse upon his Spirit to Preach those things which
he never premeditated at home, and could not, he thought, do otherwise. The
morning of this dreadful day was very fair and clear, affording no suspicion of
the least evil, but in the space of three minutes about half an hour after
eleven in the morning, Port Royal the fairest Town of all the English
Plantations the best Emporium and Mart of that part of the World, exceeding in
its riches, plentiful of all good things, was shaken and shattered to pieces,
and sunk into and covered for the greatest part by the Sea. Few of the Houses
that stood were left whole. So that by their falling, the opening of the Earth,
and the Inundation of the Waters, it is reckoned there were lost fifteen
hundred Persons. The Sunday after, the Minister Preached to them in a Tent, not
daring to venture among the shattered Houses, the People were overjoyed to see
him among them, and wept bitterly when he Preached to them. It was a sad sight
to see all that Harbor, one of the fairest and goodliest in America, covered
with the dead bodies of People of all conditions, floating up and down without
burial; for the great and famous Burial-place called the Pallisadoes, was
destroyed by the Earthquake, and the Sea washed the Carcasses of those that
were buried out of their Graves, their Tombs being dashed to pieces by the
Earthquake, of which there were hundreds in that place. Multitudes of Rich men
were utterly ruined, whilst many that were poor, by watching opportunities and
searching the wracked and sunk Houses, even almost while the Earthquake lasted,
and terror and amazement was upon all the considerable People, have gotten
great riches. From St. Anns there was news that above a thousand Acres of
Wood-land were turned into the Sea, and carried with it whole Plantations, but
no place suffered like Port Royal, where whole streets were swallowed up by the
opening of the Earth, and the Houses and Inhabitants went down together. Some
of them were driven up again by the Sea which arose in those breaches and
wonderfully escaped. Some were swallowed up to the neck, and then the Earth
shut upon them and squeezed them to death, and in that manner several were left
buried, with their heads above ground, only some Heads the Dogs had eaten.
Others were covered with dust and Earth by the remaining People to avoid the
stench Great bellowing and noises were heard sometime after in the Mountains,
which made them apprehensive of an Eruption of Fire; but thanks be to God, no
ill Event has yet succeeded.

By a second Letter from another worthy Divine and a Minister of the parish of
Vere in that Island, some Leagues from Port Royal; we have this further
Relation of that tremendous Judgment, Dated June 30. 1692. On Tuesday June 7.
about 11. in the morning it pleased the Just God to visit us with a terrible
Earthquake, which continued with much violence and terror for about a quarter
of an hour, as most say, but in my opinion not above 6. or 7. minutes, in which
time it overthrew all the Brick and Stone Buildings in the Country, whereof
several in my own Parish, which now are either levelled with the ground, or
standing Monuments of the wrath of God, so shattered and torn that they are
irreparable; while these were tumbling, the Earth opened in my Parish in
multitudes of places, and though their dire Chasms spewed out Water to a
considerable height above ground, in such quantities in some places that it
made our Gullies run on a sudden, though before exceeding dry, insomuch that
some were afraid of being overwhelmed at once by the River and Sea joining
together to swallow up the Country; these gaping mouths being no less than 12,
20. or more foot deep under the Earth, and above two miles up in the Country,
especially nigh the River in the purest mould, which had not Clay nor other
consolidating Matter beneath to oppose the force of the Fountains of the Deep
breaking up: for where that was, we do not find any cracks of the Earth at all:
And yet it pleased God that we in this Parish have escaped the danger much
better than our Neighbor Parishes; for happening to content our selves with
mean and low-built Houses, generally of Timber and Boarded, or with Cratches
set deep in the ground and plaistred, such Houses are generally standing. So
that we have means to assist one another, whilst in other parts hundreds of
Souls are cast out of their dwellings, and have not a place to hide their Heads
in, except in Booths and Tents which they have since built to shade themselves
from the Sun. Our noted Town of St. John de la Vega: Or, The Spanish Town is
utterly down to the ground, and its Church devoured in the same Ruins; Our
Magazine and only Storehouse of Port Royal is three parts swallowed up in the
Sea, Ships and Shallops now riding at Anchor where great numbers of fine
Fabrics stood not long since. Many eminent Merchants worth thousands, have
scarce any thing left but the blue Linen on their backs; several are dead,
either overwhelmed with their Houses, or drowned in the Sea, which flowed in
suddenly upon them. For while they fled from the Sea, the Earth devoured them
in her gaping Jaws, or they were killed with the falling Houses; and while they
fled from the gaping Chasms of the Earth, or the tottering buildings, the Sea
met and swept them away. A whole Street called the Wharf, (where most of the
noted Merchants lived, and where much of the Planters goods were landed, for
convenience of Sale and Shipping; particularly Sugar and Cotton) sunk at once
from one end to the other with a general crack at the very beginning of the Ear
thquake, together with two Forts Guns, etc. thereon; and all that were upon or
nigh it perished in an instant without warning: and soon after while the People
were in the greatest horror and consternation imaginable, not knowing whither
to fly for safety, two or three more Streets in their whole length rottered and
fell, and were immediately funk, ground and all together deep into the Sea, as
far as the Jews Street; All the Upper part of the Town, with the Church, and
all above the Pallisadoes is under Water, even the very Pallisadoes it self
where their burying place was, is now no longer Earth but Sea; and the dead
Corpse floated from thence to all parts of the Harbor. The Houses that yet
remain are many of them so rent and torn, and others so deeply sunk into the
Water, even up to their Balconies, that they are unserviceable. The Wall at the
Pallisadoes is utterly ruined, with the Port thereto belonging; and though
Morgans Line, and Walkers Fort yet stand, they are sorely shaken and rent, and
so sunk they are not tenable, the whole place that is yet above Water sinking
daily by those Earthquakes we have ever since had; sometimes 4, 5, 6. times,
more or less in 24. hours. I my self while I am now writing, expecting when the
Earth will tremble under me, though in other parts of the Country through Gods
mercys we do not hear of any further damage since the first. The reputed number
of the Dead, (for perhaps there will never be an exact Account) is reckoned
about 1500 persons, besides Negro's, who are thought to be 6. or 700 more, a
multitude of whose Black Corpse floated many days from one side of the Harbor
to the other, which caused such an intolerable stench that the dead were like
to destroy the Living; till at last some were sunk, and others dispersed by the
Sea-breeze.

Imediately upon the Cessation of the Earthquake, your heart would abhor to
hear of the Robberyes and Violences committed in an instant upon the place, by
the vilest and basest of the People. No man could call any thing his own, for
they that were strongest and most wicked seized what and whose they pleased
without regard to the Owners, Gold and Silver, Jewels, Plate or Goods was all
their own if they could lay hands on them. Nothing but breaking open Houses,
rushing into Shops, and taking from the owners what they pleased even before
their faces; Yea Robbing them of Money and goods in the open Street, as they
were carrying them to other places for security: whilst others in Canoes,
Wherries, Shipboats, etc. were plundring Chests, Boxes, Scriptores, etc. of
what they could find in them upon the Water: Even the very Slaves thinking it
their time of Liberty, committed many barbarous Insolences and Robberyes, till
they were suppressed by the Death of some and punishment of others. And indeed
our first fears were concerning our Blacks, those irreconciliable and yet
intestine Enemies of ours, who are no otherwise our Subjects than as the whip
makes them, who seeing our strongest Houses demolisht, our Army broken, and
hearing of the destruction of our greatest dependency the Town of Port Royal,
might in hopes of Liberty be stirred up to rise in Rebellion against us; which
is a War always the more terrible, by how much there is no quarter given in it,
but they kill and slay all the Whites, Men, Women and Children that they can
Conquer; But God be praised those fears are now blown over. Many days did these
Depredations last, especially upon the Water, where the dead were Robbed of what
they had about them, some stripped, others searched, their Pockets picked, their
Fingers cut off for their Rings, their Gold Buttons taken out of their shirts,
and then they were turned adrift again. From thence was taken all manner of
stores that would swim, every one taking that for his own which he could lay
his hands on, as Pork, Beef, Mackril, Saltfish, Coaca, Candle, Soap, Wine,
Beer, Brandy, and a vast deal of other things, not to be thought of, or
reckoned up. So that the richest became poorest, and the meanest of the people
were enriched by the losses of others, to estimate which seems as difficult as
to reckon the number of the People lost, and destroyed.

Port Royal in its flourishing condition was a famous Empory and Mart Town for
the West Indle's and the Archinto being settled there, a very large share of the
riches of Mexico and Peru were brought thither, and vast sums of Coin and
Bullion yearly transported for England, to the great enriching of the Jamaican
Merchants and Factors, so that it was hard to compare what was lost, but many
think, at least, the value of four hundred Thousand Pound at Port-Royall only;
Yet in the midst of this woeful Calamity, some People were miracolously
preserved from Death, being swallowed down into the Bowels of the Earth alive,
yet spued up again and saved by the violent Eruption of Water through those
Gaps, Others, as themselves affirm, (if they were then capable of knowing what
was done to them,) were swallowed up in one place, and by the rushing of the
Waters to and fro, by reason of the Agitartion of the Earth at that time; were
cast up again by another Chasm at places far distant. But the general means of
Preservation was by Peoples flying as fast as they could toward the back Sea
side, or speedily getting aboard the Ships in the Harbor, which were croudded
with Men, Women and Children: Among others a Man of War, the Swallow then in
Harbor was so damaged by the fall of the Houses that she became utterly
unserviceable, and Twelve Shallops were sunk by the same means.

Likewise Ligania, the first and principal Town for Planting, and imitating if
not exceeding, the stately Buildings of Port Royal, is now brought to most
terrible Desolation, and its fine New Built and yet Unfinished Church buried in
the same ruin with the Houses. Above which place the Costly Blue Mountains lift
up their heads, but are now so rent and torn, that they are fearful to behold
and stand like lasting marks of Divine Wrath; which has also happened in other
parts of the Country which is very Hilly in the middle, so that by the fall of
a Mountain into the Channel of the River which supplies both this Town and
Port Royal, with Water, the River became dry for sixteen hours together, to the
terror of the Inhabitants, fearing the Desertion as well as Desolation of the
place, till it afterward Run again as formerly, and they were informed of the
cause of the Stoppage of the Water for so long a time.

This, among other reasons, was the Cause why the People that were saved at
Port-Poyal were almost perished for Thirst in their deep Extremity; their own
Water-casks being either ruined or swam away into the Sea, and no Boats to
fetch any in that Dismal Consternation, or otherwise employed to save Peoples
Lives, or to get Plunder. Or if any did go, there was no Water to be had; so
that it was hard to be gotten and very dear, many paying great rates only to
quench their Thirst. And yet for all these Woeful Disasters, great Numbers of
People are not all Reformed of their Wickedness which brought them upon us, but
there is the same Whoring and Drinking, the same Cursing and Swearing, if not
worse, than formerly; So that we have cause to fear the Judgment of Sodom may
be our next punishment.

In the midst of our Distress it pleased God to give us a Signal Victory over
our Enemies the French, who happened at that time to make the Sharpest Attack
upon us since the War, having Landed, as we hear, Two Hundred men on the North
side of the Island, which is but weakly furnished with men, where they
entrenched themselves, but were shamefully beaten out by a Vigorous Attack in
the Night by a Party of about Thirty Men, who Slew Seven or Eight outright, and
the rest flying to their Boats, Thirty of them were drowned; While in the mean
time our Fleet, which was set out on purpose, persuing theirs, we took one
Shallop, and made them desperately blow up their great Ship; such as were saved
remaining our Prisoners, and others fled home to give an Account of their
overthrow.

To conclude, God in his Displeasure remembered Mercy, for though such Numbers
perished at Port Royal, where they were thronged together in an Isthmus of Land;
yet I cannot hear of fifty Persons both Whites and Blacks that were lost beside
throughout all the Island.

Other Letters add these particulars; That this terrible Earthquake came from
the North, and attacked Port Royal on the Harbor side, on which was the Wharf
the whole length of the place, where stood the Kings House, a Bastion of 207.
Guns, Carlisle Battery of 119. Guns, and the Houses of the greatest Merchants;
All those Sunk down in a moment from three to five fathom of Water. Some were
sunk in their Houses, others buried in the Rubbish, some who were got into
clear Water and could Swim were carried away with drifts of Timber and tops of
Houses, driven by a steering carreer and there perished. Nothing else was seen
but the Dead and Dying, nothing heard but Shrieks and Cries, the Living were
covered with Wounds, Bruises and Blood; The Thunder Roared over their Heads,
the Earth Trembled under their Feet, the Rocks and Mountains were rent in
sunder, and Firebals fell by day and night from Heaven, so that the most
hardened Atheists might have considered that there was a God who Governed the
World. In short (says my Author) it is impossible for Tongue to speak or Pen to
write the Sorrows and Terrors of that day, of which I my self, who escaped to a
Miracle, was an Eyewitness.

Because some may be desirous to know the Names of those that perished in this
terrible Calamity, I thought fit to give an Account of them who were of most
note (though doubtless great numbers were lost of which no public notice has
been given.) Attorney General Musgrove, Provost Marshal Reeves, Captain Ruden
who with his Wife and Family, with several others in it sunk first into the
Earth, Captain Agar, Dr. Boy, Capt. Wail, Capt. Warder and his Family; Mr.
Nushall and his Family, Mr. Crosts Family, Mr. Alcoks Family, Capt Wilison and
his Son, Dr. Trapham a Phisician by hanging by hands upon the Rack of a
Chimney, and one of his Children hanging about his Neck, were both miraculously
saved in a Boat, but his Wife with the rest of his Children and Family were all
lost; so was Mrs. Robinson, Mrs. Gifford, Mrs. Enllers Mr. Fyrme, Mr. Brown,
Mr. Stephens, Mr. Reeves and his wife, Mr. Pryer, Mr. Lambspert. Mr. Atwell,
Mrs. Radburn and her Family, Mr. Ryvers and his Family, Mrs. Eeylin and her
Child, Mrs. Elizabeth Beckford, Sir Jame Cos^ybyes Daughter, Mrs. Dowingtons
Child, Capt. Cunnings Capt. Tokely, Capt. Martin, Capt. Woody, Mr. Nash, Mr.
Meares, Mr. George Philips, Mr. Norbery's Wife, Mr. Jonanathan Wood, Mrs.
Corbet, Colonel Read, Colonel Reeves's Lady, Mr. Magirah, Mr. Joys Child, Mr.
Diggins. Cap. Watson, Mr. Stockton and Family, Mr. Ralph Knights Widow and
Neice, Mrs. Sweeting, Mrs. Susanna Cdrson, Mr. Keen, Mr. Hellinwood and
Family, Mr. John Lake and Wife, Mr. John Perks Wife and Child, Mr. Hayward and
Family, Mr. Dean, Mr. William Turner, Mr. Watts and Mr. Beckfords two Daughters.

LXV. In the same year 1692. Sept. 8. an Earthquake was felt in London, and in
several parts of Essex, Kent, Sussex, Hampshire, etc. as Sheerness, Sandwick,
Deal, Maidstone, Porismouth, etc. the People leaving their houses in many
places least they should fall on their heads, but it lasted only a minute. It
shook Leeds Castle in Yorkshire so violently that all in the Castle, even the
Lady her self went out of it, and expected its falling. A Person being in the
Field hard by, the ground shook so under him that he could not stand, and being
forced to lie down on the Ground was so tossed up and down, that he received
several bruises. At Maidstone in Kent the people generally got out of their
houses fearing they would fall. It happened at London about four minutes past
two, and was felt in most part of the Durch and Spanish Netherlands, as also in
Germany, France, etc. The account from Holland runs thus. On Sept. 8. between
two or three a Clock in the Afternoon all Holland was sensible of a trembling
of the Earth which lasted about three minutes. The shog, or joiting, which it
caused three times one after another, was not violent, for it did no damage,
but it was plainly perceptible and very much alarmed the People: At Middleburg
in Zealand it continued for some time, and caused the Earth to move so much,
that the people was forced to hold by what was next in the Street, and it was
feared that the Steeple of the great Church by its motions, would have fallen,
it causing the Bells both there and at the Hague to jahgle, and the Ships at
Sea were sensible of it.

The Gazaet relates, that our Gracious Sovereign King Willium being encamped at
Grammen in Flanders at the same time there happened an Earthquake which lasted
near a minute, and was very sensible to the whole Camp. The King was then at
Dinner in an old decayed House, which shaking very much, and every one
apprehending it was ready to fall, His Majesty was prevailed with to rise from
Table to go out of the House but the surprise was soon over.

An ingenious Gentleman has made observation that this Earthquake affected
places most on the Seacosts, and near great Rivers, which seems to favor the
opinion of another learned Person, That Water and not Wind is the cause of
Earthquakes, which the Ancient Philosophers did also assert. And therefore
says he, the excessive Rains which fell that Summer, in far greater quantity
than what the Earth could possibly receive, being shut up in the hollow Caverns
and Bowels of the Earth, and striving to get out again, may have caused these
Universal shivering Fits in our European parts: and there is this Argument to
corroborate this Conjecture, for that very great Earthquakes indeed, are many
times attended with violent Inundations, the Rivers being swelled with the
Water which the Earth has let out. Another odd accident that followed this
Earthquake was the effect it had upon the Spa Waters in Germany, which are so
famour and so wholesome, and are now become much more improved since that
happened. Spa is a Borough in the Country of Liege, where there are several
Mineral Fountains, to which a great number of people resort at all seasons of
the Year. Among all the Springs belonging to that noted Borough, that in the
middle out of which the Bottles are filled that are sent over all Europe every
year, is changed after a very extraordinary manner. The source of it is as big
again as it was, and the Water which before was seldom clear is become
extremely Limpid, and is of that strength that the Bottles if they be stopped
immediately after they are hil'd, break all in pieces, which never happened
till since this late Earthquake. The rest of the Springs are also become much
clearer and better. This will be a subject for those to exercise their Pens,
who make it their business to dive into the secrets of Nature.

This Earthquake went not beyond 52 Degrees and 40 Minutes of Northern
Latitude. How far it reached South and East is not yet certainly known. It has
been traced beyond, Paris to the 48 degree of North Latitude, and beyond the
Rhyne on the East to Franckfort, so that 260 Miles square were shaken by it.
The time of its happening here, and beyond the Seat seem to vary some minutes,
but that may easily be accounted for, by the difference of Meridians. So that
the inflamed Damp; says Mr. Ray, which caused this Earthquake was lodged sleep
in the Earth, the Caverns that contained it passing under the bottom of the Sea.

The same year, 1692. Oct. 15. about three a Clock in the Morning they felt an
Earthquake at Bale and Schaffouse in Switzerland, which was very violent as to
the motion, but did no harm at all.

LXVI. I have already given an Account of diverse Earthquakes and Irruptions of
the dreadful Burning Mount Aetna in Sicily for many years past, but that which
lately happened in this unfortunate Island is of so astonishing a Nature that
it may be more easily imagined than expressed, and which can hardly be paralleled
in any former Age; Both for the suddenness of it, and the mighry defolations it
did produce? This tremendous Eauthquake (a greater than which we read not of
either in Ancient or modern History) Was upon Jan. 7. 1692, At which time about
ten at night, Mount Aetna began to roar in a most horrible manner, which
usually presages some dismal Calamity to ensue. Its loud bellowings continued
for two days. and then began to cease and fall lower; and about an hour after
the People of Catania. which was nearest to the Mountain felt a trembling under
them for near three Minutes, during which no noise was heard from Mount Aetna,
so that it only affrighted the Inhabitants: but within a Minute after the
Roaring of the Mountain was redoubled with infinite terror, and the top thereof
appeared all in Flames, and the West Wind carried away a great quantity of
burnt Ashes; This trembling of the 9th. was felt in the Cities of Mineo,
Palaonia, Ragosa, Licodia and most of the South parts of Sicily at the same
instant with that of Catania. But the most tremendous shake of all happened on
Jan. 11. which affected the whole Island in a more or less degree, even from
Messina North, to Cape Coio the farthest Southern point of Sicily; and though
it continued but Six Minutes, yet made horrible Ravage throughout the whole
Country. Under which dimal Calamity the Ancient City of Catania, pleasantly
Seated, and full of Inhabitants of Quality, with an University, and about
24000. People, in a Minute was sunk out of sight, with a noise as loud as if
thousands of Cannons had been discharged at once; and some Moments after, to
the East where the City stood, a little Mountain, advanced it self several
times a considerable height above the surface of the adjacent ground, but soon
after became likewise iuvisible. The dismal bellowing of Mount Aetna was louder
both before and after, and appeared more than ever in Flames; Yet a few Minutes
after Catania was swallowed up, there was neither Flames visible, nor for five
or six hours any Roarings to be heard. After which it began to rage and throw
out more Black and Smoaky Flashes than at any time before. These particulars
were observed by some Fishermen who happened at that time to be in their Boats
in the Bay to the South, and within three Miles of the City, who expected every
moment to have been swallowed up by the wonderful Agitation of the Waves; But
upon the sinking of the imaginary Mountain aforementioned the Sea became
instantly Calm; It is computed that not above 2000. of the Inhabitants of this
City escaped, and those of the Gentry, who by the shake of the 9th. instant,
and the hideous roaring of Mount Aetna the 11th. in the morning, which is the
usual presage of some dismal Tragedy were frighted away; all the rest of the
People perishing in this lamentable ruin. In the place where Catania stood some
heaps of rubbish and a great Lake of Water appear at a distance.

Some Letters add, That just as the Earthquake in Catania began to be
perceived, the Sea retired about two Miles from the Shore; which put the People
into such a terrible fright, that every one betook himself to what he thought
might best secure him from this dreadful Scourge of Heaven; Away they flew to
the Cathedral where one of the Cannous carried about the Relics of St Agatha
the Patroness of that City, but neither the Relics nor the Prayers of the
Patroness could prevent the impending stroke, for the whole City was destroyed
in a moment after, and all the People therein.

Under the same dismal Calamity fell the Ancient City of Syracuse, so famous in
History that it was formerly reckoned one of the greatest in the World; having
for many Centuries been the Metropolis of a Renowned Republic, and still
retained some marks of its prestine Grandeur, seated in a Rich and pleasant
Soil, with a strong Castle, and about 16000. Inhabitants. By the Earthquake of
the 9th. many principal Houses and most part of the Castle were torn in diverse
places, and the next night it was again shaken with so terrible a storm of
Wind, that the great Bell in one of the Churches made a noise by the violent
Motion of the Steeple. Many were killed by the Tempest, and the rest fled out
of the City for safety in the Night, and so escaped the horrible devastation of
the 11th, wherein two thirds of the buildings were thrown down, and above 7000.
People buried in the Rubbish; a great number were dug out of the Ruins, but
so bruised that there was little hope of their Recovery. The Chief Magistrates
and People of Condition fled for security into the great Church, but there met
with Death by the fall of the Stone-Roof and Steeple at once.

Neither did Noto though built upon a very high Bock, almost inaccessible on
all sides but one narrow way, and a City which formerly contended with Syracuse
for dignity, partake of a less dismal fate. It has one of the largest and best
Harbors in Sicily, and is the Key of the Country on that side; and though the
hardness of the Rock whereon it stood seemed to secure it, yet the trembling of
the 9th did very much affect it, and on the 11th laid it in heaps in a minute,
all the Inhabitants, except some few who fled from thence on the 9th were
buried under the ruins of their own Houses, being reckoned about 7000. a part
of a Church, and very little more, remaining standing in the whole Town
Augusta, a City in a Peni-insula, on the East of Sicily, with a large prospect
to the Sea, safe Harbors and considerable Trade, was much damaged on the 9th
instant and about 600 People killed by the downfall of the Houses. The next day
the shake was renewed, which caused most of the Gentry to fly to the Castle for
security, but there being terrible Lightning, a Magazine of Powder took Fire
and about 1100 Persons who sought for safety were slain there in the
destruction of the Castle which was blown up in the Air, and the following day
the rest of the Town and the remaining Inhabitants by another dreadful shake,
were utterly destroyed and buried in rubbish, so that of 6000 People none were
left alive. Lentini the ancient Lecotium, a Town of about 3000 Families was
burnt to the ground on the 11th and nothing to be seen but several great heaps
of Earth in the beautiful Lake upon which it stood, the Water whereof is now
become brackish, and of a bituminous taste, which was before very clear. And
great quantity of Fish are found dead on the shore. Calatgirmie a Town well
built of Freestone, by the shake on the 11th had a fifth part of the buildings
and two Monasteries demolished, but of 7000 People 5000 made their escape.
Mineo was stricken both the 9th and 11th, of the former the Heavens were sealene
without the least Cloud, but on the latter there was a terrible storm of
Lightning and Thounder for six hours together. At both times several houses and
a large Church were overthrown, and it was judged about 4000 People perished.
The shake of the 11th did likewise greatly shatter the Cathedral Church of
Monreal, one of the most famous structures in the World. The Dome above the
high Altar falling, ^^^ied in pieces four curious Brass Pillars, and many
Images of Saints of rare workmanship. Part of the Archbishops Palace was burnt
with Lightning, and some few of the Inhabitants were killed by the fall of
Houses. Parermo, where the Viceroy of Sicily keeps his Court, received some
damage in its Cathedral, and another Church was ruined, which obliged the
Viceroy, his Family, and the Archbishop to go aboard the Galleys in the Harbor,
where they expected death every moment from the violent motion of the Waves,
some part of the great Mole being shattered, yet not above 100 People were
killed in this famous City, who lived in a Suburb built of Wood. The Town of
Pasceni of about 200 Inhabitants was so entirely ruined, that not one house or
person was saved. The spacious Valley adjoining, which was formerly full of
excellent Vines being turned into a new Lake, whose Water is brackish and like
Brimstone. In Patuzolo a place of about 1000 people all were swallowed up.
Furla another Town of about the same number of Souls, had the like fate, and
the Rocks adjacent which formerly were white as Marble, are now black and as if
burn with Fire and Gunpowder, and the Fountains of fair Water are become muddy
and taste of Brimstone. Sciorti a bigger Town than the three last, was totally
demolished and the Inhabitants which were reckoned about 2000 so utterly
destroyed that none were left to tell the news. No more than there were at
Militello, where of 6000 People no one is left to give tidings how or when its
calamity happened The Country People who dwell in the Mountains about it
affirm that for three days before they could not discern the Town by reason of
a thick Fog which surrounded it, but that on the 11th in the morning it was no
more to be seen. A great part of the Mountain on the North side is torn
asunder, and the one half overwhelmed the Town, leaving a deep Gulf betwixt
that and the other part of the Mountain.

Luechela had better fortune for of 2000 near half escaped, having happily had
warning by some former shakes, and by the Earths swallowing up an old Castle
which stood on a rising ground two miles from thence, in a minutes time, no
sign of its station remaining, but instead thereof a vast quantity of Waters
issued out, which in a little time made a large Lake. Upon sight whereof half
the Inhabitants of this Town fled from thence, and the rest with all the
buildings were utterly destroyed. Palonia another small Town received much
damage by the fall of a Church one of the beautifullest in Sicily, which was
shattered to pieces on the 11th, and the Dome falling crushed to Death 300
Persons and the Priest that was saying Mass, most of the remaining Inhabitants
got into the Fields, and many other Houses did not fall, so that the loss was
not so great as in other places. Buchino another large Village also, escaped
without much slaughter of People, though most of the Houses fell, at Seodia a
Village about the same bigness 150 people were killed by the fall of the
Church, and the buildings much shaken. Likewise a Lake about a mile thence,
which was two miles about, and very deep was on the 11th wholly swallowed up by
the opening of the Earth in the middle of it, and the Channel left dry Land,
which still continues. Chirramonte another Village, was utterly overthrown and
3 or 400 hundred of the Inhabitants buried in the ruins. Monterusso was shaken,
but 200 people flying to the Castle for security were with that buried in the
ground, and a Pool of faltish Water arose in the place. Vizzini a fine Town
built on the side of a Hill of the hardest stones like marble which seemed to
ensure it from such accidents, yet felt some shakes on the 9th, which
affrighted the Chief Inhabitants, so that they lived in Tents in the Fields,
but hearing no more the next day, they returned home on the 11th in the morning
and in a few hours the Town and themselves consisting of about 3500 Souls, were
swallowed up in the Earth. Modica a large Village was the only place that was
utterly ruined by the shake of the 9th, and that so very suddenly that of about
1400 People not one was left alive. A River about two miles from thence was
overwhelmed by the fall of a Mountain, but afterward found a new passage
underneath it, as has likewise happened to diverse other Rivers in Sicily, the
Earth being thrown over them like a Bridge or Vault. Bisenti another Village
lost 200 Persons and some few houses were snaken down. A little Town called
Francofome built most of Timber, though not much damaged by the Earthquakes,
yet a dreadful storm of Thunder and Lightning for three days together burnt
down the spire of the Church Steeple, which was of Wood covered with Lead. The
Nunnery of the Carmelites was almost ruined, so suddenly that five Nuns were
smothered in Bed. But not above 12 or 14 Houses more burnt.

The Town of Carlontoni was shaken on the 9th, and some Houses and People were
destroyed, which so alarmed the Bishop and Magistrates that they persuaded the
Inhabitants to go into the Fields; About four a Clock next day most of them
with the best things they could carry away deserted the Town, and the Morning
after the whole Town was overturned in a momens, and of 4000. People not above
800. were killed, by reason of their happy removal. Ragusa a renowned City for
Situation, Buildings and all other Humane Delights, had a great share in this
common Calamity. On Jan. 8. it had several shakes with a terrible storm of
Thunder and Lightning, but on the 11th. the Town House, a stately Building
with, two Churches and diverse Houses were destroyed; One of the best Streets in
the Town, inhabited by Rich Merchants and Tradesmen, sunk into the Earth in a
moment leaving a mighty Chasma or Gaping in the place; One of the Churches sunk
also, but the other fell down, the modestest Calculations reckon eight thousand
People slain, most of them of principal Quality. Within this Gap the tops of
some Houses are visible, from whence proceeds a Noxious Sulphury smell. In
Scodia only the Bishops Palace, newly built was overturned and 24. Persons were
buried in the Rubbish, the Bishop himself being absent, the rest of the Town
escaping. Specasurno another considerable Town was shaken the 9th, whereby the
Convent of the Capuchint was destroyed. All the next day so horrible a storm of
Thunder and Lightning happened as is not to be expressed or imagined, whereby the
Townhouse a very fine structure, and some other Buildings were ruined; which
frighted a few of the Inhabitants into the Flields, but the next morning in one
Minute the whole Town was laid in vast heaps of Rubbish, and the Fresh Water
Lake a Mile off was made almost dry Land, the remaining Water being Black and
Brackish, the Fish wherewith it abounded lying all dead on the Shore; The
Inhabitants that perished were accounted at least 3500. and about 300 saved
themselves by going away the day before. The Town of Scichilo suffered 20.
shakes successively on the 8th, each greater than the other; and on the 11th.
in less than two Minutes was wholly brought to desolation, and vanished out of
sight, a stinking Pool of Water succeeding, wherein the Cathedral of St.
Stephen and part of St. Salvator Steeple appears above Water. It was judged to
contain about six or seven Thousand People of which, it is thought not one made
their escape; An old strong Castle at the Eastside of the Town likewise fell,
and thirty People perished therein. At Cafamero a Village of 200. Houses the
People were so affrighted at the shake three days before successively, that on
the 11th, most of them fled to the Church to beg the asistance of St. Katherine
of Sienna in a Chapel held venerable among them, but there they met with death
altogether, the Roof of Lead falling and crushing 200, of them in the Church,
and about 20. more were killed in the Village. In Cafamero only the Timber
Houses suffered and about an hundred Inhabitants were destroyed, the rest
flying into the Fields. In the little Town of Giamontano about 400. Persons
perished in that Quarter of the Town next the River, the other part escaped. In
the Tower of Livodia, all the Timber Houses and three hundred of the
Inhabitants were destroyed, the Cathedral was burnt down by Lightning, and
likewise the famous Pine-Trees on an Hill near ajoyning. The large Town of Ja^^
was so shaken that by the fall of Houses and two Churches in the time of Mass
above 2000. People perished. The Village of La Motta famous for the Summer
Houses of the Citizens of Palermo, was wholly overthrown, a pond of water now
filling up the the place and about 200 People were thought to be lost. Lastly
M^ssina a great and famous City for Buildings Trade and Riches, was so sensibly
shaken on the 9th. that above half the Inhabitants abandoned it, and retired
into the Fields; The rest employed themselves in Prayers and Vows, and the
Churches were filled with multitudes of all Ages; Forty Eight hours Prayers
were Ordered, and many Relics were carried in Procession through the Streets.
On the 11th. Twenty Six Palaces, and many Timber Houses were overturned, and
the whole City so fearfully shaken that every one expected present Death, and
the Archbishop and the other Priests having given the People Absolution they
all endeavored to avoid the present peril by flying into the Fields where yet
they suffered much by the horrible Thunder, Lightning and Rain which continued
three days together, so that they were obliged to set up Tents for security; So
that few were killed, but most of the Churches much damaged.

Neither was there security from this terrible Visitation of God, even upon the
Water, several small Ships and vessels being cast away all along the Coast by
the fury of the Waves; the Tides being three foot higher in most parts than
was ever known before. The damage and loss in this terrible sudden and
surprising Desolation in Money, Goods, Houses and Lands is unaccountable; The
least that has been computed amounts to the value of six Millions of Ducates,
and an 100 years will scarce repair the damage: But the greatest loss was of
People, of whom there perished by this dreadful Judgment at least an Hundred and
Twenty Thousand Souls, besides a multitude maimed and wounded by the fall of
buildings which died afterward, and may be reckoned Twenty Thousand more.

In short amore Astonishing, a more Universal and more Swift Destruction was
never known; And Sicily that was one of the most Beautiful, Rich and Fruitful
Islands in the World, is now an heap of Rubbish, and a continued Desolation.

LXVII. I have before menrioned some of the Natural Causes of Earthquakes, and
the Philosophers of Italy are apt to assign the Causes of this astonishing
Calamity to proceed from the unseasonable Summer preceding, and that the many
great Rains and Heats which often succeeded each other in Sicily the last year
might occasion great store of vapors to enter into the Bowels of the Earth,
which afterward dilating themselves for want of room forced their way into the
Air with the destruction of all that opposed them. But these are only the
guesses of short-sighted Men, for the hand of Heaven seemed visible in this
terrible Devastation; And as I have before related some of the Presages that
usually preceed such sweeping Judgments; so the Prognostics which ushered in
this horrible desolation, and of which there were a Multitude of Witnesses; may
be judged intimations, and Effects of the Divine Vengeance these following
being very remarkable; That in June the Summer before Mount Aetna's Roarings
and Noise was extraordinary dreadful, which is always reckened the forerunner
of some Irruption, either of the Mount it self or some part thereabout; And May
15. preceeeding, two hours before Sunset the Sky being Clear, the Heavens
suddenly appeared all in Flames, without either Lightning or Thunder, which
continued about a quarter of an hour; And at the same time two Rainbows were
seen in the Air directly above the City pointing as usually toward the Earth,
and a third with the points upward toward Heaven, being all three extreme
bright; and that which occasioned astonishment in the Spectators, and made it
really Supernatural, was, that during the whole time of the appearance of the
Rainbows, not the least Cloud was visible in any part of the Horizon; In July
following in one of the Churches of Carania, Father Baletti a Person much
Reverenced by the Common People, lay buried. whose Tomb was much adored, and
daily Prayers and Offerings made at his Shrine; It happened that one merning
when the Doors of the Church were opened, the Image of this Saint which was
erected on his Tomb, was fallen flat on the ground. It was thought at first to
be a common accident, but being again set up in its place for seven or eight
nights together it was found constantly fallen on the ground, and at last was
sorted to be said flat upon the Tomb; where it continned till the ruin of the
Church and City together; The People were taught to believe. that about an
hundred twenty years since, a Flood of Brimstone and Fire breaking out of Mount
Aetna, and approaching with great fury and the destruction of all in its
passage toward the Gates of Catania, the Citizens expecting nothing but
immediate Ruin from it, this Holy Man by his Prayers and Exorcisms put a stop
thereto in the presence of all the People, and thereby prevented the
approaching desolation. Again in February before, about Sunset the Counntrey
People about Alari a small village within three Miles of Catania verily thought
they saw that Village all in Flames which showed at first but little, yet in a
quarter of an hour all the Houses seemed on a light Fire; which appearance
continued about six minutes, and then seemed to decay for want of Fuel. The
People that saw it ran with all speed thither to help to quench it, and all
along the Road they imagined it increased, but being come thither they found
all but an Apparition, or rather Prognostic of the Calamity that some Months
after befell the place.

LXVIII. This terrible Earthquake communicated it self to the Island of Malta
on the one side and to Calabria on the other. All the account we have of the
Desolations in the former, is in a Letter dated from thence Jan. 16. 1692.
published by Authority. They began to perceive it on the ninth, and next day
they felt five or six shakes, and on the 11th about 3 afternoon it was so
violent and lasted so long that the Inhabitants believed the whole City would
have been instantly destroyed, the Bells of the Metropolis of the Island rung,
the Roof of the Church of our Lady de Pelay was thrown down, with part of that
of St. Laurence. The Church and College of the Jesuits also suffered very
much, but the Cathedral and the Church of la Gusmane received the greatest
damage, and are so ruined that they can hardly be repaired, The rest of the
Churches and most of the Houses are extremely shattered and deferted by the
Inhabitants. The Great Master of the Order was then abroad a hunting, with a
great number of other Persons, who were all in danger to have been buried in
the Gulf that was made in the midst of a Rock almost under their feet. It is
reckoned that the losses occasioned by this Earthquake in the Isle of Malta
amount to two hundred thousand Crowns. The Grand Master having understood what
had happened in Sicily, and that their principal Cities from whence they had
their sustenance were ruined, he instantly dispatched away several Galleys laden
with Corn to relieve those wretched People but arriving at the Port of Syracuse
there were such mighty Thunders and Lightnings that they could not enter in.
They went back to Sea and staid for better weather, and then made a second
attempt, but there arose so violent a Wind that they were forced to return for
fear of being caft away.

LXIX. The Monthly Mercury gives an account that toward the end of September
1693. Another great Earthquake happened at Catania, and the Parts adjoining,
but, the damage that ensued was very small, Nevertheless it was observed that
during the most violent shakes the top of Mount Aetna was considerably sunk.
The Duke of Canastra Vicar General who was then about Catanea, sent certain
Persons to view the Mount, who perceived that the top was fallen in above 600
foot within the compass of about 2000 feet, and that all the Earth was tumbled
down into the gaping Chasm which was about six miles in circumference. At the
same time all the Fountains of Taurmina and parts adjacent dried up, and the
Earth opened at the foot of an Hill which is about a mile distant, and out of
it issued forth five or six Torrents of Sulphurous Waters of different colors.
These new Accidents have put the trembling Inhabitants of Sicily into fresh
Consternations of some impending mischief ready again to overwhelm them.

LXX. I shall conclude these Relations with some natural Reflections of an
ingenous Author. These two or three years past (says he) have been general for
Earthquakes they have been felt all over Europe, as well as in America. Some
have been of opinion that the Earth was a great Animal, and that the shivering
of some Ague Fit was the Cause of his trembling. The greatest part of the
Heathen Philosophers accused the Stars of these disorders. But to speak one
word of the Causes of them, I say there are two which are Natural, the
subteraneal Fires and Winds are the first cause. The Bowels of the Earth are
full of Mines of Coal, Sulphur and Salt Petre, and when it happens that one
Stone falling upon another strikes Fire by Collision, those combustible matters
being kindled, and the Winds blowing up the flame, they cause most terrible
overturnings of the Earth, unless they find Outlets as in Aetna, Vesuvius, and
other Mountains of the same Nature. The second natural cause proceeds from the
Water that is under the Earth, which undermining the Foundations that support
the subterraneal Vaults which extend themselves for several Leagues together in
diverse parts, these Vaults deprived of their usual support overpressed by their
own weight, sink down, and all of a sudden impetuously pushing forward the Air
and the Water enclosed in the Earth, give the upper part such violent and
hoistrous jolts as quickly overturn the weaker structures of human Art, which
must of necessity give way to those more than Gygantick Impetuosities, that
rend and shatter the more solid frame of Nature it self. And of this there is
no question to be made, considering what so many Authors have written of the
vast Regions that are under the Earth, they say, that there is in the Island of
Malta a Hill within the Concavities whereof inhabits a famous Plantation of
People that have no other day but what they see through the Clefts of the
Rocks, this place is called Gaar Kebir, or the Great Cavern. In the Territory
of Viterbo in Tuscany there is a large subterraneal Borough called Meonia,
over which there are Meadows, through which you shall see the smoke of that
B^rrough arise. But all this is nothing in comparison of what Martin Martinius
relates in his Chemical Atlas. He reports that there is a Mountain in China
which is full of great Concavities in several places, which are as it were
bored through, and serve as Roads from one Province to another. That there are
within this Mountain Lakes, Rivers, Fish, Meadows and Animals of several sorts,
and that it would require half a years time to survey and describe all these
Caverns.

LXXI. To close all with some Moral and Divine Reflections. Who does not start
at the thought of such tremblings of the Earth, as we have already given large
accounts of? In what condition can a man be safe (says Seneca, speaking of
Earthquakes) when the World it self is shaken, and the only thing that passes
for fixed and immovable in the Universe, trembles and deceives us? Whither
shall we fly for security if wheresoever we are the danger be still under our
feet? Upon the cracking of an House every man takes himself to flight, and
leaves all to save his life, but what retreat is there where that which should
support fails us, when the soundations not only of Cities but even of the World
it self opens and wavers, what help or what comfort where fear it self can
never carry us off? An Enemy may be kept at a distance with a Wall, a Castle
may put a stop to an Army, a Port may protect us from the fury of a Tempest.
Fire it self does not follow him that runs away from it, a Vault may defend us
against Thunder, and we may quit the place in a Pestilence, there is some
Remedy in all these evils. Or however, no man ever knew a whole Nation
destroyed by Lightning. A Plague may unpeople a Town, but it will not carry it
away, there is no Evil of such an extent, so inevitable, so greedy so publicly
Calamitous as an Earthquake. For it does not only devour Houses and single
Towns but ruins whole Countries and Nations either overturning or swallowing
them up, without so much as leaving any Footstep or Mark of what they were.
Some People have a greater horror for this Death than any other. To be taken
away alive out of the number of the living. As if all Mortals by what means
soever were not to come to the same end, death, and it is not to be regarded
whether I am crushed to death by one Stone or by a whole Mountain. Whether I
perish by the fall of an House or fall under the burden of the whole Earth,
whether I be swallowed up alone or with a thousand more for Company. We should
therefore arm our selves against that blow, which can neither be avoided nor
foreseen. It is not the abandoning those places that we find infested with
Earthquakes which will secure us, for there is no Place can be warrant against
them. What if the Earth be not moved? It is moveable, for the whole body of it
lies under the same Law and exposed to danger, only some at one time and some
at another. As it is in great Cities where all the Houses are subject to
ruintho' they do not all fall together. So in the body of the Earth, now this
part fails and then that. Tire was formerly subject to Earthquakes. In Asia 12
Cities were swallowed up in one night. Achaia and Maccdonia have had their
turns, and now Compagnia. The Fate goes round and strikes at last where it has
a great while passed by. It falls out: oftener, it is true, in some places than
in others, but no place is totally free and exempt. And it is not only men, but
Cities, Coasts, nay the shores and the very Sea it self that suffers under the
dominion of Fate. And yet we are so vain as to promise our selves some kind of
assurance in the goods of Fortune never considering that the very ground we
stand upon is unstable, and it is not the frailty of this or that Place, but
the quality of every spot of it, for not one inch of it is so compacted as not
to admit many causes of its Resolution. And though the Earth remain entire, the
parts of it may yet be broken.

Thus the three Heathen Philosophers strove to sortifie themselves against
these calamities which they judged inevitable, not considering them as
punishments of their sins and enormities inflicted upon them by Divine Justice.
Hear now what Christians who are instructed in a better School say of them.

How astonishing (says a worthy Person of our Nation) are the fearful Effects
which Earthquakes have had produced in all Ages? as we may find them in
Histories and Philosophical Discourses, where you may read of Rocks torn in
pieces, Mountains not cast down only, but removed; Hills raised not out of
Valleys only, but out of Seas; Fires breaking out of Waters; Stones and Cinders
belched up; Rivers Changed; Seas Dislodged; Earth opening, Towns Swallowed up,
and many other such hideous Events. Of which kind our own Memories can furnish
us with many at home, although these colder Climates are more rarely infested
with such frightful Accidents.

And of all the Animadversions that Divine Justice gives men, there is none
more horrid or less Evitable than this of Earthquakes; For what assurance can
we hope for here below, if the Earth quake under our feet? where can we think
to escape danger, if the most solid thing of all the World do shake? If that
which sustains all other things above us, threaten us with sinking under our
feet? What Sanctuary shall we find to defend us from an Evil that does
incompass us round? And whither can we withdraw, if the Gulphs which open
themselves shut up our passages on all sides? With what horror are Men struck
when they hear the Earth groan? When her trembling succeeds her complaints,
when Houses are loosned from their Foundations, when the Roofs fall upon their
heads Heads, and their Pavement sinks under their Feet? What hope is there to
be had in so general a disorder when fear cannot be fenced by flight? In other
Cases there is some outlet whereby to escape an Evil. An Enemy is beaten from
the Bulwark he had possessed himself; of Earthworks are opposed to the
Thundering Cannon; Winds which raise Tempest. deliver us from them, and after
having a long time tossed us to and fro, they cast us on the Shore; Houses
serve us for Sanctuaries against the injuries of the Air and VVeather; If a Man
will resign his goods to the Fi^^ he may save his Person; Thunder hurts not
those who hide themselves in Caverns; When the Pestilence infects whole
Cities, we may shun the Contagion by going into the Country; And if it
dispeople Towns it does not throw down Houses. But an Earthquake incloses what
it overthrows, and wages War not with some few Houses only, but whole
Provinces, and sometimes leaves nothing behind it to inform postery of its
Outrages; More Insolent than Fire which spar^^ Rocks; More Gree^y than the Sea
which vomits up Shi^wracks; Mnre Cruel than the Conqueror who spares VValls; it
swallows and devours whaesoever it oVerturns. The Sea is Subject to its Empire,
and Mariners confess that those Storms are most dangerous which are occasioned
by Earthquakes.

This misfortune is common to all Kingdoms; Since Man became Criminal, all
parts of the Earth are become moveable, and stedfastness must be no longer
looked for in the World, since Innocence is banished thence by Injustice. This
disorder is the punishment of our Sin; and Reason a well as Faith does
sufficiently assure us, that the Universe would never have been agitated with
these furious Accidents during the state of Original Righteousness; Wherefore
should Gods Anger have Armed the Elements against his Faithful and Obedient
Subjects? Wherefore should he have overthrown all this works to destroy
Innocent Men? Why should it have overwhelmed the Inhabitants of the Earth with
the ruins thereof, if they had not been sinful? Why should it have buried
those in the Bowels of the Earth who were not to dye? Let us then conclude that
Earthquakes are the Effects of Sin.

Appendix.
HAving given an Account of the most remarkable and tremendous Earthquakes in
the World from the Creation to this time, I think it may not be improper to add
two or three unusual Occurrences and strange Passages that have happened of
another kind, but altogether as surprising as the former.

I. The first shall be the Copy of a Letter sent from an Abbot in France giving
a Relation of an Hermit living in that Country who seems to revive the ancient
simplicity and innocence of that solitary Life to which some pious men in
former ages confined themselves thereby to be freed from the noise and hurries
of the World, and to devote their minds wholly to the Service of God. Which
being so very unlike the lazy Luxurious Lives of the generallity of the present
Romish Monks and Friars, may be somewhat diverting, after the reading the
former melancholy Relations; And I shall give it you in the Abbots own words as
I sind them in the Memoirs of the Present State of Europe for the Month of May
1692.

Sir, It is now eleven years and an half that the famous Father Hermit has been
received into the Wood of my Abbey, but I can assure you that at this hour I
know him no more than the first day I saw him. This venerable Old Man has been
so careful to conceal his Name, Family, Country, Age, and all that could make
him known, that neither I, nor any of his Brethren, nor, as I fancy, any other
Person has ever known any thing of him touching his Bitth. Having told him one
day that the example of a man of his Quality had mighty Efficacy. He cried out
immediately, telling me that he was nothing, and that if the rumor went he was
something, he would depart the Province the next day, insomuch that I never
mentioned it to him but once since. It is now about a month that the occasion
lay fair for so doing. He told me with some heat that all that was said of his
Birth was Lie and Fiction.

About seven years ago he was grievously sick and forsaken by his Physicians.
The most ancient of his Brethren, and whom he most cherished conjured him to
make himself known at least to them, promising never to discover it till after
his death. He refused him with a rebuke, telling him that it was above 40 years
that he had labored to conceal himself, and that he would make him lose a work
of a so many years in one quarter of an hour. The truth is, that in the
Province of Burgundy where he remained a long while, the report ran that he was
the Natural Son of King Henry IV. and as soon as he came hither the same report
was scattered here. What gave occasion to it so far as I can judge, is his
great presence and his Majestic Air, which causes him to be beloved and
respected generally by all People, his noble and easy carriage and behavior,
his countenance wherein are observed many seatures of that of Henry le Grand,
his quick wit, and gay hamour, but more especially that profound silence he
observes, to prevent his being known, for the more he would be concealed, the
more People strive to know who he is, and the less he speaks of himself the
more he is discourst of. As concerning his Age, it is difficult to know it
exactly. When he came hither which was in June 1676 he told me he was 70 years
old. Since he has said he was about the Age of the Bishop of Angiers who is
above ninety. He formerly told me he had seen the Moors go out of Spain when
they were driven thence, and that he was then tall. In fine his Brethren by
other circumstances affirm him to be ninety four years old.

Now follows what I know of his Life, and which I have learnt from himself.
That until the Age of 20 years he had been well educated, which was the Cause
of his great Vigor. That he had born Arms without being wounded. That thinking
to retire from the World, he had examined all the different manners of living
in the Religious Orders, and that nothing had pleased him so much as the
Hermitick Life, after the manner it subsisted in the time of the first Hermits
of the East. That this was that he embraced. That for this purpose he had gone
into Italy, and had retired into a Forest that belonged to the Republic of
Venice whence he had been driven by the frequent visits of the people of that
Country. That thence he went into Germany, and that to see a brave Hermit he
willingly went 3 or 400 Leagues. That being since retired into the Kingdom of
France, he had remained in Lorrain, Champagne, in Lionnois, in Burgundy, and
lastly in Anjou. And that where ever he had been he had built Hermitages, and
had assembled Companions. I fancy you will not be sorry that I give you such a
particular account of his establishment in this Province, since I am a Witness
of it. This good old man having left the Diocese of Langres, by reason (as his
Brethren told me) of the report that was spread there, of his being the Son of
Henry IV. of France. He took the Resolution of going to settle with one of his
Companions in Normandy upon the Sea side. Having fallen down as far as Saumur
upon the River Loire, he understood there was a Forest in that Neighborhood
where he might erect a fine Hermitage, This Forest is called the Wood of
Brossuy belonging to M. de la Meilleraye. The next day he went with his
Companion to view that Forest, but having found no Water in it, he lost hopes
of being able to retire thither. At his coming out of the Wood this good old
Man being wearied, and perceiving our Abbey he came to it to refresh himself. I
received him and falling presently to discourse of solitude and retreat, he
reasoned so well and sensibly of it, that I looked upon him as a solitary,
filled with the Maxims and Sentiments of one of the Primitive Hermits. In the
sequel of our Conversation he told me the occasion that had brought him into
our Country, and that he only sought a little Water and Wood to make him a
Retreat, I offered him a small space of ground planted with Coppice, near a
fine Spring and about a mile from our Abbey, he accepted it, but I thought sit
to tell him, by way of precaution, that besides the place I offered him, he
could not expect any great assistance from me, because our Abbey was small and
ruinous, and my Companions would complain if they saw me engage to build and
furnish an Hermitage with Requisits; Further I was in a Country where were
many poor who would murmur if I rendered my self incapable of relieving them.
However we would supply Wood and other Materials for building of Cells, and if
they could not subsist with the labor of their hands, we, in their necessity
would share our bread with them. To this he answered what merits to be known.
That he only sought a little Wood to hide himself, and a little Water to build
some Cell with Earth, That as to his Nourishment and Cloths, they were the
least of his Concerns, and the smallest of his Cares, That his Brethren and he,
knew how to bring up Bees, which would furnish them with Clothes, and the
labor of their hands would give them bread sufficient. That they knew how to
make Panniers, of which the dearest sold were such as they gave for nothing,
That they were Carpenters, Bricklayers, and that they had nor need of any
Workman, no not so much as to make their Clothes. That they would not be a
burden to any body. That they would not beg, nor demand any thing of any
whoever.

All this proved exactly true, They have a great number of Bees, They make a
great number of Panniers, Baskets and other Osier works which they give away,
without having ever sold any for a Penny. They want neither Cloths, nor any of
the things necessary for Life; They are a charge to none, nor ever ask any
thing, nay are loath to receive what is offered them. They have built nine or
ten Cells and a very pretty Chapel. They have them selves grub'd up a part of
their Wood to make a Garden and Orchards, and to plant Osiers. This Hermitage
is fine and the admiration of all People. And since you would know after what
manner they Live therein, I must tell you, That they rise very early; That they
begin the day with Meditation and Prayer, That then they go to Prayers in the
Chapel, for they have a Priest among them; After they go to work till ten a
Clock, then they assemble to hear the reading of some good Book, and then they
dine. After Dinner they go to work till five a Clock, Then they go into their
Chapel, perform half an hours Meditation, and say some Prayers and from thence
they go to the Refectory to take their repast, after which they go again to
work upon their Osiers till ten at night; During which one of them in their
turns reads some good Book, or the good Father gives them instruction; Their
drink is water; wherein they put Juniper Berries; this they call Genevrette;
Their usual meat are Pulse, Legumes and Fruits, and what providence sends them,
for they never buy either Flesh or Fish; Their Cells are small and very low,
their movables consist in a Straw Bed, a little Table, and the Representation
of Christ on the Cross, some Paper Picture, and some devout Books. They are
Clothed in White, wear no Linen, have no Shoes but Wooden Sandals and go bare
Legged; They Live under che obedience of the Bishop of Angiers, who loves them
tenderly; They make no Vows but they practice them exactly; They never Beg;
They keep no Box; They give a great deal of Alms, and the poor are never seen
to go from their Hermitage empty handed; The Father has a very tender Heart,
especially toward poor Gentlemen, whom he gladly assists; They seldom stir
abroad unless it be to the Parish Church on Sundays and great Festivals, and
never eat in the Neighborhood; The Father is neither a Priest nor Clerk, but a
Person of great reading, especially in History. This is what I know concerning
this Old Man, but his Birth is altogether unknown to me; I know People pretend
to find additional marks and Conjectures sufficiently strong to establish the
report that goes about it; but as these are only Hearsays. and not built upon
any thing he himself has said, little credit is to be afforded to them.

II. The second strange Occurrence or Accident I shall mention is the Abstract
of another Letter inserted in the Memoirs of the Present State of Europe, for
the Month of November, 1693. written from Breslaw a City in Silesia one of the
Provinces of the German Empire, and Dated Sep. 7. 1693.

Sir just as I was closing this Letter, there came to me a Person and told me
that the Locusts which are like Grasshoppers, appeared in the Air, I went out of
the City with a vast crowd of People the better to see this great Prodigy; It Is
an incredible thing, and if I had not been an Eye witness of it my self I
should hardly have believed it. They flew in the Air about a man's height
distant from the ground, and reached up above the highest Steeple, making a
noise like a violent wind; and were as thick together as the Snow commonly
falls; They past the Oder, and then Directed their course toward Poland and
Brandenburgh, and they continue this March to the very Instant I am writing,
which is about five Clock in the Evening. It is a frightful sight; These
Locusts or Grasshoppers are the length of ones Finger' and of Green, Brown and
Yellow Colors. Letters from Austria and Bomia spoke of them a fortnight ago,
but no Body gave credit to them; At night they rest and extend themselves at
least 16. English Miles in circumference; They eat up everything, Herbs, Grass,
Leaves and whatever is Green, and even the Barks of Trees; They march every day
about 12. or 16. Miles; Yesternight they took up their Quarters some two
Leagues from hence, and this night perhaps may lodge in the adjacent Parts, or
in the Meadow grounds there about. The Country People run in great Companies to
the places where they think they will light, and with the noise of Drums and
Shooting off Guns, fright them a little farther. They write from all parts that
these Creatures are not only venomous but they even leave an Infection upon the
Grass and every thing they touch; In a Village not far from this Town it is
said, that 200. Swine were poisoned with them. The thing is amazing but yet
true; One can hardly believe that it were possible there should be so many of
these Insects in the World; for they are three hours in passing by, and extend
themselves three or four Leagues in Length. Some will tell you that they
observed upon their Wings the number of the year, 1693. and certain Hebrew
Characters; but I must confess that I could discover no such things, otherwise
I should have preserved some of these Wings.

In a second Letter from Breslaw, Dated Sept. 14. 1693. We have this further
account.

The Grasshoppers I mentioned in my last, remain yet within four Leagues or
sixteen English Miles of this place, and the wether having been a little cold,
all the ground round about is covered over with them a foot thick; some
contagious Disease may proably be the consequence. The next day which was the
Eight Instant the March of these Creatures yet continued near this City till
two a Clock, and in the Morning at Sunrising abundance more were observed to
pass by; some whereof being weary dropped down in our Streets.

These two Letters were written by a Person of Note. whose Name there is no
occasion to tell, but being a Man of Integrity, and writing nothing but what he
saw, it would be some what strange not to give credit to his Testimony.

III. The Third and Last remarkable Instance I shall give is, An Account of
Three Wonderful and Miraculous Cures lately wrought by the Power of God, and
the Divine Efficacy of a sincere Faith in his Blessed Son Jesus Christ.

The first is the remarkable cure of Mary Maillard, a French Girl, of Thirteen
Years of Age, living at St. James's Westminster (of which a Relation of
undoubted Truth and Veracity, with a multitude of undeniable Attestations is
lately published.) This Young Maid was very Lame from her Birth, and as she
grew in Years appeared still more deformed in her going, occasioned by a
diflocation in her left Thigh, so that in walking, by throwing her Body first
on one side, and then on the other; she became ridiculous to the Children in
the Streets, who often abused her with ill Names, and threw Dirt at her, to
show how hateful she was in their sight. This ill Treatment much afflicted her,
particularly upon Sunday November. 26. 1693. when coming from Church she met with
her former Young Persecutors, who slockt about her, and bespattered her Clothes
with Dirt; upon her coming home she grieved and wept extremely, complaining to
her Mistress of the Abuses offered her, who exhorted her to be patient, and put
her Trust in God. In the Evening she took the Bible, and in reading the second
Chapter of St. Mark, wherein is related the Miraculous Cure of one sick of the
Palsy; she seemed very much affected therewith, and told her Mistress that she
could not but wonder at the Unbelief of the Jews, adding, That if such a thing
should happen now, she would soon run and be Cured too; she had no sooner spoke
but her great Pains which she formerly selt began to return with more violence,
and suddenly stretching out her Leg, the Bone snapt into its place, and her
Foot and Knee were instantly restored to their natural posture; Upon which her
Pains immediately went off, and she supposed a Voice said to her, Thou art
healed; and she was fully Cured of her Lameness walking up and down the
Chamber, and so she still continues, telling all that come to see, of which
there are great numbers daily, that she was Lame, but thanks be to God she is
not now so, and that she was recovered by Reading a Chapter in the Gospel
without any Humane Help.

This Remarkable Instance of Almighty Power and Goodness has been since
followed with Two other of the like Nature, of which I shall now give such a
brief and true Relation, with the Names of the Places and Parties concerned
therein, as will leave no room for the severest Critic to question the
Certainty thereof.

One is the Admirable Cure of Mrs. Savage, the Wife of Mr. Savage, a Minister,
and Schoolmaster living in Horse shoe-Alley in Morefields. This Gentlewoman had
a very troublesome Lameness in her Hand from a Child, her Fingers being so
contracted, that her Hand seemed almost wholly saut, insomuch that it was of
little use to he.

In December last 1693. she had likewise some Weakness and Illness of Body, and
about the latter end of the same Month, some Means being administered unto her
for the same, her Husband thought it necessary to implore the Blessing of God
thereupon, by Fasting and Prayer, and accordingly went to Prayer with her;
before he had done, she found a real Amendment of her Distemper as she declared
afterward, and that she was much better than she had been a long time before:
After the Duty was ended, as they were sitting by the Fire, the Story of the
French Girl aforementioned came into his mind, of which he had heard by two
Persons, yet could not give full Credit to the Truth thereof, but used some
some expressions of Blessing God if it were true: At length a strong Impression
came upon his Spirit, that his Wifes Hand might be Cured by the same Means that
the Girl's was (if it were true;) And thereupon he took the Bible to look out
the same Chapter, by the Reading whereof (it was said) she was Healed; but not
being exactly informed which it was, they fell upon the 8th Chapter of St.
Matthew, and Reading there of the Faith of the Leper, who said, Lord, if theu
will thou can make make me clean. He with an Extraordinary Emotion of Spirit
took hold of his Wifes Hand, and asked her if she had Faith to believe that her
hand could be Cured; adding, that his Faith was as much as the Lepers; for
though he did absolutely believe the Power of Christ, yet he put an If to the
Will of Christ, or words to that effect: To which she replied, That she had
Faith in the Power of Christ, that he was as able now he is in Heaven, to Cure
her, as he was when upon Earth, but whether it was his pleasure, or whither he
saw it good for her, she could not tell; but if he thought fit, she doubted not
but he would Heal her, or to that pupose: Her Husband proceeded in Reading till
he came to the Faith of the Centurion about his Servant, when on a sudden she
felt a pain in her Knuckles and Fingers, and pulling off her Glove, her Hand
instantly stretched out straight, and became like the other, and she was
immediately Cured of what was judged by all to be incurable. Her Hand likewise
received strength as well as straightness; and whereas it used to be extremely
cold it is now as warm as the other: The Gentlewoman has also received such
strength of Body, that whereas formerly she was scarce able to walk half a
Mile, she can now go three or four Mile: She still continues in Health, both
her self and Husband blessing and Praising God for his wonderful and miraculous
Mercy and Goodness toward them. The Truth hereof will be confirmed by
themselves, to any who inquire at their House aforementioned as well as by
diverse others.

The last Relation is as certain as the two former, of which I shall likewise
give the Names of the Persons, and their Places of abode, as it came in a
Letter from Hitchin in Hartferdshire, as follows.

Hitchin, Jan. 6. 1693. Dear Sir, Yours I received the last Night; As to the
Person you enquire after, and the Lord's work upon him, take it in short as
follows: His Name is David Wright, about 27 or 28 Years of Age; he lived two
or three Miles from hence for some Years, in the capacity of a Shepherd, his
Distemper of Body by the Evil rendering him incapable of any hard Work: At
Michaelmas 1693. he desired a Religious Woman to take him into her Service,
which she was unwilling to do, because he was a profane Wretch, and much given
to Swearing and other Vices, but upon his promising a Reformation, and that he
would go to Hear the Word Preached, she Hired him; yet he afterward went on in
his Evil Courses, and would not go to Hear: But Nov. 29. last past, having
notice that there was a Sermon to be Preached at Hitchin, by one Mr. Edward
Coals, a worthy Minister, his Mind was so much sixth to go and Hear him, that
notwithstanding the same day he had a Brother came for him with a Horse to go
some Miles another way about urgent Business of his own, yet he could by no
means be prevailed with to go with him, of which Resolution he says he can give
no reason in himself: He came to Hear, and the Word made such deep Impression
upon his Mind, that his Soul was Converted, and his Body Healed at the same
time: He declares that while the Minister was Preaching his hard Heart was
softened, and the Eyes of his Mind enlightened, whereby he had Faith in his
Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and that at the same time he found his
Body Cured of the Evil under which he had long Languished, and is fully
persuaded he shall never have it again: But however God may please to do as to
that, this is certain, that he has been very well from the 29th of November to
this very day: But the Change upon his Soul is more remarkable than the Cure of
his Body; To see such a poor grossly ignorant Wretch so suddenly Changed, and to
hear him blessing and praising of God, and admiring his Grace and Love to him,
That he who knew nothing one hour before, should now speak so sensibly of Jesus
Christ and heavenly things; This is to the astonishment and admiration of all
that knew him: As to his bodily Distemper, he has had the King's Evil for about
steen or sistxteen Years past, and was formerly Touched by King Charles the
Second: At first he was forced to keep his Bed for several Weeks together,
great Pains and diverse running Sores upon him; but for about twelve Years past
he has been in Service for the most part, yet never in Health all the while,
but had Running Sores which were sometimes skinn'd over and swelled, and then
he was at the worst, and felt most Pain till they broke and run again: He has
had these Sores in many parts of his Body, of which the Scars are visible, and
two continued in the same place in the small of his Back a long while, and at
the time when he came to Hear the Sermon aforementioned they were skinn'd over,
and swelled, so that he was in very great Pain, and could not keep pace with
his Company; but while he was Hearing, the swelling of his Sores sunk
insensibly, and he was well on a sudden, and all his Pain was gone; so that as
they returned home, he went before them leaping, rejoicing, and praising God
for his great Mercy and Loving kindness to him all the way he went. After he
came home he continued to admire the exceeding Grace of God to so vile and
ignorant a Sinner as he was, and spent most part of the Night in this heavenly
Exercise, and still remains in this admirable frame of Heart. Much more might
be mentioned, but this may suffice at present from Yours, etc.

We whose Names are hereunto subscribed, do hereby attest and declare. That
living in the same Family with David Wright, we were Eye and Ear-witnesses of
the Truth of the foregoing particulars concerning him, and in confirmation of
the Verity thereof, we have hereto put our Hands. Slape Drever, Tho. Drever.
Both Sons to the Mistress of the House with whom David Wright dwelt. Thomas
Child, Joseph Morgan.

In short, as Atheism and Profaneness, it may be, never more abounded than in
the present Age; so the Almighty has not lest himself without witness of his
Power and Providence in the World, by several Examples both of Judgment and
Mercy; And a Race of Impious Wretches being risen up, who deny the Divinity of
our Blessed Lord and Savior; The Almighty by these repeated Instances of
Supernatural Power seems at this time loudly to assert and proclaim the Godhead
of our Glorious Redeemer, since such Miracles are new wrought by Faith in Jesus
Christ, as very much resemble those done by himself when he was in the State of
Humanity.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultrey;
near Cheapside.
History.
1. ENglands Monarchs: Or, A Compendious Relation of the most remarkable
Transactions from Julius Caesar to this present; adorned with Poems, and the
Picture of every Monarch, from K. Will. the Conqueror to K. Will. and Q. M.
With a List of the Nobility, and the number of the Lords and Commons in both
Houses of Parliament. Pr. one shilling.

2. THE History of the House of Orange: Or, a Brief Relation of the Glorious
and Magnanimous Achievements of His Majesty's Renowned Predecessors, and
likewise of His own Heroic Actions, till the Late Wonderful Revolution.
Together with the History of William and Mary, King and Queen of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, etc. Being an Impartial Account of the most
Remarkable Passages and Transactions in these Kingdoms from Their Majesty's
Happy Accession to the Throne to this time. By R. B. Price One Shilling.

3. THE History of the two late Kings, Charles the II. and James the II. being
an Impartial account of the most remarkable Transactions, and observable
passages, during their Reigns, and the secret French and Popish Intrigues
managed in those Times. Together with a Relation of the happy Revolution, and
the Accession of Their present Majeles, K. William and Q. Mary to the Throne,
Feb. 13. 1689. Pr. 1 s.

4. THE History of Oliver Cromwell, being an Impartial Account of all the
Battles, Sieges, and other Military Archievements, wherein he was engaged in
England, Scotland and Ireland; and likewise of his Civil Administrations, while
he had the Supreme Government, till his Death. Relating only matters of Fact,
without Reflection or Observation. By R. B. pr. 1 s.

5. THE Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland. containing a particular and
impartial Account of all the Battles, Sieges, and other remarkable
Transactions, Revolutions and Accidents, which happened from the beginning of
the Reign of K. Charles I. With his Trial at large, and last speech; and the
most considerable matters till 1660. With Pictures of several Accidents. Price
one shilling.

6. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and Present State of
London and Westminster, showing the Foundations, Walls, Gates, Towers, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Schools, Inns of Courts, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with
the most remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and other
ocourrences, for above 903 years past, Pr. 1 s.

7. ADmirable Curiosities, Rarities and Wonders in England, Scotland, and
Ireland; or an account of many remarkable persons and places; and likewise of
the Battles, Sieges, prodigious Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Thunders,
Lightnings, Fires, Murders and other Occurences and Accidents for many hundred
years past: Together with the Natural and Artificial Rarities in every County
in England With several curious Sculptures. Price one shilling

8. THE History of the Kingdom of Ireland, being an Account of the Ancient
Inhabitants, and of all the Battles, Sieges, and other considerable
Transactions both Civil and Military in that Country, from the first Conquest
thereof, under King Henry II. till its entire Reduction, by His Majesty's Arms.
Together with the most remarkable Passages, that have since happened there to
this time. Also a List of the present Nobility of that Kingdom. By R. B. Pr. 1s.

9. THE History of the Kingdom of Scotland, Containing an Account of the most
remarkable Transactions and Revolutions of State in that Kingdom during the
Reigns of 72. Kings and Queens to this time. Intermixed with variety of strange
Accidents, Prodigious Appearances, and other considerable Events. And a List of
the present Nobility of that Kingdom. By R. B. Pr. 1s.

10. THE English Empire in America, or a prospect of His Majesty's Dominions in
the West Indies, namely, New Foundland, New England, New York, New Jersey,
Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina, Bermudas, Barbuda, Anguila,
Monserrat, Dominica, St. Vincent, Antego, Mevis or Nevis, St. Christophers,
Barbados and Jamaica: With an account of their Discovery, Situation and
Product: The Religion and Manners of the Indians, and other excellencies of
these Countries: Illustrated with Maps, and Pictures of the strange Fruits,
Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Insects, Serpents and Monsters found in those parts of
the World. Price one shilling.

11. A View of the English Acquisitions in Guinea and the East Indies: With an
Account of the Religion, Government, Wars, strange Customs, Beasts, Serpents,
Monsters, and other Observables in those Countries. And among others, the Life
and Death of Mahomet the Grand Impostor, with the Principal Doctrines of the
Turkish Religion as they are displayed in the Alcoran. Two Letters, one written
by the Great Mogul, and the other by the King of Sumatra in the East Indies, to
our K. James I. of an extravagant style. The cruel Executions in those parts,
with the manner of the Women's burning themselves with their dead Husbands. Pr.
1 s.

12. THE English Hero: Or, Sir Francis Drake Revived. Being a full Account of
the dangerous Voyages, admirable Adventures, notable Discoveries, and
Magnanimous Achievements of that Valiant and Renowned Commander. As, I. His
Voyage in 1572. to Nombre de Dios in the West Indies, where they saw a Pile of
Bars of Silver near 70 foot long, 12. foot broad, and 10. foot high II. His
incompassing the whole World in 1577. which he performed in two years and ten
months, gaining a vast quantity of Gold and Silver. III. His Voyage into
America in 1585. and taking the Towns of St. Jago, St. Domingo, Carthagena, and
St. Augustine. IV. His last Voyage into those Countries in 1595. with the
manner of his Death and Burial. Revised, Corrected, and very much enlarged,
reduced into Chapters with Contents, and beautified with Pictures By R. B.
Prince One Shilling.

13. TWo Journeys to Jerusalem, Containing first, An account of the Travels of
two English Pilgrims some years since, and what Admirable Accidents befell them
in their Journey to Jerusalem, Grand Cairo, Alexandria, etc. 2. The Travels of
14 English-Merchants in 1669. from Scanderoon to Tripoly, Joppa, Ramah,
Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Jericho, the River of Jordan, the Lake of Sodom and
Gomorrah, and back again to Aleppo. To which is added, a Relation of the great
Council of the Jews, assembled in the plains of Ajayday in Hungary, 1650. to
examine the Scriptures concerning Christ. By S. B. an English man there
present: With the notorious delusion of the Jews, by a counterfeit Messiah, or
false Christ at Smyrna, in 1666 and the event thereof. Lastly, The Extirpation
of the Jews throughout Persia in 1666. Epistle of Agbarus to our Savior, with
our Saviors Answer: Beautified with Pictures. Pr. 1s.

14. EXtraordinary Adventures of several Famous Men: With the strange Events,
and signal mutations and changes in the Fortunes of diverse Illustrious places
and persons in all Ages; being an acount of a multitude of stupendous
Revolutions, accidents, and observable matters in diverse States and Provinces
throughout the World; With Pictures. Pr. 1 s.

15. THE History of the Nine Worthies of the World: Three whereof were
Gentiles: 1. Hector Son of Priamus King of Troy. 2. Alexander the great King of
Macedon, and Conqueror of the World. 3. Julius Caesar first Emperor of Rome;
Three Jews. 4. Joshua Captain General and Leader of Israel into Canaan. 5.
David King of Israel. 6. Judas Maccabeus a valiant Jewish commander, against
the Tyranny of Antiochus. Three Christians. 7. Arthur King of Britain, who
courageously defended his Country from the Saxons. 8. Charles the Great K. of
France, and Emperor of Germany. 9 Godfrey of Bullen King of Jerusalem. Being an
account of their glorious lives, worthy actions, renowned Victories and Deaths.
Illustrated with Poems and the Picture of each Worthy. By R. B. Price One
shilling.

16. FEmale Excellency, or the Ladies Glory, Illustrated in the Worthy Lives
and Memorable Actions of nine Famous Women, who have been renowned either for
Virtue or Valor, in several Ages of the World: As 1. Deborah the Prophetess.
2. The valiant Judith. 3. Queen Esther. 4. The virtuous Susannah. 5. The Chaste
Lucretia. 6. Voadicia Q. of Britain, in the Reign of Nero Emperor of Rome,
containing an account of the Original Inhabitants of Britain. The History of
Danus and of his fifty Daughters, who murdered their Hosbands in one Night Of
the valor of Voadacia, under whose conduct the Britains slew 70 thousand
Romans, with many other remarkable particulars. 7. Mariamne Wife of K. Herod 8.
Clotilda Queen of France. 9. Andegona Princess: of Spain. The whole adorned
with poems and pictures to each History. By R. B. Price One Shilling.

17. Wonderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy, discovered in above 300.
memorable Histories; containing, 1. Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists,
Blasphemers, and Perjured Villains. 2. The miserable ends of many Magicians,
etc. 3. Remarkable predictions and presages of approaching Death, and how the
event has been answerable. 4. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants, Murderers,
etc. 5. Admirable Deliverances from imminent dangers and deplorable distresses
at Sea and Land. Lastly, Divine goodness to penitents, with the dying thoughts
of several famous Men, concerning a future state. Pr. 1 s.

18. Unparalleled Varities, or the Matchless Actions and Passions of Mankind;
displayed in near 400 notable Instances and Examples, discovering the
transcendent Effects; 1. Of Love, Friendship and Gratitude. 2. Of Magnanimity,
Courage and Fidelity. 3. Of Chastity, Temperance and Humility: And on the
contrary, the Tremendous consequences; 4. Of Hatred, Revenge and Ingratitude.
5. Of Cowardice, Barbarity and Treachery. 6. Of Unchastity, Intemperance and
Ambition. Imbellished with Proper Figures. Price 1 s.

19. THE Kingdom of darkness: Or the History of Demons, Specters, Witches,
Apparitious, Possessions, Disturbances, and other wonderful and supernatural
Delusions, Mischievous Fears and Malicious Impostures of the Devil. Coptaining
near 80 memorable Relations, Foreign and Domestic, both ancient and modern.
Collected from Authentic Records, Real Attestations, Credible Evidences, and
asserted by Authors of undoubted Verity. Together with a Preface obviating the
common Objections and Allegations of the Sadduces and Atheists of the Age, who
deny the Being of Spirits, Witches, etc. With Pictures of several memorable
Accidents, Price 1 s.

20. SUprizing Miracles of Nature and Art, in two parts; containing, 1. The
Miracles of Nature, or the wonderful Signs, and prodigious Aspects and
Appearances in the Heavens, Earth and Sea; with an account of the most famous
Comets, and other Prodiges, from the Birth of Christ to this time. 2. The
Miracles of Art, describing the most Magnificent Buildings, and other curious
Inventions in all Ages, as, the seven Wonders of the World, and many other
excellent Structures and Rarities throughout the Earth. Beautifyed with
Pictures. Price 1 s.

21. MEmorable Accidents and Uunheard of Transactions, containing an account of
several strange Events: As the Deposing of Tyrants, Lamentable Shipwracks,
Dismal Misfortunes, Stratagems of War, Perilous Adventures, Happy Deliverances,
with other remarkable Occurrences, and select Historical passages, which have
happened in several Countries in this last Age. Printed at Brussels in 1691.
and Dedicated to His present Majesty, William King of England, etc. Published
in English by R. B. Pr. 1 s.

22. MArtyrs in Flames, or Popery in its true Colors being a Brief Relation of
the horrid Cruelties and Persecutions of the Pope, and Church of Rome, for many
hundreds of years past, to this present time, in Piedmont, Bohemia, Germany,
Poland, Lithuania, Erance, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Scotland, Ireland, and
England; with an abstract of the cruel Persecutions lately exercised upon the
Protestants in France and Savoy, in the year 1686, and 1687. Together with a
short account of God's Judgments upon Popish Persecutors. Price 1 s.

Miscellanies.
23. Delights for the Ingenious, in above Fifty Select and Choice Emblems.
Divine and Moral, Ancient and Modern, curiously Engraven upon Copper Plates,
with 50 delightful Poems and Lots, for the more lively Illustration of each
Emblem, whereby instruction and good counsel may be promoted and furthered, by
an honest and pleasant Recreation; to which is prefixed, A Poem, entitled,
Majesty in Misery, or an Imploration of the King of Kings, written by R.
Charles I. with his own hand, during his Captivity in Carisbrook Castle in the
Isle of Wight, 1648. with a curious Emblem. Collected by R B. Price 2 s. 6 d.

24. Excellent Contemplations Divine and Moral, written by the Magnanimous A.L.
Capel Baron of Hadham; together with some account of his Life, and his
affectionate Letters to his Lady the day before his Death; with his Heroic
Behavior and last Speech at his Suffering. Also the Speeches and Carriages of
of D. Ham, and the Earl of Holl. who suffered with him: With his Pious Advice
to his Son. Price 1. s.

25. VVInter Evenings Entertaintment, in two parts, Containing, 1. Ten Pleasant
Relations of many Rare and Notable Accidents and Occurrences: 2. Fifty
Ingenious Riddles, with their Explanations, and useful Observations and Morals
upon each. Enlivened with above 60 Pictures, for illustrating every Story and
Riddle. Excellently accommodated to the Fancies of Old or Young, and useful to
cheerful Society and Conversation. Price 1 s.

26. DElightful Fables in Prose and Verse, none of them to be found in Aesop,
but collected from diverse Ancient and Modern Authors, with Pictures and proper
Morals to every Fable. Several of them very applicable to the Present times. by
R. B. Price bound one shilling.

Divinity.
27 THE Divine Banquet, or Sacramental Devotions, consisting of Morning and
Evening Prayers, Contemplations and Hymns for every day in the Week, in order
to a more Solemn Preparation for the worthy Receiving of the Holy Communion,
representing the several steps and degrees of the Sorrows and Sufferings of our
blessed Savior, till he gave up the Ghost: As, 1. His Agony in the Garden. 2.
His being betrayed by Judas. 3. His being falsely accused, smitten, buffetted,
and spit upon before Caiphas the High Priest. 4. His condemnation, scourging,
crowning with Thorns, and being delivered to be crucified by Pontius Pilate. 5.
His bearing his Cross. 6. His crucifixion. 7. Our Savior's Institution of the
Blessed Sacrament. Together with brief Resolutions to all those scruples and
objections usually alleged for the omission of this important duty. With eight
curious Sculptures proper to the several parts, with Graces. Imprimatur Z.
Isham, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris. Price 1 s.

28. A Guide to Eternal Glory: Or, brief Directions to all Christians how to
attain Everlasting Salvation: To which are added several other small Tracts:
As, 1. Saving Faith discovered in three heavenly conferences between our
Blessed Savior, and, 1. A Publican. 2. A Pharisee. 3. A doubting Christian. 2.
The threefold state of a Christian: 1. By Nature: 2. By Grace: 3 In Glory. 3.
The Scriptures concord, compiled out of the words of Scripture, by way of
question and answer, wherein there is the sum of the way to Salvation, and
spiritual things compared with spiritual. 4. The Character of a true Christian.
5. A brief Directory for the great, necessary, and advantageous duty of
Self-examination, whereby a serious Christian may every day examine himself. 6.
A short Dialogue between a Learned Divine and a Beggar. 7. Beams of the Spirit,
or Cordial Meditations, enlivening, enlightening, and gladding the Soul. 8. The
Seraphick Souls Triumph in the Love of God; with short remembrances and pious
thoughts. 9. History improved, or Christian Applications and Improvements of
diverse remarkable Passages in History. 10. Holy Breathings in several Divine
Poems, upon diverse Subjects and Scriptures. Price one Shilling.

29. YOuths Divine Pastime; Containing Forty Remarkable Scripture Histories,
turned into common English Verse. With Forty Pictures proper to each Story;
very delightful for the virtuous, employing the vacant hours of Young Persons,
and preventing vain and vicious Divertisements. Together with several Scripture
Hymns upon diverse occasions. Pr. 8 d

30. THE Young Man's Calling, or the whole Duty of Youth, in a serious and
compassionate Address to all young persons to remember their Creator in the
days of their Youth. Together with Remarks upon the Lives of several excellent
young Persons of both Sexes, as well Ancient as Modern, who have been famous
for Virtue and Piety in their Generations. With twelve curious Pictures,
Illustrating the several histories. Price 1 s. 6 d.

31. THE Vanity of the Life of Man represented in the Seven several Stages
thereof; With Pictures and Poems exposing the Follies of every Age. Price Eight
pence.

32. MOunt Sion, or a draught of that Church that shall stand for ever.
Together with a view of that World which shall be broken in pieces and
consumed. By William Dyer, Author of Christ's Famous Titles, and a Believers
Golden Chain. Price One Shilling.

33. DIstressed Sion Relieved, or, the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of
Heaviness. A Poem. Wherein are discovered the grand Causes of the Churches
trouble and misery under the late dismal Dispensation. With a complete History
of, and Lamentation for those Renowned Worthies that fell in England, by Popish
rage and cruelty, from the Year 1680. Humbly Dedicated to Their Present
Majesty's. By Benjamin Keach, Author of a Book called, Sion in Distress, or the
Groans of the true Protestant Church. Price one shilling.

34. ANtichrist Stormed, or the Church of Rome proved to be Mystery Babylon the
Great Whore, Rev. 17. by many and undeniable Arguments, Answering all the
Objections of the Papists, and all others. Together with the Judgment of many
Ancient and Modern Divines, and most Eminent Writers concerning the rise and
final ruin of the Beast and Babylon, proving it will be in this present Age.
With an Account of many strange Predictions relating to these present Times. By
Benjamin Keach. Price One Shilling.

35. THE Devout Souls Daily Exercise in Prayers, Contemplations and Praises,
containing Devotions for Morning, Noon, and Night, for every day in the week;
with Prayers before and after the Holy Communion: And likewise for Persons of
all conditions, and upon all occasions: With Graces and Thanksgivings before
and after Meat. By R. P. D. D. Price bound Six Pence.

36. SAcramental Meditations upon diverse select places, of Scripture, wherein
Believers are assisted in preparing their hearts, and exciting their affections
and graces when they draw nigh to God in that most awful and solemn Ordinance
of the Lords Supper. By Jo. Flavel Minister of Christ in Devon. Price one
Shilling.

37. JACOB Wrestling with GOD, and prevailing: Or, a Treatise concerning the
Necessity and Efficacy of Faith in Prayer: Wherein diverse weighty Questions and
Cases of Conscience about praying in Faith, are stated and resolved: For the
comforting and satisfying of weak and, scrupulous Conscienc^^* The Conviction
of formal Hypocrites, awakening of all Saints, both weak and strong, great and
small, to this great Duty of Prayer. Pr. 1 s.

38. THE True Light Shining in Darkness, in the matter of Justification in III.
parts. Showing, 1. That by the deeds of the Law no Flesh can be Justified in
the Sight of God. 2. That the Righteousness of God is the only Matter of our
Justification. 3. The time and Season wherein God does Justify his Elect.
Price one Shilling Two Pence. Both by Tho. Tailor, formerly at Edmunds Bury,
now Pastor to a Congregation in Cambridge.

39. SEveral Sermons, or Declarations of Mr. Stephen Crisp, late of Colchester
in Essex; exactly taken in Characters or Shorthand, as they were delivered by
him at the Public Meeting houses of the People called Quakers, in
Grace Church Street, in Devonshire House, London. And now faithfully
Transcribed and Published. Together with his Prayer at the end of every Sermon.
Price bound one Shilling.

FINIS.

