

The EFFIGEY of OLIVER CROMWELL, Late Lord-Protector of ENGLAND.

LIFE OF Oliver Cromwell, Lord PROTECTOR Of the Commonwealth Of England,
Scotland, and Ireland.

Being an Account of all the Battles, Sieges, and other Military Achievements,
wherein he was engaged, in these Three Nations.

And likewise, of his Civil Administrations, while he had the Supreme
Government, till his Death.

Relating Matter of Fact, without Partiality.

LONDON: Printed by D. PRATT, at the Bible and Crown, over against York-House,
in the Strand.

THE PREFACE.
THERE is scarce a Character of any Man of Fame in the World, which suffers
such an unaccountable Variety, as this, of Oliver Cromwell. His History is told
so many Ways, and so every way different from one another, that it will be
impossible for Posterity to make a right Judgment of him, or of his Accounts.

On one hand he is represented as a Hero, on the other as a Traitor; on the one
hand he is called the greatest Soldier, on the other the greatest Villain of
the Age he lived in; on one side he is the greatest Politician, on the other
the greatest Hypocrite; on one side the greatest General, on the other the
greatest Tyrant; but I must add, that both sides agree, that he was what ever
they add to it, not Great only, but the Greatest.

In a Word, Party is the Test of his History, if a Cavalier writes History we
know what to expect of him (viz.) that Oliver shall be villify'd with the
utmost Spleen and Rage: If a Roundhead, he shall be exalted with the utmost
Rhetoric. However to speak Impartially, the Cavalier's will acknowledge this,
namely, that he was a great Man, and will often say what great Things he has
done, and how happy it had been, if he had been on the King's side: And on the
contrary, the Presbyterian's will say on all Occasions, how glorious a Man had
he been, if he had but done So and So? (viz.) if he had but turned out the P.
set him up and the like.

To do his Character Justice, two Actions fully'd it in general, namely,
cutting off the King, and setting himself up as Head of the Commonwealth; in
the first he dipped his hands in a cold Murder on the Person of his Sovereign;
and in the second he darkened all the Glory of his Gallantry, and of the great
Things he had done in the Field, showing that it was all with a secret Aim to
gratify his private Ambition.

Abstracted from these, Character was truly Great, and it is among such as are
scarce to be imitated in the World; this was acknowledged by his worst Enemies.
The whole is Elegantly expressed in two Lines by that excellent Poet Mr.
Melvell.

Though his Government did a Tyrant resemble,
He made England great and her Enemy's tremble.
But I return to his History, and shall give a Brief but Sure and Impartial
Draft of, with all possible Partiallity.

THE LIFE of Oliver Cromwell, etc.
OLIVER CROMWELL was born at Huntington, descended of the ancient Family of the
Williams's, of the County of Glamorgan; and by Adoption into that of the
Cromwels, the more noble Family, as descend of Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex,
the Ax that hewed down the Abbeys in the Time of King Henry the Eight.

His Education, in his Youth, was, for a Time, at the University of Cambridge,
where, though he attained to no great Perfection in Learning, yet, with his
other Additionals, the Fox's Tail with the Lion's Skin, his Strength of Reason
with the sharp Edge of his Sword, stood him in great Stead in his
After-tranfactions; and which, together with his indefatigable Industry,
rendered him so fortunate, that he never fell short of what he undertook.

After his Return from the University, without any extraordinary Respects from
the Muses, whose Unkindness he afterward most severely retaliated, he resolved
for the Future, upon the first Advantage, to try the Fortune of Mars; but long
it was ere the blind Goddess provided him any Action; during which Time he
married a Gentlewoman of the ancient Family of the Bourchiers, (whence the
Earls of Essex were descended) by whom he had two Sons that survived him,
Richard and Henry, and three Daughters, Bridget, Mary, and Frances.

For his private Fortunes they were competent, a Mediocrity betwixt Riches and
Poverty; the one blunting the Edge of Wit and Industry, the other, by its
Hardship, whetting it quite away. But what was wanting in his Estate, was
supplied in the greatness of his Mind, which put him upon high Attemps, which
proved so successful, that at last they placed him at the Helm of Government.

He took his first Rise from the long Parliament, where he was a Member, being
chosen Burgess for the University of Cambridge; in this Parliament that Fire
burst forth, which had been long before in kindling, that fatal Division
betwixt King and Parliament; with which last he wholly sided: What Motives
induced him thereunto, I know not, nor will I determine of the Integrity of his
Choice; this I am sure of, he took the more fortunate, or, by his Manhood, made
it so.

When he delivered his Mind in the House, it was with a strong and masculine
Eloquence, more able to persuade than to be persuaded; his Expressions were
hardy; Opinions resolute; Asseverations grave and vehement, always intermixed,
Andronicus like, with Sentences of Scripture, to give them the greater Weight,
and the better to insinuate into the Affections of the People, he expressed
himself with some kind of Passon, but with such a commanding wise Deportment,
that at his Pleasure he governed and swayed the House, as he had most Times the
leading Voice.

Those who find no such Wonders in his Speeches, may find it in the Effect of
them; most of the People he was concerned in, being, as they term it, Enemies
to Booklearning; and whosoever should endeavor, with an eloquent Oration, or
otherwise go about to reconcile them, and make Friends, should make them
Enemies; such great Adorers are they of the Scripture Phrase, though but little
Practicer's; such as our late Times have brought forth. Indeed he usurped his
holy Oil Quotations very frequently, which were so advantageous to his Designs,
that Cicero and Demosthenes, with all their Troops and Figures, could never
have so persuaded and moved the People, as he with one Text of Scripture aptly
applied; the Dove, and the Serpent, of Scripture, and some small Parcel of
Policy, to what he intended, slily intermixed.

But his Side standing more in need of Action then Eloquence, he quitted the
House, and betook him to the Field, to manifest his Courage as well as his
Eloquence, maintain by his Deeds what his Words had introduced.

Having raised a Troop of Horse at his own Costs and Charges, he marched
against the Muses to Cambridge, (whereof he was Burges) seizing on a very
considerable Sum of Money and Plate, which the Colleges had raised, and were
sending away unto Oxford; which, as it was very advantageous to his own Side,
(Money being the very Lise and Sinews of War) so did it much weaken the adverse
Party, who had always great Want of it. The Parliament having on their Side the
rich City of London, that inexhaustible Bank of Treasure. By this Means he
strengthened himself with sufficient Aids to oppose the Lord Capel, who was to
have been seconded by Prince Rupert, and should have seized on Cambridge,
thereby to have impeded the Association of the adjoining Counties for the
Parliament.

He being advanced from a Captain to a Colonel, having completed a Regiment of
Horse, to the full Number of a thousand Men, in the Spring of the Year he
marches to Lowerstoft in Suffolk, where he suddenly surprised Sir Thomas
Barker, Sir John Pettas his Brother, with above twenty other Persons of Note,
who were entering into an Association for the King; several Peasons of Quality,
and diverse Noblemen hourly flocking to that Rendezvous; this other Service was
very seasonably rendered to the Parliament, the King's Party both in Suffolk
and Norfolk, being much discouraged by this Success.

Having, by new raised Aids, enforced his Army to a very considerable Strength,
he marched into Lincolnshire, with a Resolution to assist those Forces that lay
about Newark, a very strong and stout Garrison of the King's; where, by their
daily Excursions they kept all the Country thereabouts in awe; which he not
only blocked up, but also defeated part of the Earl of Newcastle's Army which
came to relieve them. I shall not need to particularize all his Actions, his
other interveening Achievements are innumerable. To look forwards, only to
mention the Battle of Marston Moor, where by his Valor he turned the Scales of
Victory, which at the first inclined to the King's Side: As also, at that fatal
Fight at Naseby, where the King's Foot were all cut in Pieces, or taken
Prisoners: His memorable Discomfiture of the King's Forces at Preston, in
Lancashire, over Duke Hamilton and Sir Marmaduke Langdale; the last of them as
valiantly faithful to the King, as the other was disloyal: Their united Forces
amounting to Twenty five thousand, his not above Ten thousand at most; (although
indeed he found little Opposition, save only of those few Forces of Sir
Marmaduke Langdale, who fought it out courageously to the last Man.) Should I
thus continue to signalize his Trophies, I might tire out the Reader with his
strange Successes; let it suffice then, that his Actions, with such Fame,
arrived at the House, that in Recompense, they first bestowed on him the
Generalship of the Horse, and afterward the Lieutenant Generalship of the
whole Army. Certainly if his Ambition had terminated here, and his wonderful
Successes had not raised his Thoughts higher; if he could not, for his Martial
Merits, have been beloved, he had Power enough to have rendered himself save,
and for his valiant Achievements, feared, honored and admired.

Raised to this Degree of Command, he was more careful of hazarding his Person
than before; well knowing the Loss of a General is the most irreparable of all
Losses; for him to expose his Person to trivial Hazards, in the Breath of whose
Nostrils the victorious Achievements of the Soldiers remains, is too
impertinently adventurous, as if it were more glorious to fight than command:
Whereas, that is more especially the Virtue of a common Soldier: This other of
a Leader, whose principal Talent lies more in Direction than Execution; more in
the Brain than Hand: Thus that ever to be deplored Laureat of our Times, the
Gentleman of the long Robe, the Oracle of the King's Cousels, the Lord
Faukland, was as unfortunately lost, as unnecessarily engaged in the Field.

But to proceed, he grew so subtly careful, as to maintain a fair
Correspondence; there was no Place taken; no Battle won, but he was the first
that brought or sent Word to the House; by which he insinuated himself into the
Affections both of the Parliament and People; expressing his own Actions in
such Terms, as whilst he seemingly attributed much to others, he drew the whole
Commendation thereof to himself.

One Thing that made his Brigade so invincible, was his arming them so well, as
whilst they assured themselves they could not be overcome, it assured him to
overcome their Enemies. He himself, as they called him Ironside, needed not to
be ashamed of a Nickname that so often saved his Life.

These were his Acts whilst Lieutenant General, by which he got so great a Name
in War, as Essex, Waller, and those other great Names before him, excepting
only Sir Thomas Fairfax's Laurels, which were interwoven with his, the rest
were swallowed up in his most inimitable Successes, even as great Rivers are
swallowed up by the Ocean.

For the rest of his Actions when he was General; his conquering Ireland; his
subduing Scotland; the many other Battles he fought till his s^ishing the War
in England. To treat also largely of these it is Trophies, would weary the Pen
of a serious, though industrious Writer, that sadly concerns the Incivility of
those late Civil War, howsoever they were strange Successes, and so many, that
as a Modern Poet agrees with what I have expressed; -- It were a Work so great,
Would make Olympus bearing Atlas sweat.


I shall therefore summarily relate the most notable Occurrences then
happening, leaving the less Assairs to be related by more voluminous Authors.

No sooner were the Civil Wars of England terminated, by the Discomfiture of
all the King's Armics; the taking of his own Person, and putting him to Death,
but the Parliament, by a solemn Vote and Ordinance, changed the Monarchial
Government, into a Commonwealth. The Kingdom of Ireland, discontented at this
Change, uniting themselves, owned the late King's eldest Son, and solemnly
proclaimed him King; no Place considerable standing out for the Parliament,
saving only Dublin and Londonderry; the first whereof of was immediately
besieged by an Army of Twenty two thousand Men, commanded by the Marquess of
Ormond; and the other by a considerable Party of the Natives of the Country. To
the reducing of this Kingdom was Oliver Cromwell nominated Governor of Ireland
by the Commonwealth; who, with a well appointed Army set sail for Dublin: Where,
although he found Things in an indifferent good Posture, the Marquess of Ormond
having been beaten off, by the Valor of Michael Jones the Governor, yet he
met with Work enough for his Army: For Droghedah, one one of the best and
considerablest Places in all Ireland, held out stiffly against them, and having
a strong Party, bid Defiance to his Army: Yet notwithstanding, after many
Assaults, and much Valor shown on both Sides, he at last took it, putting
therein to death 3000 Irish; who, though Enomies, yet for their Valor and
undaunted Resolution, might have been looked on with a more merciful Eye, as
they were Men, and more especially Christians. Soon after followed the
Surrender of Trim, Dundalke, Nury, Wexford, Rove, Bandonbridge, and Kingsale;
yet notwithstanding the reducing of these Towns, many of the Irish retreating
to their Bogs and inaccessible Places, held out for a long Time, in dsepite of
the English.

To proceed, not only the Irish showed their Dislike of this Change of
Government, but also the Colonies in Virginia, and the Carybde Islands; to the
reducing of whom the Parliament sent Sir George Askue, with a Fleet of Ships,
who brought them again into Obedience.

In the mean Time the Scots were very busy, they had commenced a Treaty with
Prince Charles at Breda, which at last was concluded on, he assenting to their
Presbyterian Government; and they to instal and re-establish him in that
Kingdom, and in the other accordingly, as they questioned not but Fortune would
answer their blind zealous Covenant Expectations.

The Prince puts forth to Sea, and in despite of foul Weather, and the English
King Fishers that lay there to intercept him, he landed safely at the Spey. in
the North of Scotland. Now, though the Scots had a King, yet (as if they had
none) every one did that which is right in his own Eyes; and, as if they
intended him only the Title, being now in their Power, they forced him to
follow the Rules of their haughty Clergy, in all their sanatick Humors and
imperious Decrees. First then, they bereaved him of all his old Friends,
Counselors, and Confederates, whether of the Clergy or Laity, as those who
adhered to Episcopal Government, and so not pure enough for so reformed a
People. Thus they hamstringed him, not as what was formerly in the Sign-post,
only of printed Papers. Next, they make him take the Solemn League and
Covenant, that strange Fire which the Scots believe descended from Heaven, and
by which they, at their Pleasures, kindle those Wars wherewith they infest
England: Then these Horse Farriers of the Conscience gave him another Drench,
he is taught to Renounce the Sins of his Father's House, and of his own, the
Idolatry of his Mother, by a constant adhering to the Cause of God, according
to the Covenant, in the firm Establishment of Church Government, as it is laid
down in the Directory for public Worship, Confession of ^aith and Catechism.
These, with diverse others of the like Nature, they wrought so on his Necessity,
they obtruded, or rather rammed into his Conscience (although with much
Reluctance) he signed to, making many strange Faces at these bitter Pills he
swallowed, yet it bettered not his Condition, which was like that of a Child
under Tutors and Governors; there was not an Officer in that Kirk or
Commonwealth how vile and abject soever, in Place or Person, but enjoyed more
Freedom both in Body and Mind, than he. Guarded indeed he was, but no otherwise
than he was surrounded with the Ignis Fatuus of their zealous Suspicions of
him, so that move he must not but in the Sphere of the Kirk, their Primum
mobile; whereby it is apparent, that the Government of that Nation might be
almost questioned whether it ever were truly Monarchial (though they had Kings.)

To proceed, the Parliament having notice of all their Proceedings, recalled
General Cromwell out of Ireland, making him Generalissimo of the Commonwealths
Armies, in the Lord Fairfax's Stead, who at the same Time laid down his
Commission; he, with a choice Army, marches into Scotland, and after many petty
Defeats, gives them a great Overthrow at Dumbar, September 3, 1650, and
prosecuting his Victory, takes Leith, a very considerable and advantageous
Place; as also Edinburgh, the Metropolitan City of all Scotland. Thus he set
firm there his Sword, hewing his Way for him to conquer that Country, which the
King lost by his Pen.

Now were the Scots truly miserable, for besides a raging Enemy in the very
Heart of their Kingdom, they were divided among themselves, even to the killing
and slaying of one another; one Party in the North was for the King without the
Kirk; another. Party in the West, was for the Kirk without the King; a third
Party was for the King and Kirk. Yet notwithstanding these Losses and
Divisions, they assumed new Courage, levied more Men, and crowned their King
with the utmost Magnificence, as the Indigency and Necessity of their Affairs
would admit. The English, on the other Side, being resolved to terminate this
War with Scotland, passed over into Fife, and having defeated four thousand
Scots, they soon became Masters of Inchigravy, Burntisland, and St. Johnstoun:
Mean while the Scots Army, consisting of 16000 abandoned their own Territories,
and, by the Way of Carlisle, entered England. General Cromwell advertised hereof,
leaves Colonel Monk with 7000 Men in Scotland, to perfect the Conquest of that
Kingdom, and with the rest of the Army pursues the Scots; who, wheresoever they
came, proclaimed their King, to be King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
etc. But few stirred unto their Aid, among others, the unfortunate Earl of
Darby, who having assembled 1200 Men, in Lancashire, was defeated by Colonel
Lilbourn, and to save himself was constrained to flee to Worcester; where the
Scots, after a long and tedious March, had pitched their Camp, whither General
Cromwell soon pursued; and having the Aid of the Train Bands of several
Counties, gave them Battle, which proved fatal unto the Scots, their whole Army
being overthrown. The King in a Disguise escaped into France, not without much
Difficulty and Danger, the Parliament having promised five hundred Pounds to
any one that could discover his Person. Such a List of Prisoners as were then
taken, we shall seldom meet with in any Battle but Cromwell's, the Earl of
Darby, the Earl of Lauderdale, Duke Hamilton, General of the Scots Army, who
afterward died of his Wounds, the Earl of Rothes, the Earl of Cornwarth, the
Earl of Shrewsbury, Peckington, Cunninghame, and Clare, Knights; the Lord
Spine, and Sinclare, the Earl of Cleveland, of Kelley, and Colonel Greaves, six
Colonels of Horse, thirteen of Foot, nine Lieutenant Colonels of Horse, eight
of Foot, six Majors of Horse, thirteen of Foot, seven and thirty Captains of
Horse, seventy three of Foot, fifth five Quarter Masters, eighty nine
Lieutenants of Foot, Major General Biscotty, Major General Montgomery, the
Lieutenant General of the Ordnance, the Adjutant General of the Foot, the
Marshal General, the Quartermaster General, the Conductor General of the
Baggage, seventy six Standards, ninety nine Ensigns; all which were hung up in
Westminster Hall, for successive Parliaments, to understand what Vigor of
Spirits, they, by their Influence, can infuse into those they please please to
authorize, only the Want of the Allay of their Ambitions, often works them
high, where it is impossible to set limits to generous Minds. To continue the
other Appendixes to this Victory, there were also taken nine Ministers, nine
Surgeons, One hundred fifty and eight Colors, and all the Cannon and
Baggage generally, the Royal Standard, the King's Coach and Horses, the Royal
Robe, the Collar of the Order of the Garter, thirty of his domestic Servants,
and that admirable Poet, his Secretary, Fanshaw. Several other Persons were
also afterward taken in the remotest Countries, as Major General Massey (who
being committed to the Tower, afterward made his Escape) Major General
Middleton, Lieutenant General David Lesly, insomuch as that it may be said, the
Gleanings of this Victory, were as considerable as the whole Harvest itself.
Many of the common Soldiers were transported into Barbados, and other
Plantations; this Mercy extended to them in saving their Lives, causing much
Gain to accrue thereby unto the Commonwealth, in selling the poor heathenish
Highlanders to the Plantations. I shall end these sad Transactions with what
Mr. Wharton chronologized in these Words, Since England 's Hogs eat our dear
Brethren up. He only reflects on the half Graves were made for them in Tuttle
Fields.

Of all this long List two only suffered Death, viz. Sir Timothy Featherstone
Knight, and the Earl of Darby, who, on the 15th of October following, was
beheaded at Bolton in Lancashire, being conducted thither by sixty Foot, and
eighty Horse, about two of the Clock he was brought forth to the Scaffold,
which was built at the Cross, part of it with the Timber of his own House at
Latham, there was not above an hundred Lookers on, besides Soldiers; presently
after his coming upon the Scaffold there happened a great Tumult. (the Occasion
whereof was not certainly known) in appeasing of which there were some cut,
many hurt, and one Child killed. The Earl was no eloquent Orator, and the
Tumult put him out of his speaking what he intended: At last, after some
Silence made, he began as follows.

Since it has pleased God, by this untimely Death to shorten my Days, I am
glad it is in this Town, where some have been made believe I was a cruel
Person, that I might vindicate myself from this Aspersion: It was my Desire,
the last Time I came into this Country, to come hither, as to a People that
ought to serve the King, as I conceive, upon good Grounds: It was said, that I
was accustomed to be a Man of Blood; but it does not lie upon my Conscience, I
was wrongfully belied. I thank God I desired Peace. I was born in Honor, and I
shall die Honorably, as I suffer for my Sovereign. I had a fair Estate, good
Friends, and was respected, and do respect: Those that were ready to do for me,
I was ready to do for them. I have done nothing, but as my generous
Predecessors acted, to do you good. It was the King that called me in, and I
thought it my Duty to wait upon his Highness, to do him Service.

Here he was disturbed by the Noise of the People, after some Pause he said, I
intended to have expressed my self further, but I have said. I have not much more
to say to you, but as to my Good Will to this Town of Bolton, I can say no
more, but the Lord bless you. I forgive you all, and desire to be forgiven of
you all, for I put my Trust in Christ Jesus. Looking about him he said, I did
never deserve this hard Measure. Honest Friends, (you that are Soldiers) my
Life is taken away, after Quarter given, by a Council of War, which was never
done before. Walking up and down the Scaffold he said, The Lord bless you all,
the Son of God bless you all of this Town of Bolton, Manchaster, Lancashire,
and the rest of the Kingdom; and God send that you may have a King again, and
Laws. I die like a Christian, and a Soldier, God and my Sovereign's Soldier.
Causing his Coffin to be opened, he said, I hope when I Am imprisoned here,
armed Men shall not need to watch me. Looking upon them that were upon the
Scaffold, he said, What do you stay for? it is hard that I cannot get a Block
to have my Head cut off. Speaking to the Executioner, he said, Thy Coat is so
troublesome and cumbersome, that I believe that thou can not het right, the
Lord help thee and sorgive thee. Other Words he used, which to avoid Proxillty
I willingly omit. At last submitting his Neck to the Block, he had his Head
severed from his Body with one Blow; his sorrowful Son, who was a sad Spectator
of this woeful Tragedy, out of a pious care, and filial duty, conveyed his Corpse
back with him that Night to Wiggan, and afterward gave them honorable Burial.

Not long before at London was Colonel Eusebius Andrews apprehended, who having
formerly practiced the Law, changed his Gown into a Coat of Armor, having
received a Commission from the King of Scots, for the raising Men in England,
he was tried in Westminster Hall, at the High Court of Justice, then again
newly erected, being the first unfortunate Centleman that hanselled the Court.
He was condemned, and the 22. of August, 1650. brought to the Scaffold on
Tower Hill, where he expressed himself to the People in these his last Words.

Christian Gentlemen and People, your Business hither to Day is to see a sad
Spectacle, a Man to be in a Moment unmanned, and cut off in the prime of his
Years, taken from further opportunities of doing good either to himself, his
Friends, the Commonwealth, or more especially as to my continued services to
my Creator. Truly, if my general known Course of Life were but enquired into, I
may modestly say, there is such a moral Honesty upon it, as some may be so
saucy as to expostulate why this great Judgment is fallen upon me; but know I
am able to give them and my self an answer, and out of this Breast am able to
give a better Account of my Judgment and Execution then my Judgers themselves,
or you are able to give: It is Gods wrath upon me for Sins long unrepented of,
many Judgments withstood, and Mercies slighted; therefore God has whipped me
by his severe Rod of Correction, that he might not lose me. I pray join with me
in Prayer, that it may not be a fruitless Rod, that when by this Rod I have
laid down my Life, by his Staff I may be comforted, and received into Glory. I
am very consident by what I have heard since my Sentence there is more
exceptions made against proceedings against me, then I ever made. My Triers had
a Law, and the value of that Law is undisputable; and for me to make a question
of it, I should shame my self and my Discretion. In the strictness of that Law,
something is done by me, that is applicable to some clause therein, by which I
stand condemnable. The means whereby I was brought under that Interpretation of
that which was not in my self intended maliciously, there being Testimony
given, (by Persons whom I pity) so false, yet so positive, that I cannot
condemn my Judges, for passing sentence against me, according to Legal Justice,
though Equity lies in the higher Breasts.

As for my Accusers. or rather Betrayers, I pity, and am sorry for them; they
have committed Judas 's Crime, but I wish and pray for them with Peter's Tears,
that by Peter's Repentance they may escape Judas 's Punishment; and I wish
other People so happy, they may be taken up betimes, before they have drunk
more Blood of Christian Men, possibly less deserving then my self.

It is true, there have been several Addresses made for Mercy, and I will put
the Obstruction of it upon nothing more than my own Sin; and seeing God sees it
fit, (having not glorified him in my Life) I might do it in my Death, which I
am contented to do; I profess in the fear of God, particular Malice to any one
of State or Parliament, to do them a bodily Injury I had none.

For the cause in which I had long waded, I must needs say, my engagement or
continuance in it has laid no scruple upon my Conscience; it was on Principles
of Law, the Knowledge whereof I profess, and on Principles of Religion, my
Judgment satisfied, and Conscience rectified, that I have pursued those ways
which I bless God I find no blackness upon my Conscience, nor have I put it
into the Bed-roll of my Sins.

I will not presume to decide controversies; I desire God to honor himself in
prospering that side that has right with it, and that you may enjoy Peace and
Plenty, beyond all you possess here. In my Conversation in the World, I do not
know where I have an Enemy with cause, or that there is such a Person whom I
have to regret; but if there be any whom I cannot recollect, under the notion
of christian Men, I pardon them as freely as if I had named them by name, I
freely forgive them, being in free Peace with all the World, as I desire God
for Christ's sake, to be at Peace with me. For the business of Death it is a sad
Sentence in it self, if Men consult with Flesh and Blood: But truly without
boasting, I say it, or if I do boast, I boast in the Lord, I have not to this
minute had one consultation with the Flesh about the blow of the Axe, more then
as my passport to Glory.

I take it for an honor, and I owe thankfulness to those under whose Power I
am, that they sent me hither to a place, however of Punishment, yet of some
Honor, to die a death somewhat worthy of my Blood, answerable to my Birth and
Qualification, and this courtesy of theirs much helped toward the
pacification of my Mind.

I shall desire God that those Gen^lemen in that sad Bed-roll to be tried by
the High Court of Justice, that they may find that really there, that is
nominal in the Act, an High Court of Justice, a Court of High Justice, high in
its Righteousness, though not in its severity. Father forgive them, and forgive
me as I forgive them.

I desire you now that you would pray for me, and not give over praying till
the Hour of my Death, not till the Moment of my Death, for the Hour is come
already, the instant of Time approaches, that as I have a great load of Sins,
so I may have the wings of your Prayers, to help those Angels that are to
convey my Soul to Heaven; and I doubt not but I shall see my Savior, and my
gallant Master the King of England, and another Master whom I much honored, my
Lord Capel, hoping this Day to see my Christ in the presence of the Father, the
King in the presence of him, my Lord Capel in the presence of them all; and my
self there to rejoice with all other Saints and Angels for ever more.

After the uttering of these and many the like Words, declaring his Faith and
Confidence in God, with as much undaunted, yet Christian Courage, as possibly
could be in Man, he exposed his Neck to the fatal Ax, commending his Soul into
the Hands of a faithful and merciful Creator, through the meritorious Passion of
a gracious Redeemer; and having said Lord Jesus receive me the Executioner with
one Blow severed his Head from his Body.

For such a collateral design, not long after one Master Benson was executed at
Tyburn, one that had some Relations to Sir John Gell, who was tried for the
same Conspiraccy, with his Man: Sir John's former Services to the Parliament,
being his best and most assured Intercessors for his Life, and at that time
were more then ordinary Advantages to him.

I shall in the next place give you an account of the Beheading of Sir Henry
Hide. He was by the Scots King commissonated as Ambassador to the Grand
Signior at Constantinople, and stood in Competition with Sir Thomas Bendish
(then Ambassador for the English) for his Place; whereupon they had a Hearing
before the Vizier Bassa; the result whereof was, that Sir Thomas Bendish should
dispose of the said Sir Henry Hide, as he thought good; who was to the same
purpose sent to Smyrna, thence into England, and there condemned and executed
before the Royal Exchange in London, March 4. 1650.

His last Words were to this Effect.
CHristian People, I come hither to die, I am brought hither to die; and that I
may die Christian like, I humbly beseech the assistance of your Christian
Prayers, that by the benefit of them my passage may be the more easy: Yet
because Men in that condition, which it has pleased God to reduce me to, give
the more credit to Speech; in the discharge of my Duty toward God, I shall use
a few Words and so conclude.

I pray all of you join with me to praise this Almighty God, to whom I desire
to render all hearty Thanks; as for all his Mercies, so in particular for this,
that he has brought me hither; that whereas I owe a Debt to Sin and and to
Nature, that now I can pay the Debt to Nature, I can pay it upon the account of
Grace. And because it is fit to render the blessed account of that hope that is
in me, I shall tell you, to the praise of Almighty God, that I have been born
and bred up in the Doctrine of the Church of England, I have no negative
Religion, believing to be saved by the only merits of my Savior Jesus Christ,
and whatsoever else is professed in the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of
England, authorized by Law; humbly beseeching Almighay God to restore unto this
Church her Peace, Prosperity and Patrimony, whereof I have an Obedient and a
Loving (however an unworthy) Son; and now both my Hope being consident, and my
Faith perfected, there remains only Christian Charity; Charity we carry into
Heaven, Charity on Earth; that I leave, beseeching all whomsoever I have
offended to forgive me, as I from the bottom of my Heart do all whomsoever;
blessing Almighty God for the happy advantage he takes to bring me the sooner
to Heaven; I bless Almighty God that he has given me this Advantage, as he
has been Merciful to me before the Foundation of the World, in my Savior, so
that now he has in Mercy honored me, with a suffering for his Name, in
Obedience to his Commandment.

On this Day sevennight I was summoned before that Justice, which condemned me
on Friday last, praised be Almighty God, that by this way he has brought me
nearer to himself. My charge I presume is public, as my Punishment is visible;
if there have been any thing in the management of my part, being unskilful,
having discontinued my own Country many Years, I shall beseech the Christian
Charity of all you my beloved Countrymen, to impute it rightly to the Ignorance
of my unskilful ways of managing of affairs; it was objected unto me there,
that I had a vanity of delighting in strange Tongues; I do acknowledge that I
was best skilled in the Italian, (but free from that vanity, I thank Almighty
God) and therefore I would in defense of my Life, (if it had been the custom
here, or the Judges favor) have used that Language, which was almost as
natural to me as my Mother Tongue.

It was objected, that I did not so freely as a thorow-paced Cavalier, own my
Master: I was told since I came into England (this Skill I have in our Laws)
that a legal denial in Law might be tolerable; I hope I did not exceed the
bounds of that in any thing, for God forbid that I should be ashamed of serving
so pious a Master; (putting off his Hat) for this I rejoice, and I humbly
beseech Almighty God to fill my Heart and my Tongue, and all that hear me this
Day, with thankfulness for it.

As to the Business, that another construction had been made and believed here,
then what was there, the righteous God knows it; if any weakness were in the
management, that was mine. I was sent to serve and protect, not to injure any,
as God acquits me of the Intention of matter of Fact, as having not done any
manner of Evil that way, however here understood, blessed be his holy Name
(again putting off his Hat) so those Gentlemen of the Turkey Company, if they
would might acknowledge, for they know it very well, the impossibility of my
doing them any manner of harm. Whereas that of the Embassy objected against me,
that my Master honored me with it, though I was never worthy of it; I was his
Messenger and Internuntio for the conservation only of his good Subjects, of
all the Merchants, until such time as he could confirm that Gentlemen now
Resident, or to send any other; and they themselves know that there was an
unpossibility (as I bless God there was an innocence in me) unto any such
Intention to do them harm; for my Masters commands were point blank the
contrary: I was only sent for their good; as I never owned the Title so the
very Letters themselves speaking no other: I never did so much as think of any
manner of address to the grand Signior, but gave him the Letter from my Master;
the rest of the English Nation that were there present, may, when they please,
assert so much. This I would insert, that those Gentlemen as they have been
Losers by the miscarriages of others, may now have a breach of their Charity
with me; but if it be, as it seems it is now in this Country, a Sin to be
Loyal, I hope my God has forgiven that, when it is upon harmlefs Employment,
not invading any, according to my just Masters order; for indeed I have been
always bred up in the Religion of Loyalty, my Allegiance has been incorporated
into my Religion, and I have thought it a great part of the service due from me
to Almighty God, to serve the King (again putting off his Hat.) He said, I need
not make any Apology for any thing in relation to the present Affairs in
England, for were I (as I spoke before my Judges) were I as evil as my Sentence
here has made black, it were impossible for me to have prejudiced any body in
England, or to England belonging, in that Employment; But I bless God for his
infinite Mercy in Jesus Christ, who has taken me to himself by this manner of
way, it was the best Physic for the curing of my Soul, and those that have
done it, have no more Power than that of my Body; I leave nothing behind me,
but that I am willing to part withal; all that (...) am going to, is desirable;
and that you may all know that Almighty God has wrought in me a total denial
of my self and that there is that perfect reformation of me within, of my own
Corruptions, by the blessed Assistance of ^hs Holy Spirit I desire Almighty God
in the Abundance of the Bowels of his Mercy in Jesus Christ, not only to
forgive every Enemy, (if any such be in the World, here or wheresoever) but to
bring him into his Bosom, so much good and particular Comfort, as he may at any
time, whether the Cause were just or unjust, have wished me any manner of Evil;
for I take him to be the happy Instrument of bringing me to Heaven. I am
tedious, but I have an inward comfort, I bless Almighty God: (pray Gentlemen
give leave, speaking to some that pressed upon him) I should never do it but to
give satisfaction to all charitable Hearts. I have been troublesome.

Here he made a Pause, as discontented at the disturbance of those on the
Scaffold, when the Sheriff said to him, Sir, you have your Liberty to speak
more if you please, at length he proceeded.

But as to that part, Mr. Sheriff, that did concern the denial (as it was
assirmed by Master Attorney General) of my Masters Employment; truly, landing
at White Hall, I told that Council, there was warrantable Commissions to an old
Officer, which by the Blessing of God, I have by me, and I have other
acceptable things that God has blessed me withal; we that are Merchants
abroad, we allow our selves any sufferance that may induce to our own safety,
Enlargement of Trade, or Preservation of what is ours. Why I had by the favor
of my gracious Master, a confirmation of my old Commission of Consulage in
Greece, but as to the Embassy, no more then my credential Letters did speak,
nor no more then that I attempted, an Internucio they call it in those places,
which is a Messenger between the one and the other King, they both unhappily
dyed of several Deaths, and both violent too; and it is a custom not unknown to
you, Master Sheriff, and other Gentlemen that practice in the World, that
Princes of course, for the continuation of Amity do send Messengers where there
is Pence, that the transaction of those public expressions of reciprocal
affections may be performed; but for Embassy, God forbid I should own it, I
never had it, however they have used it as the happy means to bring me to God
this Day, whom I in the Bowels of my Savior beseech to forgive those People
that have done it; I owe them no harm, God return better things into their
Bosoms with all the good of this; and an everlasting Life.

As for my part, I have been long absent, I have meddled with no Affairs in
England; sufficient to me is God's grace to the Salvation of my Soul.

I have been always fearful of offending God, according to the Grace he has
given me; but to learn a new Religion, or new ways, (that I must say Mr.
Sheriff to you, and all others that hear me) I could never dispense with my
Conscience to give offense to Almighty God. I am now (if it may be with your
Commission Master Sheriff) to pour out my Soul to Almighty God in two or three
Words (the place is straightened) if I knew wherein to give any satisfaction to
any Person whatsoever that imagines I have offended him, or he me, I am here in
the fear of God to do it. I forgive them with all my Soul, and my forgiveness
is clear, as I am now going to receive Happiness at the Hand of my Savior; if
I thought it were satisfaction to Sir Thomas Bendish, and all the Company, or
any who think they have offended me, I am come, Master Sheriff, to pay that
Debt I owe to nature, to pay it upon the Score of a Loyal Subject; my
Conscience within me informing me, that for the intentions of serving my
Prince, I could not deserve such a Death, though ten thousand times more other
ways.

Having expressed himself to this effect with much meekness, he submitted his
Neck to the Ax, having first said, Lord Jesus receive my Soul, the Executioner
at one blow severed his Head from his Body.

Not long after Brown Bushel was beheaded under the Scaffold on Tower Hill, one
who had formerly done great service to the Royal Party both by Sea and Land;
crimes of such a Nature, as brought him into compass of Piracy, and then of
high Treason.

Soon after ensuing the Deaths of Mr. Love and Mr. Gibbons, who were beheaded
ed on Tower Hill the 22. of August, 1651. Their Crimes objected, were, for
combining with the Scots to re-establish Charles Stuart. many others were
apprehended upon the same Account, but these two only suffered.

Passing over these Golgotha's, the Reader may be pleased to understand, that
all these Persons here mentioned, (save only the Earl of Darby) suffered Death
before that memorable Battle at Worcester, though in our History we have
related them after, as not willing to discontinue the series of our affairs
with Scotland by such diversions. But to return to matters of more public
concernment, the Isles of Jersey, Jernsey and Man, who had hitherto held for
the King, submitted themselves; so that now all seemed quiet, when suddenly a
War brake forth with Holland, began only at first upon points of Honor at Sea,
Van Trump the Dutch Admiral refusing to vail his Flag, a Ceremonial Honor
which the English appropriate to themselves, as being Lords of these narrow
Seas, whereupon a sharp Fight ensued betwixt them, wherein the Dutch were
discomfited, one of their Ships sunk, and another of thirty Guns taken, with
the Captains of both, and about a hundred and fifty Prisoners.

This Skirmish produced open War betwixt the two Nations, notwithstanding
Overtures of Peace made by the Hollander. General Blake, the English Admiral,
surprises twelve Dutch Men of War toward the Isles of Orkney, Sir George Ascue
in the Road betwixt Dover and Calice, sets upon their Fleet, being thirty in
Number, of which ten were taken and burnt, the rest hardly escaping. Soon after
near Pliniouth he gave them another Fight, wherein the Dutch went again by the
worst. These successes were seconded by others very remarkable, General Blake
steering Northwards, took six Holland Ships of a great Value about the Downs.
Captain Pen also took six more upon the Coast of France.

Soon after, the Navies engaged in another Fight at a place called the Kentish
^^ock, wherein the Dutch were again de(...), eleven of their Men of War set
upon four of the English in the Straights, took the Phoenix Frigot, and much
damaged the other. In a short space after, another Sea Engagement ensued on the
Backside of Goodwin Sands, wherein the English were worsted, four Ships taken,
and a considerable Loss of Men. The greatest Fight of all was near the Isle of
Wight and Portland, wherein the Dutch received a great Overthrow, fifty
Merchants being taken, nine Men of War, above two thousand slain, and fifteen
hundred taken Prisoners. But this great Victory soon after received a check,
the English Fleet in the Levant Seas being again worsted by the Dutch, with the
Loss of diverse Ships and Men.

But leaving off these Affairs for a time, let us come to General Cromwell; who
pretending for the better accomplishing of his own Designs, the dialtory
proceedings, pernicious and arbitrary actings in the Parliament, to perpetuate
their Session, to be very dangerous, and enthrall the Nation; this train of his
he knew would take well with the People; he therefore resolved to put a Period
to the Parliament, and accordingly accompanied by the chief Officers of the
Army, he entered the House, and having declared his Intentions, some by force,
some through fear, and others not without a great deal of reluctance and
murmuring, departed the House. To set a fair gloss upon what he had done, and
to give some satisfaction to the People, he publishes a Declaration, the
substance whereof follows.

That after God was pleased marvelously to appear for his People, in reducing
Ireland and Scotland to so great a Peace, and England to perfect quiet; whereby
the Parliament had opportunity to give the People the Harvest of all their
Labor, Blood, and Treasure; and to settle a due Liberty in reference to Civil
and Spiritual things; whereunto they were obliged by their Duty, Engagements,
and those great and wonderful things God has wrought for them. But they made
so little Progress therein, that it was matter of much Grief to the good People
of the Land; who thereupon applied themselves to the Army, expecting redress by
their means, who (though unwilling to meddle with the Civil Authority) agreed
that such Officers as were Members of Parliament should move them to proceed
vigorously, in reforming what was amiss in the Commonwealth, and in settling
it upon a foundation of Justice and Righteousness; which being done, it was
hoped the Parliament would have answered their expectations.

But finding the contrary, they renewed their desires by an humble Petition in
August, 1652, which produced no considerable effects, nor was any such Progress
made therein, as might imply their real Intentions to accomplish what was
petitioned for; but rather an averseness to the things themselves, with much
bitterness and opposition to the People of God, and his Spirit acting in them;
insomuch, that the Godly Party in Parliament were rendered of no further use,
then to countenance the ends of a corrupt party, for effecting their desires of
perpetuating themselves in the supreme Government.

For obviating these evils, the Officers of the Army obtained several meetings
with some of the Parliament, to consider what remedy might be applied to
prevent the same; but such endeavors proving ineffectual, it became evident,
that this Parliament, through the corruption of some, the jealousy of others
non-attendance of many; would never answer those ends which God, his People,
and the whole Nation expected from them: But that this cause which God had so
greatly blessed, must needs languish under their Hands, and by degrees be lost;
and the Lives, Liberties, and Comforts of his People be delivered into their
Enemies Hands.

All which being sadly and seriously considered by the honest People of the
Nation, as well as by the Army, it seemed a Duty incumbent upon us, who had
seen much of the power and presence of God, to consider of some effectual means
whereby to establish Righteousness and Peace in these Nations.

And after much debate it was judged necessary, that the Supreme Government
should be by the Parliament devolved upon known Persons fearing God, and of
approved integrity for a time, as the most hopeful way to countenance all God's
People, reform the Law, and administer Justice impartially; hoping thereby the
People might forget Monarchy, and understand their true Interest in the
election of successive Parliaments; that so the Government might be settled
upon a right Basis, without hazard to this glorious cause, or necessitating to
keep up Armies for the defense of the same.

And being still resolved to use all means possibly to avoid extraordiany
courses, we prevailed with about twenty Members of Parliament, to give us a
conference, with whom we plainly debated the necessity and justness of our
Proposals: The which found no acceptance, but instead thereof it was offered,
that the way was to continue still this Parliament, as being that from which we
might probably expect all good things. This being vehehemently insisted on, did
much confirm us in our apprehensions: That not any love to a Representative,
but the making use thereof to recruit, and so to perpetuate themselves, was
their aim, in the Act they had then under consideration.

For preventing the consumating whereof, and all the sad and evil consequences,
which upon the grounds a foresaid must have ensued, and whereby at one Blow the
interest of all honest Men and of this glorious Cause had been endangered to be
laid in the dust, and these Nations embroyled in new Troubles, at a time when
our Enemies abroad are watching all Advantages against, and some of them
actually engaged in War with us, we have been necessitated (though with much
reluctance) to put an end to this Parliament.

This Declaration was seconded by another for settling a Council of State, to
give some Satisfaction to the People what Government they intended; which
Declaration, for the Readers further Satisfaction, take as follows.

Whereas the Parliament being dissolved, Persons of approved Fidelity and
Honesty are (according to the late Declararation of the 22. of April last) to
be called from the several parts of this Commonwealth to the Supreme Authority;
and although effectual proceedings are and have been had for perfecting those
Resolutions, yet some convenient time being required for the assembling of
those Persons, it has been found necessary for preventing the mischiefs and
inconveniences which may arise in the mean while to the public Affairs, that
a Council of State be constituted, to take care of and intend the Peace,
Safety, and present Management of the Affairs of this Commonwealth; which being
settled accordingly, the same is hereby declared and published, to the end all
Persons may take notice thereof, and in their several places and Stations,
demean themselves peaceably, giving Obedience to the Laws of the Nation as
heretofore; in the exercise and administration thereof, as endeavors shall be
used, that no oppression or wrong shall be done to the People, so a strict
account will be required of all such as shall do any thing to endanger the
Public peace and quiet upon any pretense whatsoever. April 30. 1653.

O. Cromwell.

These domestic revolutions put new Life into the Dutch, who hoping from these
Distractions to reap a Victory over the English, with great confidence put
forth again to Sea; thinking upon nothing so much as Chapmen for the English
Fleet, saying; It was to be cried out by the sound of Trumpet^ and Horns. But
they were deceived in their expectation; for coming to a Fight, on the North
Foreland, near unto the South poin^ of the Gobes, their Fleet was defeated
eleven Men of War, and two Water Hove being taken, besides six Captains and
fi^teen hundred Prisoners, and six Men (...) War which were sunk.

Not long after, to set the better face o^ his resolute proceedings, Cromwell
calls (...) another Parliament convened at Westminster, who met July 4. 1653.
to whom General Cromwell made a long Speech. Then he produced an Instrument
under his own Hand and Seal, whereby the Supreme Authority of the Nation was
devolved upon them, unto whom all Persons were to yield obedience and
subjection. He delared that they were to sit no longer then the third of
November 1654. and three months before their dissolution they were to make
choice of others to succeed them, who were not to sit above twelve months, and
then to take care for a succession in Government.

Now was the time come for the train to take the Dutch, having, as has been
expressed, cast the Urine of the present Affairs, being quite tired with then
continual losses, sent Commissioners over into England to treat of Peace. It
has been the result of the opinions of those that had their Eyes in their
Heads, that the Dutch thought to have made up their Mouths, to have taken our
Navy napping in the time of the Treaty the Fight happening betwixt the^^ and
us; but they found it otherwise, their whole Fleet was put to slight, their
(...) Van Trump, a Man of eminent (...) being slain, about thirty Men of War
suck and fired, six Captains, and about a thousand Men taken Prisoners, and
about six thousand slain. This great Victory did not a little conduce to hasten
the conclusion of the Peace, but on such terms as were at that time more
honorable for his present Designs, than advantageous to the English Nation*
For this service, gold Chains were presented to the Generals, Blake, Monk,
Run, and Lawson, and to the other Flag Captains; and silver Medals to the
other Officers of the Fleet.

The Parliament having sat about as many Weeks as the other had done Years,
they dissolved themselves, immediately making way for General Cromwell, by their
dissolution, to be chosen Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and of all the Islands and Territories thereunto
belonging, December, the 16, 1653. The Articles of the Government to which he
signed are as follows.

1. That his Excellency be chief Protector of the three Nations of England,
Scotland, and Ireland.

2. That he will, call to his assistance Counselors, not under the Number of
thirteen, nor above twenty one.

3. That he shall not act without the advice of his Council.

4. That here shall be every three Years a Parliament called, freely chosen, to
begin in September next, viz. four hundred, and the Number for every County
proportionable.

5. That no Parliament shall adjourn till they have sat above five Months.

6. When ever any Bill is passed in Parliament, the Lord Protector shall have
twenty Days to advise with his Council; if he sign it not in twenty Days, it
shall pass without, unless contrary to these Articles.

7. That no Parliament be dissolved by the Protector, but end every three
Years, and the Protector to issue out Warrants.

8. All the Crown Revenues left, to go to the maintenance of the Lord Protector.

9. To make Peace or War as he pleases, with the advice of his Council, in the
interval of Parliaments; but not to raise Money without the Parliament, unless
in extraordinary Causes.

10. Whatsoever goes out in the name of the Keepers of the Liberties of
England, to go out in the Name of the Lord Protector.

11. That it is Treason to speak against the present Government.

12. That all forfeited and confiscated Estates go to the maintenance of the
Lord Protector.

13. That all Acts of Parliaments made, and Estates sold, stand good and be
enjoyed.

14. That the Lord Protector have Power to confer titles of Honor, and to
dispose of the great Places of trust.

15. That in the interval of Parliaments, the Lord Protector, with his Council^
do order the Affairs of the Nation.

16. That all Articles of War be kept.

17. That the known Laws of the Commonwealth be continued.

18. That a standing Army be maintained of ten thousand Horse, and twenty
thousand Foot.

19. That Christian Religion be maintained, such as is contained in the Word of
God.

20. That all Persons shall have Liberty of Conscience, provided that they
disturb not the Civil Government, except the Popish and Prelatical party.

21. That no Papist, or Delinquent in Arms since the Year 1649, elect, or be
elected, a Parliament Man, under Penalty of forfeiture of one Years revenue,
and the Moiety of his personal Estate.

22. That the Lord Protector have Power to pardon all Offenders, except Murder.

23. That Writs be issued out in Jul next for summoning the Parliament, either
by the Protector, or in course.

24. That when the Protector dies, the Council then sitting shall summon all
the Members of the Council, the Major part to elect one to be Protector before
they stir out of the Council Chamber, and the Person so chosen, not to be under
the age of twenty one Years, nor of the Family of the Stuarts.

These Articles sworn to, he was proclaimed Lord Protector in the Palace-yard,
at Westminster, and by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen in their Scarlet Gowns at
the Royal Exchange; who to ingratiate themselves with their new Governor,
bestowed on him a costly Feast at Grocers Hall; it is an usual observation that
Persons that make their ways with their Swords, that their shows to take the
People, generaly are more stately then those of successive Princes; what he
admitted of, as with his own permission, was nothing to those dutiful
solemnities that pursued his Memory; without dispute he had studied the art and
ordinance of self-denying, insomuch that the Parliament perceiving that he did
but complement his Generalship, which he might with safety and most right have
accepted, they pressed him the less, as he seemed to push away that with his
little finger that they were certain he was ready to grasp with both his Hands.

The greatest Admiration that has furprized me, has been what in the compass
of a Year I have observed, the Tides and Streams of Petitions out of most
Counties, that at the first rise or promise of greatness have pursued every
alteration, as Party-colored as Joseph's Coat, and as variable as the Rainbow;
it is not to depictured how Janus-faced they have been on all occasions, with
how many religious expressions and wishes they have made their Addresses and
masqued their self-interests, if it were possible in so short an interim of
time, at once adoring so many rising Suns.

Since I have so strangely dissgressed, it will not be amiss to take notice of
a Book lately come forth, entitled, History and Policy reviewed, concerning
the political transactions of the Protector, published in a strange name,
written in the style of the holy Court, in which, the Author undertakes a
prodigious Enterprise, to compare Cromwell to Moses; his Pen is too palpably
^^aught with Flattery, yet not without un^^^ (...) Subtilty; he having like the
little (...) Gentleman, in the short Jacket, picked the Vermin out of Nic.
Machiavels Head for his use; throwing off one side principles honester then his
own; Machiavel never so disguising himself with the Vizard of Religion, that he
appears to be an arranter Devil than the Florentine; certain I am, that I never
read a Book that more pleased or displeased me.

But to proceed, at his first instalment, Heavens bless us, immediately follows
a Plot, miraculously discovered, eleven of the grand Conspirators being
apprehended, were committed to the Tower; where having remained a while, they
were again set at Liberty. This web was not well spun, his Spies and Informers
which he entertained at vast expense, put on their Spectacles that they might
see better against the next occasion.

In the Interim, the Scots under the Earls of Glencarne and Kenmore, raised
another Army of 4000 Horse and Foot, but were soon dissipated by the vigilance
of Colonel Morgan, who after a short but smart Fight, killed ^one hundred and
fifty of them, and defeated all the rest. Suspicions are necessary Alarms, as
they at least suffer persons not to be overtaken with too much security of
their Affairs.

Another great Plot was now again discovered; the chief Conspirators were said
to be Mr. Thomas and John Gerrard, Brothers, John Jones an Apothecary, and
Thomas Tendor, Somerset Fox, and Master Peter Vowel; who were all condemned,
but two only suffered, viz. Mr. Vowel who was hanged. Also about the same time
the Portugal Ambassadors Brother was brought to his Trial for the pistoling of
one Mr. Greenwood by a Knight of Malta, one of his high spirited followers; the
tumult being afterward occasioned from his retinue, he having been first very
uncivilly treated by Mr. Gerrard in his expatiating of the New Exchange, as he
termed it in his Declaration; for which Mr. Gerrard received a prick with his
Dagger, and afterward had the honor to die the same Death. The young
unfortunate Stranger suffered a very high favor to please the New Exchange
Chevaliers.

Mean while the Scotch Highlanders impatint of bearing the English yoke,
resolved to try the other bout; to which purpose, they assembled together in
great Numbers, having General Middleton to their Leader, who was newly come to
them out of Holland, but all their endeavors vanished into Smoke, General Monk
on the twentieth July, 1654, at a place called Loughberry, gave them such a
charge as utterly defeated them, and made them incapable of ever after thinking
of appearing in Arms again.

Soon after was a Parliament called, who no sooner were set, but fell upon
questioning the Power by which they were convocated; and doubting of its
lawfulness were soon dissolved by the same Power which they distrusted. The
Protector at the dissolution of this short Parliament, made a very long Speech,
wherein amongst many other passages he has this expression; This one thing I
speak as thus advised, and before God, as having been to this Day of this
Opinion, and this have been my constant Judgment, well known to many that hear
me speak, if this one thing had been inserted, that one thing, that this
Government should have been, and placed in my Family hereditary, I would have
rejected it. And a little after, If this be of humane structure, and invention,
and it be an old plotting and contrivance to bring things to this issue, and
that they are not the births of Providence, then they will come to nothing.

But notwithstanding his Speech was candied over with Scripture phrases, and
great expressions of his zeal for the good Government of the Land; yet these
his Actings much discontented the common People, whereupon ensued risings in
Shropshire, Montgomery, Nottinghamshire, Northumberland, and Yorkshire; but the
most considerable was at Salisbury, where Sir J^seph Wagstaff, Penruddock, and
Jones, who had formerly been Officers in the late King's Army, having gotten
together about 200 armed-Men, entered Salisbury, seized on all the Inns and
chief Houses; and the Assizes being holden there at that time, they took away
the Judges Commissions and Pattents, and all their Horses, and so marched away.
Sir Henry Slingsby and Sir Richard Malleverer assembled some Forces also in
Yorkshire; but not being seconded according to their expectation, they dispersed
themselves on their own account. For these actings were put to Death Master
Lucas, Thorp, Kensey, Graves, and Penruddock, Sir Henry Slingsby was taken and
Imprisoned, and aftewards beheaded upon another account, as I shall show you in
its due place. About this time the great Headpiece of Europe joins his Foxes
Tail to our Lions Skin; Correspondencies are held betwixt the French and us,
which occasioning some Jealousies with some other bitter Pills that had before
been swallowed, but not disgested by the Spaniard, caused some Heart-burnings,
which soon broke forth into an open War, first managed by the Generals, Pen and
Venables, who on the 27. of December 1654, with a gallant Fleet set sail from
Portsmouth, and on the 28 of January following, arrived at the Barbados, where
they seized on 18 Holland Merchant Men, who contrary to the Ordinance of the
long Parliament traffiqued in those Parts, from thence they sailed to
Hispaniola, arriving near to the Port Sancta Domingo, where by the deepness of
Sands, and heat of the Climate being infinitely tired, they were by the
Spaniards put to Flight, and enforced to march back again to their Ships; from
thence they set-sail to the Island of Jama^ca, which after a little resistance
they mastered, and have since preserved, notwithstanding the Spaniards to
regain the same, landed there with two or three thousand Men, but were
discomsited with the Loss of all their Cannon and Baggage.

In the Interim General Blake with a considerable Fleet of Ships, having cast
Anchor before Tunis, April, 18, 1655. sent unto the Dey of the Place, demanding
satisfaction for some English Ships, which the Pirates of those parts had
carried away, and the Liberty of the English Slaves they had detained; but his
message and himself was refused with scorn and derision, the Turk making this
answer, Behold our Castles of Galleta, and our Castles and Vessels of Port^
Ferino, do your worst against them, and do no^ think to brave us with the sight
of your great Fleet. This answer so exasperated the English Admiral, that
notwithstanding there were one hundred and twenty Guns planted on the Shore,
and in the Castle against them; yet regardless of all danger, he set upon their
Men of War which lay in Port^ Ferino, and in less then in four Hours space
burnt all their Ships, being in number nine to their very Keels, which enforced
the King of Tunis to seek to the English for their friendship, and restored all
the Prisoners for little or nothing.

These successes were seconded by two other great Victories obtained over the
Spaniards at Sea; the one by Genera Mountague about nine Leagues from Cadiz
where he destroyed six of their Ship whereof two were taken, two run aground
one sunk, and another burnt, and there^ the Marquess of Badex, his Wife and
Daughter; the young Marquess and h^ Brother, with a great deal of Wealth bei^
taken, and brought into England. The Fight being incomparably related by (...)
Laureat of our times, I thought fit to inse^ it, not to deprive the Reader of
so Elegant a Poem; let him wave the poetical Flattery of it as he pleases.

Upon the present War with Spain, and the first Victory obtained at Sea.
NOw for some Ages had the Pride of Spain,
Made the Sun shine on half the world invain;
While she bid War to to all that durst supply
The place of those, her Cruelty made dye.
Of Nature's Bounty Men forbear to taste,
And the best Portion of the Earth lay waste.
From the New World her Silver and her Gold,
Came like a Tempest, to confound the Old.
Feeding with these the bribed Elector's Hopes,
She made at Pleasure Emperors and Popes:
With these, advancing her unjust Designs,
Europe was shaken with her Indian Mines.
When our Protector looking with disdain
Upon this gilded Majesty of Spain;
And knowing well that Empire must decline,
Whose chief support, and sinews, are of Coin:
Our Nation's solid virtue, did oppose
To the rich Troublers of the World's repose.
And now some months encamping on the main,
Our Naval Army had besieged Spain.
They that the whole Worlds Monarchy design^d*
Are to their Ports by our bold Fleet confined:
From whence our Red Cross they triumphant see,
Riding without a Rival on the Sea,
Others may use the Ocean as their road,
Only the English make it their abode:
Whose ready Sails with every Wind can fly,
And make a covenant with the unconstant Sky.
Our Oaks secure, as if they there took root;
We tread on Billows with a steady foot.
Mean while the Spaniards in America,
Near to the Line, the Sun approaching saw;
And hoped their European Coasts to find
Cleard from our Ships, by the Autumnal Wind.
Their huge capacious Gallions stuffed with Plate,
The laboring Winds drives slowly toward their Fate.
Before Saint Lucar they their Guns discharge,
To tell their Joy, or to invite a Barge,
This heard, some Ships of ours, though out of view,
As swift as Eagles to the Quarry flew.
So heedless Lambs which for their Mothers bleat,
Wake hungry Lions and become their Meat.
Arrived, they soon begin that Tragic Play,
And with their smoaky Cannon banish Day.
Night, horror, slaughter, with confusion meets,
And in their sable Arms embrace the Fleets.
Through yielding Planks the angry Bullets fly,
And of one Wound hundreds together die.
Born under different Stars, one Fate they have,
The Ship their Coffin, and the Sea their Grave.
Bold were the Men, which on the Ocean first
Spread their new Sails, shipwreck was the worst
More danger now from Men alone we find,
Then from the Rocks, the Billows, or the Wind.
They that had sailed from the Antartick Pole,
Their Treasure safe, and all their Vessels whole;
In sight of their dear Country ruined be,
Without the guilt of either Rock or Sea.
What they would spare, our fiercer Art destroys,
Excelling storms in terror and in noise.
Once love from Hyda did both Hosts survey,
And when he pleased to thunder, part the Fray:
Here Heaven in vain that kind retreat should sound,
The louder Cannon had the Thunder drowned.
Some we made Prize while others burnt and rent,
With their rich Lading to the bottom went.
Down sinks at once (so fortunate with us sports)
The Pay of Armies, and the Pride of Courts.
Vain Man, whose rage buries as low that store,
As Avarice, had dug for it before.
What Earth in her dark Bowels could not keep,
From greedy hands, lles safer in the deep:
Where Thetis kindly does from Mortals hide
Those seeds of Luxury Debate, and Pride,
And now into her lap the richest Prize.
Fell, with the noblest of our Enemies.
The Marquess glad to see the Fire destroy
Wealth, that prevailing Fees were to enjoy:
Out from his flaming Ship his Children sent,
To perish in a milder Element.
Then laid him by his burning Ladies side,
And since he could not save her, with her died.
Spices and Gums about them melting fry,
And Phenix-like, in that rich nest they die.
Death bitter is, for what we leave behind,
But taking with us, all we love, is kind,
What could he more then hold for term of Life,
His Indian Treasure, and his more prized Wife?
Alive, in Flames of equal love they burned,
And now together are to Ashes turned.
Ashes more worth then all their Funerals cost,
Then the huge Treasure which was with them lost.
These dying Lovers, and their floating Sons,
Suspend the Fight, and silence all our Guns.
Beauty and Youth, about to perish, finds
Such noble pity in brave English minds;
That the rich Spoil neglecting, and the Prize,
All labor now to save their Enemies.
How frail our passion's? how soon changed are
Our wrath and Fury to a friendly care?
They that but know to gain the Spanish Plate,
Made the Sea blush with Blood, forget their hate;
And their young Foes, while sinking they retrive,
With greater danger then they fought they dive.
With these returns Victorious Mountague,
With Laurel in his Hands, and half Perue.
Let the brave General divide that Bough.
Our great Protector has such Wreaths enough,
His conquering head has no more room for bays
Then let it be as the whole Nation prays:
Let the rich Oar forthwith be melted down,
And the State fixed, by making him a Crown:
With Ermins clad, and Purple; let him hold
A Royal Scepter made of Spanish Gold.
About this time the blasphemies of many Sectaries in England were horrible;
particularly of one James Nailor, who under a seeming Sanctity, and pretended
illuminations, vented most horrible blasphemies, for which he was cast into
Excester Goal; yet had this wretched Impostor so bewitched his followers to the
committing of strange absurdities, that they ascribed to him Divine Honors,
and gave him in Scripture phrase, the same titles which are applicable to none
but Christ himself.

In a Letter of one Richard Fairman to him, are these horrid expressions, I am
filled with joy and rejoicing when I behold thee in the eternal Unity. O my Soul
is melting within me, when I behold thy Beauty and Innocence, dear and precious
Son of Zion, whose Mother is a Virgin, and whose Birth is immortal. One of his
she Converts writes of him thus, All the Wise Men shall seek for him, and when
they have found him, they shall open their Ears, and shall give unto him of
their Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh. The same Woman in another Letter to him
proceeds thus. O thou fairest of ten thousand, thou only begotten Son of God,
how my Heart pants after thee; O stay me with Flaggons, and comfort me with
Wine; my well-beloved thou art like a Roe, or young Heart, upon the Mountains of
Spices. Then by way of Postscript her Husband Thomas Stranger adds this. Thy
Name is no more to be called James, but Jesus. Also a Maid named Dorcas Erbury,
being examined, declared, James Nailor to be the holy one of Israel, the only
Son of God, and that she pulled off his Stockings, and put her Clothes under
his Feet, because he is the Holy Lord, of Israel, and that she knew no other
Savior but him; affirming moreover, that the Spirit of the Lord within her,
commanded her to call him Lord and Master, and to serve him. That in Excester
Goal he had raised her from the Dead, after she had been dead two Days, and
that he should sit at the Right Hand of the Father, and judge the World.

Having seduced these silly Souls into such damnable opinions, and gotten
releasment out of Excester Goal, he began immedintely to play his Pranks at
diverse Places in the West; particularly at Wells and Glastenbury, through which
Towns he rode on Horseback, a Man going bare before him, some walking a foot on
each side of his Stirrup, and others strewing their Garments in the Way; from
thence he took his Journey toward Bristol, and coming to a Village called
Bedminster, about a Mile from Bristol, rid through it in the same presumptuous
blasphemous manner, as he did before at Wells and Glastenbury. There
accompanied him two Men, with each a Woman behind on Horseback, which alighted
when they came to the Suburbs of Bristol, and footed it along on each side of
Nailor's Horse, the Man still bare-headed leading the Horse, and all the Way
they went, they sung, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Israel, and then the Women
led the Horse with the Reins in their Hands, up to the high Cross of Bristol,
and from thence to the Whitehart-Inn in Broad-street; by this time the
Magistrates hearing of their doings, sent for Nailor and his Companions, who
came singing all the Way Hosanna, and Holy, Holy, Holy, etc. The Magistrates of
Bristol having examined him, sent him up to the Parliament (together with the
narrative of his Action committed in those parts) to receive his Sentence,
which was as follows.

That James Nailor be set with his Head in the Pillory, in the new Palace at
Westminster, during the space of two Hours, on Thursday next, and shall be
whipped by the Hangman through the Streets from Westminster, to the Old
Exchange London; and there likewise be set in the Pillory, for the space of two
Hours, between the Hours of eleven and one, on Saturday next; in each of the
said Places, wearing a Paper containing an Inscription of his Crimes, and at
the Old Exchange his Tongue shall be bored through with a hot Iron; and that he
be there also stigmatized in the Forehead with the Letter B. and that he be
afterward sent to Bristol, and conveyed into, and through the said City on a
Horse bare ridg'd, with his Face backward; and there also publicly whipped, the
next Market Day after he comes thither. That from thence he be committed to
prison in Bridewell, London, and there restrained from the Society of all
People, and kept to hard labor, till he shall be released by Parliament; and
during that time be debarred the use of Pen, Ink, and Paper, and shall have no
relief, but what he earns by his daily Labor, which accordingly was executed
upon him, December 17. 1656.

His Flies and Familiars were still useful to him for the discovering of more
strange designs; the revealing of which, no Question kept many Conspiracies
from being attempted, to which effect there is yet another Plot, against the
Protectors Life, intended by Miles Sindercomb, alias Fish, one who had formerly
been a Parliament Soldier, under the command of Sir John Reynolds, together
with one Cecil; induced thereunto, as is said by Don Alonso, the late Spanish
Ambassador; to the effecting their designs, they are said to have hired a House
at Hammersmith, adjoining by the Highway side, to have shot him in his Coach,
as he passed by; but that failing, they intended to have shot him in Hide-Park,
and to that purpose they filed off the Hinges of the Gates for their better
escape; and this miscarrying, they intended to have fired White Hall. For these
Offenses Sindercomb was arraigned at the Upper Bench Bar in Westminster Hall,
February, 9. 1656. where being found guilty by the Jury, he was condemned to be
hanged, drawn, and quartered at Tyburn; but before his Execution he was found
dead in his Bed, and several presumptions of a violent Death appearing on him;
it was concluded he poisoned himself. Afterward he was drawn from the Tower
unto Tower Hill, at a Horse's-Tail, with his Head forward, and there under the
Scaffold, turned into a hole stark naked, and a Stake spiked and plated with
Iron, driven through him into the Earth. It is to be observed that whatsoever the
vigilance of the Guard of the Tower was over this Gentleman, that he died with
as fresh a Color as Sir Thomas Overbury is said to have expired with.

But to return where we left, that successful Seaman General Blake, the
Protectors intended Drake, an honest stout incomparable Seaman, he failing
with his Fleet to Sancta Cruza, in the Island of Teneriff, in which Port lay
sixteen great Spanish Vessels, laden with rich Merchandises from the Indies, He
on the 20th of April, 1657. set upon them, and destroyed them all, not sixty of
his own Men being lost.

But to return, June the 20. 1657 the Protector with great Magnificence was
installed at Westminster, the Parliament then sitting; and in Westminster Hall,
a rich Cloth of State was set up, and under it a Chair of State placed upon an
ascent of two degrees, covered with Carpets, and before it a Table with a Chair
appointed for the Speaker of the Parliament, and on each side of the Hall upon
the said Structure were Seats raised one above another, and decently covered
for the Members of Parliament, and below them, Seats on one side for the Judges
of the Land, and on the other side for the Aldermen of the City of London.

About two of the Clock in the Afternoon, the Protector met the Parliament in
the Painted Chamber, and passed such Bills as were presented to him; after
which they went in order to the place appointed in Westminster Hall; the
Protector standing under the Cloth of Estate, the Lord Widdrington Speaker of
the Parliament, addressed himself to him in this Speech.

May it please your Highness,

You are now upon a great Theater, in a large Chore of People, you have the
Parliament of England, Scotland, and Ireland, before you; on your Right Hand my
Lords the Judges, and on your Left Hand, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Sheriffs
of London; the most noble and populous City of England. The Parliament, with
the Interposition of your sufferage, makes Laws, and the Judges, and Governors
of London are the great Dispencers of those Laws to the People.

The Occasion of this great Convention and Intercourse, is, to give an
Investiture to your Highness in that eminent Place of Lord Protector; a Name
you had before, but it is now settled by the full and unanimous consent of the
People of these three Nations assembled in Parliament; you have no new Name,
but a new date added to the old Name; the 16 of December, is now changed to the
26 of June.

I am commanded by the Parliament, to make oblation to your Highness of four
Things in order to this Inauguration.

The first is a Robe of Purple, an Emblem of Magistracy, and imports
Righteousness and Justice; when you have put on the Vestment, I may say, (and I
hope without Offense) that you are a Gown Man. This Robe is of a mixed Color,
to show the mixture of Justice and Mercy, which are then most excellent when
they are well tempered together. Justice without Mercy, is Wormwood and
Bitterness, and Mercy without Justice is of a too soft a Temper for Government;
for a Magistrate must have two Hands, Plectentem and Amplectentem.

The next thing is a Bible, a Book that contains the Holy Scripture; in which
you have the Honor and Happiness to be well versed. This is the Book of Life,
consisting of two Testaments, the Old and New. In the first we have Christum
velatum, Christ in Types, Shadows, and Figures; in the latter we have Christum
revelatum, Christ revealed. This Book carries in it the grounds of the true
Christian Protestant Religion; it is a Book of Books, it contains in it both
precepts and examples for good Government.

Alexander so highly valued the Books of his Master Aristotle, and other great
Princes other Books, that they have laid them every Night under their Pillows.
These are all but Legends and Romances to this one Book; at Book to be had
always in remembrance: I find it said in a Part of this Book which I shall
desire to read, and it is this. Deuteronomy. 17. And it shall be when he sits upon
the Throne of his Kingdom, that he shall write a Copy of this Law in a Book,
out of that which is before the Priests and Levites. And it shall be with him,
and he shall read therein all the Days of his Life, that he may learn to fear
the Lord God, and to keep all the Words of his Law and those Statutes, to do
them. That his Heart be not lifted up above his Brethren; and that he turn not
aside from the Commandment, to the Right Hand or to the Left, to the end he may
prolong his Days in his Kingdom, he and his Children in the midst of Israel.

The next Thing that I am to offer to your Highness, is a Scepter, not unlike a
Staff, for you are to be a Staff to the Weak and Poor; it is of ancient use in
this kind; it is said in Scripture, in reference to Judah, the Royal Tribe, That
the Scepter shall not depart from Judah. It was of like use in other Kingdoms
and Governments. Homer the Prince of the Greek Poets, calls Kings and Princes
Scepter-bearers.

The last Thing is a Sword, not a Military, but a Civil Sword; a Sword rather
for a Defense than an Offense; not to defend your self only, but others also;
the Sword is an Emblem of Justice. The noble Lord Talbot, in Henry the Sixths
time, wrote upon his Sword, Ego sum Talboti, propter occidendum inimicos meos;
This Gallant Lord was a better Soldier then a Critic. If I might presume to
fix a Motto upon this Sword, it should be this, Ego sum Demini Protectoris ad
protegendum populum meum.

I say, this Sword is an Emblem of Justice, and is to be used as King Solomon
used his, for the discovery of truth in the points of Justice. I may say of
this Sword as King David said of Goliah's Sword, There is none like this,
Justice is the proper Virtue of the Imperial Throne, and by Justice the Thrones
of Kings and Princes are established. Justice is a Royal Virtue, which as one
says of it, does employ the other three Cardinal Virtues in her service. 1.
Wisdom to discern the nocent from the Innocent. 2. Fortitude, to prosecute, and
execute. 3. Temperance, so to carry Justice that Passion be no ingredient, and
that it be without confusion, or precipitation.

You have given ample Testimony in a^^ these particulars; so that this Sword in
your Hand will be a right Sword of Justice, attended with Wisdom, Fortitude,
and Temperance.

When you have all these together, what a comely and glorious fight is it to
behold, A Lord Protector in a Purple Robe, with a Scepter in his Hand, a Sword
of Justice girt about him, and his Eyes fixed upon the Bible.

Long may you prosperously enjoy them all, to your own comfort, and the comfort
of the People of these three Nations.

The Speech being ended, Master Speaker came from his Chair, took the Robe, and
therewith vested the Protector, being assisted therein by the Earl of Warwick,
the Lord Whitlock and others. Which done, the Bible was delivered him; after
that the Sword girt about him; and last of all he had the Scepter delivered
him. These Things being performed, Master Speaker returned unto his Chair, and
administered him his Oath, in haec verba.

I do in the Presence, and by the Name of God Almighty, promise and swear, that
to the uttermost of my Power I will uphold and maintain the true Reformed
Protestant Christian Religion, in the Purity thereof, as it is contained in the
Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to the uttermost of my Power and
Understanding; and encourage the Profession and Professors of the same; and
that to the utmost of my Power I will endeavor as Chief Magistrate of these
three Nations, the Maintenance and Preservation of the Peace and Safety, and
just Rights and Privilege of the People thereof; and shall in all Things,
according to our best ^est Knowledge and Power, govern the People of these
three Nations according to Law.

These Ceremonies being performed, a Herald of Arms by sound of Trumpet
proclaimed him, Lord Protector of England, Scotland, Ireland, and the Dominions
thereto belonging; hereupon the Trumpets sounded again, and the People (after
the usual manner) gave several Acclamations, with loud shouts, crying, God save
the Lord Protector. His Highness had scarce accepted of these Honors, but as
if the ill affected would not let him breath, yet another Plot is discovered,
Colonel Edward Sexby is said to have conspired against the Lord Protector; for
which he was committed to the Tower, where having continued about half a Year,
he died.

But to reflect a little back, Mazarine that great Minister of State, on which
hinge all the grand Affairs of France turn, perfects a Peace with England; the
Protector having no regard to those Advantages that Spain might render him as
to Commerce, the Places of Hostage which she proffered to put into his Hands,
as Gravelin Dunkirk, and others, he was swayed with other Interest which he
best understood himself, to prefer an Alliance and League with France before
all those Advantages, except his civility induced him (which seldom had such
Power over him) to look more lovingly upon France as the weakest at that time,
being abandoned by some of her Allies, as quite disordered by an Intestine War
in her own Bowels, her Navigation totally ruined, as the Pirates of Dunkirk had
blockt up all her Sea Ports; whereas the English scowred those Seas, cast away
the Pirates, and reduced the Mounsieur and Diego by their successes to their so
likely advantageous Peace. Indeed, (as one writes) it was a high generosity,
since the English caused the French to lose Graveling and Dunkirk, to help
France again to take those places. In the mean Space was not here rare bandying
of Interests.

France having thus perfected a Peace with England, they jointly resolve to
(...) ^ainst the Spaniard; hereupon Article^ Reynolds with six thousand Foot
was sent into Picardy, to join with the French Cavalry, which completed as
gallant an Army as had been seen in France for many Years together. These
jointly besiege and take Mardike; a strong Fort of the Spaniards in Flanders,
whereof Major General Morgan took Possession for the English; as the earnest of
further Conquests; which the Spaniards attempting for to regain, were twice
repulsed with very great loss.

But the Joy of these Successes was mitigated by the Death of Admiral Blake,
who as he got his Honor by the Sea, died on it, and that within sight of
Plymouth. He was a Man who had deserved of his Country, and might justly be
styled the Neptune thereof. His Body was brought with a Naval pomp by Water
from Greenwich to Westminster, being a suitable Ceremony to ^his Employment,
and was there buried in Henry the Seventh's Chapel. Upon whom an Ingenious
Person bestowed this Epitaph.

Here lies a Man, made Spain and Holland shake
Made France to tremble, and the Turks to quake.
Thus he tamed Men, but if a Lady stood
(...) sight, it raised a Palsy in his blood;
(...) agonist, who in his Life
Had Fortune as familiar as a Wife.
A stiff hard Iron Soldier; for he
It seems had more of Mars than Mercury;
At Sea he thundered, calmed each raging Wave,
And now he is dead, sent thundering to his Grave.
Soon after was St. Venant taken by the English, the Lord Henry Cromwell made
Deputy of Ireland. Sir John Reynolds, Colonel White, and some other Officers
drowned upon Goodwin Sands, as they were coming out of Flanders into England.

One writes that the subtilty of discovering of Plots, though but in the
Embrio, or before they are hatched, in the time of Peace is the most succinct
way of letting of Blood? March 24. (the last Day of the Year accounted for)
1657. a great Conspiracy was again discovered in London, several Regiments (as
was said) being enrolled; who on the first day of May in the Night Time should
have set Fire on several parts of the City, and whilst the Confusion and
Horror thereof had seized all Men, they should have made a general massacre of
all who opposed them. Hereupon several Persons were apprehended, as Doctor
Hewet, Sir Henry Slingsby, Colonel Ashton, etc. and a High Court of Justice
erected for the Trial of them; and first they began with Sir Henry Slingsby,
the Articles charged against them will in part discover themselves in their
several Speeches made just before their Deaths. In short, they were both
condemned, Dr. Hewet (professing himself to be ignorant of such Law; though
amongst the most learned Divines few of them were more knowing in the Gospel)
being taken in three defaults upon formalities of the Court, was proceeded
against as mute,

June 8. 1658. was the Day appointed for their beheading, Sir Henry Slingsby
first mounting the Stage, spoke in effect as follows.

That he stood condemned by the Court of Justice, as contriving and
endeavoring to withdraw diverse Officers of the Garrison of Kingston upon Hull
from their Duty; and persuading them to a surrendering and yielding up of that
Garrison, and one that held correspondence with some beyond Sea to that end.
That it was true, he had conference upon that Account with the Officers of that
Garrison; and that he gave Major Waterhouse a Commission signed Charles R. But
that it was but an old one that had lain by him, though he thought fit to make
use of it to the Major. Many Passages he said there were which he would not
insist on; that some Friends of his had made Application to his Highness for
the saving of his Life, but it seems it was thought fit not to be granted, and
therefore he submitted, and was ready to dye, etc.

Having uttered these and the like Words he took off a Ring from his
Bandstrings wherein instead of a Seal engraven, was the Picture of the late
King exactly done, and giving it to a Gentleman that stood by him, he said,
Pray give this to Harry. Then he addressed himself to Prayer, wherein he
continued some time; taking leave of his Friends, he submitted his Neck to the
Block, and had his Head severed from his Body at one Blow by the Executioner.
This at one Blow by the Executioner, the Reader may observe has been very
often repeated in this Volume.

His Tragic Scene being acted, that Religious and Reverend Divine Doctor
Hewet, the golden tongued Chrysostom, entered the Lists of Death. In this
Warfare the Doctor put on the spiritual Armor of a blessed Confidence,
delivering his Mind to the People in these following Words.

I am now become a public Spectacle to Men and Angels, and (I hope) God who is
omniscient is now beholding me with much Pity, Mercy and Compassion; and the
more, because I am now come to that end that his own Son came into the World
to, to bear Witness to the Truth; he himself said, For this end was I born, for
this cause came I into the World, that I should bear Witness to the Truth. I
was brought into the World (the Christian World) for to bear Witness to the
Truth of the Gospel, as (...) common Christian; I was brought into the World
(the Church) as a Minister of hi^ blessed Word and Sacraments; [blessed be his
Name for that great Honor and Dignity;] and I came into the World to die more
immediately for the Testimony of Jesus, which God has now called me to. (...)
came into this World (this Commonwealth) to be a Member thereof, to bear
Witness to the Truths of the Customs, the Laws the Liberties, and Privileges
thereof; for am a Member of the Commonwealth. And methinks it seems to me a
strange thing that in as much as we all plead for Liberty and Privileges, and
I pleading for the Privileges, the Laws, the Statutes, and the Customs of this
Land, yet I should die by those that should stand for the Laws, the Statutes,
and Privileges of the Land. An^ I am here beheld by those that plead for their
Liberties, and I hope I am pitied, because I here give up my self willingly
and steely to be a State-Martyr for the public good; and I had rather die many
Deaths my ^elf, then betray my fellow Freemen to so ^any Inconveniences that
they might be ^^ke to suffer, by being subject to the Wills ^f them that willed
me to this Death.

And it is worthy Remembrance that Master Solicitor having impeached me of
Treason to the Commissioners of the Court against his Highness, I did often
(when brought before those Commissioners) plead for the Liberties of the People
of England, though I had no Knowledge of the Law, ^et I had Instructions from
those that were learned in the Law, and had several Law-Cases and made my
Appeal. First, for ^he Judicature that I was to be tried by, Whether it were
according to Law? Whether it were according to the Act? And whether it were
according to the Words of the said Act? I did appeal to have the said Act
argued by learned Lawyers on both sides, and then to be resolved by his
Highness own Council, which was denied me. [This by the by.] I pressing the
Argument, made a second Appeal, that those Judges, if they would give singly
their several Judgments that it was a just and lawful Court of Judicature, I
would answer to my Charge. I did make another Appeal to those that were his
Highnesses Council, and pleaded against me, That if they would deliver it to me
under their (...) to be according to Law, I would then (...) plead, and answer
to the Charge. What was then said further my Spirits being faint, I shall not
say much, but only this, I was taken in three defaults upon formality of the
Court. It seems it is a custom in all Courts, (which I did not know before)
that if they answer not the third time speaking, by the Clerk, that then they
are guilty of three defaults, and proceeded against as mute: [I had no such
Knowledge of the Law.] So they found me guilty of those defaults; and when I
would have pleaded, and resolved to begin to plead, I was taken from the Bar. I
did the next Day make my Petition to the Court in the Painted Chamber, two
Petitions were presented, the same in effect; the former, the Title was
mistaken. Yet because the Title was mistaken, and no Answer given, therefore it
was that another Petition was drawn up to the same Effect, with a new Title
given, (as I remember) presented by the Sergeant at Arms; and one writ it over
in such haste, lest they should be drawn out of the Painted Chamber into the
Court, that I had not time to read it over, only I subscribed my Name, and
there was in the Front of the Petition a Word left out, but what the Word was,
I know not; and this was taken so ill, as if I had put an Affront and Contempt
on the Court: And it was thought they would have heard me plead; and then
because of that mistake, they sent Word, I should have my Answer when I came
into the Court, and my Answer was the Sentence of Condemnation. And therefore I
pray with all my Soul, that God would forgive all those that occasioned the
Charge to be drawn against me, to give such unjust Things against me: I pray
with all my Soul, that God would forgive all those that upon so slender and
small Grounds adjudg'd me to dye, taking Advantage of such simple Ignorance as
I was in. And I had at the very beginning of my pleading, engaged their Honors
no Advantage should be taken against me to my Prejudice, that in as much as I
understood nothing of the Law: And having heard that a Man in the Nicety of the
Law might be lost in the Severity thereof; merely for speaking a Word out of
simple Ignorance, I made it my Prayer to them that no Advantage might be taken
against me to the Prejudice of my Person And there was to me a seeming Consent;
for the President told, there should be no Advantage taken against me; and upon
these Considerations I am afraid there was too great Uncharitableness; but I
pray God forgive them from the very bottom of my Soul, and I desire that even
those that shed my Blood, may have the Bowels of the God of Mercy shed for them.

And now having given you the Occasion of my coming hither, it is fit I should
give you somewhat as concerning my self as I am a Christian, I thank God I was
Baptized to the Holy Church, so I was Baptized to be a Member of the Holy
Catholic Church, that is, the Church of England, which I dare say for Purity
of Doctrine, and orderly Discipline, till a sad Reformation had spoiled the
Face of the Church, and made it a querry whether it were a Church, or no; I
say, it was more purely Divine and Apostolical, than any other Doctrine or
Church in the Christian World, whether National, or Classical, or
Congregational. And I must tell you, That as I am a Member of this Church, so I
am a Member of the Holy Catholic Church, and shall give a most just Confession
of my Faith both negatively and affirmatively; negatively, I am so a Member of
the Holy Catholic Church, that I abhor all Sects, Schisms, Sedition, and
Tyranny in Religion. Affirmatively so, that as I hold Communion with, so I love
and honor all Christians in the World that love the same Lord Jesus in
Sincerity, and call on his Name agreeing with those Truths that are absolutely
necessary, and clearly demonstrated in the Word of God, both in the Old and New
Testaments; though in Charity dissenting from some others that are not necessary.
And I, as I am thus a Christian, I hope for Salvation through the Merits of
Christ Jesus; his Blood I rely on, his Merits I trust to for the Salvation of
my own Soul. Though to this Faith, good Works are necessary, not meritorious in
us, but only made meritorious by Christ his Death; by his all sufficiency, by
his satisfaction, and his righteousness, they become meritorious. And truly as
I am a Member of this Church, so I am a Member of this Community, and so
pleaded for the Liberties and Privileges thereof. I must now answer something
I am aspersed withal in the World.

They talk of something of a Plot, and a Treasonable Design, and that I had a
great Interest in the Knowledge and Practice thereof, and that for the saving
my Life, I would have discovered and betrayed I cannot tell what: I hope my
Conversation has not been such here in this City, where I have been a long
Time very well known, as to make one imagine I should intermeddle in such an
Action, and go so contrary to the Practice of my Profession; and I hope there
are none so uncharitable toward me, as to believe I had a Knowledge of that
Design.

Here I must come to particulars, for a Plot, of having a Design upon the City
of London for the Firing of it: I so much trouble at the Thought of the Thing
that should have been done, as they say, for the carrying on of such a Design,
(if my Heart deceive me not) had I known it, I so much abhor the Thing, I
should have been the first discoverer of it: Nor ever had I Correspondency or
Meetings with such Persons as would have carried on such a Design. It is said
likewise, I entertained the Earl, the Marquess of Ormond; to my Remembrance I
never saw the Face of that Honorable Person in my Life. It is said, One Lords
Day I did preach at Saint Gregory's and the next Lords Day I was at Brussels or
Bruges, and kissed the Kings Hand, and brought I cannot tell what Orders and
Instructions from him; this I shall say, For these three Years last past
together, I have not been sixty Miles from this City of London, and I think it
is somewhat further to either of those Places then threescore Miles. It is said
that I kept Correspondence with one Barrow and Bishop; they are Persons I have
heard of their Names, but never saw their Faces, and to my Knowledge I do not
know they knew me; nor do I know them at all, but only as I have heard of their
Names. And whosoever else has suggested such things against me, I know not.

His Highness was pleased to tell me, I was like a flaming Torch in the midst
of a Sheaf of Corn; he meaning, I being a public Preacher, was able to set the
City on Fire by Sedition and Combustions, and promoting D^signs. Here truly I
do say, and have it from many of those that are Judges of the High Court, that
upon Examination of the Business they have not found me a Meddler at all in
these Affairs. And truly, I must needs say therefore, that it was a very
uncharitable Act in them (who ever they were) that brought such Accusations
against me, and irritated his Highness against me, I will not say it was
Malice, it might be Zeal, but it was rash zeal which caused me to be sentenced
to this Place; the God of Mercy pardon and forgive them all, and truly as I am
a Member of the Church, and as a Member of the Community whereon behalf I have
been speaking, I cannot but do as our Savior himself did for his Disciples
when he was to be taken from them, he blessed them, and ascended up to Heaven.
My Trust is in the Mercy of the most High, I shall not miscarry; and however my
Days are shortened by this unexpected doom, and shall be brought untimely to the
Grave: I cannot go without my Prayers for a Blessing upon all the People of
this Land, and cannot but bless them all in the Name of God, and beseech God to
bless them in all their Ways, and his Blessing be upon them.

Let us Pray.
O Most glorious Lord God, thou whose Dwelling is so far above the Highest
Heavens, that thou humblest thy self but to look upon the Things that are in
Heaven, and that are in Earth, and thou do whatsoever thou will both in
Heaven, in Earth, in the Sea, and in all deep Places; in thy Hands are the
Hearts of all Men, and thou turnest them which way soever thou will, O Lord
look in Mercy and Compassion we beseech thee, on this great and innumerous
People of this Land; look upon them O Lord, withan Eye of Pity, not with ^n Eye
of Fury and Indignation; O look not upon all those great and grievous Sins that
have provoked thee most justly to Wrath and Displeasure against us. Gracious
God, who can stand in thy Sight when thou art angry? When thou with rebuke do
correct Man for Sin, thou make his Beauty to consume away like as it were a
Moth fretting a Garment. O Lord, thy Indignation and Wrath lies heavy upon us,
and thou have vexed us with thy Scourges, thou have made us a Reproach and a by
Word amongst our Neighbors, and the very Heathens laugh us to scorn. O that
thou would turn us again, O Lord God of Hosts; that thou would show us the
Light of thy Countenance, that we may behold it; that thou would humble us
for all those Sins and grievous Transgressions that are amongst us; for those
Atheisms, for those Infidelities, horrid Blasphemies, and Profaneness; for
those Sacriledges, for those Heresies, for those Schisms, Errors, and all those
Blindnesses of Heart, Pride, vain Glory, and Hypocrisy; for that Envy, Hatred,
and Malice, and all Uncharitableness, that has set us one against another,
that we are so dashed one against another, even to destroy each other; Ephraim
against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, and both against Judah. O Lord
we are like those Moabites and Ammonites, etc. -- This thou have done to us O
Lord, because we have rebelled against thee: O how greatly and grievously have
we sinned against thee, yet for all this, thou have not requited us according
to our ill deservings, for thou might have brought us to Desolation and
Destruction; Fire might have come down from Heaven, and destroyed us; our
Foreign Enemies, and the Enemies of thee, and thy Christ our Savior, might
have swallowed us up. What have we not deserved! yet O the long Suffering, and
Patience, and Goodness of our God! O Lord our God, we pray thee that thy
Patience and long Suffering might lead to Repentance that thou would be
pleased, thou who delightest not in the Death of a Sinner, but rather that he
should turn from his Sins and live, that thou would turn us unto thee O Lord,
and we shall be turned; draw us, and we shall run after thee; draw us with the
Cords of Love, and by the Bands of loving kindness, by the powerful working of
thy Holy Spirit in our Souls, working Contrition in our Hearts, and a Godly
Sorrow for all our Sins, even a Sorrow to Repentance, and a Repentance to
Salvation never to be repented of. Lord break those stnoy Hearts of ours by the
Hammer of thy Word, mollify them by the Oil of thy Grace, smite these rocky
Hearts of ours by the Rod of thy most gracious Power, that we may shed forth
Rivers of Tears for all the Sins we have committed. O that thou would make us
grieve because we cannot grieve, and to weep because we cannot weep enough;
that thou would humble us more and more in the true Sight and Sense of all
our Provocation against thee; and that thou would be pleased in the Blood of
Jesus Christ to cleanse us from all our Sins; Lord let his Blood that speaks
better Things than that of Abel, cry louder in thine Ears, for Mercy, then all
those Mischiefs and Wickednesses that have been done amongst us for Vengeance.
O besprinkle our polluted, but Penitent Souls, in the Blood of Jesus Christ,
that we may be clean in thy Sight, and that the Light of thy Countenance may
shine upon us. Lord be pleased to Seal unto our Souls the free Pardon and
Forgiveness of all our Sins; say to each of our Souls, and say that we may hear
it, that thou art well pleased with us, and appeased toward us. Lord, do thou
by the Spirit assure our Spirits, that we are thy Children, and that thou art
reconciled to us in the Blood of Jesus Christ. To this end, O Lord, create in
us new Hearts, and renew right Spirits within us. Cast us not away from thy
Presence, and take not thy Holy Spirit from us; but give us the Comfort of thy
Help, and establish us with thy free Spirit. Help us to live as thy redeemed
ones; and (Lord) let us not any longer by our wicked Lives deny that most Holy
Faith whereof our Lips have for so long Time made Profession, but let us that
call on the Name of the Lord Jesus, depart from Iniquity, and hate every evil
Way. Help us to cast away all our Transgressions, whereby we have transgressed,
and make us new Hearts. Carry us along through the Pilgrimage of this World,
supplying us with all Things needful for us; thy Grace alone is sufficient for
us: Lord, let thy Grace be assistant to us to strengthen us against all the
Temptations of Satan, especially against those Sins whereunto we are most
prone, either by Custom or Constitution, or most easily provoked. O Lord, with
what Affliction soever thou shall punish us, do not punish us with spiritual
Judgments and Desertions. Give us not over to our own Hearts Lusts to our vile,
lewd, and corrupt Affections; give us not over to Hardness and Impenitency of
Heart, but make us sensible of the least Sin, and give us thy Grace to think no
Sin little committed against thee our God, but that we may be humbled for it,
and repent of it, and reform it in our Dives and Conversations; and Lord keep
us from Presumptuous Sins, O let not them get the Dominion over us, but keep us
Innocent from the great Offense, O Lord our Strength and our Redeemer. And Lord
sanctify unto us all thy Methods and Proceedings with us, fitting us for all
further Tribulations and Trials whatsoever thou in thy divine Pleasure shall be
pleased to impose upon us; Lord give us Patience, Constancy, Resolution and
Fortitude to undergo them, that though we walk through the Valley of the Shadow
of Death, we may fear none ill; knowing that thou O Lord, art mercifully with
us, and that with thy Rod as well as with thy Staff thou will support and
comfort us; and that nothing shall be able to separate us from thy Love which
is in Jesus Christ our Lord.

And (gracious God) we beseech thee be thou pleased to look mercifully and
compassionately on thy Holy Catholic Church, and grant that all they that do
confess thy Holy Name, may agree together in the Truth of thy Holy Word, and
live in Unity and godly Love. Thou have promised O Lord, the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against thy Church; perform we beseech thee, thy most
gracious promises both to thy whole Church, and to that Part of it which thou
have planted, and now afflicted in these sinful Lands and Nations wherein we
live; arise, O Lord, and have Mercy upon our Sion, for it is time that thou
have Mercy upon her, yea, the Time is come, for thy Servants think upon her
Stones, and it pittieth them to see her in the Dust. Lord maintain thine own
Cause, rescue the Light of thy Truth from all those Clouds of Errors and
Heresies, which do so much obscure it, and let the Light thereof in a free
Proffession break forth and shine again among us, and that continually, even as
long as the Sun and Moon endures.

To this end, O Lord bless us all, and bless him, the Posterity -- which in
Authority ought to rule over, and be above us; Bless him in his Soul, and in
his Body, in his Friends, and in his Servants, and all his Relations: Guide him
by thy Council, prosper him in all Undertakings, granting him a long,
prosperous, and honorable Life here upon Earth, and that he may attain to a
Blessed Life hereafter. And gracious God, look mercifully upon all our
Relations, and do thou bring them to the Light of thy Truth that are wandering
and ready to fall. Confirm them in thy Truth that already stand, show some good
Token for good unto them, that they may rejoice. O let thy good Hand of
Providence be over them in all their Ways. And to all Orders and Degrees of Men
that be amongst us, give Religious Hearts to them that now rule in Authority
over us: Loyal Hearts in the Subjects toward their Supreme, and loving Hearts
in all Men to their Friends, and charitable Hearts one toward another. And for
the Continuance of thy Gospel among us, restore in thy good Time to their
several Places and Callings, and give Grace O Heavenly Father to all Bishops,
Pastors, and Curates, that they may both by their Life and Doctrine set forth
thy true and lively Word, and rightly and duly administer thy Holy Sacraments.
And Lord bless thy Church still with Pastors after thine own Heart, with a
continual Succession of faithful and able Men, that they may both by Life and
Doctrine declare thy Truth, and never for fear or favor backslide or depart
from the same; and give them the Assistance of thy Spirit that may enable them
so to preach thy Word, that may keep the People upright in the midst of a
corrupted and corrupt Generation. And good Lord bless thy People every where
with hearing Ears, understanding Hearts, conscientious Souls, and obedient
Lives, especially those over whom I have had either lately or formerly a
charge, that with meek Heart and due reverence they may hear and receive thy
Holy Word, truly serving thee in Righteousness and Holiness all the Days of
their Lives.

And we beseech the of thy Goodness and Mercy to comfort and succor all those
that in this transitory Life be in Trouble, Sorrow, Need, Sickness or any other
Adversity; Lord help the Helpless, and comfort the Comfortless, vifit the Sick,
relieve the Oppressed, help them to right that suffer wrong, set them at
Liberty that are in Prison, restore the Banished, and of thy great Mercy, and
in thy good Time deliver all thy People out of their Necessities: Lord do thou
of thy great Mercy fit us all for our latter end, for the Hour of Death and the
Day of Judgment; and do thou in the Hour of Death and at the Day of Judgment,
from thy Wrath and everlasting Damnation, good Lord deliver us, through the
Cross and Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ.

In the mean Time, O Lord teach us so to number our Days, and me my Minutes,
that we may apply our Hearts to true Wisdom; that we may be Wise unto
Salvation, that we may live soberly, Godly, and Righteously in this present
World, denying all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts: Lords teach us so to live,
that we may not be afraid to dye, and that we may so live that we may be always
prepared to dye that when Death shall seize upon us it may not surprise us, but
that we may lift up our Heads with Joy, knowing that our Redemption draws nigh,
and that we shall be for ever happy, being assured that we shall come to the
Felicity of the Chosen, and rejoice with the Gladness of the People; and give
us such a fullness of thy Holy Spirit that may make us steadfast in this Faith,
and confirm us in this Hope; indue us with Patience under thy afflicting Hand,
and withal a cheerful Resolution of our selves to thy divine disposing; that so
passing the Pilgrimage of this World, we may come to the Land of Promise the
Heavenly Canaan, that we may reign with thee in the World to come, through
Jesus Christ our Lord; in whose blessed Name and Words we farther call upon
thee, saying, Our Father etc.

Let thy mighty Hand, and outstretched Arm, O Lord, be the Defense of me and
all other thy servants, thy mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ our
salvation, thy true and holy word our instruction, thy grace and holy Spirit
our comfort and consolation, to the end, and in the end, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen,

His Speech and Prayer ended with much Meekness and spiritual Consolation. He
submitted his Neck to the stroke of the Ax, to as great a Loss of the Church of
Christ, and of all good Men, as has happened in our Times. I have the more
enlarged my self, that my Reader might not without a kind of a Consternation or
Possession of strange Amazement pass by the Concernments of this blessed Hero.

The same Day of Doctor Hewets Trial, was also tried John Mordant of Clement
Danes Esquire, with whom he was a Fellow-Prisoner; the Charge against him, was
for combining with Henry Bishop of Parham in Sussex Gent. Hartgil Baron, and
Francis Mansil, with diverse others for raising War against Oliver Lord
Protector, in the behalf of Charles Stuart, and confering with J. Stapely, Esquire
Henry Mallory, and others, how to effect the same; and delivering Commissions
to several Persons in the Name of, and as from the said Charles Stuart, etc. He
stood long upon it (as did ^^e Doctor before) to have Council assigne^ him, and
that he might be tried by a Jury; but finding it would not be granted, he at
last pleaded not Guilty, many Witnesses deposited against him; yet he by his
Ingenuity so cleared himself; that notwithstanding many Endeavors to the
contrary, he was discharged.

July the 17. following, Colonel Ashton and John Betley were executed, the one
in Tower-street, the other in Cheap Side: Colonel Ashton was the first, being
drawn on a Sledge, that Worthy Divine Doctor Warmestry submitting for the good
of a poor Christians Soul to lie along with him upon the Sledge, that he might
lose no Time for his spiritual Converse. They were drawn from Newgate to
Tower-street, over against Mark-lane end, where a Gibbet was erected. As he
ascended the Ladder, Doctor Warmestry said, Almighty God, who is a strong
Tower, be with thee, and make thee know and feel, that there is no other Name
under Heaven, whereby to attain everlasting Life, but by the Name of Jesus. The
Blessing of God the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost be with you henceforth and
for ever, Amen.

He being upon the Ladder, expressed a great deal of Confidence he had in the
Merits and Mercies of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; not doubting but that
through the red Sea of his Blood he should arrive at the Heavenly Canaan, and
in little space behold his Savior, whom his Soul so much longed after. Then
fixing his Eyes upon the Multitude, he spoke to this effect.

I am brought here to a shameful Death; I am an English Man born, and (as many
know) a Gentleman born; I was drawn into this Business by several Persons, and
am now brought here for my former Sins: God has delivered me several Times
from several Judgments, he has visited me at this Time; because I slighted and
did not pursue that Repentance that I promised. Therefore I desire all good
People to leave off their Sins for Christ his sake, and beagme new Men, for it
is that that brings all Men to ruin: I beseech God of Mercy have Mercy upon my
Soul, Lord God I come to thee, Lord the Father of Heaven have Mercy upon me O
God the Son Redeemer of the World have Mercy upon me, O God the Holy Ghost
proceeding from the Father and the Son have Merry upon me. Remember not my
Offenses, but spare me, good Lord God; I beseech thee spare thy Servant whom
thou have vedeamed, for thy dear Sons sake. I have no more to say, but desire
the Prayers of all good People.

Having ended his Speech he committed his Spirit into the Hands of God, and
having said, Lord have Morcy upon my Soul, he was turned off the Ladder, and
instantly cut down, his Belly ripped up, and his Bowels burnt in a Fire ready
prepared for that purpose; he being not yet Dead; then was his Head cut off,
and his Body divided into four Quarters, put into a Basket and conveyed back to
Newgate.

Next they proceeded and fetched John Betley (for there was a great deal of
Business done by the Executioner that Day) into Cheapside, where formerly the
Cross stood; where was likewise a Gibbet set up; being come to the Place with a
Minister, the Minister read, and the People sung with him a Psalm, beginning
thus, O Lord consider my Distress, etc. Then he went up the Ladder, and said as
follows.

LOrd receive my Soul, and be merciful to me; I commit my Soul into Almighty
Gods Hands; for he is my Protector and Redeemer. I am not ashamed to live, nor
afraid to die; for my Conversation has been such, in Christ Jesus I hope I
shall find Mercy. As concerning them that are my Enemies, I pray God forgive
them their Sins, I freely forgive them all that have done me wrong. As for the
late Plot, I was never but once in Company with them concerned therein: I did
know of such a Thing, but deny that I acted therein. Shall I damn my Soul at
this Instant? I will speak the Truth. One Brandon, that was one of them, drew
me into the Business, and his Man. I carrying Work to him, could not refrain
his House, he so often enticed me thereto, and would not let me alone, till he
had got me into a House, where we drank together. I have no more to say as to
the Plot, but desire Mercy from God. Having this said, the Executioner turned
him off, and the rest of the Sentence was executed upon him, as before upon
Colonel Ashton, and his Head and Quarters were conveyed also to Newgate.

Some two Days after, one Edmund Stacy also about the same Conspiracy was
executed in Cornhil over against the Exchange; as also a Youth in Smithfield
having the Rope about his Neck, the horror of Death being worse then Death it
self, but for his Souls Health, was Reprieved, the Torrent of Blood being for a
while stayed.

Whilst these Tradgedies were acting on the Land, a strange Accident no less
prodigious happened on the Water; a Whale of a monstrous bigness, at least
sixty Foot, and of a proportionable Breadth, was cast up on the River of Thames
near London; which by the common People was accounted a Prognostication of the
Protectors Death, which ensued not long after.

But to return to Flanders, where we formerly left, the Sea whereof like a
sharp Humor did always nourish the Wounds of incurable Evils; nor was the
French their letting of her Blood sufficient, she wanted an English Physician
to treat her. Our Armies, whose Valors made not a stand at Mardike, but with a
gallant Resolution besieged Dunkirk, which being a Place of great Importance,
the Spaniard intended to relieve; and with an Army of sixteen thousand, came
within an English Mile and a half of the French Quarters; whereupon the Engeish
and French uniting their Forces, leaving some part of them before Dunkirk; to
make good the Approaches, and guard the Trenches; with fifteen thousand Men,
and ten Pieces of Cannon, set upon the Spaniard, whom after a long and sharp
Fight, they put to a total Rout and Confusion, with the Loss of three thousand
five hundred Men; which Victory was in a manner wholly attributed to the Valor
of the English. The Loss of this Day lost the Spaniard Dunkirk, who quickly
after surrendered up the Town upon these following Conditions.

1. That the Town shall be yielded up, with all their great Guns, their stores
of Victuals, Magazines of Arms, and Ammunition, without any embezlement.

2. That all Officers and Soldiers shall have Liberty to marth out with their
Arms, Drums beating, Golours flying, two Pieces of Oridinance, and their
Baggage.

3. That they shall have the Liberty to march with a Convoy so conduct them to
Saint Omers.

4. That the Inhabitants should remain indempnified in their Persons and Goods,
and enjoying their former Customs and Privileges for two Years, and not be
molested touching the Exercise of their Religion.

The Articles signed, the Spaniards marched out, being about one Thousand Horse
and Foot, and seven hundred more that were wounded; the French (according as it
was articled before) put the English in Possession thereof, which ever since
they have maintained.

I have heard of an expression of the Governors of Ostend. A little before the
Massacre there, a Person of Quality being sent thither about the exchange of
Prisoners, after he was civilly treated, the Glasses of Wine going freely
about; the Governor being in a safe Place began to throw forth Words to this
effect; Sir, is this the Mode of your Mushroom Protector, has he no other Way
to pay my Master the King of Spain for his Bullion, but with Bullets.

Soon after the taking of Dunkirk deceased the Lady Cleypoll, second Daughter
to the Protector; a Lady whom Posterity will mention with an honorable
Character, who often interposed, and became an humble Supplicant to her Father
for many Persons designed to dye; her last request as it was thought, for some
eminent Persons being denied, was a means of hastening her Death, which much
sadned her Father's Spirits; nor did he long survive her, her Death causing
more Wounds in his Heart, than all he received in the Wars.

But as his Severity was great to his Enemies, so did he excel in Gratitude to
his Friends; amongst other Examples, I shall Instance in the Person of one
Duret a Frenchman, who attonded him during his Generalship, and served him with
so much Fidelity and Zeal, as that he entrusted him with the Managing and
Conduct of the greatest Part of his Domestic Affairs, always retaining him
nigh his Person, bearing so great an affection toward him, and reposing so
entire a Confidence in him, that during a great Sickness which he had in
Scotland, (and whereof it was thought he would have died) he would not be
served by any one, nor receive any nourishment, or any thing else that was
administered unto him, save from the Hands of Duret, who both Day and Night
continued to watch by his Master; tending him with a special care and
assiduity, not giving himself a Moments rest until his Master had recovered his
perfect Health; which long and continued Watches of Duret, and the great Pains
he had taken, drove him into a sad fit of Sickness; to recover him, his
endeared Master in retribution of his great Services, spared no Cost, but
applied all possible means that could be procured, not only by his Commands,
but by his personal Visits (so often as his urgent Affairs would permit.) Duret
dying, he sends over into France for his Mother, Sister and two Nephews, to
requite in them the Obligations he owed to his deceased Friend and Servant; and
where as by reason of the continuance of the Scotch Wars, he was as it were
confined to the North, he wrote unto his Wife, That she should proportion that
Kindness which during his Absence she should show unto them, to the Love which
she bare unto him. In so much that Duret's Mother was admitted into her own
Family, and seated at her own Table; his Sister was placed in the rank and
Quality of a Maid of Honor, and his two Nephews were admitted to be her
Highnesses Pages, which Love of his he extended toward them to the Day of his
Death.

One writes, that when he came to have more absolute Power toward the latter
End of his Days, that he has been heard often to wish, that those that had
been put to Death were yet alive; protesting solemnly, that if he could not
have changed their Hearts, he would have changed their Dooms, and converted
their Deaths into Banishment.

Waving this digression, as in respect of the distance of Time, we are now come
to his own approaching Catastrope. His Death was ushered in by an extraordinary
Tempest, and violent gust of Weather, which blew down some Houses, tore up the
Trees by the Roots, one in the old Palace Yar'd by the Parliament House, which
by the event has signified no otherwise then the Root and Branch of his
Government. It was a horrid Tempest, as if Nature would have the Protectors
Death to be accompanied with a general horror. The same is elegantly set forth
in a Poem by the same Laureat. I shall set down his smooth Poem, which was
answered as roughly in respect of the single rapier'd Sense, though otherwise
in the same Virgil style, Line for Line; the latter as too Satirical I have
ommitted, the other follows.

We must resign, Heaven his great Soul does claim
In Storms as loud as his immortal Fame.
His dying Groans, his last Breath shakes our Isle,
And Trees uncut fall for his Funeral Pile;
About his Palace their broad Roots were tossed,
Into the Air, so Romulus was lost:
New Rome in such a Tempest mist their King,
And from Obeying fell to Worshipping,
On Aetna's top, thus Hercules lay dead,
With ruined Oaks, and Pines about him spread,
Those his last Fury from the Mountain rent,
Our dying Hero from the continent.
Ravished whole Towns, and Forts from Spaniards reft,
As his Last Legacy to Britain left.
The Ocean which so long our Hopes confined,
Could give no Limits to his vaster Mind:
Our Bounds enlargement was his latest Toil,
Nor has he left us Prisoners to our Isle,
Under the Tropic is our Language spoke,
And part of Flanders has received our yoke.
From Civil Broils he did us disengage,
Found nobler Objects for our Martial rage;
And with wise Conduct to his Country showed
Their ancient way of conquering abroad.
Vngrestful then it were no Tears to allow
To him that gave us Peace and Empire too:
Princes that feared him grieve, concerned, to see
No pitch of Glory from the Grave is free.
Nature her self took notice of his Death,
And sighing swelled the Sea with such a Breath;
That to remotest shores her Billows rolled,
The approaching Fate of their great Ruler told.
September the third, 1658, he marched off from his earthly Honors, and
received his Writ of Ease from all his Labors, as Death alone was able to
encounter him, which was on a Day, one Year after another, Anno 1650, and Anno
1651, rubrickt with two of his remarkable Victories; as Antipater died the same
Day of his rising. But as concerning the manner of his Death, after he had been
sick about a Fortnight of the Disease, which at the beginning was but an Ague,
of which Tamberlain died; on Friday being the third of September 1658. in the
Morning he gave all the Signs of a dying Person; he remained in that manner
till three of the Clock in the Afternoon; he had to his last a perfect and
entire Understanding, his greatest and most important Affair was to name a
Protector to be his Successor, which after his decease was conscentaneously
confirmed on his eldest Son Richard; he died in the midst of his Victories and
Triumphs, and in a Bed of Bucklers. On his Deathbed he dispatched several
Businesses of Consequence, answering the Physicians who reproved him, as the
Emperor did, That a Governor ought to die standing.

Alexander the Great was born on the sixth Day of April, on the like Day the
famous Temple of Diana at Ephesus was burnt presaging that Fire which this
Conqueror should kindle in Asia. The same Gnatho, from whom I borrow this
example, who has many more, but at last, says he, to look no further then our
own Country, into our own Histories, it is observed that the late Richard the
succeeding Protector was installed in his Protectorship the third Day of
September, when as Richard the First so much spoken of in our Histories, begun
his Reign; an Accident, says he, which cannot but promise him a most
favorable Om^n, and good Token: But a blunt Fellow in two rustical Verses has
since, as to the event, better specified.

That his successors Government never staid,
A strayed Sheeps Time, not to be year'd and dayd.
As to the remarkable Passages which happened on the like Days of Olivers Life,
some have observed, that on the third of September he was confirmed in his
Protectorship by the Parliament; on the third of September he gained that
Battle of Dunbar; on the third of September he gained that great Battle of
Worcester; and on the third of September he died at White Hall; with all the
Comforts that good Hopes could give in his Posterity.

His Corpse being embalmed, and wrapped up in a Sheet of Lead, were September
the 26, about ten of the Clock at Night, privately removed from White Hall to
Somerset House, where it remained till the 23 of November, lying in the mean
Time in so great State, as would puzzle Antiquity to show such a President;
which by some was accounted an unnecessary Vanity, the Commonwealth at that Tim
being so involved in Debts both to the Soldiery, the Navy, and others.

The three first Rooms at Somerset House where the Spectators entered, were
hung with black, having in each of them a Cloth of State, with a Chair of State
under the same, at the Head of each Cloth of State was fixed a large Majestic
Scutcheon fairly painted and gilt upon Tassaty, and all the Rooms furnished
with Scutcheons of his Arms, crowned with the Imperial Crown

The fourth Room where both the Corpse and the Effigies did lie, was completely
hung with black Velvet, the Roof ceiled with Velvet, and a large Canopy or
Cloth of State of black Velvet sringed, was plated over the Effigies made to
the Life in Wax. The Effigies it self being apparel'd in a rich suit of uncut
Velvet, robed in a little Robe of Purple Velvet, laced with a rich geld Face,
and furred with Ermins; upon the Kirtle was the Royal large Robe of the like
Purple Velvet, laced and furred with Ermins; with rich strings and tassels of
Gold: the Kirtle being girt with a rich embroidered Belt, wherein was a fair
Sword richly gilt and hatched with Gold, hanging by the side of the Essigies.
In the Right Fland was the Golden Scepter, representing Government; in the Left
Hand the Globe, denoting Principality; upon the Head a Purple Velvet Cap furred
with Ermins, signifying Regality: Behind the Head there was placed a Rich Chair
of State of tissued Gold, and upon the Cushion which lay thereon was placed an
Imperial Crown set with precious Stones. The Body of the Effigies lay upon a
Bed of state covered with a large Pall of black Velvet, under which there was
spread a fine Holland Sheet upon six Stools of tissued Cloth of Gold: on the
sides of the Bed of State was placed a rich suit of Complete Armor, and at the
Feet thereof stood his Crest.

The Bed of State whereupon the Effigies did thus lie, was ascended unto by two
Steps covered with the aforesaid Pall of Velvet; at each corner whereof there
was placed an upright Pillar covered with Velvet, upon the Tops whereof were
the four Supporters of the Imperial Arms, bearing Banners or Streamers crowned.
The Pillars were adorned with Trophies of Military Honor, carved and gilt, the
Pedestals of the Pillars had Shields and Crowns gilt, which completed the
whole Work, covered with Velvet: within the Rails stood eight silver
Candlesticks, or Standards, almost five foot high, with Virgin-wax Tapers of a
yard long; next unto the Candlesticks there were set upright in Sockets the
four great Standards of his Arms, the Guydons, great Banners, and Banrolls of
War, being all of Taffety very richly gilt and painted. The Cloth of State
which covered the Bed and the Effigies, had a Majestic Scutcheon; and the
whole Room adorned with Taffety Scutcheons, several of his Servants attending
bare-headed, to set out the Ceremony with the greater Luster.

After this (to show there is no intermission of this Vanity) his Effigies was
several Days shown in another Room, standing upon an ascent under a rich Cloth
of State; vested in Royal Robes, having a Scepter in one Hand, and a Globe in
the other, a Crown on his Head, his Armor lying by him at a distance, and the
Banners, Banrolls, and Standards being placed round about him, together with
the other Ensigns of Honor, the whole Room being adorned in a Majestical
manner, and his Servants standing by bare-headed, as before.

November the 23. was the Day appointed for the Solemnization of the Funerals,
multitudes were the Spectators, which from all Places came to behold it, so
much are we taken with Novelty, that we think no cost too much for the
beholding a two or three Hours Vanity. The Effigies being a while placed in the
middle of a Room, was carried on the Hearse by ten Gentlemen into the
Courtyard, where a very rich Canopy of State was born over it by six other
Gentlemen, till it was brought and placed in a Chariot; at each end whereof was
a seat wherein sat two of his late Highness Gentlemen of the Bedchamber; the
Pall which was made of Velvet, and the White Linen was very large, extending
on each side of the Carriage and was born up by several Persons of Honor. The
Chariot wherein the Effigies was conveyed, was covered with black Velvet,
adorned with Plumes and Scutcheons, and was drawn by six Horses covered with
black Velvet, and each of them adorned with Plumes of black Feathers.

From Somerset House to Westminster the Streets were railed in, and strewed
with Sand; the Soldiers being placed on each side of the Streets without the
Rails, and their Ensigns wrapped up in a Cypress mourning Veil.

The manner of the proceeding to the Interment was briefly thus. First, a
Knight Martial advanced on Horseback with his black Truncheon tipped at both
ends with Gold, attended by his Deputy and thirteen Men on Horseback to clear
the Way.

After him followed the poor Men of Westminster in mourning Gowns and Hoods,
marching two and two.

Next unto them followed the Servants of the several Persons of all Qualities,
which attended the Funeral.

These were followed by all his own Servants, as well inferior as superior,
both within and without the Household, as also all his Bargemen at Watermen.

Next unto these followed the Servants and Officers belonging to the Lord
Mayor, and Sheriffs of the City of London.

Then came several Gentlemen and Attendants on the respective Ambassadors, and
the other public Ministers.

After these came the poor Knights of Windsor in Gowns and Hoods.

Then followed the Clerks, Secretaries, and other Officers belonging to the
Army, the Admiralty, the Treasury, the Navy, and Exchequer.

After these came the Officers in Command in the Fleet, as also the Officers of
the Army.

Next followed the Commissioners for Excise, those of the Army, and the
Committee of the Navy.

Then followed the Commissioners for the Approbation of Preachers.

Then came the Officers, Messengers, and Clerks belonging to the Privy Council,
and the Clerks of both Houses of Parliament.

Next followed his late Highness Physicians.

The Head Officers of the Army.

The chief Officers and Aldermen of the City of London.

The Masters of the Chancery, with his Highness learned Council at Law.

The Judges of the Admiralty, the Masters of Request, with the Judges in Wales.

The Barrons of the Exchequer, the Judges of both Benches, and the Lord Mayor
of London.

Next to these the Persons allied in Blood to the late Protector, and the
Members of the Lords House.

After them the public Ministers of Foreign States and Princes.

Then the Holland Ambassador alone, whose Train was born up by four Gentlemen.

Next to him the Portugal Ambassador alone, whose Train was held up by four
Knights of the Order of Christ.

And thirdly the French Ambassador, whose Train was also held up by four
Persons of Quality.

Then followed the Lords Commissioners of the great Seal.

The Lords Commissioners of the Treasury.

The Lords of the late Protectors Privy Council.

After whom followed the Chief Mourner, and those Persons of Quality which were
his Assistants, and bare up his Train. All the Nobles were in close Mourning,
the rest were but in ordinary, being disposed in their Passage into several
di^isions, being distinguished by Drums and Trumpets, and by a Standard or
Banner born by a Person of Honor, and his Assistant, and a Horse of State
covered with black Velvet, and led by a Person of Honor, followed by two
Grooms: Of which Horses there were eleven in all, four covered with black
Cloth, and seven with Velvet. These being all passed in Order, at length the
Chariot followed with the Effigies, on each side of which were born six Banner
Rolls, twelve in all, by as many Persons of Honor. The several Pieces of his
Armor were born by eight Officers of the Army, attended by a Herald and a
Gentleman on each side. Next followed Gartar principal King of Arms, attended
with a Gentleman on each side bare-headed.

Then came the chief Mourner, together with those Lords and other Personages
that were Supporters and Assistants to the chief Mourner.

Then followed the Horse of Honor in very rich Trappings embroidered upon
Crimson Velvet, and adorned with White, Red, and Yellow Plumes, and was led by
the Master of the Horse.

Finally, in the close of all followed those of his late Guard, and the Warders
of the (...).

At the West Gate of the Abbey Church in Westminster the Hearse with the
Effigies thereon was taken off again from the Chariot by those ten Gentlemen
who placed it thereon before, and in their passing on to carry it into the
Church, the Canopy of State was by the former six Gentlemen born over it again:
In which stately manner it was carried up to the East end of the Abbey, and
there placed in a magnificent Structure purposely erected there to receive it;
being interred amongst the Kings and Queens at Westminster; for all which vast
expenses, his Son Richard might have taken up that sad expression in Virgil.
Infandum Regina jubes renovare dolorem. had not the Parliament since dealt so
generously with him, as to order the Payment of his Debs contracted by his
Fathers Funeral. Certainly the Gentleman expressed noble and truly dutiful
respects to his Memory, fit for brave Minds to imitate. Thus as great Oliver
lived victoriously, so he was buried honorably, Sic Fxit. It was a report that
his Effigies was taken down and preferved from a threatening Mulitude of the
rascally People; even he that had swayed and governed these three Nations five
Years, his Reign being troublesome, was necessitated after his Death to be
protected in his Picture; his Posterity after him being suddenly levelled.

Thus after many a weary Step, having traversed so many Crowns, I must now set
my Reader down at a Commonwealth. I shall end all with a Glimpse rather than a
Character, some gleaned Observations on this great Favorite of Fortune, I hope
in Terms agreeing to Truth, such as are neither below or above his Estate.

THE CHARACTER, Or rather a GLYMPSE OF THIS Favorite of Fortune.
IN his Person he somewhat exceeded the usual middle Stature, proportionable
without any unevenness either o^ lineaments or parts, accordingly being of a
becoming fatness, well shaped, his aspect having somewhat of the Soldiers,
inclining to redness, his usual Posture in his walking was his Hand upon his
Sword; he had a sparkling fierce Eye, nevertheless his usual deportments were
both courteous and harsh at once in his encounters, where he found the least
Opposition. He was hardy and resolute in his reprehensions, subtle, temperate,
and meek in his Councils; he was of a strong Constitution, and of an active
Body, an Enemy both to ease and excess; being ever suspicious, circumspect, and
over vigisant, of a notable Headpiece; yet if he had any spare time, he
disdained not to conser though in matters of least moment; he delighted to read
Men more then Books, his eloquence being Masculine and Martial, rather a
natural Gift then an effect of Art, in which he did not want his holy
Vestments, always managing some Passages of the sacred Writ, to which most
charming part (as well as that of the Sword) he owed most of his Victories. He
was always accustomed to exhort his Soldiers at the undertaking of any great
enterprise, or before a Battle: He had a strict Eye over his Army, his greatest
Care being to see them provided of all Necessaries, by which Foresight he was
the better able to execute severe Punishment on them for their Misdemeanors.
He took great Delight to discourse of the Affairs of the World, of the
Interests of other Princes, in which his Judgment did so guide him, that
without entering into their Cabinets, or partaking of their secret Councils, he
could discourse very pertinently of their Affairs, and foresaw their several
Issues and Events; he was an excellent Physiognomer, having once seriously
considered any one, he was seldom deceived in the Opinion he had of him. He was
no Friend to the vain-gloriousness of Habit, and though he was always as it
were fierce, of a passionate Constitution; yet he was so, sly, as to keep his
Passions in; but when there was Occasion to carry a Business on he exposed
himself with so much Vigor, as gave those he had to do withal to understand,
that he was not easily persuaded from the Thing he had once resolved. He had
one knack above all the rest which stood him in much stead, he had a deep
Insight into the Natures and Dispositions of the common People, who as they are
impatient of Servitude, so are they incapable of entire Liberty; frighted with
the Sight of the Rod, but mutinous in the feeling of it, none talking more of
Liberty, nor understanding it less then they; more troubling themselves then
their Heads with their Grievances, considering nothing but repinining at every
thing; bold Talkers so you suffer them but to talk: Above all, most tenacious
of their Liberty of Conscience, rather to follow any new fangled Opinion, then
to remain constant to the Old; his Policy herein was to allow them something to
induce others to their dear Liberty (or Lice^ne rather) of their Tongues, which
he knew he could not help, but so as that he had his Evesdropp^rs every where,
who seldom brought him Word of what they said, except they also ^ave an Account
of what they had, and then their Estates paid for the malepertness of their
Tongues, and for their chiefest darling of all to err in in their Opinions: He
permitted them to follow and embrace what Sect they pleased, so that they all
remained in Obedience to Civil Government. This was his Method, whilst Men's
reasons did comprehend so little, as that they needed their own experience to
believe how he (Atlas-like) could support so mighty a Frame and Machine,
composed of so many different and disjoynted parts, yet to keep them from
slipping and falling in pieces; which he did, rivetting them so fast together,
and making them all firmly cohere amongst themselves, as so many Pieces of soft
Wax melted and molded all in one could not cleave faster in a Ball or Globe;
this was the great Work he had begun, which had not Death prevented him, he was
on point of finishing, as he was a Person indefatigable both of Body and Mind.

Politicians hold, that in the changing the Government, all things, if it were
convenient and possible, ought to be changed; the very Religion it self, if any
were profane enough to meddle with it. To wave their Atheistical Opinions,
this may be observed, that both in respect of his Policy and Fortunes, he might
very well, having so many Advantages over the present Distractions of the
Times, raise his Thoughts to more then ordinary Ambitions: It is only for God
to search the Heart, and try the Reins, he knows what our Religious Affections
are, we ought to conjecture charitably of what we cannot determine; this we are
certain of, he could so well see through superstition (as in these Times they
term it) for his better Advantage, as that his political Conscience could
dispense with more then ordinary Transactions; nevertheless he was still under
the Privilege of the Sanctuary, some of the Clergy, (as they have ever done)
stuck close to him, to raise him and themselves; whereas the late King undid
himself for the then flourishing Clergy, and they themselves for him. It Is
true, his Actions were complying with a military Soul, so that he had the less
Leisure to dispute Cases of Conscience; only he might with the Emperor, as he
did, cite Saint Paul, The Good that I would, I do not; but the Evil that I
would not,, that I do; now if I do that I onld not, it is no more I that do it,
but Sin that remains in me. The truth is, he made no haste in the Settlement of
Ecclesiastical Affairs, as he was too crafty to disturb the powerful party,
those that were unsettled in their Opinions.

As to his State Employments he took several Oaths, which for the present might
stand him in some stead, yet certainly they might have endangered him to much
Loss in his after enterprises, which depended upon Faith. In his Youth I have
heard he was so uncircumspect, as not to rise, experience having taught him in
his latter Time Wisdom to repair himself, his better Fortune miraculously
making up all his breaches; his Martial Spirit advancing him in Times as it
were set apart for his designs, full of Mutations and rare Accidents; for it is
with Times as it is with ways, with some they are up Hill, and with some they
are down Hill; nor could he have made good his Footing, had he not been full of
suspicions, of secret Thoughts, of serious Observations, full of Notes and
Memorials, especially as he was well read in the Men of his Time; whom to
employ, whom to reward, whom to enquire of, whom to beware of; what were the
Dependancy, what were the Factions, as it were keeping a Journal of his
Thoughts, Indeed one can scarcely write that he was too suspicious. too
apprehensive, though questionless he was by reason of his restless Jealousies a
trouble to himself as well as others, so that which did him good one Way, did
him hurt another.

Although, as has been already said, his Flies and Familiars were useful to
him for the discovering of Conspiracies, the revealing of which no Question
preserved him from many Dangers from being attempted, his Nature being almost
married to Troubles, his confidence made him successful, to go through them;
his cunning always winding him out, he being the more ready, and sharpened by
the Occasions of Perils: howsoever the dazelings of his suspicions gave his
Industries enough to do to save himself and help others. Questionless he had
Wisdom, and a strange kind of rule and strain of Government, which all Men
acknowledged in the bitterest of Times. His Armies neither in Civil nor
Foreign Wars were ever unfortunate. As his great Judgment in leading as well
as preserving them, in Courage personally fighting with them, determined him to
be both a daring Soldier, and an expert Commander; which indeared his Soldiers
so much to him, as that they suffered him to act for the future for himself
what they did not so well disgust. Many Battles he fought with them, in all
which he triumphed, his Fortunes being inviolable; thus as he appears strangely
successful to Posterity, so likewise most unhappy for those bloody Conquests he
obtained, they being in the Bowels of his own Country. He signalized the
magnanimity of his Mind by putting his Soldiers on miraculous attempts, as well
in the Christian as the other Heathen Parts of the World; the Question is, so
much honorable Blood being shed in his time, whether future Histories will
wash his Memory clean from it, though Malice it self cannot charge him that he
was actualy nocent, yet Posterity will hardly believe but that he was in some
degree guilty. But to come closer to him, of those three Things which either
should or ought to tie the Hearts of the People to those that govern, Love,
Fear, and Reverence; he only purchased of them chiefly to himself Fear, which is
furthest from the Heart; which forced him, being sometimes straightened in his
Affairs, to retire much to his Cabinet Council, with whom he sat often in
Person, where he was always sair spoken, not without his sweetness and
blandishments of Words; but his Rhetoric was not so vainly spent, but that
before he went he informed his Judgments; and though those were cunning that he
employed, yet he had still a Reserve to himself, as he had the Master-reach;
such an extent his Judgment had, though it was not much assisted by his former
Learning, or bettered by his futune Studies; the Trumpet and Drum sounding so
loud in his Ears, that he had little leisure to admit of the sober Councils of
Philosophy. He was nevertheless well enough furnished, as his Wit had long
before purchased Lewis the Eleventh's so well known slights, which he left to
his Son as Maxims for his Practice, as one in another case writes of Secrets,
that they should be kept till the Breath stinks. Questionless his dissimulation
in Transactings, together with his Privacy and Silence in his Managements were
to him Assistances beyond all Arts and Sciences. in his Time there were many
that suffered the more Blood was drawn; the less Love he found, the less
Treasure, which with a good Will he never received. One writes, that he
distributed forty thousand Pounds a Year in charitable Uses out of his own
Purse; he might have been more plain in his Expressions, certainly he meant out
of the Commonwealths Moneys. We may conclude thus much, that his aunual Incomes
were not so great as Malice has given out, considering all his necessary
expenses; without dispute they had been more enlarged, if the People had loved
him but half so well as they feared him, though I must still acknowledge it to be
hard to distinguish of his Liberality, his Necessities having so much limited
his Rewards; tho his Mind was high; and he pursued his own Way as one that
always revered his own Will. If we look on his careful or rather politic
Liberality, somewhat may be said, as he was at vast Charges, as he made good
his dexterity to impropriate himself with Foreign Instruments to obtain good
Intelligence from all Parts abroad; from which Spies all wise Men conclude,
that he received more Articles of Inquisition then Negotiation, ^as he was
still working and casting up others, not to be undermined himself. Some are so
humbly minded as to believe his Designs were to high for Foreign Parts,
certain it is Carolus Gustavus lost a dear Friend of him; and for other Princes
howsoever they might look a squint on him, he was courted by two of the
greatest, and was a Friend (as if Fortune attended him) to either of them both
when he pleased, they having as much as they could allie^ themselves to his
Interests, when they on^ found him to be at leisure to be helpful t^ them. It Is
true for some Time they stood at a distance, certainly if they did not so soon
see into the Passages of his Affairs, they did at last pass their Judgments on
the Issue of them; perhaps they at the first saw him only at Strife, but they
were afterward forced to acknowledge him to be always aloft, so fortunate he
was in all his enterprises. The Royal Party were once of Opinion, that he
having past his Laurels, he had a Mind to reach at the Crown; they were
somewhat mistaken, it had too many Thorns in it, which of themselves are sharp
enough to fetch Blood, if we should not otherwise accept of the Interpretation
of the Fifth Monarchy Gentleman, who means by them the displeased Soldiery, to
whom such Lustres could never have been acceptable, as some other of our late
Pamphletters have libelled him to be another Henry the Fifth, that he would
have stolen the more then protested against Diadem off from the Pillow; if he
had a Mind to it, it is more then they know, the worst they could have said of
him had been, that he entertained somewhat more then self-denying Thoughts, or
rather as the Poets has it, Magnis tamen excedit ausis. Indeed outwardly he
seemed to have little of vain Glory in him, or else he turned his dark Lanthorn
to himself, his closeness being always such, that this great Politician walked
invisible; others stood in the Light to him, but he in the Dark to all, only
for his most grand Transaction there was no vizzard could disguise it, that he
should after so many selfish refusals, (a Word lately put into the new canting
Dictionary of the Enthusiasts) that he should after the slighting as it were of
so many tendered, forfeited, and sequestered Estates presented to him by the
Parliament for his remarkable Services; after that in parts and piecemeals he
had denied the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, he made it his
master-design to take in all at once, as he knew well enough how to cog a die,
he had thrown for all, won all, and swept all at once; rendering his Motto, Pax
quaeritur Bello, into that English which pleased him best, the Protectorship.

To reflect briefly on his Domestical Affairs, he was not uxorious, but
respectful to his Wife, to his Children he had a paternal affection, careful of
their educations, and of their aspirings to advancement; he endeavored to cast
a Luster on them, which did not take with the People, though as to his Son
Richard there was a more then ordinary consent. For his Pleasures there is no
extraordinary News of them, some Frolicks I have heard of, with those he was
most familiar, the Truth is, he had too little Leisure for trivial repasts; he
did with them as great Persons do with Banquers, come and look upon them, and
so turn away. As he begun from a private Fortune, as I have already intimated,
that Fortune quickened in him all Seeds of observation, being always more
prosperous in himself, then confirmed from the Affections of others. For the
Imputations against him of Moneys in his Treasury, certainly if he had been
such a hoarder, the Urgency of his pressing Affairs would never suffer him to
be so poor as to stand still, and admire his Riches. Before I end, I cannot
choose but remark his hard dealings with Parliaments, which he formerly so
vindicated against the late King for his breach of Privilege about the five
Members, whatsoever fine Thread he did twist for himself, in all his religious
Speeches, those that are right Englishmen will never clear him from his
violations, though he managed those actings as that they were to him but short
Tempests, or small over-castings, as whatsoever Injury the Nations endured, he
had one pretense or other to shift it off from his own Shoulders, extremely
mistaking himself, as the People look less on the failing of those who have
been their own choice, then on those who have taken on them to be Carvers for
themselves; he thought himself crafty enough for Parliaments, and from his
Deathbed he determined himself cock sure, as he was flesht with his former
Fortunes; he could never have imagined his Posterity should ever have been
lean. It Is true, we may be so political, as on this Earth to endeavor to grasp
these humane Affairs to our own Interests, but we must lay down our greatest
Wisdoms when we come to sleep in the silent Grave, as after Death there is no
providing against the cross blows of Fortune.

To conclude, as far as we can conjecture, his Confederates continuing alike
victorious, and fortunate with him, he might i^ he had lived to it, extended
his Victories to some other parts of the World; if he did no more, it was
either through the Disturbances of the Times, or long of himself, for what he
minded he compassed. Certain it is, that he so husbanded his successe^, that he
did not live to see himself unfortunate, who having assumed or rather snacht
his Honors, showed himself to be one of the strangest sort of Wonders that our
late Times have produced.

One writ this strange EPITAPH on Him.
HERE LIES OLIVER CROMWELL, WHO THAT HE MIGHT BE PROTECTOR HIMSELF, FIRST
BROUGHT THE ENGLISH MONARCHY ON ITS KNEEES.

The END.
A CATALOGUE of BOOKS Sold by DANIEL PRATT, at the Bible and Crown in the
Strand, London.
ARistotle's Master Piece. The Art of Gardening. Anne of Bullen. An Accademy of
Complements. Banquet for Ladies and Gentlemen. Bunyon's Hearts Ease. The seven
Champions. Cynthia. The French Convert. The seven Wise Masters. The seven Wise
Mistresses. The Secretary's Guide. The Destruction of Troy. The Great Assize.
Francis Spira. Thomas Savage. Russels Sermons. Christ's Famous Titles. Weeks
Preparation. The nine Worthies. The Pleasures of Matrimony. Reynard the Fox.
Aesop's Fables. Parismus. The Duty of a Woman. Guy of Warwick. The wonderful
Prodiges: Wars in England. Mars and Venus. Nine Novels. The Wooden World.
Winter Evenings Entertainments. Rochester's Poems. Ladies Delight. Duty of
Sacrament. Triumph of Wit. Come and Welcome. Queens Cookery. Cry of the Son of
God. Aristotle's Legacy. Aristotle's Problems. Token for Youth. Mariners
Jewel. Cambridge Jests. Cabinet of Wit. History of Montelion. Gentleman's
Jockey. Lambert of Cattle. Complete Servant Maid. Hocus Pocus. Fortunatus.
Posie of Prayer. Culpeper's Midwife. French Rogue. Scholars Recreation. Flavel
of the Sacrament. Grace Abounding. Pilgrim's Progress. Three Novels. Universal
Jester. Royal Jester. Coffee-House Jests. Female Policy. Oxford Jests. Lilly's
Book of Fortune. Essex and Elizabeth. The Shepherds Calendar. War with the
Devil. The merry Companion. Lydals Spelling Book. Cockers Spelling Book. Toungs
Spelling Book. Artimedorus of Dreams. Laugh and be Fat. Argalus and Parthenia.
Valentine and Orson. Duty of Prayer. Cocker's Arithmetic. Arts Treasury.
Ayre's Arithmetic. Arraignment of Women. The Art of Legerdemain. Bunyons Holy
War. Solomon's Temple. Sighs from Hell. The Book of Knowledge. Crucified
Savior. Crumbs of Comfort. Dyers Works. Divine Breathings. English Rogue.
Female Grievances. Holy Jesus. Wars of the Jews. History of fair Rosamond.
History of the Tales of the Fairies. Hearts Sermons. The Life of Oliver Cromwell.
Jacobs Ladder. Mother's Blessing. Travels of Godliness. Travels of Ungodliness.
New Years Gift. Protestant Tutor. Practice of Piety. Pelling of Time. Quevedo's
Visions. Reynolds of Adultrey. Supplication of Saints. Secretary's Guide. Token
for Mariners. Young Man's Calling. Art of Money Catching. The great Assize.
Quakers Accademy. Young Man's Companion. Ladies Closet. Life of Robin Hood.
Englands Monarchs. Robinson Cruso. Devout Communicant. Life of John Shepherd.
^ious Breathings. ^^istory of Jeosephat. Devout Companion. Token for Children.
London, Printed by D. Pratt, at the Bible and Crown against York-House, in the
Strand. Where may be had all Chapmens Books, Bibles, Common Prayers, and all
sorts of Stationary Wares.

THere is lately brought from Chili a Province in America, a most Natural
Excellent Balsam, found by several Eminent Persons to excel that of Peru and
Tolu, in curing of diverse Diseases as it has given demonstration; it is a
Remedy that no Man under the Sun can compose, being a most Odoriferous, and
Natural Balsam. It cures most diseases in human Bodies, particularly helps, all
Pains coming from cold, chiefly pains in the Stomach, want of Appetite,
corroborating and strengthening the whole Body. It Is a wonderful Remedy for all
inward Sores, Bruises, Ulcers of the Lungs, Reins, Bladder or Womb, etc. It
helps shortness of Breath, Coughs, Consumption or Wheesings, it is good in most
diseases of the Head, as falling Sickness, Appoplexy, Palsy, Trembling,
Convulsions, Head Ach, and Giddiness of the Head, and strengthens the Brain and
Nerves: It kills the Worms and helps the Stone, and is a good provoker of
Urine, and brings away the Sand and Gravel, which oftentimes Obstructs the
Urine; it helps all Fluxes of the Belly, and it is a wonderful thing for most
Diseases of the Ears, especially Deasness, and outwardly applied, cures all
manner of green Wounds, Ulcers, and Fistula's, and cures most diseases in
Women, and many other Distempers, which you may see at large in the printed
Bills of Direction.

Whereas the Balsam o^ Chili has been Sold by Mr. Eben Tracy, Bookseller, at
the Three Bibles on London Bridge these 30 Years last past, but since his
decease, Mr: John Stuart Stationer at the Three Bibler and Ink Bottles, at the
Corner of the Square o^ London Bridge, has made a sham ^ort, which is an^
Imposition on the Public, therefore the Buyers are desired to take care that
they come to the right House.

Note, The Right Sort is only to be had of John Tracy, at the Three Bibles on
London Bridge, at one Shilling and Sixpence the Ounce: The Bottles are sealed
with the Balsam Eree.


