THE HISTORY Of the Principality of WALES: In Three Parts: Containing, I. A
brief Account of the Ancient Kings and Princes of Britain and Wales till the
final Extinguishing of the Royal British Line. II. Remarks upon the Lives of
all the Princes of Wales, of the Royal Families of England, from K. Edward the
First to this Time. III. Remarkable Observations on the most Memorable Persons
and Places in Wales, and of many considerable Transactions and Passages that
have happened therein for many hundred years past.
Together with the Natural and Artificial Rarities and Wonders in the several
Counties of that Principality.

By R. B.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.
1695.

John the French King taken Prisoner by Edward the Black Prince of Wales at the
Battle of Poictiers in France
F.H. van. Hove. Sculp


To the READER.
IN a small Tract formerly published, Entitled; Admirable Curiosities,
Rarities and Wonders in every County in England, I added at the end some brief
Observations upon the Counties in Wales, but they being defective for want of
room, and finding that the Subject would afford sufficient matter for a Book of
the same value, I have now been more large and copious in giving an account of
this Principality, having omitted nothing material that I could meet with
concerning it, as well before the reducing and annexing thereof to the Crown of
England, as since I have likewise added some short Remarks upon the Princes of
Wales of the Royal Families of England, and several other Observables in the
several Shires thereof, which I doubt not will be Novelties to many Readers,
and diverting to all, and thereby answer the design in the Collecting and
Publishing of them from Historians of the best Authority, which is the hearty
wish of

R. B.

The History of the Ancient Kings and Princes of Britain and Wales.
PART. I.
IT is recorded in History, that after the Universal Flood, the Isles of the
Gentiles were divided by the Posterity of Japhet the Son of Noah; and it is
probable, that this Island, among the rest, was then peopled by his Progeny;
the History of whom may be easier wished for than recovered: And therefore it
may seem unnecessary to relate what some Ancient Authors have recorded with
much uncertainty of the Successors of Japhet, whom they have named Samothes,
Magus Sarron, Druis and Bardus: But rather to follow the Authority of Geoffery,
Archdeacon of Monmouth, in his History written in the British Tongue, and
translated into English about five hundred years since, and begins his
Chronology with Brute, who after the Posterity of Japhet, seems to be the first
Discoverer, Ruler, and Namer of this Island: Yet by the way we may observe,
That Pomponius Mela, a Roman Historian writes, that one Hercules killed Albion
a Giant about the mouth of the River R^^s^e in France; from whence some have
concluded, that Albion Reigned King here, (the Greek Monuments likewise, always
calling this Isle Albion) and that after his death Hercules came hither: And
Solinus another Roman Historian reports, that by an Inscription upon an Altar
found in the Northern part of Britain, about 1600 years since, it plainly
appeared that Ulysses in his ten years Travels after the Destruction of Troy,
arrived in Britain before the coming of Brute.

We shall now give a brief Account of what is commonly received concerning
Brute, and the Race of the Kings of Britain that proceeded from him, though,
with my Author, I shall not impose upon the belief of any in these Narrations.
Brute the Son of Sylvius, the Son of Ascanius, the Son of Aeneas, after the
Ruin of Troy, and the Death of his Father, being banished into Greece, he there
by his Valor rescued and delivered the remainder of the Trojans his
Countrymen, from the Captivity which they had been for many years sufferers
under the Grecians, with whom he departed to seek some new habitation, and
associating to himself Corineus, whom with another Band of exiled Trojans he
found in the way, after a long and tiresome Journey, and many notable
encounters and achievements, he arrived in this Island then called Albion, and
landed at Totnes in Devonshire, in the year from the Creation of the World
2855. which was about the time that Jeptah and Samson Judged Israel, and before
the Birth of Christ 1116 years; and being made King or Governor of the Land,
he called it by his own name Britain, according to the opinion of many ancient
Authors; He also built the City of London which he named Troynovant or New
Troy; At his Death Brute divided the Country among his three Sons, unto Locrine
his Eldest he gave the middle part between Humber and Severn, which from him
was called Loegria; To Camber his second he bequeathed all the Region beyond
the River Severn, which from him was called Cambria, now Wales; To Allanact the
youngest he left all the Land beyond Humber Northward, which was after called
Albania, now Scotland; After which partition he deceased, having reigned 24
years, and was Buried at London. Locrinus succeeded his Father, and Humber King
of the Hums or Scythians Invading his Brother Albanacts Country, he and his
Brother Camber assisted Albanact so successfully, that they utterly defeated
his Army, himself, and abundance of his Soldiers being Drowned in the River,
from thence called Humber; Madan his Son reigned in his stead, then Mempricus,
Ebrauh, Brute Greensheeld, Leil who is said to have built Carleil; Bladud a
great Necromancer who is reported to have made those hot Baths at Bath, and to
magnify his skill, undertook to fly in the Air, but his Art failing, he fall
upon the Temple of Apollo in London, and broke his Neck. Lear his Son was King
after him, who was very unfortunate in two unnatural Daughters, whose Husbands
strove to deprive him of his Kingdom, but their designs being defeated, his
youngest Daughter whom he had slighted was admitted Queen after him, to whom
succeeded her two Nephews, Morgan and Cunegad, between whom differences
arising, Morgan was slain and Cunegad reigned singly 30 years; Many other Kings
of Britain are reckoned up after him, as Dunwallo D. of Cornwall, Belinus and
Breanus who are said to have Conquered France, Italy, Germany, and at last to
have taken the City of Rome it self. King Lud who much beautified Troynovant,
fortifying it with Walls and Gates, particularly Ludgate called after his name,
and founded a Temple where it is thought St. Paul's now stands, and changed the
name of the City from Troynovant to Luds Town, now London; He left two Sons
Androgeus and Theomantius under Age, whereupen Cassibilane their Uncle was
admitted Governor, in whose Reign Julius Caesar first Invaded this Island in
the year from the Worlds Creation 3913. and 54 years before the Birth of
Christ, the Land being then not under one sole Monarch or King, but divided
into 28 petty Kingdoms or Provinces; Caesar being landed at Deal in Kent, the
news thereof was so welcome to the Senate of Rome, that they Decreed a
Thanksgiving should be kept for 20 days together; Cassibilane was only King of
the Trinobantes who inhabited Middlesex, Essex and Hartfordshire, but in this
common danger the other Princes mutually agreed that he should command in Chief
to withstand the Roman Invasion, which he did with very great courage, beating
them twice off from the British shore; his chief City was Verulane near St.
Albans.

Theomantius the Son of Lud succeeded Cassibilane, who paid the three thousand
pound a year Tribute to the Romans which his Uncle had agreed to, when
notwithstanding the utmost Efforts for their Liberty, the Britains were
obliged to submit to the Conquering Romans; Yet did not Caesar wholly subdue
Britain, for he never came toward the North, (which several of his Successors
afterward endeavored to bring under) but subjected only those parts of the
Island lying next to France, which our Countreyman Roger Bacon relates, that
Caesar discovered by setting up Prospective Glasses on the Coast of France from
whence he saw all the Havens and Creeks in England; So that he may rather seem
to have discovered than reduced to the Roman Power. Kymbeline or Cunobeline the
Son of Theomantius reigned next, whose principal seat was at Carnolodunum now
Malden in Essex; He is said to have refused to pay the former Tribute, upon
which Augustus, who fucceeded Julius Caesar, designed thrice to make an
Expedition hither to recover his Right, but was as often diverted by
Insurrections in diverse parts of his mighty Empire. Guiderus was King after his
Father, and being very valiant, refused Tribute to Caligula the Roman Emperor,
who therefore resolved, as his Predecessors Augustus and Tiberius had done, to
reduce Britain, as being the utmost bounds of the Roman Monarchy, making great
provision for this Noble Enterprise, being encouraged therein by Adminius the
Son of Cunoboline, who being banished by his Father, fled with some few
followers to Caligula for protection; Guiderus expected, and provided for his
Arrival, who bringing down his Forces into Flanders, put them in Battle Array
upon the Sea shore, planting his Engines of War, as if ready for an Engagement;
after which the Emperor himself in a Galley lanched into the Sea about two
Bow-shots from the Land, and then presently returned, and getting into a Pulpit
provided for him, he by found of Trumpet caused his Soldiers to prepare for
Battle, and then charged every Man to fill his Helmet with Cockle and Muscle
Shells, which he called, The Spoils of the Conquered Ocean, and gave as great
Rewards to them for these trifles, as if they had performed some notable
Service in War; and against the place he built a Tower as a Trophey of his
Victory, the Ruins whereof (says my Author) remain to this day, and is
called, The Britains House. He carried many of these Shells to Rome, boasting
of this honorable Voyage, and requiring a Triumph, which the Senate seeming
unwilling to allow, he threatened to murder them all.

Claudius succeeded him in the Empire; and having leisure, resolved to make War
upon the Britains, who had long neglected to pay their Tribute, being invited
thereto by certain British Fugitives, ordering Aulus Plautius a Roman Senator,
to transport the Veterane Soldiers out of France thither, to which they were
very unwilling, complaining, That they must be forced to make War out of the
World, for so they accounted this Island to be; but at length being Embarked,
they Landed unexpectedly upon the Britains, who were encamped in the Isle of
Sheppey in Kent, and defeating them, took the City of Camolodunum in Essex, and
subdued the East-part of the Island. Jeffery of Monmouth writes, That Claudius
Landed at Rochester, near Portsmouth, which he Besieged, and Guiderus coming to
relieve it, fought and prevailed against the Romans, till one Hanno, Armed like
a Britain, pressing through the midst of the Troops till he came where
Guiderus was, he instantly slew him, which Arviragus the King's Brother
perceiving, to prevent the Britains from being discouraged, putting on the
Royal Robes, fought so courageously, that the Romans were routed, Claudius
flying to his Ships, and Hanno to an adjoining Forest, whom Arviragus pursued
and killed ere he could get to the Haven, from whence it is said to have the
name of Hanno's Haven, then Hampton, now Southampton: After his Death the Land
was many years under Roman Governors and Lieutenants, but the Silures or
Inhabitants of South Wales would not endure the Romish Yoke, relying much upon
the Courage of their Prince Corvactacus, who incamping his Army on the top of
an Hill, and stopping all the passages thereto with heaps of Stones, he
expected the approach of his Enemies, striving in the mean time to animate his
Soldiers with encouraging Speeches, telling them, That day and that Battle
would either restore them to their former Liberties, or else reduce them to
perpetual slavery, and that they should remember the valor of their Ancestors,
who formerly had driven Caesar the Dictator out of their Country, and thereby
delivered themselves from Roman Taxes and Axes, and freed their Wives and
Daughters from being debauched by their implacable Adversaries; The Soldiers
were much encouraged and echoed out their hopes of Victory, with so great a
shout as much disturbed the Romans, who thought the Fortifications the
Britains had raised to be impregnable, but Ostorius marching forward, though
opposed by a shower of Arrows, he at length broke down that rude ill compacted
Fence, and coming to handy strokes with the Britains who had more courage than
Armor, having neither Head-peice nor Coat of Mail, they were so fore galled
with the Javelins and two-handed Swords of the Romans, that they soon fled;
This Victory was unexpected by the Romans, and more considerable by the taking
the Wife, Daughter and Brethren of Cataractus Prisoners, he himself flying to
the Brigantes, or those that Inhabited Lancashire, Cheshire, etc. for succor,
but was by Cartismunda the Queen treacherously delivered into the hands of the
Conquerors, after nine years generous resistance, and his fame having reached
even to Rome it self, Cataractus was carried thither and led in Triumph through
the Roman Legions with his Brethren, Wife and Daughter, whose great Courage and
strange Attire filled the People with admiration and delight; His Body was
almost naked, Painted over with Figures of diverse Beasts, he wore a Chain of
Iron about his Neck, and another about his middle, his Hair hanging down in
Curls covered his Back and Shoulders, and the Hair of his upper Lip or Whiskers
parting in the middle reached down to his Breast, he neither hung down his head
as daunted with fear, nor asked mercy as the rest, but with an undaunted
Countenance coming before the Imperial Seat, he made the following Speech to
the Emperor on the Throne.

Great Caesar, If my moderation in prosperity had been answerable to the
greatness of my Birth and Estate, or the success of my late attempts agreeable
to the resolution of my mind, I might have come to this City rather as a Friend
to have been entertained, than as a Captive to be gazed upon; Neither would you
have disdained to have accepted the terms of Peace that I should have offered,
being a man of royal descent, and a Commander of many Warlike Nations; But
though the Clouds have darkened my present Fortune, yet have the Heavens and
Nature bestowed that upon me in Birth and Mind, which none can vanquish or
deprive me of; I plainly perceive that you make other men's miseries the subject
and matter of your Triumphs, and in this my Calamity, as in a Mirror, you now
contemplate your own Glory; Yet remember that I was a Prince furnished with
strength of men, and habiliments of War, and that it is no such wonder I am now
deprived of them all, since daily experience shows that the events of War are
uncertain, and the success of the best Policies are guided by uncertain Fates;
And thus it was with me, who presumed that the deep Ocean like a Wall enclosing
our Land, which is so situated by Divine Providence as if it were a World by
it self, might have been a sufficient security and defense to us against any
Foreign Invasion; but I now observe that the desire of Dominion admits of no
Limitation, neither has the Roman Ambition any bounds, for being desirous to
Command all, it seems all must obey them; For my own part while I was able I
made resistance, being unwilling to submit my Neck to a servile Yoke, since the
Law of Nature allows every man to defend himself being assaulted, and to
withstand force by force; Had I yielded at first, neither your Glory nor my
Ruin would have been so remarkable; Fortune has now done her worst, we have
nothing left us but our lives, which if you take from us, our miseries will
have an end, and if you spare us, we shall live the objects of your Clemency.

Caesar admiring at the Courage and Resolution of so free a mind in a Captive
condition, he pardoned him and the rest, who being unchained from the Triumphal
Fetters, they then did reverence to Agrippina the Empress, who sat aloft on a
Throne Royal; And afterward continued at Rome to their Deaths for any thing we
read to the contrary.

After Ostorius was recalled, Paulus Suetonius was sent hither by the bloody
Nero, during whose Government the Britains made several attempts to regain
their Country, and free themselves from the insupportable slavery and misery
wherein they lived; for Arvivagus having made Nero the Emperor and his two
Daughters his Heirs, hoping thereby to secure the Kingdom to his Family it
happened otherwise; For the Land was ruined by the Roman Soldiers, Voadicia
his Queen beaten and abused, her Daughters Ravished, the Nobles deprived of
their Estates, and the People in a most deplorable servitude; Voadicia made
such sensible Remonstrances of these unsufferable wrongs to the People, that
she raised an Army of an hundred thousand men, who willingly submitted to her
Conduct, and with whom, being confident in her numbers, she engaged against the
Romans at some disadvantage, and was vanquished by them with the loss of
fourscore thousand Britains; And after she had showed all the courage of a
gallant Commander, and had made so notable an attempt for redeeming her
Country from bondage, doubting to fall one time or other into her Enemies
hands, she like another Lucretia fell upon her own Sword and Died. In the 73
year from our Saviors Birth.

If the Reader desire to know more of the former Kings of Britain, the
Invasion of the Romans, and the Life of this renowned Queen Voadicia, I have
published a Book called Female Excellency or the Ladies Glory, wherein there is
a full account of all these particulars, being of the same value with this.

About this time Historians report that Christianity was first planted in this
Island, certain Disciples being sent by Philip the Apostle out of France into
Britain, whereof Joseph of Arimathea that Buried the Body of Christ was chief,
who first laid the Foundation of the true Faith at a place called Avalon, now
Glastenbury in Somersetshire, where with his twelve Assistants he Preached the
Gospel of Salvation to the Islanders, and left there Bodies Buried in that
place.

Galgacus a valiant Commander of the Caledonians was the last Prince that
resisted the Roman Dominion, and was made General of the Britains against the
Invasions of Agricola in the Reign of the Emperor Domitian, he with the chief
of the British Nobility made a very valiant defense for several years, but the
Romans seeming to be decreed by Heaven to reduce the World under their
obedience vanquished all that opposed them, and in a bloody Battle defeated him
and his Forces, and laid all in ruins before them, whereby the whole Island was
subjected to the Roman Emperors, 136 years after the entrance of Julius Caesar.
Jeffery of Monmouth the Welsh Historian does here bring in a succession of
British Kings, and amongst them Marius who Conquered Roderic King of the Picts
and Scots, whose Monument crected near Carleile, wherein his Victory was
inscribed, remained a long time; After him Corlus his Son is said to succeed,
who being carried to Rome and Educated there in his Youth, upon his return to
his own Country, he gratefully paid the Romans their Tribute without
constraint, but we must leave these relations as doubtful as we find them.

The Picts and Northern Inhabitants of Britain continuing to Invade and
Destroy the Britains who were now become Tributary to the Romans, the Emperor
Adrian in 124. came hither in Person for their relief, and drove the Picts out
of the plain Country into the Woods and Mountains where the Roman Horsemen
could not attack them, but finding the Air too severe for his Soldiers, and
the Country barren, instead of leaving the Britains a Roman Garrison, he
built a strong Wall or Fortification of Earth for their defense against their
Enemies; It was composed of Stakes driven deep into the Ground, and bound
together like a hedge, which being filled up with Turf and Earth, became a
strong Rampant against sudden Incursions. It began at the River Eden in
Cumberland near Carleile; and ended at the River Tyne near Newcastle, being
eighty miles in length. After which the Britains continued for many years in
peace without opposition, time and castom causing them to bear the Yoke of
subjection patiently, especially considering they were obliged to the Romans
for assistance against their own Barbarous Countrymen.

After the Romans had Conquered the greatest part of the World, the succeeding
Emperors politickly permitted Kingdoms and Provinces to be governed by Kings
and Governors of their own Nation, thereby the better to keep them in
obedience to their Empire; Among others Antoninus Pius constituted Lucius to be
King of Britain, who disliking the Idolatry and Paganism of his People, and
being much affected with the holy lives of the Christians, and with the
Miracles wrought among them, and encouraged by the Emperors Edicts in their
favor, he allowed the public Profession thereof, being the first Christian
King in the World, and Britain the first Kingdom that embraced the Gospel by
public Authority; After this he sent two Persons to Eleutherius Bishop of
Rome, to desire the form of some Laws to Govern his People by; To which the
Bishop replied, You desire us to send you the Roman and Imperial Laws, for the
Reformation of the People, and Guidance of the King and Kingdom of Britain;
The Roman Laws we altogether mislike, but the Law of God by no means; By the
Divine Clemency you have of late received the Law and Faith of Christ into your
Kingdom; You have with you the Old and New Testament, out of them (in Gods
name) by the advice of your Counselors, take you a Law, and therewith by Gods
permission Govern your Kingdom, for you are Gods Vicar therein, etc. By this we
may see the vast difference between the humility and piety of the Roman Church
in the Primitive times, and the Pride, Cruelty and Usurpation of the present
Synagogue of Satan.

This Epistle with two Preachers, Fagianus and Daniranus whom the Bishop sent
to King Lucius, prevailed so much upon him, that being Baptized into the
Christian Faith, he converted the Heathenish Temples of the Arch- Flamins and
Flamines into so many Bishops Sees, whereof London, York, and St. David's in
Wales were made the Metropolitans; A Table that remains in St. Peter's Church
in Cornhill London Records, that King Lucius founded that Church for a
Cathedral, and likewise St. Peter's Westminster, now the Abbey, and likewise
Dover Castle; He reigned 12 years and lies buried at Gloucester, and dying
without Children left the Roman Emperors his Heirs, of whom Commodus succeeded,
in whose Reign the Roman Legions in Britain fell into diverse mutinies, because
the Emperor instead of Senators and Consuls, who used to Command them, put
inferior Persons over them, but Helvius Pertinax being sent hither quieted all
dissentions with the severe punishment of the Offenders, and at length by his
policy he obtained the Imperial Dignity; Severus Reigned after him, whom
Albinus Lieutenant of Britain opposed, and assisted by the British Youth,
fought a Battle with him in France, where Albinus was defeated, and Severus
confirmed in the Empire, and then coming over into Britain, endeavored to
secure the Country to himself by erecting several Walls and Forts in the
Inland Parts, and repairing those with Stone which were formerly of Turf or
Earth, and finding the Northern Britains or Scots very troublesome, he built a
Wall or Fortification for defending the more Civilized from the Savage and
Barbarous Inhabitants; this Wall crossed the whole Island from Sea to Sea,
beginning at the Frith of Solney in Scotland and ending at Timnouth, in length
132 Miles, it was built with Turfs and Timber with strong Bulwarks at a
convenient distance, near, if not upon the Foundation of the former, called
Adrians Wall, the ruins whereof are yet visible through the Counties of
Northumberland and Cumberland, for which act he Surnamed himself Brittannicus,
and after 18 years Reign died at York in 212. not so much of Sickness, say some
Authors, as of Discontent and Grief; Others say of a Mortal wound given him by
Fulgence Captain of the Picts; Bassianus Garacalla his Son succeeded him, and
hastening to Rome offered very easy conditions of Peace to the yet resisting
Britains, who being tired with the long Wars accepted thereof, and Hostages
were given for conserving the same. And now the Royal Title of Kings of
Britain being annexed to the Roman Emperors, they by their continual divisions
for gaining the Imperial Dignity, gave a long breathing time of Peace to this
harassed Island, so that little of action happened here till the reigns of
Dioclesian and Maximin, in whose time Carausius being by the Romans made
Admiral of the British Seas to guard them against the Pyracies of the Saxons
and Belgians, he by conniving at their Robberies became rich and popular, so
that having notice the Emperor had ordered him to be secretly killed, he by the
aid of the Picts and Northern Britains took upon him the Title of Emperor of
Rome, and valiantly defended his Dignity for seven years; At length Maximin
Marched to the British Ocean with a powerful Army, but hearing of the strength
of Carausius and wanting Seamen, he Encamped on the French Shore, and
concluding a Peace with him, returned back to Rome; Carausius Governed the
Britains with Justice and Peace for seven years, repairing the Roman Wall, and
defending them from their brutish Enemies, but was at length Murdered by his
treacherous friend Alectus, who took upon him the Imperial Purple.

The Romans after the Death of Carausius resolved to attempt the recovery of
this Island, and Constantius with a Potent Army Landed here in a great Fog,
without observation or hindrance, at which Alectus being surprised was slain
with most of his Army, the rest escaping toward London designed to Plunder and
Burn it, but the Romans made such speed that they prevented them, killing
Gallus their Leader, and throwing his Body into a Brook that ran through the
City, which was after called Gallus his Brook, now Walbrook.

After this, these two Tyrants Dioclesian and Maximin raised a dismal
Persecution in all the parts of the Roman Empire, whereby 17000 Christians, Men
and Women were Crowned with Martyrdom, within the space of one Month, and in
Britain the Churches were demolished, their Bibles and other Writings burnt,
and for 10 years together the poor People were continually tormented without
intermission, or any place being free from the Blood of Martyrs, who were
constant in the profession of the Faith; Among others St. Alban was beheaded at
the Town bearing his name, whom Fortunatus Priscus mentions.

Albanum egregium faecunda Brittannia profert.
Britain fruitful of all good,
Washed with glorious Alban's Blood.
His Instructor in the Christian Religion Amphiole or Britain was afterward
taken, and being brought to the same place was whipped about a Stake whereto
his Intrails were fastened and so wound out of his Body, and was lastly stoned
to death; Several others suffered, as Julius and Aaron at Leicester, or rather
Coverleon in Monmouthshire, and so many at Lichfield that the place became a
Golgotha, or Field of Dead Corpse, and therefore the Seal of Arms of that City
is charged with many Martyrs to this day; But these two bloody Emperors enjoyed
their honors a very short time, for within a year after this bloody
Persecution, they were both of them by the hand of God (says Eusebius) struck
with such a mad humor, that they renounced the Empire, and laying aside the
Imperial Robes, Dioclesian retired into Dalmatia where he died raging of a
terrible disease; And Maximinus hanged himself at Marseilles in France.

Gallerius and Constantius succeeded them, the last of whom was a Prince of
singular Piety toward God, and Clemency toward men, being very kind to the
Christians, and rebuilding their Churches, for which God so blessed him, says
Eusebius, that this virtuous Father left a more virtuous Son Constantine called
the Great, the Heir of his well-gotten Empire; He Married Helena the Daughter
of Coilus a British Prince; She is reported to have removed the Pagan Idols
out of Jerusalem, and to have built a Temple in the place where our Savior
suffered, and to have found out the Cross so highly venerated by Ancient
Writers, and the Crib or Manger where Christ was born; And they say she was the
chief instrument of her Husbands Conversion, persuading him to renounce all
Superstitious and Idolatrous Worship, and to acknowledge one God and Jesus
Christ his only Son, and encouraging the Christians who had been hid in Caves
and Dens from the fury of their Enemies, to come forth and freely to exercise
their Religion. Constantius after two years Reign, returning from an expedition
against the Picts and Scots, fell sick at York being his Imperial Residence:
About which time his Son Constantine escaping from Gallerius at Rome (where he
had been left Hostage) he by Horses laid on purpose, arrived in a short time at
York, with whose presence his Father was so comforted, that sitting up in his
Bed he spoke thus to him in the presence of his Counselors.

Death is not now terrible to me, since I am well satisfied that those actions
which I have left unaccomplished will be performed by you my Son, in whom I
doubt not but my name and memory will be preserved; I advise thee to govern thy
Empire with Impartial Justice, protect the Innocent from Oppressors, and wipe
away all Tears from the Eyes of the Christians, for therein I am sure thy
happiness will consist; To thee therefore I leave my Diadem and their Defense,
desiring that my faults may be buried with me in my Grave, and leaving my
virtues (if I ever had any) to revive and live in thee; Having thus said he
expired in 306.

His Son Constantine the Great succeeded, being joyfully proclaimed Emperor by
the Britains, being as it is said was born of a British Princess; He
prosecuted the War his Father had begun against the Caledonians, Picts, and
Britains, in the remote Islands of Scotland; He then made War with Maxentius a
wicked Usurper, Necromancer and Tyrant, and being sensible that success depends
much upon the blessing of Heaven, yet doubting what God to Invocate to his
assistance (as not yet fully settled in the Christian Faith) he devoutly cast up
his Eyes to the East, and (says Eusebius) thereupon the Sign of the Cross, or
the first Greek Characters of the Name of Christ were visibly presented to his
sight, the Stars like Letters being so placed that this Sentence might be read
in Greek, In hoc Vince, In this shall thou overcome, which Promise of Victory
gave him such encouragement, that engaging the Tyrant Maxentius, he utterly
defeated his Forces, himself being drowned, by the fall of a Bridge, into the
River Tyber; After this Constantine obtained several other Victories, and then
to complete his worthy actions, he laid the Foundation of the Christians
security, by bringing them under the protection of Kings and Princes, which
could never since be shaken, though often attempted by several Heathen Emperors
his Successors; At his Death he divided his large Empire among his three Sons,
Constantine the Eldest having France, Spain, part of Germany and Britain for
his Lot; After him several other Emperors succeeded without making any great
alteration in the British affairs, neither were there any considerable
Transactions; The last of them was Theodosius in the year of Christ 423. about
which time the Goths who had faithfully served the Romans about 20 years, being
disobliged and slighted, to revenge their wrongs, they chose for their Leader a
valiant Goth called Alaricus, who proved the scourge of Rome; for the Vandals,
Alans, and Suecians joining with him, they began a fierce War in Austria and
Hungary, increasing their forces into such vast Multitudes, that the World
stood amazed, and trembled at them. For soon after two hundred thousand Goths
more resorted to them, who with these united Forces overrun Thracia, Hungary,
Austria, Sclavonia and Dalmatia, ruining and destroying all things in so
dreadful a manner that it seemed rather the Ravage of Devils than Men. The
Roman Empire thus declining, they drew their Forces out of Britain: But a
while after the Britains were extremely distressed by the continual disturbers
of their Peace, the Scots and Picts; therefore they sent their Ambassadors to
Rome, with their Garments rent, and Dust upon their Heads, bewailing their most
miserable condition, and begging Assistance; whereupon the Emperor sent a
Regiment of Soldiers into Britain, under Gallio, who for a while defended
them, but was soon called back with his Legion into France, to secure the
Country about Paris. At his departure he advised the Britains to stand upon
their Guard; and for the future to provide for their own safety, and not to
depend upon any succors from the Romans, who had their hands full of troubles
nearer home.

Thus the Romans, after they had commanded in Britain above five hundred
years, took their last farewell thereof. During their continuance here, they
have levied so many Companies of stout Britains for their Wars in Armenia,
Egypt, and other Frontier Countries, that they had much dispeopled the Nation.
Some of these British Soldiers, after they were worn out in the Wars, had
Armorica in France assigned them by Constantine the Great for their good
Service in the Wars, from whom it was called Little Britain. Unto this
Country, in the time of Gratian the Emperor, was Vrsula the Daughter of Dinoth
Regent of Cornwall sent with eleven thousand Virgins, who were to have been
married to their Countrymen the Britains; but they all perished e're they
arrived; some being drowned in the Sea by Tempest, and the Remainder put to the
Sword by the barbarous Huns and Picts, because they would not yield to their
filthy Lusts.

The Southern or more Citiliz'd Britains being extremely weakened by the Romans
exporting so many of their valiant Soldiers, and then forsaking them, and
likewise by Scarcity and Famine; their inveterate Foes, the Scots and Picts,
take this unhappy Opportunity to infest them with all manner of Cruelties and
Barbarities: So that being no longer able to defend and secure themselves, they
supplicate for Aid from Germany, inviting the Jutes, Angles, and Saxons, who
then inhabited Jutland, Holstein, and the Coasts along the River Rhene, to come
to their Assistance. Their proposal was readily embraced, and nine thousand of
them, under the command of two Brethren, Hengist and Horsa, entered the Land at
Ebsfleet in the Isle of Thanet in Kent, where they were received with great
Joy, and entertained with Songs, according to the custom of the Britains, who
alloted them that Island to inhabit, and a while after Vortigern then King of
the Britains, allowed Hengist so much Land as he could encompass within a
Bull-hide cut out into Thongs, wherein he built a Castle, which from thence had
the Name of Thong-Castle; when it was finished, Hengist invited the King to see
it, who there fell in love with Rowena, the Daughter or Neice of Hengist; upon
which Match Hengist grew more bold, contriving to make the Island his
Inheritance; and thereupon sent for fresh Forces, who at their arrival caused
several Quarrels among the Natives, dispossessing the people of their estates,
every Commander reckoning that part of the Country his own where they could
over-match the Britains, where they commanded as absolutely as Princes;
whereby the Country was burdened with seven Kings at once, each of them having
Sovereign Command within his own limits, though still one seemed to be Supreme
over all the rest.

This was usually called the Saxons Heptarchy, or seven Kingdoms; The first and
chiefest, was that of Kent only governed by Hengist and his Successors for
three hundred seventy two years. The next was the Kingdom of the South Saxons,
containing the Counties of Sussex or Surrey, continuing a hundred and thirteen
years. 3. That of the West Saxons, comprehending the Counties of Cornwall,
Devon, Dorset, Somerset, Wilts, Berks, and Hampshire; it lasted three hundred
years. 4. The East Saxons Kingdom, which was Essex, Middlesex, and part of
Hartfordshire. 5. The Kingdom of Northumberland, containing the Counties of
Northumberland, Westmorland, Cumberland, Durham, York and Lancaster, continuing
three hundred seventy nine years. 6. The Kingdom of Mercia, which was composed
of the Counties of Oxford, Gloucester, Worcester, Salop, Cheshire, Stafford,
Warwick, Buckingham, Bedford, Huntington, part of Hartfordshire, Northampton,
Rutland, Lincoln, Leicester, Derby, and Nottingham, continuing two hundred and
two years. 7. The last Kingdom was that of the East Angles, containing the
Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, which lasted three hundred and fifty three
years.

Yet during the time of this Heptarchy, many of the British Princes valiantly
defended their lawful Inheritances, and with great courage endeavored to
prevent the Saxon Yoke from being imposed upon their Necks: Among whom was
Vortimer, the Son of Vortigern aforementioned, for Vortigern after sixteen
years Reign deposed from the Government, for his kindness to the Saxons, his
Son Vortimer was chosen King of the Britains, and presently engaged against
the Saxons, gaining so much in four famous victories over them, that they were
almost extirpated. He erected a Monument in the Isle of Thenta, in the place
where the Saxons were overthrown, which to this day is called the Stowers,
wherein he commanded his Body to be buried, that the Saxons might be terrified
with the sight thereof. He restored the Christian Religion, then much decayed,
and rebuilt the Churches destroyed by the Pagan Saxons. Rowena procured his
Death by Poison, after which his Father Vorfigern was re-established in the
Government: But being oppressed by the Saxons, and pursued by Aurelius, he fled
into Wales, where, in a Castle which he built by Merlin's Directions, in the
Mountains, he, with his Daughter, whom he had taken to Wife, were burnt to
ashes.

Aurelius Ambrotius was likewise very successful against the Saxons. He is said
to have built Stonehenge near Salisbury, in remembrance of the Massacre of
three hundred of the British Nobility, who were there slain by the Treachery of
the Saxons. Vter Pendragon, who succeeded him, was no less fortunate. He was
named Pendragon, either because at his Birth there appeared a fiery Comet like
a Dragons Head, or from his Royal Banner, wherein was the Picture of a Dragon
with a Golden Head. He died of Poison put into a Well wherein he used to drink.
Arthur his Son and Successor won twelve Battles against the Saxons, and chased
Colgern their Captain from his Camp in Northumberland to York, from whence he
escaped into Germany. The Relics of Arthur's Round Table are to this time
shown in Winchester, with the Twenty four Seats. After him reigned Constantine,
Aurelius, Conantus, Vortiporus, Malgo, Canonus, and Careticus. This last King
raised a Civil War among his own Subjects the Britains, which made them forsake
him, and leave him to the Mercy of the Saxons, who pursuing him, he fled to
Cirencester in Berkshire for safety; but his Enemies taking several Sparrows,
fastened fire to their feet, and let them fly into the City, who lighting upon
straw, and thatcht houses, burnt the City to the Ground; but Careticus escaped,
and fled for security to the Mountains of Wales, where he died.

After twenty four years Civil Dissension Cadwan was made King. During these
Troubles, Austin the Monk, who was sent hither by Pope Gregory to convert the
Britains carrying himself very insolently at a Meeting with the British
Bishops, at a place thence named Austin's Oak in Worcestershire, they could
come to no Agreement; whereupon it is thought, Austin contrived this cruel
Revenge.

Cadwallo was victorious over the Saxons, slaying Edwin King of Northumberland,
and his Son Osfride in a bloody Battle. He died in peace, say the British
Writers, and was buried at St. Martin's Church in London; his Statue on
Horseback in Brass being set upon Ludgate, for a terror to the Saxons.

CAdwalloder the Son of Cadwallo fought manfully against the Saxons; but the
distractions among his Nobility much hindered his proceedings. There was
likewise a dreadful Famine in his Reigh, so that the common People reckoned
Roots and Herbs to be dainty Food: This was followed by a woeful Mortality,
which was so raging and sudden, that great numbers of People were surpised by
Death while they were eating, drinking, walking and speaking. These calamities
lasted near eleven years, so that the Country was almost depopulated, the King
and his British Peers being forced to leave the Land, who went to his Cousin
Alan, King of Little Britain in France. The Saxons taking advantage of these
severe miseries, lamentably oppressed the wretched Britains, to whose Aid
Cadwallader, with the Assistance of his Cousin Alan, did once design to return,
but being diverted by a Dream which he had, he went on Pilgrimage to Rome, and
according to the Superstition of that Age, he there turned Monk, where he soon
after died and was buried; with whom died all the hopes of the Britains, he
being the last King of the British Blood, whereby the Saxons became Sovereign
Lords and Masters of this Island. And thus was this unhappy Country a second
time conquered by Strangers, which happened about the Year of our Lord 689.

The Britains being thus outed of their Country by the Conquering Saxons,
retired beyond the River Severn, and therein fortified themselves, which
Country thereupon came to be called Wales, and the People Walsh or Welchmen;
not that the word Walsh signified in the Saxon Language a Foreigner or Alien
(for how could they be called Aliens in their Native Country) but Wales and
Walish from Galls or Gallish by changing G into W according to the custom of
the Saxons; The Britains being descended of the Gauls kept their own name
still, though somewhat altered in the Letter, as is said before; and to this
day the French call the Prince of Wales by the name of Le Prince le Galls; At
first their Chiefs were honored with the Titles of Kings of Wales, and are
these that follow. 1. Idwallo in the year of Christ 688. called Iror the Son of
Alan. 2. Roderick. 3. Conan. 4. Mervyn. 5. Roderick Surnamed the Great, who
left Wales between his three Sons, allotting unto each his part, the Country
being divided into North Wales, South Wales and Powys-Land, which had their
several Lords and Princes; North Wales fell to the share of Amarawd the eldest
Son of Roderick Mawr, or the Great, the last King thereof, with a superiority
of Power over both the rest, who were but Homagers to this; It contains the
County of Merioneth, part of Denbigh, Flint, Carnarvan, and the Isle of
Anglesey, which being the more Mountainous Parts, and of difficult access,
consequently preserved their Liberty longest, and do still keep their Language
from the Incursions of the English; Aberfraw in the Isle of Anglesey was the
Princes Palace, who were thence sometimer called Kings of Aberfraw.

South Wales in the division of the Country fell to Cadel the second Son,
comprehending the Counties of Glamorgan, Pembroke, Carmarthen, Cardigan and
part of Brecknock, which though the rich^^ and most fruitful part of Wales, yet
Pembrok^ and Brecknock having their several Kings, there remained only Cardigan
and Carmarthen under the immediate subjection of the Princes of South Wales,
whose principal Seat was at Dynefar or Dynevor Castle, not far from Carmarthen,
who thence were called by their Subjects, the Kings of Dynevor.

Powys-land was bestowed by Roderick upon his youngest Son Mervyn, containing
the Counties of Montgomery and Radnor, with part of Denbigh, Brecknock,
Merioneth and Shropshire; His chief Palace was Matraval in Montgomeryshire,
from whence the Princes thereof were so called; This Country continued in the
Line of Mervyn a long time together, but much afflicted and dismembered by the
Princes of North Wales who cast a greedy eye upon it; The last that held it
entire was Meredith, who left it to his two Sons Madoc and Griffith, of which
Madock died at Winchester in 1160. and Griffith was by King Henry I. created
Lord Powys, the residue of Powys-land which pertained to Madock, depending
still upon the fortune of North Wales.

In these several Divisions were different Kings and Princes, who long strugled
with the Saxons for their Liberties; But because we find very little mention of
their Actions in our Chronicles, I shall proceed with the History of the Saxons
and Danes, and afterward give an account of the actions of some of the Welsh
Kings and Princes, till that Principality was wholly subdued to the Crown of
England.

The Saxons, according to the common fate of Conquerours, after they had
subdued their Enemies, disagreed among themselves, and several of their Princes
incroached upon the Territories of each other, and so became petty Monarchs of
some part of Britain: These were reckoned to be ^ourteen in number, till at
last Egbert, the eighteenth King of the West Saxons, got command over all the
seven Kingdoms of the Saxons, and so became sole Monarch of England, which none
of his Predecessors before ever obtained. He had War fourteen years with the
Cornish and Welsh, and took West-chester, their chief hold, from them, making a
strict Law against any Welcoman that should pass over Offa's Dike, or set one
Foot within his English Dominions. He slew Bernulf King of Mercis in Battle,
and drove the King of Kent out of his Kingdom. The East Angles and East Saxons
submitted to him, and likewise the South Saxons; whereupon he caused himself to
be crowned absolute Monarch at Winchester: And this Monarchy continued in the
Saxons, till the Danes first got, and then lost it again; and the Saxons Issue
failing upon their next entrance, it then fell to the Normans, as by the Sequel
will appear. In the fourteenth year of Egbert the Danes with thirty three Ships
landed in England, to whom he gave Battle, but had the worst of the day, losing
two of his chief Captains, and two Bishops; but the Danes returning two years
after into Wales, and joining with the Welsh, Egbert overcame both Danes and
Welsh together.

Ethelwolph his Son succeeded; after whom reigned Ethelbald, Ethelbert,
Ethelred, and then Alfred, in whose time the Danes, under Roll a Nobleman, came
over with a great Army, but by the Valor of Alfred were beaten. This virtuous
Prince divided the twenty four hours of the Day and Night into three equal
parts, which he observed by the burning of a Taper set in his Chapel, Clocks
and Watches being not then in use: Eight hours he spent in Contemplation,
Reading, and Prayer, other eight, for his Repose, and the Necessaries of Life;
and the other eight in Affairs of State. He divided the Kingdom into Shires,
Hundreds, and Tythings, for the better Administration of Justice, and
suppressing of Robbers and Felons; which had so good effect, that the People
might Travel with all manner of security: yea, says my Author, if Bracelets of
Gold had been hung in the Highways, none durst have presumed to have taken
them away. He commanded all his Subjects who possessed two Hides of Land, to
bring up their Sons in Learning till they were at least fifteen years old,
asserting, That he accounted a man Free born, and yet Illiterate, to be no
better than a Beast, a Sot, and a Brainless Creature: Neither would he admit
any into Office that were not so. He translated the Holy Gospel into the Saxon
Tongue, was devout in the Service of God, and a great Protector of Widows and
Orphans.

Edward his eldest Son succeeded him, against whom his Nephew Ethelwald
rebelled. His Sister Elfleda had very hard Travel of her first Child, whereupon
she ever after forbore the Nuptial Embraces, alleging it to be an over-foolish
Pleasure which occasioned such bitter Pains; and listing her self a Soldier
under her Brother, she performed many valiant exploits against the Danes;
against whom Edward obtained a great Victory near Wolverhampton, wherein two of
their Kings were slain, with many of the Nobility and a multitude of Common
Soldiers, which procured him both Fear and Love from the People.

After his death Ethelstane reigned, who is said to be the first Anointed King
of this Island: He enlarged his Dominions farther than he received them. He
overthrew Godfrey the Danish King of Northumberland, Howell King of Wales, and
Constantine King of Scotland, forcing them to submit to his pleasure; after
which he again restored them to their Dignities, glorying, That it was more
Honor to make a King, than to be a King. These actions procured him much
renown from his Neighbor Princes, who courted his Friendship, and sent him
curious Presents. Othy the Emperor, who married his Sister, sent him a
curiosity richly set with Precious Stones, very artificially contrived, wherein
were Land-skips with Vines, Corn, and men seeming so naturally to move, as if
they had been real. The King of Norway sent him a sumptuous Ship, richly guilt,
with Purple Sails. The King of France sent him a Sword, which was said to have
been Constantine's the Great, the Hilt whereof was all of Gold, and therein, as
they said, was one of the Nails which fastened Christ to the Cross: He likewise
sent the Spear of Charles the Great, reported to be the same wherewith our
Savior's side was pierced; also a part of the Cross, a piece of the Crown of
Thorns, and the Banner of St. Maurice. It is related, That this King
Ethelstane, or Athelstane, in the third year of his Reign, was so harassed by
the Danes, that he was forced to shut himself up in Winchester City; who
propounded to him, either to submit, and hold the Realm of them, or to
determine the Quarrel between two Champions of each side. The King was much
perplexed at these Propositions, because his three valiant Knights, Guy Earl of
Warwick, (who lived in his Reign, or not at all) one Herand another courageous
Knight, and Earl Rohand Guy's Father-in-Law, were gone to the Holy Land. In
this strait, after he had prayed for Deliverance, it is said, he had a Vision,
wherein he was directed to rise early the next morning, and taking two Bishops
with him, to get up to the top of the North Gate of that City, where he should
see a likely Man, clothed as a Pilgrim, barefoot, and on his bare Head a
Chaplet of White Roses, and that this should be the man that should conquer
Colebrand the Danish Gaint (for so was his Name) and free the English from the
Danish Bondage. The next day the King thus attended at the Gate, sees Earl Guy
so habited, being newly arrived from Jerusalem; whereupon Athelstane addressing
himself to him, desires him to accept the Combat, as being ordained by Heaven
to acquit this Realm from Tyranny. Guy replied, My Lord, you may easily
perceive that I am not in a Condition to take upon me this Fight, being
harassed and weakened by daily Travel; lay this task therefore upon your stout
and hardy Soldiers, whom you were wont very much to esteem. Ah, said the King,
such indeed I had, but they are gone; some to the Holy Land, as one valiant
Knight, called Guy, who was Earl of Warwick: I had also a courageous Servant,
named Sir Herand de Ardene; Would to God they were now here, for then would
this Duel be soon undertaken, and the War quickly finished. In speaking which
Words the Tears trickled down his Cheeks, which made such impression upon the
Pilgrim, that he engaged to undertake the Combat. Upon the day appointed, Guy
putting on the King's best Armor, the Sword of Constantine the Great, St.
Maurice his Lance, and one of the King's best Coursers, he rode through
Winchester, appearing like a most accomplished Knight, and went to the place
appointed, which was in a Valley called Chiltecumb, where Colebrand soon after
came, so loaded with Armor, that his Horse could scarce bear him, and a Cart
driven before him, filled with Danish Axes, great Clubs with knobs of Iron,
squared Bars of Steel, and Iron Hooks to pluck his Adversary to him. Thus
marching disdainfully along, and seeing Sir Guy in the height of Pride, he
commanded him to come off his Horse, and throw himself with submission at his
Feet: But the gallant Pilgrim disregarding his Words, commending himself to
Heaven, put Spurs to his Horse, and at the first Encounter pierced the Giant's
Shield with such force, that his Lance broke into Shivers, which so enraged the
Giant, that coming up furiously, he killed Guy's Horse, who being dismounted,
dangerously wounded Colebrand. The Combat having lasted for some time, the
Giant fainted and fell with loss of Blood, and Guy immediately cut off his
Head, threeby freeing England at present from the insulting Dane. After all
which he offered his Sword in the Cathedral of Winchester, which was long after
kept in the Vestry, and called Colebrand's Axe. The other Relics of Guy, Mr.
Drayton thus describes: Thy Statue, Guy, Cliff keeps, the Gazers Eyes to please;
Warwick thy mighty Arms, ( thou mighty Hercules)
Thy strong and massy Sword, that never was controlled,
Which, as her ancient Right, her Castle still does hold.


Thus much for Earl Guy, who lived in the Year of Christ 929. This King
Ethelstane, by the insinuation of his Cup Bearer, became incensed against his
Brother, as if he had contrived Treason against him, who therefore ordered him
to be put into a small Vessel without Tackle or Oars, and so be exposed to the
mercy of the Sea; wherewith the young Prince was so overwhelmed with sorrow,
that he threw himself headlong into the Sea; whose Ghost the King endeavored
to appease, by a voluntary Penance of seven years, and building two
Monasteries. Neither did the treacherous Cup Bearer escape Vengeance; for on a
Festival day, as he was busy in waiting, one of his Feet slipping, he
recovered himself by the help of the other, and thereupon pleasantly said, You
may see now how one Brother can help another: This Speech suddenly recalled to
the King's Mind the Death of his Innocent Brother; whereupon he caused the
Cup Bearer, who was the Procurer thereof, to be immediately executed.

Edmund the fifth Son of King Edward succeeded, and after him, Edred, his sixth
Son: Then Edwy, or Edwin the eldest Son of Edmund was Crowned at Kingston upon
Thames, who was of a lascivious temper; for it is related, That on the very Day
of his Coronation, he suddenly left his Nobility, and went into a private Room,
to debauch a great Lady, his near Kinswoman, whose Husband he soon after slew.
St. Dunstan who was present, and then Abbot of Glastenbury, followed the King
into his Chamber, and leading him out by the Hand, accused him before Odo
Archbishop of Canterbury, by whom he was severely reproved, and forbid him the
Company of that woman. The King was hereat enraged against Dunstan, and
banished him out of the Land, and became so great an Enemy to the Order of
Monks, that he expelled many of them out of their Monasteries, and put married
Priests in their Places. The People having a great Opinion of the Holiness of
Dunstan, and being offended at the King's severity toward him, and other
Irregularities; they turned their Affections to Edgar his Brother, and removing
Edwin from his Princely Dignity; Edgar was made King in his stead: for very
grief whereof he soon wasted away; and died in 959.

Edgar was called the Peaceable: He maintained the Kingdom in great Glory and
Prosperity. His Navy Royal is said to consist of three thousand six hundred
Ships, with which he every Summer sailed round his Land, to secure the Sea from
Pirates. He caused Ludwal Prince of Wales to pay him three hundred Wolves
yearly, instead of a former Tribute in Money, whereby England and Wales, which
were formerly very much overrun, were now so freed, that there was scarce a
Wolf to be found alive. he was very severe upon his Judges, if he found them
guilty of Bribery and Partiality, riding the Circuit himself every Year for
that purpose; Yet among all these Virtues, he is said to be very Voluptuous,
especially toward Women, not sparing the very Nuns; which sounded so ill, that
Dunstan took the boldness to reprove him for it; and coming into his presence,
the King in Courtesy rose from his Royal Throne, to take him by the Hand, and
seat him by him. But Dunstan refusing the King's Hand, with a stern Countenance
and contracted Brow spoke thus to him: You that have not been afraid to corrupt
a Virgin dedicated to Christ, how can you presume to touch the Consecrated
Hands of a Bishop? You have defiled the Spouse of your Maker, and do you now
think by your flattering service to pacify the Friend of the Bridegroom? No
Sir, do not mistake your self; for I will be no friend to him who has Christ
for his Enemy. The King thunderstruck with these dreadful Words and touched
with remorse of Conscience, fell down at the Feet of Dunstan; who raising him
up, began to aggravate his Crime, and finding the King pliable to his
Instruction, he enjoined him the following Penance for satisfaction; That he
should wear no Crown for the space of feven years; That he should fast twice a
week; That he should distribute his Treasure left him by his Ancestors
liberally to the poor; That he should build a Monastery for Nuns at Shaftsbury,
that since he had robbed God of one Virgin by his Transgression, so he should
restore to him many again for the time to come; Likewise, That he should expel
Clerks or Priests of evil life (meaning those who were married) out of the
Churches, and place Monks in their room. All this Edgar performed, and the
seven years being past, Dunstan (says the Historian) calling the Nobility,
with the Bishops, Abbots, and Clergy together, he before all the People set the
Crown upon the King's Head at Bath, in the thirteenth year of his Reign;
Dunstan, who it seems ruled all, having hitherto hindered it. The Nun here
mentioned was Wilfrid a Duke's Da^ghter by whom he had a Daughter called
Editha: He had a Son likewise by Elfrida, the Earl of Devonshire's Daughter,
which Dunstan being now grown goood natured, Christened: The words of the
Historian are these. The Child also which was gotten of the Harlot he Baptized
in the Holy Fountain of Regeneration, and giving him the name of Edward,
adopted him to be the King's Son. There are abundance of ridiculous miracles
related of this Dunstan: One among many others was, That a Vision appearing to
him, required him to take up the Body of Editha the Bastard and Canonize her
for a Saint; her Tomb being accordingly opened in the Church of Wil^on, where
she was buried, her whole Body (says the Monkish Historian) was consumed to
Dust, save only her Thumb, her Belly, etc. whereof she her self showed the
meaning, declaring That her Thumb remained entire, because she so often used to
cross her self therewith, and the other Parts did signify the extraordinary
Abstinence and Chastity. With such stuff were the People then abused, and
persuaded to worship for Saints the dead Carcases of those that were many times
of very profligate Lives while on Earth. In King Edgar's Reign there was a
great Famine, wherein Ethel wald Bishop of Winchester sold away all the
Church-Plate, and Vessels of Gold and Silver, to relieve the Poor, saying,
There was no reason that the senseless Temples of God should abound in Riches,
and the lively Temples of the Holy Ghost to be in want of them.

After the Death of Edgar there was great Diviston, many of the Nobility being
for Etheldred, the true and only legitimate Heir of Edgar; but the other
Nobles, and the Clergy, especially Dunstan, fearing the Married Clergy should
again prevail, he, with several other Bishops, meeting together, and carrying
the Cross before Edward, brought him to the Lords, and by many Persuasions
prevailed with them to accept him for their King. He was accounted a just, meek
Prince, and very charitable to the Poor: Yet enjoyed he the Crown but a short
space; for in the fourth Year of his Reign, as he was Hunting near Corf-Castle,
where his Brother Etheldred and Queen Elfrida his Mother resided, while he was
discoursing and drinking on Horseback, as the Cup was at his Mouth, a Servant
of the Queens, by her contrivance, struck him into the Back with a Knife or
Dagger; at which setting Spurs to his Horse to get away, and fainting with loss
of Blood, he fell from his Horse with one Foot in the Stirrup, and was dragged
up and down the Woods, till at last his Body was left dead at the Gate of
Corf-Castle. When this Fact was committed the Queen was so struck with remorse,
that to expiate her Guilt, she built two Monasteries, Almsbury and Wormwell:
For, as Mr. Fox observes, most of these Religious Houses were founded either
upon the account of some Public or Private Murder.

Edward the Martyr, as he was called, being thus slain, Etheldred his younger
Brother, the Son of Edgar and Queen Elfrida, succeeded. He reigned thirty eight
years, but was very unfortunate, and full of Troubles all his time. It is
related, That when Archbishop Dunston Christened Etheldred as he held him over
the Font, the Child was not very cleanly, whereupon the Bishop swore, By the
Mother of God, this Boy will prove an unhappy and slothful Prince; which
happened accordingly. At his Coronation a Cloud appeared, half like Blood, and
the other half like Fire. In his third Year the Danes Invaded the Kingdom in
several places, and the King paid them forty thousand pound yearly for his
Quiet, which much disobliged his Subjects; yea, the English were so low, that
the Danes commanded their Houses, Wives, Daughters, and all they had: Whereupon
Etheldred contrived, that all the Danes were massacred in one day: But this did
more enrage them, so that first Swain and then Canutus, came with two hundred
Sail of Ships, and landed in Cornwall, burning, and destroying all before him,
and killing Nine hundred Monks and Nuns at one time, the King's Counsels being
all betrayed by the Traitor Edrick: Whereupon he fled, with his Queen Emma and
her two Sons into Normandy, to Richard, Duke thereof, who was her Brother. But
Swain being soon after killed by his own men, they made his Son Canutus King.
After which Etheldred returns again to England, and perceiving the several
Treasons against him, and being unable to withstand their Fury, he soon after
died.

Edmund, the eldest Son alive of Etheldred, succeeded, surnamed Ironside, from
his great Strength and Courage. He was Crowned at Kingston: But the Danes were
then so powerful in England, that Canutus was accepted King at Southampton,
many of the Clergy and Laity swearing Allegiance to him; but the City of London
stood firm for Edmund, who fought several Battles against the Danes, and routed
Canutus four times in the plain Field, and would in likelihood have freed the
Nation from the Danes, had not the ever-false Edrick and other perfidious
persons of the Clergy and Laity, prevented it. At length, to avoid further
Bloodshed, they made an Agreement to divide the Kingdom betwixt them; but
Edmund enjoyed the benefit of this Accord a very short time, being soon after
murdered as he was easing Nature, by Edrick, and his Head presented to Canutus,
who, though he loved the Treason, yet commanded the Traitor to be beheaded.

By the Death of Edmund, the Saxon Monarchy came to a Period; for Canutus,
after his Death, seized upon the other half of England, none being able to
withstand; whereby the Danes made themselves sole Masters of this Island, after
it had been in possession of the Saxons about 566 Years: The English Nobles
owning Canutus for their lawful King, and swearing Fealty to him at his
Coronation at London in the year of Christ 1017. Though Canutus had never the
better Opinion of them, considering, that most of them had sworn Allegiance to
Edmund their Natural Sovereign, and likewise that they were English Natives: He
therefore judged them treacherous Persons, and used them accordingly; for some
he banished, others he beheaded, and many by the Just Judgment of Heaven died
sudden Deaths. Canutus, to establish his Government, called a Parlaiment of
Bishops, Lords, and Barons, in London, wherein many laws were ordained, and,
among others, this following: We admonish diligently all Christian Men, that
they do always love God with an inward heart, and be diligently obedient to
Divine Teachers, and do subtly search God's Learning and Laws often and
daily, to the profit of themselves: And we warn, that all Christian men do
learn to know at leastwise the right Belief, and a right to understand the
Lord's Prayer and the Creed, for that with the one every Christian man should
pray unto God, and with the other show forth right Belief. He also ordained in
another Parliament at Oxford, That both English and Danes should observe the
laws made by King Edgar, as judging them to be above all others most just and
reasonable. He married Emma the Widow of King Etheldred, and Sister to Richard
Duke of Normandy, with this Condition, That the Issue of her Body by him should
inherit the Kingdom of England. He went to Rome to complain of the excessive
Extortions of the Pope from the English Archbishops, upon receiving their
Palls: And having reigned twenty Years over England, he died.

Notwithstanding the former Agreement, yet Harold the Son of Canutus by Elgina
his first Wife, (in the absence of Hardiknute the Son of Queen Emma) succeeded
his Father; and the better to secure himself, he, by the assistance of the
treacherous Earl Goodwin, who had married Canutus's Daughter, endeavors to get
into his Power Edward and Alfred the two Sons of Queen Emma by King Etheldred,
whom he knew had more Right than himself; and to that purpose they counterfeit
a Letter in Emma's name, whom Harold had abused, and robbed of her Jewels, the
Contents whereof were to this purpose.

EMMA, in Name only Queen, to Edward and Alfred her Sons sends Motherly
Greetings. Whilst we severally bewail the death of our Sovereign, my Lord, and
your Father; and your selves (Dear Sons) are still more and more dispossessed
from the Kingdoms of your lawful Inheritance; I much wonder what you intend to
do, since you know that delays in Attempts give the Usurper more leisure to lay
his Foundation, and more safely to fix thereon his intended Building; never
ceasing to post from Town to City, to make the Lords and Rulers thereof his
Friends, by Threats, Prayers, or Rewards: But notwithstanding his Policy, yet
they privately signify, that they had rather have one of you, their Native
Contrymen, to reign over them, than this Danish Usurper. Therefore my advice
is, That either of you do with all speed repair to me, that we may advise
together what is to be done in this so great an Enterprise. Fail not therefore,
but send me word by this Messenger what you intend to do herein. And so fare ye
well.

Your Affectionate Mother Emma.


Messengers being sent to Normandy with this Letter, they met only with Alfred,
( Edward being gone into Hungaria) to whom delivering their Message, he was
very joyful, and made all possible have to England, accompanied with diverse
Norman Gentlemen, and arriving at Southampton, was received by the villainous
Earl Goodwin with much pretended Kindness and Friendship, who made as if he
would bring him to London; but being come to Gilford in Surrey, Goodwin
commanded his men to kill all Alfred's Company, and then carrying him to the
Isle of Ely, ordered his Eyes to be put out: Then opening his Body, they took
out his Bowels, and fastening one end of his Guts to a Stake, they drove him
round it with Iron Darts and Needles, till all his Bowels came clear away. Thus
died innocent Alured, or Alfred, the true Heir to the Crown, by the Treachery
of Godwin, to the great disgust of the English Nobility, who vowed Revenge.
This Harold, called Harefoot for his great swiftness, did not long enjoy his
usurped Dominion; for after four years he died.

After which Hardiknute, the Son of Canutus and Queen Emma, who was by his
Father made King or Denmark, is now by the States of the Land, both Danes and
English, invited over hither to take upon him the Government. He was a great
Oppressor of the English by heavy Taxes, which so enraged them, that two of his
Collectors were slain at Worcester, for which their City was burnt, and their
Bishop Alfred expelled his Office, till with Money he had purchased his peace.
Though this King was very vicious, yet it is said, he was more kind to Edward
his Half-brother, and made Earl Godwin purge himself for the death of Prince
Alfred, though it is thought his bountiful Gifts to the King prevailed much
more for clearing him, than his Innocence. One present especially is very
remarkable, that is, A Ship whose Stern was of Gold and fourscore Soldiers, all
richly habited, within her; on their Heads they all wore guilt Burgonets, and
on their Bodies a triple gilt Harbergeon, about their Wastes Swords girt richly
guilt, a Danish Battle-ax on their left Shoulders, a Target with gilt Bosses on
their left Hand, a Dart in their right, and upon their Arms Bracelets of Gold
of great Value. After two years Reign Hardiknute died in the midst of his
drunken Debaucheries, and in him ended the Danish Race in England, three Kings
only of that Nation Reigning here. This third Conquest was but of a short
continuance, yet were the Danes very insolent toward the English during that
time; for if an Englishman and a Dane met at a Bridge, or at a Door, the
Englishman must stand still till the Dane past by, and if he did not then bow
down very low to the Dane, he was certainly beaten and abused: Yea, it is
related, That while the English were drinking, the Danes would stab them, or
cut their Throats; to prevent which, when the Englishman drank, he desired his
next Companion to be his Surety or Pledge, from whence it is said the Custom of
Pledging one another did first arise. For these, and abundant greater
Insolences, after the Death of Hardiknute, the Danes were utterly driven out
of England, and never again returned.

Edward called the Confessor, succeeded next, in 1042. who was an absolute
Englishman, and the youngest Son of Etheldred and Queen Emma; being invited
from Normandy by all the English Nobility, who disdained the Danish Subjection,
and was entertained with great Joy. He first remitted that heavy Danish Tax of
Forty thousand pound a year, called Dane gilt, imposed by his Father, and paid
forty years by all but the Clergy, who are exempted, Because the Kings reposed
more confidence in the Prayers of the Holy Church, than in the Power of Armies.
It is reported, Edward forgave that Tax upon this occasion: A great Sum of that
Treasure being brought into his Chamber, and laid in a heap, he being called to
see it, was at first sight much affrighted, protesting he saw the Devil dancing
with great Joy upon the same; and therefore commanded it should be again
restored to his Subjects, and released them from it for ever after. He married
Editha Earl Godwin's Daughter, but never had any Conjugal Society with her,
though she was a Lady accomplished with all excellent Endowments both of Mind
and Body, so that this old Ve^^^^^ written on her; Sicut Spina Rosam, Genuit
Goduinus Editham.
From prickled Stalk as sweetest Rose,
So Editha fair from Godwin grows.


Edward himself confessed upon his Deathbed, That openly she was his Wife, but
in secret Embracings as his own Sister: But whether it were Infirmity or
Chastity, it seems he was willing to have her accused of Incontinency, whereof
if she were guilty, he could not be innocent, it being a great injury to put
his Wives virtue to so Tyrannical a trial. After this, some differences arose
between him and Earl Godwin, and Forces were raised on both sides, but by the
Intercession of the Nobility, an Agreement was made: Yet Godwin escaped not
Divine Vengeance; for being charged by the King for the Munder of Alfred, he
wished if he were guilty he might never swallow down a bit of Bread again;
which happened accordingly; for the first bit of Bread he put into his Mouth
choked him; as he sat with the King at Table: A dreadful Instance of God's
Severity against Perjury. This King is blamed for his Cruelty to his Mother, in
forcing her to pass over nine burning Plow shares, barefoot and blindfold,
for a Trial of her Continency; which yet she performed without the least
damage. He is said to be the first King that cured the Disease called the
King's Evil.

It is related, that this King lying on his Bed one Afternoon, with the
Curtains drawn, a pilfering Courtier coming into his Chamber, and finding the
King's Casket open, which Hugoline his Chamberlain had forgot to shut, he took
out as (...) Money as he could well carry, and went away: But finding success,
he came a second, and a third time, still carrying off more. At which the King,
who had observed all, called to him to be gone with all speed, since he had
enough, if he could be contented; For, said he, if Hugoline should come and
catch thee, thou will go nigh to lose all thou have got, and may get a
Halter into the Bargain: The Fellow was no sooner gone, but Hugoline came in;
and finding the Casket open, and a great deal of Money taken out, he was much
incensed: But the King bid him not be moved; For, said he, he that has it,
has more need of it than we.

When this King Edward was hastening out of Normandy with a great Army to
recover England from the Danes, being ready to give Battle, his Captains
assured him of Victory, and that they would not leave one Dane alive: God
forbid, said Edward, that the Kingdom should be recovered for me, who am but
one Man, by the death of so many thousands; better it is that I should live a
private and unbloody Life, than to be a King by such a Slaughter and Butchery.
This King having no lisue of his own, sent for Edward the Son of Edmund
Ironside out of Hungary, who for his long absence was called the Outlaw; but he
dying soon after, he declared Edgar the Outlaw's Son, to be Heir, and surnamed
him Atheling, or Adeling, a Term appropriated to the presumptive Heirs of the
Crown. He had also a Daughter named Matilda, who was married to the King of
Scots, and was Mother to David King of Scotland, and Maud Queen of England.

When King Edward was on his Deathbed he observed all present weeping and
lamenting for him, to whom he said, If you loved me, you would forbear weeping
and rejoice; because I go to my Father, with whom I shall receive the Joys
promised to the Faithful, not through my Merits, but by the free mercy of my
Savior, who shows mercy on who he pleases.

After the Death of Earl Godwin, Harold his Son grew into great Favor with
King Edward, and was by him made Lieutenant of his Army against the Welsh; who,
with his Brother Tosto, or Toston, utterly subdued that Rebellion. After which,
Harold still increasing more in favor with the King, there grew such hatred
between the two Brethren, that Tosto coming to Hereford, slew all his Brother's
Servants, and cutting them in pieces, salted them, and put them into
powdering-tubs. It happened afterward, that Harold going beyond Sea, was by
Tempest ^^^ven into Normandy, and being seized, and carr^^d before Duke Wiliam,
he made him promise, That after the death of King Edward, he would secure the
Kingdom for him, according to King Edward's Will: Which Oath having taken,
Harold came back, and told King Edward what he had done, who seemed well
content therewith, says the Historian; which, if it were true, he had surely
forgot his former Declaration concerning Edgar Atheling.

However, after the death of King Edward, Harold neither regarding his Oath to
Duke William, nor Edgar's Right, whom he despised for his tender Age, caused
himself to be Proclaimed King, without any great Ceremony or Celebration, none
much approving or disapproving thereof: and to ingratiate himself with the
People, he eased them of several severe Taxes laid upon them by his
Predecessor, and was affable and kind to all: But this was a short calm before
a great storm; for soon after Duke William sent his Ambassadors to him to mind
him of his Oath; but he returned answer, That it was extorted from him in his
Imprisonment, and therefore was no way obliging. At this Answerthe Duke was
much enraged and prepared Forces for gaining the Kingdom by force. Neither was
Harold idle, but made provision to withstand him: At which time a dreadful
Comet appeared in the Heavens, which was then judged and after proved to be a
fatal Omen.

During these Preparations, Tosto Brother to Harold, and Harfager King of
Denmark, with three hundred Ships, invaded the Country; landing in Yorkshire,
Harfager claiming the Crown as Son of Canutus; but the Nobility of those parts
opposing them, were routed: which Harold hearing, marched against them, and at
Stamford-Bridge he encountered them, where his whole Army was withstood by one
single Dane, who slew forty of his men and made good the Bridge, till a Soldier
in a Boat rowing under the Bridge, thrust his Spear through a crevice and so
slew this valiant Champion: After which, the King fell upon the Danes and got
an entire Victory over them, killing King Harfager, and Tosto his own Brother:
Olave the Son of Harfager, and Paul Earl of Orkney, were taken Prisoners, with
abundance more, who begging their Lives, the King ordered 20 of their 300 Ships
to carry them to Denmark, with the sad news of the loss of their King and his
whole Army.

No sooner was this Storm over, but a worse began; for Duke William having
prepared a great Army and Navy, resolved for England, having the free consent
of his Nobility for his Voyage, many of them assisting him therein. But first
he sent to Pope Alexander to confirm his Title to the Crown, who did it
readily, and withal sent him a Consecrated banner, an Agnus Dei, and a Hair of
St. Peter, with a curse to all opposers to carry in the Ship wherein he himself
failed. Being thoroughly furnished he and his Men embarked at St. Vallery, where
they staid a long time for a Wind; at length setting Sail, Sep. 28. 1066. he
arrived with his Fleet at Pevensey in Sussex, where as soon as he landed, it
happened one of his Feet stuck so fast in the Sand that he fell to the ground;
whereupon one of his Attendants catching him by the Arm, and helping him up,
said, Stand up my Lord; and be of good Courage, for now you have taken fast
footing in England; and observing that he had taken up Sand and Earth in his
Hand, he added, You have now taken Livery and Seisin of the Country; it being
the custom, that when Possession is taken of Land, a piece of Earth is given to
the Possessor. A Wizard or Necromancer had told Duke William, That he should
safely arrive in England with his whole Army, without any hindrance from
Harold; which after it came to pass, King William sent for this Conjurer, to
confer further with him; but it was told him, That he was drowned in that Ship
which alone of the whole Navy miscarried; whereupon the Conqueror said, He
would never put confidence in that Science which was of more benefit to the
Ignorant than the Skilful therein; for it seems he could foresee my good
fortune, but not his own misfortune.

After his Landing, the Duke set all his Ships a fire, to assure his men that
they must either conquer or die. He then marched toward Hastings, declaring
the cause of his coming to be to inherit the Kingdom, which was given him by
King Edward, and strictly charging his Soldiers not to wrong any of the People
in the least, since they were so soon to become his Natural Subjects. He then
sent Messengers to Harold, either to deliver him up the Country, and be subject
to him, or to fight it out in the sight of both Armies in single combat; or
lastly, to stand to the Pope's Determination: But he returned answer, That
unless he did suddenly depart, he would give him cause to repent this his rash
Invasion; and that the next day it should he tried by more Swords than One.
Accordingly Harold marches courageously against Duke Widiam, who put himself
into a posture to receive him. It happned, that the Morning before the Battle,
William's Armourer by mistake put on his Back-piece before, and his
Breast Plate behind; which being observed by some of his Attendants, was judged
an ill Omen, and therefore they advised him not to fight that day: To whom the
Duke replied, I value not such Fooleries; but if I have any skill in
Soothsaying, (as in truth I have none) I am of the opinion if does foretell,
that I shall change my Condition, and of a D. shall this day become a K.

The Armies being Marshalled, Harold placing the Kentish-men with their heavy
Axes or Halberts in the Van, the Battle began, both Parties fighting bravely,
one for the Liberty of their Country, and the other for a Kingdom. The Normans
perceiving they could not break the united strength of the English, pretended
to fly, which the English believing, pursued them in disorder, whereupon the
Normans taking the advantage, rallied, and charging them furiously in that
disjoynted Posture, made a very great slaughter among the English; and among
the rest, King Harold, his Brother, and most of the English Nobility, fell that
day; and of the Common Soldiers, Sixty seven thousand nine hundred seventy
four. Others report, an hundred thousand were slain. Duke William had three
Horses killed under him, yet received not the least wound, his Loss being only,
as is said, Six thousand Men. Thus died King Harold, after only nine Months
Reign, and was buried at Waltham Abbey in Essex. And it is very remarkable, That
whereas Harold, with his Father Godwin, had cruelly murdered Alfred the true
Heir to the Crown, and his Normans, he was now by a Norman Wounded in the left
Eye with an Arrow, whereof he immediately died. This great Battle was fought at
Hastings in Sussex, on Saturday, October 14. 1066. The English after this vast
loss had designed to make Edgar Atheling King, but it was prevented by their
private Animosities. And thus ended the Saxon Monarchy in England, which from
Hengist in 475 to this Year, had continued (save only some short interruptions
by the Danes) Five hundred ninety one years.

During these stupendous Revolutions in the State and Government of England,
we do not read of much action between the Welsh, and the Saxons, Danes and
Normans; It is recorded they had still a Succession of Kings and Princes, and
among them Leoline ap Sytsill who lived about the year 900, in the Reign of
Edward Surnamed the Elder, a Valiant Saxon King, and yet free from Pride or
Ambition, (says the Historian) as appears by the intercourse betwixt him and
this Leoline, who after several Skirmishes thought fit to Treat of Peace; The
King lay at a place called Austeline, and the Prince at Bethesly not far
distant; Leoline thought it below him to cross the Severn to wait upon Edward,
whereupon the King went into a Boat to come over to him; Leoline observing it,
and surprised at this great condiscention, upon the King's approach to the
opposite shore, threw off this rich Robe he had on, prepared on purpose for
that Royal Assembly, and entered the Water Breast high, where embracing the Boat
he submissively said, Most Prudent and Worthy King, your Humility has overcome
my Insolence, and your Wisdom has Triumphed over my Folly, Come, tread upon my
Neck which I have foolishly lifted up against you, and enter into my Country
this Day with all freedom, since your generosity has made it all your own.
Having said this, he took the King upon his Shoulders, and carrying him ashore
caused him to sit down upon his Royal Robe, and so putting his hands jointly
into his, acknowledged Homage and Allegiance to him.

Ethelstane his Successor had Wars with the Welsh, whose Princes and Rulers he
brought to be his Tributaries, who at Hereford entered into Covenants to pay him
yearly twenty pound weight in Gold, three hundred weight of Silver, and two
thousand five hundred Head of Cattle, with a certain number of Hawks and
Hounds; Toward the payment of which, by the Statutes of Howel Dha, the King of
Aberfraw was charged at sixty six pounds, the Prince of Dynever and the Prince
of Powys the like Sums. This Ethelstane confined the Britains (who hitherto had
enjoyed the City of Exeter with the same right as the Saxons) into the furthest
Promontory of Cornwall, enlarging his Dominions beyond any Saxon King before
him.

In the time of King Edward the Confessor 1053, the Irish with 36 Ships entered
the River Severne, and with the assistance of Griffith King or Prince of
North Wales, burnt and destroyed all they met with; Against whom Alfred Bishop
of Worcester marching with considerable force, was defeated, many of his
Soldiers being slain, and the rest put to flight, which much elevated the
Welsh, so that Rice the Brother of Griffith made many Incursions into the
English Territories, and carried away great Booties, till at length he was
routed and slain at Bulenden, and his Head presented to King Edward at
Gloucester. Two years after the King having banished Algar the Son of Leofrike
Earl of Chester without cause, he with the assistance of the Welsh and Irish
under Grissith, who had Married his Daughter, much indamaged the English,
defeating Rodulf Earl of Hereford with the slaughter of five hundred men,
defacing that City, and burning the Minster, with many other mischiefs; Against
whom Harold Son to Earl Godwin (afterward King, and slain by William the
Conqueror) was sent, who prosecuted the War with much courage and conduct,
pursuing his flying Enemies and passing through North Wales Encamped upon
Snowdon Hills; but the Earl and Griffith not daring to come to an Engagement,
fled from thence to South Wales, and again took possession of Hereford, of
which Harold having notice marched thither with all diligence, and soon
recovering the City fortified it with a deep Trench and an high Rampire, and
for preventing of Bloodshed, and ingratitude to Algar, who had freely resigned
his Earldom to Harold upon his return from Exile, a peace was concluded, and at
Harold's request King Edward pardoned both him and Griffith; But Algar raising
fresh disturbances, and again assisted by his old friend Griffith, recovered
his Earldom of Chester by Arms, at which the King was highly offended,
especially with Griffith, who was always ready to appear against him, and
Harold was a second time made General, and with a great Army entered North Wales
without sight of an Enemy, whereupon he burnt down the stately Palace of Prince
Griffith, and so returned to the King; But the Welsh were not long quiet, and
Griffith inflamed with revenge, with the greatest strength he could raise, made
Inroads into ihe English Borders; Upon which Harold is sent a third time
against them, who burst into Wales with such mighty Forces, that Prince
Griffith doubting the Success withdrew secretly from his Camp, leaving his
Soldiers to fight for themselves if they pleased; who finding their Prince had
deserted them, the whole Army yielded themselves to Harold's mercy, and having
seized upon Gaiffith, they cut off his Head and sent it to Harold, giving him
Hostages for their future obedience, and for payment of the ancient Tribute,
which for some time had been denied. After which King Edward kept a severe Eye
over the Welsh, making a Law that if any of that Nation should pass armed over
Offa's Ditch, his Right Hand should be cut off.

In the Reign of William the Conqueror, Roger Earl of Hereford raising a
Rebellion against him in that Country, was assisted by the Welsh, but it being
soon suppressed and the Earl taken and banished into Normandy, the King used great
severity against the Welsh, putting out the Eyes of some, Hanging others upon
Gibbets, and they that escaped best were forever banished their Country; and
afterward entering Wales with a great Army, he obliged the Princes thereof who
were unable to resist, to do him Homage at St. David's, and taking Hostages for
their peaceable demeanor, he returned as a Victorious Conqueror.

In 1095. William Rufus finding the Welsh often attempting mischief against the
English, resolved to make a full Conquest of them, and redoubling his usual
Forces drew into the Marshes of Wales, and their Encamped, calling a Council of
War to consult how to prosecute his design against them, who finding their own
weakness to oppose, they according to their usual manner secured themselves in
their Woods and Mountains, and other inaccessible places; Upon which the King
sent Hugh Montgomery Earl of Shrewsbury and Hugh Lupus Earl of Chester into the
Isle of Anglesey, who there executed great cruelty, on the People, cutting off
the Hands, Noses and Arms of the Resisters, sparing neither Age, Sex, nor place
Sacred or Profane from Destruction; At which very time M^gous King of Norway
landed there, in hope to Conquer the Island, whom the English Earls opposed
with all their might, armed at all points, yet Montgomery through the sight of
his Beaver was shot with an Arrow into the right Eye, whereof he died.

In 1107. those Flemings which his Brother Rufus had settled in Cumberland,
whose Lands the Seas had overwhelmed some years before, were by King Henry I.
removed into Ross in Wales, both to free the Inland Country from such a burden,
and to keep the Welsh in obedience, which project answered his expectation;
For, says Giraldus, they were a Colony of stout men, enured to the Wars, and
likewise Clothiers and Husbandmen, as time and place required, and most loyally
devoted to the Crown of England, whereby they kept the Country in subjection
for some time. Yet 1114. Griffith ap Conan Prince of North Wales, and Owen ap
Cadogan Prince of South Wales made Inroads upon the Lands of Gilbert Strangbow,
Hugh Earl of Chester and other English Gentlemen, and so incensed the King by
these Outrages, that in a rage he vowed he would not leave one alive in North
or South Wales, and going thither in Person divided his Army into three parts,
to catch if possible these nimble Combatants, who at his approach were got
again to their old Recesses, however with much difficulty he pursued and killed
many of them in their Hills and Woods, and the rest yielded to King Henry, who
returned home with much satisfaction.

In 1121. King Henry was again disquieted by the Welsh under Meredith ap Beldin
Prince of Powis-Land, and the three Sons of Cadogan, who broke into the Marshes
of Cheshire and burnt two Castles, against whom the King marched with strong
Forces, sending the main of his Army and Carriages the Common Road, but himself
with a select company, took a nearer way through the Streights and Mountains,
which the Welshmen having notice of, they laid an Ambush who courageously set
upon them and rained down Showers of Arrows on them, from the higher grounds
whereby many of the English were slain, and one Arrow aimed at the King shot
him on the Breast, but by his Armor was hindered from doing farther mischief,
whereat he was little concerned, only swore, By our Lord's Death, his usual
Oath, that he was sure that Arrow was shot by own of his Followers and not by a
Welshman; At length finding he should gain little, and might lose much of the
honor he had gained in this barren Country, he concluded a Peace with the
Welsh Princes, giving them a thousand head of Cattle, and so returned to London.

In 1138. Owen and Cadwallader the Sons of Griffith ap Conan Prince of Wales,
made an Irruption into the Pale, and did much damage, carrying away much spoil
of Goods, Horses, Arms, and other Habiliments of War, which King Stephen was
not able to revenge, being sufficiently incumbered in defending his Crown,
which Maud the Empress upon pretense of a better Title endeavored to deprive
him of, under the Conduct of her Brother in Law Robert Earl of Gloucester. King
Stephen Besieged Ramilph Earl of Chester and Earl Robert in Lincoln, who issued
out of the City resolving to give the King Battle, being assisted with a great
number of Welsh as well as Englishmen. Before the fight the Earl of Chester
animated his Soldiers by telling them, That he gave them unfeigned thanks for
hazarding their lives in so just a cause against a faithless King, and that he
himself would lead them amidst the strongest Troops of the Enemy, and seemed
already in his own thoughts to be breaking through them, and trampling on the
necks of their Chief Captains, yea piercing with his Sword the very Heart of
King Stephen himself, not doubting but they would follow their Leader, and by
his example quickly put their persidious adversaries to flight; On the other
side Baldwin, King Stephen's General, told his men, That the Justice of their
Cause, obliged them to defend their valiant King to whom they had sworn
Allegiance, and whose Presence, Courage and Conduct ought more to encourage
them than thousands of men; What is Robert the Bastard their General, says he,
but a boasting Coward who can speak big, but perform little, has a Lion's
Voice, but the Heart of an Hare? and what is Chester's Earl but an hair-brained
audacious man, without Judgment or Courage? and what are the Welshmen which he
has with him, are they not fitter for our contempt than fear? who being naked,
unarmed and without any military Discipline, run headlong like wild Beasts upon
the Javelins and Spears of the Hunter; and the rest are only straglers and
runagates, who will never endure the force of your puissant Arms. After this a
bloody Battle was fought, but at length King Stephen's Horse giving way, and
the Foot being thereby exposed, they allfled together, leaving the King almost
alone in the Field. A strange sight it was (says the Historian) to see King
Stephen left almost alone, and yet none durst approach him, who grinding his
Teeth and foaming like a furious wild Boar, with his Battle Ax drove whole
Troops before him, cutting down great numbers of them to the eternal Renown of
his Courage, so that if but an hundred like himself had stood by him, a whole
Army had not been able to surprise his Person: yet he still defended himself,
till first his Battle-ax and then his Sword flew in pieces by his irresistible
blows, so that being left Weaponless he was struck down with a great Stone and
taken Prisoner. Yet he afterward regained his Liberty and his Crown, and Died a
King after having Reigned near 19 years.

In 1170. The Welsh surprised the Town of Cardigan under Rice ap Griffith
Prince of South Wales, and took therein the Governor Robert Fitz Stephens a
valiant Norman, who could not procure his Liberty upon any other terms than by
forever renouncing all Right and Title to his Estate and Possessions in the
Principality of Wales, which hard condition he was obliged to accept, and
joining with Dermot one of the five Kings of Ireland, who at that time came
over to crave aid from King Henry II. was instrumental in conquering that
Kingdom, and annexing it to the Crown of England.

In 1199. King Richard I. resolving to make a Voyage for the recovery of the
Holy Land or Jerusalem, he resolved to leave all quiet at home, and Rice ap
Griffith Prince of South Wales being then in amity, came as far as Oxford to
wait upon him: but because the King who was there, went not out of the City in
Person to meet him as his Father Henry had done, (though Earl John the King's
Brother had conducted him from the Marshes with all the marks of honor and
esteem) this haughty Welsh Prince took it in such great scorn and indignation,
that he presently returned back into his Country without once seeing or
saluting King Richard, who by this disrespect lost Rice's love and favor; As
upon the like omission and superorlousness, the stately Monk Austin formerly
lost the affections of the Monks of Bangor, Rice's own Countrymen, in another
part of Wales.

In 1211. Leolin ap Jorwith Prince of Wales (though he had a while before made
his submission to King John) plundered several English Towns in the Marshes,
which caused the King to raise a great Army to reduce him to obedience,
whereupon Leoline ordered all his People to convey their Cattle and Goods of
Value, to the almost inaccessible places upon Snowdon Hills: however the
English pursued them with so much speed, vigor, and revenge for their continual
losses, that their Prince and Chief Lords were compelled to accept of what
terms the King would allow them, whereby they were obliged (both by Oath,
Homage and Hostages, and likewise by granting all their Lands to the King, to
be held of him forever) to buy their peace, and save themselves from being
utterly extirpated out of their Country.

In 1230. King Henry III. having given the Castle of Montgomery to his great
Favorite Aubert de Burgh, the English Garrison issued out with intent to root
up all the Trees near a Wood about five Mile long, where Travelers used to
^erobbed and murdered, which the Welsh would by no means permit, falling upon
the Soldiers and driving them into the Castle; Upon which the King Marches
thither, and not only suppresseth these Mutineers, but sets the whole Forest
in a Flame; From hence he pierces farther into Wales, and burns a place called
Cridia, and then begins to raise a new Fort for bridling the Natives, which
whilst he was doing David Prince of Wales marched toward him with his Forces,
being encouraged by many great men in King Henry's Army, who were confederates
with him, and a great Battle was fought where many were slain on both sides,
and afterward by the treachery of these English Barons, Provisions grew so very
scare that the King was compelled to yield to a dishonorable Peace, namely, To
raze to the ground the new Fort, now almost finished, That William Bruce a
valiant Commander taken in the Fight, should continue Prisoner during Prince
David's Pleasure, Lastly, That David should pay the King only three thousand
Marks toward the charges of the War.

About a year after Prince David made another Insurrection in revenge of those
Welshmens Heads whom Hubert de Burg had caused to be struck off in cold Blood,
and presented to the King, for which David burnt several Churches and many
Ladies in them, whereupon he was solemnly Cursed and Excommunicated at Oxford
in the presence of all the Nobility, and Clergy, and the King raising a great
Army went to repress the Welsh, but returned without effecting it; So that they
continued their ravages more than ever; Complaints whereof coming daily to the
King, the Lords of his Council told him how pernicious it would be to him to
suffer it, who replied, That he was not able to suppress them for want of
money; They being envious at his kindness to Hubert de Burg, boldly replied, He
might well be poor who gave away his Estate to make others Rich and Great, and
thereupon they drew up many Articles against de Burg, one whereof was, That he
had stolen out of the King's Jewel Office a precious Stone of wonderful value,
which had virtue to make him that wore it Invincible in Battle, and that he had
given this Stone to David Prince of Wales, the King's Enemy; Another was, That
he by his Letters had caused Prince David to hang the gallant William Bruce;
But he defeated all their designs against him, and recovered the King's favor.

Afterward Prince David joined with the Earl Marshall in a Rebellion against
the King, and defeated his Forces; But the King at length recovering his power
there, and giving himself up to Works of Charity and Hospitality caused Prince
David to use this notable expression, I more fear says he, the Almsdeeds which
the King does than all the men of War that he has, and the whole Clergy put
together; After this having taken Homage of all his Nobility, Prince David
voluntarily offered to hold his whole Principality of the Kings of England,
(though with the dislike of his People) that he might thereby strengthen
himself against the attempts of his Son Griffith, who used great endeavors to
deprive him of his Royalty.

Griffith succeeded him, and being taken Prisoner by King Henry was committed
to the Tower of London, from whence endeavoring to make his escape over the
Walls, by tying the Sheets and Blankets of his Bed together, the weight of his
heavy Body loosed them, and falling down upon his Head he broke his Neck.

Afterward his Son David being provoked by the many injuries received from the
Earl of Hereford, made an Inroad into the English Marshes, and designed to have
freed himself from all Homage to the Kings of England, exhibiting his complaint
to the Pope, and alleging, That he was by force and violence unjustly
compelled to hold his Principality and Estate of them; But the King's Credit
and Power prevailed against the weak Allegations of this poor Prince, who
thereupon continued his depredations; Against whom King Henry sent three
hundred men at Arms under the Command of Sir Hubert Fitz Matthew, but through
his own rashness, and the valor of the Welsh, he and his Party were totally
defeated; At which the King being much troubled, resolved to go against them in
Person, and after he had fortified the Castle of Grennock in North Wales, and
wasted the Isle of Anglesey he was forced by the rigor of the Weather to
return home, endeavoring to starve the Welsh, by prohibiting the Irish and
Cheshire men under severe penalties to furnish them with any provisions; and if
any of them ventured out of their Fastnesses on Snowdon Hills, to satisfy
their hunger the Garrison of Grennock were ready to surprise them; Yea the two
Welsh Lords Powys and Bromfield joined with the King against them, insomuch
that they were in miserable distress, about which time Prince David died.

In 1255. The Welsh being oppressed by Geffery Langley Governor of the Marshes
fled to Arms, whereupon Prince Edward (afterward King Edward I.) to whom his
Father had given that Principality, raises an Army to subdue them, and wanting
Money borrowed large sums of his Uncle Richard, and then Marches against Prince
Leoline, whose Forces consisted in about Ten Thousand Country Horsemen, and
many more Foot, who took a Solemn Oath, That they would stand together for the
recovery and defense of their Ancient Laws, Liberties and Country, counting it
better to lose their Lives with Honor, than to live in Ignominy and Slavery;
And indeed they had already performed very notable enterprises under the
conduct of their valiant Prince, having recovered all the Inland Country of
North Wales, and in one Battle killed above a thousand English, putting the
rest to flight, and making Irruptions to the very Walls of Chester; Neither had
Prince Edward any better success, for Leoline fell upon his Army with such
Courage as obliged them to retire and not attempt any thing farther against
him, who complaining to his Father of the disgrace he had received; What Is that
to me (says K. Henry) I have given the Country to thee, and thou must use thy
courage to defend it, and thereby gain such honor in thy Youth, that afterward
thine Enemies may stand in fear of thee; As for me I have somewhat else to do.
In the absence of Prince Edward, Leoline and his Welsh Forces continued their
ravages on the Marshes; He likewise Confederated with the English Barons then
in Arms against King Henry whom they had defeated and taken Prisoner in a
bloody Battle at Jews in Sussex, and carried into Wales with them, destroying
the Lands of the English in the Counties of Monmouth and Glamorgan, under the
command of Prince Leoline and Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester. Prince Edward
perceiving that he must use his utmost power for the recovery of his Father's
Liberty, and the Kingdom, resolved with the assistance of the People of
Cheshire, Herefordshire, Worcester and Shropshire (who had been great sufferers
in these public calamities) to give the Rebels Battle, which he did
accordingly in a large Plain near the Town of Eversham in Worcestershire, where
the Army of the Barons was utterly discomfited with a very great slaughter,
especially of the Welsh; Simon Montfort called the Great Earl of Leicester was
also slain; at which very minute there was such terrible Thunder, Lightning and
Darkness as caused much amazement. After the Death of Montfort, Prince Leoline
who had given him great assistance, thought fit to make a reconciliation with
King Henry, and by paying thirty thousand pound Sterling, four Welsh Counties
taken from him in the Wars, were restored to him.

In 1275. King Edward I. sent for Prince Leoline to attend at his Coronation
and do him Homage, which he excused or modestly refused; He was afterward
summoned to appear at the Parliament at Westminster, which he likewise
declined, standing upon terms of safe Conduct, doubting to be used, as he
pretended, like his Grandfather Griffith, whom he intimated was murdered in the
Tower of London, and not killed by accident: yet he sent a message to the
Archbishops of Canterbury and York, That if the King pleased to appoint
Commissioners to receive his Oath and Homage he was very ready to give it, or
if he would name some indifferent place and give Prince Edward, the Earl of
Gloucester, and the Lord Chancellor as Hostages for his safe return, he would
wait upon him in Person; The King dissembled his anger at these arrogant
demands, but a while after coming to the Castle of Chester on the Border of
Wales, he again sent for him, and Leoline again denied to come; At which the
King resolved, for preventing all future disturbances on that side, to make an
absolute Conquest of the Country; And on the contrary the Welsh having always
a custom at every change of Princes in England to try conclusions, expecting
one time or other to change their Yoke of Bondage into Liberty, were in great
hopes of doing it at this time, having now a valiant Prince to command them;
But an accident happened which somewhat took off their edge, for the Lady
Eleanor Daughter of Simon Earl of Montfort, whom Prince Leoline extremely loved
Sailing out of France into Wales, was by the way taken by some English Ships,
and brought to King Edward, and for the Love of her, Prince Leoline was willing
to submit to any conditions, so that besides his Promise of submission to the
Government, he agreed to pay down Fifty thousand pounds Sterling, and a
thousand pound a year during life; Upon these Terms he Married his beloved
Lady, and the Wedding was solemnized in England, the King and Queen being
present thereat; Three years Leoline continued faithful and obedient, in which
time David one of his Brothers, staying in England, and being found by the King
to be of a stirring Spirit, was much honored by him, Knighted and Match to a
Rich Widow, Daughter of the Earl of Derby, to which the King added the gift of
the Castle of Denbigh with a thousand pound a year, though it was at length
discovered that he lived here only as a Spy; For Prince Leoline's Lady dying
soon after, and he contrary to his engagements taking up Arms, his Brother
David notwithstanding these favors from the King, went and joined with him,
and they together enter into England seizing the Castles of Flint and Ruthland
with the Person of the Lord Chief Justice Clifford who was sent thither as a
Judge, and in a great Battle the Welsh overthrew the Earls of Northumberland
and Surrey with the Slaughter of many English.

King Edward was at the Vizes in Wiltshire when news coming of this revolt and
overthrow, he raises an Army to revenge it; In his way he goes to visit his
Mother Queen Eleanor, who lay at the Nunnery of Almesbury, with whom while he
was discoursing a Person was brought into the Chamber, who pretended that being
formerly blind he had received his Sight at the Tomb of King Henry III. When
the King saw him, he knew him, and that he was a most notorious lying Villain,
and entreated his Mother not to give the least credit to him: but the Queen who
was glad to hear of this Miracle for the glory of her Husband, finding her Son
unwilling that his Father should be a Saint, fell suddenly into such a rage,
that she commanded him out of her sight, which the King obeys, and going forth
meets with a Clergyman to whom he tells the story of this Impostor, adding
merrily, That he knew the Justice of his Father to be such, that he would
rather pluck out the Eyes, being whole, of such a wicked wretch, than restore
him to his sight.

In the mean time the Archbishop of Canterbury went of himself to Prince
Leoline and his Brother David, endeavoring to persuade them to submission, but
in vain: for Leoline was so animated with an old British Prophecy of Merlin's,
That he should shortly be Crowned with the Diadem of Brute, that he had no Ear
for Peace, and shortly after no head, for the Earl of Pembroke first took Bear
Castle which was his usual residence from him, he then gave him Battle, and his
Party being defeated, his Head was cut off by a Common Soldier and sent to
King Edward, who caused it to be Crowned with Ivy, thereby in some part
unluckily fulfilling his Welsh Prediction. And this was the end of Leoline the
last of the Welsh Princes, betrayed, as some write, by the men of Buelth. Soon
after his Brother David flying into Wales, and being destitute of help or
relief, he was at length taken with two of his Sons and seven Daughters (as
some Authors write) all which were brought before the King; David was committed
to Chester Castle, and afterward in a Parliament at Shrewsbury was convicted of
Treason, and sentenced to an ignominious death, namely, to be first drawn at a
Horse Tail about the City of Shrewsbury, then to be beheaded and quartered, his
Heart and Bowels burnt; His Head to accompany his Brothers was put upon the
Tower of London, and his four Quarters were set up in four Cities, Bristol,
Northampton, York and Winchester; A manifold Execution and the first showed in
this kind in this Kingdom, in the Person of the Son of a Prince, or any other
Nobleman that we read of in our History. Some have observed that upon King
Edward's thus totally subjecting Wales, he lost his Eldest Son Alphonsus a
Prince of great hopes, about twelve years of Age, and had only left to succeed
him his Son Edward lately born at Carnarvan, and the first of the English Royal
Families that was Entitled Prince of Wales, but no Prince worthy either of
Wales or England.

After this, the rest of the Welshmen as well Nobles as others submitted
themselves to King Edward, and all the Country and Castles therein were
surrendered to him, who then annexed that Country to the Crown of England, and
built two strong Castles at Aberconway and Carnarvan to secure their obedience;
He also gave several Lands and Castles to Englishmen, as the Lordship of
Denhigh to Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln; Of Ruthen to Reginald Lord Gray, and
divided Wales into Counties and Hundreds, establishing the Government thereof
agreeable to the Laws of England; This happened in the twelfth year of his
Reign, 1284.

Remarks upon the Lives of the Princes of Wales of the Royal Families of
England.
PART. II.
THough King Edward I. had subjected the Principality of Wales, and afterward
annexed it to the Crown of England, yet he could never induce that People
freely to own him as their King, but upon condition that he would come and
reside among them, or at least appoint them a Prince of their own Nation to
Govern them; for the Welchmen having experienced the rigorous and severe
Treatment of the English Governors, and being sensible that the King would
rule them by an English Deputy, they could not with patience bear the thoughts
of it, so that oftentimes when the King charged them with affronting his Lord
Lieutenants, they unanimously answered, That they were very willing to be
subject to any Prince he should nominate, provided he were a Welshman born.

The King perceiving their inflexible temper, resolved to gratify them by a
Politic Stratagem; He thereupon sends secretly to the Queen who was then big
with Child, that she should come to him with all speed to Carnarvan, and when
she was nigh her time of Delivery, He ordered all the Welsh Nobility and Gentry
to appear before him at Ruthland Castle to consult about the Public welfare of
their Country; When they were come he detained them till he had notice that the
Queen was delivered of a Son at Carnarvan, and then calling them together, he
told them, That they having often Petitioned him to have a Prince to rule them,
he being now going out of their Country would nominate one to them, provided
they would promise to accept and obey him. The Welshmen answered they would be
willingly obedient to him, provided he were their own Countryman; Ay, says the
King, I will assure you that he was born in Wales; That he can speak never a
word of English, and that he never did any wrong to man, Woman or Child; The
Welshmen were very joyful of their good fortune, promising true subjection to
him; Whereupon he named his own new born Son Edward, firnamed Carnarvan from
the place of his Birth, and from that time the Eldest Sons of the Kings of
England have been Entitled Princes of Wales.

This Prince succeeded his Father by the name of King Edward II. He was a
comely Person, and of great strength, but much given to Drink, which made him
often disclose his Secrets; For his other conditions, his greatest fault was
his inordinate love to Garestone and the Spencers, who being Persons of lewd
Lives, endeavored to debauch him with Wine and Women, and occasioned many
mischiefs and grievances in the Kingdom, of which the Nobility and People were
so sensible, that when they found him irreclaimable, they resolved to depose
him and set his young Son Edward on the Throne, his Queen likewise joining with
the Lords therein, who going over to France, she there Contracted a Marriage
between her Son Edward and Philippa Daughter to the Earl of Heynault, by whom
being aided with Forces, she landed at Orwell near Harwich in Suffolk, The
Lords immediately resorted to her, and the Londoners inclining to take her
part, the King found his evil Counselors the Spencers and others could do him
little service; Therefore Shiping themselves for the Isle of Lundy, they were
by Tempest cast upon the Coast of Wales, and the King secured himself in a
Monastery in Glamorganshire; But soon after both he and his Favorites were
taken from thence. They were Hanged and Quartered, and he himself was deposed
by Parliament, having been first persuaded to make a formal resignation of the
Crown; And at length he was committed a Prisoner to Berkley Castle near
Bristol, where he was miserably murdered, by having a red hot Iron or Spit
thrust up into his Body.

II. Edward of Windsor, so called from the place of his Birth, the Son of this
unfortunate King was the second Prince of Wales of the English Royal Blood.
Upon the Deposing of his Father by the Parliament, it was resolved that he
should be advanced to the Throne, which this young Prince refused, unless his
Father resigned the Government, which he was obliged to do, and so his Son was
Proclaimed King by the name of Edward III. who afterward proved a Glorious and
Renowned Prince. His Minority (being but four years old when he was Crowned)
though it may Palliate, cannot so take off the scandal of not preventing his
Death who gave him Life, but that there remains a great blemish upon his
memory; For being a Master of so much reason as to pause upon it, as he did,
upon the first motion of putting his Father to Death, it may be thought he had
power enough to have prevented the execution, it being a violation of the Law
of Nature, and likewise of ill example, since the People might use him in the
same manner if he outlived their affections, or his own discretion; But his
revenge upon Mortimer seems to declare him really innocent, or that he abhorred
the World should think otherwise; Whereby he so far reconciled himself to the
opinion of the Vulgar, that he seldom wanted Friends during his long Reign, as
he never wanted an occasion to make use of them.

He was a Prince of that admirable composure of Body and Mind, that Fortune
seemed to have fallen in love with him, elevating him so far above the reach of
Envy or Treachery, that all the Neighbor Princes dazzled with the splendour of
his Glory gave place to him, who from the very first Ascent to the Throne, had
a prospect of two Crowns more than he was born to; The one placed within his
reach, which was Scotland, The other that of France which was more remote; To
the attaining the first there was a fair opportunity offered by the
irreconcilable contest of two Rival Kings, David Bruce, and Edward Baliol
whose Right and Interest were so evenly poized, that King Edward's power could
easily turn the Scale; To the recovery of France there was yet a fairer
opportunity given him by the revolt of Philip of Artois a Prince of the Blood
Royal, and Brother in Law to Philip of Valois the present French King, who upon
discontent came over and discovered all the Secrets of the French Counsels to
King Edward, assuring him of the Affections of several of the French Nobility;
And now the two Kings set up their Titles to the Kingdom of France; Edward was
nearest by Blood, but drew his Pedigree from a Female; Philip was farther off
but descended of all Males, and because the Law Salique, which excludes Women
from Reigning in France, was conceived as well to exclude all Descendants from
Females, therefore was Philip's Title accepted, the French obstinately
declaring, That they would never tie the Succession of that Crown to a Distaff;
To which King Edward replied, That he would then tie it to his Sword; With the
English took part the Emperor and the chief Princes of Germany; With the French
the King of Bohemia, the two Dukes of Austria, the Earl of Flanders, the Duke
of Savoy and diverse Princes of Italy; together with his enraged Neighbor David
Bruce King of Scots, a weak but restless Enemy, against whom King Edward had
set up Edward Baliol as Competitor; and to whose assistance he sends an Army
toward Scotland, and at Hallydown Hill near Berwick, the Scots are utterly
defeated, about Thirty Two Thousand Soldiers being slain, with a great number
of Nobility and Gentry, After this King Edward gained a Glorious Victory over
the French at the Battle of Cressy, and another at Poictiers, wherein John King
of France was taken Prisoner; And David King of Scots with an Army of
Threescore Thousand men a second time Invading England, his Army is routed and
himself taken Prisoner.

King Edward III. was of Stature indifferent tall, with sparkling Eyes, and of
a comely and manly countenance, no man was more mild when there was submission,
nor none more fierce if opposed; He had a command over his Passions as well as
People, being never so loving as to be fond, nor so angry as to be
irreconcilable; But this must be understood of him when he was a man, for in
his old age he became a Child again, and was Master of neither; He was
Fortunate and Valiant, both which were heightened in the estimation of the
World as reigning between two unfortunate Princes, his Father to whom he was
Successor, and his Grandson Richard II. to whom he was Predecessor; His
disposition was so martial that his very Recreations were Warllke, for he
delighted in none more than in Justs and Tournaments; and among the rest in the
fourth year of his Reign a solemn Turnament was held in Cheapside, between the
great Cross and the great Conduit, which lasted three days, where his Queen
Philippa with many Ladies fell from a Stage erected for them to behold the
Justing, and though they were not hurt at all, yet the King threatened to punish
the Carpenters for their negligence, till the Queen entreated pardon for them
upon her Knees, as she was always ready to do all good Offices of mercy to all
People. To discover his Devotion one example may be sufficient, for when
neither Cardinals nor Counselors could move him to make Peace with France, a
Tempest from Heaven did it; To which may be added, That he never won a great
Battle but he presently gave the Glory of it to God by public Thanksgiving; He
outlived the best Wife and the best Son that ever King had, and to say the
truth, he outlived the best of himself, leaving all Action, and bidding adieu
to the World Ten Years before he went out of it, declining so fast from the
Fortieth year of his Government, that it may rather be said his Son the Prince
Reigned than he: and happy 'twas for him that when his own Understanding failed
him he had so good a supporter. And the grief for the loss of him, besides the
Fatigues of War, was thought to hasten his Death, together with the trouble for
the loss of the benefit of his Conquests in France, of all which he had at last
little left but the Town of Callice. Being oppressed thus in Body and Mind, he
was drawing his last breath when his Concubine Alice Pierce (who was so
confident sometime before, as to sit in Courts of Justice, and overawe the
Judges) packing away what she could catch, even to the Rings of his Fingers,
left him; and by her example others of his Attendants seize on what they could
meet with, and march away; yea all his Counselors and Courtiers forsook him
when he had most occasion for them, leaving his Bedchamber quite empty. Which
a poor Priest in his Palace observing, approached to his Bedside, and finding
him yet Breathing, called upon him to remember his Savior, and to beg Mercy
for his Offenses, which none about him before would do; But now moved by the
Voice of this Priest, he shows all signs of Contrition, and at his last Breath
he pronounces the Name of Jesus. Thus died this Victorious King at his Manor
of Sheen (now Richmond) June 21. 1377. in the 64 year of his Age, having
reigned above 50 years; His Body was conveyed from Sheene by his four Sons
(having had seven in all, and five Daughters) and the Nobility, and solemnly
interred in Westminster Abbey, where his Monument is to be seen, and likewise
his Sword which it is said he used in Battle being eight pound in weight, and
seven foot in length.

III. The Third Prince of Wales of the Blood Royal of England,, was Edward
commonly called the Black Prince, but why so named is uncertain, for to think
it was because of his dreadful actions (as Speed says) has little probability,
neither do the Historians of that Age ever give him that name, nor mention that
he was so called; He was eldest Son to King Edward III. by the fair Philippa
Daughter to William Earl of Henault and Holland, and born at Woodstock, July
15. 1329. in the third year of his Father's Reign; He was afterward created
Prince of Wales, Duke of Aquitain and Cornwall, and Earl of Chester; He was
likewise Earl of Kent in the right of his Wife Joan Daughter of the Earl of
that Name, and Brother by the Father's side to King Edward II. the most admired
beauty of that Age. King Edward was very careful of his Education, providing
him the most able Tutors to educate him both in Arts and Arms.

When he was but fifteen years old, his Father passing over into France with a
gallant Army, took his Son along with him, making him a Soldier before he was
a Man, being willing to try his Metal, and loath to omit any thing that might
give reputation to that Battle wherein two Kingdoms were laid at Stake. In
1345. King Edward with a Fleet of about a Thousand Sail, landed an Army of Two
Thousand Five Hundred Horse and Thirty Thousand Foot most of them Archers, in
Normandy, making devastation of all before him even to the very Walls of Paris.

In the mean time Philip the French King was not idle, having raised as brave
an Army as France had ever seen, consisting in near an Hundred and Twenty
Thousand Fighting Men; K. Edward's Army being laden with the rich Spoils of
the ruined Country, he was unwilling to retreat, neither indeed was he able
being got into the Heart of the Enemies Country, between the two fine Rivers
of Scin and Soan, so that he began to inquire how he might find a passage out
of these straits, which the French having notice of, looked upon as an intended
flight, and King Edward was willing they should nourish that opinton; The River
Soan between Abbeville and the Sea was fordable when the Tide was out, of which
the French were aware, and therefore guarded the passage with a Thousand Horse,
and Six Thousand Foot commanded by Gundamar de Foy a Valiant Norman Lord. King
Edward coming to this place plunges into the River, crying out, He that loves
me will follow me; as resolving either to pass or dye; This so animated his
Soldiers that the Passage was won, and Du Foy defeated by the undaunted
courage of the English, almost before he was fought with; carrying back to King
Philip. Two Thousand less than he brought beside the terror of the English
Arms, the Soldiers resolving to live and dye with such a gallant Sovereign;
King Edward was now near Crescy in the Province of Pontheiu between the Rivers
Soam and Anthy (a place unquestionably belonging to him in right of his Mother)
where he provided all necessaries for a Battle; King Philip enraged at the late
defeat, and by his numerous Forces growing confident of success, marches
furiously to fall upon them without any stop till they came within view of the
English Colors.

King Edward having implored the aid of the Almighty, full of hopes of
obtaining Victory, without the least disturbance of mind, divided his Army into
three Bodies; The Front was commanded by the young Lion of Wales our brave
Prince Edward, assisted with several of the most experienced Generals
consisting of Eight Hundred Men at Arms, Two Thousand Archers, and a Thousand
Welshmen. The second Battalian was commanded by the Earls of Northampton and
Arundel with other Lords, being Eight Hundred Men at Arms, and One Thousand Two
Hundred Archers; The third and last being about Seven Hundred men at Arms, and
Three Thousand Archers, with the rest of the Nobility, the King led himself,
and being mounted upon a white Hobby he Rid through the several Ranks, reviving
and encouraging his Soldiers with cheerful words to fight like Men for his
Right and their Honor. He then ordered the Rear of the Army to be Barricado'd
with Trees and Carriages, and likewise commanded the Troopers to dismount and
leave their Horses behind them, so that all means of flight being taken away,
they must now resolve either to Conquer or Die.

In King Philip's Army were the King of Bohemia, the King of Majorca, the Duke
of Lorrain, the Duke of Savoy, the Earls of Flanders, Nevers, Sancerre, with
many other Dukes, Earls, Barons and Gentlemen Volunteers, both French, Dutch
and Germans; and just the Night before the Battle Ann of Savoy joined him with
a Thousand Men at Arms; So that all things seemed to conspire to elate the
French Pride and assure them of Victory; They divided their Army likewise into
three Battalia's: The Van was led by the Duke of Alonson the King's Brother,
and the King of Bohemia; The Rear by the Duke of Savoy; And the main Battle the
King Commanded himself; He was so impatient of delays that He would scarce stay
to call a Council of War to consider how to manage the Fight; He likewise
caused the Banner of Auriflamb to be erected, which was of red Silk and
Hallowed by the Pope, of which the French had as high an opinion as if it had
fallen from Heaven; The King of Bohemia hearing of the posture of the English
Army, (contrary to the proud conceit of the French) said, Here will the English
end their Days or Conquer.

A little before the Fight, happened a very terrible Tempest of Thunder and
Rain, and a bright Rainbow appeared in the Heavens; And soon after the Sun
broke forth, shining full in the Faces of the French and on the Back of the
English; and at the same time great numbers of Ravens and other Birds of Prey
flew over the French Army; All which accidents were judged ominous, and
presaging mischief to the Enemy; The signal of Battle being given by King
Philip, it was entertained by a shout from his Army, the Drums beat, the
Trumpets sounded, Banners flew in the Air; Glittering Swords were seen
threatening Death and Destruction, and all the horrors of War appeared in their
most dismal Colors. The ruin of the French began at the Genoeses, who being
all Cross-Bow Men were ordered to open a way for the French Horse, but it
happened that their Bow-strings being Wet by the late great Shower, and their
Bodies weary with a long March, after the English had received the first Volley
of their Arrows with their Targets, their Ranks were opened in many places by
the fall of their slain Fellows, who were killed by the English Bowmen, and at
length most outragiously scattered and trampled under foot by the Duke of
Alanson (by Command of the King himself) who bringing up the Horse in a full
Career, cried out; On, on, let us make our way upon the Bellies of these
Genoeses, who do but hinder us; And instantly Rides through the midst of them,
followed by the Dukes of Lorrain and Savoy, never staying till they came to
that Body of the English commanded by the Gallant Prince of Wales; These French
Gallants half out of breath with their Post haste, and terribly disordered by
the perpetual Storms of our Whistling Arrows, came now to handy strokes with
the Princes Squadron with Battle Axes, Swords and Lances; The Fight was very
bloody while each earnestly contended for Victory. The old King of Bohemia
resolving to dye honorably, thrust himself into the first Ranks of his own
Horsemen, and furiously charging the English he was slain with Sword in hand,
the Troop of his faithful Followers with their slaughtered Bodies covering him
even in Death, and his fate was soon perceived by the fall of the Bohemian
Standard.

King Philip in Person, with a strong Party, hastened to the relief of his
Brother and Friends who were also much distressed by the English Valor, and
great numbers slain, though the Prince of Wales was in danger in the encounter,
had not his Soldiers rusht in courageously among their Enemies for the
preservation of their worthy Prince.

King Edward stood all this while upon Windmill-Hill (with his Helmet on, which
he never pulled off till the Fight was ended) judiciously surveying the whole
Field of Battle to observe the success, being ready to bring down his Party
which lay hovering like a Black Cloud, where necessity should require. In the
mean time the brave Prince of Wales was contending with the whole power of
France, whereupon some of his Generals seeing the great inequality, and
doubting the worst, they sent to the King, requesting his assistance; The King
asked the Messenger, whether his Son were slain or hurt; who replied, No, he
was safe, but like to be over powered by the multitude of his Enemies; Well
then, said the King, go back to them that sent you, and tell them that so long
as my Son is alive, they send no more to me whatever happen, for I design that
the honor of this day shallbe his if God permit him to survive, and am
resolved that he shall either win the Spurs or lose his life.

This resolution of the King's though it brought no assistance, yet seemed to
inspire new Life and Spirits into the English, so that they fought like Lions;
On the otherside King Philip whose Kingdom lay at Stake, performed the Duty of
a good General, and a gallant Soldier, fighting so long in his own Person,
till his Horse was killed under him, himself twice dismounted, and wounded both
in the Neck and Thigh, and in danger of being trodden to death; had not the
Earl of Beaumont rescued and remounted him, and the French out of their Loyalty
to save him (almost against his Will) conveyed him out of the Field, who seemed
rather desirous to end his days in such noble Company. His departure was
quickly known to both Armies, and as suddenly put an end to this bloody
Carnage, wherein hitherto none had quarter, but were all put to the Sword; The
French King himself with a small Company fled to Bray in the Night, and
approaching the Walls the Guard demanded who was there, He replied, The Fortune
of France; By his Voice he was Known, and thereupon received into the Town with
the Tears and lamentations of his People; The rest of his Army strove to save
themselves by flight, whom the English did not pursue, but stood still upon
their Guard, according to the true Rules of Martial Discipline, being unwilling
to hazard so glorious a Victory by following them in the Night, knowing there
were so many of the Enemy escaped as might yet overwhelm their tired Army with
multitude.

King Edward seeing the Field clear of the French, came down from the Hill with
his Troops entire toward his Victorious Son, whom most affectionately embracing
and kissing he said, Fair Son, God send you good perseverance to such
prosperous beginnings, you have acquitted your self right Nobly, and are well
worthy to have a Kingdom entrusted to your Government for your Valor; To which
the most Noble and Magnanimous Prince replied, with silence, humbly falling on
his Knees at the Feet of his Triumphant Father; After this Victory King Edward
marched with his Army through France, and Besieged Calice.

In 1355. King Edward was informed that Philip of France being dead, King John
his Son and Successor had given the Duchy of Aquitain to Charles the Dauphin
his Eldest Son, whereupon the King being much incensed, conferred the same upon
his own Son the Prince of Wales, commanding him to defend his Right therein
with his Sword against his Adversaries; He was likewise appointed by Parliament
to go into Gascoin with a thousand men at Arms, Two Thousand Archers, and a
great number of Welshmen who accompanied their Prince; and soon after with
Three Hundred Sail of Ships, attended by many of the English Nobility, he
landed in France, and with his Victorious Arms Marched into Aquitain,
recovering a great number of Cities and Towns, and releasing a multitude of
Prisoners; He then entered Guienne, passing over Languedock to Toulouse, Narbone
and Bruges without opposition, and laden with Plunder returned to Bourdeux;
Afterward he made a second Course through Perigort and Limosin into the Bowels
of France, even to the very Gates of Bruges in Berry, the terror of his name
preparing his way, and then wheeled about designing to return by Remorantine in
Blasois, which Town he took, and so through the Country of Tourain, Poictou
and Xantoign to his Chief City of Bourdeux.

But King John having raised a very Potent Army followed him in the Rear, and
about the City of Poictiers he overtook our Invincible Prince, where the Armies
approached each other, the French exceeding the English six to one; Two
Cardinals sent from Pope Clement (as before the former Battle) mediated to take
up the Quarrel, but the French King supposing he had his Enemy now at his mercy
would hear of no conditions, but that the Prince should deliver him four
Hostages, and as Vanquished render up himself and his Army to his discretion;
The Prince was content to restore to him all the places he had taken, but
without prejudice to his Honor, wherein he said, he stood accountable to his
Father and his Country. But King John would not abate any thing of his first
demands, as judging himself secure of Victory, and thereupon was ready to
attack the Prince, who in this exigency politickly got the advantage of the
ground, by obtaining the benefit of certain Vines, Shrubs and Bushes upon that
part where he was like to be assaulted, whereby to imbarass and disturb the
French Horse whom he saw ready to fall furiously upon him; The success answered
his expectation, for the Enemies Cavalry in their full Career were so entangled
and incumbered among their Vines that the Prince's Archers galled and annoyed
them at pleasure; For the French King to give the Honor of the day to his
Horse, made use of them only, without the aid of his Infantry; And they being
thus disordered, the whole Army was thereby utterly defeated; Here, if ever,
the Prince of Wales and his Englishmen gave full proof of their undaunted
Courage and Valor, never giving over till they had wholly routed all the three
French Battalions, the least of which exceeded the number of the Prince's
Forces. King John himself Fighting valiantly, and Philip his youngest Son (who
by his undaunted Prowess so defended his distressed Father, that he gained the
Surname of Hardy) were both taken Prisoners. The most remarkable of the
Prince's Commanders for Courage and Conduct were the Earls of Warwick, Suffolk,
Salisbury, Oxford, and Stafford; The Lords Chandois, Cobham, Spencer, Berkley,
Basset, etc. and particularly James Lord Audley signalized himself, receiving
many wounds, and was rewarded by the Noble Prince of Wales, with the gift of
Five Hundred Marks Land a year in England, which he instantly divided among his
four Esquires, who had stood by him in all the fury and brunt of this bloody
Battle; Whereupon the Prince asked him if he did not accept of his gift; He
answered, That these men had deserved it as well as himself, and needed it
more; With which reply the Prince was so well pleased, that he gave him Five
Hundred Marks a Year more. A rare example, where desert in the Subject and
reward in the Prince strove to exceed each other. He vowed to be foremost in
the Fight and made good his word.

It was the misfortune or rather glory of the French Nobility in these
disastrous times, that the loss commonly fell very heavy upon them, for in this
fatal overthrow the French confess that Fifty Two Lords, and about One Thousand
Seven Hundred Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen were slain; The chief were, the
Duke of Athens, the High Constable, Great Marshal, and High Chamberlain of
France, the Bishop of Chalons, the Lords of Landas, Pons and Chambly; Sir
Reginald Charney who that day carried the Consecrated Standard Auriflamb was
slain also, and of the Common Soldiers about Six Thousand. So wonderfully did
the great God of Battles fight for the English in those days. There escaped
from this bloody fight Three of the French King's Sons, (for he brought them
all into the Field) Charles the Dauphin, Lewis Duke of Anjou, and John Duke of
Barry. The French Prisoners taken were John King of France, and Philip his Son,
the Archbishop of Sens, the Earls of Ponthieu, Eu, Longuevil, Vendosme,
Tankervile, Salbruch, Nassaw, Dampmartin, La Roch, Vaudemont, Estampes, etc.
With many other Lords and Two Thousand Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen, that
bore Coats of Arms.

After the Battle a Contention arose who was the Man that took King John
Prisoner. At length the King himself decided the Controversy by declaring that
one Sir Dennis Morbeck of St. Omers had made him Prisoner. For which service
the Prince of Wales rewarded him with a Thousand Marks, This great Battle was
fought Sept. 19. 1357. and is thus described by Mr. Thomas May in his Poem on
the Life of King Edward III.

The first hot charge
The valiant Lord, renowned Audley- gave,
Who to perform a noble Vow, in Deeds
Almost the Prowess of a Man exceeds,
And like the strokes of Jove's resistless Thunder
Shoots forth, and breaks the strongest Ranks
Here in the thickest throng of Enemies,
Like Thracian Mars himself, Black Edward plies asunder.
Death's fatal task. Here Noble Warwick gives
A furious onset. There brave Suffolk strives
T'out (...) the foremost: Emulations fire
Is kindled now, and blazes high: Desire
Of Honor drowns all other Passions there;
Not in the Chiefs alone: Each Soldier
In that small Army feels bright Honors flame,
And labors to maintain his proper Fame.
Never was a Battle through all parts so fought,
Nor such high wonders by an handful wrought.
White Victory, that soared above, beheld
How every English hand throughout the Field
Was stained with Blood: Amazed to see the Day,
And that so few should carry her away.
The Fields no more their verdure can retain,
Enforced now to take their Purple stain,
And be obscured with slaughter, while the wounds
Of France manure her own unhappy Grounds.
Where mixed with Plebeian Funerals
Her greatest Princes die: There Bourbon falls,
And Marshal Clermont welters in his gore,
There Noble Charney's beaten down, that bore
The Standard Royal that sad Day: Here dies
Athens Great Duke: There Valiant Eustace lies,
Who as a badg of highest Honor wore
A Chaplet of bright Pearls, that had before
(Won by King Edward, in a skirmish, near
To Calice he was taken Prisoner)
As testimony of his Prowess showed
Been by that Royal Enemy bestowed.
Great are the French Battalia's, and in room
Of those that fall, so often fresh Soldiers come.
So often the bloody Fight's renewed, that now
The English weary with subduing grow.
And 'gin to faint, oppressed with odds so great;
When lo, to make the Victory complete,
Six hundred Bowmen (whom to that intent,
Before the Battle, the brave Prince had sent
Abroad, well mounted,) now come thundering over
The Field, and charge the French behind so sore,
As with confusion did distract them quite:
And now an Execution, not a Fight
Ensues. All routed that great Army flies,
A Prey to their pursuing Enemies.
With his disheartened battle, Orleans
Forsakes the Field: with him the Heir of France,
Young Charles of Normandy, and thousands more
Not overthrown, but frighted by the foe.
Nor are the English, though enough to gain
The day, enough in number to maintain
So great a chase: And not so well suffice
To follow, as subdue their enemies.
Nor yet (which more declared the Conquest sent
From Heaven alone, to strike astonishment
in overweening Mortals, and to show
Without that help how little Man can do).
Are all the English, Conquerors in the Field,
Enough to take so many French as yield;
Nor to receive the Prisoners that come
Though some in fields are Ransomed, and sent home;
Yet more from thence are Captive born away,
Then are the Hands that won so great Day, etc.
And now though King John had the misfortune to fall into the Hands of an
Enemy, yet he had the happiness to be made Captive to a Noble Enemy; For Prince
Edward, having conquered his Person by the Fortune of War, endeavored now to
overcome his Mind by his Courteous demeanor, addressing him with such an humble
Grace, yet generous deportment, as a Person of so gallant a Soul as this noble
Prince was capable of, which so alleviated the King's affliction, that he could
not find much difference between his Captivity and Liberty, which the same Poet
thus expresses.

THE chase together with the day was done,
And all returned. In his Pavilion
Brave Edward feasts his Royal Prisoner;
At which as Noble did the Prince appear
As erst in battle, and by sweetness won
As great a Conquest as his Sword had done.
No fair respect, or Honor that might cheer
That King's afflicted breast was wanting there.
No Reverence, nor humble courtesy,
That might preserve his state and dignity,
But Edward showed at full. And at the Feast
In Person waited on his captive Guest.
But what content, what Object fit could Fate
Present, to comfort such a changed State
-- For him;
Whose State the Morning Sun had seen so high,
This night beholds in sad captivity;
His restless passions rolling to and fro
No calm admit: when thus his noble Fo,
Prince Edward spoke, (Great King, for such you are
In my thoughts still, whatever the Chance of War
Has lately wrought against you here) forgive
Your humble Kinsman's service, if I strive
To ease your sorrow, and presume to do
What is too much for me, to counsel you.
Do not deject your Princely thoughts, or think
The Martial Fame that you have gained, can sink
In one succesless Field: Or too much fear
your Nation's Honor should be tainted here.
Men's Strength and Honor we most truly try,
Where Fields are fought with most equality.
But God was pleased to make this days success
The more miraculous, that we the less
Might challenge to our selves; and humbly know,
That in so great and strange an overthrow
Some secret Judgment of our God was wrought,
And that the Sword of Heaven, not England, fought, etc.
And for your self, Great King, all History,
That shall hereafter to the World make known
The event of Poictiers Battle, shall renown
Your Personal Prowess, which appeared so high,
As justly seemed to challenge Victory,
Had not Gods secret Providence opposed:
But though his Will (Great Sir) has thus disposed;
Your State remains, your Person, and your Fame,
Shall in my humble thoughts be still the same.
And till my Father see your Face, to show
How he respects your Worth, and State, to you
As to himself, were he in Person here,
In all observance, Edward shall appear.
The Noble King, a while amazed to see
Victorious Youth so full of Courtesy;
At last replies: Brave Cousin, you have shown
Your self a Man built up for true Renown;
And, as in Action of the Wars, to be
This Ages Phoenix in Humanity.
Why do you wrong me thus, as to enthral
Me doubly? Not insulting over my Fall,
You rob me, Cousin, of that sole Renown,
Which I, though vanquished, might have made mine own,
To bear Adversity. I might have showed,
Had you been proud, a Passive Fortitude;
And let the world though I am fallen, see
What sp'rit I had in scorning misery.
But you have robbed me of that Honor now,
And I am bound in Honor to allow
That Noble Theft, content (since such are you)
To be your Captive and your Debtor too;
And since my Stars ordained a King of France,
Armed with such odds; so great a Puissance
Must in a fatal Field be lost, to raise
So great a Trophie to another Praise,
I am best pleased it should advance thy Story,
And John's dishonor be Prince Edward's Glory.
After the Battle, Prince Edward led King John and the Captive Nobles Prisoners
to Bourdeaux, the Archiepiscopal See, and chief City of his Dominions in
France, where he retained them till the Spring following: But sent present News
of this Victory to his Father, who thereupon ordered a Thanksgiving to be
celebrated all over England for eight days together.

The Prince, having refreshed his Men, the May following set sail for England,
with his Prisoners, and safely arrived at Plymouth, and was with great joy and
acclamations received every where. At his coming to London where at that time,
a magnificent Citizen, Henry Picard (he who afterward at one time so Nobly
Feasted the four King's of England, France, Scotland, and Cyprus) was Lord
Major, he received him with all imaginable Honor. And the multitude of People,
that came to see the Victorious Prince, with the King of France, his Son
Philip, and the other Prisoners, was so great, that they could hardly get to
Westminster between three a Clock in the Morning, and twelve at Noon: Great
Edward, saving that he forgot not the Majesty of a Conqueror, and ^f a King of
England, omitted no kind of civility toward the Prisoners. King John, and his
Son, were lodged under a Guard at the Savoy, which was then a goodly Palace
belonging to Henry Duke of Lancaster; and the other Prisoners in other places.

Some time after Prince Edward, by dispensation, married the Countess of Kent,
Daughter to Edmund, Brother to King Edward the second, and his Father invested
him with the Duchy of Aquitain: So that he was now Prince of Wales, Duke of
Aquitain, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester and Kent. And not long after, he
with his Beloved Wife, passed over into France, and kept his Court at Bourdeaux.

The Prince of Wales was now grown famous over all the Christian World, and the
man to whom all wronged Princes seemed to Appeal, and to fly for relief. For
which end there came at this time to his Court James, King of Majorca, and
Richard, King of Navarr, just when his Lady brought him a Son, for whom these
two Kings undertook at his Baptism, giving him the Name of Richard.

The Soldiers, most of whose Captains were English, either by Birth, or
Obedience, wanting employment, because the Wars of Britain were quieted for the
Present, ranged tumultuously up and down France: But about this time Sir
Bertram de Glequin (having paid his Ransom) found employment for them, drawing
the greatest part of that Military Pestilence into another Coast. For by the
assistance of Peter King of Arragon, and the Power of Glequin, with his
floating Bands, called The Companions, or Adventurers, Peter King of Castile
and Leon (a cruel Tyrant) was driven out of his Kingdom, his Bastard Brother
Henry being chosen in his room, and Crowned King of Spain at Burgos. This Peter
was Son to Alphonsus the eleventh King of Castile, and had to Wife a French
Lady called Blanch, Daughter to Peter Duke of Bourbon, who was Father also of
Joan, the French King's Wife. His Tyrannical cruelties were so many and so
foul, that the Spanish Stories, scarce allow Nero or Caligula to go beyond him:
For which, by his Subjects he was deposed.

Peter thus driven out of his Kingdom, by the aid of the French, applied
himself to Prince Edward, craving his assistance for his restoration, making
many and large Promises to him upon the accomplishment thereof. The Prince out
of Charity to succor a distressed Prince, and out of Policy to employ his
Soldiers, having got leave of his Father, marched with a gallant Army of
thirty thousand men, upon confidence of good pay for his men, and other
benefits when Peter should be re-established in his Throne; He made his way
through the famous straits of Rouncevallux in Navarre, by permission of that
King, who yet suffered himself to be carried Prisoner, into Castile, that he
might not seem to cross the French King's designs, who favored Henry the
Usurper. Our Prince had ^n his Company, besides most of all the principal
Captain of the English, two King's, Peter of Castile whose the quarrel was, and
the King of Majorca; As also John Duke of Lancaster, who after Don Pedro's
death, having married his eldest daughter, wrote himself King of Castile and
Leon.

On the other side, King Henry for the defense of his new Kingdom, had raised a
very great Army, consisting partly of French, under Glequin their famous
Captains, and of Castilians and others, both Christians and Saracens to the
number of about an hundred thousand. And upon the Borders of Castile it came to
a bloody battle, wherein the valaint Prince of Wales obtained a very great
victory, having slain many thousands of his enemies. Henry himself fighting
valiantly, was wounded in the Groin, but yet escaped. There were taken
Prisoners, the Earl of Dene, Bertram de Glequin (who yet shortly after, by
paying a great Ransom was set at liberty.) The Marshal Dandrehen, and many
others. Neither was this Victory less worth to Peter than a Kingdom: For our
most Noble Prince left him not, till at Burgos he had set him upon his Throne
again.

But this unworthy King's falsehood and ingratitude were odious and monstrous.
For the Prince notwithstanding this great success was enforced to return to
Bordeaux without money to pay his Army, which caused great mischiefs to
himself, and the English Dominions beyond the Seas, as if God had been
displeased with his succouring such a Tyrant. The Prince himself, though he
returned with Victory, yet he brought back with him such a craziness, and
indisposition of Body, that he was never thoroughly well after. And no marvel,
considering the Country, the Season, and the action it self, and it may be more
wondered at, that his Soldiers came home so well, then that he returned so ill:
Being come home, discontent of Mind was added to his indisposition of Body. For
not having Money to pay his Soldiers, he was forced to wink at their preying
upon the Country, for which the Country, to stop whose murmuring, his
Chancellor the Bishop of Rhodes devised a new Imposition of levying a Frank for
every Chimney, to continue for five years to pay the Prince's debts. But this
Imposition (though granted in Parliament) made their murmurs increase; For
though some part of his Dominions, as the Poictorians, the Xantoigns, and the
Limosins, seemed to consent to it, yet the Counts of Armigniac and Cominges,
the Vicount of Carmain, and diverse others, so much distasted it, that they
complained thereof to the King of France, as unto their Supreme Lord:
Pretending that the Prince was to answer before King Charles, as before his
Superior Lord, of whom (they said) he held by homage and fealty: whereas King
Edward and his Heirs by the Treaty at Bretagny were absolutely freed from all
manner of Service for any of their Dominions in France; King Charles openly
entertained this Complaint, and hoping to regain by surprise and policy, what
the English had won by dint of Sword, and true Manhood, he summoned the Prince
of Wales to Paris, to answer such Complaints as his subjects made against him.

Our valiant Prince returned answer, That if he must needs appear, he would
bring threescore thousand men in Arms to appear with him. And now began the
Peace between England and France to be unsettled and wavering. For while King
Edward rejoiced in the excellent Virtues and Actions of his Son and People,
Charles the French King, warned by so many calamities as his Dominions had
sustained by the English War: and earnestly coveting to recover the Honor of
his Nation, betook himself to secret practices. Never adventuring his own
Person in the Field, but executing all by his Deputies and Lieutenants,
especially by the valor and service of Bertram de Glequin, Constable of
France, who from a low estate was raised to this height for his prudent and
magnanimous Conduct in War. And our truly Noble King (without suspicion of
craft) reposing himself upon the Rules of Virtue and Magnanimity, did not reap
the stable effects of so great and important victories, nor of the Peace so
Ceremoniously made, that (in the World's opinion) it could not be broken,
without the manifest violation upon one side, of all Bonds both divine and
humane.

The Prince of Wales by Letters advised his Father not to trust to any fair
words, or overtures of further Amity made by the French, because (as he said)
they entertained Practices underhand in every place against him. But his
counsel was not hearkened to, because he was judged to write out of a restless
humor, delighting in War, though the event showed that his words were true.
For now King Charles, having by quick payments, and other means got home all
the Hostages which had been delivered for performance of the Articles of Peace,
set all his wits on work to abuse the King of England's credulity. He courted
him with loving Letters and Presents, and in the mean time surprised the County
of Ponthieu (our King's undeniable inheritance) before King Edward heard
thereof. Who hereupon calls a Parliament, declares the breach, craves aid, and
has it granted. And then again claims the Crown of France, and sent over his
Son John, Duke of Lancaster, and Humfrey de Bohun, Earl of Hereford, with a
great Army to Calice to invade France.

Among the States and Towns made over to the English at the Treaty of Bretigni,
which had revolted to the French, was the City of Limosin: Thither did the
Prince march, and sat down with his Army before it: And not long after came
unto him out of England, his two Brethren the Duke of Lancaster, and the Earl
of Cambridge, with a fresh supply of Valiant Captains, and Soldiers. The City
held out to the utmost, and was at last taken by storm, where no mercy was
showed by the enraged Soldiers, but Sword and Fire laid all desolate. After
this Service, the Prince's health failing him more and more, he left his
Brethren in Aquitain to prosecute the Wars, and himself taking Ship, came over
to his Father in England, his eldest Son [Edward] being dead a little before at
Bourdeaux, and brought over with him his Wife and his other Son Richard.

The Prince having left France, his Dominions were either taken or fell away
faster than they were gotten, Gueschlin entered Poictou, took Montmorillon,
Chauvigny, Lussack and Moncontour. Soon after followed the Country of Aulnis,
of Xantoyn, and the rest of Poictou: Then St. Maxent, Neel, Aulnay: Benaon,
Marant, Surgers, Fontency, and at last they came to Thouras, where the most
part of the Lords of Poictou, that held with the Prince, were assembled. At
this time the King, Prince Edward, the Duke of Lancaster, and all the Great
Lords of England set forward for their relief: But being driven back by a
Tempest, and succor not coming, Thouras was yielded upon composition. In fine,
all Poictou was lost, and then Aquitain, all, but only Bordeaux, and Bayon. And
not long after Prince Edward died, and with him the Fortune of England. He was
a Prince so full of Virtues as were scarce to be matched by others. He died at
Canterbury upon Trinity Sunday, June 8. in the forty sixth year of his Age, and
the forty ninth of his Father's Reign: and was buried in Christ's-Church there,
1376.

Among all the Gallant men of that Age this our Prince was so worthily the
first, He had a sumptuous Monument erected for him, upon which this Epitaph was
engraven in Brass, in French, thus Englished.

Here lies the Noble Prince Monsieur Edward; the Eldest Son of the thrice
Noble King Edward the third, in former time Prince of Aquitain, and of Wales,
Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, who died on the Feast of the Trinity,
which was the eighth of June, in the year of Grace 1376. To the Soul of whom,
God grant mercy. Amen.

After which were added these verses in French, thus Translated according to
the homely Poetry of those times.

Who so thou art that passest by
Where these Corpse entombed lie:
Understand what I shall say
As at this time speak I may.
Such as thou art sometime was I:
Such as I am, such shall thou be.
I little thought on the hour of Death
So long as I enjoyed Breath.
Great Riches here I did possess
Whereof I made great Nobleness.
I had Gold, Silver, Wardrobes, and
Great Treasures, Horses, Houses, Land.
But now a Caitiff Poor am I,
Deep in the Ground, lo here Ilye:
My beauty great is all quite gone,
My Flesh is wasted to the Bone:
My House is narrow now, and throng;
Nothing but Truth comes from my Tongue.
And if you should see me this Day
I do not think but ye would say,
That I had never been a Man,
So much altered now I am.
For God's sake pray to the Heavenly King,
That he my Soul to Heaven would bring.
All they that Pray and make Accord
For me unto my God and Lord;
God place them in his Paradise,
Wherein no wretched Caitiff lies.
The Death of this Prince, says an ingenious Historian, was a heavy loss to
the State, being a Prince of whom we never heard ill, never received any other
note but of goodness, and the Noblest performance that Magnanimity and Wisdom
could ever show, insomuch as what Praise could be given to Virtue, is due to
him.

I shall only add this short Remark, That the Captivity of two Kings at the
same time, namely John King of France, and David Bruce King of Scotland,
demonstrated at once the Glory and Power of King Edward, and his magnanimous
Son; The French King continued Prisoner in England five years, enough to have
determined the fortune of that great Kingdom, and dissolved their Cantoned
Government into Parts, had it not been a body consisting of so many strong
Limbs, and so abounding with Spirits that it never fainted, notwithstanding all
its loss of blood, but scorned to yield though King Edward came very near the
Heart, having wounded them in their most mortal part the Head. At length he
recovered his liberty by paying three millions of Crowns of Gold, whereof six
hundred thousand were laid down presently, four hundred thousand more the year
after, and the remainder the next two years following. The Scots King could not
gain his Freedom in twice the time, being the less able to redeem himself, for
that he was upon the matter half a King, the other half being in the possession
of Edward Baliol, but at length he was ransomed for ten thousand Marks, and
restored to his Kingdom.

IV. The forth Prince of Wales of the English Royal Line was Richard of
Bourdeaux, so called from the place of his Birth. The Black Prince his renowned
Father, whose Wisdom doubtless was no way short of his Courage, knowing how apt
they who stand near the Throne are to step into it, was so intent to prevent
any disorder of that kind that might be feared from the well known ambition of
his aspiring Brothers, the Eldest of whom Henry Duke of Lancaster, (afterward
King Henry IV.) having the Title of King of Castile in the Right of his Wife,
but without any Kingdom, might reasonably be suspected to affect one so much
the more his own Right, and to take advantage of his Nephew Richard's weakness.
He therefore made it his dying request to his declining Father, to inaugurate
his Son whilst he was yet alive, that by being committed to the Parliaments
care, he might have public security against all private supplantations, and
without further dispute enjoy all those Prerogatives which either his own
Right, or his Father's Merit entitled him to. Whereupon he was set upon the
Throne at Eleven years of Age, and in the life time of his Grandfather Edward
III. began to Reign by the name of Richard II. with this happiness, that at the
same time he took upon him to Govern them, the Parliament entered into
Consultation about the Persons fittest to Govern him; And because the safety of
the King as well as of the Kingdom, consisted in the multitude of Counselors,
they designed to add to his Uncle the Duke of Lancaster, (who was ambitious of
being Protector) the two other Brothers Edmund Earl of Cambridge, and Thomas of
Woodstock Duke of Gloucester, with whom they conjoined several Spiritual and
Temporal Lords of known Wisdom and Integrity. This so offended the Duke, as
seeming a reflection on his Ambition not to be trusted solely, that he refused
the charge, and retiring into the Country, so played the King at his own House,
that a poor well meaning Friar thought himself obliged in point of Allegiance
to accuse him of an Intention to Usurp the Crown, and consequently to destroy
the King. Neither wanted he matter enough, it is thought, to make out that
charge, but his Innocence being overmatcht by Power, and having none to second
his accusation, the Crime w^^ cast upon the Accuser, who being friendless wa^
(...) into Prison, and inhumanely murdered by his Keepers, who tying one end of
a Cord about his Neck, and the other to his Privy Members, hung him up on a
Pin, and with the weight of a Stone laid upon his Belly, burst his back, and so
all further proof deceased with him.

This being known among the People, and no punishment inflicted upon the
Murderers, derogated very much from the young King's Justice and Honor among
his Subjects, who not being able to distinguish betwixt the want of Skill, and
want of Power to punish, began thenceforth to Worship the Duke of Lancaster, as
the Indians do the Devil for fear. And as the King's Father Prince Edward never
recovered the health which he lost in the last expedition into Spain, so his
Son never recovered this and other disadvantages, put upon him by his ambitious
Uncle, and particularly that the very first day he took his Grandfather's Seat
in Parliament as Heir Apparent to the Crown, he taught him to demand a Subsidy,
purposely to alienate the Peoples Affections from him, who were before
sufficiently disgusted with the heavy Taxes they had already paid: And likewise
his ommitting no occasion of propagating Tumults and Factions, whereby he at
length deprived his Nephew first of his Crown, and then of his Life.

Richard II. was the comeliest Person of all the Kings since the Conquest,
being Tall, well Limbed and Strong, and of so amiable a Countenance, that he
might well be the Son of such a beautiful Mother. As to his Temper of Mind, it
proceeded more from his Education than his natural Humor, for he seemed to
have many good Inclinations, which might have grown into Habits, had they not
been perverted by corrupted Flatterers in his Youth. He was of a credulous
disposition, apt to believe, and therefore easy to be abused, and it was his
great weakness that he could not distinguish between a Parasite and and a
Friend. He seemed to partake both of a French and English Nature, being violent
at the first apprehension of a thing, and calm upon deliberation. He never
showed himself so worthy of the Government, as when he was Deposed as unworthy
to Govern. For it appeared that the Royal Dignity was not so pleasing to him,
as a quiet retired Life, which if he might have enjoyed, he would never have
complained, that Fortune had done him wrong. He lived thirty three years, and
reigned twenty and two months, and was Murdered at Pomfreh Castle in the place
of his Birth.

V. Henry of Monmouth the Son and Successor of King Henry IV. was the Fifth
Prince of Wales, of the Royal Blood of England. He was bred a Student in Queens
College in Oxford, and from thence being called to Court, the Lord Piercy Earl
of Worcester was made his Governor. But coming afterward to be at his own
disposing, whether being by nature valorous, and yet not well staid by time and
experience, or whether incited by ill Companions, and imboldened by the opinion
of his own Greatness, he ran into many Courses so unworthy of a Prince, that it
was much doubted what he might prove if he should come to be King. For it is
recorded that he with some other young Lords and Gentlemen, lay in wait in
disguise for the Receivers of his Father's Revenue, whom they robbed of their
Money to maintain their riotous Living, though sometimes they missed their
Prize, and were soundly beaten in prosecuting such attempts, and when upon his
return to Court he had heard the Receivers complain of their great losses, he
would give them Money to make them part of amends, but rewarded those best that
had made the stoutest defense, and from whom he had received the most blows. It
happened that one of his Companions was arraigned at the King's Bench Bar in
Westminster Hall for Felony, of which the Prince being informed, he by the
advice of the rest, came in a great rage to the Bar, and attempted to take away
the Prisoner by force, commanding that his Fetters should be taken off, and he
set at Liberty. All present were much amazed, but Sir William Gascoign then
Lord Chief Justice mildly desired him to forbear, and suffer the Felon to be
Tried by the Laws of the Land, and that he might afterward get his Pardon of
his Father, if there were occasion. The Prince grew more inflamed at these
words, and endeavored to take him away himself. But the Judge charging him
upon his Allegiance to withdraw out of the Court, the Prince furiously stepped up
to him, and struck him over the Face: Whereat the Judge not at all disturbed,
rose up and told him, That the affront he had offered, was not done to him, but
to the King his Father, whom he did there represent. And therefore I charge
you, says he, to desist from proceeding any further in your Lawless designs,
and I commit you to the King's Bench, there to remain during your Father's
pleasure, for the abuse you have committed, and the ill example you have given
to those that may hereafter be your own Subjects. It was wonderful to see how
calm the Prince was in his own cause, who had been so violent in that of his
Companion, for laying aside his Dagger which he had in his hand, and with which
the People feared he would have killed the Judge, he quietly submitted to his
Order, and went to the King's Bench. At which his Attendants being in a great
fury, ran instantly with mighty complaints to the King giving him an account of
the whole matter. King Henry appeared at first a little surprised, but
recollecting himself, he seemed ravished with joy, and holding up his hands to
Heaven, cried out, O merciful God, how much am I bound to thy Infinite
goodness, that thou have given me a Judge, who is of such Courage as not to be
afraid to administer Justice, and a Son of such humility that he will submit
thereunto. However for these and some other Pranks he removed him from being
President of the Council, and put his younger Brother Lord John in his place.
This made the Prince so sensible of his Father's anger, which some of his
Enemies endeavored to heighten, that he thought it necessary to use all means
to recover his good opinion, which he endeavored to do by a way as strange as
that by which he lost it. Of which I shall give an account in the words of the
Larl of Ormond, who was an Eye and Ear witness of the same.

During the sickness of the King, faith he, some ill disposed people
endeavored to raise dissension between him and his Son, reproaching the Prince
both with the Frolicks of his Youth, and for the great concourse of People that
continually attended his Court far exceeding those of his Father, whereby they
insinuated, that he designed to usurp the Crown during his Life, which raised
much jealousy in the King's Mind, and greatly alienated his affections from
him. The Prince had notice thereof by some of his Friends in Court. Whereupon
he attired himself in a Garment of blew Satin, wrought all with Oylet holes of
black Silk, at every hole a Needle hanging by which it was sowed, and about his
Arm he wore a Hound's Collar studded with S S. of Gold. Thus strangely
apparrell'd, with a large Retinue of Young Noblemen, he came to his Father at
Westminster, and his Attendants staying in the Hall by his Order to prevent
suspicion, he himself with the King's Officers went to wait upon his Father.
Being admitted into the Presence, after due obeisance, the Prince desired that
he might have Audience of his Majesty in the Privy Chamber. Upon which the King
caused himself to be carried thither in a Chair, where in the Presence of only
three or four of his Privy Council, he demanded of the Prince the Cause of his
unwonted Habit and Coming.

The Prince kneeling, replied, Most honored Lord and Father, I am come to
throw my self at your Majesty's Feet, as your most Loyal Subject and Obedient
Son, to whom nothing is more afflicting than that your Majesty should entertain
the least jealousy of my designing any thing against your Royal Dignity, or to
imagine me so horridly undutiful and ungrateful to a Father who has always
showed such tender love and affection to me, as your Highness has always done,
so that I should deserve a thousand deaths, if I durst imagine the least harm
or damage against your Sacred Person. And if it be my bounden duty, to hazard
my life in your defense against any, even the greatest Traitor whatsoever, then
much more ought I to Sacrifice my self to free your Grace from the fear of any
peril or danger from me, and upon that account, I have this day by confessing
my Sins, and receiving the Sacrament prepared my self for another World.
Therefore, most Honored Father, I beseech you for God's sake to put an end to
my life, now lying at your Feet, with this Dagger, (delivering his Dagger to
the K.) for I had rather be out of the World, than continue a day longer in it,
to give any disturbance to your mind. And dear Father, in the doing hereof I
freely forgive you, as I shall do the same before God at the Day of Judgment.

The King was so moved at these words, tha^ throwing the Dagger away, he fell
upon his Neck and embracing him, said, My dear and truly be loved Son, I must
confess I had entertained some suspicions, but I now find they were altogether
causless on your part, and since I am now sensible of your fidelity and
obedience, I do assure you upon my honor, I will never hereafter harbor any
ill opinion of you, whatsoever may be suggested against you. And hereupon he
was fully restored to the King's former Grace and Favor.

The King's weakness of Body increasing daily, he oft-times took occasion to
give some useful instructions to his Son, for the future Governing of his
Kingdom, to this effect. Dear Son, I am much concerned for fear that after my
decease some difference may arise betwixt you and your Brother Thomas Duke of
Clarence, whereby great mischiefs may happen to the Kingdom, you being both of
great Spirits, and he of an Usurping Temper, which I am sure you will never
endure. And as often as I think of it, I heartily repent me that ever I charged
my self with the troubles of a Crown. The Prince replied, Gracious Sovereign
and Father, I pray God continue long your Life and Reign to Govern us both, but
if it please the Almighty that I shall succeed you in the Kingdom, I shall
honor and love my Brethren above all others, so long as they be true and
faithful to me their Sovereign Lord. But if any of them shall conspire or rebel
against me, I do assure you, I shall as soon execute justice on them as upon
the meanest and most inconsiderable Person in the Nation.

The King was extremely pleased with this answer, and then proceeded. My well
beloved Son, Thou have much eased my troubled Mind, and I charge thee to do as
thou have said, To administer Justice impartially, but to be always ready, and
speedy in relieving the Oppressed. And let not Flatterers, whose hands are full
of Bribes, withdraw thy Mind therefrom. Delay not to do Justice to day if thou
be able, lest God should execute Justice upon thee, and deprive thee of thine
authority. Remember that the happiness of thy Soul, thy Body, and thy Kingdom
depends thereupon. Yet in some Cases let Justice be tempered with Mercy, lest
thou be accounted a Tyrant, but be sure that thou take great care to redress
the Grievances of thy Subjects, and severely punish those that wrong them.
Hereby shall thou gain the Englishmen's Hearts, and reign prosperously: for so
long as they freely enjoy their Liberties and Estates, thou may be sure of
their Loyalty and Obedience, but if thou strive to slave or impoverish them,
they will certainly rebel against thee, for such is their nature that they will
rather choose to dye Freemen, than to live Slaves and Beggars. Therefore if thou
Govern thein with a mixture of love and fear, thou will be King over the most
Pleasant and Fruitful Country, and the most Loving, Faithful, and Valiant
People in the World, whereby thou will be a terror to all thine Enemies. My
Son, when it shall please God to take me out of the World, which is the Common
Lot of all men, I must leave my Crown and Kingdom to thee, and I would
earnestly advise thee, that of all things thou will avoid Pride, neither be
thou bewitched with worldly honor, so as to be exalted in thine own
imagination, but always remember that the higher thy Dignity is, so much
greater is the burden that lies upon thee for the security of thy Kingdom, and
of every particular Subject therein, as being like the Head and Heart in the
Body, from whence all the Members receive Life and Nourishment. Whereby thy
People finding they receive so many benefits from thee, will be always ready to
assist and defend thee, for their own preservation, as the Members do the Head
and Heart. But above all things be careful to serve God sincerely, and ascribe
to him the Glory of all thy Successes against thine Enemies, as coming from his
goodness and not any merit of thine.

These and many other good Instructions the King gave to his Son. And soon
after being at his Prayers at St. Edward's Shrine in Westminster-Abbey, he was
suddenly taken with an Apoplexy, and thereupon removed to the Abbot of
Westminster's House, where recovering himself, and finding he was in a strange
place, he asked where he was; and being told in the Abbot's House, in a Chamber
called Jerusalem (where an Astrologer had formerly told him he should dye;) He
said, Nay then I am sure I shall dye, though he before thought it would have
been in Palestine, and was therefore preparing to make a Voyage thither. And
here he died indeed March 20. 1413. It is observable that during his sickness
he always required to have his Crown set upon his Bolster by him, and one of
his Fits being so strong upon him, that all thought him absolutely dead, the
Prince coming in, took away the Crown, when suddenly the King recovering his
senses and missing it, was told the Prince had taken it, who being called, came
back with the Crown, and kneeling down said. Sir, to all our Judgments, and to
all our griefs, you seemed directly dead, and therefore I took the Crown as my
Right, but seeing to all our comforts you live, I here deliver it more joyfully
than I took it, and pray God you may long live to wear it your self. Well (said
the King sighing) what Right I had to it, God knows. But says the Prince, If
you dye King, my Sword shall maintain it to be my Right against all Opposers.
Well, replied the King, I leave all to God, and then turning about said, God
bless thee, and have mercy upon me. And with these words he gave up the Ghost.

After his Father's Death, the Prince was Proclaimed King by the name of Henry
V. and proved a better Man of a King than a Subject, for till then he was not
in his right Orb, and therefore no marvel he was exorbitant. Those that have
taken the height of him, paralleled him with Alexander for Magnanimity, and
Caesar for his being Invincible, and Affectation of Glory: but he had something
of Caesar that Alexander the Great had not, That he would not be Drunk nor
Intemperate, and something of Alexander that Caesar had not, That he would not
be flattered: and both were short of him in this, that Conquering others they
could not Conquer themselves, but even when they were Lords of the World,
became Slaves to their own Passions. He advanced the former Title of the Right
of the Kings of England to the Kingdom of France, and sent Ambassadors to King
Charles VI. to demand a peaceable surrender of that Crown to him, offering to
accept his fair Daughter Katherine with the Kingdom, and to expect no other
Pledge for his Possession till after Charles's Death. But the French King being
sick, his Son the Dauphin, who managed the Government, instead of another
answer, scornfully sent the King a Present of Tennis Balls; as an intimation
that his Youth was better acquainted with the use of them than of Bullets. The
King, whose Wit was as Keen as his Sword, returned him this answer. That in
requital of his fine Present of Tennis Balls, it should not be long e're he
would toss such Iron Balls amongst them, that the best Arm in France should not
be able to hold a Racket against them. Neither was he worse than his word,
though his Army seemed very disproportionate for so great a work, being only
(as some Write) nine thousand Horse and Foot, with which small number he met
with the French Army at a place called Agencourt, where though the Enemy were
above five to one, he fought them with such resolution, that he took more
Prisoners than his own Forces consisted of, and killed ten thousand of them,
the Dauphin himself dying soon after of grief, with the loss only of six
hundred English; nay one Author says, of not above twenty six in all, which
made the Victory almost miraculous: And which the Religious young King was so
sensible of, that he caused the Clergy in his Army to sing that Psalm of David,
When Israel went out of Egypt, etc, and the Soldiers in their Arms responded
at every Verse: Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be all the
Glory. And upon his return to England with his Prisoners, he commanded that no
Ballad or Song should be sung, but those of Thank sgiving to God for his happy
Victory and Safe return, without any reflections upon the French, or extolling
the English Valor.

Soon after he returned back to France, where many great Cities and Towns were
Surrendered to him, and the French being unable to make any resistance, at
length a Treaty of Peace is concluded, and he married his beloved Lady
Katherine, Daughter to the French King Charles, being Proclaimed Regent of
France during that King's Life, and Heir Apparent to that Crown after King
Charles his Death.

He was tall of Stature, lean of Body, and his Bones small, but strongly made,
somewhat long Neckt, black Hair'd, and of a very comely Countenance. So swift
in running, that he with two of his Lords would run down a Wild Buck or Do in
a Park. He delighted in Songs and Musical Instruments, and used some English
Psalms turned into verse in his private Chapel. And indeed it may be said of
him, that he had scarce his equal both for Virtue and Valor. For he seldom
fought a Battle where he got not the Victory, and never got Victory whereof he
gave not the Glory to God with Public Thanksgiving. He was indeed a great
Affector of Glory, yet not of the Glory of the blast of Men's Mouths, but of
that which fills the Sails of Time. He died of full years, though not full of
years. If he had lived longer, he might have gone over the same again, but
could not have gone further. He fell sick in France, and having given necessary
instructions to the Nobility about him how to manage affairs, he then returned
thanks to the Almighty for his many favors and blessings, and in the midst of
saying a Psalm of David he gave up the Ghost: who might have justly prayed God
with David, Lord take me not away in the midst of my days, for he died about
the age of thirty six, which in David's account is but half the life of Man.
Being dead, his body was imbalmed, closed in Lead, and laid in a Chariot Royal
richly apparelled in Cloth of Gold, and then conveyed from Boys de Vincennes
where he died, to Paris, Roan, Callice, Dover, and so through London to
Westminster Abbey. Upon whose Tomb Queen Katherine caused a Royal Picture to be
laid, covered all over with Silver Plate gilt, but the Head all of Massy
Silver, which was afterward all stolen away. He died Aug. 31. 1422. having
reigned about nine, and lived about thirty eight years.

VI. Henry of Windsor, his Son and Successor, was the sixth Prince of Wales of
the English Royal Line, but so unlike his Father, that had not the virtues of
his Mother been so well known as they were, the Virtues of his Father would
have rendered this Prince justly suspected not to have been his Son, and that
his Mother begat him all of her self by imagination. His Father seemed to have
some Prophetic Revelation of the future unhappiness of his Reign, and it was
thought the knowledge thereof was not the least cause of shortning his days. For
it is credibly reported, that at the news of the Birth of this Son born at
Windsor, he in a Prophetic rapture cried out, Good Lord, Henry of Monmouth,
shall small time Reign and get much, and Henry of Windsor, shall long time
Reign and lose all. But God's Will be done.

And yet no doubt Henry VI. was a Prince of excellent parts, though not of
kindly parts for a Prince, being such as were neither fit for the Warlike Age
he was born in, nor agreeable to the Glory he was born to; but such rather as
better became a Priest than a Prince, so that the Title which was sometimes
given to his Father with relation to his Piety, might better have been applied
to the Son, That he was Prince of Priests. Herein only was the difference
betwixt them, that the Religion of the one made him bold as a Lion, that of the
other made him meek as a Lamb. Whereas if he had less of the Dove-like
Innocence, and more of the Serpentine subtilty, it is probable he had not only
been happier whilst he lived, but more respected after he was dead: whereas
now, notwithstanding all his Indulgence to the Church and Churchmen, there was
none of them so grateful, (after he was Murdered by the Bloody Duke of
Gloucester) to give him Christian Burial, but being brought from the Tower to
St. Paul's in an open Coffin barefaced where he bled, thence to Black-Friars,
where he also bled: he was carried from thence by Boat to Chertsey Abbey,
without Priest or Clark, Torch or Taper, Mass or Mourner. Indeed his Burial was
so without regard to his Person or Dignity, that if his Funerals were any whit
better than that which the Holy Writ calls the Burial of an Ass, vet they were
such, that his Competitor and Successor King Edward IV. who denied him the
Rights of Majesty living, thought him too much wronged being dead, and to make
him some kind of satisfaction, he removed his Corpse to Windsor Chapel, and
there erected a fine Monument over him.

In this King we may see the fulfilling of that Text, Woe to that Nation whose
King is a Child, for he was not above eight months old when he succeeded his
Father in the Kingdom, though this Text may be meant as well of a Child in
understanding as years. The first defect may be supplied by good Governors or
Protectors, but the last is hardly to be repaired, of which in this Prince we
have a pregnant instance, For so long as he continued a Child in years, his
Kingdoms were kept flourishing by the Providence of his careful Uncles, but so
soon as he left being a Child in years, and yet continued a Child in Ability of
Ruling, having not the judgment to conceal his own weakness, then presently
Faction and Ambition broke in upon the Government, so that all things went to
wrack both in France and England, and we were forced to surrender tamely all
our Foreign Acquisitions, which we had obtained with so much Reputation and
Glory. This King being Crowned King of France at Paris in 1431.

He was tall of Stature, spare and slender of Body, of a comely Countenance,
and in all parts well proportioned. For endowments of his mind, he had Virtues
enough to make a Saint, but not a King. He was sensible of that which the World
calls Honor, accounting the greatest honor to consist in humility. He was not
so stupid not to know Prosperity from Adversity, but he was so devout as to
think nothing adversity which was not an hindrance to Devotion. He had one
privilege peculiar to himself, that no man could ever be revenged on him,
seeing he never offered any man injury. He was so modest, that when at
Christmas a show of Women was presented to him with their naked Breasts, he
presently departed, saying, Fie, Fie for shame, forsooth you are to blame. So
pitiful that when he saw the Quarters of a Traitor over Cripplegate, he caused
them to be taken down, saying: I will not have any Christian so cruelly handled
for my sake. So free from swearing, that he never used any other Oath but
forsooth, and verily. So patient, that to one who struck him when he was taken
Prisoner, he only said, Forsooth you wrong your self more than me to strike the
Lord's anointed. So Devout, that on principal Holy Days he used to wear
Sackcloth next his Skin. In fine, let his Confessor be heard, who in ten years
Confession never found that he had said or done any thing worthy of a
Reprimand. For all which Christian Virtues King Henry VII. would have procured
him to be Canonized for a Saint, but that he was prevented by Death, or perhaps
because the charge would have been too great, the Canonization of a King being
much dearer than that of a private Person. He reigned thirty eight, and lived
fifty nine years, and was murdered in the Tower of London, in 1472.

VII. Edward the only Son of King Henry VI. by Queen Margaret Daughter to the
King of Sicily, was the seventh Prince of Wales of the Royal Blood of England.
He Married Anne the Daughter of Richard Nevil called the Great Earl of Warwick;
After his Father's Army was defeated by King Edward IV. at Tauton Field in
Yorkshire, he with his Mother were sent into France to pray aid from that King.
This Battle was the bloodiest that ever England saw, King Henry's Army
consisting in threescore thousand, and King Edward's in about forty thousand
men, of which there fell that day thirty seven thousand seven hundred seventy
six Persons, no Prisoners being taken but the Earl of Devonshire. Afterward the
Queen returns from France with some Forces, but before her coming King Edward
had defeated the Earl of Warwick (who with some other Lords had raised a Party
for her assistance) at Barnet, wherein near ten thousand were slain. So that
when it was too late she landed at Weymouth, and from thence went to Bewly
Abbey in Hampshire, where the Duke of Somerset, the Earl of Devonshire, and
diverse other Lords came to her, resolving once more to try their Fortune in the
Field. The Queen was very desirous that her Son Edward Prince of Wales, should
have returned to France, there to have been secure, till the success of the
next Battle had been tried, but the Lords, especially the Duke of Somerset,
would not consent to it, so that she was obliged to comply with them, though
she quickly repented it. From Bewly she with the Prince and the Duke of
Somerset goes to Bristol, designing to mise what men they could in
Glocestershire, and to march into Wales and join Jasper Earl of Pembroke, who
was there assembling more Forces. K. Edward having intelligence of their
Proceedings resolves to prevent their conjunction, and follows Queen Margaret
so diligently with a great Army, that near Tewksbury in Glocestershire he
overtakes her Forces, who resolutely turn to engage him. The Duke of Somerset
led the Van, and performed the part of a Valiant Commander, but finding his
Soldiers through weariness begin to faint, and that the Lord Wenlock who
commanded the main Battle moved not, he rode up to him and upbraiding his
treachery, with his Pole-ax instantly knocked out his Brains, but before he
could bring this Party to relieve the Van, they were wholly defeated, the Earl
of Devonshire with above three thousand of the Queens Men being slain, the
Queen her self, John Beufort, the Duke of Somerset's Brother, the Prior of St.
John's, Sir Jervas Clifton and diverse others were taken Prisoners. All whom,
except the Queen, were the next day Beheaded. At which time Sir Rich. Crofts
presented to King Edward, King Henry's Son Edward, Prince of Wales. To whom
King Edward at first seemed indifferent kind, but demanding of him how he durst
so presumptuously enter into his Realm with Arms? The Prince replied, though
truly, yet unseasonably, To recover my Father's Kingdom and my Inheritance.
Thereupon King Edward with his hand thrust him from him, or as some say, struck
him on the Face with his Gauntlet, and then presently George Duke of Clarence,
Thomas Gray Marquess Dorset, and the Lord Hastings standing by, fell upon him
in the place and murdered him. Others write, that Crook-back'd Richard ran him
into the Heart with his Dagger. His Body was Buried with other ordinary Corpse
that were slain, in the Church of the Monastery of the Black Friars in
Tewksberry.

VIII. Edward eldest Son of King Edward IV. was the eighth Prince of Wales of
the English Royal Blood, Of whose short Reign and miserable Death, there is an
account in a Book called England's Monarchs.

IX. Richard only Son of King Richard III. was the ninth Prince of Wales. His
Mother was Ann the second Daughter of Richard Nevil the Great Earl of Warwick,
and Widow of Prince Edward Son of King Henry VI. aforementioned, who was
Married to King Richard though she could not but be sensible that he had been
the Author both of her Husband's and Father's Death, but women's Affections are
Diametrically opposite to common apprehensions, and generally governed by
Passion and Inconstancy. This Prince was born of her at Midleham near Richmond
in the County of York. At four years old he was created Earl of Salisbury by
his Uncle King Edward IV. At ten years old he was created Prince of Wales, by
his Father King Richard III. but died soon after.

X. Arthur eldest Son to King Henry VII. was the tenth Prince of Wales of the
Royal English Families. He was born at Winchester, in the second year of his
Father's Reign. When he was about fifteen years old, his Father proposed a
Marriage for him with the Princess Katherine Daughter to Ferdinando, King of
Spain, which being concluded, the Lady was sent by her Father with a gallant
Fleet of Ships to England, and arrived at Plymouth. Soon after the Princess was
openly espoused to Prince Arthur, they were both clad in white, he being
fifteen, and she eighteen years of age. At night they were put together in one
Bed, where they lay as Man and Wife all that Night. When morning appeared, the
Prince (as his Servants about him reported) called for Drink, which was not
usual with him. Whereof one of his Bedchamber asking him the cause, he merrily
replied: I have been this Night in the midst of Spain which is a hot Country,
and that makes me so dry. Though some write, that a grave Matron was laid in
Bed between them to hinder actual Consummation. The Lady's Dowry was two
hundred thousand Ducats, and her Jointure the third part of the Principality
of Wales, Cornwall and Chester. At this Marriage was great Solemnity and Roval
Justings. Prince Arthur after his Marriage was sent into Wales, to keep his
Country in good Order, having several prudent and able Counselors to advise
with, but within five Months after, he died at his Castle at Ludlow, and with
great solemnity was Buried in the Cathedral of Worcester. He was a very
ingenious and learned Prince, for though he lived not to be sixteen years old,
yet he was said to have read over all or most of the Latin Fathers, besides
many others. Some attribute the shortness of his Life to his Nativity, being
born in the eighth month after Conception.

XI. Henry the second Son to King Henry VII. was the eleventh Prince of Wales,
of the Royal English Line. He was born at Greenwich in Kent. After the Death of
his eldest Brother Prince Arthur, the Title of Prince of Wales was by his
Father's Order not given to him, but his own only, of Duke of York, till the
Women could certainly discover whether the Lady Katherine were with Child or
not. But after six months when nothing appeared, he had his Title bestowed upon
him, and King Henry being loath to part with her great Portion, prevailed with
his Son Henry, (though not without some reluctance in one so young as himself,
for he was scarce twelve years of age) to be contracted to the Princess his
Brother's Widow, for which Marriage a Dispensation, by advice of the most
Learned men at that time in Christendom, was by Pope Julius II. granted, and so
the Marriage was Solemnized soon after at the Bishop of Salisbury's House in
Fleetstreet. After the Death of his Father he succeeded to the Crown by the
name of King Henry VIII. His reign was long, and full of action, but the
greatest was his renouncing the Pope's Supremacy, and suppressing of many
unnecessary Abbeys, and Monasteries, and thereby laying a Foundation for the
happy Reformation that followed.

He was exceeding tall of Stature, very Strong, and fair of Complexion. A
Prince of so many good Parts, that it may be wondered he had any ill, reither
indeed had he many, till flattery and ill Counsel in his latter time prevailed
upon him. His cruelty to his Wives some endeavor to excuse, by saying, that if
they were Incontinent he did but Justice: If they were not so, yet he thought
it sufficient to satisfy his Conscience that he had cause to believe them so,
and if Marriage be honorable in all, in Princes it is sacred. In suppressing
of Abbeys he showed no little Piety but great Providence, for though they were
excellent things being rightly used, the most pernicious being abused; and then
may the use be justly suppressed, when the abuse can scarce possibly be
restrained. To think he suppressed them from Covetousness, is to make him
extremely deceived in his reckoning, for by comparing the profit with the
charge, he must needs be a great loser by the bargain. He was so far from
Pride, that he was rather too humble. At least he conversed with his Subjects
in a more familiar manner than is usual with Princes. So Valiant that his whole
Life almost was exercises of Valor, and though performed among his Friends in
Jest, yet they prepared him against his Enemies in earnest, and they that durst
be his Enemies, found it so. It may be said, the complexion of his Government
for the first twenty years was Sanguine and Jovial, for the rest, choleric and
bloody, so that it is a question, whether in the former he were more prodigal
of his own Treasure, or in the latter part, of his Subjects Blood. For as he
spent more in Masks, Shows, and Fictions, than any other King did in reality,
so in any Distempes of his People he used no other Physic but to open a Vein.

But it will be injurious to his Memory to charge all the Blood spilt in his
Reign to his account. They were the Popish Bishops that made those Bloody Laws,
and the bloody Bishops that put them in execution, the King oftentimes scarce
knowing what was done. Certain it is, when Bishop Gardener put a Gentlewoman (I
suppose Mrs. Ann Askew) a second time on the Rack, the King hearing of it,
extremely condemned him for such Barbarous cruelty. As for Religion though he
brought it not to a full Reformation, yet he gave a good beginning thereunto.
They that charge him with the Vice of Lust, let them show such another example
of Continence as was seen in him, to lie six months by a young Lady and not to
touch her, for so he did by the Lady Ann of Cleve. It is recorded of him, that
in his latter time he grew so fat and slothful, that Engines were made to lift
and remove him up and down, but however in the fifty sixth year of his age,
either by a Dropsy or an Ulcer in his Leg he fell into a languishing Fever,
which brought him into such extremity, that his Physicians utterly despaired of
his Life, and yet none durst acquaint him with it, till Mr. Denny of his Privy
Chamber ventured to tell him of his danger, and put him in mind of preparing
for Death. To which he answered, that he confessed his Sins to be exceeding
great, yet he had such confidence in the Mercy of God through Christ Jesus,
that he doubted not of forgiveness though they had been much greater. And being
asked whether he would have a Divine, he answered he would willingly have
Archbishop Cranmer, but not till he had taken a little rest. The Archbishop
being then at Croyden was sent for, but before he came the King was grown
speechless, only seemed somewhat sensible, putting out his hand. And the
Archbishop desiring him to show some sign of his Faith in Christ he then wrung
him hard by the hand, and immediately gave up the Ghost. Jan. 28. 1547. in the
fifty sixth year-of his age, and of his reign the thirty eighth. His body with
great solemnity was Buried at Windsor under a very stately Tomb, begun in
Copper and Gilt, but never finished.

XII. Edward the only Son and Successor of King Henry VIII. was the twelfth
Prince of Wales of the English Race. He was an excellent Prince, in his tender
years, being committed to the Tuition of Dr. Cox, he profited in Learning to
admiration, attaining in a short time to speak freely several Languages,
namely, Greek, Latin, French, Italian, Spanish and Dutch, and likewise had
great knowledge in many other Sciences, so that he seemed rather to be born
than to be brought up to them: for he was not ignorant of Logic, natural
Philosophy, nor Music, and in the midst of his youthful Recreations be would
be always sure to observe his hours for study. So that the famous Cardanus
coming into England, and having often conference with him, gives this Character
of him, That he had an extraordinary insight into the Politics, was well read
in Philosophy and Divinity, and in a word a Miracle of Art and Nature. He would
answer Ambassadors on the sudden, either in French or Latin. He knew the state
of Foreign Princes perfectly, and his own more. He could call all the Gentlemen
of Quality in his Kingdom by their Names, and all when he had scarce yet
attained to the age of fifteen years. He was extraordinary zealous in the True
Religion, banishing Popery and perfecting that Reformation which was but just
began in his Father's Reign. He was very merciful, and averse from taking away
the Lives of his Subjects, for proof whereof there is this instance. One Joan
Butcher being condemned to be burnt for notorious Blasphemy and Heresy, his
whole Council could not persuade him to sign the Warrant for her execution, but
were fain to get Archbishop Cranmer to prevail with him, who using many
arguments to persuade him, What said he, would you have me send her quick to
the Devil in her Error. But when the Bishop showed him the necessity of it, he
signed it weeping, and saying, Well, my Lord, I will lay all the blame upon you
at the Day of Judgment. He was very Charitable, and upon a Sermon preached by
Bishop Ridley of the excellency of Charity, he gave and endowed three Hospitals
for the Poor in the City of London: 1. Christ's Hospital, for poor Children and
Orphans. 2. St. Bartholomew's Hospital for poor, maimed, diseased People and
Cripples, etc. 3. Bridewell, for employing and correcting Vagrants, Harlots,
and Idle Persons.

He was a Comely Person, and of a sweet Countenance, especially in his Eyes,
which seemed to have a starry liveliness in them. In the sixth year of his
Reign, which was the year before he died, he fell sick of the Measels, and
being fully recovered, he rode a Progress with greater magnificence than ever
he had done before, having in his Train no fewer than four thousand Horse. The
January following, whether procured by sinister Practice, or growing upon him
by natural infirmity, he fell into an indisposition which centred in a Cough of
the Lungs. Whereupon it was reported that a Poisoned Nosegay had been presented
him for a New years Gift, which brought him into this slow but mortal
Consumption. Others said, it was done by a vene nous Clyster. However it was,
he grew so ill that his Physicians dispaired of his Life. After which a
Gentlewoman, though to be provided on purpose, pretended to cure him, but did
him much hurt, for with her applications his Legs swelled, his Pulse failed,
his skin changed color and many other symptonis of approaching death appeared.
An hour before he was overheard to pray thus by himself: O Lord God, deliver me
out of this miserable and wretched Life. O Lord thou know how happy it were
for me to be with thee, yet for thy Chosens sake, if it be thy will send me
life and health that I may truly serve thee. O Lord God save thy chosen People
of England, and defend this Realm from Papistry, and maintain thy true Religion
that I and my People may praise thy name, for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake. Then
turning his Face and seeing some by him, he said, I thought you had not been so
nigh: Yes, said Dr. Owen, we heard you speak to your self. Then said the King I
was Praying to God, O I am faint, Lord have mercy upon me, and receive my
Spirit, and in so saying he gave up the Ghost, July 6. 1553. in the sixteenth
year of his age, when he had reigned six years-five months, and nine days, and
was solemnly buried at Westminster Abbey.

XIII. Prince Henry eldest Son to King James I. was the thirteenth Prince of
Wales, of the Royal Family of England. He was born at Sterling Castle in
Scotland, and in his Childhood gave promising signs of an Heroic and Noble
Spirit, no Music being so pleasant to his Ears as the Trumpet and Drum, and
the roaring of Cannon, and no sights so acceptable as that of Muskets,
Pistols, and any kind of Armor: and at nine years of age he learned to ride,
shoot at Archery, leap, and manage the Pike, all which manly exercises he
performed to admiration in such young years. He was tall of stature about five
foot eight inches high, of an amiable, yet Majestic countenance, a piercing
Eye, a gracious smile, and a terrible frown, yet courteous and affable to all.
He was naturally modest and patient, and when most offended, he would by
overcoming himself say nothing, very merciful, very just, and very true to his
promises, very secret and reserved from his youth. He was most zealous in his
love to Religion and Piety, and his Heart was bent if he had lived, to have
endeavored to compound those differences that were among Religious men. He
showed his love to good men, and hatred of evil in encouraging good Preachers,
and slighting the vainglorious, in whom above all things he abhorred flattery,
loving and countenancing the good, and never speaking of the slothful Preachers
without anger and disdain. He was very Conscientious of an Oath, so that he was
never heard to take God's name in vain, or any other Oaths that may seem light,
much less such horrible Oaths as are now too common. He never failed to
sacrifice daily the first of his actions to God by Prayers and Devotions. He
was so resolved to continue immutable in the Protestant Religion, that long
before his death he solemnly protested, That he would never join in Marriage
with a Wife of a contrary Faith, for he hated Popery with all the Adjuncts and
Adherents thereof, yet he would now and then use particular Papists kindly,
thereby showing that he hated not their Persons but Opinions. He was obedient
to his Parents, careful in the affairs of his Family and Revenue, loving and
kind to Strangers, and in a word he had a certain extraordinary excellency that
cannot be expressed in words. In the nineteenth year of his age he was visited
with a continual Headache, and had two small Fits of an Ague, which were
afterward followed with very had symptoms, which daily increasing, Dr. Abbot
then Archbishop of Canterbury went to visit him, and finding the extreme danger
he was in, discourst to him of the vanity of the World, the certainty of Death
and the Joys of Heaven, asking his Highness, whether he were well pleased to
die now if it were the Will of God, he replied, Yes with all my Heart, farther
declaring, That he hoped for the pardon of his sins only from the merits of
Christ. In his best moments he continued in a Christian frame of Spirit, and
November. 6. 1612. quietly yielded up his Spirit to his blessed Savior and
Redeemer, being attended with as many Prayers, Tears, and strong Cries as ever
any Soul was.

XIV. After his death Charles his Younger Brother succeeded, being the
fourteenth Prince of Wales, and afterward King of England by the Title of King
Charles I.

XV. Charles the eldest Son of Charles I. was the fifteenth and last Prince of
Wales of the Royal Family of England, and after King of England by the Title of
King Charles II.

I have been very brief in relating the Actions of several of the Princes of
Wales, having already given an account of them in some other Books which I have
formerly published. As for instance.

In a Book called, Admirable Curiosities, Rarities and Wonders in every County
in England, in the Remarks upon the County of Gloucester, you may find all the
particulars of the Murder of King Edward the second. In another called
Historical Remarks upon the Cities of London and Westminster, there is a full
Relation of the deposition and miserable death of King Richard II. In another
entitled, The young Man's Calling, or the whole Duty of Youth, the Lives of
King Edward, VI. and Prince Henry Son to King James I. are related at large. In
another called England's Monarchs, is an account of the Lives and Actions of
all the Kings of England, from William the Conqueror to this time, and among
them, of those Princes of Wales who were after Kings of England, and are
mentioned in the preceding Remarks. In another called, The Wars of England,
etc. There is a full account of the Life of King Charles I. with his Trial and
Death. In another called The History the two late Kings, is a Relation of the
Life and Death of King Charles II. To all, or any of which Books I refer the
Reader for farther satisfaction, being unwilling to repeat, or that any should
pay twice for the same matter.

Remarkable Observations upon the most Memorable Persons and Places in Wales.
And an account of several considerable Transactions and Passages that have
happened, for many hundred years past. Together with the Natural and Artificial
Rarities and Wonders in the several Counties of that Principality.
PART III.
GReat Britain comprehends the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and is an
Island in the Ocean divided by Antiquity into three Parts, the first and
greatest called Loegria, is contained within the French Seas, the River
Severne, Dee and Humber to the German Ocean, now called England. The second
contains all the Land Northward from Humber to the Deucalidonian Seas, now
called Scotland. The third lies between the Irish Seas and the Rivers Severne
and Dee, and was called Cambria now Wales. Some Authors add a fourth division,
called Cornubia, now Cornwall, the Inhabitants of all four differing in
Language humor and Customs among themselves.

My design at present is to give an account of Wales, having already treated of
England in a Book called Admirable Curiosities, Rarities, and Wonders in every
County thereof. And I intend to proceed in the same method in this
Principality.

Wales is situated on the West and Northwest part of England, over against the
Kingdom of Ireland, and appears like a Promontory o^ Foreland, being surrounded
by the Sea almost on every side, except on the South-East part, where it is
divided from England by the River Severn, and by a Ditch drawn from the Mouth
of the River Dee to the mouth of the River Wye, being an hundred Miles from
East to West, and an hundred and twenty Miles from North to South. The
forenamed Ditch is called Claudh Offa because made by Offa King Mercia, of a
great depth and breadth, thereby to confine the Welsh into narrower limits who
enacted, That if any Welshman were found on the East side of this Ditch he
should forfeit his right hand, but that Law is long since repealed, and the
Loyal and Valiant Welsh have for several ages past enjoyed the same Liberties
and Privileges with the other Subjects of the Crown of England.

It was divided into three parts, that is North Wales, South Wales and
Powis-Land, by Roderick the Great in 877. as you have heard, which proved the
confusion of Wales; their Princes being commonly at War with the English or
among themselves to enlarge and defend their several Dominions Of these three,
North Wales was the chief, being left to Amarawd the eldest Son of Roderick,
the Princes whereof by way of eminency were styled Princes of Wales, and
sometimes Kings of Aberfrow their Chief Residence, and paid to the King of
London, (as well as the Princes of South Wales and Powis-Land) sixty three
pounds yearly as a Tribute. Yet South Wales, called by the Inhabitants
Dehenbarth, or the right side, as being nearer the Sun, was the largest, most
fruitful and rich, but more subject to the Invasions and Depredations of the
English and Flemings, and therefore North Wales being secured by its Hills and
Mountains was preferred before it, and retains more of the purity of the Welsh
Tongue. However this makes the soil lean and hungry, but that is supplied by
the large quantity thereof, which occasioned this pleasant passage. An English
Gentleman in discourse with a worshipful Knight of Wales, boasting that that he
had in England so much ground worth 40 s. an Acre, the Welsh Gentleman replied,
You have ten yards of Velvet, and I have two hundred yards of Frize, I will not
exchange with you.

There are likewise in Wales very pleasant Meadows Watered by fine Rivers, and
as the sweetest Flesh is said to be near the Bones, so the most delicious
Valleys are interposed betwixt these Mountains. The Natives are generally,
healthy, strong, swift and witty, which is imputed to the clear and wholesome
Air of the Mountains, the cleanly and moderate Diet of the People and the
hardship to which they are inured from their Childhood. The Ancient Britains
painted their naked Bodies with Pictures of living Creatures, Flowers, Sun,
Moon and Stars, thereby as they imagined to appear terrible to their Enemies,
yet some more civil were clothed, and as a great Ornament, wore Chains of Iron
about their Wastes and Neck, and Rings on their middle Fingers. They wore the
Hair of their Head long, which was naturally curled in many. All other parts
they shaved, only wore long Whiskers on their upper Lip. They had ten or twelve
Wives a piece, who lived in common among their Parents and Brethren; yet the
Children were only accounted his who first married the Mother while she was a
Maid: They were brought up in common among them. They were moderate in their
Diet, as Milk, Roots, and Barks of Trees, and a little thing no bigger than a
Bean, which for a great while took away both Hunger and Thirst; Neither would
they eat Hens, Hares, Geese, nor Fish; yet would often Dine upon Venison and
Fruits. Their usual Drink was made of Barley. They are reported by Plutarch to
have lived very long, many to an hundred and twenty years.

They were Idolatrous Heathens as to their Religion, using Man's Flesh in their
Sacrifices, and adoring a multitude of Idols. Their Priests were called Druids,
who managed their Sacrifices, and likewise acted as Temporal Judges in all
Civil Matters; and it was highly criminal not abide by their Judgment. They
were excused from the Wars, and all contributions. They had a Primate, who
commanded over them in chief. Their Divinity was, That the Soul is immortal,
and passes from one Body to another: which Doctrine they taught not out of
Books, but by word of Mouth. Their Buildings were low mean Cottages, like those
of the Gauls, or Boors of France; yet they fortified several thick Woods with
Rampires and Ditches, which they called Towns. Brass and Iron Rings were the
Coin they used, which were of a certain weight; but afterward they grew more
civil by Traffic, and had both Gold and Silver Money. Their chief Trade was in
Chains, Wreaths, Ivory Boxes, Bitts and Bridles, with some Toys of Amber and
Glass. Neither was their Shipping more considerable, their chief Vessels being
made of light wood, covered over with Leather: Their usual way of Fighting was
in Military Chariots; neither did they engage in great bodies, but had still
fresh men to succeed those who retired, or were weary. Their weapons were
Shields and short Spears, at the lower end whereof was fastened a round Bell of
Brass; with which they terrified their Enemies. Many times they fought under
the Conduct of Valiant Women, who were extraordinary courageous. They managed
their Chariots so dexterously, that running downa steep Hill with all speed,
they could stop them in the middle of their course.

The Principality of Wales produces Mines, and among others, Royal Mines of
Silver in Cardiganshire in the Mountains of Cosmelock, Tallabant, Gadarren,
Bromfloid, Geginnon and Cummerrum. The Romans began to Mine here, as appears by
their Coins found in the Trenches wherein they worked about twenty four fathom
deep, and found plenty of Lead. The Danes and Saxons wrought an hundred farhom
deep, and gained mhch Lead till the Waters drowned their Works. Sir Tho. Smith
discovered Silver in Cosmelock in the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign.
Which design was prosecuted after his Death by Sir Hugh Middleton, Coining the
Silver to his great charge at the Tower of London, as his Predecessor had done.
Next Sir F. Godolphin of Cornwall and Tho. Bushel Esquire undertook it, having
power from King Charles I. to Coin it at Aberruski in that County. Sir Francis
dying and Cosmelock being deserted, Mr. Bushel adventured on the other five
Mountains, and at last these Mines yielded an hundred pound a week, and half so
much more in Lead. The Silver was Coined into Pence, Groats, Shillings and Half
Crowns, and had the Ostrich Feathers, being the Arms of the Princes of Wales,
stamped on them for distinction. They had an ingenious invention to supply the
Miners with fresh Air, which was done by two men's blowing Wind with a pair of
Bellows on the outside of the entrance into a Pipe of Lead, which was daily
lengthened as the Mine grew longer whereby the Candle in the Mine was daily
kept burning, and the Diggers were constantly supplied with a sufficiency of
Breath. But the Civil Wars in 1642. discomposed all the Work. Lead is found in
many places in Wales, but the best in Carnarvanshire. There are plenty of Goats
in Montgomeryshire. As for Manufactures, the British generally valuing
themselves more upon their Gentile Birth and Extraction, are better pleased in
employing their Valor than Labor, and therefore they had but few Commodities,
as Cottons and Frieze, of which King Henry V. when Prince of Wales having a
suit, and being checked by a bold Courtier for wearing the same many weeks
together, I wish, said he, that the Cloth of my Country would last forever.
Then they have Cheese very tender and palatable, the Pedigree whereof was by
one thus merrily derived.

Adam's nawn Cusson was by her Birth ap Curds, ap Milk, ap Cow, ap Grass, ap
Earth. They have likewise Metheglin, first invented by Matthew Glin their own
Countreyman, it is compounded of Milk and Honey, and very wholesome. Pollio
Romulus being an hundred years of age, told Julius Caesar, "That he had
preserved the vigor of his Mind and Body by taking Metheglin inwardly, and
using Oil outwardly. It is like Mead but much stronger, Queen Elizabeth, who by
the Tuders was of Welsh Descent, much loved this her Native Liquor.

The Buildings of Wales, are generally like those of the old Britains, neither
large nor beautiful, the Italian humor of Building not having affected (not to
say infected) the British Nation. About the year 800 Hoell-Dha Prince of Wales
built a Palace for his own Residence of white Hurdles or Wattles, and therefore
called White-House, or White Hall if you please. However there are brave
buildings in Wales, though not Welsh buildings, which the English erected
therein as Bridles to keep the People of that Country in obedience some
Authors derive the name of Wales from Idwallo the Son of Cadwalladar, who with
the small remainder of his British Subjects defended the dangerous places of
this Country against his Enemies, and first was called King of Wales. Neither
was the Conquest of them to be attributed to their want of Valor, since King
Henry II. in a Letter to Emanuel Emperor of Constantinople gives this Testimony
of them, The Welsh Nation is so adventurous that they dare encounter naked with
armed men, ready to spend their Blood for their Country, and pawn their Life
for Praise.

Thus far of Wales in general, I shall now give an account of the most
memorable Persons, Places, Accidents, Rarities and Wonders in every County
thereof, particularly, in Alphabetical Order, (as I have formerly done in the
Counties of England) the names whereof are Anglesey, Brecknock, Cardigan,
Carmarthen, Carnarvan, Denbigh, Flint, Glamorgan, Merioneth, Monmouth,
Montgomery, Pembroke and Radnor, of all which I have made some few Remarks in
the Tract aforementioned, but shall now be more large and copious, not omitting
any thing that I can meet with remarkable. And first of

ANGLESEY called by the Britains Tir Mon or the Land of Mon, in Latin Mona, and
by the English Anglesey or the English Island, being separate from the
Continent, and surrounded on all sides by the Irish Sea, save on the South,
where it is joined by a small and narrow straight of the River Menai, and
almost square, containing twenty Miles from Beumaris to Holy-Head East and
West, and from Llanbaderick North to the Point of Menai South seventeen, in the
whole Circuit about seventy Miles. The Air is generally healthy, and the Soil
seemingly barren, but really fruitful, affording Corn and Cattle sufficient
both for the Natives and their Neighbors, and therefore the Welsh Proverb is,
Mon Mam Cymbry, Anglesey is the Mother of Wales, because when other Countries
fail, this plentifully feeds their Markets, and is said to afford Cormenough to
supply all Wales. This County produces likewise the best Millstones to Grind
it: Also Alum and Coperas, and in diverse places in the low Fields and Champain
Grounds, there are several Trees dug up, black within like Ebony, and are
used by Carvers for inlaying Cupboards. yea Haslenuts are found under ground
with found Kernels in them. It is hard to resolve how they came hither, some
imagine the Romans cut them down as being Coverts for their Enemies. Others
think they fell of themselves, and with their own weight were buried in those
Marshy places, and that the clammy Bituminous substance which is found about
them, keeps them from putrefaction.

The Ancient Inhabitants of this Country were the Ordovices, and this very
Island that ancient and renowned seat of the British Druids, the Conquest
whereof was first attempted by Paulinus Suetonius in the reign of the Tyrant
Nero, who making preparation to Invade the same, the Inhabitants that were
strong and numerous, by the assistance of many Fugitives, raised all the Forces
they were able, and stood ready upon the Shore to resist and hinder his
Landing, their Women running about with their Hair about their Ears, and
Firebrarnds in their hands, in mourning Garments like Furies of Hell, and their
Druids or Priests with Hands and Eyes lifted up to Heaven, uttered many direful
Curses, and Imprecations, and cried for Vengeauce against their Enemies. The
strangeness of the sight so amazed the Roman Soldiers, that they seemed to
offer themselves as a prey to the Swords of the Britains, had not their Captain
suddenly rowzed them out of their surprise, by reminding them of their ancient
Valor which seemed now to be lost, only at the sight of a fearful Flock of
weak Women, and a crew of rude, undisciplined, frantic men: This brisk
reprimand awakened their courage, so that displaying their Eusigns and Marching
toward them, the Britains were instantly defeated, slain, and put to flight,
and the Romans became Masters both of the Field of Battle and the whole Island
also, yet were they not wholly subdued till the Reign of Julius Agricola.

When the Roman Empire in Britain began to decline several Irish, came secretly
over and settled here, and certain sinall Hills and Mounts are yet to be seen,
entrenched about, which are called the Irish-men's Cottages, and another place
named of the Irish-men Hiercy Gwidil, because it is said they here put the
Britains to flight under the conduct of Sivigus. Afterward the Normans ost
infested this Isle, but in the year 1000 King Etheldred set out a Fleet which
scoured the Seas round about it, and wasted the Country in a more hostile
manner than either the Irish or Norwegians. Then Hugh Earl of Chester and Hugh
Earl of Shrewsbury both Normans did grievously afflict Anglesey, at which very
time Magnus the Norwegian arriving here, shot Hugh Earl of Shrewsbury through
with an Arrow, and after he had plundered the Island departed. Next, the English
continually vexed the Inhabitants, making several descents upon them even to the
time of King Edward I. when they were totally subjected to that Crown.

The chief Town Beumaris formerly called Bonover, built by this King Edward I.
(together with a strong Castle) is governed by a Mayor, two Bailiffs, two
Sergeants at Mace, and a Town Clerk. At Llanvais not far from hence, was
formerly a Monastery of Friars Minors, richly endowed by the Kings of England,
where a Daughter of King John, and the Son of a Danish King, with several other
persons of Dignity were Buried that were slain in the Wars between the English
and Welsh.

Guido de Mona, or of Anglesey was Bishop of St. David's, and Lord Treasurer of
England to King Henry IV. though the Parliament moved that no Welshman should
be a State Officer in England. He died 1407. Arthur Bulkley Bishop of Bangor,
though bred Doctor of the Laws, either never read, or else he had forgot the
Chapter against Sacrilege, for he spoiled the Bishopric, and sold the five
Bells of the Cathedral, being so over officious that he would go down to the
Sea to see them shipped away. He was suddenly deprived of his sight, and died
1555. William Glyn D. D. bred in and Master of Queen's College was made Bishop
of Bangor in the second year of Queen Mary, an excellent Scholar being
constant to his own and not cruel to the Professors of the Protestant Religion,
there being no Persecution in his Diocese. He died the first year of Queen
Elizabeth, whose Brother Jeffery Dr. of Laws, Built and Endowed a Free School
at Bangor.

Madoc Son to Owen Gwineth Brother to David Prince of North Wales was born
probably at Aberfrow in this County, then the principal Palace of their Royal
Residence, who upon the Civil Dissentions in his own Country in 1170
adventured to Sea, and leaving Ireland on the North came to a Land unknown,
where he saw many wonderful things, this by Dr. Howel, and Mr. Humfry Lloyd is
judged to be the main Continent of America, being confirmed therein as well by
the saying of Montezuma Emperor of Mexico, who declared his Progenitors were
strangers as well as the rest of the Mexicans, as by the use of diverse Welsh
words among them, as Cape de Breton, Norwinberg, Penguin, a name they give to a
bird with a White Head. The story adds, that Madock left several of his People
there, and coming home returned back with ten Sail full of Welshmen who
continued there, and Peopled the Country. Which relation if true, redounds much
to the Glory of Madoc, who discovered this vast Region near three hundred years
before the renowned Columbus first Sailed thither. This Isle had anciently
three hundred sixty three Villages therein, and is still well Peopled, having
two Market Towns, seventy four Parish Churches, and is divided into six
Hundreds. It gives the Title of Earl to James L. Annesly.

BRECKNOCK-SHIRE, so called say the Welsh, from Brechanius the Father of an
Holy offspring, whose twenty four Daughters were Saints. It has Radnorshire on
the North, Caermarthen West, Glamorgan South, and Hereford and Monmouthshire
East, in breadth twenty eight, and in length twenty Miles. It is full of Hills,
and difficult in Traveling. The Mountains of Talgar and Ewias on the East seem
to defend it from the excessive heat of the Sun, which makes an wholesome and
temperate Air, from whence likewise rise many curious Springs that render the
Valleys fruitful both in Corn and Grass, and thereby make amends for their own
barrenness. The Silures were the ancient Inhabitants of this County, who
valiantly opposed the Roman servitude, and were first subdued by Julius
Frontinus, who found it more difficult to encounter with the Hills, Streights
and Mountains than with the People, whereof one Mountain in the South is of
such an height and occult quality that faith Mr. Speed, I should blush to
relate it, had I not the Aldermen and Bailiffs of the Town of Brecknock for my
Vouchers, who assured me, that from this Hill called Mounch-denny they had
oft-times cast down their Hats, Cloaks and Staves, which yet would never fall
to the bottom, but were with the Air and Wind still returned back and blown up
again, neither will any thing but a stone or hard Metal fall from thence: and
the Clouds are often seen lower than the top of it. There is likewise Cadier
Arthur, or Arthur's Chair, a Hill so called, on the South side of this Country,
the top thereof somewhat resembling the form of a Chair, proportionate to the
dimensions which the Welsh imagine that great and mighty Person to be of. Upon
the top thereof rises a Spring as deep as a Well, four square, having no
streams issuing from it, and yet there are plenty of Trouts to be found
therein. They also told him, that when the Mere Lynsavathan two Miles from
Brecknock has its frozen Ice first broken, it yields a dreadful Noise like
Thunder. And it is reported that where this Mere now spreads its Waters,
there formerly stood a fair City which was swallowed up by an Earthquake, and
it seems probable, both because all the Highways of this County lead thither.
And likewise the Learned Camden judges it might be the City Loventrium, which
Ptolomy places in these parts, and Mr. Camden could not discover, and
therefore likely to be Drowned in this Pool, which the River Levenny running
hard by farther confirms, the Waters whereof run through this Mere without
mixing with them, as appears by the color, and breadth of the Stream which is
the same through the whole length of the Pool. This Shire had formerly two
Towns called Hay and Bealt pleasantly situated, both which in the Rebellion of
Owen Glendour were unwalled, depopulated and burnt, under whose ruins many
Roman Coins are found, and therefore thought to be two of their Garrisons.
Bealt was formerly possessed by Aurelius Ambrosius and Vortigern, and afterward
Leoline the last Prince of the Britains was therein betrayed and slain.

Brecknock still retains some beauty in its Building, it had formerly three
Gates for entrance, and ten Towers for defense, with a very since Castle. The
Town is seated on two Rivers, and is governed by two Bailiffs, fifteen
Aldermen, two Chamberlains, two Constables, a Town Clerk, and two Sergeants.

This County boasts of Canock and Cadock Sons, and Keyne Daughter to King
Brechanius aforementioned, who were all three Saints, (though he had twenty
four Daughters and all Saints also, who all died young, so that Keyne only
survived) who flourished about 492. of whom St. Cadock is said to be a Martyr,
and his name highly venerated by the People of South Wales. St. Cli^tank was
King of Brecknock it happened that a Noble Virgin declared, That she would
never Marry any Man but him, who was a zealous Christian, whereupon a Pagan
Soldier resolving to disappoint her, killed this King, who left behind him the
reputation of a Saint. Giles de Bruise Bishop of Hereford was born in this
County, and in the Barons Wars sided with the Nobility against King John, upon
which he was banished, but after restored to the King's Favor. He was also
Lord of Brecknock, which honor with his paternal Inheritance he left to his
Brother Reginald, who Married the Daughter of Leoline Prince of Wases. His
Effigies on his Tomb in Hereford Church holds a Steeple in his hand, whence
it is judged that he built the Belfree of that Cathedral. He died 1215.

Nesta Daughter to Griffin Prince of Wales, and Wife to Bernard of New-march a
Noble Norman, and Lord by Conquest of this County, was debauched by a young
Gentleman. Mahel her Son having got this Gallant into his hands, used him very
severely, at which Nesta being enraged came into open Court, and on her Oath
before King Henry II. publicly deposed that Mahel was none of the Lord
New-marches Son, but begotten on her in Adultery. This if true declared her
dishonesty, if false her perjury, but whether true or false her matchless
impudence. Hereby she disinherited Mahel, and settled a vast Estate on Sybyl her
only Daughter, Married afterward to Milo Earl of Hereford.

The Welsh are reproached by the English with the Byword of Croggen, Croggen,
the original whereof was in the Reign of King Henry II. the Welsh then
obtaining a memorable advantage at Croggen-Castle under the Conduct of their
Valiant Prince Owen, in defense of North Wales and their Countries Liberty,
with extreme danger to King Henry's own Person, his Standard Royal being
Cowardly abandonded, and the King reported to be slain. The Standard Bearer
Henry de Essex for this ignominious action was afterward challenged by Robert
Monford his near Kinsman to a combat, and In single Battle within Lists at
Reading was vanquished by him, whereupon Essex was shorn a Monk and put into a
Monastery (according to the custom of those times) where he ended his days. The
English afterward used this word Groggen as a Provocative to revenge, when they
had the Welsh at an advantage, and it is still without cause uttered in
disgrace of the Welsh, though originally it was expressive of their honor.

The County of Brecknock was formerly fortified with nine Castles. It is
divided into six Hundreds, has three Market Towns, Brecknock, Bealt and Hay,
and fifty two Parish Churches. And gives the Title of Earl to James Lord
Butler, who is also Duke of Ormond in Ireland.

CARDIGAN-SHIRE is parted on the North from Merioneth-shire by the River Dovi,
from Brecknock-shire by the River Tory, on the South from Carmarthen and
Pembroke-shire by the River Tiry, from Montgomery-shire East by the Plinillimon
Hills, and on the West is wholly washed by the Irish Sea. The ancient Inhabitats
were the Dinietae who likewise possessed Carmarthen and Pembroke-shire, and in
their struglings much depended on the Valor of their Warlike Prince Cataractus
beforementioned, from whose name some will have this County called Cardigan,
but was after subdued and the Prince being taken and carried to Rome, after he
had thoroughly viewed the magnificence of that City, I cannot but wonder, said
he, that you Romans having such stately buildings of your own should covet our
poor Cottages. After the Norman Invasion William Rufus assailed this Country,
as well to gain so fair a Possession, as to secure those Seas from any Invasion
against him, and therefore though it was the most remote from England, yet
being nearer to the Sea, which afforded the English a more convenient passage
who were potent in Shipping, it was soonest reduced to the English Dominion.
Henry I. bestowed the whole County entirely upon William de Clare^. The Air is
open and sharp, for besides the great and high Mountain of Plinillimon it has
a continued range of lesser Hills. The Valleys are rich in Pasture and Corn,
and well Watered with Pools and Springs. In the River Tivy Beavers were
formerly found, a Creature living both by Land and Water, having the two fore
feet like a Dog wherewith he runs on the Land, and the two hinder like a Goose
with which he Swims, his broad Tail ferving for a Rudder, but now none are
found, the Salmon seeming to succeed, who coming out of the Sea into fresh
Waters, and meeting with some downright Water-falls in this River, he bends
himself backward, and putting his Tail in his Mouth gives a Spring up those
alcents, which are called the Salmons leap, many of which are caught in this
River.

Cardigan is the Shire Town, and was Fortified by Gilbert de Clare with a Wall
and a strong Castle, the ruins of which remain to this day. Land Badern the
Great was formerly an Episcopal Seat, till the Citizens cruelly flew their
Bishop, after which both City and Bishopric dwindled to nothing, from whence
rose that Welsh Proverb, Ni difanco y Beriglaver, that is, Vilify not thy
Parish Priest. Llandevibrevi was also famous, being built by David Bishop of
Mereria, where in a Synod holden by him; he resuted the Pelagian Heresy then
sprung up in Britain, both by the Holy Scriptures, and by Miracle, for it is
reported that while he was Preaching, the Earth suddenly rose up a great height
under his Feet, that the People might the more conveniently hear his Doctrine.
The Welsh use a word, Talaeth, Talaeth, that is, Fine, Fine, which was thus
occasioned, when Roderick divided Wales betwixt his three Sons, he ordered that
each of them should wear upon his Bonnet or Helmet a Coronet of Gold set with
Jewels, called in British Talaeth, and they from thence were named Ytritrwysoc
Talaelteioc, The three Crowned Princes. It is now applied to the uppermost part
of the head attire in Children. Yea the English call the top of she Cap or Hat
the Crown. They have a Proverb, Bu Arthur and tra fu; that is, Arthur was not
but whilst he was. It is honorable for old men if they can say, we have been
brave Fellows. They have another Proverb, Ne Thorres Arthur Nawd gwraig, that
is, King Arthur did never violate the Refuge of a Woman. For that King was the
mirror of Knighthood. By the Woman's Refuge we may understand her Tongue, and
no Valiant man will revenge her words with his blews.

John Lewis Esquire, a Justice of Peace at Glaskerrigg near Aberystwith in this
County, in the year 1656. by several Letters to Mr. B. a late worthy Divine
deceased, gives an account of several strange Apparitions in Caermarthen,
Pembrokeshire and this County about that time, confirmed by diverse Persons of
good Quality and Reputation, the substance whereof are as follows. A Man and
his Family being all in Bed, he being awake about midnight perceived a Light
entering the little Room where he lay, and about a dozen in the shapes of Men,
and two or three Women with small Children in their Arms following, they seemed
to Dance, and the Chamber appeared much wider and lighter than formerly. They
seemed to Eat Bread and Cheese all about a kind of a Tick upon the Ground, they
offered him some, and would smile upon him, he heard no voice, but calling once
upon God to bless him, he heard a Whispering Voice in Welsh bidding him hold
his peace. They continued there about four hours, all which time he endeavored
to awake his Wife but could not. Afterward they went into another room and
having danced a while departed, he then arose, and though the room was very
small yet he could neither find the Door, nor the way to Bed again until crying
out his Wife and Family awaked. He living within two Miles of Justice Lewis he
sent for him, being a poor honest Husbandman, and of good report, and made him
believe he would put him to his Oath about the truth of this Relation, who was
very ready to take it.

This Gentleman adds a second account of the strange and usual appearance of
Lights (called in Welsh) Canhwyllan Cyrth, Corpse or Deadmens Candles, which are
so ordinary in these Counties, that scarce any dye, either young or old, but
this is seen before death, and often observed to part from the very bodies of
the Persons all along the way to the place of Burial, and infallibly death will
ensue. There is that evidence for these Candles, that few or none of any age
but have seen them, and will depose it. A while since (says this Gentleman)
some of my Family saw two Candles, one less than the other passing the Church
way under my house, my Wife was then big with Child, and it caused much
apprehension both in us and her, but just a week after, her self came first to
me, as something joyed that the danger might be over, with the news that an old
Man and a Child of the Neighborhood were carried that way to be Buried.

Mr. John Davis a Minister in this County confirms the same Relations with the
addition of the following Circumstances and Instances. We call them says he,
Corpse Candles, not that we see any thing besides the light, but yet it
resembles a material Candlelight as much as Eggs do Eggs, only they sometimes
appear and instantly disappear: for if one comes near them, or on the way
against them, unto him they vanish, but presently appear behind him and hold on
their course. If it be a little Candle pale and bluish, then follows the Corpse
either of an Abortive or some Infant. If a big one, then the Corpse of some one
come to age. If two, three or more, great and little are seen together, then so
many and such Corpse will follow together. If two Candles come from diverse
places and be seen to meet, the Corpse will do the like. If any of these Candles
seem to turn out of the way or path that leads to the Church, the following
Corpse will be found to turn in the same place, for the avoiding of some dirty
lane, plash, etc. Now for the particulars. At Lanylar late at night, some of
the people saw one of these Candles hovering up and down along the Rivers bank
which they continued to view till they were weary, and at last left it so, and
went to Bed. A few weeks after came a proper young Woman from Montgomeryshire,
to see her Friends who dwelt on the other side of that River Istwyth, and
thought to ford the River at that very place where the Light was seen, but
being dissuaded by some standers by (who probably had seen the Light) not to
venture on the Water which was high by a sudden Flood, she walked up and down
the Rivers Bank as the Light had done, waiting for the falling of the Water,
which at last she went into, but too soon for her, for she was therein drowned.

Of late, (says the same Author) my Sexton's Wife, an aged understanding
Woman, saw from her Bed a little bluish Candle upon her Table's end, two or
three days after comes in a Fellow inquiring for her Husband, and taking
something from under his Cloak, claps it down directly upon the Table's end
where she had seen the Candle, and what was it but a dead born Child. Another
time the same Woman saw such another Candle upon the other end of that very
Table, within few days after a weak Child, by my self newly Christened, was
brought into the Sexton's House, where it presently died. And when the Sexton's
Wife who was then abroad came home, she found the Woman shrouding of the Child
on that other end of the Table where she had seen the Candle. On a time my self
and a Kinsman coming from our School in England, and being three or four hours
benighted e're we could reach home, we met with such a Candle, which coming
from an house we well knew held its course the highway to the Church, shortly
after the eldest Son in that House deceased, and was brought the same way. My
Self and Wife in an Evening saw such a Candle coming to the Church from her
Midwife's house, and within a Month she her self did follow. Mrs. Catherine
Wyat an eminent Woman in the Town of Tenby, being in an Evening in her
Bedchamber saw two little Lights just upon her Belly which she endeavored to
strike off but could not, within a while they vanished of themselves. Not long
after she was delivered of two Still-born Children. A Neighbor's Wife of mine
being great with Child, and coming in at her own door met two Candles, a little
and a big one, and within a while after falling in labor she and her Child
both died. Some years ago one Jane Wyat my Wive's Sister, being Nurse to
Baronet Rudds three eldest Children, and his Lady being dead, his Housekeeper
going late into a Chamber where the Maid Servants lay, saw five of these Lights
together: a while after that Chamber being newly plaistred, a great Grate of
Coal Fire was kindled therein to hasten the drying of it. At night five of the
Maid Servants went there to Bed as they were wont, and in the morning were all
found dead and suffocated with the steem of the new tempered Lime and Coal.
This was at Llangathen in Carmarthenshire.

About the same time, I my self, says Mr. Davis, coming home from Cardigan,
where I had been enjoined to Preach the Sessions Sermon, about Evening (though
it was as light as noon) and I had nine long miles to ride, there seemed twice
or thrice from behind me, on my right side, and between my shoulders and hat to
fly a little whitish thing about the bigness of a Walnut, which appeared once
in seventy or eighty paces. At first I took no notice of it, thinking it to be
only the glimpsing of the little Ruff which I then wore, but by degrees it grew
redder, even like fire both for light and color. At length I turned my Horse
twice to see from whence it came, but could see nothing, yet as I went on it
flashed again as before, till I came to a Village called Laureslid, and coming
to the Door where I designed to Lodge the fire did flash again upon or very
near the threshold of the house, and there I think it staid. At that very
Sessions one John William Lloyd a Gentleman who dwelt, and whose Son now dwells
within a mile of Glasterigg fell fick, and coming home was able to ride no
farther than this House where I left my Fire to entertain him, and there he
lighted, lodged, and died within four days after. Some Candles have been seen
come to my Church within these three weeks, and the Corpse not long after. Thus
far of Candles.

Another kind of Apparition we have, which we usually call Tanwee, or Tanwed,
because it seems to be fiery. We judge it to be in the lower Region of the Air,
straight and long, and shoots directly and level, but far more slowly than a
falling star, as we call it, for it often passes over three or four miles of
ground, or more it may be, for no man sees the rise or beginning of it. When it
falls to ground it sparkleth and lightens all about. The Freeholders or
Landlords upon whose ground it falls, will certainly dye in a short time after,
and we scarce bury any such here with us, be he but the Owner of an House or
Garden, but some of the Neighborhood have seen this fire fall upon some part
of his House or Lands. Two of these I have seen my self, but the interposition
of the grounds hindered that I could not observe where they fell, but where I
guest they fell there died in one place an aged Gentleman, and in the other a
Freeholder.

To come nearer home (says Mr. Davis) my Mother's first Husband walking about
his grounds saw one of the Darts or Piles aloft, which fell down hard by him,
shone far, and sparkled round about his body, he took it for a warning piece,
made his Will, and having lived in good health, some four or five months after
died. A little before the decease of my own Father aged 96. a Son in Law of his
who dwelt two Miles off, but upon higher ground, saw such another fall in a
Close behind the Old Man's House, which gave such a light, that by it he did
clearly see the house, the Hedges and the Oaks in the Wood adjoining. As to the
causes of these strange Omens, whether they proceed from Good or Evil Angels or
Spirits, it must be left to the disquisitions of the Learned, who it may be
after all will be puzzled to give a satisfactory account thereof.

In this County also, in the Silver and Leaden Mines, nothing is more ordinary
than that some Subterranean Spirits called Knockers (where a good Vein is) are
often heard and seen in the shape of men little Statured, about half a yard
long. And living men's Ghosts are commonly seen in these parts, unawares to the
Party. We hear that a Man's Daughter fetching Water at a Well, had a blow given
her, and a Boy coming toward her she charged him with the blow, who denied he
was so near, but bid her look upon her Father that stood not far off, and with
that she could see her Father fling a Stone at her, which passed with a mighty
violence by her Face, and the Stone was found with prints of Fingers in it, but
no such thing as the Father was there, neither was he at home the night before.

The County of Cardigan is divided into five Hundreds, wherein are four Market
Towns, Aberstwyth, Cardigan, Llanbeder, and Tre^aron: With sixty four Parish
Churches, and gives the Title of Earl to Robert L. Brudenel.

CARMARTHEN-SHIRE so called from the chief Town therein, has Brecknock and
Glamorgan-shires on the East, Cardigan on the North, Pembroke on the West, and
on the South the Severn Sea. In length thirty five, breadth twenty, and
circumference an hundred and two Miles. It is not so Hilly as others in Wales,
and therefore affords plenty of Corn, Cattle, Grass, Wood, Pitcoal, Fowl and
Fish, especially Salmon which is very great and plentiful. It was anciently
possessed by the Silures, and subdued to the Roman yoke by Julius Frontinus who
long strugled to gain it, being reckoned the strongest part of South Wales. At
Kilmanloid sometime since there was found an Earthen Pot filled with Roman
Coins of course Silver, which stamped with the Image of several Emperors and
Emperesses, makes it probable that some of their Legions were quartered in
these Parts. Carmarthen the Principal Town is pleasantly seated near the River
Tovy, which runs through the midst of the Shire, and falls South into the Sea,
where was formerly a good Haven for Ships, but now so choked up with sands
that only small Vessels can come up to the Bridge, which is built of Free
Stone, and over it on an hanging Rock a large Castle from whose Stone-Wall
another mingled with Brick encompassed the whole Town, being in circuit 1400
paces. Upon the entrance of the Normans this Town was reduced to their
obedience, and suffered much damage, but was after the Chancery or Exchequer of
the English Princes for all South Wales. It is governed by a Mayor, two
Sheriffs, sixteen Burgesses all in Scarlet, a Sword Bearer, a Townclark, and
two Sergeants with Maces.

East from this Town on an high Hill are the ruins of Carreg-Castle, under
which are many deep, spacious Vaults and Caves, wherein it is thought the poor
Natives, unable to resist, secured themselves from the fury of the Wars.
Giraldus reports that there is a Well or Fountain in this place which
conformable to the Sea, Ebbs and Flows tw^^e in twenty four hours.

The People of this County do much glory in their Ambrosius Merlin, who they
say was born in Carmarthen, the Son of a bad Angel or Incubus, the Britains
great Apollo, whom Geffery ap Arthur compares with the Southsaying Seers, yea
with the true Prophets themselves, yet it is thought he was a mere Seducer and
Fantastical Wizard, and though Alanus has by his Comments endeavored to
disclose the dark and hidden Prophecies wherewith his Book is filled, yet the
reading thereof was by the Council of Trent, and afterward by Queen Elizabeth
deservedly prohibited as vain, and not worth minding. As to his birth Humfry
Lloyd a Welsh Writer affirms, that his Mother before Marriage was a Noble
Virgin, and that his Father for his great knowledge in the Mathematics and
other abstruse Learning, was in those ignorant times reputed by the Common
People to be a Conjurer, and his Son Merlin to be begotten by an Evil Spirit or
Male Devil, who in the likeness of Men are said to have the Carnal use of
Women. Many wonderful things are attributed to Merlin, as that by his
assistance Aurelius Ambrosius erected that stupendous Monument near Salisbury
called Stonehenge, those vast Stones being brought by Magic Art from Africa
into Ireland, and from thence to this Plain through the Air. That Vter
Pendragon the Brother and Successor of Ambrosius falling in love with the Duke
of Cornwall's Wife, Merlin by his Necromantick skill made Vter appear to her in
the exact form and shape of her Husband Duke Gorlois, by which means he enjoyed
this fair Lady, on whom he begot the renowned King Arthur. At the birth of this
Vter, it is reported, a Comet appeared somewhat like the Head of a Dragon,
whereupon Merlin declared that it presignified the Birth of Vter then new born,
and from thence he was called Vter Pendragon. Others to his honor relate that
many of his Predictions were fulfilled, as that which runs thus, Since Virgin
gifts to Maids he gave,
Amongst blessed Saints God will him save.


This is interpreted to be meant of King John, who built several Monasteries
for Nuns in diverse parts of the Kingdom. Another says, The sixth shall
overthrow the Walls of Ireland, and reduce their Countries into a Kingdom. This
was thought to be accomplished under King James VI. of Scotland, and I. of
England, who dismantled their Fortresses and Castles, which were the Irish
Walls, and Courts of Justice were set up through all the Land. Though the Welsh
Proverb contradicts this foreknowledge which says, Namyn Dduw nid oes Dewin,
that is, Besides God there is no Diviner.

Robert Ferrar Bishop of St. David's was made a Martyr in this County. He was
preferred by the Duke of Somerset Lord Protector in the Reign of King Edward VI.
a man not unlearned but somewhat indiscreet, or rather uncomplying, so that he
may be said, with St. Lawrence, to be broyled on both sides, being persecuted
both by Protestants and Papists. Some conceived that his Patron's fall was his
greatest guilt and encouraged his Enemies against him. In the Reign of Q. Mary
he was sent for, and examined about his Faith by Gardener Bishop of Winchester,
who told him that the Queen and Parliament had altered Religion, and therefore
required him to embrace the same. To which he answered, That he had taken an
Oath never to consent or agree that the Bishop of Rome should have any
Jurisdiction in this Realm. At which the Bishop of Winchester called him Knave
and Forward Fellow, and so returned him to Prison again. He was afterward
examined before Henry Morgan pretended Bishop of St. David's, who requiring him
to subscribe to several Articles, he absolutely refused it or to recent any
thing, whereupon the sentence of degradation was read against him, and he was
delivered to the Secular Power, by whom he was carried to Carmarthen to be
burnt. A while before his Execution there came one to visit him who much
lamented the painfulness of his death, to whom Bishop Ferrar answered, If you
see me once stir or move in the pains of my burning, then never give any credit
to the truth of the doctrine which I have formerly taught. And he was as good
as his word, standing so patiently in the midst of the Flames that he never
moved, holding up the stumps of his Arms, till one with a Halbert dashed him on
the head, whereby he fell down and quietly resigned up his Spirit to God.

Sir Rice ap Thomas, little less than a Prince and called the Flower of the
Britains, was born in this Shire. When the Earl of Richmond (afterward King
Henry VII.) landed at Milford Haven with contemptible Forces, this Sir Rice
with a considerable accession of choice Soldiers joined and marched with him
to Bosworth Field where he behaved himself with much Courage; and in reward of
his good service was made Knight of the Garter. He rebuilt Emeline in this
County and called it New Castle, being one of his Principal Seats, and one of
the latest Castles in Wales. In the fourth of King Henry VIII he conducted 500
Horse to the Siege of Theroene in France.

Walter Devereux created Earl of Essex by Q. Elizabeth, was born in the Town of
Carmarthen. Being a Martial Man he Articled with the Q. to maintain such a
number of Soldiers at his own cost in Ireland and to have the fair Territory
of Clandebuy in the Province of Vlster for the Conquering thereof. To maintain
this Army he sold his fine Inheritance in Essex. Over he goes into Ireland with
a noble Company of Kindred, Friends and Supernumerary Volunteers above the
proportion of Soldiers agreed on. Sir William Fitz William's Lord Deputy of
Ireland doubting he should be Eclipsed by this great Earl, solicites the Q. to
maintain him in the full power of his Place. Hereupon it was ordered that the
Earl should have his Commission from this Lord Deputy, which with much
importunity and long attendance he hardly obtained, and that with no higher
Title than Governor of Vlster. After many attempts not very successfully made
in Vlster, he was ordered to march to the South of Ireland, where he spent much
time to little purpose. From Munster he was sent back to Vlster, where he was
forbidden to make use of the Victory he had gotten, and soon after his
Commission was Vacated, and he reduced to be Governor of 300 men. He received
all these affronts with undaunted constancy. Pay days in Ireland came very
quick, Money out of England very slow, his noble Associates began to withdraw,
common men to mutiny, and himself was soon after recalled home. He was
afterward sent back with the Title of Earl Marshal of Ireland, where he fell
into a strange Flux, not without suspicion of Poison, and died 1576. of his Age
36. His Estate much impaired, descended to his Son Robert, his body was brought
over and buried in Carmarthen. His Father and Grandfather died about the same
age, to which his Son Robert never attained, being beheaded by Q. Elizabeth on
the Tower Green, on Ashwednesday, Feb. 25. 1600.

Carmarthen-shire has 28 Rivers and Rivulets, is divided into six Hundreds,
has six Market Towns, 87 Parish Churches, and had formerly nine Castles, and
gives the Title of Marquess to the Lord Osborn eldest Son to the D. of Leeds.

CARNARVAN-SHIRE has Merioneth on the South, Anglesey divided by the River
Menai on the North, Denbigh-shire on the East, and the Irish Sea on the West,
from North to South 40, from East to West 20, and in compass 110 miles. The Air
is sharp and piercing by reason of the high Mountains, which may be properly
termed the British Alps (for steepness and cragginess not much unlike those
that divide France from Italy) all tow ring into the Air, and some far higher
than the rest called Snowdon Hills, or Snowy Mountains, being all the year
round crusted over with Snow though liable to the Sun and Wind. This made them
a secure refuge to the Britains against their Enemies, no Army though never so
potent, nor any Traveller never so lightly clothed being able to find a passage
among so many rough and hard Rocks, so many Pools, Vales and Sloughs, as are to
be encountered with in the middle of this County. Yet it is sufficiently
fruitful, for the Mountains are so rank with Grass that it is become a Proverb
among them, Craig Eriry, or Snowdon will yield sufficient Pasture for all the
Cattle of Wales put together. And it is certain that there are Ponds and
Standing Waters upon the tops of them, though generally covered with Snow, and
if a man sets his foot any where upon the top of them, he shall perceive the
Earth to move at a considerable distance from him. Penmen-maur, or the great
stony head is an exceeding high and steep Rock or Hill in this County, which
hanging over the Sea, when it is Flood affords a very narrow Way for
Passengers, huge Stones hanging over head as if ready to fall upon them, and
the Tempestuous Ocean lying under of a very great depth. But after the passing
this, and Penmen-bidam, the less stony head, there is a great open Plain
reaching as far as Aber-Conway in which River are found a sort of shell fish,
conceived as they say by the Heavenly Dew, which are thought to bring forth
Pearl, formerly much valued.

The ancient Inhabitants of this County were the Ordovices who had a City which
the Emperor Antovinus calls Segontium, the ruins whereof are still visible hard
by a River called to this day Sevont, and near a little Church Consecrated to
the Memory of St. Publicius. Some Authors name it Caer Custenith or the City of
Constantine saying that in 1283. the body of Constantius was found here, which
K. Edw. I. caused to be sumptuously buried in the Church of the new City, that
he raised out of the ruins of the old, and called Carnarvan, which now gives a
name to the whole Shire. This Town has a fine Prospect toward the Sea, and was
encompassed with the Walls of the Castle. The Government was formerly
administered by the Covernour of the Castle, who was always Mayor by Patent,
assisted by one Alderman, two Bailiffs, two Sergeants at Mace and a Town Clerk.
The Townsmen much glory that K. Edw. II. was born in a Tower of their Castle
called Eagle Tower, and Surnamed Carnarvan, being the first Prince of Wales of
the English Race.

The Welsh report that the Corpse of 20000 Saints are interred in a small Island
called Berdsey lying within a Mile of the South Promontory of this County. It
is I confess more easy to find Graves there for so many Saints, than Saints
for so many Graves.

Bangor is a Bishops See of ancient standing, but by whom founded is not yet
known, the Cathedral is dedicated to the Memory of St. Daniel who was Bishop
here about the year 516. It is now but a small Town, yet was formerly so large
that the Welsh called it Banchor Vaur or great Bangor, which Hugh Earl of
Chester fortified with a Castle, long since so thoroughly demolished that the
very ruins are now invisible upon the severest search. This Diocese contains
in it the whole County of Carnarvan and Anglesey, and part of Denbigh,
Merioneth, and Montgomery-shires, and in them 107 Parish Churches, and three
Arch-Deaconries. The ancient Cathedral was defaced and set on fire by Owen
Glendour and his Associates, who had a design to have destroyed all the
Churches in Wales whose People submitted to the King of England, but was
afterward repaired by one Henry Dean Bishop thereof in the Reign of King Henry
VII. yet has scarce recovered the resemblance of its pristine dignity.

There was formerly a Town called by the Roman's Canonium near the River
Conway, from whence it took its name, which is now utterly extinct, only there
is a poor remembrance of it in the new name of a mean Village standing in the
rubbish thereof called Caer-hean, that is, The ancient City. Out of the ruins
thereof King Edward I. built a new Town at the River's Mouth called
Aber-Conwey, that is the Mouth of Conwey, it was formerly fortified by Hugh E.
of Chester with strong Walls and a Castle, and seems rather a City than a Town
were it but more populous. Newin a small Market Town is famous for a great
Triumph made there by the Nobility of England in 1284. in memory of the
renowned K. Arthur, after the subduing of Wales by K. Edward I. Over against
Conwey where it runs into the Sea, sometimes stood an ancient City named
Diganway, which many years since was consumed and utterly destroyed by
Lightning. It is reported there is a Fish in the Pool Linperis called Torcoch
with a red Belly, no where else to be found. And that on the High Mountains
there are two Mears or Ponds, in one of which are store of Fish that have only
one Eye, and in the other a floating Island, which when trod on moves a great
way off, whereby the Welsh are said to have often escaped their Enemies.

John William's was born at Aber-Conwey, bred Fellow of St. John's College in
Cambridge, was preferred to be Dean of Worcester, Bishop of Lincoln, Lord Keeper
of the Great Seal, and at last Archbishop of York. He died March 25. 1649.
Richard Vaughan was born at Nuffrin, bred at St. John's College in Oxford,
became successively Bishop of Bangor, Chester, and London, a very corpulent man
but spiritually minded, an excellent Preacher and Pious Liver, a pleasant man
in Discourse, especially at his Table, using frequently this expression, At
Meals be glad, f^^ sin be sad. And indeed he was a very mortified man, and
zealous in Religion. He died March 30. 1607. Henry Rowlands bred in Oxford was
Consecrated Bishop of Bangor Nov. 12. 1598. he bought four new Bells for the
Tower of St. Asaph, whereof the biggest cost an 100 pound. He also gave to
Jesus College in Oxford, a revenue for maintenance of two Fellows. He died 1615.

The County of Carnarvan has five Market Towns, Aber-conwey, Bangor,
Carnarvan, Newin and Pullhely, and 68 Parish Churches. It gives the Title of
Earl to Charles Lord Dormer.

DENBIGH-SHIRE bath Carnarvan and Merioneth-shire on the West, part of
Flint-shire and the Sea on the North, Cheshire and Shropshire on the East, and
Montgomery-shire on the South. It is generally Mountainous, Cold and Barren:
Yet not without some fruitful Valleys, by the industry of the Husbandmen, who
may be said to fetch their Bread out of the Fire, by cutting up Turfs, which
being burnt in great heaps, the ashes spread on these hungry grounds, cause
them to bring forth a kind of Rye in very great plenty. The ancient Inhabitants
were the Ordovices, as the Romans named them, who being armed with want and
cold, were made bold against the force of their Enemies, and continued longest
free both from the Roman and English Dominion. This Shire is 31 Miles long, and
17 broad, and in circuit 114. The Mountains abound with Oxen, Sheep and Goats.
The middle of it has a Valley 17 miles long and five broad, lying open to the
Sea, encompassed on all other sides by Hills, among which the hi^hest is
Moilleally Hill, on the top whereof is a Fort ^^d Warlike Trench and a spring
of clear Water. From these Mountains the River Cluyd rises and runs into the
Valley in the Parish of Llan-sanan in the side of a stony Hill, there are 24
seats cut out of the main Rock, some bigger than others, where youth come to
tend their Cattle and make their sports, which to this day is called Arthur's
round Table. After the beheading of David brother to Luellin the last P. of
Wales for High Treason, K. Ed. I. bestowed the Town of Denbigh upon Hugh Lacy
E. of Lincoln, who fortified it with a strong Wall, a fair Castle, and several
high Towers, but had not fully finished the Work before his only Son was
drowned in a Well therein, which caused the sorrowful Father to leave it off,
and proceed no farther. This Town is reckoned the most beautiful in all
North Wales, and this is remarkable that in 1575. a great Earthquake which much
terrified the People and damaged the Cities of York, Worcester, Gloucester,
Bristol, Hereford and the parts adjacent, and caused the Bell in the Shire Hall
of Denbigh to Toll twice with shaking of the Earth, yet no farther mischief
happened. This Town is Governed by two Aldermen, two Bailiffs, 25 Burgesses, a
Recorder, a Town Clerk, and two Sergeants at Mace.

Wrexham in this County is much admired for the Church, which is a fair and
spacious structure, having a stately Tower or Steeple without, and a fine Organ
within it, being built according to the most exact Rules of Architecture. Holt
Castle in this County was formerly in the possession of William Lord Stanley,
whose ready Money and Plate therein, besides Jewels and Rich Housholdstuff,
amounted to four thousand Marks, got by the plunder of Bosworth Field where
King Richard III. was slain, but this Lord upon discontent afterward conspiring
against King Henry VII. was beheaded for High Treason, and it was all
confiscated to the King's Exchequer.

Leoline ap Lleuellin was born in this Shire, and made Bishop of St. Asaph by
King Edward I. At his death he left a great Estate, besides Plate, rich Vests,
and Books to the Canons of that Church and his Chaplains, dying in 1313.
Godfrey Goodman was born of wealthy Parents in this County, and afterward
Bishop of Gloucester, yet was no friend to the Reformation constantly
complaining of the first Reformers, amongst whom he noted Bishop Ridley as a
very odd man. One present, My Lord, says he, Ridley was a very odd manindeed,
for all the Popish Party in England could not match him, with his equal in
Learning and Religion. He died a Roman Catholic and left most of his Estate to
pious uses. His Uncle Gabriel Goodman was Dean of Westminster for 40 years, and
the Bible was translated into Welsh at his cost. He founded a School and an
Almshouse for 12 poor People at Ruthen with a competent Salary. He purchased a
fair house at Cheswick in Middlesex wherewith his own hands he planted a fair
row of Elmes for a retiring place to the Masters and Scholars of Westminster
School. He employed Mr. Camden to make an actual Survey of all England at his
expense. He died 1601. and was buried in Westminster Abbey. Sir Hugh Middleton
was born at Denbigh and bred in London. This is that worthy Knight who fetched
into London the New River Water at his own cost more than 24 Miles, encountering
all the way with an Army of oppositions, grapling with Hills, struggling with
Rocks, and fighting with Forests, till in defiance of difficulties he had
brought his Project to perfection. Robert Earl of Leicester in the reign of Q.
Elizabeth, by his bounty advanced the building of a new Church in Denbigh.

Denbigh. In 1660. a very great Well in Chick-Town was dried up. Richard Clough
born at Denbigh, was a Chorister at Chester, whence he removed to London, where
he was Apprentice to, and after Partner with Sir Tho. Gresham: Having lived
some time at Antwerp, he traveled to Jerusalem, where he was made Knight of
the Holy Sepulcher: Some affirm that he disbursed several thousands of pounds
in building the Royal Exchange, and that it was agreed betwixt them, the
Survivor should be Heir to the other; on which account, they say, Sir Tho.
Gresham carried away the main of the Estate: He gave 100 pound a year to the
Free School in Denbigh, besides his Benefaction to the New Church there.

This County is divided into twelve Hundreds, had formerly 5 Castles, has 3
Market Towns, Denbigh, Ruthen and Wrexham, and 57 Parish-Churches: It gives the
Title of Earl to L. Feilding.

FLINTSHIRE has Cheshire on the East, the Sea on the North, Shropshire on the
South, and Denbighshire on the West: It is the least Country of Wales, not so
mountainous as other parts, but lies pleasantly along by the River Dee: The Air
is healthful, and the Soil plentiful of Corn and Cattle; the Rivers abound with
Fish: There are not many Woods or Trees in this, as well as other parts of
Wales, the frequent Rebellions of the Inhabitants having occafioned the English
to make great devastations of them to prevent their being the retreats of these
unquiet people. Fruits are not very common, but of Milk, Butter, Cheese and
Honey there is plenty: Of the last of which they make great quantities of a
Drink like Muscadine, called Metheglin: There were formerly several strong
Castles in this Shire, as Flint, Hawarden or Harden, Treer, Rudland, Mold,
Yowley and Hope; the first was the most famous, being founded by K. Henry 2.
and finished by K. Edward the first. Afterward K. Richard 2. going over to
Ireland to suppress the Rebels there, his Uncle Henry Duke of Lancaster
returning from his Banishment into England at the same time, and being joined
by several of the Barons, who were much displeased at K. Richard's Arbitrary
and Tyrannical Government, raised an Army of 60000 Men against him. The King
returned in hope to suppress this Insurrection, and coming to Flint-Castle, the
Archbishop of Canterbury and the Earl of Northumberland were sent to him from
the D. of Lancaster, to whom K. Richard made a Proposition, That if himself and
eight more whom he would name, might have an honorable allowance, with the
assurance of enjoying peaceably a quiet life, he would resign his Crown: This
the Earl of Northumberland assured him should be performed, whereupon the King
surrendered himself into the Duke's hands. When K. Richard came first to this
Castle, they let loose one of his Greyhounds, as was usual whenever the King
got on Horseback, which Greyhound used to leap upon the King's shoulder, and
fawn very much upon him, but at this time he leaped upon the Duke of Lancaster;
and fawned upon him as on his Master; the Duke asked the King what the Dog
meant or intended; It is an ill and unhappy Omen to me, said the King, but a
fortunate one to you, for he acknowledges you to be King, and that you shall
Reign in my stead: This he said with a presaging mind upon a slight occasion,
which yet in short time came to pass; for K. Richard was deposed, and after
murdered at Pomfret Castle, and the D. of Lancaster advanvanced to the Throne
by the name of Henry the 4th.

This County has not any River of note within it, but near Rudland-Castle is a
famous Spring, called Holy Well, or St. Winifreds Well, of which Antiquity
gives this Account; That St. Winifred a virtuoun Christian Virgin, having by
her exceeding Beauty inflamed the mind of Carodocus, a lustful Prince of this
Country, he attempted to allure her to his pleasure both by large promises,
and rich gifts, but finding he could by no means prevail upon her Chastity, at
length he resolved to obtain his desires by force; and having surprised her in
a place of advantage, he ravished her weak body, notwithstanding the utmost
resistance she could make, and afterward to prevent her complaints and
exclamations, he killed her, and then cut off her head: And in that very place
(says my Author) there suddenly arose a pleasant Spring, which continues to
this day, running with so strong a Current, that the like is not to be found in
Christendom: Over the head of the Spring there is built a Chapel of Freestone,
supported with curious wrought Pillars, on the Chancel and Glass-window whereof
is painted the Picture of this Virgin, and the Story of her suffering and
death. To this Well Romish Pilgrims resort to this day, and others Bathe
therein, supposing that there is much Virtue in the Water. In the bottom of it
are many Red Stones, which the superstitious People believe are spots of this
Lady's blood, which all the Water in the Spring can never wash away; and that
the green Moss which grows on the sides of the Well is her Hair, which though
every Stranger almost carries away a part of, yet they say it never wastes; and
the truth is, the Moss smells exceeding sweet, which confirms these weak
Believers in their fond Opinion.

St. Beno the Instructor of St. Winifred in the Christian Faith, is of special
account is this Country, who it seems was a Surgeon to a Miracle; for after
Winifred was beheaded by the lustful Carodocus, he set her head on again, she
living 15 years after.

In the South part of this County divided from the rest, is a place formerly
called Bovium, now Banchor, or Bangor; first a City, and afterward a famous
Monastery anciently very renowned for the pious Monks that resided there, they
being called by some Authors, The College of Divine Philosophers, and Bangor
the Mother, or first of all the Monasteries in the World, the Foundation
thereof being ascribed to King Luctus; it was situated in the fruitful Valley
now called, The English Mailor, upon the Bank of the River Dee, being
encompassed with a great Wall containing a Mile and a half of ground, two of
whose Gates, Port Hogen to the North, and Port Clais South, are yet
discernable; the River Dee, which has since changed its course, now running
through the midst betwixt both Gates, which stand 500 paces asunder: This
Monastery, in memory of the 7 Churches of Asia, was divided into 7 Classes or
Wards, every one consisting of about 300 Souls, and all maintaining themselves
by the labor of their hands: They are said to have received their Christianity
from the Eastern Church, dissenting in their Rites and Doctrines from that in
the West, neither would they acknowledge that the Bishop of Rome had any
authority over them in matters of Religion or the service of God. They
continued 438 years before Austin the Monk came to pervert them by introducing
Roman Ceremonies, Superstition and Servitude. Many of these Monks assembled at
Caer Legion now West-Chester to pray for the good success of their Friends the
Britains against the Heathen Saxons, and continuing three days in Fasting and
Prayer. Ethilfrid the Saxon King seeing them so fervent in their Devotions,
asked what kind of People they were, and being told that they prayed against him
and his Army, Then, said he, though they carry no weapons, yet they fight
against us, and with their Prayers and Preaching prosecute us, and presently
fell upon Brockmall a man at arms that was their Guard, who to save his own
life left their's to the Sword, and the Soldiers assaulting the unarmed Monks
murdered 2000 of them, and likewise defeated the Army of the Britains, only 50
escaping. But God left not their deaths long unrevenged, for this cruel King
was soon after killed in the Field by the Christian King Edwyn, who succeeded
him in the Kingdom of Northumberland. Many of these Monks were buried in their
own Monastery, whose bodies (says Leyland the Historian) have been found in
the memory of man among the rotten Weeds wherein they were slain. This famous
place has been long since utterly ruinated so that scarce the remains of a
City or Monastery are now to be discerned.

Another Monastery called Llan Elwy formerly stood in the Vale below Varis, a
little City built by the Romans between this and Denbigh-shire upon the Banks
of Elwy and Cluyd. The English named it Asaph of the Founder a Person of
honorable birth, who was educated by Kentigern Bishop of Glasco. This Bishop
in the year 560. flying from the Persecution in Scotland to this place, erected
it into a Bishop's See and built a Monastery near it, wherein he placed 663
Monks, whereof 300 that were more unlearned than the rest, were employed in
Husbandry and other business about the Convent, the rest devoted themselves to
Prayer and Divine Meditation. Among the rest who attended Divine Service, Asaph
was conspicuous for Piety and Learning, insomuch that Kentigern being recalled
to his own Country, resigned both his Convent and Cathedral to him. Here he
demeaned himself with so much sanctity that Llan Elwy was after his death
called from him St. Asaph. He was an assiduous Preacher, having often this
saying, That such as are against the Preaching of God's Word, envy man's
Salvation. He is thought to have died about 569. After which his See was vacant
above 500 years until Jeffery of Monmouth was placed therein. It is still a
Bishopric, and contains in it no one whole County, but part of Denbigh, Flint,
Montgomery, Merioneth, and some Towns in Shropshire, wherein are 121 Parishes.
It was not at first very rich, but made much poorer in the Reign of King Edward
VI. for whereas the Bishop had before five Episcopal Houses he has now but
one, the rest with the Lands belonging to them being alienated from the Church
for ever.

Another Monastery of great account was at Basing-wark in this County near the
famous Ditch made by Offa K. of the Mercians, which begun in this place,
running through North Wales nigh the mouth of the River Dee, and from thence
along the Mountains in the South, and ended near Bristow at the fall of the
Wye. The Tract whereof is yet to be seen, and called to this Day Clawd Offa, or
Offa's Ditch. Congellus or Comgallus is challenged by the Welsh for their
Countryman as being first Abbot of Banchor, though Archbishop Usher makes him
the first Abbot of Bangor in the North of Ireland. He was of a pious life,
wrote Learned Epistles and Died in 600. Elizabeth the seventh Daughter of King
Edward I. and Queen Eleanor was born at Ruthland Castle where anciently a
Parliament was kept. This Princess at 14 years of age was Married to John Earl
of Holland, Zealand, etc. and after his death to Humfrey Bohun Earl of Hereford
and Essex, High Constable of England, by whom he had a numerous Issue she died,
1316. and was buried in the Abbey Church of Saffron Walden in Essex.

Owen Glendour Esquire was born in his ancient Patrimony of Glendour Wye in
this County, was bred in London a Student of the Common Law till he became a
Courtier and Servant to King Richard II. after whose death being on the wrong
side of preferment he retired into Wales, where there arose a difference
between him and the Lord Gray of Ruthen about a Common, upon which many spurred
on his posting ambition, by telling him he was the true Heir of all
North Wales, and he was likewise encouraged therein by those who pretended to
interpret some Prophe^s of the famous Merlin in his favor, persuading him the
time was come wherein he should recover the Welsh Principality. All these
allurements meeting with an aspiring mind, and the English being at variance
among themselves, He in 1402. and the third year of K. Henry IV. endeavored to
draw the Welshmen to a general defection: assuring them they had now a fair
opportunity to shake off the English Yoke, and to resume their own ancient Laws
and Customs. To whose persuasions the Welshmen harkening, they constituted him
their Prince and Captain General. Having got some Forces together, he falls
first upon his old Adversary Reynold Lord Gray, and takes him Prisoner, yet
with promise of releasment, if this Lord would Marry his Daughter; which offer
though the Lord Gray at first not only refused but scorned, yet was at last
obliged to accept thereof, though his treacherous Father in Law delayed his
enlargement till he died.

The Welsh much animated with this first success break furiously into the
Borders of Herefordshire, plundring and destroying all before them, being
opposed only by the Lord Edmund Mortimer who had formerly withdrawn himself to
the Castle of Wigmore. He having assembled what Forces he was able, gave them
Battle, and was taken Prisoner, and then fettered and cast into a deep and
filthy Dungeon. It was thought that if Glendour had as well known how to use
his Victory as to get it, he might at this time have much endangered the
English Dominion over the Welsh: But having killed 1000 English he thought he
had done enough for that time, and so giving over the pursuit retired. The
inhumanity of the Welsh Women was here memorable, who stripped the dead Carcasses
of the English, and then cut off their Privy Parts and Noses, whereof the one
they thrust into their Mouths, the other they pressed between their Buttocks.

King Henry was compelled to suffer these affronts at this time from the Welsh,
being engaged in a dangerous War with Scotland, that K. having Invaded England
with a great Army, but with very ill success, his Forces being first defeated
by the Earl of Northumberland: And afterward by Henry Piercy his Kinsman called
Hot-spur, and George Earl of March who at a place called Hamilton killed 10000
Scots, and took 500 Prisoners.

In the mean time Glendour had solicited the French King for aid, who sent him
1200 men of quality, but the Winds were so contrary that they lost 12 of their
Ships, and the rest returned home. The English deriding this ill success of the
French, so exasperated the French K. that presently after he sent 12000 more,
who landed safely and joined with the Welsh, but when they heard of the
approach of the English Army, whether mistrusting their own strength, or
suspecting the Welshmens faithfulness, they ran to their Ships and
disgracefully went home.

Although King Henry IV. was advanced to the Crown by the Parliament of England
who Deposed King Richard II. for his misgovernment, yet many of those who were
instrumental therein, grew in a short time discontented upon one account or
another, as is usual in such cases, insomuch that several Conspiracies were
made against him. Among others the Peircies Earls of Northumberland and
Worcester with Henry Hot-spur began about this time to fall off from him, one
reason whereof was, because the King at their request, as well as of several
other Noblemen, refused to redeem their Kinsman Mortimer from Glendour's
slavery, for Henry was deaf of that Ear, and could rather have wished both him
and his two Sisters in Heaven, for then he should be free from concealed
Competitors. And another cause was, his denying them the benefit of such
Prisoners as they had taken of the Scots, whereupon they went of themselves,
and procured Mortimer's Delivery, and then entered into a League Offensive and
Defensive with Glendour, and by their Proxies in the House of the Archdeacon
of Bangor, they agreed upon a Tripartite Indenture under their Hands and Seals,
to divide the Kingdom into three parts, whereby all England from Severn and
Trent South and Eastward was to be given to Edmund Mortimer Earl of March. All
Wales and the Land beyond the Severn West were assigned to Owen Glendour and
all the remaining Land from Trent to the North to be the Partition of the Lord
Piercy. Wherein Glendour persuaded them they should accomplish an old Welsh
Prophecy against the Mole or Mouldwarp of England. That K. Henry was this
Mouldwarp cursed of God's own Mouth, and they were the Lion, the Dragon, and
the Wolf which should divide the Land among them.

At this time King Henry, utterly unacquainted with this Conspiracy, published
a Proclamation intimating that the Earl of March had voluntarily caused himself
to be taken Prisoner, to the end that the Welsh Rebels having him in their
custody might have some pretense for their Insurrection, and therefore he had
little reason to be concerned for his Redemption. Upon this the Piercy's
assisted with some Scots, and drawing to their Party the E. of Stafford, Rich.
Scroop Archbishop of York, and many others, they drew up certain Articles
against King Henry, and sent them to him in writing, namely, That he had
falsified his Oath given at his landing, That he came but only to recover his
Inheritance, and would not meddle with the King or the Crown, That most
Traitorously he had taken arms against his Sovereign Lord, imprisoned him, and
then most barbarously caused him to be murdered. That ever since the death of
K. Richard II. he had unjustly kept the Crown from his Kinsman Edmund Mortimer
Earl of March to whom of right it belonged. That upon no occasion he had
imposed diverse large Taxes upon the People. That by his Letters he procured
Burgesses and Knights of Parliament to be chosen. For which Causes and many
others they defied him, and vowed his destruction, and the restoring the Earl
of March to his Right.

K. Henry could not but know that much of this was true, yet since it did not
hinder him from seeking to get the Crown when he had it not, it could less
hinder him from seeking to keep it now he had it, and if he were able being a
private man to get it from a King, he was likely to be more able now to keep it
from a private man. And for any objections that Conscience could make, he had
enough to answer them all. For if his Title were good against K. Richard II. by
his Resignation, it was good against Mortimer by his swearing Allegiance, Upon
these grounds he satisfied himself, and raised an Army against these Lords,
whom he prevented from joining with the Welsh, and near Shrewsbury engaged
them, where though Henry Hot-spur showed sufficient Courage, yet he was slain,
and the K. obtained the Victory, taking several Prisoners of note, and among
others the Earl of Worcester whom he caused to be Beheaded, and many of the
rest to be Hanged and Quartered, and their Heads to be set upon London Bridge.
There fell 6000 of the Rebels that day, whereof K. Henry killed 36 with his own
hands. And the young P. (afterward Henry V.) though wounded in the Face with an
Arrow, yet was not wounded in his Courage but continued fighting till the end
of the Battle. After this the K. sent his Son Henry P. of Wales with his whole
Army into that Country, but before his coming Owen Glendour was forsaken by all
his Company, and lurking about the Woods was there famished to death for want
of sustenance. Such was the miserable end of this aspiring ambitious Britain.
After this Rebellion was suppressed, K. Henry enacted several rigorous Laws for
preventing the like in time to come, as 1. That no Welshman should purchase
Lands or be chosen into office in any City, Town or Borough, or wear arms
within any City. 2. That if a Welshman should sue an Englishman the cause
should be tried by an English Jury. 3. That all English Burgesses who married
Welshwomen should forfeit their Liberties. 4. No meeting nor Council to be
permitted to the Welsh but in the presence of the Officers of the L. of the
Manor. 5. No Victuals to be carried into Wales without License of K. or
Council. 6. No VVelshman should possess any Castle, or Fortified House. 7. No
VVelshman to be capable of any Office of State, or in any Court of Judicature.
8. No Englishman marrying a Welshwoman should enjoy any office in Wales.

Thomas ap William ap Thomas ap Richard ap Howel ap Vaughan Esquire was born
of an ancient Family at Moston in this County. This Gentleman being called at a
Panel of a Jury by all these names was advised by the Judge in the reign of K.
Henry VII. to contract them, whereupon he nominated himself Moston. A leading
case to the Gentry in Wales, who leaving their Pedigrees at home, carry one
Surname only abroad with them.

Flint though the Shire Town is no Market Town, no nor St. Asaph though a City
and Bishop's See till made so very lately. But it is near VVest-Chester the
Market General of these parts, and besides every Village has a Market in it
self, as affording all necessary commodities. This County was part of the
County Palatine of Chester, paying 2000 Marks (called a Mize) at the change of
every Earl of Chester till the year 1568 for then upon occasion of one Thomas
Radford committed to Prison by the Chamberlain of Chester, this County
disjoined it self from that Earldom, and united to the Principality of Wales.
It is divided into five Hundreds, had seven Castles, has only one Market Town
Calerwis, and 28 Parish Churches. Near Kelkin a small Village in this County is
a little Well whose Water rises and falls according to the motion of the Sea
Tides.

GLAMORGAN SHIRE (so called as is thought from P. Morgan the Possessor thereof,
or from Morgan Abbey founded by Will. E. of Gloucester upon the Seashore on the
South of this County) is bounded on the East by Monmouth-shire, on the North by
Breckneck, on the West, by Carmarthen-shire, on the South, by the Severn Sea,
in length 40. in breadth 20. and in circumference 112 Miles. The North part of
this Shire is Mountainous, the South Plain and very fruitful, being called the
Garden of Wales, abounding with Cattle, pleasant Springs, and Fruits. Tare is
the chief River, upon the Eastern Shore of which, Cardiffe the fairest Town of
all South Wales is situated, which Fitz Hannon fortified with a Wall and Castle
in the reign of William Rufus, when he and his Norman Knights had conquered
Rhese or Rice Prince of these Parts, and deprived Jestine of his legal
Inheritance. After which he made it his own Court of Justice, ordaining his
Followers, to whom he disposed of the Lands, to hold them in Vassalage of him.
The Castle was strong in which K. Henry I. Surnamed Beuclark kept his Elder
Brother Robert called Courthose twenty six years Prisoner, they being both Sons
of K. William the Conqueror.

The City and Bishopric of Landaff is seated in this County, being one of the
most ancient Bishops Sees either in England or Wales, and claims a direct
succession from the Archbishops of Caerleon upon Vsk. The first Bishop we read
of was St. Dubritius, confearated by Lupus and Germanus when they came hither
out of France for extirpating the Pelagian Heresy. The Cathedral is dedicated
to St. Telian successor to Dubritius, founded upon the River Tassi or Tare, and
thence called Landaff, Llan in Welsh being a Church. This Church was formerly
well endowed, so that it might have been reckoned one of the richest in
Christendom, but now enjoys not the Tenth of the former revenue, the ruin
thereof coming in the time of Bishop Dunstan alias Kitchen. This Diocese
contains most part of Glamorgan and Monmouth-shire, wherein are 177 Parish
Churches.

Giraldus Cambrensis reports that in the Island of Barrey in this County there
is a chink in a Rock, to which if you lay your Ear, you will hear a noise like
that of Smiths at work, one while blowing the Bellows, then striking with the
Hammer on the Anvile, sometimes the noise of a Grindstone grinding Tools,
afterward the hissing of Iron quenched, and the puffing sound of Flames under a
Furnace. Clemens Alexandrinus writes of a place in Britain, which is thought to
be this, That on the top of an Hill there is a gaping Chink, into which when
the VVind is gathered and moved to and fro in the hollows thereof there is
heard above a musical sound like that of Cymbals.

Likewise near Newton on the Bank of the River Ogmore near the Severn, there is
a Well the water whereof is so low at the flowing of the Sea that you can
hardly get a dishful, but at the Ebb and Fall of the Tide it rises amain,
which may be occasioned by the wind or air, which not finding a passage out
stops up the passages of the springs, but when the water is gone and the air
has room to vent it self the water boils up abundantly. On the the same shoat
of Severne on the top of an Hill called Minyd Morgan is erected a Monument
inscribed with strange Character and the People thereabout have a tradition,
that if any man read the same he shall dye soon after, meaning, I suppose, that
it is impossible to be read.

At Lauellin in Gouersland in this Shire, happened many very strange Passages
in 1656. as they were sent in several Letters to Mr. R.B. an eminent Divine
lately deceased, the substance whereof I shall briefly relate. In this place
dwelt one Bowen a Lieutenant Colonel in the late Wars, who by his Valor
obtained a good repute, but the War being over, his case and preferment led him
to a careless sensual life, and at length he grew so vain and notional that he
was Cashiered from his Command, and being then at liberty to sin without
restraint, he became an absolute Atheist, denying Heaven and Hell, God and
Devil, acknowledging only a Power like that which the ancient Heathens called
Fate, accounting Temporal Pleasures all his expected Heaven, so that at last he
became hateful, and hating all civil society, though before he had been famous
for Profession of Religion. He said he would give ten thousand pound to know
the Truth about God, and denied the Being of the Spirit of God. In December.
1655. he went over to Ireland, and some time after his Wife a very religious
Woman living in his House in Glamorganshire was very much troubled one night
with a great noise much like the sound of a VVhirlwind, and a violent beating
of the doors and walls, as if the whole House had been falling down. She being
in her Chamber with most of her Family, after praying to God, accounting it
sinful incredulity to yield to fear, and being naturally of a courageous
temper, went to bed, when suddenly one in the likeness of her Husband, and in
his very posture, presented himself, and asked her whether he should come to
bed, she sitting up and praying to God told him, that he was not her Husband
and he should not. He urged more earnestly, What! not the Husband of thy bosom?
What! not the Husband of thy bosom? She replied, Christ was her Husband, at
which it vanished, without having any power to hurt her. Upon this she with some
other good People spent the rest of the night in Prayer being very often
interrupted by this Apparition.

The next night Mr. Miles a Pious Minister and four other good Christians came
to watch and pray with her, in which holy exercise they continued all night
without any disturbance. But the night following Mrs. Bowen with several other
Devout Women being in the House, the noise of the Whirlwind began again with
more violence than before, and the Apparition walked in the Chamber, attended
with an unsufferable stench like that of a putrified Carcass, filling the Room
with a thick smoke smelling like Brimstone, darkning the light of the Fire and
Candle but not quite extinguishing it. Sometimes going down the Stairs, and
coming up again with a dreadful noise. Disturbing them in their Prayers, one
while with the sound of words which they could not understand, then striking
them, so that the next Morning their Faces were black with Smoke and their
Bodies swollen with bruises.

Another Night was very remarkable, and had not the Almighty defended the
Gentlewoman and her two Maids they had probably been destroyed. As Mrs. Bowen
was going to bed, by the impression thereon she supposed that some body had
lain in it, and opening the bed he smelt the smell of a Carcass somewhile dead,
however she went to bed, and presently perceived upon the Tester which was of
cloth something rolling from side to side, and being forced out of her bed, she
had not time to dress her self, such lamentable cries and noises so much
amazing her. Yet having scarce any cloths on, she with her two Maids got upon
their Knees at the bedside to beg God's help and assistance, but were
extremely assaulted. Oftentimes the Gentlewoman would, by something which felt
like a Dog under her Knees, be lifted up a foot or more from the Ground. Some
were heard to talk on the other side of the bed, which the Maid hearkening to,
she had a blow upon the back. Diverse assaults would be made by fits. It would
come with a cold breath of wind, there were horrible screeching howlings and
cries heard, and both within and without the House horrid suffocating smells of
Brimstone and Gunpowder. This continued from nine at night till about three
next morning, Mrs. Bowen and her Maids all smelt of this filthy Sulphur. At
other times Fires have been seen upon the House and in the Fields, Mr. Bowen's
Voice has been heard, luring his Hawks, a Game he delighted in, as also the
Bills of Hawks. His tread, his posture, sighing, humming were heard frequently
in the Parlour. In the day time often the shadow of one walking would appear
upon the Wall. I could wish (says my Author) that they who question the
existency of Spirits had been but one night at Lauellin to receive satisfaction
to their objections.

These disturbances continued so violent that Mrs. Bowen and her Family left
the house, lest they should tempt God by their overbold staying in such danger.
She sent the Atheist her Husband the sad news of this Apparition, who in May
following coming to England expressed more love and respect to his Wife than
formerly, yet telling her that he could not believe her relation of what she
had seen, as having not a power to believe any thing but what he himself saw.
But he had not the Courage to go to his House and make Trial of the certainty
thereof. However he continued as Atheistical as ever, all his Religion being
comprised in the acknowledging of a Power which, he says, we may call God, and
waiting for some miraculous appearance to verify to him all the rest which we
own as our Religion. Sure if ever a Blasphemer was unworthy to live (says my
Author) this is the man. He afterward returned again to Ireland, and shut up
himself in a small Castle without any company but one Boy, who reported that he
rose in the night, and talked as if some body were discoursing with him. Others
relate that he was continually haunted with Ghosts and Apparitions, but what
his end was my Author does not mention. However, the former surprising
Accidents have sufficient confirmation from Mr. Jones and Mr. Bedwell, two
worthy Ministers in that Country, from Mrs. B^wen her self, a Woman much
praised for her true Piety and Courage. From Colonel Wroth Rogers then
Governor of Hereford, from Mr. Samuel Foley, Colonel John Bridges, and many
other Persons of honesty and reputation.

Sir Edward Carne descended from a good Family flourishing at Wenny in this
County. He was bred in Oxford Dr. of the Civil Law, and Knighted by Charles V.
Emperor of Germany. He was dispatched to Rome by K. Henry VIII. to remonstrate
to the Pope, That if he cited his Master to appear at Rome, as he had
intelligence was intended, that his Highness was not bound by Law to appear,
This he effectually performed, pleading that the Emperor was so powerful at
Rome that he could expect no Justice there in the matter of the Divorce, Q.
Katherine being of the House of Austria: Declaring that if the Pope persisted
in this arbitrary way, the King must appeal from thence to some able men in
some indifferent Universities, and if this were refused, he protested against
all Proceedings in that Court as null and void. A behavior that discovered
this Gentleman to have as much courage as ability. Queen Mary highly prized
him, and no whit the less for his Cordial appearing for K. Henry in the matter
of her Mothers divorce, imputing it to the discharge of his Employment in him
who was otherwise a through paced Romanist, and whom she afterward sent
Ambassador to the Pope.

After her death he still resided at Rome, and by command of Q. Elizabeth had
audience of Paul IV. to acquaint him that his Mistress was advanced to the
Crown of England. To whom the Pope returned answer, That England was a Fee of
the Church of Rome, and that she could not succeed as being Illegitimate. This
Pope would allow no Prince to be his Equal, but that all should be subject
under his Foot. Besides he commanded Sir Edward to lay down his Character of
Ambassador, and under pain of the greater Excommunication, and Confiscation of
his Goods not to go out of the City of Rome, but take upon him the Government
of the English Hospital there. So that Queen Elizabeth cannot justly be taxed
by the Papists for a Schistmatick, being thrust from the Church of Rome by the
Pope himself, so unreasonably treating her Ambassador before she had made any
alteration in Religion. Though some think the crafty old Knight was well
contented with his restraint, wherein he died, 1561.

The County of Glamorgan is the furthest bounds of South Wales, and lying
exposed to Foreign Invasions was anciently fortified with 25 strong Castles,
which Time and Storms have so entirely ruined that the very names of them are
almost obliterated. It had likewise three Monasteries besides Landass, called
Neath, Margan and Cardiss, which fell in the general Whirlwind upon Abbys in
the Reign of King Henry VIII. This Shire is divided into ten Hundreds, wherein
are six Market Towns, and 118 Parish Churches. It gives the Title of Earl to
Henry Somerset Duke of Beufort.

MERIONETH-SHIRE has Denhigh and Carnarvanshires on the North, Montgomery on
the East, Cardig an shire on the South, and the Irish Sea on the West, whose
raging Waves, it is thought, have swallowed up great quantities of Land in
former Ages. The form of the County is like a Welsh Harp, though it yields but
dull music to the Inhabitants, being the roughest and most barren Shire of all
Wales as Giraldus the Welsh Historian acknowledges, the Air giving little
pleasure, unless to those that admire the furious and blusting Winds that roar
from the adjacent Hills and Mountains, which are so high, and yet so near
together that it is reported men may discourse from the tops thereof one to
another and yet hardly meet in a day's time, so that if the Shepherds should
fall out in the morning and challenge one another to fight, before they can
come together, the day will be spent, and the Heat of their fury abated after
they have slept till Morning. These Mountains did formerly abound with Wolves
which much annoyed the People, to prevent which King Edgar Surnamed the
Peaceable imposed a yearly Tribute of 300 Wolves heads upon Ludwall Prince of
Wales, where by in three years time they were utterly destroyed, and now the
Hills are covered with Flocks of Sheep which are the only Riches of this
County, for by reason of the unevenness and rockiness of the Soil the Plow
cannot go, nor the Corn thrive here, though some have causlesly imputed the
sacarcity of Grain to the sloth of the People.

The Inhabitants were formerly the Ordovices already mentioned, who by the
advantage of these Mountains long defended their Liberties against the Romans,
and were never wholly subdued till the time of King Edward I. There are only
three Market Towns in this Shire, Bala, near which is a Pool called Pimble
Mear, or Lin Tegid in Welsh, covering near an hundred and Sixty Acres of
ground, of which it is reported that the Land Floods though never so great do
never cause it to rise or swell, whilst a blast of Wind will quickly make it
mount above its bounds and banks. Into the South part of it runs the River Dee
with a swift stream, and glides through the same without any mixture of its
Waters as the People imagine, because the Salmon usually taken in Dee is never
found in that Pool, and on the contrary the Fish called Guiniad bred in that
Mear is never seen in the River Dee.

Delgethe is another Market Town in this Shire, of which I know not whether it
be worth relating what is known for a Truth. 1. That the Walls thereof are
three Miles high, that is, the Mountains which surround it. 2. That men come
into it over the Water, but go out of it under the Water: Because they go in
over a fair Bridge, but the Water falling from a Rock is couveyed in a wooden
Trough under which Travelers make shift to pass. 3. The Steeple thereof does
grow therein, since the Bells if they have more than one, hang in a Yew-Tree.
4. There are more Alehouses than Houses, for Tenements are divided into two or
three Tippling Houses, and Barns without Chimneys are used to that purpose.

Harlech is the last Market Town, standing on the Seashore, cold and barren
enough but only of Fowl and Fish, having few houses and meanly built. Here is a
little decayed Chapel and out of use, wherein Sir Richard Thimbleby an English
Knight lies buried, who for the delight he took in Fishing and Fowling removed
his dwelling from a far better Soil. Here likewise was erected a strong and
beautiful Castle upon an Hill, with a double Bulwark walled about, commanding
the Sea, to impede the entrance of all Invaders. Near this are two great Inlets
into the Sea which People pass over at low Water, and upon the Shore, as upon
all the Sea coasts in this Country abundance of Herrings are caught, and are
therefore much frequented at the season of the year by People of several
Nations.

St. Thelian, educated by Dubritius Bishop of Landaff aforementioned, was born
in this Shire. He was much envied for his Holy Life by one of the Pictish
Princes who harassed this Country. This Captain sent two lewd Strumpets to him,
supposing that by their Tempting Tricks this Devout man might have been enticed
to folly. These Women counterfeited madness that they might take the more
liberty to themselves of filthy discourse, but returned Distracted indeed, not
having sense nor understanding enough to relate the cause of their sad
misfortune, which had such effect on this Commander, that he received the
Christian Faith (says my Author) and was Baptized, retaining ever after a
great veneration for this our Saint, who asterward accompanied St. David Bishop
of Menerin to Jerusalem and returning into his own Country by his fervent
Prayers freed Scotland from the Plague wherewith it was then much infested He
died about 563.

Mr. Camden takes special notice of the beauty and comelines^ of the
Inhabitants of this Shire. During the differences betwix^ the Houses of York
and Lancaster, David ap Jenkig, ap Enion stout Gentleman on the Lancastrian
side, resolutely defended the Castle of Harlech against King Edward IV. until
Sir William Herbert, afterward Earl of Pembroke, so furiously stormed it that
he was obliged to surrender. This County is divided into six Hundreds wherein
are 37 Parish Churches.

MONMOVTH-SHIRE has Hereford-shire on the North, Glamorgan on the West,
Gloucestershire on the East, and the Sovern Sea on the South. It is 24 Miles in
length, 19 in breadth, and 77 in compass. The Air is temperate, clear and
healthful, the Soil hilly, woody, and fruitful of Cattle, Corn and all other
accommodations of Life. It was anciently inhabited by the Silures whose chief
City is called by the Emperor Antoninus Venta Silurum, by the Welsh Caerwent,
and now Caerleon, and was by Tathai the British Saint made an Academy and a
place of Divine Worship, where the second Roman Legion called Augusta resided,
(as appears by their Coins, Altars, Tables and Inscriptions sound there daily
in digging up old Foundations.) Giraldus says, That King Arthur kept his Court
in this City, whither the Roman Ambassadors resorted to him, and that there was
a School or Academy, of 200 Philosophers skilful in Astronomy and other
Sciences erected therein. St. Aaron a wealthy Citizen of Caerleon was Martyred
under Dioclesian the Roman Tyrant in 3031 Note that the three first British
Martyrs, namely Alban, Amphibalus and Aaron, have, the first a Latin, the
second a Greek, and the third an Hebrew name. St. Julius of Caerleon, suffered
with Aaron aforesaid. St. Amphilalus the Instructor of St. Alban in the
Christian Faith, was also a Citizen of Caerleon. This Town though now but
small, was once a great City reaching a Mile in length, and comprehending St.
Julian's a house of late Sir William Herbert's, now a Mile distant from the
Town. But as all humane Glory has its period, so this City formerly renowned
for beauty, circuit and magnificence is now deplorably decayed.

Monmouth is a Market Town in this County, and had anciently a very strong
Castle with many lofty Towers, as the ruins do still demonstrate. The Town is
pleasantly situated between the Rivers Monnow and Wye, and has an handsome
Church with three Isles. And at the East end of the Town is another decayed one
called the Monks Church. Monmouth is in good repair, and well frequented,
governed by a Mayor, two Bailiffs, 19 Common Council men, a Town Clerk, and two
Sergeants. Several Monasteries were erected and suppressed in this County, the
most memorable being at Caerleon, Chepstow, God-cliff, Monmouth and Llantony,
which last stood so solitary among the high Hill that the Sun did shine upon it
not above two or three hours in a day. As for Manufactures the best Caps were
formerly made at Monmouth, where the Cappers Chapel does still remain. In Q.
Blizabeth's Reign an Act of Parliament was made, enacting that all Persons
should wear Monmouth Caps, but about twenty five years after it was repealed.

Geffery of Monmouth the Welsh Historian was born in this County, and in the
Monks Church aforenamed is said to have written his History of Britain, having
translated, compiled and collected the various British Authors into one Volume.
He had many things from the British Bards or Poets, which though improhable may
not be untrue. His Book was prohibited by the Pope whilst the lying Legend of
Romish Saints is permitted to be read without control. If Geffery be guilty of
mistakes they are such as make not for the Pope's advantage, and therefore it
seems a great mistake in those who avouch that the Pope made him a Cardinal. He
flourished 1160 under King Henry II.

Walter Cantilupe Son to William Lord Cantilupe, whose chief Residence was at
Abergavenie in this County, was made Bishop of Worcester by King Henry III. He
would not yield to the Pope's Legate, who complained of many Clergymen, keeping
their Livings against the Canons, intending to make room for the Pope's
Favorites, or force such irregular Incumbents to a composition. He was of a
keen temper, whose two edged Spirit did cut on both sides against the King and
Pope. Against the former he fided with the Barons to whom he promised Heaven
for the reward of their Rebellion against their Prince, though it cost him an
Excommunication from the Pope, who was the more forward in denouncing that
fatal sentence against him, because the Bishop had told Rusland his Legate,
That he would prefer him to be hanged on the Gallows rather than ever consent
to such expilation of the Church as aforesaid. He died in 1267. Thomas of
Monmouth wrote an History of St. William, the Child that was Crucified by the
Jews at Norwich in hatred of our Savior. He flourished 1160 in the Reign of
King Henry II.

Richard de Clare, alias Strongbow, born probably at Stringule Castle was Earl
of Stringule and Pembroke. It happened that Man Murrugh in 1167. being expelled
his Territories for several Tyrannies by the Lords of Mead and Connaught
repaired to King Henry II. and invited him into Ireland. That politic King
sent over this Rich. Strongbow with 1200 men, who soon possessed himself of the
Ports of Leinster and Munster, with large Lands thereunto belonging, insomuch
that the King growing jealous of his greatness recalled him home, commanding
him to surrender his Acquisitions into his hands, which done, he received them
back by a Grant from the King, who only reserved the City of Dublin for
himself. He was commonly called Domitor Hibernia, The Tamer of Ireland. Yet
some of the Great Lords there, did still retain the Power and Title of King.
Witness the Preface to the Commission, whereby King Henry II. made William
Fitz. Adelme his Lieutenant of Ireland, which was directed, To al Archbishops,
Bishops, Kings, etc. Health. This Earl died at Dublin, 1177.

Henry Plantaginet Duke of Lancaster was born in Monmouth Castle the chief Seat
of his Barony. He is commonly Surnamed The Wryneck, and by others more
rightfully, The good Duke of Lancaster. He founded Corpus Christi College in
Cambridg, and was buried at Leicester 1361. Henry V. the victorious Conqueror
of France was likewise born in this Castle, of whom I have already given an
account. Sir Roger Williams born of an ancient Family at Penress, was first a
Soldier of Fortune in the Netherlands ander the Duke of Alv^^, and afterward
served Queen Elizabeth. He was a man extremely forward to fight. When a
Spanish Captain challenged Sir John Norris to fight a single combat, which he
could not accept, as being below him who was a General, this Sir Roger
undertook the ^on. And after they had fought for some time, in the view of both
Armies, without any hurt, they pledged each other a deep draught of Wine and
so friendly departed. Another time at midnight he assaulted the Camp of the
Prince of Parma nigh Venloe, slew some of the Enemies Soldiers, and pierced to
the very Tent of the General. Byron Marshal of France once saying, That he did
not like the March of the English Drum because it was so slow; Sir Reger
hearing him, sharply replied, As slow as it is, yet it has gone through all
France. He bravely defended the Town and Fort of Sluice in Flanders, whilst
there was any hope of relief, but as length being forced to surrender it, he
returned to the Court, whom some of Queen Elizabeth's Ladies of Honor
reproached and pointed at, crying, That Is the Valiant man that delivered up
Sluice. Ay Ladies, said he, and if you had been so hard put to it as I was you
would have delivered up your Sluices too.

William Herbert Earl of Pembroke with Sir Richard his Brother were both
vassant men, and as fast friends to King Edward IV. as professed Foes to
Richard Nevil the Great Earl of Warwick. Leading the Army of the Welsh in the
Battle of Banbury, these two Brothers with their Pole-axes twice made way
through the Battle of the Northern men which sided with King Henry VI. without
any mortal wound. There passes a Tradition in the Noble Family of the
Herbert's of Cherbury, that this Sir Richard their Ancestor slew that day 140
men with his own hands, in passing and repassing through the Army. Guns not
being then in fashion the Poll axe was the next mortal Weapon especially in
such a dead doing hard as this Knight had. He is likewise reported to be of a
Giant's Stature, the Peg or Pin being yet to be seen in Montgomery Castle,
whereon he used to hang his Hat at Dinner, which no man of an ordinary height
can reach with his hand at this day. It is recorded that by the courage of
these two Brothers the Battle of Banbury had certainly been won, had not John
Clapham Esquire, and Servant to the Earl of Warwick (...) played his Lord's
Colors, and from an high Hill cried out, a Warwick, a Warwick, whereat the
Welshmen were so terrified, supposing Warwick with the whole Army to be there
that they turned their backs and fled, knowing how unable they were to
withstand VVarwick's Forces, since upon a quarrel the Night before between the
Earl of Pembroke and the Lord Stafford the last had withdrawn his Party from
them, so that the General and his Brother were left alone in the Field, who
valiantly fighting were encompassed and taken, with the Neath of 5000 of their
Men. The Earl with his Brother Sir Richard Herbert were brought to Banbury
where (with ten other Gentlemen) they lost their Heads, the Earl was buried at
Tinterne, and Sir Richard at Abergavenny in this County.

William Jones born at Monmouth was forced to fly his Country for not being
able to pay ten Groats. Coming to London he became first a Porter and then a
Factor, and going over to Hamburg had such a vent for Welsh Cottons that he
gained a very considerable Estate in a short time. He founded a fair School in
Monmouth allowing 50 pound yearly to the Master, and 100 pound Salary to a
Lecturer, besides a stately Alms house for 20 poor People, each of them having
two Rooms and a Garden, and half a Crown a week. All which he left to the
oversight of the Company of Haberdashers in London, who discharge their trust
therein to this day.

William Evan's of this Shire was two yards and an half in height being Porter
to King Charles I. He was somewhat lame, knocking his knees together, and going
out squalling with his seet, yet he made a shift to Dance in an Antimask at
Court, where he drew little Jeffery the Dwarf out of his Pocket. The Moor or
Marish near Chepstow suffered great loss in 1606. by the River Severn
overflowing its banks, drowning many Cattle, some People, and overthrowing
diverse Houses.

Monmouthshire may be called an English Welsh County. For whereas formerly all
Welsh Counties sent but one Knight to Parliament this has the privilege of
two, and is not subject to the Welsh Jurisdiction but to the governance of the
Itenerant Judges who ride Oxford Circuit. It was subdued by King Henry II. who
passed the Nant Pen-carne a small Brook, and of no danger, yet held fatal by
the Welsh, who were over credulous of a Prophecy of Merlin's that predicted,
That when a stout King with a freckled face should pass over a Ford called
Ryd-pencarn in a River called Nant pen-carn the Welsh should be conquered, and
therefore when King Henry who was freckle faced passed over it, the Welshmen
remembering this Prophecy submitted themselves, and became an easy Conquest to
the English, and it may be the King being sensible of their credulity, thinking
their Hearts might fail them, chose to go over this Ford to facilitate his
Conquests. Monmouth was made a Shire in the reign of King Henry VIII. It has
six Market Towns, 127 Parish Churches, is divided into six Hundreds, and had
formerly 14 Castle. It gives the Title of Earl to Charles Lord Mordant.

MONTGOMERY-SHIRE has Denbigh-shire on the North, Radnor and Cardigan on the
South, Merioneth on the West, and Shrop-shire on the East. In this County are
many high Hills, and diverse Vales, Springs and Rivers, of which the Soverne is
the Chief, being the second River in the Kingdom, whose head rising from the
vast high Mountain Plymlimon, and being joined with other smaller streams runs
through the East part of this Shire. It is said to have taken its name from
Abren the beautiful natural Daughter of King Loerinus, begotten out of Wedlock
upon Estrildis the Daughter of Humber the Seythian King, who invaded this Land,
both of them being drowned by Gwendolena the surviving VVidow of Locrinus, the
Daughter in this River, and the Father in the other bearing his name. Of this
Jeffery of Monmouth writes, Fair Abren headlong thrown into this stream,
As a Memorial left to them her name,
From whence at length the name of Severn came.


The ancient Inhabitants were the Ordovices, who also peopled the Counties of
Merioneth, Carnarvan, Denhigh and Flint, whose Hearts and Hills kept them free
a long time, both from the Roman and English Yoke, opposing themselves against
the first till the reign of Domitian, and the other till their total Conquest
by King Edward I. They are a generous and affable People, comely and fair of
body, courteous to strangers, and very Loyal to the English Crown.

Montgomery is the chief Town, and is one of the new Shires taken out of the
Marches of Wales, and made a County of King Henry VIII. so called from Roger de
Montgomery a Noble N^rman, Earl of Shrewsbury, who gaining much Land hereabout
from the Welsh, first built it to secure his Conquests, as likewise a very fine
Castle standing not far from the banks of the River Severn upon the rising of a
Rock, from whence it has a very pleasant prospect into a curious Plain that
lies beneath it.

There is a Proveb in this County, Y Tair Chiwiorydd, in English The three
Sisters, whereby was meant the three Rivers of Wye, Severn, and Rhiddial,
arising all three in this County. The Tradition is, That these three Sisters
were to run a Race which should be first Married to the Ocean. Severn and Wye
having a great Journey to go, chose their way through soft Meadows, and kept on
a Travelers pace, whilst Rhiddial, presuming on her short journey, staid
before she went out, and then to recover her lost time runs furiously in a
distracted manner with her mad stream over all opposition. It is applicaple to
Chidren of the same Parents, but of different dispositions and courses of life,
so that their Cradles were not so near, but their Coffins are as far asunder.
There is another Proverb, Pywys Paradwys, Cymri, that is, Powis is the Paradise
of Wales. This Proverb refers to Teliesten the Author thereof, that Powis
contained all that pleasant Land lying betwixt Wye and Severn. A third Proverb
is, Gwan di Brwlin Hafren, Plafren fydd hifel cynt, that is, Fix thy Pale in
Severn, (with intent to fence out his Water) Severn will be as before, that is
run its course, applied to those who undertake projects above their power to
perform.

Hawis Gadarn a Lady of remark, sole Daughter and Heir to Owen ap Griffith
Prince of Powis-land, was justly Surnamed Gadarn, that is, The Hardy. Her four
Uncles, Leoline, Griffith, Vaughan and David detained her inheritance from her.
Give, said they, A Girl a little Gold and Marry her, God and Nature made Land
for men to manage. Hereupon Hawis complained to King Edward II. who
commiseraring her condition consigned his Servant John Charlton born at Apple
in Shrepshire, a vigorous Knight to Marry her, creating him in her right Baron
of Powis. Being assisted with the King's Forces, he took three of her Uncles
Prisoners, and brought the fourth to composition. And finally recovered all his
Wives Estate, procuring also the Lands of her Uncles in default of their Issue
Male to be settled on her.

George Herbert born at Montgomery-Castle, was bred Fellow of Trinity-College
in Cambridge, and Orator of the University, where he made a Speech of the
return of Prince Charles out of Spain. Waving Wotldly Preferment he served at
God's Altar. Of so Pious a Life, that as he was a Copy of Primitive
Christianity, so he might be a Pattern of Sanctity to Posterity. He never
mentioned the name of Jesus but with this addition My Master. Next God the
Word, he loved the Word of God, being heard often to protest, That he would not
part with one leaf thereof for the whole World. By his good example he gained
much to the Church. He was Preacher at Bemmerton nigh Salisbury, where he built
a fair House for his Successor, and Prebendary at Leighton in the Diocese of
Lincoln, where he built a fair Church with the assistance of some Friends free
Offerings. When a tfriend of his went about to comfort him with the remembrance
hereof as a good work, he returned, It is a good work if sprinkled with the
Blood of Christ.

Edward Herbert his Brother was Knighted by King James I. who sent him over
Ambassador to France King Charles I. created him Baron of Castle-Island in
Ireland, and after Baron of Cherbury in this County. He was a most excellent
Artist and a rare Linguist, Studied both in Books and Men. He wrote a Treatise
of the Truth in French, extant with great honor in the Vatican Library at
Rome. He Married the Daughter of Sir William Herbert of St. Julian's in
Monmouthshire, with whom he had a large Inheritance both in England and
Ireland. He died in 1648. and was buried in St. Giles's in the Fields London. A
fair Monument of his own Invention was begun and almost sinisht in the Church
of Montgomery.

In the Year 1661. Dec. 20. about Sunsetting the Inhabitants of Weston in
Montgomeryshire, discovered a great number of Horsemen about 400 paces from
them, marching two a breast in Military order upon the Common, and were half an
hour before the Rear came up, seeming to be about 500 in all; the spectators
were amazed, thinking them to be an Army of Roundheads going to release the
Prisoners at Montgomery, (there being at that time several Ministers and
Gentlemen in Prison) and therefere several of them went to the top of the next
Hill, where they had another full view of them, and could distinguish their
Horses to be of several Colors, as white, gray, black, etc. and that they
marched in three Companies, and betwixt every Division they had two Horse
colors flying; but as they drew toward them they still marched from them, so
that they could not come nearer than 100 Yards; they asked a man (who was
thatching a House all that day, which they judged the Horsemen went by) whether
he saw all those Soldiers which marched by, who said that he saw none, neither
was there any Tract of the Horses to be seen that night, nor the next morning,
so that they concluded it to be a wonderful Apparition, and deposed the Truth
of these particulars before the Lord Herbert, and several other Justices of the
Peace of this County; at the same time a Women coming from Bishops Castle over
the same Common, fell off her Horse, being much terrified with the sight of a
blazing Star, which she and six men with her saw, sometimes white and sometimes
red, with a Tail like an Arrow, which seemed to hang just over their heads from
Bishops Mount to this Common, being three Miles, and the People of the house
where the Woman fell, when they came out, saw the Star also.

This County is very plentiful of Cattle, especially Horses, which for their
shape and swiftness are much valued. It is divided into seven Hundreds, wherein
are six Market Towns, and forty seven Parish Churches, and gives the Title of
Earl to Thomas Lord Herbert, who is likewise Earl of Pombroke. Cherbury the
Title of Baron to Henry Lord Herbert.

PEMBROKE-SHIRE is bounded by Carnarthen on the East, and Cardigan shire on the
North-East. On all sides else it is surrounded by the Sea. In length 26. in
breadth 20. and in circumference 93 Miles. It was anciently Peopled by the
Dimetree, as well as Cardigan and Carmarthen-shires, part of this County was
after inhabited by the Flemmings sent thither by King Henry I. who lost their
Country by the breaking in of the Sea, whereby a great part of Flanders was
drowned, and whose Posterity continue there to this day, and speak so good
English that their Division is called, Little England beyond Wales. The
Commodities of this shire are Corn, Cattle, Seafish and Fowl, and in the days
of Giraldus Cambrensis, they had Wines for sale, the Havens being so commodious
for Traffic, particularly Tenby and Milford, the last of which is so large a
Port that sixteen Creeks, five Bays, and thirteen Roads, distinguished by
particular names are all contained within it.

Pembroke is the Shire Town, which appears more ancient than it is, it was
formerly Walled and had three Gates, with a large Castle, and a Causey leading
over to the decayed Priory of Monton. The Town consists principally of one long
street, on a long narrow Point of a Rock, and has within the Walls thereof,
two Churches. St. David's is a Barren old City, having neither Trees to defend
it, nor is it pleasant with Fields or Meadows, but lies exposed to Winds and
Storms. It is now the seat of a Bishop, but was once an Archbishopric in the
British Church. At the first planting of the Gospel in the reign of King Lucius
there were three Archbishops Seats appointed, London, York, and Caerleon. The
last in the Reign of Arthur King of the Britains was translated from thence to
St David's as being farther off from the Saxon's fury. Twenty seven of them
retained the Title of Archbishops; the last whereof was Samson who removed the
Archi-episcopal Dignity to D^le in Bretaign a Province in France. Yet his
Suceessors though they lost the name, retained the power of the Archbishop, the
Welsh Bishops being consecrated by him till the Reign of King Henry I. when
Bernard the 47th Bishop of this See was forced to submit himself to the Church
of Canterbury. The Cathedral here has been often ruined by the Danes,
Norwegians and other Pirates, as standing near the Sea in an extreme Corner of
this County, that which we now see was built by Bishop Peter, and by him
dedicated to St. David. In the middle of whose Quire Edmund Earl of Richmond
Father to King Henry VII. lies buried, whose Monument secured the Church from
being defaced in the Reign of King Henry VIII. The roof of this Church is
higher than any in England.

Calphurnius a British Priest (who Married Concha Sister to St Martin, and had
St. Patrick the Apostle of Ireland to their Son, was born at St. David's.
Likewise Justinian a Noble Britain, with his own Inheritance built a Monastery
in the Island of of Ramsey in this County, where many Monks dwelt happily under
his Jurisdiction, until three of them Murdered him out of envy and emulation
for his Plous Life. His Body was brought to (...) or St. David's, and there
interred, and his Tomb afterward much famed for many supposed Miracles.
Giraldus Cambrensis whose Surname was Barry (some write Fitz Girald) the Welsh
Historian, was born at Tenby in this County, being Son to William Barry an
Englishman by his Wife Angareth, daughter of Nesta, Daughter of Rhese, or Rice
Prince of South Wales. He was Nephew to David the second Bishop of St David's,
by whom he was made Archdeacon of Brecknock. He was wont to complain, That the
English did not love him because his Mother was a Welshwoman, and the Welsh
hated him because his Father was an Englishman. Though by his excellent
Writings he deserved of England well, of Wales better, and of Ireland best of
all, making an exact description of all three, and acting in the last as
Secrety to King John, with great industry and expense. Having Traveled to
Jerusalem he writ a Book of the Wonders of the Holy Land. He had no great
success at Court, and therefore attained to no considerable Dignity, till at
length he was offered a very mean Bishopric in Ireland, and his highest
Preferment was to this of St. David's, of which he gives the true reason, That
he was looked upon with a Jealous Eye, because being a Welshman by the Mother,
the furer side, he was thought to have a natural antipathy against the English,
since it was believed no good Subject could come out of Walee. Being now Bishop
of St. David's he went to Rome, and there was very importunate for an exemption
of that Diocese from the Authority of Canterbury, whereby he highly offended
Hubert the Archbishop thereof. Whereupon being rather overborn with bribes than
overcome in his Cause, he returned without effecting it, and dying was buried
in his own Cathedral about 1215.

When King Henry II. was at St. David's in this County, and from thence in a
clear day discovered the Coast of Ireland, in an huffing bravado he said, I
with my Ships am able to make a Bridge thither if it be no farther. Which
Speech of his being related to Murchard King of Lemster in Ireland, he asked
whether he did not say, He would do it with the help of God: and being told no,
he cheerfully answered, Then I fear him the less, since he trusted more to
himself than to the help of God. The same King Henry coming back from Ireland
arrived at St. David's where being told that there is an old Prophecy of
Merlin's, That the Conqueror of Ireland returning that way should dye upon a
stone called Lechlaver near the Churchyard. He thereupon before a multitude of
People passed over it unhurt, and reproving the Welshmen said, Now who will
hereafter credit that Liar Merlin.

The County of Pembroke has been fortified with sixteen Castles, besides two
Block-houses or Forts Commanding the Mouth of Milford Haven, and has five
Market Towns, is divided into seven Hundreds, wherein are forty five Parish
(...) It gives the Title of Earl to Thomas Lord Herbert, who is also Earl of
Montgomery.

RADNOR-SHIRE has Monmouth on the North, Hereford and Shropshire on the East,
Brecknock on the South, and Cardiganshire on the West. In length twenty four,
in breadth twenty two, and in circuit ninety miles. The Air is sharp and cold,
as generally it is through all Wales, whereby the Snow lies long unmelted under
those vast Mountains, Hills and Rocks that overshadow the Valleys, yet the East
and South parts are somewhat fruitful, indifferently stored with Woods, and
watered with Rivers and Mears. The riches of the North and West consist chiefly
in the Cattle which they produce. The ancient Inhabitants were the Silures, who
by their own courage and the assistance of their inaccessible Mountains
preserved their freedom very long against all the attempts of the Romans. These
Rocks are so dreadful (says Mr. Speed) that I feared to look down from them
into those deep and dark Valleys through which I passed, which seemed to be the
entrance into the Kingdom of Darkness. Among these dismal Vales Historians say
that unhappy Prince Vertigern, (who invited in the Saxons to the ruin of his
Country) was with his incestuous Wife consumed with Fire from Heaven in his
Castle called Guartiger Maur. Though others write it was near Beshkelleth in
North Wales. Fatal was this place also to Leoline the last Prince of the
British Race, who being betrayed by the men of Buelth, fled into these vast
Mountains of Radnor, where by Adam Franston he was slain, and his Head Crowned
with Ivy set upon the Tower of London.

Radnor is the Chief Town in this County, from whence it receives its name,
called anciently Magi, where the Pacensian Legion of the Romans lay, and
thought to be Magnes mentioned by me Emperor Marcus Antoninus. It had formerly
a Wall, with a large and strong Castle. Prestayn is the best Town in this
Shire for handsome Buildings, and good Trading. Knighton is also a Market Town,
under which is to be seen the Tract of Offa's Ditch along the Edge of the
Mountain. The fourth place remarkable is, Raihader Gewy, from which word
Raihader the English, It is thought, named the County Radnor. It is also called
Meliueth, from the yellowish Mountains thereof, which stretch from Offa's Dyke
to the River Wye, which River cutteth overthwart the West corner of this Shire,
where meeting with some Rocks that impede its passage, for want of ground to
glide on it has a violent downfall, with a continual noise, and is called The
Fall of Wye. At this Town the Market day was formerly kept on a Sunday; but is
since altered. This Shire is divided into six Hundreds, wherein are three
Forests, four Market Towns, and fifty two Parish Churches, and formerly six
Castles. It gives the Title of Earl to Charies Lord Roberts.

There are several other Proverbs in Wales besides those already mentioned, as
1. Her Wash Blood is up: and it is no wonder that a very ancient Gentleman being
deprived of his Country, should digest his losses with great difficulty. 2. As
long as a Welsh Pedigree, and as high too, seeing commonly a Welsh Gentleman
can clime up to a Princely Extraction. 3. Give your Horse a Welsh Bait. That is
stop on the top of the Mountains, where the poor Palfrey is forced to make
shift with Cameleons Commons, the clear Air. 4. Calen y Sais wrah Gimro. That
is, the Heart of an Englishman toward a Welshman; This was invented while
England and Wales were at deadly feud, and applied to such as are possessed
with prejudice, and only carry an outward compliance without cordial affection.
5. Ni Che^w Cymbro oni Golle, That is, The Welshman keeps nothing until he has
lost it. When the British recovered their loft Castles from the English, they
doubled their Diligence and Valor, keeping them more tenaciously than before.
6. A fo Pen, bid Bout, That is, He that will be a Head let him be a Bridge.
This is of a ficticious Original, for Benigridan a Welsh General is said to
have carried his Army (one by one, we must imagine) upon his Back over a River
in Ireland, where there was neither Bridge nor Ferry, and therefore deservedly
was made their Prince. 7. There was an ancient Play in Wales wherein the
stronger put the weaker into a Sack, from whence came the Proverb, He is able
to put him up in a bag. The Princes of Wales are very ancient and numerous, yet
they never had any Coin of their own, as Mr. Camden observes. In the reign of
King William the Conqueror, upon the Sea shore in Wales was found the body of
Gawen, Sisters Son to Arthur the Great K. of Britain reported to be fourteen
foot in Length. In 1662. July 2. were seen above an hundred Porpusses together
near Newport, which seemed very strange and prodigious to the Inhabitants.
Walter Brute was born in Wales, A Siuner, Layman, Husbandman and a Christian:
They are his own words in a certain Protestation which he made. He was bred in
Oxford, and being accused to the Bishop of Hereford, he by a solemn
subscription submitted himself, principally to the Evangely (or Gospel) of
Jesus Christ, to the determination of the General Councils of Holy Kirk, to
Austin, Ambrose, Jerem and Gregory: And lastly to his Bishop, as a Subject
ought to his Bishop. It seems this Walter was the first that was vexed about the
Doctrines of Wickliff.

To conclude, the Principallity of Wales was modelled into Shires in the reigh
of King Henry VIII. In the thirteen Counties whereof aforementioned are
reckoned one Chase, thirteen Forests, thirty three Parks, two hundred thirty
Rivers, an hundred Bridges, four Cities, fifty five Market Townt, forty one
Castles of old erection, four Bishoprics, and a thousand and sixteen Parish
Churches, and elects thirty Parliamont Men.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultrey;
near Cheapside.
History.
1. ENgland's Monarchs: Or, A Compendious Relation of the most remarkable
Transactions, from Julius Caesar to this present; adorned with Poems, and the
Picture of every Monarch, from K. Will. the Conqueror to the Sixth year of the
Reign of K. Will. and Q. M. With a List of the Nobility, and the number of the
Lords and Commons who have Votes in both Houses of Parliament; and many other
useful particulars. Price one shilling.

2. THE History of the House of Orange: Or, a Brief Relation of the Glorious
and Magnanimous Archievements of his Majesty's Renowned Predecessors, and
likewise of His own Heroic Actions, till the Late Wonderful Revolution.
Together with the History of K William and Q. Mary, etc. Being an Impartial
Account of the most Remarkable Passages from their Majesty's Happy Accession to
the Throne to this time. By R. B. Price one shilling.

3. THE History of the two late Kings, Charles the II. and James the II. being
an Impartial account of the most remarkable Transactions, during their Reigns,
and the secret French and Popish Intrigues in those Times. Together with a
Relation of the happy Revolution, and the Accession of Their Majesty's, K.
William and Q. Mary to the Throne, Feb. 13. 1689. Pr. 1 s.

4. THE History of Oliver Cromwell, being an Impartial Account of all the
Battles, Sieges, and other Military Achievements, wherein he was engaged in
England, Scotland and Ireland; and likewise of his Civil Administrations, while
he had the Supreme Government, till his Death. Relating only matters of Fact,
without Reflection or Observation. By R. B. pr. 1 s.

5. THE Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland, containing a particular and
impartial Account of all the Battles, Sieges, and other remarkable
Transactions, Revolutions and Accidents, which happened from the beginning of
the Reign of K. Charles I. The Trial of K. Charles I. at large, with his last
Speech; and the most considerable matters till 1660. With Pictures of several
Accidents. Price one shilling.

6. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and Present State of
London and Westminster, showing the Foundations, Walls, Gates, Towers, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Schools, Inns of Courts, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with the
most remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and other occurrences,
for above 903 years past, Pr. 1 s.

7. ADmirable Curiosities, Rarities and Wonders in England, Scotland, and
Ireland; or an account of many remarkable persons and places; and likewise of
the Battles, Sieges, prodigious Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Thunders,
Lightnings, Fires, Murders and other Occurences and Accidents for many hundred
years past: Together with the Natural and Artificial Rarities in every County
in England With several curious Sculptures. Price one shilling.

8. THE History of the Kingdom of Ireland, being an Account of the Ancient
Inhabitants, and of all the Battles, Sieges, and other considerable
Transactions both Civil and Military in that Country, from the first Conquest
thereof, under King Henry II. till its entire Reduction, by His Majesty's Arms.
Together with the most remarkable Passages, that have since happened there to
this time. By R. B. Pr. 1s.

9. THE English Empire in America, or a prospect of His Majesty's Dominions in
the West Indies, namely, New Foundland, New England, New York, New Jersey,
Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina, Bermudas, Barbadus, Auguila,
Monserrat, Dominica, St. Vincent, Antego, Mevis or Nevis, St. Christophers.
Barbados and Jamaica: With an account of their Discovery, Situation and
Product: The Religion and Manners of the Indians, and other excellencies of
these Countries: To which is prefixed a relation of the discovery of this New
World, and of the remarkable Voyages and Adventures of Sebastin Cabot, Sir
Martin Frobisher, Capt. Davis, Capt. Weymouth, Capt. Hall, Capt. Hudson, Sir
Tho. Cavendish, the E. of Cumberland, Sir Walter Rawleigh and other English
Worthies, to diverse places therein. Illustrated with Maps, and Pictures of the
strange Fruits, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Insects, Serpents and Monsters found in
those parts of the World. Price one shilling.

10. A View of the English Acquisitions in Guinea and the East Indies: With an
Account of the Religion, Government, Wars, strange Customs, Beasts, Serpents,
Monsters, and other Observables in those Countries. And among others, the Life
and Death of Mahomet the Grand Impostor, with the Principal Doctrines of the
Turkish Religion as they are displayed in the Alcoran. Two Letters, one written
by the Great Mogul, and the other by the King of Sumatra in the East Indies, to
our K. James I. of an extravagant style. The cruel Executions in those parts,
with the manner of the Women's burning themselves with their dead Husbands.
Together with a description of the Isle of St. Helena, and the Bay of
Souldania; intermixed with pleasant Relations. Pr. 1s.

11. THE English Hero: Or, Sir Francis Drake. Revived. Being a full Account of
the dangerous Voyages, admirable Adventures, notable Discoveries, and
Magnanimous Achievements of that Valiant and Renowned Commander. As, I His
Voyage in 1572. to Nombre de Dios in the West Indies, where they saw a Pile of
Bars of Silver near 70 foot long, 12. foot broad, and 10. foot high. II. His
incompassing the whole World in 1577. which he performed in two years and ten
months, gaining a vast quantity of Gold and Silver. III. His Voyage into
America in 1585. and taking the Towns of St. Jago, St. Domingo, Carthagena, and
St. Augustine. IV. His last Voyage into those Countries in 1595. with the
manner of his Death and Burial. Revised, Corrected, and very much enlarged
reduced into Chapters with Contents, and beautified with Pictures. By R. B.
Price One Shilling.

12. TWo Journeys to Jerusalem, Containing first, An account of the Travels of
two English Pilgrims some years since, and what Admirable Accidents besel them
in their Journey to Jerusalem, Grand Cairo, Alexandria, etc. 2. The Travels of
14 English-Merchants in 1669. from Scanderoon to Tripoly, Joppa, Ramah,
Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Jericho, the River of Jordan, the Lake of Sodom and
Gomorrah, and back again to Aleppo. To which is added, a Relation of the great
Council of the Jews, assembled in the plains of Ajayday in Hungary, 1650. to
examine the Scriptures concerning Christ. By S. B. an Englishman there
present: With the notorious delusion of the Jews, by a counterfeit Messiah, or
false Christ at Symrna, in 1666, and the event thereof. Lastly, The Extirpation
of the Jews throughout Persia in 1666. Epistle of Agbarus to our Savior, with
our Savior's Answer: Beautified with Pictures. Pr. 1s.

13. EXtraordinary Adventures of several Famous Men: With the strange Events,
and signal mutations and changes in the Fortunes of diverse Illustrious places
and persons in all Ages; being an acount of a multitude of stupendons
Revolutions, accidents, and observable matters in diverse States and Provinces
throughout the World; With Pictures. Pr. 1 s.

14. THE History of the Nine Worthies of the World: Three whereof were
Gentiles: 1. Hector Son of Priamus King of Troy. 2. Alexander the great King of
Macedon, and Conqueror of the World. 3. Julius Caesar first Emperor of Rome;
Three Jews. 4. Joshua Captain General and Leader of Israel into Canaan. 5.
David King of Israel. 6. Judas Maccabeus a valiant Jewish commander, against
the Tyranny of Antiochus. Three Christians. 7. Arthur King of Britain, who
courageously defended his Country from the Saxons. 8. Charles the Great K. of
France, and Emperor of Germany. 9 Godfrey of Bullen King of Jerusalem. Being an
account of their glorious lives, worthy actions, renowned Victories and Deaths.
Illustrated with Poems and the Pictures of each Worthy. By R. B. Price One
shilling.

15. FEmale Excellency, or the Ladies Glory, Illustrated in the Worthy Lives
and Memorable Actions of nine Famous Women, renowned either for Virtue or
Valor, in several Ages: As 1. Deborah the Prophetess. 2. The valiant Judith.
3. Q. Esther. 4. The virtuous Susannah. 5. The Chaste Lucretia. 6. Boadicia Q.
of Britain, in the Reign of Nero, with the Original Inhabitants of Britain. Of
Danus and his fifty Daughters, who murdered their Husbands in one Night: Of the
valor of Boadicia, under whose conduct the Britains slew 70 thousand Romans,
with many other remarkable particulars. 7. Mariamne Wife of K. Herod 8.
Clotilda Queen of France. 9. Andegona Princess of Spain. The whole adorned with
poems and pictures to each History. By R. B. Price One Shilling.

16. WOnderful Prodigies of Judgment and mercy, discovered in above 300.
memorable Histories; containing, 1. Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists,
Blasphemers, and Perjured Villains. 2. The miserable ends of many Magicians,
etc. 3. Remarkable predictions and presages of approaching Death, and how the
event has been answerable. 4. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants, Murderers,
etc. 5. Admirable Deliverances from imminent dangers and deplorable distresses
at Sea and Land. Lastly, Divine goodness to penitents, with the dying thoughts
of several famous Men, concerning a future state. Pr. 1 s.

17. Unparalleled Rarities, or the Mathchless Actions and Passions of Mankind;
displayed (...) near 400 notable Instances and Examples, discovering the
transcendent Effects; 1. Of Love, Friendship and Gratitude. 2. Of Magnanimity,
Courage and Fidelity. 3. Of Chastity, Temperance and Humility: And on the
contrary, the Tremendous consequences; 4. Of Hatred, Revenge and Ingratitude.
5. Of Cowardice, Barbarity and Treachery. 6. Of Unchastity, Intemperance and
Ambition. Imbellished with Proper Figures. Price 1 s.

18. THE Kingdom of darkness: Or, The History of Demons, Specters, Witches,
Apparitions, Possessions, Disturbances and other wonderful and supernatural
Delusions, Mischievous Feats and Malicious Impostures of the Devil. Containing
near 80 memorable Relations, Foreign and Domestic both ancient and modern.
Collected from Authentic Records, Real Attestations, Credible Evidences, and
asserted by Authors of undoubted Verity. Together with a Preface obviating the
Common Objections and Allegations of the Sadducees and Atheists of the Age, who
deny the Being of Spirits, Witches, etc. With Pictures of several memorable
Accidents. Pr. 1 s.

19. Surprising Miracles of Nature and Art, in two parts; containing, 1. The
Miracles of Nature, or the wonderful Signs, and prodigious Aspects and
Appearances in the Heavens, Earth and Sea; with an account of the most famous
Comets, and other Prodiges, from the Birth of Christ to this time. 2. The
Miracles of Art, describing the most Magnificent Buildings, and other curious
Inventions in all Ages, at, the seven Wonders of the World, and many other
excellent Structures and Rarities throughout the Earth. Beautifyed with
Pictures. Price 1 s.

20. THE General History of Earthquakes: or An Account of the most Remarkable
and Tremendous Earthquakes that have happened in diverse parts of the World from
the Creation to this time, and particularly those lately in Naples, Smyrn^
(...)maica, England and Sicily; With a Description of (...) Burning Mount
Aetna, and the seve^^^ dreadful Conflagrations thereof for many Ages. To which
is added an Appendix, containing several other late strange Accidents and
Occurences. As I. A Surprising Account of Angels Singing Psalms in the Air over
the Ruins of the Protestant Church at Orthez, a City in the Province of Bearne,
and other places in France in the year 1686. with the Words they Sang in the
hearing of many hundred Auditors at once, Papists as well as Protestants, II.
The Life of a Great Person of near an Hundred years old, who is now an Hermit
in a Forest in France, with the Devotions, Clothing, Diet and Subsistence of
him and his Companions, etc. III. The wonderful Army of Locusis or Grasshoppers
that were seen near Breslaw in Silesia, September. 7. 1693. and in other parts of
Germany; which in their March took up 16. Miles devouring every Green thing.
IV. Three Miraculous Cures wrought by Faith in Christ, in 1693. As 1. Of Mary
Maillard the French Girl, suddenly healed of an extreme Lameness. 2. The Wife
of Mr. Savage Cured of a Lame Hand. 3. A Shepperd near Hitchin in Hartfordshire
instantly healed of the King's Evil, under which he had languished Twenty
Years. Price one shilling.

21. MEmorable Accidents and Unnheard of Transactions, containing an account of
several strange Events: As the Deposing of Tyrants, Lamentable Shipwracks,
Dismal Misfortunes, Strategems of War, Perilous Adventures, Happy Deliverances,
with other remarkable Occurrences, and select Historical passages, which have
happened in several Countries in this last Age. Printed at Brussels in 1691.
and Dedicated to His present Majesty, William King of England, etc. Published
in English by R.B. Pr. 1 s.

22. MArtyrs in Flames, or Popery in its true Colors being a Brief Relation of
the horrid Cruelties and Persecutions of the Pope and Church of Rome, for many
hundreds of years past, to this present time, in Piedmont, Bohemia, Germany,
Poland, Lithuania, France, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Scotland, Ireland, and
England; with an abstract of the cruel Persecutions lately exercised upon the
Protestants in France and Savoy, in the year 1686, and 1687. Together with a
short account of God's Judgments upon Popish Persecutors. Price 15.

Miscellanies.
23. DElights for the Ingenious, in above Fifty Select and Choice Emblems,
Divine and Moral, Ancient and Modern, curiously Engraven upon Copper Plates,
with 50 delightful Poems and Lots, for the more lively Illustration of each
Emblem, whereby instruction and good counsel may be promoted and furthered, by
an honest and pleasant Recreation; to which is prefixed, A Poem, entitled,
Majesty in Misery, or an Imploration of the King of Kings, written by K.
Charles I. with his own hand, during his Captivity in Carisbrook Castle in the
Isle of Wight, 1648. with a curious Emblem. Collected by R. B. Price 2 s. 6 d.

24. EXcellent Contemplations Divine and Moral, written by the Magnanimous A.L.
Capel Baron of Hadham; together with some account of his Life, and his
affectionate Letters to his Lady the day before his Death, with his Heroic
Behavior and last Speech at his Suffering. Also the Speeches and Carriages of
of D. Ham, and the Earl of Holl, who suffered with him: With his Pious Advice
to his Son. Price 1. s.

25. VVInter Evenings Entertaintment, in two parts, Containing, 1. Ten Pleasant
Relations of many Rare and Notable Accidents and Occurrences: 2. Fifty
Ingenious Riddles, with their Explanations, and useful Observations and Morals
upon each. Enlivened with above 60 Pictures, for illustrating every Story and
Riddle. Excellently accommodated to the Fancies of Old or Young, and useful to
cheerful Society and Conversation. Price 1 s.

26. DElightful Fables in Prose and Verse, none of them to be found in Aesop,
but collected from diverse Ancient and Modern Authors, with Pictures and proper
Morals to every Fable. Several of them very applicable to the Present times. by
R. B. Price bound one shilling.

Divinity.
27. THE Divine Banquet, or Sacramental Devotions, consisting of Morning and
Evening Prayers, Contemplations and Hymns for every day in the Week, in order
to a more Solemn Preparation for the worthy Receiving of the Holy Communion,
representing the several steps and degrees of the Sorrows and Sufferings of our
blessed Savior, till he gave up the Ghost: As, 1. His Agony in the Garden. 2.
His being betrayed by Judas. 3. His being falsely accused, smitten, buffetted,
and spit upon before Caiaphas the High Priest. 4. His condemnation, scourging,
crowning with Thorns, and being delivered to be crucified by Pontius Pilate. 5.
His bearing his Cross. 6. His crucifixion. 7. Our Savior's Institution of the
Blessed Sacrament. Together with brief Resolutions to all those scruples and
objections usually alleged for the omission of this important duty. With eight
curious Sculptures proper to the several parts, with Graces. Imprimatur Z.
Isham, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris. Price 1 s.

28. A Guide to Eternal Glory: Or, brief Directions to all Christians how to
attain Everlasting Salvation: To which are added several other small Tracts:
As, 1. Saving Faith discovered in three heavenly conferences between our
Blessed Savior, and, 1. A Publican, 2. A Pharisee, 3. A doubting Christian. 2.
The threefold state of a Christian: 1. By Nature: 2. By Grace: 3. In Glory. 3.
The Scriptures concord, compiled out of the words of Scripture, by way of
question and answer, wherein there is the sum of the way to Salvation, and
spiritual things compared with spiritual. 4. The Character of a true Christian.
5. A brief Directory for the great, necessary, and advantageous duty of
Self-examination whereby a serious Christian may every day examine himself. 6.
A short Dialogue between a Learned Divine and a Beggar. 7. Beams of the Spirit,
or Cordial Meditations, enlivening, enlightening, and gladding the Soul. 8. The
Seraphick Souls Triumph in the Love of God; with short remembrances and pious
thoughts. 9. History improved, or Christian Applications and Improvements of
diverse remarkable Passages in History. 10. Holy Breathings in several Divine
Poems, upon diverse Subjects and Scriptures. Price one Shilling.

29. YOuths Divine Pastime; Containing Forty Remarkable Scripture Histories,
turned into common English Verse. With Forty Pictures proper to each Story;
very delightful for the virtuous, employing the vacant hours of Young Persons,
and preventing vain and vicious Divertisements. Together with several Scripture
Hymns upon diverse occasions. Pr. 8 d.

30. THE Young Man's Calling, or the whole. Duty of Youth, in a serious and
compassionate Address to all young persons to remember their Creator in the
days of their Youth. Together with Remarks upon the Lives of several excellent
young Persons of both Sexes, as well Ancient as Modern, who have been famous
for Virtue and Piety in their Generations. With twelve curious Pictures,
Illustrating the several histories. Price 1 s. 6 d.

31. THE Vanity of the Life of Man represented in the Seven several Stages
thereof; With Pictures and Poems exposing the Follies of every Age. Price Eight
pence.

32. DIstressed Sion Relieved, or, the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of
Heaviness. A Poem, Wherein are discovered the grand Causes of the Churches
trouble and misery under the late dismal Dispensation. With a complete History
of, and Lamentation for those Renowned Worthies that fell in England, by Popish
rage and cruelty, from the Year 1680. Humbly Dedicated to Their Present
Majesty's. By Benjamin Keach, Author of a Book called, Sion in Distress, or the
Groans of the true Protestant Church. Price one shilling.

33. ANtichrist Stormed, or the Church of Rome proved to be Mystery Babylon the
Great Whore, Rev. 17. by many and undeniable Arguments, Answering all the
Objections of the Papists, and all others. Together with the Judgment of many
Ancient and Modern Divines, and most Eminent Writers concerning the rise and
final Ruin of the Beast and Babylon, proving it will be in this present Age
with an Account of many strange Predictions relating to these present Times. By
Benjamin Keach. Price one shilling.

34. THE Devout Souls Daily Exercise in Prayers Contemplations and Praises,
containing Devotions for Morning, Noon, and Night, for every day in the week;
with Prayers before and after the Holy Communion: And likewise for Persons of
all conditions, and upon all occasions: With Graces and Thanksgivings before
and after Meat. By R. P. D. D. Price bound Six Pence.

35. SAcramental Meditations upon diverse select places of Scripture, wherein
Believers are assisted in preparing their hearts, and exciting their affections
and graces when they draw nigh to God in that most awfal and solemn Ordinance
of the Lords Supper. By Jo. Flavel Minister of Christ in Devon. Price One
Shilling.

36. JACOB Wrestling with GOD, and prevailing: Or a Treatise concerning the
Necessity and Efficacy of Faith in Prayer: Wherein diverse weighty Questions and
Cases of Conscience about praying in Faith, are stated and resolved: For
comforting and satisfying of weak and scrupulous Consciences: The Conviction of
formal Hypocrites, awakening of all Saints both weak and strong, great and
small, to this great Duty of Prayer. By Tho. Tailor, formerly at Edmund Hury,
now Pastor to a Congregation in Cambridg. Price one Shilling.


