THE APPRENTIS's COMPANION


He that is called in ye Lord being a Servant is the Lords Freeman. 1 Cor.
7.22. Fidelitas Diligentia If thou with Piety join diligen^ God will thy faith
and labor recompen.



THE APPRENTICES Companion, Containing Plain and Useful Directions for
Servants, especially Apprentices, how to perform their Particular Dutys to
their Masters, so as to please God.

And discovering such Sins and Vices which are the Common Hindrances to them
therein.

With some Examples of Gods Severe Judgments upon such as have taken ill
Courses.

Together with Prayers and Devotions for Morning and Evening.

To which is added, A short and familiar Method of Arithmetic, and some Copies
of the most Useful, Writing Hands.

By Richard Burton Autho of the Civil Wars of England, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Mercer, at the Sign of the Half Moon under the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1681.

THE EPISTLE TO PARENTS
NOthing can be more plain and evident, eve^ by the light of Nature than that
it is the indispensable Duty of Parents to take care for the good Education of
the^ Children: This Charge Solomon gives, Prove. 22.6. Train up a Chil^ in the
way be should go. Nor is the obligation to this Duty greate^ than the
advantages of i^ due performance, arising from the comforts which such Parent
^^dinarily reap as the fruit of ^^eir labors. But Alas! how ^uch are the
dismal effects of ^^e great neglect too many Pa^^nts are guilty of herein, to
be ^^mented, while they take no ^^re to eradicate those roots of Corruption
which they commu^icated to them from their own ^nful Natures. As soon therefor
as your Children attain to ^^e use of Reason, and are capa^le of receiving
instructions, it is (...) debt you owe to their Souls to ^eason them with the
early ^nowledge of their Duty, Chil^ren frequently retaining those Principles
they imbibed in their tender age; if you train up a Chil^ in the way he should
go, when he (...) old he will not depart from it.

And indeed the Obedience o^ Children to Parents, during their tenderest age is
so unseparabl^ from their own future comfort as well as that of their Parents
that none can deservedly be sai^ to be desirous of their Children future good,
and advancemen^ even in this World, that do no^ labor to infuse into them suc^
good and pious Principles a^ may entitle them to the protection and blessing of
that God wh^ has commanded Children t^ Honor their Parents, and hat^
encouraged them to a careful^ performance of that great duty ^y making it as
the Apostle observes, the first Commandment with promise; and I am persuaded,
if Parents would be prevailed upon, seriously to weigh and deli^erately to
consider the advan^ageous Consequences that would doubtless ensue their
di^igent discharge of this duty, and ^here enter upon a faithful ende^our to
perform it, we should ^oon find by a happy experience, ^ow great and almost
incredible ^n influence a religious education of Youth would have upon ^he
World, and how far it would tend to a blessed Reformation from that Atheism and
Profan^ness which like a Leprosy has ^verspread not only the Christian World,
but even those place which are accounted the Refo^med parts thereof: but the
P^rents care must not terminate i^ laying the foundation of a goo^ Education in
their Children (...) without procceding with equa^ diligence to erect the
Supe^structure of a Virtuous Life, encouraging their willing end^^vours,
correcting any Stubbor^ and Disobedient Behavior, an^ maintaining that
Authority ove^ them which God and Nature ^ath invested them withal for their
good. The next thing ^herein Parents ought to ma^ifest their love to their
Chil^ren is, in taking care for their ^uture Maintenance in some Calling or
Course of Living ^hereby they may hereafter be ^n a capacity of Maintaining
themselves and their Families, and relieving those that are in Want, and be
useful and service^ble in the Places where they ^^ve, may the better exercise
^he General Duties of Christiani^y, and may also be restrained from the
Vanities of Youth, from the immoderate pursuit of pleasures, from unlawful
Games Idleness and Ill Company, and multitudes of other Inconveniences, which
too frequently are found to be the Sluices and Floodgates through which a
Deluge of Wickedness has overflowed the Soul, and drowned it in utter
perdition.

In the choice of a Calling let your principal Care be, that it be such a one
as is approved and warranted by the Word of God, or at least, not contrary to
the General Rules prescribed therein, that so the diligent exercise thereof may
not necessitate the Shipwreck of Faith or a Good Conscience.

2. That the Calling have ^ome aptitude and fitness for the Child, there being
as great a di^ersity amongst the Capacities of Children, as there are va^eties
of Calling, some are ^ttest for such Callings as re^uire an accute and ready
Wit, ^ith the help of Learning, and ^ome Callings do chiefly require ^n able
and strong Constituti^n of body: and indeed the Pro^idence of God is very
remarka^le herein, for all Persons may and some employment suitable ^o their
Capacity, and become serviceable one to another; an^ therefore in the
management o^ this weighty Concern, respec^ ^ought to be had to the Ability and
Inclination of the Child, a^ being a matter wherein much o^ ^he future Comfort
and Con^entment of his Life does consist. Nor ought your care to be less in
bestowing your Chil^ with such a Master, as by his Godly and Prudent Government
of his Family may restrain ^he too forward desires of Youth after that liberty
which oftentimes proves very prejudicial and destructive; and by his own Pious
Example and Instructions encourage any ver^uous Inclinations in his Servants.

Vale.
THE APPRENTICES COMPANION.
CHAP. I. Of Servants.
GOvernment is a thing so absolutely necessary, that without it, Mankind,
instead of being reduced into Civil Societies and Republics, would quickly
appear, to be like Herds of Beasts, or heaps of Flys; who do what they list,
are incapable of Laws, and obey none, and therefore are killed and destroyed at
pleasure, but are sensible neither of reward nor punishments.

Now of all Governments, the Government of Families was the Original, which is
commonly divided into three parts; That of Husband and Wife, Parents and
Children, Masters and Servants. It is the last of these only, whereunto this
present. Discourse is designed; wherein we would endeavor in this last and
worst Age of the World, to give some motives and directions to Servants, as to
their indispensable Dutys toward their Masters; but more particularly to
Apprentices, that Genteel Servitude, which by a few years service faithfully
and diligently performed toward their Masters, lays a certain foundation for
attaining Riches and Honor in this world, and by Gods grace everlasting
happiness in the life to come.

There is nothing more plain nor certain, than that God Almighty has ordained
and appointed degrees of Authority and Subjection; allowing Authority to the
Master, and commanding obedience from the servant unto him; for God has given
express commands to Masters to govern their Servants, and to Servants to be
subject to their Masters. As in the Fourth Commandment, Masters are charged
that they take care, their Servants do no manner of work. And in the Sixteenth
of Genesis the Angel bids Hagar humble herself under her Mistress hands; and
St. Paul in Ephesians, 6.5. gives long directions to servants, as to their
obedience to their Masters, many directions are likewise given both to Masters
and Servants in regard of their different places, how they are to deport
themselves to each other; As the many Laws prescribed by Moses to that purpose,
and the several Precepts, Proverbs and Councels of King Solomon upon that
account; as also those of St. Paul and other Apostles. And further, Christians
in all Ages have asserted and owned this distinction; some of them having been
placed as Masters, and others as Servants, and according to the Station which
it has pleased God to allot them, they have performed their mutual dutys;
likewise the many Parables which our blessed Savior makes use of, and which
he draws from the powers which Masters have and exercise over their Servants,
and the obedience required of them to their Masters, do abundantly confirm the
same. God has also made diverse promises both to Masters and Servants that
shall honestly and with a good Conscience perform the several dutys of their
relations, and has set down diverse threatenings against those that are careless
and negligent there in. All which Arguments are so clearly and plentifully
expressed in the Word of God, that any person who is acquainted with the Holy
Scriptures will be easily satisfied therein.

This being premised: The next thing that an ingenious and well minded young
man ought to do, is willingly to prepare and compose himself to some honest
Calling and Employment, wherein he may afterward live serviceably and
comfortably in his Generation. And to that end let him consider, that it is
dishonorable to come into the World as an useless Cipher, or to stand in it,
as a Tree that cumbers the ground; and that therefore he ought to endeavor to
appear hereafter with some what of true worth upon the Stage; for God has
committed to all persons some^ Talents for improvement, though with great
variety, and it will be expected at all our hands, that we bind not up our
Lords Talent in a Napkin; but that we should cheerfully address our selves to
be useful for the good of the whole, since we are all Gods witnesses, that
throughout the whole Creation, from the Angel in Heaven, to the Hysop upon the
Wall; from the Sun in the Firmament to the Waters hidden in the bowels of the
Earth; all of them labor to perform those good offices, which God in his
Wisdom has created them unto.

Therefore an industrious young man should take example from these, and not
stand idle in the Marketplace, while all other creatures are thus
industriously at work in the Lords Vineyard: to which purpose, his first care
ought to be in the choice of his Calling, wherein we may observe too many to
miscarry; some by their unadvisedness therein, binding themselves, as it were,
Apprentices to continual temptations, and in effect, necessitate themselves to
the promoting the service of Sin and Vanity in the World, which no man ought
either to abet or shelter. Others again match themselves to Employments which
their dispositions can never affect, and so like Turkish Gally-Slaves they toil
themselves heavily and unwillingly in their Trades all their days.

These Rocks being avoided, every wise young man ought to aim that his Calling
may be in its nature just and lawful in the management thereof, that it may
comport with the public Good, and serve for his own support and maintenance,
and in its kind, that it may be suitable in some measure to his own abilities
and inclinations: and because in these things he is young, unexperienced, and
very subject to mistakes, he ought to refer himself very far to the riper
judgment and disposal of his friends.

And now having with their advice and consent placed himself in his Calling,
his next care ought to be, to settle his mind therein, and to reckon it to be
the Sphere and Station which God has appointed him to continue in, and to
study to perform all the duties which are required from a true and faithful
servant, which we shall reduce into several particulars.

1. Respect to, and fear of his Master, as set over him by Divine Authority, to
have such a reverend esteem of his Master as to count him worthy of all honor,
as St. Paul expressly enjoineth Servants to do, from whence proceeds, a dread of
provoking him to wrath, and using all lawful and honest means to please him;
and this kind of fear is intimated by St. Paul in Ephesians 5.6. Servants be
obedient to them that are your Masters according to the flesh with fear and
trembling, etc. And indeed this fear is so proper and necessary in a Servant,
that where it is wanting there seems to be a plain denial of the place and
power of a Master, which God himself intimates in that expostulation, Malac.
1.6. If I be a Master where is my fear: as much as to say, it is apparent and
evident that you do not account me your Master, because in your hearts you have
no fear of me. Now where this fear is really implanted in the heart of a
Servant, it will induce him faithfully to perform all duties to his Master, and
the more it abounds, the greater desire and endeavor will there be to please
and content the Master, according to that of St. Paul to Titus 2.9. Exhort
Servants to be obedient unto their own Masters, and to please them in all
things; yea, it will rejoice the heart of a good Servant to see his Masters
Affairs prosper, of which we have a very worthy Example in Abraham's Servant,
whose great care in his Masters business; his praying for a Divine Blessing
thereupon, and his thankfulness for his succeeding therein, was a clear
evidence of that awful respect and reverence which he bore toward his Master:
Let a Servant therefore consider that God has placed his Master in his stead,
and has in part given him his power; Masters are the Deputies and Ministers of
God, and therefore the Title of Lord is after a peculiar manner given to
Masters in the Holy Scriptures, Genesis 24.2. Ephesians 6.5. Now as Inferior
Magistrates are reverenced by the People, because they represent the Person of
the King, and receive their Authority and Power from him; so ought Servants to
have reverence for their Masters, as those that by Gods appointment are placed
over them.

Contrary to this, is that slavish fear, when a Servant is afraid of nothing
but the revenging power of his Master, the Whip or the Rod, as we may say; and
if they can avoid that, they take no further care whether their Master be
pleased or not; this is that fear, which causes Servants to wish, that their
Masters had no power over them, or that they were rid of them; this is that
fear which possessed the heart of that unprofitable Servant in St. Matthew 25. I
knew that thou were an hard man, and I was afraid; such servile fear as this
is, will never oblige a servant to be profitable to his Master.

No less contrary to this awful Respect, is that light esteem, and real
contempt that some Servants have of their Masters, which is apparent from that
opposition, which God himself makes between them in Malachy aforementioned, If
I be a Master where is my fear, O ye that despise my Name? As if he should have
said, you do hereby show that you do not fear me as a Master, because you
despise me; this sin of despising Masters is expressly forbidden by St. Paul, 1 Timothy 6.2. and for this sin Hagar was dealt hardly withal by Sarah, because her
Mistress was despised in her eyes. And when Masters happen to be poor, weak or
aged, or otherwise infirm, it is then usual for proud Servants to despise their
Masters, which shows a very ill and unworthy mind, and argues that they respect
the power their Master exercises over them, more than his Place and Office;
for the meanest and weakest Masters have of right the same Authority on their
Servants, as the richest and most wise; they all bear the image of God alike,
and therefore proud and disdainful Servants, in scorning them, do in effect
disregard the image of God in them.

Now this respect that is due from Servants to their Masters is discovered in
their Words, that is by refraining to speak in the presence of their Master
without some just cause: that expression concerning Solomon's Servants in 1 King
10.8. They stand continually before thee, and hear thy words: seems to intimate
that they were slow to speak, and swift to hear in the presence of their
Master, from that respect which they had toward him.

Servan^s ought likewise to forbear replying and answering again to their
Masters, especially when they know it will be offensive to them; Thus St.
Peter, when our blessed Savior gave him this short answer, what is that to
thee? John 21.22. he forbore to speak any more.

To this may be added, Servants attending and regarding what their Masters
shall please to deliver to them, and show such kind of respect to their Masters
when they are speaking to them, as Samuel did to God Almighty, in 1 Samuel 3.10.
When he said Speak Lord for thy Servant hears. This reverence likewise did
Abraham's Servant show to his Master, when he received a Wife for his Son
Isaac, Genesis 25, 9.

And for the better ordering of their Speech toward their Masters, it is
necessary that Servants consider when it is convenient for them to speak, and
that is, either when their Masters require it of them, as our Savior did of
his Disciples in St. Matthew 16.13. when he asked them, whom do men say, that I
the Son of Man am? Or else, when they know it is for the interest of their
Masters to speak to them, that is, when they know o^ any thing that may be for
the advantage and profit of their Masters, then they ought to declare it though
they be not asked, and this was the case of the Servant of Naaman, 1 King.
2.13. who observing the loathsome disease wherewith her Master was infected,
she without asking, informed her Mistress that there was a Prophet in Samaria
who would recover him of his Leprosy: and sometimes a Master may through
ignorance or passion refuse to do what his Servant is satisfied will be for his
benefit; in which case it is the duty of Servants to persuade them to it; and
thus did some others of the Servants of Naaman in the place aforementioned,
when they persuaded their Master to wash himself in the River of Jordan as the
Prophet Elisha advised him to do.

Also if Servants do not fully understand the will of their Masters, as to what
they are sensible they ought to do, then are they to know the will of their
Masters therein, and thus did the Disciples of our Lord act in St. Matthew
25.17. when they asked their Master, where will thou that we prepare for thee
to eat the Passover? Or when some scruple arises in their minds, as to the
management of those Affairs wherein they are employed, then ought they to
inquire of their Masters, as the Servant of Abraham did, Genesis 24.5. when he
said, what if the Woman will not come with me? Or Lastly, when their Master
unjustly suspecteth them to be guilty of what they are innocent in, then may
they lawfully vindicate themselves to their Master, as David did to Saul in 1 Samuel 24.9. And David said to Saul, wherefore hear thou men's words, saying,
Behold David seeks thy heart?

Yet let them still be careful that their way and manner of speaking be with
submission and respect to their Masters, and to this purpose let them speak to
them with respectful Titles. It was a very worthy respect which the Servants of
Naaman used toward him, when they called him, My Father; let Servants words be
few when they speak to their Masters, and let them use no more than is
necessary; let them be likewise humble and submissive. Observe but how the
Children of the Prophets managed their discourse with their Master Elisha, 1
King 6.1, 2. They first humbly beg leave that they may go to Jordan, then they
beseech him to go in these words, Vouchsafe we pray thee to go with thy
Servants, and when one of them had lost the Head of his Hatchet, he seems
afraid positively to ask his Master to restore it again, but refers it to his
pleasure, only cries out, Alas Master, for it was borrowed.

Servants ought also to observe convenient seasons for speaking to their
Masters, as when they know they are at leisure to hear them; and this is
remarked of our Saviors Disciples, Mark 4.10. That when their Master was alone
they propounded their Questions to him; likewise when they see their Masters
mind is not disquieted or disturbed with Passion, thus when David observed that
the mind of Saul was somewhat pacified by the words which he uttered, 1 Samuel
26.17. Is this thy voice my Son David? he from thence took encouragement more
freely to discourse with him.

Servants should likewise, give ready and present answers to what their Masters
demand of them, and this is often commended in St. Peter, that when our Blessed
Savior propounded any question to his Disciples, he would return a present and
ready answer thereunto. But above all things, let their speeches and answers to
their Masters be nothing but what is truth; let them by no means dare to tell a
Lie, according to that of the Poet: Ever speak Truth, nothing can need a Lie,
A fault that needs it most, grows two thereby.
This discovers a very reverend respect to a Master; when Eli demanded of young
Samuel what the Lord said to him, 1 Samuel 3.18. we read that, Samuel told him
every whit, and hid nothing from him. And when David charged the Woman of
Tekoah not to hide the thing that he should ask her from him, 2 Samuel 14.18, 19.
She told him the whole truth: and this Servants are obliged to do, both upon
the account of Conscience toward God, who is a God of Truth and cannot lie, and
out of respect to their Masters, with whom they ought to deal faithfully in all
things, and therefore, Lastly, should speak honorably of their Masters behind
their backs, speaking good of them and not evil: and this Respect did Abraham's
Servant likewise discover toward his master, Genesis 34.35, etc.

Now contrary to that respect in the aforementioned particulars, is that
confidence and boldness in Servants, which is now too much in fashion, whereby
Servants seem to have no regard to their masters presence; but are full of idle
and impertinent discourse, even before, or within hearing of their master:
answering again, and repeating the words of their masters, is likewise contrary
to this respect, and occasions much trouble and disturbance; so is impatience
also, when they will not endure to hear their masters make an end of their
discourse, but will either intempt them, or go away from them.

Stubbornness, or refusing to give an answer of what is demanded of them,
though their silence may be prejudicial to their masters or themselves, is
contrary to that respect which is due to their masters: and so is Pride and
Arrogance in speaking to their masters, which proceeds sometimes from Servants
despising, or disdaining of their masters for their Poverty, or some other
reason, and sometimes from Servants overvaluing themselves, and thinking
themselves better than he, by reason of their Birth, Parentage or Education,
which occasions them to forget the present circumstances they are in, and the
place and condition wherein they are; from whence proceed too low and mean
thoughts of their masters, and too high and presumptuous conceits of
themselves; and this does often occasion muttering and murmuring upon every
inconsiderable accident, and is the occasion many times of much disturbance, as
Solomon says, Proverbs 15.1. Grievous words stir up ananger.

Uns^asonable or impertinent interruption of their masters, is also a sign of
very little respect, especially when his mind is intent upon some urgent or
important affair, and this the people seem guilty of in St. Mark 3 32. when
they interrupted our Savior while he was preaching to them, by telling him,
that his Mother and his Brethren were without to seek him: speaking to their
Masters while they are in Passion, is very unbecoming to Servants, and has
often occasioned great mischief and damage; and so has stubborness, or want of
speaking in Servants when they have been required thereunto. Holy Job among his
many other afflictions and calamities complains of this as one, I called my
Servant and he gave me no answer, Job. 19.16.

But especially lying, is very sinful and wicked, when a Servant shall
endeavor to hide or conceal a fault thereby, and is very contrary to that
respect which is due to a Master; Lying is in it self a very heinous sin, but
has far greater aggravations when it is imposed upon those who have authority
over us, and are thereby the Representatives of the Almighty: when Gehazi had
cunningly got Money and Garments from Naaman, and his Master inquired of him
where he had been, he very briskly replies, Thy Servant went no whither, 2
King. 2.25. whereupon Elisha to deter all Servants from such wicked practices
for the future, immediately executes the judgment of Naaman upon him, The
Leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cleave unto thee and to thy seed for ever.

Lastly, It is very wicked in a Servant to disgrace or speak evil of his master
in his absence, for though what he may say of his master may be true, yet ought
he rather to conceal his faults and infirmities than discover them; how much
more abominable is it then to raise false and slanderous reports of his master;
this was a monstrous and ungrateful wickedness in Ziba against his master
Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 16.3. and ought to be avoided by all honest and faithful
Servants.

And as Servants ought to be respectful to their masters in words, so likewise
in their Carriage and Behavior toward them; and therefore according to customs
or places wherein they are, they ought to use all submissiveness toward them,
in going to them, coming from them, receiving any charge from them, or bringing
any message to them. When Isaac gave his Blessing to Jacob, Genesis 27.29. he
gives him this as part of it, Be Lord over thy Brethren, and let thy Mothers
Sons bow down to thee: which seems to determine the posture of a Servant, and
likewise his duty therein. And therefore when the Children of the Prophets saw
that the Spirit of their master Elijah rested upon Elisha, 2 King 2.15. they
presently concluded it to be an evident demonstration, that God had appointed
him to be a Master and Governor over them, and thereupon they came to meet
him, and bowed themselves to the ground before him.

And therefore the whole behavior of a Servant toward his master ought to be
managed with such modesty and humility, as may plainly discover an honorable
respect to him, as by standing in the presence of his master, to signify that
he is ready to perform any service which his master shall require of him; and
this was one thing which was taken notice of, and commended by the Queen of
Sheba in the Servants of Solomon 1 Kin 10.5. for when she saw their standing
she said, Happy are thy men, happy are these thy Servants, which stand
continually before thee, and hear thy Wisdom. Likewise to have their their
heads uncovered in our times, and (...) these parts of the World is in men a
^gn of respect to each other, and therefor ought to be used by Servants toward
their Masters. Briefly, there ought to ^e modesty and sobriety in the whole
car^iage and countenance of Servants in the ^resence of their Masters, that
they may ^hereby testify their reverence and respect ^oward them.

How rude and unbecoming then is the carriage of those Servants, who for want
of good Education come in, and go out of the presence of their Masters, without
^he least sign of respect toward them, as ^f they were their fellows and
companions: others, if at the first coming in of their Masters they show any
kind of reve^ence toward them, yet all the day after, ^hey presume upon a saucy
and unbecom^ng familiarity with them, and can scarce aford to keep themselves
uncovered in his sight, especially (as we hinted before) ^f the Master be mean
and low in the World; as if a poor Master did not represent the image of God,
as well as the rich; certainly the Word of God makes no difference nor
distinctions, it does no where command them to serve rich Masters only; with
fear and trembling; Servants therefore ought more to regard the Authority, than
Ability of their Masters since God has conferred as much honor and authority
upon the poor Master a^ the Rich.

CHAP. II. Of Servants Apparel.
THE Apparel and Cloths worn by Servants, ought to be according to their
quality and decree, and not to exceed their Masters, as is too much used in
these days; since one end of our Apparel is to distinguish between superiors
and inferiors, and therefore it must necessarily show a great disrespect in a
Servant, to exceed his Master therein. An ingenious Servant is easily contented
with mean, but becoming Raiment; he knows the time of his life will be but
short, and therefore thinks it unreasonable that his thoughts about such
inferior things should be long. Fond cares about the body do too frequently
entice away the strength of the mind after them.

2. Exceeding faulty therefore a^ those Servants who are so excessive in the^
Apparel, that there is no distinction between them and their Masters, or if
the^ be, the Servant excels in Gallantry; no^ modes and fashions are many times
soon taken up by Servants than their Masters* and they seldom scruple at any
indirect course for procuring them: So that if the Queen of Sheba were now
living, she would have as much cause to admire (...) the disorder that is to be
seen among Servants in our days, as she wondered at the comely order of the
Servants of King Solomon. Let such proud Servants take heed for if God has
threatened to visit the Children of Princes that walk in strange Apparel, Zeph.
1.8. it is much to be feared tha^ he will more severely visit them.

3. Besides let Servants remember tha^ cloths are things which add no true
wort^ to any, and therefore it is an intollerabl^ vanity to spend any
considerable part o^ our time upon them, or to value our selve^ ever the more
for them; Let Servants rather cloth themselves as richly as possible with all
Christian Graces and Virtues; for those are the garments that will make them
appear lovely in Gods Eyes, yea, and in Men's too; for there are none but Fools
and Idiots, who will not value persons more for being good, than because of
their fine cloths.

4. For let us but consider to what end our Clothing and Apparel was designed,
and we shall have no great cause to be proud of it: one end was the covering of
our nakedness, as we may read, Genesis 3.21. and that was the effect of the first
sin, and therefore we have cause to be ashamed and humbled, as having lost that
innocence which was a much greater Ornament than any the most glorious Apparel
can be; and from hence we are engaged to have our Cloths modest, that it may
answer the end of covering our shame. Another end of our Apparel is, the
defending the body from cold, and thereby to preserve the health of the body.
Lastly, Another is, the differencing and distinguishing of Sexes, and likewise
of Qualities, as was intimated; God has placed some in a higher condition than
others, and in proportion to their condition, it is necessary their clothing
should be; and therefore it befits Servants always to remember their present
State and Station, and to cloth themselves accordingly, and if they desire to
adorn themselves, let it be as St. Peter advises persons in his time, 1 Pet.
3.4. In the hidden man of the heart, even the ornament of a meek and quiet
spirit.

CHAP. III. Of Servants Obedience to their Masters.
CErtainly no inferiors are more obliged to Obedience than Servants; it is
their chief and principal duty, and expressly commanded in the Scriptures, Ephesians.
5.6. Servants be obedient to them that are your Masters, etc. and indeed all
other dutys are comprehended under obedience; so that those who are contrary
minded, who are rebellious, and disdain to be under the command of their
Masters, and are ready to say with those in St. Luke 19.14. We will not have
this man to reign over us, ought to be accounted as Enemies to God and all
Civil Authority and Government; for how can they pretend to acknowledge them to
be their Masters, if they deny all lawful subjection to them?

2. Now the Obedience required of a Servant to his Master, consists either in
not doing any thing without the advice, or against the consent of his Master;
or in readily obeying and performing all the lawful commands of his Master: as
to the first, Servants ought to forbear to do any thing without, or against the
consent of their Masters, because that during the time of their Service, they
are not their own men, neither ought they to do any thing upon their own
account; both their persons and actions are all their Masters, the will of
their Masters must be their absolute rule and guide in all things which are not
contrary to the Will of God. We have a very notable example in Abraham's
Servant, who when he was employed by his Master in a matter of concernment, he
propounds all such scruples as he could then think of to his Master, that he
might receive direction from him therein, that so he might not be obliged to do
any thing of his own head without particular order and warrant from his Master,
Genesis 24.5.

3. And this part of a Servants duty will appear more plain and evident by
considering some particular instances, of these things which a Servant ought
not to do without the consent of his Master, as we find them recorded in the
holy Scriptures.

4. Servants ought not to go whither they please without the knowledge of their
Masters, that expression of the Centurion in St. Matthew 8.9. I say to one go,
and he goes, seems strongly to imply, that without the consent of his Master a
Servant ought not to absent himself from his Service: and therefore those
Servants who watch their opportunities to go whither they list, when their
Masters are employed about some urgent affairs, or at night when their Masters
are gone to their rest, are very much to be blamed, and do exceedingly come
short of that obedience which is required of Servants, besides the dangerous
consequences which commonly proceed from such ill practices: thus Gehazi the
lewd Servant of Elisha, watched his opportunity to run after Naaman supposing
that his Master would know nothing of it, but the dreadful effect thereof upon
him and his Posterity, may be a sufficient warning to all other Servants for
the time to come, 2 King 5.20.

5. Servants ought not to manage their own Affairs and Concerns and neglect
that of their Masters; it is observed that Jacob while he was a Servant to
Laban, though he had a Flock of his own, yet he fed his Masters Flocks, and
committed his own into the hands of his Sons, for them to keep and look after,
Genesis 30.25. which is contrary to the practice of some Servants, who being bound
faithfully to serve their Masters, yet do their own business, and study and
contrive their own profit and advantage without the license or knowledge of
their Masters, and this was the aggravation of the crime of Gehazi, and made
it, as it were, private stealing, by his with, drawing himself from the service
of his master, and going to receive gifts upon his own account, and thus faulty
are many unfaithful servants who will make use of their masters Credit and
Reputation for their own benefit and profit.

6. Servants ought not to do what business they themselves please, though in it
self lawful, and upon their masters account; we read in 2 Samuel 18.19. that
Ahimaaz had a great desire to carry the news of the death of Absalom to King
David, yet he would not presume to do it without leave given him by Joab, who
was his Captain and master; it is said Proverbs 31.15. that the virtuous Woman
or Mistress gives a Portion to her Maidens, that is, the portion of work which
they are to do by her appointment. The servants of the Centurion every one
performed that part of their duty which was required of them: and those
servants that had their Talents committed to them, Mat. 25.16. each of them was
solicitous for the improvement of his own Talent; therefore servants ought not
to choose their own work, or to do only that part of it which pleases them, or
else wholly to neglect it, or do it with much unwillingness or discontent.

7. Servants ought not to marry during the time of their service, and this
Apprentices generally oblige themselves not to do by their own consent in their
Indentures, without leave from h^ir masters; and the Law of God in Exodus 21.4.
allows a servant to marry, if his Master give him a Wife, which implys that he
may not marry without his leave, and therefore when St. Paul in 1 Cor. 7.2.
says, To avoid fornication let every man have his Wife, etc. he discovers what
means God has appointed for every one to avoid Fornication, yet not that every
one should make use of it, when it may happen to be contrary to some other
Command or Order ordained of God; for this precept is given to those that are
within their own power, but servants and children are to be directed by their
Masters and Parents: However, if necessity require, servants have liberty to
acquaint their masters with their desires, and to use all lawful means for the
obtaining liberty, or the assent of their master therein.

8. Servants should not dispose of the Goods of their master at their own
pleasure, nay, though it may be to charitable uses. The Steward in St. Luke
16.1, 2. who wasted his masters Goods was justly deprived of his office for the
same; yea, in the 8th verse he is called the unjust Steward, for disposing of
some of his masters Goods, for his own future maintenance, and therefore it was
a point of injustice, and unlawful; and though it is said the Lord commended
him; the intent thereof only is, that he commended his Wisdom therein, but not
his injustice; he commended his care for providing for the future, not the way
and means he made use of for obtaining it; neither ought servants to be liberal
in disposing of their masters Goods, or to think that without their leave they
may give them to the Poor; for pretense of Charity is no excuse for Injustice,
and therefore they ought to give their master or mistress an account that such
things are in the House, and meet to be disposed of for the relief of the Poor;
but without the knowledge and consent of their masters, they ought to dispose
of nothing.

9. Servants ought not to go from their masters till the time of service which
they have covenanted with them, be expired, when Jacob after a very long
Apprenticeship to Laban, had a desire to go away from him, Genesis 30.26. he asked
leave, and because his Uncle and Master was unwilling to part with him he
continued still with him; and though it is afterward said, that Jacob stole
away privily from his master; yet it is plain, that the Covenanted time of his
Service was out, and that he had an express Command and Warrant from God
Almighty to be gone; and therefore his example herein is neither to be insisted
on, nor followed, without such an extraordinary Call thereunto, which is not
now to be expected. And therefore those two servants who ran away from their
master Shimei in the 1 Kin. 2.39. are charged therewith by the Holy Spirit, and
it is Recorded to their shame and infamy; and Onesimus who run away from his
master, is sent back by St. Paul, Philemon verse. 22. And Hagar is by an Angel
commanded to return home to her Mistress, Genesis 16.9. And though it may be
objected that their Masters are cruel and severe, as it is said Sarah was to
Hagar, yet an Angel from Heaven commanded her to go back, and submit her self
under the hand of her mistress, and St. Peter 1 Pet. 2.18, 19. gives this
positive charge to servants. Be subject to your masters with all fear, not only
to the good and gentle, but also the froward; for this is thank-worthy, if a
man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully.

CHAP. IV. Of Obedience to the Commands of Masters.
1. HAVING briefly discoursed of what Servants ought not to do if they would
testify their obdience to their Masters. Let us in the next place consider
what is their duty herein: The first and principal part whereof, is a very
ready and willing performance of all the lawful commands of their Master; the
power of commanding is in the Master, and the duty of obeying in the Servant;
and therefore the peculiar duty of a servant, is to have respect to his masters
desires, and to do what he requires him.

2. And thus the Prophet David describes the property of a good servant, Psalm.
123.2. The eyes of Servants look to the hands of their Masters; which
expression of looking, as it implies an expectation of relief and succor: So
likewise it intends a willing and ready mind to execute any command that
their masters should lay upon them. And the Centurion, St. Mat. 8.9. commends
this duty in his servants, who performed whatever he commanded them: and so
also are the servants of Abraham, Elijah and others; and our blessed Savior in
St. Luke 17.7, 8. seems to exact and require this duty of servants; when he
intimates, That though a Servant have been all the day long at plow, which is a
very tiresome and laborious employment, yet when he comes home, if his master
command him to dress his Supper, and wait, he must do it. By all which
Instances it appears, that if a master command his servant to come or go, to
do this or that, he ought to obey him therein.

3. When servants therefore refuse to perform the commands of their master,
This is the highest degree of Disobedience; and this was a great crime in Ziba,
the servant of Mephibosheth, who when he was commanded to saddle his masters
Ass, that he might meet King David 2 Samuel 19.20. went away and did it not,
which might have happened to have been very prejudicial to his master; and thus
Job laments and complains of his servants; who being called would not answer
nor obey him, Job 19.16. And this indeed of all other offenses, is the most
provoking, because it discovers the greatest contempt of the power and
authority of a master.

4. And this obedience of Servants, must not be a grumbling and unwilling
service, but ready and cheerful, as St. Paul exhorts, Ephesians. 6.5, 7. Servants
obey your Masters in all things, with good will, doing service, and to help
them therein, they are to consider that it is to the Lord and not to men; our
blessed jesus took upon hius the form of a servant, Phil. 2.7. and has in that
case left his own example as an excellent pattern, for Psalm 40.8. he says, I
delight to do thy will; speaking to God that sent him. and St. John 4.34, My
meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work Intimating
that Jesus Christ did do the work of him that sent him, with the same
willingness, delight and cheerfulness that a man eats his meat when he is
hungry: and Jacob served his Uncle Laban cheerfully, Genesis 29.20. So that seven
years seemed to him but a few days; and though one reason thereof was his love
to Rachel; yet if he had not had some kindness and respect to his master and
his service, the time might have seemed tedious enough; but however, if the
Love of Rachel caused Jacob to perform his service so cheerfully; then if
servants love God, for whose sake they ought to do their duty, and who has
promised, that whatsoever good thing a man does, the same he shall receive of
the Lord, whether he be Bond or Free, Ephesians. 6.8. then should they execute all
the commands of their masters with cheerfulness and willingness.

5. And indeed that temper of mind which St. Paul tells us, is requ^red in the
giving of Alms, 2. Cor. 9.7. may be very fitly extended to all other Christan
Dutys, which we are commanded to perform; for he says that God loves a
cheerful giver; that work or duty therefore that is not seasoned therewith, is
not acceptable to God; and as cheerfulness in our works renders it more
pleasing to the Almighty, he so it likewise causes it to be more easy and
pleasant to those who are exercised therein, as it is in our common Proverb,
nothing is hard to a willing mind.

6. Nay, when there is this cheerfulness of spirit in a servant, he is even as
free as his master, for such a servant is the Lords Freeman, 1. Cor. 7.22. And
though he be not free from his master, yet he does thereby make his service as
easily as freedom to himself. Let servants therefore have respect toward God
in their service, and to his acceptance and remuneration, or rewarding
thereof, and this will very much quicken and enliven them in their duty. If a
reward from men encourages poor men to be glad of their work, and to perform
it cheerfully: If Tradesmen, Physicians, Lawyers, and in deed most sorts of men
are with much willingness engaged to take great pains for the hope of gain and
advantage; should not the recompense which God has promised to bestow upon
servants, be a strong willingness therein: Let them therefore endeavor to
obtain such an Eye of Faith as Moses had, Heb. 11.26. who had respect unto the
recompense of the reward

7. That service then which is performed with heaviness of spirit, and
discontentedness of mind; that same which is done grudgingly and by compulsion,
is certainly very displeasing both to God and man, that service which servants
are forced to out of mere necessity, is rather the service of a beast than a
man, and servants surely can reap but little satisfaction nor comfort from it,
since it can be no ways pleasing to God, nor acceptable to their Masters.

CHAP. V. Of Obedience to the Instructions of Masters.
NOW as a Master has power to command, so it is likewise his duty to instruct
his servants in the ways of righteous, and likewise in that civil course of
li^e wherein they ought to walk for the future; and it is the duty of servants
to hearken, and to be obedient to them therein: and those servants who are
bound to their masters to learn a Trade of them, are more particularly obliged
to hearken to their masters, in what he shall instruct them; and endeavor with
their utmost diligence to perform what he requires, and that upon several
accounts.

2. As that Servants may for the future do their masters better and more
profitable service; and that by being perfectly instructed in their calling or
mystery, the^ may be the more capable to maintain and provide for themselves
and their familie^ when they come to be free; and may likewise be able to
instruct those that may happen to be servants to them in time to come^ and
thereby be serviceable in their Generations for the advantage of mankind, an^
may the better discharge a good conscienc^ in that particular place, and
calling, which it has pleased God to allot to them.

3. But some servants through Idleness sluggishness or dullness, or else by
reason of carelessness and untowardness, are very faulty in this particular,
and therefore exceeding vexatious and troublesome t^ their masters or
themseives, and never prove expert in their Trade and Employment; whereas had
they been careful, attentive and obedient to their masters Instructions, they
might have known as much as he: These are to be reckoned enemies both to their
masters and themselves; (...) grief and trouble to their Parents and Friends,
and unprofitable Drones in the City or Country where they dwell.

4. Those Servants who have pious and ^eligious masters, that are careful to
in^truct their servants in the ways of godli^ess, ought likewise to be obedient
to the ^nstructions of their masters therein; such were the servants of Joshua,
or else cer^ainly he would not have engaged for them ^s he did Joshua, 24.15.
As for me and my house we will serve the Lord, and such were the servants of
that Rule mentioned ^n St. John, 4.53. of whom it is said, that, himself
believed and all his household. And the Servants of Lydia, Acts 16.15. who was
baptized and her household; and ^he Jaylors servants in the 33 verse of that
Chapter; of him it is mentioned, that he believed in God and all his house; for
under the Term of House and Household, surely none doubts but that servants
are likewise comprehended.

5. Now if these Servants had not hearkened nor yielded to the Instructions of
their Masters or Mistresses, they would not have believed in him, in whom their
master believed; neither would they have been baptized at the same time with
their mistress; and that expression of St. Paul. Romans 16.5, Likewise greet
the Church that is in their House; and Philemon ver^ 2. to the Church in thy
House, seem to imply, that all in the house were of the same faith with the
master and mistress; and i^ is expressly observed, Acts 10.7. that the Soldier
which waited continually upon Cornelius, was a devout man, and one that feared
God with all his house.

6. And the transcendent benefit and advantage which will redound to servants,
by harkening to, and obeying such pious instructions, is unspeakable, for there
is more real profit to be obtained by following the spiritual directions of
religious masters, than by the most subtle and cunning Artifices they can
learn from the wittiest and overreaching Person in the way of their Trade and
Employment; and therefore both upon the account of duty, and also for their
profit and Interest, servants are bound to give ear to, and follow the godly
Instructions of their masters.

7. But notwithstanding this du^y is so exceeding beneficial, yet of all
others, it is generally least accounted to be a duty, and commonly neglected
and disregarded, and the contrary thereof too much in use and practiced: for
many servants have such ^icious and debauched minds, that if it ^e possible,
they will avoid being concern^d with those masters who make consci^nce instruct
their servants in the way of ^ternal life and salvation, They will choose
^asters that are irreligious, and profane Worldlings, Atheists, or any thing
rather ^an those that are serious and religious; or nothing is so displeasing
to our corrupt ^atures, as being restrained, and kept ^ithin the bounds of
Religion: there are ^ew that are willing to walk in that narrow ^ay, or enter
into that straight gate, which ^eadeth to everlasting happiness; The God ^f
this World does so blind the eyes of most ^en, that they cannot see nor
consider the and of this narrow way; They cannot for ^ant of faith behold the
blessedness this ^reight gate will bring them into; or if they ^o see it or
believe it, yet they think it is (...) far off, and their minds do so much
sa^our the things of the flesh, and of this pre^ent evil world, that they do
not regard ^he happiness that is to come.

8. Now those masters that are religous, will endeavor as much as possible to
oblige all their servants to walk in this narrow way; whereas those that are
irreligious, will suffer them to go in the way of their own hearts, without
interruption or reproof; they will not correct them for swearing, sying,
drunkenness, or profanation of the Sabbath, but suffer them to spend that holy
day of Rest as they please, either in drinking, walking or playing without the
least restraint; they allow them to rise and go to bed, without prayer,
Catechizing, hearing or reading the Scriptures; and if they do but rise to do
their masters business and follow his employment, they concern themselves no
farther; such masters are not like devout Cornelius, who was one that feared
God and all his house, and prayed to God always.

9. And therefore some servants, who have been placed with religious masters,
when they have observed the pious and devout dispositions of their masters, and
the strict orders of their family, they have been very much discontented
therewith, have thought their master's houses to be as bad as a Prison to them,
often mur^uring and muttering because of the re^raint which was laid upon their
destruc^ve exorbitances; and when they have ^een called to any religious
Exercise, they ^ve been ready to say, that they never ^me to learn this, nor to
be thus employ^d; but if their masters will set them a^out their work, they are
willing to per^rm it; but this strictness and exactness in ^eir lives and
conversations, does not at ^l agree with their vicious and extrava^ant humors
and naughty inclinations.

10. Other Servants again, are more ^egligent and careless in doing the
business ^hey are employed in, because their ma^ers are religious; and it is
many times ^bserved, that profane and irreligious ^asters shall have more
service done them ^an those that are godly and pious; yea though those good men
give them more ^ncouragement than others, which some ^harge as a fault in the
masters; but que^ionless it is generally chargeable upon ^ervants, who by their
vitiated tempers and inclinations, do esteem the false de^ights and pleasures
in sin, and the liberty ^llowed them therein by ill men, to be much more
valuable than any virtuou^ consideration whatsoever; and thereby demonstrate
themselves to be inpious and Rebels against God, ungrateful to their masters,
and very injurious and false to their own souls: But let such perverse minds
remember the Rule of blessed St. Paul, 1 Timothy 6.2. That they that have
believing masters, let them not despise them, but rather do them service
because they are faithful and beloved.

CHAP. VI. Of Submission to the Rebuke and Correction of Masters.
1. THE Obedience which Servants ought to render to their Masters, in respect
of Rebuke and Correction, is patiently and meekly to suffer Reproof, not
answering again, as St. Pau^ exhorts Titus, 2.6. that is, not making such surly
and rude replies, as may increase the displeasure of their Masters, a thing too
frequently practiced by Servants, even when there is just cause of
reprehension, whereas St. Peter directs them to suffer, even the most
undeserved correction, even when they do well and suffer for it, 1 Pet. 2.18.
when the Apostle gives them an express command which is strengthened and
enforced by many reasons, Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear,
not only to the good and gentle, but to the froward, for this is thankworthy,
if a man for Conscience toward God, endure grief, suffering wrongfully; for
what glory is it, if when you are buffeted for your faults, you take it
patiently? This is acceptable with God.

2. From which Precept of St. Peter it is very clear and evident, That
correction is to be patiently endured by Servants, and if so, then much more
reproof, and though correction may sometimes happen to be unjustly inflicted;
yet it is to be suffered quietly, and therefore by consequence much more, when
it is deservedly laid upon them; and if buffeting, and that from a froward
Master, be thus submissively to be born, then much more the lighter Rebukes and
Corrections of a good and discreet Master. Joseph patiently endured Fetters,
Iron Chains and Imprisonment, though they were unjustly inflicted upon him;
even for his Justice and Faithfulness to his Master, but great was the
recompense which he received of God for the same, and there is nothing more
sure, than that the righteous Lord of Heaven will render recompenses to those
his Servants who shall endure pains and grief and wrong for the sake of a good
Conscience, and in pursuance of their duty toward God; for the Apostle says,
this is thank-worthy, as if he should say, it is worthy of praise and
commendation, and so consequently of reward. He says likewise, it is
acceptable to God; so that though men may account it baseness and meanness of
spirit, nay, though proud and unjust Masters may from thence take occasion to
insult and trample upon their Servants, yet God will recompense them for the
same.

3. For this is one of the principal Rules of our Christian Profession, which
is likewise intimated by St. Peter, when he says, even hereunto were ye called;
and the Christian Religion requires all men, to give place unto wrath, Romans
12.19. to turn the other Cheek when one is smitten, St. Mat. 5.39. to overcome
evil with goodness, Romans 12 21. Now if all good Christians are required to use
so much patience and forbearance toward their equals, how much more ought
Servants to suffer it from their Masters, and St. Peter recommendeth the
Example of our Blessed Savior himself in this case, 1 Pet. 2.21. who when he
was reviled, reviled not again; and when he suffered, and that most
injuriously, yet he patiently endured all; and let Servants remember, that if
they suffer with Jesus Christ, they shall likewise reign with him.

4. And therefore if it should happen, that a Servant should be unjustly
reproved by his Master, and charged with what he is altogether innocent of, yet
an angry and passionate contradicting his Master, may chance to be of very ill
consequence, and therefore if he thinks fit to undeceive his Master, that so he
may no longer continue to have an-ill Opinion of him, let him humbly and meekly
vindicate himself when he shall find a convenient opportunity: Nay, though a
Servant should be likewise unjustly corrected, yet ought he to make no
resistance, since our Savior himself could very easily have freed himself from
his Persecutors, but would not, and his Example is recommended to Servants, for
if Servants suffer for Conscience sake, they will not resist, though it be in
their power so to do.

5. Much less will they study to revenge themselves upon their Masters, as some
wicked Servants have designed to do; for this proceeds from a malicious and
desperate mind; and those who in their heart^ wish the ruin and destruction of
their Masters, make themselves guilty of blou^ before God, who without serious
Repentance will require it at their hands.

6. But the patient suffering of rebuke is not all that is required of Servants
i^ this matter, they must also amend the fault which they are rebuked for, and
no think that they have done enough, when they have (though never so dutifully)
given their Master the hearing; and it may sometimes happen, that a real
amendment of former faults, may cause a Servant to be better, and more useful
than before he committed them; as St. Paul seems to intimate in his Epistle to
Philemon ver. 11. where speaking of Onesimus, he says, In time past he was to
those unprofitable, but now profitable to thee and me.

7. If Servants therefore, after being rebuked, go on still in their evil and
indirect courses, and thereby add greater Provocations to their Masters, they
are to be reckoned either proud and scornful, (and Solomon says, a scorner
bears no Rebuke, Prove. 13.1.) or else, that it proceeds from a base, servile,
brutish disposition, of whom it is said, An hundred stripes enter not into him,
Prove. 17.14. and is one of those fools whom Solomon characterizeth, Prove.
27.22. Though thou should bray a fool in a Mortar among Wheat, with a Pestle,
yet will not his foolishness depart from him. But much worse is the temper of
those servants, who grow more extravagant extravagant for being rebuked and
corrected; certainly, such as these must expect nothing but shame, beggary, or
some ignominious death, without speedy amendment and reformation.

CHAP. VII. Of Fidelity.
1. ANother great duty of Servants toward their Masters, is, that faithfulness
whereby Servants are oblied truly and faithfully to discharge that trust which
is committed to them; and this is expressly commanded to Servants by St Paul, to
show all good fidelity, Ti^us, 2.10. And it is required in Stewards that a man
be found faithful, 1 Cor. 4 2. And that expression concerning Moses, H^b. 3.5.
He was faithful as a servant, implys, that faithfulness does properly and
absolutely belong to Servants; and our Blessed Savior joineth goodness and
faithfulness together, St. Mat. 25.21. Well done thou good and faithful
Servant, which intimates, that a Servants goodness consists in his
faithfulness.

2. And this fidelity in Servants is very advantageous both to their Masters
and themselves; the benefit that accrues to Masters thereby, Solomon takes
notice of, Prove. 25.13. As the cold of Snow (is very pleasant, refreshing and
comfortable) in the time of Harvest (when men are even ready to faint with
heat) so is a faithful messenger to them that send him, for he ref^esheth the
soul of his masters, And the advantage that redounds to Servants is excellently
describe^ by our Savior, who thereby likewise discovers his approbation and
rewarding thereof; St. Math. 25.21. Well done thou good and faithful Servant,
thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many
things, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

3. Every Servant must be called to an account, if not by his Master on Earth,
yet by his Master in Heaven, who will then say to every one, Give an account of
thy Stewardship. Luke 16.2. Now if Servants be not faithful, what other
sentence can they expect, then that which was pronounced upon that wicked,
slothful and unprofitable Servant, who hid his Talent in a Napkin, Mat. 25.30.
Cast ye the unprofitable Servant into utter darkness, there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth.

4. Now this fidelity in Servants consists in several particulars; whatsoever
is committed by a Master into the hand of a Servant must by him be carefully
preserved: And that expression of St. Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 6 20. keep that
which is committed to thy trust, seems to be a Metaphor taken from the duty of
Servants; and great was the faithfulness of Joseph in this kind, which caused
his Master to put all that he had into his hand, Genesis 39.4. the fidelity of
Jacob was likewise very remarkable, Genesis 31.38. for in twenty years wherein he
had the keeping of his Master Labans Cattle, the Ews and the she Goats cast not
their young, neither were the Rams of the Flocks devoured, etc.

5. If Servants therefore observe any damage to be done to their Master's Goods
(which are under their charge) by others, they must carefully endeavor to
prevent it, or to give an account thereof to their Masters, that it may be
redressed, as those Servants did which are mentioned in St. Matthew 13.27. who
gave notice to their Masters, that Tares sprang up in his Field instead of good
Corn. And this Duty is indeed absolutely necessary in a Servant; for every
Master is supposed to entrust his Affairs, as well to the care, as to the
honesty of a Servant, for it would be little advantage to a Master to be
secured that his Servant himself would not cheat him, whilst in the mean time,
he would by his carelessness give opportunity to others to do it.

6. Servants ought likewise to endeavor to advance and promote their Master's
Estate and Concerns; the little that Laban had, Genesis 30. was by the
faithfulness of Jacob in this kind increased into a multitude. And the Talents,
which were committed to the trust of the two faithful Servants, in St. Matthew
25. were by their care and industry increased into as many more; so that
Servants do not sufficiently discharge their duty by not impairing their
Masters Estates, unless they improve it; for he that kept his Master's Talent
safe, was accounted an unprofitable Servant, and received a very severe doom
accordingly; therefore he that does not carefully look to his Masters profit,
deceives his Trust as well, as he that unjustly provides for his own.

7. And this is another chief part of fidelity in a Servant, the not converting
any part of his Masters Goods to his own use, without leave and allowance from
him, or retaining any thing that is due to his Master; and this is that
Purloining which the Apostle expressly charge Servants not to be guilty of,
Titus 2.10. not purloining, but showing all good fidelity; and this word
purloin, is the same whereby the fraud and deceit of Ananias is described, Acts
5.2. who kept back part of the price for which the Possession was sold. And
this indeed is no better than arrant Theft.

8. Now under this Head may be comprehended; not only open and manifest Robbing
of their Masters, by stealing their Money, or conveying away their Goods; but
those other ways, that a Servant has of gaining to himself, by the loss and
damage of his Master, as being bribed to make ill bargains, concealing part of
the price which he has received for his Masters Goods; borrowing money in his
masters name; charging more expense to his Masters account than has been truly
expended; inveigling away his Master's Customers, or purloining the Men's Goods
committed into the Custody of his Master, to his great discredit and damage
many times. And indeed this sort of unfaithfulness, is worse than common Theft;
for by how much there is a greater trust reposed in any Person, so much the
more does the betraying thereof add to the crime.

9. The Fidelity of a Servant is likewise expressed in the doing all true
Service to his Master, not only when his Eye is over him, and he expects
punishment for his omissions and neglects; but at all times even when his
Master is not likely to discern his sailing; and that Servant that does not
make conscience of this, is far from being a faithful Servant; This Eye-service
being by the Apostle put in opposition to that singleness of heart which he
requires in Servants, Ephesians. 6.6. not with Eye-service as Men-pleasers, but as
the Servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart. Thus Joseph
feared his Master in singleness of heart; and therefore he refused to abuse his
Master, by committing wickedness with his Mistress, though she was in a private
Chamber, and none but themselves in the House. Happy is it for Masters when
they have such Servants as he was, that they took no more care than Potiphar
did, who committed all his Concerns into the hands of Joseph.

10. How unfaithful then are those Servants, who act with a double heart, when
they perform only Hypocritical Service to their Masters, who are really
Eye-servants, and such a Servant was Gehazi, who came in and stood before his
Master, 1 Kings 5.25. as if he had performed some considerable service for him;
when in the mean time, he had almost highly dishonored him; and such a wicked
Servant was Judas, who had as plausible a carriage and behavior before his
Master as any other of the Disciples, St. John 13 29. and yet was an horrid
Traitor in his heart; for when it was thought that he went out to buy
Provisions for his Master, at that very time he went purposely to betray him.

11. A Servants faithfulness is likewise discovered, in dispatching all the
affairs of his Master, which are under his hand, and to endeavor that they
prosper; It is noted concerning ^oseph, 39.2. that he was a prosperous man. And
we have an excellent Precedent for this in the Example of Abraham's S^rvant,
who was very faithful in dispatching the business of fetching a Wife for Isaac,
and the matter accordingly prospered in his hand; of which we may observe
several reasons; one was that he feared God, as we may read in the whole
management of this affair; and God prospers such as fear him in all things
they take in hand, as we may see in the examples of Jacob, Joseph, David and
others; then he called upon God for success upon his endeavors; now p^ayer is
the most ready way to obtain any blessing from God; and without that all our
endeavors are in vain; It is in vain to rise up early, or to go to bed late,
and to eat the bread of carefulness, unless the Blessing of the Lord attend it,
Psalm, 127.2. Then he returned thanks to God, when he saw an hopeful beginning
of his affairs; Thanksgiving for the beginning of a Blessing, is the most
effectual means for succeeding therein. Lastly he took all oportunities to
inform himself in his business, Genesis 24.17.23. and when he had concluded and
dispatched it, he makes no stay, but returns back again to give his Master an
account thereof: so that he omitted nothing which he thought to be necessary in
that matter; and acted therein, as if it had been for himself; and is thereby a
worthy pattern for all faithful Servants to imitate.

12. How blameworthy then are those Servants, who never concern themselves,
whether the affairs wherein they are entrusted by their Masters, prosperor not?
for if they have any ways employed themselves therein; so that their Master
cannot say they absolutely neglected it, that is all the care they take; nay
many times these Servants, instead of using the means for obtaining a blessing;
(as Prayer, Thanksgiving and the like) run into such wicked and debauched
courses, as do directly prevent, and hinder them from succeeding in their
Masters business, such as swearing, drunkenness, uncleanness and the like:
These Irreligious Servants, as they sin against God and their own Souls, so
they are likewise unfaithful, and unprofitable to their Masters.

13. There is another part of Fidelity in a Servant toward a Master which
consists in keeping his secrets, and concealing his Infirmities. For by
reason of the obligation and near converse and concernment that is between
them; there is a necessity that Servants must be acquainted with some secrets
of their Masters, which in faithfulness they are obliged to conceal, still
supposing that they do not tend to the dishonours of God, nor to the
indangering of the Government, nor to to the damage or mischief of any
particular Person: for Jonathan is commended for discovering the mischievous
design which Saul secretly intended against David, 1 Samuel 20 12 And Solomon
says, He that is of a faithful Spirit concealeth a matter, Proverbs 11.13. The
faithfulness of Jeremiah is very remarkable, Jer. 38.27. who tho the Princes
came to him to know what he had said to King Zedekiah, yet he would not reveal
it to them: the faithful concealing the infirmities of a Master, is likewise
required of a Servant; for the best men are subject to many; and Servants being
continually conversant with their Masters must necessarily observe some of
them; and if they be not faithful herein, the discovering them may be very
prejudicial, and of ill consequence.

14. Servants ought likewise to be faithful to their Masters, in assisting,
advising, and concealing one another, by giving virtuous examples to them,
encouraging them in virtue and goodness; and discouraging their vicious
inclinations and practices; and likewise by prese ving peace, unity and
kindness between each other; such a servant as this our blessed Savior himself
calls a faithful Servant, and pronounces him to be blessed. Mat. 24.45. for it
is observable that the examples or advices of our equals and companions, have
more prevailing influence upon our minds than that of others; a Servant
therefore that is faithful in this kind, is a double blessing to his Master,
not only from his own service, but likewise from that of his Fellow Servants.

But how much is to be lamented, that in these days the directly contrary is
too much practiced: How many Servants are there who by their evil examples,
debauch and corrupt the minds of their Companions: how many are like that
wicked Servant mentioned in St. Mat. 24 42. who in the absence of his Master,
began to smite his Fellow Servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken; that
is, caused others to be drunk with him; others conspire together to do
mischief, like the Sons of Jacob, Genesis 37.18. who when they saw their Brother
Jos^ph coming, consulted among themselves, and concluded together to slay him;
Behold this Dreamer comes, come now and let us slay him; or like those in St.
Matthew 21.38 who when they saw their Master's Son, said among themselves, this
is the Heir, come now, let us kill him, and let us seize on his Inheritance.
Some Servants are apt to encourage others in disobedience and unfaithfulness,
Psalm. 2.3. Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast their Cords from us, like
Sheba, 2 Samuel 10.1 We have no part in David, every man to his Tents O Israel.
This is the humor of unfaithful Servants, which is one occasion of the general
deprecation that is among young Persons at this time; but let such consider,
that though they may escape the revenging hand of man, yet the vengeance of God
will at last certainly overtake them.

16. A Servant may likewise express fidelity to his Master in relation to their
Children, especially when they are young, by infusing honest, vi^tuous
Principles into their minds, by being loving and kind to them, and by avoiding
vain, idle, and profane discourses before them: St. Paul (...) us, that evil
communications corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15.33. for Servants imbibe such ill
language and vicious habits and behavior, that it is very difficult for
Parents to reduce them again to sobriety; so that they have cause to curse the
time that they entertained such lewd Servants unto their Families. These and
many other ways may Servants be unfaithful to their Masters as to their
Children, which are therefore with all imaginable caution to be avoided by
those that are honest and virtuous.

17. The faithfulness of a Servant may be expressed about a general carefulness
about his Masters Concerns; by a readiness to obey the lawful and necessary
commands of his Master and Mistress; and likewise a tenderness over them in
their sickness, weakness, old age, or other distress^s which may sometimes
happen to befall them; and wherein the help of his servants may be very necess
ry for them: It was great faithfulness in the servants of Saul when their
master was vexed with an evil spirit, that they enquired after some remedy for
him, 2 Samuel 16.16 and so it was also in the servants of Naaman, 2 Kings 5.3.
Those therefore that shall forsake their masters when they are in distress, are
certainly very inhumane, and ungrateful servants: These are like the servants
of Job, who when the hand of God was heavy upon him, and all his goods was
taken from him; and his Body was full of Sores and Boils Job. 19.15, 16. even
at this very time he woefully complains, They that dwelt in his House, and his
Neighbors counted him for a Stranger, and he was an Alien in their sight; he
called his servant and he gave him no answer, so did Ziba leave Mephibosheth in
his greatest necessity, 2 Samuel 19.26 and thus did the Disciples fly from their
Lord and Master. St. Matthew 26.56. but what wretched and villainous servants
then are they, who from the weakness and impotency of their master, take
advantages against them, to abuse and injure them, as Rechab and Baanah did. 2 Samuel 4.6. or those who shall betray their masters into the hands of their
enemies, as the wicked Judas did our blessed Lord and Savior, St. Mat. 26.15.
what can such Traitorous and unfaithful servants expect but to meet with such
deserved ends as justly happened to the Traitors aforementioned.

18. Lastly, to enforce this most necessary duty of faithfulness upon servants;
Let them make their masters case their own, and do for him as they would for
themselves, or as they would wish and desire ohters to do for them. The general
Rule in the Levitical Law, is love thy Neighbor as thy self, Levit. 19.18 and
whatsoever you would have men do to you, that do you to them, St. Mat. 7.12 Now
if men ought to use this general justice and sincerity to one another; yea
though they be strangers to each other; then are servants much more obliged to
do the same toward their masters; and upon this account our Savior speaking of
servants in St. Luke 17.10 says that when they have done all that is
commanded, they have but done their duty.

CHAP. VIII. Of Diligence in Servants.
ANother Duty required of Servants, is diligence in the service of their
Masters; one part whereof, is; that they spend no more time in doing any thing
than necessity requires. It is remarkable concerning Rebecca, Genesis 24.18. that
she hasted and let down her Pitcher; that she hasted and emptied her Pitcher,
and then went to the Well again: The Servant of Abraham having then made all
possible expedition in dispatching the Affairs of his Master; It is said Genesis
24.33. that he would not eat till he had told his Errand: and 2 Samuel 18 23.
Ahimaaz strove with Cushi who should soonest be with David to bring him the
Tidings of the Overthrow of Absalom and his Army; and questionless the
diligence and willingness in Ahimaaz to do his master service, ^ade him outrun
Cushi, and arrive before him: we read 2 Kings 4.29 when Elisha sent his servant
to raise the Shuna^ites Son to life again; he gives him this ^harge; give up
thy Loins, go thy way; if ^hou meet any by the way, salute him not, and if any
salute thee, answer him not a^ain; which way of expressing himself, ^mplies
that diligence and expedition which ^s required of servants in the concern^ents
of their masters.

2. A servant ought likewise constantly ^o attend to all those things which are
the ^utys of his place, and not to give himself to Idleness nor Sloth, but to
exercise ^ll manner of care and pains in the performance thereof. That general
Charge which is laid upon all men, Genesis 3.19. in ^he sweat of thy face thou
shall eat thy bread, ^s certainly more particularly required of ^ervants;
Solomon exhorts, Eccles. 9.10. that whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do ^t
with all thy might; the diligence of Ja^ob is very remarkable toward Laban,
Genesis 31.4., who says thus of himself; is the day the drought consumed me, and
the frost by night, and my sleep departed from mines eyes. Great likewise was
the diligence of those Shepherds that kept watch over their flocks by night,
St. Luke 2.8. and very commendable was the diligence o^ those servants, who by
their industry doubled the Talents committed to their charge, St Mat. 20.16.

3. Now as this dilgence in servants i^ recommended to us in these
aforementioned examples; so has God Almighty likewise made many faithful
promises to those that are exercised therein, such i^ that, Pro. 10.4. the hand
of the diligen^ makes rich, Pro. 12.14. the recompense o^ a man's hands shall
be rendered unto him, an^ ver. 24. the hand of the diligent shall bea^ rule.
Pro. 24.13 in all labor there is profit; for indeed the work or business
wherein servants are employed by their masters ought to be performed by them as
the work of God; and St. Paul says as Go^ has called every one, so let him
walk 1 Cor 7.17. now we know the work of God i^ to be done with all diligence,
for curse is he that does the will of the Lord ngeligen^ly, Jerem. 48.10.

4. Solomon therefore is very severe against Idleness and Slothfulness, and
discovers the several mischiefs and inconveniences that proceed therefrom, Pro.
26 13. The slothful man says there is a Lion in the way; that he pretends very
improbable and unlikely dangers, which may hinder him in his duty, Pro. 13.15.
as the door turns upon the hinge, so a slothful man upon his bed; intimating
that he ^turns from one side to another; but does not rise up to perform any
business, Pro. 20 16. The slothful man hides his hand in his bosom, it
grieveth him to bring it again to his mouth; he is unwilling to use the least
diligence about these things which are absolutely necessary for his maintenance
and well-being, Pro. 24.33. yet a little sleep, yet a little slumber, a little
folding of the hands to sleep; He is slothful and sluggish, and never satisfied
with sleeping, though he can sleep no more.

5. These are some of the lazy excuses and postures of idle persons; but what
are the natural effects and consequents thereof, even as bad as can be
imagined, as poverty, slavery and bondage; fruitless wishes and desires,
hunger, beggary and death; as Solomon at large expresses in several places of
his Proverbs; and to demonstrate what little happiness, or comfort Masters
enjoy in such slothful, negligent Servants, he compares them to vinegar to the
teeth, and smoke to the eyes, then which nothing can be more offensive, Pro.
10.26. as vinegar is to the teeth, and smoke to the eyes, so is the sluggard to
them that send him; and since many Servants are apt to think, that negligence
and idleness is no crime, and that they do no wrong thereby to their Masters,
Solomon says, he that is slothful in his work, is brother to him that is a
great waster; Pro. 18.9. upon which account our blessed Savior charge a
slothful servant to be a wicked and unprofitable servant, and gives him his
portion with those that do a great deal of mischief.

6. How slight soever therefore Servants may esteem of this want of diligence
which is required of them; yet certainly their neglect herein is absolute theft
and wrong to their Masters, since the best of their service is due to their
Masters from them; and ought to use their utmost endeavor by all lawful and
justifiable means to advance their Masters interest; so that it is not enough
that they are employed in their Masters affairs, but they are likewise to use
all kind of diligence therein, and carefully and conscionably perform the same;
not so much to escape their Masters anger, as the wrath of the Almighty, who
will certainly call every one of them to an account, how they have behaved
themselves toward their several Masters.

7. Now one great occasion of this neg^igence in Servants, arises often from
the many companions of, and multitude of acquaintance, which some Servants
procure to themselves, which is many times the cause of this, and diverse other
mischiefs to young persons; and indeed what wickedness and debauchery is there,
which Servants in these days are not drawn into by evil company? how many
hundreds have been split upon this dangerous Rock? what sin almost does escape
them; and how do they encourage one another to do evil? from hence proceed
drunkenness, whoredom, swearing, lying, cheating, gaming, and what not: It may
therefore seem necessary to expostulate with our young Apprentice concerning
this matter; and to discover in short some of those mischievous and deplorable
consequences, which are certainly produced by such crying abominations.

CHAP. IX. Of Evil Company.
1. THE Proverb says, proestat esse solus, quam male comitatus; how easily are
the tender natures, and the most hopeful dispositions of young persons
corrupted thereby; for the filth will secretly cleave unto them, and will
insensibly infect them: he therefore that goes in and sits with them, seems
desirous to get acquaintance with Hell before his time; but let virtuous young
men say as Jacob did, Genesis 49.6. O my soul come not thou into their secret;
unto their Assembly, mine Honor be not thou united. These are seeming friends,
but real foes; so when you may justly say, Is this your kindness to your
friend, to become my snare and inticements unto evil? Or with the Philosopher,
Oh friends, among hundreds of such companions; there is scarce one real,
virtuous friend to be found.

2. Thousands have died, and perished for ever of the infection they have
caught from evil company, leaving this sad Epitaph upon their Gravestone for
the warning of others after them, Bad Company in Life, is too ready a way to
worse company in Death. The honest Traveller is not overwilling to ride in the
Company of Thieves, if he can possibly avoid it, and we may all say of our
profane Companions, that they steal, at least, our good name, and our time
from us; for since men cannot see within our hearts, they will be apt to judge
of us according to the company which we outwardly keep. It was a Proverb among
the Jews, If you can tell me what company he keeps, I will then certainly tell
you what he himself is.

3. Not that young persons should despise any, but they may, and ought to carry
themselves meekly and humbly toward all; but however, let them be very
cautious, to choose none, but those that are ingenious, virtuous and harmless
for their companions. The Dove does not keep company with the Ravens, be you
therefore as David, who was a companion of all that feared God, as Solomon
after him, walking the way of good men, keeping the path of the Righteous, and
it shall turn to you for a blessing and a testimony. It shall become as the
Orator expresses it, a sweet specimen or evidence of a good nature, and which
shall demonstrate apparently your inclination toward Wisdom and Virtue.

4. For if you do indeed love your Heavenly Father, you cannot then consort, or
keep company with those, who tear and blaspheme that holy Name of his, by
profane Oaths and Curses. I Jesus Christ your blessed Savior be of any value
or consideration with you, then certainly, you cannot possibly delight your
selves in them, who tread under foot the Son of God, and account the blood of
the Covenant an unholy thing; do you therefore deliver your own souls, and
desire them either to leave their sinning, or else tell them plainly, you must
for the future leave their company.

CHAP. X. Of Drunkeness.
Fly Drunkenness, whose vile Incontiuence
Takes away both the Reason and the Sense.
1. DAILY Experience too sadly tells us, That there is nothing more common than
Drunkenness, both among Young and Old, Masters and Servants; and this is one
evil effect likewise of bad Company, for he must certainly be wretchedly
fottish that is drunk by himself; good fellowship therefore, and the keeping of
others company is the specious pretense of young persons, to meet and drink
together: But certainly, if one man should drink rank Poison, his companion
would hardly pledge him for company; and if so, he has far greater reason to
be sober, for immoderate drinking is worse than Poison, and though it does not
always work immediate death, (though there are many Examples of those that have
died in their Drunken Fits) yet the Custom therein, does usually bring Persons,
but especially young Men, to the Grave before their time; however, it at
present works that which every Wise Man should more abhor than Death, that is,
Madness and Fury; it transforms a Man into a Beast, by drowning that Reason
which should difference him from one; surely the effects of it are such, that
if being drunk had at first been imposed as a punishment, he would certainly
have been counted no less than a Tyrant that should have inflicted it.

3. Solomon says, it is not for young men to drink Wine, nor for the lovers of
Virtue to mingle strong drink, the most holy men in Religion, the most renowned
among the Nations, the most honorable in their several Ages, were all of them
Men of great Abstinence. The Grave, that undesired thing, is visited by
Thousands and Ten Thousands before its time, and what Bill of Mortality can be
made of it, but only thus, it was their Cups which were their Bearers, and
brought the Dropsy Corpse so soon thither: why do we so unkindly complain of
the shortness of our life, when it is our own intemperance that cuts the
Thread, and hastens Death; but a great Writer observes, The Drunkard will needs
have his lust, though it cost him his life.

3. Men may softly flatter us, and with words too smooth tell us, That the
Drunkard is no man's foe but his own; But the Almighty God has other Language
to salute him with, Woe to the Drunkards of Ephraim; Woe to him that dares thus
deface the Image of God upon him; that being born a Man, chooses to make himself
a Beast: Woe to him that says to Conscience Bow thou down, and Sense shall stamp
upon thee, that plucks Reason from the Chair, and sets up Madness and Phrenzy
there, to overthrow the Chariot, and proclaim his shame before all! Woe to him
that fills every Table with Vomits; that sells his heart to work wickedness,
and becomes the Devils Decoy to draw others to all Excess of Riot, and at last
to drown them with himself in Perdition: Woe to him that by one sin makes way
for others, for Legions to follow, that by Drunkenness makes way for
contentions, for Murders and for Uncleanness: Woe to him that has forsaken the
Lord, the fountain of living waters, and makes his belly his God, that man's end
will be destruction: yea, lastly, Woe once more to him that makes so many
weeping eyes, so many aching hearts in his sad Family at home, the Children cry
and there is no Bread: the dear Mother sighs and replys, whence my Babes can I
satisfy you? My Husband, alas! is no longer my praise in the Gates, but goes
from me to sit with vain persons, till the Wine and strong Drink inflame him,
foolishly talking all the day there, as the sons of Belial, of matters not
conven^ent for them, while we, poor we, are left to naked Walls, to rags and
hunger at home!

4. A Drunkard therefore is the shame of his Parents, Friends and Relations, he
is a reproach to Religion, he brings Poverty upon his Estate, Diseases to his
Body and everlasting Ruin to his Immortal Soul; he is infectious to all that
keep company with him, and sorrow of heart to all those unto whom he ought to
have been a Crown of rejoicing; let such as these hear the Word of the
Everliving God, Thou that have so often enlarged thy desires as Hell after
other Cups, Thus says the Lord, Thou shall surely drink of a Cup of Bitterness
and Trembling, from the fury of the Lord, Thou shall be drunk, but not with
Wine, thou shall be overcome, but not with strong drink, then may thou fall
and rise no more. Thus, even thus, shall Adonijah's Feasts break up with
amazement, and Belshazzer's Cups with trembling.

5. Historians tell us: That the Spartans were wont, when at any time their
Servants were drunk, to bring them in presence before their Children, that the
odiousness of their Carriage might breed in them deeper hatred of the Vice, you
have also now seen the Drunkard in some part of his vileness, though in
modesty, much has been forborne of that filth and lewdness wherewith he might
too truly be charged; Oh that you young men may never commit such folly in
Israel! Let who will live in Revelings and Excess, drown not you a Noble Mind
in Floods of Drunkenness; let the counsel that Cyrus once gave his Soldiers be
your Rule, What is truly convenient for you, and not what would overcharge
Nature into drousiness, nor inflame it into madness. The Drunkard may joyfully
call for much now; but this he may, and cannot but know, the Score runs daily
on, and his Reckoning will be very sore in the great Day of Account.

6. St. Austin, upon a terrible and dreadful Accident called his People
together to a Sermon, wherein he relates this doleful Story: Our noble Citizen
Cyrillus (says he) a man mighty among us, both in work and word, and much
beloved, had, as you know, one only Son, and because but one, he loved him
immeasurably, and above God, and so being drunk with immoderate doting; and
gave him liberty to do whatsoever he list: Now this very day, (says he) this
same Fellow, thus long suffered in his dissolute and riotous Courses, has in
his drunken humor wickedly offered violence to his Mother, great with Child,
would have violated his Sister, has killed his Father, and wounded his two
Sisters to death. These are some of the dreadful effects of this cursed sin of
Drunkenness.

7. It is affirmed that some years a go, a person at Salisbury in Wiltshire,
in his drunkenness, and carousing at a Tavern, drank an Health to the Devil,
saying, That if the Devil did not come to pledge him, he would not believe
there was either a God or a Devil, whereupon his Companions being struck with
trembling and horror, immediately hastened out of the Room, and presently after
hearing an hideous noise, and smelling a stinking savor, the Vintner ran up
into the Chamber, and coming in, he mist his Guest, and found the Window
broken, the Iron Bar in it bowed, and all bloody, but the man was never heard
of afterward. Woe therefore unto them that rise up early in the mo^ning, that
they may follow strong drink that continue until night, till Wine inflame them,
Isa. 5.1^.

8. Let not therefore the commoness of this sin, O Young Man, encourage thee to
commit it, or to think it is no sin, at least, not such a one as will bar thee
out of Heaven; but deceive not thy self, for thou may as well say, that there
is no Heaven, as that Drunkenness shall not keep thee thence: It is the same
Word of God which tells thee there is such a place of Happiness, tells thee
also, that Drunkards are of the number of those that shall not inherit it, 1
Cor. 6.10. And in Galat. 5.21. Drunkenness is reckoned among those works of the
flesh, which they that do, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; for a Drunkard
has changed himself into a Swine, and being so, he is prepared for the Devils
to enter into, as they did into the Herd, Mark 5.13. And that not only of some
one or two, but a Legion, a Troop and multitude of them; and of this we see
daily examples, for where this sin of Drunkenness has taken possession, it
usually comes as an Harbinger to abundance of others; each act of Drunkenness
prepares a man not only for another of the same sin, but of others; Lust and
Rage, and all brutish appetites are then let loose, and so a man brings
himself under that curse, which was the saddest, David knew how to foretell to
any, Psalm. 63.28. The falling from one wickedness to another.

9. Now of all this be not enough to affright thee from this loathsome, and
beastly sin of drunkenness; thou may then, O Young Man! still wallow in thy
vomit, thou may still contiue in thy sottish, senseless condition, till the
flames of Hell rouse thee, and then thou will by sad experience find what thou will not now believe, that the end of those things is death, Romans 9.2. God in
his infinite mercy timely awaken the hearts of all that are guilty of this sin,
that by a timely forsaking it, they may fly from the wrath to come.

CHAP. XI. Of Whoredom.
Quench soon the flames of Lust, and have a care
Of wanton Women, they will prove a snare.
1. A Virtuous young Man ought to be one of great Modesty and Chastity in all
his Carriage; for the time of Youth is the season of his greatest Trial,
wherein Nature will soon discover it self, whether filthiness or holiness; the
righteous Commands of God, or the wretched lusts of the Flesh, shall be dearest
to him; this indeed is the dangerous season of his life, the Archers begin now
to shoot sore temptations, and inticeing thoughts rush in thick upon him; but
let him then take up his Bible, and pray that Scripture may be to him a
preservative from evil, not in Chambering and Wantonness, but in putting on the
Lord Jesus Christ.

2. These last days of the World are wonderfully sunk, and degenerated from a
generous nobleness, and a manly delight in Heroical Achievements, to a spirit
of effeminacy and softness: it is not desirable, nor indeed altogether
convenient, to lay before the Chaste Reader any large description of it; let it
be thrown amongst the works of darkness, to be brought to light no more; let it
so dye, the sooner the better; only we cannot be ignorant we are born to far
higher things, toward God, toward our Native Country, and toward our own souls,
than wanton Complements, and the dalliances of the Flesh; but let us remember
that vicious and debauched Lives commonly end in miserable and wretched deaths;
Babylon shall one day receive for all her Luxury, wherein she has been so
profuse, measure for measure from the avenging hand of God, How much she has
lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her, Rev. such i^ the sad
conclusion of a loose and vicious life, He dies, and for ever is numbered among
the unclean.

3. These things are the young man Warning pieces, and for their sakes h^ ought
to stand upon his Guard, and to abstain from all appearance of evil: wantonness
in gestures; obsceness in speeches lasciviousness in actions; (however they are
too much used and favored by oaths) should be to the virtuous young man as the
sulphurous Sparks of Aetna, a^ so many flashes breaking forth of the bottomless
Pit, which are the shame of the actors, and the danger of the Spectators it is
an immodest abusing of nature, an^ an open defiance to all Virtue, and, which
is yet far more, an high contempt poure^ forth in the face of Religion it self;
(...) chaste spirit, as the righteous soul of Lo^ is grieved, and he turns
away from them.

4. Chastity therefore ought to be exceeding dear and honorable in the eye of
young Persons, and they ought to be like clean Vessels where into the Heavenly
Treasures should be put, they should be clean Paper whereon the words of life
should be written, they should be faithful to God under all allurements to the
contrary, and should victoriously conquer and triumph over all the snares of
Satan. They ought to avoid all occasions which may in the least endanger and
stain the purity of their minds, and watch to the utmost, that they may
preserve themselves unspotted from the Pollutions of the Flesh.

5. A Young Man should make a Covenant with his eye that it should not rove
after Vanity; let him consider, that the heart is weak, and too apt to be drawn
aside, and since there are some that have Eyes full of Adultery that cannot
cease from sin, let him seast his eyes on the good Word of God, and without
rolling to and fro, look straight forward, and ponder the path of his feet. Let
him likewise set a guard upon all his other senses, remembering the wise Counsel
of the Ancients, to Shut up those five Windows of the senses, that the house
may shine the clearer, and the noble inhabitant (the soul) may rest the safer:
he must also wisely withhold making provision for the Flesh, least giving lust
its baits, it should become as the Sons of Zerviah, too har^ for him; fullness
of bread and idleness was the sins of Sodom, and all unnatural lewdness was
quickly after the shame of Sodom; strange and light Attire ought likewise to be
avoided, as being commonly incentives to Lust and Uncleanness.

6. But above all a Young Man should charge his heart, that it should not da^
to dally with any lustful thoughts, though never so secretly; Sin is Sin in the
Root as well as in the Fruit; in the thoughts as truly as in the actions, and
Satan will grow more bold; if he once get footing so far as into the mind, he
will scarce b^ so modest as to stay long there, the fir^ once kindled, there
will soon break ou^ further, out of the abundance of the heart the mouth will
speak, and the man will act and not be restrained; the unclea^ Person therefore
may take it as a Men^ Tekel written upon the Wall against him the Lord search
the heart, and try the ^eines to give unto every man according to ^is ways, and
according to the fruit of his ^oings. Let us therefore remember, that ^ur
bodies ought to be the Temples of ^he Holy Ghost, and let the fear of God ^ome
in, and curb us with this tremendous warning in our ears, if any man shall
^efile the Temple of God, that man shall God destroy.

7. But this Virtue of Chastity reaches not only to the restraining of the
gro^ser Act; and therefore let all young persons pray earnestly that God would
give them the spirit of Purity, especially at the ^ime of any present
temptation; bring ^he unclean Devil to Jesus Christ to be ^ast out, as the man
in the Gospel did; and seriously consider the foulness and danger of this sin
of uncleanness, and abhor that shameless impudence of the World, that can make
light of this sin, against which God has pronounced such heavy curses,
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13.4. and so he will certainly
do all sorts of unclean persons whatsoever.

8. The way to Heaven is up the Hill ^ all the way, and the unclean Person with
his rotten Lungs and wasted Loins, cannot climb up to it, Virgins which are not
defiled with Women, are they which follow the Lamb in white, whithersoever he
goes; the frequency of the sin of Uncleanness among Christians, brings
dishonor to God, scandal to the Christian Profession, and a wound to their own
souls, and many of the Heathen will rise up in Judgment at the last day against
such as these, as the following Examples will more fully declare.

9. Scipio Africanus was a man of that rare chastity, that during all his Wars
in Spain, he would not permit any of the young Virgins of the Country to be
brought before him, least his eyes should betray his heart to commit folly with
them. Our King Henry the Sixth of England, even in his youth, was so chaste a
Prince, that when certain Ladys presented themselves before him in a Dance,
with their hair loose, and their breasts uncovered, he, though unmarried, rose
up and departed the presence saying, fie, fie, you are ^uch to blame.

10. Aurelian an Heathen Emperor was ^ careful to preserve the Chastity of
Wo^en, that one of his Soldiers being found ^uilty of lying with his (...), he
com^anded that the Heads (...) two young ^rees should be bowed down, and the
^ouldiers Legs tied thereto, which being ^ddenly let go, tore him into two
pie^s. Alexander the Great, when he had ^nquered Darius the Persian, and had
his Wife and Daughters brought Prisoners ^ him, though they were Virgins of
incomparable Beauty, yet he sent them a^ay without offering the least indignity
them.

11: St. Origin who all his life time had ^en ambitious of the Honor of
Martyr^om, yet in the Seventh Persecution he ^inted, his heart being overcome
with ^ar, to have his chaste body defiled by an ^gly Blackmore, which was the
greatest ^unishment that they could imagine to in^ct upon him, so that he chose
rather to ^ffer Incense to an Idol, than to be so fil^ily abused, which
evidenced his great chastity, though indeed, by that act, he lost the peace of
his Conscience, which he could not recover for a long time after.

12. St. Jerome relates the History of a Virtuous and Chaste Young Man, who
under the First ^ the Ten Persecutions, was an Example of invincible Courage
and Chastity: for his enemies having very little hope of prevailing upon him to
renounce the Faith and Religion of Jesus Christ, by the utmost Torments and
Tortures they could possibly invent; They therefore resolved to take another
cours^ with him: they brought him into a mos^ Fragrant Garden, flowing with all
pleasure and delight, and there laid him dow^ upon a Bed of Down, foftly
enwrappe^ in a Net of Silk, amongst the Lillys an^ the Roses, and the delicious
murmur o^ the streams, and the sweet whistling of the Leaves, and then all
departed; presently after there comes into the place a beautiful Strumpet, and
uses all the abominable tricks of an impure Art to inflame him, and draw him
to her desire, whereupon the Young Man fearing he should now be conquered with
Folly, who was Conqueror over Fury, bites off a piece of his Tongue with his
own Teeth, and spits it into the Face of the Whore, and so prevented the danger
of sin, by the smart of his wound, preserving his Conscience and his chastity
at once.

12. Remarkable is the Chastity of young Joseph, of which we read, Genesis 39.^7.
in refusing the temptations of his Mistress; which as it is related by Josephus,
may not be improper to be here inserted, as an excellent pattern and example
for young persons, and especially Servants (as he then was) to imitate; Joseph
being sold by his Brethren to the Merchants, They carr ed him into Egypt, where
he was bought by Potiphar an Egyptian Lord and Steward of King Pharaoh's
Household, who held him in great estimation, and educated him in all the Liberal
Arts, not suffering to live as a Slave, but as a Freeman committing to his
charge and care all his Household Affairs, which Joseph managed with very great
wisdom and discretion.

13. It happened a while after, that the Wife of Potiphar earnestly observing the
comeliness of Joseph, as likewise his wisdom and diligence, her heart was
inflamed with unlawful lust toward him; and supposing that if she did discover
her passion to him, she might easily obtain her desire; imagining within her
self that he would account it the greatest happiness which could befall him;
that he a Servant as he was, should be beloved of his Lady and Mistress;
whereupon she let him understand her inclination, entreating to grant the
fulfilling of her lustful humor.

14. But Joseph utterly refused, and denied her request, alleging that it
would be very injurious in him toward his Master, (besides the heinousness of
the sin against Almighty God) If he who had bought him as a Slave, but yet had
treated him as a dear-friend, by entrusting all his interests and concerns into
his hands, and making him Ruler over his Household; if this kind Master should
now receive so great an outrage, and injury from him; he therefore exhorted her
to conquer and overcome her evil appetite, and desire, and at the same time to
deprive her of all hope of compassing her designs upon him; he told her that
desire becomes dull and unactive, when all hope of enjoyment is taken away, and
finally avoided; that he was resolved* rather to suffer all afflictions and
torments that could be found out, than ever to consent or condescend to commit
that wickedness; and that though it were very improper for a Servant to
contradict the will of his Mistress, yet the filth^ness and unlawfulness of the
fact would excuse him both before God and man.

15. But this denial of Joseph did but the more inflame his Mistress, since she
never thought, but that he would have readily consented; and her inordinate
affections increasing every day more and more; she contrived a way to surprise
him, in hope there by to have effected her design: for there happened about this
time to be a public Feast among the Egyptians, wherein according to the usual
custom the Ladies were wont to have the Solemnity with their presence; this
Lady who was usually there, did now seign her self sick and indisposed that she
might avoid going, and by her dissimulation persuaded her Husband that she
really was so, hoping that when her Husband was gone, she might have the be^er
opportunity to solicit Joseph to her embraces, which happening according to
her desire, she began to renew her assaults upon him, and to court and caress
him with all flattering allurements and enticing persuasions.

16. She told Joseph, that he had done well, if upon her first request he had
obeyed her without contradiction, considering the dignity of her Person, and
what authority and power she had over him; as likewise considering the violent
affection and inordinate passion she had toward him, which too plainly
appeared, that she who had all the reason in the world to expect to be courted
and entreated by him, being his Lady and Mistress; yet that being overpowred by
her affection, she should so far forget and debase her self as to court him;
but that she doubted not he would behave himself more prudently and
respectfully, and thereby make amends for his former obstinacy by his present
complaisance and consent; for if you observe, said she, this my second address
is more affectionate and endearing than the former, since I have feigned my
self sick, and denied my self the pleasure of such a public Solemnity, merely
to enjoy the happiness of thy society; and therefore if thou had at first any
suspicion of my love, as to imagine I had some treacherous design against thee,
yet this second attempt may certainly confirm the sincerity of my affection
toward thee, therefore take thy choice, either presently to consent to my
pleasure and be obsequious to her that adores thee, and thereby put thy self
into the way of further honor and preferment, or else be assured of my utmost
hatred and revenge, if thou shall prefer thy pretended continency before my
affection; and be thou further assured, that thy chastity shall not secure
thee, for will certainly accuse thee to my Lord that thou did attempt to
ravish me, and though thy denials be never so strong and positive, yet I know
my power to be so great with Potiphar, that I shall be believed before thee.

17. But this chaste and faithful servant Joseph would not be moved neither with
words, nor yet with her Tears, which at this time were witnesses of her
inflamed desires; neither her flatteries, nor threats had the least power over
him, but he still continued firm and constant to his virtue, resolving rather
to suffer the greatest miseries, than in the least to give way to her
adulterous offers, accounting himself worthy of the greatest punishment, if he
should in the least condescend to this lustful woman's inclinations

18. He therefore represented unto her how great a sin it was against God, who
sees all our actions, though they are never so secretly committed; that it was
likewise a great sin, and wrong in relation to her Husband; and against all the
Laws, Rites, Customs of the Marriage Bed, wishing her to have regard to these
things and not to prefer a vain and momentary ^st before them all, which would
certainly be followed by a speedy repentance and sorrow, and a continual fear
of discovery, whereas she might enjoy the same happiness with her Husband,
without all these fears and dangers, and likewise attended with the serenity
and quiet of a good conscience; that it was more honorable for her to command
him as his Lady and Mistress, as she now did, than by committing so great
wickedness to make him equal to her, and to be afraid of displeasing him.

19. By such Remonstrances as these Joseph endeavored to abate the fury o^ her
inordinate desires, and to preswad^ her to submit to reason; but on the
contrary the more earnestly he diswaded he the more furiously she assaulted
him, and since she saw words would not prevail she laid hands upon him to force
him t^ her will.

When as the Egyptian Lady did invite
Well favored Joseph to unchaste delight;
How well the motion and the place agree
A private place, and 'twas a shameful dee^
A place well seasoned for so foul a sin,
Too sweet to serve so foul a Master in.
20. But Joseph unable any longer to endure the Intemperance of this Woman,
suddenly ran out of the Chamber, leaving his garment behind him in her hand;
she enraged at this repulse, and afraid that her Lasciviousness should be
discovered, cried out, so that her servants came to her, to whom she related
that Joseph designed to have ravished her; and that when she resisted and cried
out, he ran away, and for haste left his garment in her hand, which she kept
till her husband came home, resolving to be revenged upon him for the contempt
he had cast upon her by refusing her favor; She therefore sits down sad and
disconsolate, hiding the grief of her disappointment, under the color of anger
and indignation for her honor and chastity, which she pretended was attempted
to be ravished from her. When her husband came home and observed her to be so
much disordered and discomposed, he earnestly enquired this reason, to whom
this treacherous and deceitful woman made this doleful harangue and complaint.

21. Live thou no longer my dear husband, except thou severely punish that
wretched Hebrew Slave, who has impudently attempted to violate thy Bed,
forgetting his former condition, when he first came into this House, and
likewise the kind entertainment which he received at thy hands; and who had
been the most ungrateful creature alive, if he had not been faithful to thee in
thy household affairs; yet has not this Wretch forborne to offer the greatest
injury to thee, no not to thine own Wife, and that on a festival Day, when he
knew thou would long be absent, whereby he has now discovered that his
pretended modesty proceeded rather from baseness of Birth, and want of generous
Education, than from a Principle of Virtue; and that which has encouraged him
to this confidence, is from the great respect and kindness that you have showed
toward him, even above his hopes, and beyond his merit; for knowing thou have
committed all thy Goods and concerns to his care and trust, and seeing himself
preferred above all thy ancient Servants, he thought he might presume likewise
to attempt the chastity of thy Wife.

22. And to confirm her words, she produced his garment, which as she said he
had left behind him, being afrighted by her outcries when he attempted to
violate her; Potiphar being fully confirmed in the belief of this relation by
the words and tears of this false, dissembling woman, and being a man of an
uxorious temper, never enquired farther into the matter, but magnifying and
extolling the virtue and loyalty of his wife; he immediately commanded Joseph
to be cast into prison amongst common malefactors, and to be put into irons for
this his heinous wickedness, upon all occasions proclaiming the honesty and
constancy of his wife, since he had now such fresh evidence of the same.

23. But Joseph committing himself and his innocent cause to the providence of
the Almighty, took no great care to excuse himself, neither made any relation
to any one of the truth of the matter, but patiently and quietly suffering the
punishment, and the bonds that were upon him; he comforted himself in this,
that the Almighty God was more powerful than all his enemies, and would no
doubt in his good time deliver him out of his afflictions, and clear his
innocence to all the world, and he soon found by experience that his hope was
not in vain, for he was not only released out of Prison, but advanced to be the
second man in Egypt, and thereby was the occasion of relieving his Father and
all his Family, when they were ready to perish by Famine, of whom the Psalmist
sings, Psalm. 105.6. WHen raging famine in those Climates reigned,
God broke the staff of bread, which life maintained
But Joseph sent before them, sold to save
His Brethren; by whose envy made a slave,
There for the accusers guilt in prison thrown
With galling Fetters bound, for crimes unknown,
Tried with affliction, at the time decreed
At once by Pharaoh, both advanc d and freed,
He of his household gave him the command,
And made him ruler over all his Land,
His Princes to his Government subjects,
The prudent Youth, grave Senators directs.
And aged Jacob, into Egypt came
And sojourned in the fruitful fields of Ham


24, Thus we see the reward of chastity and faithfulness in a Servant, whom all
the temptations of the World could not incline to forget his God, or to do any
thing that might displease him, nor to wrong nor abuse the trust committed to
him by his Master; whereas the sin of Whoredom and Uncleanness is commonly
attended with very great and heavy judgments from God. The most miraculous and
extraordinary Judgment that ever fell upon any place, that is, Fire and
Brimstone from Heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah, was for the sin of Uncleanness;
and many examples likewise of Gods vengeance may be observed upon particular
persons for this sin; the Incest of Amnon cost him his life as you may read, 2 Samuel 13. Zimri and Cozbi were slain in the ve^^ act, Number. 25.8. And no person
that commits the like, has any assurance it shall not be his own case; for how
secretly soever it be committed, it cannot be hid from God, who is the sure
avenger of all such wickedness.

25. And which is yet more sad, This sin shuts us out from the Kingdom of
Heaven, wherein no impure thing can enter, and we never find any Catalogue of
those sins which hinder men from happiness, but this of uncleanness has a
special place in it; thus it is, Gal. 5.19.21. Now the Works of the flesh are
manifest, which are those Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness;
of which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they
which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; and again, 1 Cor.
6.4. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: be
not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor. Adulterers, nor
Effeminates, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, etc. shall inherit the
Kingdom of God. If we therefore thus pollute our selves, we are fit company
only for those black Spirits, the Devil and his Angels: and therefore, with
them we must expect our Portion, where our flames of Lust, shall end in flames
of fire.

CHAP. XII. Of Profane Swearing, Cursing and Perjury.
Use not to Swear, an Oath's a dangerous Dart
Which shot, rebounds, to strike the shooters heart.
THE Profanation of the Sacred Name of God by wretched Swearing and horrid
Oaths, though it be much in fashion among young Persons, yet (...) a sin of a
very high nature, for be^^^^ that it is a direct breach of the Pre^ent: of our
blessed Savior, Mat. 5.34. But I say unto you swear not at all; it shows a
very mean and low esteem of the great God, every Oath we swear is the appealing
to God, to judge the truth of what we speak, and therefore being of such
Greatness and Majesty, it requires that the matter concerning which we thus
appeal to him should be of great weight and moment; somewhat wherein his own
glory, or some considerable good of man is concerned; but swearing in common
Discourse is far otherwise, and the most trifling and slightest thing seems for
the matter of an Oath; nay men often swear to such vain and foolish things, as
a considering person would be ashamed barely to speak; and is it not a great
despising of God, to call him solemnly to judge in such childish, such wretched
matters; God is the great King of the world, now though a King be resorted to
in weighty cases, yet surely he would think himself much despised, if he should
be called to judge between Boys, at their childish games; and God knows many
things to which men frequently swear, are not of great weight, and therefore
are a sign that we do not rightly esteem of God.

2. There is a curse from God, a flying Roll, which how unwelcome soever shall
enter into the house of the swearer, and shall remain, tho sore against his
will, till it has recovered the glory of Gods Name which he has encouraged:
There is but little gotten by sin; Men do but provoke the Lord to their own
confusion; The Nations which knew not God, were yet a Law to themselves, and a
great Example to all Posterity in the condemning of this odious sin; with the
Scythians the Swearers punishment was loss of his Estate; with the Persians
Servitude and Bondage; with the Grecians the cutting off of their Ears, as
those that had infected the Ears of others; with the Romans they were thrown
down from asteep, high Rock; Thus have they born their Testimony before us,
that we might receive instruction, and learn our duty even from Heathens.

3. Besides other sins have their excuses such as they are, though but forry
ones; but this is that which has nothing to say for it self: There is no cause
for it, ^o sweetness, no pleasure, no profit in it; ^o credit, no advantage by
it: a man is neither believed nor trusted one grain ^ore for it; others are
weary of it, the ^ffender himself has not the face to plead or it: of all men
the Swearer sins upon ^e hardest Terms, and he that ventures upon so heinous a
sin while he is young, ^h what a Monster may he become ere ^e dye!

4. What reason is there to believe, that he who makes no conscience to
pro^hane Gods holy name by swearing, should be concerned at telling a lie? nay
^he forwardness of some persons to con^rm every the slightest thing by an Oath,
^ather gives jealousy that they have some ^ward guilt of falseness for which
that ^ath must be the Cloak, so that it stands ^^em in little stead, even to
that only pur^ose to which they can pretend it to be ^seful, that is to force a
belief into another; now since it does not do this, nor ^akes not the least
claim to any other ad^antage, it is therefore a sin without temp^ation, and
consequently without excuse; or it shows the greatest contempt, nay unkindness
to God, to provoke him the without any thing to tempt us to it.

5. And to this Head may be refer'^ likewise that horrid Sin of Cursing, for
they generally go together: How common is it to hear men use the horride^
Execrations and Cursings upon every t^^ slightest cause of displeasure, nay
perha^ without any cause at all; so utterly ha^ they forgot the Rule of the
Apostle, Ro^ 12.14. Bless and Curss not: yea the pr^cept of our Blessed Savior
himself, Pr^^ for those that despitefully use you, Mat. 44. Christ bids us pray
for those who (...) us all injuries, and we are often curs^ those who do us
none; This is a kind saying our Prayers backward indee^ which is said to be
part of the Ceremo^ the Devil uses at making a Witch: a^ we have in this Case
also reason to lo^ on it, as a means of bringing us into ^quaintance and League
with that acc^sed Spirit here, and to a perpetual abid^ with him hereafter;
It Is the Language Hell which can never fit us to be Cit^z^ of the New
Jerusalem, but marks us out Inhabitants of that Land of Darkn^^ (...) conclude,
let us remember the advice (...) the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.31. Let all bit^ness and
wrath, and anger, and cla^our, and evil speaking be put away from ^ with all
malice.

6. There is likewise another way of shonouring God, and that is blasphemy,
(...) speaking any evil thing of God, the ^ghest degree whereof is curs^^ him,
or we do not speak it with our mouths, yet we do it in our hearts, by thinking
any ^ worthy thing of him, it is looked upon (...) God, who sees the heart as
the vilest ^shonour; but there is also a blasphemy (...) the actions; that is,
when men who ^osess to be servants of God, live so ^ickedly that they bring up
an evil report (...) him, whom they own as their Master and Lord; This
Blasphemy the Apostle ^kes notice of, Romans 2.44. where he tells ^ose who
profess to be observers of the ^aw, That by their wicked actions the name (...)
God was blasphemed among the Gentiles; ^hese Gentiles were moved to think ill
of God; as the Favourer of sin; when they ^aw those, who call themselves his
ser^ants, commit it.

7. Perjury and Forswearing is also very provoking sin to the Almighty; a^
common swearing is that which leads ^rectly to it; for he that by the use (...)
swearing has made Oaths so familiar (...) him, will be likely to take the
dreadful* Oath without much consideration; (...) how shall he that swears
homely look upon an Oath with any reverence? and that does not, it is his
chance, not his ca^ that is to be thanked if he be kept fr^^ Perjury; nay he
that swears comm^ly, is not only prepared to for^wear wh^ a solemn Oath is
tendered him, but in p^bability does actually forswear hims^ often in these
sudden Oaths; for su^posing them to come from a man ere (...) is aware, (which
is the best that can said of them) what assurance can a man have who swears ere
he is awar^ that he shall not lie too ere he is awar^ and if he do both
together, he m^ necessarily be forsworn: But he the observes your common
swearers will put past doubt that they are often for sworn, for they usually
swear indifferen^ly to things true or false, doubtful^ ^^tain: and I doubt not
but if those who (...) guilty of this sin, would but imparti^^ examine their
own practice, their ^rts would second me in this obser^ion.

8. And indeed Swearing, Cursing and ^jury, are sins of so deep a dye, and act^
so much in defiance of Heaven, that ^d does not only reserve his wrath for
(...) his enemies in the world to come, (...) many times likewise in this
world, ^akes some of the eminent'st of these sin^s, and hangs them upon Gibbets
as it ^re to be Monuments of his heavy wrath (...) indignation and warnings,
and a ter^r to others that they may hear and ^r, and do no more so wickedly as
these ^uing examples may sufficiently evince. ^. Godmin Earl of Kent, in the
year 1055 ^ng charged by King Edward with the ^ath of his Brother Alfred
excused ^mself with many words; and at last ^ing a morsel of bread, wished that
it ^ght choke him if he were guilty there^ but before he stirred one foot from
^e place, be was according to his own ^precation immediately choked for his
Perjury; in the Reign of Queen ^lizabeth, one Anne Averies in the Ci^ of London
Widow, forswore her self f^ a little money, which she should ha^ paid for six
pounds of Tow at a Shop Woodstreet; and by Gods just Judgme^ she immediately
fell down speechless ca^ing her Execrements upward, whi^ should have been
voided downward and so immediately dyed.

10. A certain Inkeeper in the To^ of Rutlinguen, receiving a Budget of M^ney
from a Passenger to keep for him, f^ swore the same before the Judge, giv^
himself to the Devil if he swore false^^ whereupon he was immediately hoisted
(...) into the Air by two which testified again him, which indeed were two
Devils (...) Hell, and in the presence of the Jud^ was carried out of sight,
and never as^ heard of.

One hearing Perjury condemned by godly Preacher, and how it never esc^ped
unpunished, said in a bravery, I ha^ often forswore my self, and yet my rig^
hand is no shorter than my left; whi^ words he had no sooner uttered, but su^
(...) inflammation arose in that hand, that (...) was forced to go to the
Surgeon, ^d cut it off, least it should have infect^ his whole Body, whereby
his right and became shorter than the other.

11. A rich young Gentlewoman in Sax^ promised marriage to a proper young ^n,
but poor; he foreseeing that wealth ^d inconstancy might alter her mind, ^ely
discovered his fears and apprehen^ns to her, whereupon she made a thou^d
Imprecations to the contrary, wish^g that if ever she married another, the ^vil
might take her away on the Wed^ng Day; yet afterward this fickle Girl ^s
betrothed and married to another: Dinner two Men on Horseback came (...) the
House, and were entertained at ^e Feast, and after Dinner one of them ^ping the
Bride a Dance, he took her (...) the hand and lead her a turn or two, ^d then
in the presence of all her friends (...) caught her, crying out for help, and
^ent out of the Gate, where he hoisted ^r up in the Air, and vanished away ^ith
his Companion and Horses, so that ^e was never seen more.

12. Elfred a Nobleman, in the day of King Athelston of England, conspiring
against his Sovereign, intended to have pulled out his Eyes at Winchester; but
his Treason being discovered, he wa^ sent to Rome to purge himself by Oath^
where before the Altar of St. Peter, and in the presence of Pope John the
Tenth^ he forswearing the matter, suddenly se^ down to the Earth, and being
carried b^ his servants into the English School, with in three days after he
there dyed.

Henry Filmer was accused by his ow^ Brother of Heresy, as they call it; bu^
shortly after his said Brother, who ha^ born false witness against him, was
Pressed for a Pioneer in the Voyage to Bullei^ where within three days, as he
was easin^ of nature, a Gun took him, and tore hi^ all to pieces.

Gregory Towers makes mention of (...) wicked wretch in France, that
forswearin^ himself in an unjust cause, had his Tongu^ so tied, that he could
not speak, but roa^ and so continued, till by his earnest inward prayer and
repentance, it please God to restore his Speech again.

13. Vladislaus King of Hungary, having contracted a League with Amurath the
Great Turk, and bound himself to it by Oath; The Pope sent a Legate to absolve
him from his Oath, and to provoke him to War; which he undertaking with a very
great Army, the Victory stood doubtful a great while together: But Amurath
seeing a Crucifix in the Christian's Ensign, plucked the Writing, wherein the
late Legate was contained, out of his Bosom; and with his eyes, hands cast up
to Heaven, and said, O Thou Crucified Christ, behold this is the League thy
Christians in thy Name made with me, which they have causelesssly violated, If
thou art a God as they say thou art, and we dream; revenge the wrong now done
unto thy Name, and me, and show thy power upon thy perjured People, who in
their deeds deny thee to be God. Immediately afterward the King of Hungary in
the midst of his Enemies was slain, and the Christians fled, very few ever
returning to their own homes, but miserably perished.

14. There is a very remarkable Example which lately happened, of which
hundreds of People near London can justify the truth; That in October 1675.
there lived a woman in Ratcliff, who was very much addicted to Drunkenness,
Swearing and Uncleanness; This Woman as she her self confessed, wronged another
poor woman of two shillings, by taking it away from her Child, and being
charged therewith, forswore it before a Justice of Peace, wishing the ground to
open, and swallow her alive if she had it; and at another time wished, That God
would damn her if she had it; and the righteous God dealt with her accordingly;
so the Devil in a short time possessed her, and would several times have
choked and destroyed her; and thus she continued for some time in a very
miserable condition: But one Sunday coming into Gravel Lane, she cried out to
the Minister as he was going into the Pulpit, that he should pray for her;
sometimes she would be lifted up on the Ground, and had then a rattling in her
Throat, crying out He choaks me; sometimes she would seem to strive with the
Devil with all her strength, and would cry out, be gone thou Rogue I will serve
God; in this manner she continued all the time of prayer, and in the midst of
the Sermon she was flung down dead; which may serve as a Terror to all perjured
and forsworn Wretches.

15. A young man in Staffordshire, in the year 1677, having stolen a Bible, and
being charged therewith, forswore it, wishing, That God would make him an
Example, and that his hands and feet might rot off while he was alive if he had
it; It was not many days after but his hands grew black, and in a short time
roted off, and then his Legs began to rot, and the flesh fell off by
piecemeal, which caused a very loathsome and offensive smell to proceed from
him, insomuch that he was removed out of the House where he formerly lived into
a Barn hard by, where hundreds of People, both of the Neighborhood and all the
parts adjacent came to see this deplorable Spectacle; many of them discoursing
with him, to whom he gave an account, that the relation above mentioned was
true, and acknowledged the just and righteous judgment of God upon him for his
Perjury; and notwithstanding this Terrible Distemper, yet he continued eating
and drinking still, till after some considerable time he dyed.

16. Bishop Ridley in a Sermon at Paul's Cross related a Story of a young
Gentleman of Cornwall, in King Edward the Sixths days, who Riding in the
Company of other Gentlemen, began to swear very abominably, and being reproved
for it, he swore the more, and was the more enraged; whereupon one Mr. Hains a
Minister civilly told them, That he must one day give an account for it; at
which the Gentleman was displeased, and told him he should take no care for
him, but prepare for his own winding sheet; well says the Minister amend, for
death gives no warning; Gods wounds (cries the Gentleman in a fury) take no
care for me; at last they came to a Bridge, which passed over an Arm of the
Sea; and the young Gallant so spurred and switcht his Horse, that he leapt over
the Bridge with him into the water, who as he was going cried out, Horse and
man, and all to the Devil.

17. A Person in Lincolnshire used upon every trifling occasion to swear, by
Gods precious blood, and would not be warned by his friends against it, till at
length falling into a grievous sickness; he was again much persuaded by them to
repent, which counsel he still rejected, and hearing the Bell Towl, in the
very pangs of death he started up, swearing Gods wounds the Bell Tolls for me,
but he shall not have me yet; whereupon the blood immediately issued out from
all parts of his body in a most fearful and dreadful manner, that his from his
Mouth, Nose, Wrists, Knees, Heels, Toes and other parts of the Body, and so he
miserably died One who for twelve or sixteen years together used to swear by
Gods Arms; at last his own Arm being hurt with a Knife, could not by any means
be cured, but daily ranked and festered, and at last rotted so, that it fell
away by piecemeal, and himself through anguish and pain which he suffered
thereby dyed.

18. Three Soldiers passing through a Wood; There arose a Tempest of Thunder
and Lightning; and one of them to show his contempt of God and his judgments,
burst forth into swearing and blasphemy; but the Tempest tearing up an huge
Tree, it fell upon him, and crushed him to pieces.

Also two young men being in a field together at Benevides in Spain; there
suddenly arose a terrible Tempest, and withal so violent a Whirlwind, that it
amazed the Beholders; The two young Men seeing the fury of it coming toward
them, ran from it as fast as possible, but yet it overtook them, and they
fearing to be hoisted up into the Air with the impetuosity thereof, fell flat
down upon the Earth, where the Whirlwind whistling round about them for a
little while, at length passed on; one of the young men in a short time arose
again, but was in such an agony that he was hardly able to stand; the other
lying still without motion; some persons who had stood under an Hedge hard by,
went to see how he did, and found him stark dead, with his Bones so grushed,
that the joints of his Arms and Legs turned every way; and his Tongue was
likewise pulled out by the Roots, and could never be found, which was
extraordinary remarkable, because he was accounted to be a notorious Swearer
and Blasphemer of Gods Holy Name.

19. I my self (says a godly Minister, that writ lately) knew two most
notorious Swearers who brake their Necks, one with a fall down a pair of
Stairs, and the other from his Horse.

Another relates of a swearing Courtier at Mansfield, who in the midst of his
blasphemous Oaths was taken up, and carried away by the Devil.

At Tabinga in Germany, a desperate Boy used to invent such new Oaths as were
not common, but it pleased God to send a Canker or some waste disease that did
eat out the Tongue wherewith he blasphemed.

Mr. Boltor relates, That a certain Man, who in his Life Time was exceedingly
given to the fearful sin of Swearing, had his heart upon his Death bed so
exceedingly filled with enraged greediness after it, that he desperately
desired the standers by to help him with Oaths, and to swear for him, though
himself in the mean time swore as fast, and furiously as he could; and in this
dreadful humor and frame of spirit he gave up the Ghost.

20. God has likewise been pleased some time to execute his dreadful judgments
upon Cursers; for we read that in France a man of good Education, and well
instructed in Religion; yet in his passion, cursing, and bidding the Devil take
one of his Children, the Child was immediately possessed with an evil Spirit,
from which though by the continual and fervent prayer of the Church; he was at
length released, yet ere he had fully recovered his health he died.

The like is related by the Famous Dr. Martin Luther, That a Woman whose
Daughter was possessed with an evil spirit, confessed to him and others, That
being angry she bid the Devil take her, and that she had no sooner spoken the
words, but she was possessed after a very strange manner.

21. A Popish Priest in Germany preaching about the Sacrament, used these and
such kind of Blasphemous Speeches; O Paul, Paul, If thy Doctrine concerning the
^eceiving of the Sacrament in both kinds be true; and if it be a wicked thing
to receive it otherwise, then let the Devil take me^; and if the Popes Doctrine
concerning this Point be false, than am I the Devils Bondslave, neither do I
fear to pawn my self upon it, whereupon the Devil presently appeared in the
Shape of a Tall, Black Man, and of a severe Countenance, who with a fearful
noise, and roaring wind, took the Old Priest out of the Pulpit, and carried
him, away so that he was never after heard of.

22. In Helvetia, in the year 1556. a certain man who earned his Living by
making clean, foul Linen, in his Drunkenness used horrible Cursings, wishing,
that the Devil might break his Neck if ever he went to his former Employment
again; yet the next day when he was sober, he went into the Field again about
it, where the Devil attended him in the likeness of a big swarthy man, asking
him if he remembered his wish, and withal struck him over the Shoulders, so
that his feet and hands presently dried up; yet did not God give the Devil
power to do him so much hurt as he wished to himself, but allowed him time and
space for repenting of his wickedness.

23. In a Town in Misvia upon the 11th of September, 1552, a passionate and
choleric Father, observing his Son to be slack about his business, in a fury,
wished that he might never stir from that place, which he had no sooner spoken,
but his Son stuck fast indeed, nor could by any means possible be removed, no
not so much as to sit, or bend his Body, till by the Prayers of some good
Christians, his pains were mitigated, though not remited; three years he
continued standing with a Post at his Back to give him ease, and four years
more he lived sitting in the same place, at the end whereof he died; yet all
this while was he nothing weakened in his understanding, but constantly
continued in his profession of the Christian Faith not doubting of his
Salvation in and through Jesus Christ; and when at any time it was demanded of
him how he did, his answer usually was, that he was fastened of God, and that it
was not in the power of man to release him.

At Noburgh in Germany, a Woman in her anger most bitterly cursed her Son,
wishing that she might never see him return alive, and the same day the young
man bathing himself in water was drowned, so that it befell her according to
her wicked and rash wish; Let us therefore remember what the Apostle Zachary
threatens, Zachary, 5.3, 4. This is the Curse which goes forth over the Face
of the whole World; I will bring it forth, says the Lord, and it shall enter
into the House of the Thief, and into the House of him that swears falsely by
my name; and it shall remain in the midst of his House, and shall consume it
with the Timber thereof, and with the Stones thereof.

24. Let all these young men then who are not yet fallen into the custom of
this sin, be most careful never to yield to the least beginnings of it; and for
those who are so miserable, as to be already ensnared in it, let them
immediately, as they tender the welfare of their souls, get out of it; and let
no man plead the hardness of leaving an old custom, as an excuse for his
continuing in it, but rather the longer he has been in it, so much more haste
let him make out of it, as thinking it too much that he has so long gone on in
so great a sin, and if the length of the custom has increased the difficulty
of leaving it, then by all reason let him set immediately to the casting it
off, least that difficulty at last grow to an imp^ssibilty; and the harder he
finds it at present, so much the more dil^g^nt and watchful must he be in the
use of those means which may strengthen his resolutions to overcome it.

24. To which purpose let him consider the heinousness of this Sin of Swearing,
and the danger that it brings him into, of the curse of God in this world, and
will if he continue in it cast him into Hell for ever: and surely, if this were
thoroughly laid to heart, it would much restrain this sin; for let us ask that
person that pretends it is impossible to leave an old custom, whether if he
were sure he should be hanged the next Oath he swore, the fear of it would not
keep him from it; certainly no man in his wits but would forbear it, if the
penalty were so great; and surely, damning is much worse than hanging, and
therefore in reason the fear of that ought to be a much greater restraint.

25. Another remedy would be, allways to speak truth, that all men might
believe thee in thy bare word, and then thou will never have occasion to
confirm it by an Oath, to make it more credible, which is the only color or
reason that can at any time be pretended for swearing: observe likewise what it
is that most betray thee to this sin, whether it be drinking, or anger; or the
company and example of others, or whatever else; and then if thou mean ever to
forsake this sin, forsake the occasions of it.

26. Stir also to possesss thy heart with a continual Reverence of God, and
even in thy ordinary discourse when thou take his name into thy mouth, let it
be an occasion of raising up thy thoughts to him, but by no means permit thy
self to use any idle by-words, or to take Gods Name in vain; and if thou do
accustom thy self to pay this Reverence to the mention of the name of God, it
will be an excellent Fence against profaning of it in Oaths. And to conclude,
watchover thy self that thou offend not with thy tongue; and then use prayer
which must be always added to thy endeavors; pray earnestly that God will
enable thee to overcome this wicked custom, and say with the Psalmist, set a
watch Lord over my mouth, and keep the door of my L^ps, and if thou do
sincerely apply the means which are useful for it, thou may be assured God
will not be wanting with his assistance.

CHAP. XIII. Of Lying, vain Discourse, and Scoffing.
1. THere is hardly any sin more common among young Persons, than this of
Lying; and therefore we shall endeavor to show the great evil thereof, and to
deter them from commiting it; Truth is always lovely, Falsehood odious: where
the Tongue is false to the Heart, there the Heart is false to it self, and
false to God; the Lord accepts it as a Letter to that Sacred Name, whereby he
is pleased to be known to the Sons of men, that he is a God of truth: and a Lie
whatever excuses and pretenses it may have, as it is never wanting that way,
yet we know its kindred, and whence it comes; It is the Base-born of Satan, he
is a Liar, and the Father of Lies; Let us therefore all take heed how we nurse
the Devils Brats in our Bosom.

2. Lying is But a short lived cheat, where the deceit when all is done will
quickly put forth its blushing face, and to our shame appear; The Jews have a
Proverb, That the Liar may vapor awhile, but he has no Legs whereon to travel
long. It is a very low kind of Policy, when to save our selves we stab the
truth, when we gain a little repute, (which yet it is never solidly got by
lying) though to the hazard of our own souls, when we are so desirous of some
shelter for sin; that rather than fail, we make up an Hedge for it (as the
Prophet says, of Briars and Thorns set up against the Lord) In this case the
Liar too truly fulfils the Proverb, and shows himself by his pleading not
guilty, fearful of men, but by his inward falsness a wretched contemner of the
all-seeing, the heart s arching God

3. In lower things the Clock is prized by its true going, the money is valued
when it is not counterfeit, and that young man shall be accounted a Branch of
hope indeed, whose Tongue is as choice silver, and his words words of ingenuity
and Truth; The fault that is yet but one, he will not make it two by denial; he
may have many weaknesses, but he still takes care that he may be believed in
what he speaks, and therefore resolves the whole world shall not justly
charge him with a Lie.

4. Speaking of truth, is a common debt which we owe to all mankind; speech is
given us as the instrument of intercourse and society one with another; and is
the means of discovering the mind, which otherwise lies hid and concealed; so
that were it not for this, our Conversations would be but like that of Beasts;
now this being intended for the good and advantage of Mankind; It is just and
fit that it be used to that purpose; but he that lies, is so far from paying
that debt, that on the contrary, he makes his speech the means of injuring and
deceiving him ^he speaks to.

5. There are many Obligations which we lie under to speak truth to all men,
St. Paul gives us diverse commands concerning the same, thus Ephesians 4.5. The
Apostle commands that putting away lying, we speak every man truth to his
Neighbor, and again Coloss. 3.9. Lie not one to another. A Lying Tongue is
mentioned by Solomon as one of those things that are an abomination to the
Lord; yea, so much does God hate a Lie, that he will not endure it for the most
pious and religious end: The Man that lies, though in a zeal to Gods glory
shall yet be judged as a sinner, Romans 3.7. What shall then become of those
multitudes of men, that lie quite upon other ends; some out of malice to
mischieve others; some out of covetousness to defraud their Neighbors; some
out of pride, to set themselves out, and some out of fear, to avoid danger, and
to hide a fault.

6. But what strange kind of persons are those, that lie without any
discernable temptation, who will tell lies by way of story, and take pleasure
in relating things that are incredible, from which themselves reap nothing but
the reputation of impertinent Liars; in so much that among these diverse kinds
of falsehoods, Truth is become such a rarity among us, that it is a very
difficult matter to find such a man as David describes, that speaks the truth
from his heart, Psalm 15.2. Men have so accustomed their Tongues to lying, that
they do it familiarly upon any or no occasion, never thinking that they are
observed either by God or man.

7. But they are extremely deceived in both, for there is scarce any sin that
is at all endeavored to be hid which is more discerned even to men; Those that
have a custom of lying, seldom fail, (be their memory never so good) at some
time or other to betray themselves, and when they do, there is no sort of sin
meets with greater scorn and reproach; a Liar being by all accounted a Title of
the greatest Infamy and Scandal.

8. And as to God Almighty, it is madness to hope that all their Arts can
disguise them from him, who needs none of those ways for discovering of truth,
which men do, but sees the heart, and so knows at the very Instant of speaking
the falsehood of what is said, and by his Title of the God of Truth is obliged
not only to hate, but punish it: And accordingly you read, Revel. 22. That the
Liars are in the number of those that are shut out of the New Jerusalem, and
not only so, but they shall have their part also in the Lake that burns with
Fire and Brimstone; If therefore you be not of the humor of the unjust Judge
which our Savior mentions, Luke 18 2. who neither feared God nor regarded man,
you must resolve on this part of Justice, to put away all Lying, which is
abhorred both by God and Man.

9. And as an Ingenious and virtuous, young man will always speak Truth, so he
ought likewise to avoid vain Discourse; A sober young man may find a Field
large enough to walk in, to refresh himself, and others with harmless
Discourse: There may be and often are whole floods of words in Bulk, where
there are scarce the least drops of good Reason or wisdom to be found in them,
and he should therefore be cautious that he open not his Lips at any time
foolishly: Speech ought to be a Lecture of wisdom to the Hearers, the matter
should always be weighty, the manner of Expression ingenious and comely,
without which we may conclude with the great Philosopher Speech about vain
things when all is done, will be but vain and worthless.

10. A young man should rather choose to make his Discourse upon things, then
Persons: Sometimes of Virtue, and the amiableness thereof, sometimes of the
great Works, and Providence of God, and the excellent glory that is visible and
transparent in them; at other times concerning History, and those pleasing
Records so serviceable to the enlarging and settling of wisdom, which are found
therein. But above all he should delight to six most upon his own Duty, and the
mercys of God in Jesus Christ, and frequent^y bring them to his Remembrance.

11. Speech is our peculiar Excellency ^bove the beasts of the field, let us
therefor scorn to imbase it by filthy and de^auched Discourse, which is so far
below (...) man: Let the young man be modestly ^ilent while the ancient are
before him, waiting for their words as for the dew, and when at any time he
has just occasion to speak, let it be his Motto and Ma^im to consider, non
quot, sed quale, not now much, but how well he speaks. Let ^is words be always
free from Flattery, not to flatter any man: And likewise from Moroseness, That
he causlesly offend no man, and free from affectation, not to speak for vain
glory but for use and profit, and let his care be. That his Speech be truly
accented with Discretion, uttered with Modesty, and seasoned with Grace,
continually shedding and sending forth a sweet ^odour wherever he comes: And
let him consider, That his Tongue will scarce be fit to praise God in Heaven,
which has been used to filthy and light words here on Earth.

12. A young Person therefore of Virtue and Hopefulness will never revile
Religion, nor Religious People; and though he has not much understanding in
these things, yet he ought to consider, that Religion is Sacred, That it is the
Preserver of a Divine Correspondence between Heaven and Earth: It is the
Prerogative of Man above Beasts: The sweet means of our Converse with God, The
greatest Appeal that can be made: The highest claim that man can possibly lay
toward eternity: And those that have contemned Religion have in all Ages been
accounted odious: and the very Heathens would never endure that that pitiful,
sorry Idol should be scorned, much less ought we to offer contumely against the
Living and True God.

13. This is Crimen Laesae Majestatis, High Treason against the Throne and
Dignity of Heaven. Vengeance in the Case of affronting Religion, is very
particularly the Lords, and he will surely, and soon enough see to the repaying
of it; which made the Prophet cry out so earnestly to some insolent and
overdaring ^pirits in his time, Now therefore be ye ^ot mockers, least your
bonds be made strong; He that has not so much Reverence to ^pare Religion from
reproaching that, nor so much Humanity as to respect sober and ^eligious
persons, yet let him learn so much wisdom, and so much pity as to ^pare
himself.

14. It was the settled and unalterable Description which David gave long ago of
a Godly man, a man likely to dwell ^n the Tabernacle of the Lord; He is one In
whose Eyes a vile Person is contemned, ^ut he honors them that fear the
Lord; The Image of God should be exceeding ^ovely, and his Grace highly
Honorable, wherever it is found, though but in the meanest of Gods Children,
and what is to be seen of weakness in them, not yet removed, nor healed, must
be pitied but not scorned, where Religion is wantonly scoffed at without doors
in others, it is to be feared, and more than feared, it is neglected enough,
and wretchedly trodden under foot at home.

15. The Apostle St. Peter foretold, that in the last days should come
Scoffers, 2 Pet. 3.3. walking after their own Lusts, and therefore it is no
wonder, if we who live in the end and dregs of these last days, find this
Prophecy fulfilled. Ishmael was a Scoffer in Abraham's Family, and the Church
has always been troubled with these Vermin, and especially the young debauched
Generation of this Age take a very great Liberty therein, and therefore we may
the less wonder if we meet with such among those who profess a Religion that is
full of Ridiculousness and Folly, that is the Papists; Some instances whereof
these following Examples will Exhibit to us.

16. King Lewis the Eleventh of France always wore a Leaden Crucifix in his
hat, and when he had caused any one, whom he either feared or hated, to be
killed, he would take it off from his head, and kiss it, beseeching it, That it
would pardon him this one evil Act more, and it should be the last he would
commit, Mockeries fit to be used toward a Leaden, but not toward the
everliving God. Martiques Governor of Britany in France in the War against the
Protestants, persuaded them to yield to the King, for that their strong God had
now forsaken them: and scoffingly said. That it was the time for them to sing,
Help us now O Lord for it is time. But he shortly after found that their strong
God was living, and was able to help the weak, and confound the Proud, himself
being presently after slain in the Siege.

17. A Gentleman in France lying upon his Deathbed, and the Priest bringing of
him the Sacrament (which the Papists affirm to be the real Body of Christ,
consisting of his flesh, blood and bones) and telling him it was the Body of
Christ, the Gentleman refused it, because it was Friday, on which day he did
not use to eat flesh. Another Gentleman seeing the Sacrament brought to him by
a Lubbarly Priest, scoffingly said, That Christ came to him as he did once to
Jerusalem, that is riding upon an Ass. Now therefore be no more Scoffers least
your bands be made strong. Isaiah 28.22.

18. There is likewise another Sort of Scoffing, which young Persons are
Subject to, and that is at the Infirmities of other, either of the body or the
mind, either the deformity and unhansomness of the one, or the weakness and
Folly of the others, now it is very sinful to scoff and deride such, since they
are things out of their power to help, they are not his faults but the wise
Dispensation of the Great Creator, who bestows the Excellencies of body and
mind as he pleases, and therefore to scorn a man because he has them not, is
in effect to reproach God, who gave them not to him.

19. And so also, want, sickness and poverty are absolutely at the disposal of
the Almighty, and his Providence raises up, and pulls down whom he pleases,
and it belongs not to us to judge what are the motives to him to do so, as many
do, who upon any affliction that befalls another, are presently concluding,
that sure it is some extraordinary Guilt that pulls this upon him, though they
have no particular to lay to his charge; this rash Judgment our Savior
reproves in the Jews, Luke 13. where on occasion of the extraordinary
Sufferings of the Galileans, he asks them: Suppose ye that these Galileans were
sinners above all the Galileans, because they suffered such things, I tell you
nay, but except you Repent, ye shall all likewise perish. In all the miseries
of others, Compassion becomes a Debt to them, how unjust are they then that
instead of paying them that debt, afflict them with scorn, and Reproach.

CHAP. XIV. Of Profaning the Lords Day
1. GOD who gives us all our time, requires some part of it to be paid back
again as a Rent or Tribute of the whole, thus the Jews kept holy the Seventh
day, and we Christians the Lords day; the Jews were in their Sabbath especially
to remember the Creation of the world, and we in ours the Resurrection of
Christ, by which a way is made for us into that better world which we expect
hereafter. Now this day thus set apart is to be employed in the worship and
Service of God, and that first more solemnly and publicly in the Congregation,
from whence no man must then absent himself without just cause: And secondly,
privately at home, in praying with and instructing our Families; or else in the
yet more private duties of the Closet, as private Prayer, Reading, Meditation
and the like.

2. And that we may be at leisure to attend these, a Rest from all worldly
business is commanded, and therefore let none think that a bare rest from
Labor is all that is required of him on the Lords day, but the time which he
saves from the works of his Calling, he is to lay out in these Spiritual
Duties; For the Lords Day was never given us to be a pretense for Idleness, but
only to change our employment from Earthly to Heavenly: much less was it meant,
that by our rest from our Calling we should have more time free to bestow upon
our sins; And certainly he that dares spend the Lords Day profanely will not
stick to be far worse upon another, where a Sabbath of so few hours becomes so
wearisom to us upon Earth, Good Lord! what would that man do with an
Everlasting Sabbath in Heaven.

3. The Command for keeping the Sabbath has a special Memento, or Remember
prefixed unto it, that by timely thinking of it, we may lay aside our worldly
business and get our hearts in an Holy posture and readiness for entertainment
of God in them. It is the Market day of the Soul, wherein God uses to meet
those that sincerely wait upon him, and to dispense his blessings and Graces
unto them, the careful Sanctification whereof preserves and keeps up the power
of Religion in the Soul, and if worldly labor is unlawful upon that day, much
more are carnal Delights and Pastimes; It is better to plow than to dance on
the Lords Day, says St. Austin: and when men neglect to punish the Profanation
thereof, it pleases God sometimes to take the sword into his own hands, and by
visible Judgments, to plague the profaneness of it; as will further appear by
these Examples following.

4. Upon the thirteenth of January, 1583, being the Lords Day, the Scaffolds of
the Bear-Garden being overloden with People who came to see that filthy
Pastime, they suddenly fell down, whereby eight Persons were slain outright,
and many others sorely hurt, and bruised to the shortn^ng of their Lives. Not
long since in Bedfordshire a match at Football being appointed upon the Lords
Day in the afternoon, whilst two young men were in the Church tolling the Bell
to call the Company together, there was suddenly heard a clap of Thunder, and a
flash of Lightning was seen by some sitting in the Church Porch, coming through
a dark Lane, and flashing in their Faces, which much terrified them, and
passing through the Porch into the Bellfree, it tripped up his heels that was
tolling the Bell, and struck him stark dead, and the other that was with him,
was so sorely blasted therewith, that shortly after he dyed also.

5. At Alcester in Warwick shire, a lusty young wench went upon the Lords Day
not far off, where she said, she would dance as long as she could stand, but
while she was dancing, God struck her with a violent Disease, whereof within
two or three days after she dyed: Also at the same place not long after, a
young man presently, after Evening Sermon was ended, brought a pair of Cudgels
into the Street, near the Ministers House, calling upon several to play with
him, but they all refusing, at the length came one who took them up, saying,
though I never played in my Life, yet I will play one bout now; but presently
after as he was jesting with a young woman, he took up a Birding piece, which
was charged, saying, Have at thee, and the Gun going off, shot her in the face,
whereof she immediately dyed, for which Act he forfeited all his Goods, and
underwent the Trial of the Law.

6. At Wooton in the same County, a Milner going forth on the Lords Day, to a
Wake, or drinking Match, when he came home at night found his house, Mill, and
all that he had, burnt down to the ground and destroyed. At Woolston in the
same County, many loose, debauched Persons met together to drink, and to keep a
Morris dancing in a Smiths Barn on the Lords Day, to the great grief of the
Religious Minister of the Town, who endeavored if possible, to have
restrained, and prevented it. But it pleased God, that shortly after, a Fire
kindled in that Smiths Shop, which burnt it down, together with his house and
Barn; and raging furiously going sometimes with, and sometimes against the
wind, it burnt down many other houses, most of the Inhabitants whereof were
chief Actors in that Profanation of the Lords Day.

7. In the year 1634. On the Lords day in the time of a great Frost, Fourteen
young men, while they were playing at Football uphn the Ice on the River
Trent, near to Gainsborough, meeting altogether in a scuffle, the Ice suddenly
brake and they were all drowned. In the edg of Essex near Brinkley, Two Fellows
working in a Chalk-pit, the one was boasting to his Companion, how he had
angered his Mistress with staying so late out drinking, and playing the last
Sunday night; But (said he) I will anger her worse next Sunday; He had no
sooner said this, but suddenly deny the Earth fell down upon him, and killed
him outright, with the Fall whereof his Fellows Limb was broken, who had been
likewise Partner with him in his Jollity on the Lords Day.

8. A Gentleman called Edward Meridith in Devonshire, having had great pains in
his Feet, and being somewhat recovered, one said to him, He was glad to see him
so nimble; Meridith replied, That he doubted not but to dance about the Maypole
next Sunday; but before he moved from that place, he was smitten with such a
faintness of heart, and diziness in his head, that desiring help to carry him
to an house, he dyed before the Lords Day came.

9. At Walton upon Thames in Surrey, in a great Frost, which hapened in the
year 1634. Three young men on the Lords day after they had been at Church in
the forenoon, where the Minister pressing the words of his Text out of the 2
Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, They the
while wispering as they sat. In the Afternoon, they went together upon the
Ice, over the Thames into an house of disorder and gaming, where they spent the
rest of the Lords day, and part of the night likewise in Drinking and
Revelling; and the next day one of them merrily discoursed of his Sabbath days
Acts; But on the Tuesday next after, these three returning homewards, and
attempting to pass again over the Ice, they all sunk down to the bottom like
Stones, and one of them only was miraculously preserved, but the other two were
drowned. These four last are attested by sufficient Testimonies. If ye will not
therefore hearken unto me to hallow the Sabbath day, as God says, Jer. 17.27.
and not to bear a burden even entering in at the Gates of Jerusalem on the
Sabbath Day, then will I kindle a Fire in the Gates thereof, and it shall
devour the Palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched.

10, It becomes therefore every virtuous young man and true Disciple to awake
and rise early upon the morning of the Lords Day, To awake, as the Apostle
says, Out of Sin into Righteousness, and to put himself in Remembrance that
this is the day of his Saviors Resurrection, the Flour of Time, a Princess
among all other Days, the Day of his Solemn avouching and declaring his
Religion in the sight of God, Angels and Men, That this is the Day wherein God
has appointed to speak to him, and hear from him; wherein to give him a
Meeting about the great affairs of his Soul Let not him therefore neglect so
blessed an opportunity: since he knows not, whether he shall ever live till
another Sabbath comes about; Let him say to himself as the Christians did in
the primitive times; I am a Christian and dare not omit the due Observing of
this day.

11. And certainly the Controversy of violated Sabbaths has ruined thousands;
Persons, Families, Countries have dyed under it. How many hundred Malefactors
when they come to suffer for their Crimes, have confessed that the first
occasion of their engaging into wicked and profane Causes and Company, was
their neglecting of the Observation of the Lords Day; This has brought them to
Swearing, Drinking, Whoredom, Theft, Robbery and what not, especially Servants
who having their Liberty on that Day, have wickedly improved it to the
committing of all manner of Iniquity with Greediness. Therefore for Gods sake,
and for the sake of your own Souls, Let the Terror of the Lord in the
Remembrance of such sad Judgments persuade you, and charge your selves a fresh
every Lords Day in the morning, with what Solemness you possibly can, not to
speak your own words, nor to think your own Thoughts, but Thoughts meet and fit
for a Sabbath Day, and settle your selves heartily to sanctify this Day of the
Lord, for where the Religious care in the Observation of these Holy Seasons of
Grace dies, it is too commonly and sadly seen that little Goodness, little
Loveliness, little of the true Fear of God lives there.

CHAP. XV. Of Gaming.
1. INgenuous Diversions and Recreations, where they are wisely chosen
harmlesly and seldom used, timely and willingly parted with, may be sometimes
necessary and connived at: For both Body and mind may modestly require a
refreshment from their Toils, and let them have it, so they take it as a
remedy, and make it not worse than a Disease. But certainly, It is not for him,
that comes into the world a Child of wrath, born in sin, It is not for him,
whose very Condition and Religion, if he seriously bethinks himself of either,
call aloud unto him for Tears, and daily Repentance; It is not for him, that
has no more then those few and frail days to provide for that Solemn thing
Eternity, or else lie down in everlasting burnings; It is not for such a one,
to become a vain Gamester: he has other things, matters of great weight and
moment, which will call for his time, and utmost care, be is scarce at leisure
to trifle with unmanly Games.

2. Religion is not so Stoical as to condemn generous Actions: They are
commanded to be done, and we shall be commended for doing, whatsoever things
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are Lovely, if there
be any Virtue, if there be any Praise, we have free leave and are invited to
address our selves unto them. And happy is that young man, whose hopeful
Disposition presses early (as David) into the Camp and even longs to employ
it self in such noble undertakings: He that passes by, shall bless him in the
name of the Lord, and say, Go and Prosper.

3. But effeminate Games can claim no kindred, neither can they expect that
they should ever be recorded in Letters of Gold, or mentioned in the
Congregation of the Lord, (like Mordecai's good Services) unto Honor; no they
are (as Alexander wittily said in Plutarch) neither true jest nor good earnest;
neither fair play nor sober work, but of a far sadder nature, when such serious
things as Estates and the welfare of whole Families are wickedly and
unnaturally thrown away upon idle and foolish Cards and Dice.

4. Games are too commonly seeming sports, but real vexations; Acteon's hounds
kept for pleasure in a short space devour their Master: They deflour the mind,
they gratify Satan, they unhing the whole man from things of nobler worth
toward God and toward our Country; Experience has too often stood with Tears
in her Eyes, and even wept in the sight of all men over these things; and seems
thus to complain; What you account the Pastime of particular Persons, I must
lament as the danger of Thousands, as that sore Evil which unworthily softens
and corrupts the Spirit of Nations into Degeneracy and sloth, opening the Gates
to an Enemy, inviting and letting in the Trojan Horse of all Calamity. Thus
with the Roman Emperor we greedily take the Cup, because it is pleasant, but it
proves poison, and in conclusion our Death; These things please not so much one
way, but they wound as much another; whosoever seems to win all are sure to go
away great Losers; the Gamester always rashly stakes, and too commonly plays
away his dear immortal Soul in his Games.

5. We must therefore take great care as to the kind of our Games, that they be
lawful, and such as have no sin in them, we must not recreate our selves to do
any thing that is dishonorable to God, injurious to our Neighbors, Parents or
Masters: neither ought we to use sports only to pass away our time, which we
ought to study to redeem, and not to throw away, and when it is remembered how
great a work we have here to do, the making our Calling and Election sure, the
securing our Title to Heaven hereafter, and how uncertain we are what time
shall be allowed us to that purpose, it will appear our time is that, which of
all other things we ought most industriously to improve, and therefore surely
we have little need to contrive ways for driving that away, which flies so fast
of it self, and is so impossible to recover.

6. Let those that can spend whole days, and nights at Cards and Dice, and
other Pastimes, consider this seriously and with^l, whether they ever bestowed
a quarter of that time, toward that great business of their Souls, for which
all their time was given them, and then think what a woeful reckoning they are
like to make at last, when they come to account ^or that precious Treasure of
their time, and then, let not Covetousness have any thing to do with our
Recreations, if we play at any Game, let the end of our doing it be merely to
recreate our selves, not to win money; and to that purpose, be sure never to
play or any considerable matter, for if you do, you will bring your selves into
two dangers, the one of Covetousness and a greedy desire of win^ng; the other
of rage and anger at thy ^ll Fortune, if thou happen to lose; both which will
be apt to draw thee into other sins, besides themselves; Covetousness will
tempt thee to cheat and cozen in Gaming, and anger to swearing and cursing as
common Experience too often shew^ us.

7. And therefore, if thou find thy sel^ apt to fall into either of these in
Gaming thou must either take some course to secure thy self against them, or
thou mu^^ not permit thy self to play at all; For though moderate play be not
in it self unlawful, yet if it be the occasion of Sin it is sin to thee, and
therefore must no be ventured on; For if Christ command us so strictly to avoid
Temptations, that i^ our eyes or hands offend us, that is, prove snares to us,
we must rather part with them, then to be drawn to sin by them* How much rather
must we part with any of these unnecessary sports, then run the hazard of
offending God by them; H^ that so plays, lays his Soul at stake which is too
great a prize to be played away; besides he loses all the sport and recreation
he aims at, and instead thereof se^s himself to a greater Toil than any of
those Labors are, which he designs to ease himself of; For surely the desires
and fears of the Covetous, and the Impatience and Rage of the angry man are
more ^eal pain, than any the most Laborious work can be; And to conclude since
Pleasures and Recreations are most commonly pursued with the greatest Violence
by young persons, who seem to believe, they may take a greater Liberty than
others in these things, Let them consider what Solomon says, Ecclesiastes 11.9,
10. Rejoice O young man in thy Youth, and let thine heart ^heer thee in the
days of thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart and the sight of thine
Eyes; but know thou that for all these things God will bring thee into
Judgment; which is by a Gentleman thus Ingeniously Paraphrased.

Young man rejoice; what jolly mirth is here?
Let thy heart cheer thee; what delicioas Cheer
In thy young days; Thy Joys will relish sweeter,
Walk thy own ways; Thy Cares will pass the fleeter,
Please thine own heart care where it likes thee best,
Delight thine Eyes, and be a joyful Guest.
But know withal, The Day will come, whereon
The Judge will doom thee for the Deeds thou have done.
O what a Feast, O what a Reckonings; here
The Pleasure's sweet; The Pay extremely dear:
Lord I have been, and am a daily Gu^st,
Too often invited at the young man's Feast:
The Reckonings great; although I cannot pay,
I can confess; Great God before this day
I had been dragged to the Redeemless Jayl,
Had Thou not pleased to accept my Savior's Bail
Lord he must bear't I doubt; for I can get
No Coin to pay; nor Labor out of Debt:
I cannot dig, my joints are stiff and lame;
But I can beg, although I beg with shame,
I have no Grace in Begging; can receive
The first repulse, I have no faith to crave,
If the Entertainments of the Feast be these,
Lord give me Famine, take the Feast that please.
Conclusion.
HAving thus endeavored briefly, and plainly to discover the Du^s of
Apprentices, and Servants toward ^^eir Masters, and likewise those noto^ous
Sins and Vices, which are very ^reat hindrances to their Masters, and ^ring
certain ruin and destruction upon themselves, if they be continued in; I shall
conclude with Offering some Moves and Encouragements to Servants to ^erform all
those Duties, which are re^uired of them.

2. St. Paul tells us, Ephesians. 6.5. that Ser^ants ought to be obedient to them
that are their Masters in singleness of heart, as unto Christ; and again v. 6.
Not with Eye-Service as Men pleasers, but as the Servants ^f Christ doing the
will from the Heart, which implys, That the place of a Ma^ter is to be in
Christ's stead, and therefor they are likewise called Lords; from whence it
follows, That Servants i^ performing Duty to their Master; they perform their
Duty to Jesus Christ, and consequently in Rebelling and resisting against their
Masters, they Rebel against Christ, as God said to Samuel, when the People
rejected his Government, 1 Samuel* 8.7. They have not rejected thee but they have
rejected me, that I should not Reign over them. And is not this then a stron^
motive and encouragement to Servants cheerfully to perform their Duties, and
(...) Caution to them not to disobey their Masters, since if their Masters will
not reward their good Service, nor cannot revenge their Rebellion and
Disobedience yet Jesus Christ will certainly do both.

3. Again, They are called Servants of Christ. which denotes the place of a
Servant; which though it may seem mean^ and low, yet is certainly very
honorable; it is accounted a great Honor to be a Servant to a King; how much
highe^ then is it to be a Servant of the King o^ Kings, Jesus Christ who is
higher the^ all Kings; and upon this Account say the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.21.22.
Art thou ^alled being Servant? care not for it; and that for this Reason, He
that is called in ^he Lord being a Servant is the Lords Free^an. Therefore let
not Servants think the ^lace, which it has pleased God to al^ot them, to be
mean and inconsiderable, ^ince Jesus Christ is the highest Master, and there is
as much honor and comfort ^n a Servants performing the meanest part ^f his
Duty, as in the Office of a Ma^^er.

4 Let Servants likewise consider, that ^t is the will of God they should be in
sub^ection to their Masters: For he has often declared it in the Scripture to
be his will and pleasure, that they who are under the Authority of Masters
should be obedient to them, and therefore those that are otherwise, contradict
the will of God, This is much urged by the Apostle in several places, This is
the will of God. 1 These. 4.3. So is the will of God, 1 Pet. 2.15. and for that
cause we are exhorted to understand, and to prove what is the Will of God, Ephesians.
5.17. Romans 12.2. which is not done, without very great ground and reason; for
it is the will of God, that is the Foundation of all Goodness; Things are
therefore good, because they are agreeable to the will of God; It is his will
that is the very being of Goodness. It it likewise a Rule whereby we should
squate all our Actions, as Law^ and Statutes are, to the People of a Nation and
Kingdom; And this Rule is perfect, so that if we observe the same it is
impossible to miscarry, The Law of the Lord is perfect, Psalm, 19.7. It is
sufficient to give every one (and Servants among the rest) full and perfect
Directions to manage their affairs, and to demean themselves in all Cases and
upon all Accounts, as the Apostle says, the word of God is given to make us
perfect thoroughly furnished to all good works, 2 Timothy 3.7; and therefore our
adhering thereunto is a sufficient warrant to justify all our Actions.

5. So that the Obedience of Servants is not an arbitrary matter, but a
necessary, and Commanded Duty; It is not left to the Election of a Servant,
whether he will perform it or no; but that whereunto he is obliged, and that
not only by the Moral and Civil Constitutions of Men, but also by a divine
Institution of God; It is not a thing only to be done out of civil Policy, but
from Conscience toward God. And therefore Servants cannot be exempted from the
duty they ^owe to their Masters; and though their Masters are careless in
exacting it, yet let Servants be considerable in performing their duties to
them, because it is the will of God.

6. Hope of Reward is that which encourages all People to Activity and
Diligence, and this God himself has promised to Servants in express Terms,
Coll. 3.24. knowing that whatsoever good thing ^any man does, the same shall he
receive of ^he Lord, whether he be Bond or Free; and ^n another place the
Apostle says, of the Lord ye shall receive a reward; and certainly great is
the reward wherewith God will recompense faithful Servants, both as to Temporal
and Eternal Blessings.

7. Now the Temporal Blessings which it has pleased God heretofore to bestow
upon his faithful Servants, and which such have therefore (from that ground)
cause to expect from him now, are such as these, God will incline the hearts of
their Masters to respect them, as he moved Ahasuerus to recompense the fidelity
of Mordecai, Est. 6.3. Or if their Masters fail herein, he will stir up
Srangers to reward them, as he inclined the Jailer to favor Joseph, and
likewise the heart of Pharaoh to advance him to great Dignity and Honor; and
to oblige their Masters to be kind to them, God will make all that they take in
hand to prosper; thus did he bless Joseph and the Servant of Abraham. He will
give success to their endeavors when they deal for themselves: Thus he blessed
the Labors of Jacob, Genesis 30.43. And he will so order it by his providence,
that when they come to have Servants of their own, God will direct that they
shall have those who shall be alike faithful to them: so we read that in Egypt
God blessed Joseph with a faithful Servant. Genesis 43.23. And David who ventured
his Life to save his Fathers Sheep, had afterwads many Servants that put their
Lives in Jeopardy for him. 1 Samuel 17.24. 2 Samuel 21.17. So that the saying of
our blessed Savior may be fitly applied to Servants, with what measure you
meet, shall it be measured to you again, Luke 6.38.

8. Lastly, God will certainly reward faithful Servants in the Life to come,
with Spiritual and Eternal Blessings, which is positively promised them, Coll.
3.22, 23, 24. Servants obey in all things your Masters: and what soever you do,
do it heartily as to the Lord, and not unto Men; knowing that of the Lord ye
shall receive the Reward of the Inheritance, and this is that Inheritance
mentioned by our Savior, Mat. 25.34. come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you, before the Foundation of the World; and that which
St. Peter speaks of, 1 Pet. 1.4. An Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and
that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for them. Now what shall we say more;
what would not a man suffer, and undergo for such an exceeding weight of Glory?
How willingly do many Apprentices pass over the Time of their Service in hope
of obtaining a Temporal Freedom in an Earthly City: and how few days did the
many years service of Jacob seem, because he liked his Reward; But behold here
a far greater, even all that God can give; such a Reward as Eye has not seen,
neither has Ear heard, nor can it enter into the heart of Man to conceive the
Excellency thereof; and all this is prepared by God to be bestowed on all those
faithful Servants that obey and fear him. Strive therefore as Jonathan, to
climb up the Rock: Love and fear the Lord; honor and obey your Parents and
Masters; be careful and redeem your own time; design as becomes you an
ingenuous Life on Earth; design above all a glorious Life in Heaven, and God
your God shall be with you; and the Lord himself make you Branches of
Righteousness, bringing forth Fruits unto Holiness, that God the Lord may be
glorified, Amen.

A Prayer for the Morning.
HOLY and most Gracious Lord God, who art full of Loving kindness and Mercy,
and art a continual defense to all that trust in thee, whether they wake or
sleep, I a poor unworthy sinner, render unto thee humble and hearty thanks that
it has pleased thy great goodness to keep and preserve me the night past, as
well from all mine Enemies, as from all other Casualties and Dangers, that poor
mortal creatures are subject unto, and thou have given me sweet and pleasant
sleep, that I find my body refreshed and comforted for performing the dutys of
this day. O Lord I beseech thee show thy goodness to me this day in preserving
my body and soul that no evil may overtake me, and that I may neither speak nor
do any thing that may be displeasing to thy fatherly goodness, nor dangerous to
my soul, nor hurtful to my neighbor, but that all my enterprises may be
agreeable to thy most blessed will, by doing all that which may advance thy
glory, and be suitable to the Place and Calling wherein thy Providence has cast
me, that whenever thou shall be pleased to take me from this Vale of Misery,
I may enter into thy Heavenly Kingdom; O Lord, strengthen my weak faith, kindle
in my heart and affections a fervent zeal to do thy will; keep my wandering mind
and affections from all evil thoughts, my tongue from profane and lewd
speeches, my body and every part thereof from all sinful actions, and outward
violence, and let all my love, my hope, my delight and confidence be only upon
thee, for who indeed should I love beside thee; the Heavens are within a span,
the Earth within a Circle, the Waters within thy fist; Mountains are weighed in
thy balance, but what number or measure or bounds can we set to thy Mercy O
God? O let the Ocean of this thy Mercy be a partition between me and my sins,
betwixt thee and thy Judgments; who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean,
but thou alone, who justifiest the ungodly, and quickenest the dead in sin;
remove therefore, O Lord, whatsoever is in me that displeases thee, send thy
hand of mercy I pray thee upon me, and take away from me whatsoever does offend
the eyes of thy goodness; and grant that I may lead my whole life and
Conversation so, that I may live in the fear of thy holy and blessed Name, and
may dye in thy favor, that I may also rise again to live for ever with my Lord
Jesus. In whose holy Name, and Words, I further Pray,

Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name: Thy Kingdom come: Thy
Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven: Give Us this Day our daily Bread: and
forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us: and
Lead us not into Temptation; but deliver us from Evil: for thine is the
Kingdom; the Power and the Glory, for ever, Amen.

O Heavenly Father, The Giver of all good Things, and the Protector of all
those that love Thee. I yield thee most humble, and hearty Thanks; not only for
keeping and preserving me this day, but also for all my Life; that neither my
Enemies have prevailed against me as they might, nor any other danger which in
this World is incident to Mankind, has overcome me; but that thou as a Loving
Father, and careful Purveyor, have given unto me, and provided for me all
things necessary; for which thine inestimable Love I cannot sufficiently praise
thee: O Lord forgive me mine Offenses which this day I have committed, and done
against thy holy Majesty, pardon them O God, fot Jesus Christ his Sake; and
vouchsafe me thy Grace to amend my Life, and to return unfeignedly unto thee,
in serving thee; and since I cannot have a Being without thy continual
Protection, be pleased to extend the same toward me, a wretched, poor Creature
this Night, that I may quietly take my Rest, which thou have appointed, for the
refreshing of my weak, and wearied Body; I beseech thee O Lord to guard and
defend me, that nothing hurt me; preserve me by the watching of thy holy Angel,
that I may take my Rest with thee, until the Morning; and that I may then give
my self to the fulfilling of my Duty, and the Discharge of my Calling, with all
diligence and faithfulness, as a Servant unto Christ. Keep my Heart O Lord in
thy fear; and guide all the course of my Life by thy Favor; and prepare me
against the hour of Death, and Dissolution, that if thou should in the Night
make my Bed in the dark, and turn my sleep into death, I may live and dye unto
thee, who lives Everlastingly. Grant that my Soul may continually watch for
that time, that the Lord Jesus Christ shall appear for my deliverance out of
this Mortal Body. Preserve me O Lord this Night from any Fancies, Dreams or
other Temptations; and let me fully set my mind upon thee, to love thee, fear
thee, and trust in thee: These Graces, and all other Blessings which thou O
Lord know to be necessary for me; I humbly beg, and crave at thy hands in
the Name and Mediation of Jesus Christ thy Son; In that Form of Prayer which he
himself has taught me, Saying,

OUr Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name: Thy Kingdom come: Thy
Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven: Give Us this Day our Daily Bread: and
forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: and
Lead us not into Temptation; but deliver us from Evil: for thine is the
Kingdom; The Power and the Glory, for ever, Amen.

A Prayer for the Morning.
MOst Mighty, aad most Glorious Lord God, who art of infinite mercy, who
sit upon thy Throne above: Heaven and Earth, are full of thy Glory; I that
am but Dust and Ashes, presume to present my self before thee this Morning, and
beg such things as I have need of from thy divine Majesty, I have tasted of thy
favors this Night past, I beseech to defend me this day from all perils and
dangers of Soul and Body; and to this end I commend my self and all my actions
unto thy blessed Protection and Government; beseeching thee, that whether I
live or dye, I may live and dye unto thy Glory, and the Salvation of my poor
Soul, which thou have bought with thy precious Blood; bless me O Lord in the
works of my lawful Calling this day, and grant that I may serve my Master as in
thy sight, and do the works of my Calling, as expecting my reward from thee;
and to this end commend my self and all my actions unto thy blessed Protection
and Government; beseeching thee, that whether live or dye it may be to thy
Glory: must confess O Lord I have despised tha^ goodness of thine, which should
lead m^ to Repentance, hardening my heart against all those means which thou
have used for my amendment: And now O Lord wha^ can I expect from thee but
judgment an^ fiery indignation, that is indeed the tru^ reward of my sins; but
O Lord there (...) mercy with thee, that thou may be fea^ed, O fit me for
that mercy, by giving me a deep and hearty Repentance; and then according to
thy goodness, let thine Anger and thy Wrath be turned away from me: look upon
me in thy Son my blessed Savior; and for the merit of his sufferings pardon
all my sins: and Lord I beseech thee by the power of thy grace, so to renew and
purify my heart, that I may become a new Creature, utterly forsaking every
evil way, and living in a constant. sincere, universal obedience to thee all
the rest of my days, that behaving my self, as a good and faithful Servant, I
may by thy mercy be at last received into the joy of my Lord. O Lord pardon the
wanderings, and coldness of these Petitions; and deal with me not according to
my Prayers, or Deserts, but according to my necessities, and thine own rich
mercy in Jesus Christ, in whose blessed Name, and words, I conclude these my
imperfect Prayers, saying, Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for the Evening.
MOst Glorious and Everlasting Lord God, which inhabitest Eternity, and
dwell in that Light which no Mortal can attain unto: The God in whom I live
and move, and have my Being, I thine unworthy Servant, humbly prostrate my self
before thy divine Majesty, confessing and acknowledging that I was conceived in
sin, and brought forth in iniquity; and as if that had been but a small matter,
I have heaped up actual Transgressions against thee, and have gone on in a
daily course of repeating these provocations against thee, notwithstanding all
t^y Calls and my own purposes and vows of amendment: And now O Lord what shall
I say, or how shall I open my mouth, seeing I have done these things; I know
that the wages of sin is death; but thou who willest not the death of a sinner,
have mercy upon me, work in me, I beseech thee a sincere contrition, and a
perfect hatred of my sins; and let me not daily confess, and daily renew them;
but grant, O Lord, that from this instant I may give a Bill of Divorce to all
my most beloved Lusts, and then be thou pleased to marry me to thy self in
truth, in righteousness, and in holiness; and for all my past sins O Lord
receive a Reconciliation; accept of that Ransom thy blessed Son has paid for
me, and for his sake whom thou have set forth as a Propitiation, pardon all my
offenses, and receive me to thy favor; and when thou have thus spoken Peace to
my Soul, Lord keep me that I turn not any more to folly; but so establish me
with thy Grace, that no temptation of the World, the Devil, or of my own flesh,
may ever draw me to offend thee; preserve me O Lord, that I may faithfully act
as a Servant to thee and to my Master; and let me remember that thou art my
great Master in Heaven, to whom I must render a strict and severe account of
all that I have done in the Body; And now O Thou Blessed Keeper of Israel, that
neither sl^^brest nor sleep; be pleased to watch over me this N^ght, keep me
by thy Grace from all work^ of Darkness; and defend me by thy power from all
dangers, grant me moderate, and refreshing sleep, such as may fit me for the
dutys of the day following; and Lord make me ever mindful of that time when I
shall Lie down in the Dust, and because I know neither the day, nor the hour of
my Masters coming; grant me grace that I may be always ready; that I may never
live in such a state, as I shall fear to dye in; but that whether I live, I may
live unto the Lord, or whether I dye, I may dye unto the Lord, so that living
and dying, I may be thine: Hear me O Lord, and answer me in these my requests;
and graciously bestow whatsoever else thou know needful and expedient for
me, and that for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose most holy words, I further
Pray,

Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name: Thy Kingdom come: Thy
Will be done, on Earth as it is in Heaven: Give us this Day our Daily Bread:
and forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us and
lead us not into Temptation; but deliver us from Evil: for thine is the
Kingdom; the Power and the Glory, for ever, Amen.

Grace before Meat.
O Lord we beseech thee, lift up our hearts to look unto thee for a blessing
upon our Meats, that we may comfortably use thy creatures, as pledges of thy
favor, and may serve thee in the receiving of all the Mercys, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

Grace after Meat.
ETernal thanks and praise be ascribed unto thee, O blessed Lord, who have
opened thy hand at this time, and made us partakers of thy benefits, Lord, let
us never cease to offer unto thee the Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving,
through Jesus Christ, Amen.

Grace before Meat.
LORD Bless us, and bless these thy good creatures to the nourishment of our
bodies, and grant that whether we eat or drink, or whatever we do, we may do all
to the praise and glory of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Grace after Meat.
ACcept our thanks, O Lord, for the mercys we have enjoyed, in receiving these
thy creatures for our bodily releif, let us likewise labor for the Meat that
perishes not, for the sake of our Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

Grace before Meat.
Sanctify unto us, O Lord, the use of the^ thy creatures, of which by our sins
w^ have made our selves unworthy, and gra^ that the end of eating and drinking
may b^ to be the better enabled to serve thee in o^ several places, through
Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

Grace after Meat.
HVmble our souls before thee, O Lord and cause us to see the smalness o^ our
desert, even in respect of the least of the mercys, and as thou have s^tled our
body with thy good creatures, so endue our sou^ with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly things, through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

Arithmetic, or the Art of Numbers consists of these five parts: Numeration.
Addition. Substraction. Multiplication. Division


Numeration is so termed, because it instructs how to express any number
propounded, and to give each figure its place according to the value intended.

There are nine figures in number, to which is added a Cipher, which takes up
the tenth place, and has no value in (...) self, but only serves to make up
the number of places, and so may be said to add value to the figure.

Their value, according to the variation of places, may be understood by the
following Table.

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Hundred Millions. 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 Ten Millions. 9 8 7 6 5 4
3 Millions. 9 8 7 6 5 4 Hundred Thousands. 9 8 7 6 5 Ten Thousands. 9 8 7 6
Thousands. 9 8 7 Hundreds. 9 8 Tens. 9 Unites.

Here obsevve, that the first place, or Unite, is on your right hand, and so
every figure increases its value ten degrees, (...) thus, as 1 by adding
another figure ^o it takes to it self the value of ten, thus ^s 12 twelve,
which is still increased ^en degrees, if you add any more figures, ^s 125, one
hundred twenty five, 1251, ^ne thousand two hundred fifty one, etc.

A Cipher, as I said before, though it ^ave no value in it self, yet it gives
value ^o the foregoing figure, as add to 5 a Cipher, and it becomes 50 fifty,
another makes it 500 five hundred, etc.

Addition.
This Rule teaches how by putting or adding several sums together, to reduce
them all into one entire or total sum, and is thus to be performed:

First, Set your several Sums one under another in a straight line, so that
each figure may be directly under the foregoing figures of the same place in
number, and of the same denomination, as unites under unites, tens under tens,
and so of all the rest, as 254 132 272 658

Now to add these together according to your Rule, begin with the unites,
which, as I told you, are always next your right hand, and reckon thus, two and
two makes four, and the four above makes 8, then having written down your 8
under that row of figures, proceed to the next, which are tens, 7 and 3 is ten,
to which is added the five, which makes fifteen, write down your five under
that row, and for the ten, reckon one to the next row, which being added
together make 6, so you have your three sums brought altogether, into one,
which amounts to 658, six hundred fifty eight.

Addition of Money.
Before you can add sums of money together of several denominations, you ^ust
observe how many of one denomina^^on make up one of the other, as twelve ^ence
make a Shilling, twenty Shillings ^ake one pound, etc.

In Addition of Money your Sums must ^e placed in this order: pounds Shillings
pence. 22 14 3 13 15 11 28 12 7 15 17 3 13 14 9 94 14 9

To add which together, you must begin with your pence, and count thus, 9 and
3, 7, 11, 3, make in all 33, which by your Table you will find to be 2 shill. 9
pence; set down 9 under the pence, and carry the 2 shill. to your sum of shill.
and reckon 2 and 14 makes 16; (or which indeed is a better way, and you will by
experience find it to be more easy and expeditious) do thus, 2 and 4, and 7.
2. 5 4, make 25; then count the Tens, and reckon 34. 44. 54. 64. 74, which
amounting to three pounds fourteen shillings; write down your 14 shill. under
your row of shill. and carry 3 to the pounds. 3 and 3. 5. 8. 3. 2. all
together, make 24. set down your 4. and reckon 2 to the next Line, which make
9. set down your nine and you have all your Sum cast up, 94 l. 14 s. 9 d.

With a little practice, following these directions, you will quickly be expert
in any Sums of this nature: now to try for your satisfaction whether the work
be true done, cut off the upper row of figures from the rest of your Sum, with
a Line thus, and add all the under Sums together.

22 14 03 13 15 11 28 12 07 15 17 03 13 14 09 72 00 06 94 14 09

Which you see amount to 72 00 6

Then add that sum and your uppermost row which you had cut off with a ^ine
together, and they both make 94 14 9

Which agreeing with your former account you may conclude to be right.

Addition of Cloth.
Here you must remember that 4 Nails makes 1 quarter of a Yard. 4 quarters make
1 yard. 5 quarters make one Ell English. 3 quarters of a yard make a Flemish
Ell.


Now observing the title or denomination of your account, and placing the
greatest quantities still toward your left hand, (as in addition of Money) for
every four Nails carry one to the quarter of yards, writing the remainder
underneath the nails; next, for every four quarters, reckon one to the yards
(if they are Flemish yards you must reckon one for every 3) if it be Else then
carry one for every 5 quarters of yards.

All Sums of Addition may be proved after the manner before set down, whereof
having given you an example, I think it needless to insert any more.

If you are to add Measures, Weights, Time, etc. you must be first in formed of
the several parts thereof, to which end I have here inserted necessary Tables
by which you may readily take directions, and being so easy, I may save my self
and you the trouble of examples.

2 Pints make one Quart. 2 Quarts one Pottle. 2 Pottles one Gallon. 63 Gallons
one Hogshead. 4 Hogsheads one Tun.
For Troy Weights, wherewith Gold, Silver, Pearls, Silk and such like are
weighed, this short Table will direct you, 24 Grains make one penny weight. 20
Penny weight make one ounce. 12 Ounces make one Pound.


In Avoir dupois weight with which is weighed grosser Commodities, this Table
will direct you, 16 Ounces make one Pound. 28 Pounds make one quarter of
hundred. 4 Quarters make one hundred. 20 Hundred make one Tun.


Addition of Apothecaries Weights.
20 Grains moke one Scruple, the mark 3^ Scruples make one Dram, the mark 8
Drams make one ounce, the character 12 Ounces make one pound, the character lb
For every 20 Grains carry one to the Scruples, for every 3 Scruples reckon one
to the Drams, for every 8 Drams one to the Ounce, and for every 16 Ounces
reckon 1 Pound.

In Addition of Beer-Measure,
For two Pints reckon 1 Quart. For two Quarts reckon 1 Pottle. For 2 Pottles
reckon 1 Gallon. For 9 Gallons reckon 1 Firkin. For 2 Firkins reckon 1
Kilderkin. For 2 Kilderkins reckon 1 Barrel.
In Addition of Dry Measure.
For every 16 Pints reckon 1 Peck. For 4 Pecks reckon 1 Bushel. For 8 Bushels
reckon 1 Quarter. For 5 Quarts reckon one Wey. For 2 Weys reckon one Last.
(...) 3 Barley-corns make one Inch. 12 Inches make one Foot. 3 Foot make one
Yard. 5 Yards make one Perch. 40 Pearches make one Furlong. 8 Furlongs make
one English Mile.
The former Rules being observed by the Table, you may frame your self an
Example.

The parts of Time are
Minutes, whereof 60 make one hour, 24 hours make one day, 365 days make one
Year.

Which are so plain and easy to be added that I think it needless to subjoin
any Examples, or to insist any more on this part of Arithmetic, having given
you so easy and familiar Directions and Examples for the performance thereof.

Of Substraction.
Substraction is that whereby we take a smaller Number from a greater, and find
what remains. In Substractions there are 3 Numbers, whereof 2 are given, the
third sought by the Rule; the first is the Sum or Number given from which you
must Substract; the second the Sum to be subtracted; the third is that which
remains of the greater Sum, after the lesser is subctracted from it, and is
called the remainder.

Now to work by this Rule, you must first set down your greater Sum, out of
which you would substract, in one line.

Then underneath set your Number to be subtracted; but observe to place it so
that every figure may stand under those of your first row that are of the same
denomination, pounds underneath pounds; shillings underneath shillings, and so
of the rest, and if it be in numbers, see that you place unites under unites,
and tens, hundreds and thousands (if there be so many figures) all under
figures of the same denomination.

Which done, begin with the first figure toward your Right Hand, and take it
out of that over it; having drawn a Line underneath your Sum, place the Number
which remains exactly underneath, then go to the second, and so to the third,
etc. till you have done, still setting the remainder of each figure directly
under that from which you Subtracted it.

For Example:

Lent to Mr. J. C. 6389 l. Received of him in part 3242 l. I would know what
remains unpaid 3147

According to your Rule foregoing you may see how this Sum is to be performed;
take first 2 from 9, and set down the remaining 7 underneath, as you see in the
Example: then proceed to your next, which being 4, 4 from 8 the remainder is 4,
which place underneath also; then 2 from 3 and there remains 1: and lastly, 3
from 6 and there remains 3, which being placed underneath you have your Sum
perfected, and you find there remains due 3147 l.

Here are three things to be observed; the First is when a Figure is to be
Subtracted from another of the same value; as 3 from 3, or the like; in such
cases you must write down a Cipher underneath, signifying that naught remains.

The Second is when a Cipher is to be subtracted from a figure, you must then
set down the same figure underneath the Cipher, because nothing is to be taken
from it, and therefore it is not diminished.

The Third is when a greater figure is to be taken from a less, which to the
learner, seems to be a little difficult and intricate; but nothing will
afterward appear more easy; you must then borrow ton and add to the uppermost
figure and then substract your figure from that Sum, and set down the
remainder; but then you must take care to reckon one to the next figure to be
subtracted in payment for the ten you borrowed.

For Example:

J.B. Received of me 4538 l. Of which he has pa^d 3760 l. What remains due?
0778 l.

To perform this, say nothing from 8 and 8 remains, which set down; 6 from 3 I
cannot take, but 6 from 13 (borrowing ten as I told you) and 7 remains: one
that I borrowed and 7 is 8; 8 from 5 I cannot, but 8 from 15 and 7 remains.
Lastly, 1 and 3 is 4, from 4 and 4 and nothing remains, so you find there
remains 778 l. unpaid. In like manner you may perform any Sum of that nature.

In Substraction of money, that is, Sums of Money of several denominations, you
must first set your Sums so that each denomination of your Sum to be
subtracted, may stand directly under the same denomination in the Sum out of
which you would substract; pounds under pounds, shillings under shillings, and
so of pence and farthings, (as before in Addition) then begin with the least
denomination next your right hand, and having subtracted it, set down your
remainder underneath. And if in your farthings, the lower Sum be greater than
the upper, borrow 4, for which reckon 1 to the pence, when you substract them.
So if in the pence the lower number be greater than the upper, then borrow 12
pence of the shilling, for which reckon one to the shilling to be subtracted;
and in like manner, if the lower number of your shillings be greater than the
upper, borrow 20 shillings of the pounds, for which return 1, as before, in the
following Ezample you have it fully explained.

Received of J. L. 829 13 6 Paid -- 648 16 8 Remains -- 180 16 8

The question to be answered is, wha^ remains unpaid of the Sum received? yo^
see first how they are set down according to Rule, then begin with the pence,
and fay 8 from 6 I cannot, but borrowing 12 pence of the shillings, and adding
it to 6 pence, say 8 from 18 and 10 remains. which set down, and again
reckoning the 1 you borrowed to your 16 sh llings; say 17 from 13 you cannot,
but borrowing 20 shillings of the pounds, say 17 from 33 and 16 remains, which
being set down, proceed to your pounds, and adding one pound which you
borrowed, to the 8, reckon 9 from 9 nothing remains, 4 you cannot have from 2,
therefore borrow 10, and then say 4 from 12 and 8 remains, and adding the 1 you
borrowed to the 6, say 7 from 8, and set down the 1 that remains, so you have
your question answered; there remains 180 16 10.

Now for your better satisfaction whether your Sum be performed truly, without
any mistake, do thus for proof: add the Sum that you subtracted, and that
which remains together, and if they both together agree exactly with your first
row you may conclude all is right.

Example: l. s. d. 829 13 6 648 19 8 180 16 10 829 13 6

Thus you see it proved, and in the same manner you may prove any Sum of
Substraction whatever.

Substraction of Weights.
In the Table of Addition before going, I gave you an account of the
denominations of Averdupois weight; now suppose I have bought 32 hundreds 2
quarters 11 pound 8 ounces of Tobacco, whereof I have received 18 Cl. 3
Quarterns 8 ls. I would know how much there is behind due to me.

32 Cl. 2 Q. 11 l. 8 ^. 18 3 8 0 13 3 3 8

Begin first with your ounces where you find a Cipher, and therefore taking
nothing from 8 you set it down entire, then in your l. you say 8 from 11 and 3
remains, which set down also: next to your Quarters of Hundreds, where you find
3 to be taken out of 2, which cannot be, therefore borrow one hundred, (which
is 4 quarter) and then say 3 from 6 and there remains 3, which set down
beneath, then go on, 1 that you borrowed and 8 is 9 from 12 (borrowing 10 to
your 21) and 3 remains, and adding one to your next figure, say 2 from 3 and 1
remains, so you have your Sum

Cl. Qu. l.: 13 3 3 8

Which is all remains due to you, now ^or Proof of it do as before, add your
^wo lower lines together, and if they agree with the upper line your work is
^rue.

Observe that when in Substraction either of Money or Weight there are several
Sums to be subtracted out of one, you must add them all together into one Sum
first, before you can substract them.

I shall give you here an Example which may be sufficient without further
enlarging.

Suppose I have lent a Man 350 pound, whereof he has paid me in part the
following Sums, viz.

l. s. d. at one time 25 15 0 at another time 36 0 0 at another time 58 16 8
120 11 8

Now to know what remains due to me, I add the several Sums together, and then
substract the whole from the Sum lent, thus l. s. d. 350 0 0 120 11 8 the answ.
is 229 8 4

By the Directions and Examples foregoing you may frame to your self any other
Question in Substraction, and therefore we will now proceed to the next Rule in
Arithmetic, which is Multiplication.

Of Multiplication.
MVltiplication by two Numbers given, finds a third which is sought, which
third Sum being the product of the other two, contains your Sum multiplied, as
many times as that which you multiply withal contains unites; and by holding an
exact proportion serves instead of adding so many equal Sums together.

It consists (as I said) of three numbers.

1. The Multiplicand, or number to be multiplied.

2. The Multiplicator or Number by which you multiply.

3. The Product which is the number found out, or produced by the
multiplication of your first number with the second.

Example.

Multiplicand 5232 Multiplicator 17 36624 5232 Product 88944

5232 is the Multiplicand, or number to be multiplied.

17 Is the Multiplicator or Number by which the Multiplicana is to be
multiplied.

88944 The Product of the Multiplication, and here the Product 88944 contains
the 5232, as often as the Multiplicator contains unites, that is to say, 17
times.

When you have two numbers given, it is very indifferent which of them you make
Multiplicand or Multiplicator, though it is most usual to multiply the greater
number by the smaller.

Before you go about to perform any Sums of Multiplication it is necessary for
your speedier working that you be very perfect in the following Table.

A Table of MVLTIPLICATION.
2 times 2 is 4 3 6 4 7 5 10 6 12 7 14 8 16 9 18 3 times ^ is 9 4 12 5 15 6 18
7 21 8 24 9 27 4 times 4 is 16 5 20 6 24 7 28 8 32 9 36 5 times 5 is 25 6 30 7
35 8 40 9 45 6 times 6 is 36 7 42 8 48 9 54 7 times 7 is 49 8 56 9 63 8 times 8
is 64 9 72 9 times 9 is 81

If the Multiplicand consists of more places than the Multiplicator, place you^
Multiplicator underneath the first figur^ of your Multiplicand next your righ^
hand, thus: 3567 8

Then you must begin your work with the first figure toward your right hand
and multiplying your Multiplicator and Multiplicand one into another, if the
number come to less than 10, set down underneath the figure which you
multiplied; if it come just to 10 set it down a Cipher underneath, and carry
one to the next figure when you have multiplied it.

But if it comes to more than 10, or more than any equal number of tens, as if
it comes to twenty odd, thirty odd, etc. then set down the odd number above the
ten or tens, and for every ten carry one, as aforesaid, to the next product,
and when you have gone through with your ^um at the last figure set down your
^hole Product.

Example.

5567 8 28536

You are here to multiply 3567. 678. ^ou see how it is placed by the directions
^oregoing: now to work it, say 8 times (...), which, by your Table, you find to
be ^6, therefore set 6 underneath, and bear ^he 5 in mind, then say 8 times 6
is 48, and 5 which you bring from your first figure makes 53, then set down the
3, and remembering to carry the 5 that remains, say again 8 times 5 is 40, and 5
makes 45, set down your 5, and remember to add 4 to your next product, then 8
times 3 is 24, and 4 is 28; which being set down, you have your full product
28536.

In case your multiplicand and multiplicator both do consist of several
figures, begin with that figure of your multiplier^ that does stand under the
first figure o^ your multiplicand in the place of unites and multiply through
all the figures o^ your multiplicand, placing your produc^ before the line,
according to your first Example; then begin a new product with the next figure
of your multiplier, placing the product under your first product but one figure
more toward your les^ hand, so that the unites of your second product may
stand under the tens of you^ first product, and so multiply that figure o^ your
multiplier through all the figures o^ your multiplicand, setting down you^
whole Sum at your last figure, as you did your first product. Then proceed to
your third figure of your multiplicator and multiply that in like manner
through your multiplicand, setting the first figur^ of your product under the
tens of you^ second product, and so on; if you have more figures in your
multiplier, you mus^ multiply through the multiplicand with each of them,
setting the first figure of every product under the tens of the product before
going, as in this Example.

I would multiply 54722 by 3242

Place your Sums thus, and observe the ^irections given.

54722 3642 109444 218888 328332 164166 199297524

Here I begin with the first figure stand^ng in the place of unites, which is
2, and say 2 times 2 is 4, which I set down; then I go to the next, which is 2
again, and say twice 2 is 4, which I set down; then to the next, which is 7,
and say twice 7 is 14. I set down the 4, and bear 1 in mind to add to the
product of the next figure which is 4; so I say twice 4 is 8, and 1 is 9;
lastly, twice 5 is 10, which I set down, and then begin with the next figure of
my Multiplier, and say 4 times 2 is 8, again, 4 times 2 is 8, then 4 times 7 is
28, I set down the 8 and carry 2 to the next, and reckon 4 times 4 is 16, and 2
is 18, set down the 8 and carry 1, then 4 times 5 is 20, and the 1 you bring
from your last figure makes 21: Thus you must go through with each figure of
your Multiplicator, setting the Sum in this manner, as you see by the Example,
and when you have gone through with them all, draw a line underneath, and add
the products up together into one Sum, and so the Sum is completed.

Now to know whether the Work be truly done or no, add together all the figures
of your Multiplicand: 5 and 4 is 9, and 7 is 16, and 2 is 18, and 2 is 20; now
count how many times 9 there are in 20, and set down the remaining number,
twice 9 is 18, there remains 2, which set down on the side of the Cross dext
your left hand, as you see here ^ Then reckon up the figures of the multi^^ier,
3 and 6 is 9, and 4 is 13, and 2 is 5, and having cast away the 9 set down ^c 6
which remains on the other side our Cross, when you have so done mul^^ply your
2 with the 6, and what re^ains of the product above 9 set down at ^e top of
your Cross. And lastly, do ^e like by your product as you did with ^our
multiplicand and multiplier, and if ^e number left, having put out the nines,
^gree with your number on the top of ^^e Cross, you may conclude your Sum ^o be
rightly performed; your product ^^mmed up amounts to 48, now casting ^ut 5
times 9 which is 45, there remains (...), which proves the Sum to be true.

In 5362 Pence, I demand how many Farthings there are.

Here, because there go four farthings ^o one penny, multiply your penny by 4,
and the product will show the number of ^arthings they contain.

In 5362 Pence how many Farthings? 4 Answ. 21448

In 1680 Years I demand how many Days*

Multiply the years by 365, the number of days which one year contains, and the
product will answer the question.

1680 365 8400 10080 5040 613200

^

Now if you multiply your product b^ ^4, you may know how many hours the^ are
in so many days.

613200 24 2452800 1226400 14716800

^

And multiply your hours by 60, and that will show how many minutes.

14716800 60 883008000

Besides that way I have already set down to prove your multiplication, another
way which is most true and certain, is by Division, making the product of Sum
your dividend, and your multiplicand the divisor, and if your Sum be truly
performed, the Quotient of your division will agree with your multiplicator.

Of Division.
DIvision is the direct contrary to Multiplication, and teaches how many times
a smaller number is contained in a greater, by dividing it into equal parts.

In Division there are four Parts, Viz.

1. The Dividend, or number to be divided, which must always be greater than
the Divisor.

2. The Divisor, or that number by which the dividend is to be divided.

3. The Quotient, which is the result of the Divesion, and shows how often the
divisor is contained in the dividend.

4. The Remainder is that number which remains of your division, which must
always be less than the divisor.

Example.

It is required to divide 37 by 5, (that is to say, how many times 5 is
contained in 37.)

The Answer will be 7 times 5, and 2 over.

Where observe, 37 is the dividend, 5 the Divisor, 7 the Quotient, and 2 the
Remainder.

Now because Division is accounted the most difficult part of Arithmetic, (and
indeed seems so to be till understood) I shall endeavor to render it as easy
and familiar as I can: and therefore think it altogether needless, and indeed
inconsistent with the brevity here intended, to go through the several ways of
Division now in use, but shall confine my self to that only, which of all
others, I take to be the most easy and expeditious.

First, Set down your Dividend, and at each end thereof make a crooked stroke
with your Pen, the left end serves for the Divisor, and the right for the
Quotient. And if your Divisor consists but of one figure, and that figure less
than the first figure of your dividend, make a prick with your Pen under such
first figure of your dividend, and the Sum is prepared to work upon.

Suppose 635 is given to be divided by 5, here 635 is the dividend, and 5 the
divisor.

5) 635 (1 5 1

1. Place them according to the directions given, and having made a prick under
the first figure of the dividend, ask how often you can take your divisor from
it, which being but once, set down one in your Quotient, then multiply the 1 by
5 the divisor, and set it under 6 the dividend, and having drawn a line
underneath substract the 5 from the 6, and set the one that remains underneath
the line, so you have done with the first figure of the dividend.

2. Make a prick under 3 the next figure of the dividend, and bring it down to
one, the product of your last division, so have you a new dividend of 13.

5) 635 (1 5 13 10 3

Then seee how often you can have the divisor in 13, which being twice set down
2 in your Quotient, and do as before, multiplying 5 by 2, substract the product
from 13 the dividend, and you have 3 over, which set underneath.

5) 635 (127 5 13 10 35 35 0

Lastly, Make a prick under 5 your dividend, and bring it down to your 3, then
ask how often you can take 5 your divisor from 35, which being 7 times, set
down 7 in the Quotient, and multiply it by your divisor: so substracting the
product from the dividend, the Sum is perfected, and you find that 5 the
divisor is 127 times contained in 635 the dividend.

Sometimes it falls out that the first figure of the dividend is lesser than
that of the divisor, in such case you must make prick under the second figure
of the dividend, and take the divisor from them both.

If there were 16389 Pounds to be divided equally amongst 7 men, I demand what
would come to each man's share?

7) 16389 (2 14 23

Here because you cannot have 7 from 1 make a prick under 6, and ask how many
times 7 you can have in 16, which being twice, write 2 in your Quotient, then
multiply it by 7 the product, and substract the product from 10 the dividend,
setting the 2 that remains under the line as was shown before, then make a
prick under 3, and bringing it down to your 2, ask how often you can have 7 in
23, which being 3 times, set down 3 in your Quotient, then multiply it by the
divisor, and substract the product from 23 the dividend as before, nextly
making a prick under 8, prick it down to your 2, and ask how often you can have
7 in 28, set down 4 in your Quotient, and multiply i^ by 7 your divisor, the
product will be 28, which substract from your dividend, and nothing remains.

7) 16389 (23. 14 23 21 2

Lastly, Make a prick under 9 the last figure of the Sum, and bringing that
down, ask how often 7 in 9, set 1 in the Quotient, and multiplying and
substracting as before, you find 2 remaining, which is the overples of the sum,
or remainder; so is your Sum ended, and Question answered, that if 16389 l.
were to be divided amongst 7 men there would fall 2341 l. to each man's share,
and 2 remain over.

7) 16389 (2341 14 23 21 18 28 09 7 2

It is required to divide 36499 by 429.

429) 36479 (45 3432 2559 2145 414

First, set your dividend and divisor, according to the former directions, the^
make a prick under the fourth figure o^ the dividend, (because you cannot take
the divisor out of the first three) then ask how many times 4 you can take in
36, now though you may have 9 times 4 in 36, yet it cannot go so, because 9
times 429 makes 3861, which is more than 3687 the dividend; and by consequence
cannot be taken from it, therefore take 8 times, and for experience and the
better certainty multiply 429 by 8, upon a spare piece of Paper, and you will
find the product to be but 3432 which is less than the divisor and may be taken
from it, then having set 8 in the Quotient, multiply your division thereby, and
substracting the 3432 the product from the dividend (as in the former Sums) the
remainder will be 255, then make a prick under 9, bring it down, and ask how
often 429 in 2559, by trying, as before, you will find 5 times may be taken,
therefore set down 5 in the Quotient, multiply the divisor, and substract it
from the dividend, and the Sum is perfected, 414 remaining.

Of Reduction.
REduction is the bringing, or the reducing numbers of several denominations
into one denomination, and is performed either by Division or Multiplication;
by Division we reduce smaller denominations into greater; and by Multiplication
greater numbers are reduced into less.

In order to the resolving any Question by this Rule you must first consider
whether the Sum propounded is to be resolved into a greater or lesser
denomination, and then how many of one denomination makes one of the other.

Suppose you are required to reduce 235 Pounds into Shillings.

235 Pounds 20 make 4700 Shillings.

You are here to consider, that pounds being greater than shillings, therefore
you are to work by Multiplication, then remember that 20 s. making one pound
you are to multiply by 20.

20) 4700 (235 6 10 10 0

Now by turning the Question, and asking how many pounds there are in 4700
shillings, you both prove the Sum, and practice the other part of this Rule,
for in dividing 4700 s. by 20, the Question is answered.

In 347 l. 16 s. how many pence?

l. s. 347 16 20 6856 Shllings. 12 13712 6856 82272 pence pence 82272 4 329088
farthings

Here you must strst reduce the pounds into shillings, taking in the 16
shillings in the Multiplication, now because o cannot multiply, set down your
shillings first, then multiply by your next figure, thus twice 7 is 14, and 1
which you take from the shillings makes 15, then set down 5, twice 4 is 8, and
1 makes 6, thus you see that 347 l. 16 shillings reduced into s. make 6856, now
to perfect your work by reducing the shillings into pence, multiply them by 12,
and you have your desire; so likewise in multiplying pence by 4, they are
reduced into farthings.

2. If the Sum consists of several denominations, as pounds, shillings, pence
and farthings; and so of weights, etc. then you must reduce the greatest Sum
into the next denomination, and take in such odd numbers as are in that
denomination into which you reduce your greater Sum, so proceeding till your
number given be reduced to the lowest denomination required.

For Example:

In 3685 l. 13 s. 3 d. how many Farthings are there?

l. s. d. 3685 13 3 20 73713 Shillings. 12 147429 73713 884559 Pence 4 3538238
Farthings.

First, Reduce the pounds into shillings, multiplying by 20 s. and taking in
the 13, then bring the shillings into pence, multiplying by 12, and taking in
the 3 d. Lastly, reduce your pence into farthings, multiplying by 4, and taking
in the odd half penny.

Sometimes it is needless to make so many several Multiplications to reduce
your Sum into each denomination, but it may be done at once, as

It is required to reduce 248 l. into farthings.

Here consider that 48 farthings make one Shilling, and therefore 20 times so
many, must make one l. therefore in multiplying 248 by 20 times 48 which is
960, you may at one multiplication answer the Question.

248 Pounds 960 14880 2232 238080 Farthings.

If you are to reduce 4 d. 9 d. 13 d. or the like Coyns into pounds; first
bring them into equal parts of a Pound, and then work by Division.

It is demanded in 532 pounds, thirteen pence halfpenny, how many pounds?

First multiply by 27, which reduces them into halfpence, then divide by 24,
which brings them into shillings, and then you may reduce the shillings into
pounds, by cutting off the last figure, and the half of the rest is the number
of pounds, and if there remain an odd figure it shows the number of shillings
over.

Example.

532 l. 13 d.. 27 3724 1064 Shillings. 24) 14364 (598 120 236 216 204 192 12

You find that 532 l. 13 pence halfpenny, makes 598 shillings and 12
halfpence remaining; now to reduce the shillings into pounds, cut of 8 with a
dash o^ the Pen, and take the half of 59, which being 29, and one remaining,
you have 29 pounds, and the 1 being set before the 8, there is the 18 shillings
which are over.

59^8 l. s. d. 29 18 6

The Rule of Three.
IN the Rule of Three (by some called the Golden Rule for its excellency and
usefulness) by three Numbers already known a fourth is sought, which fourth
number must bear such proportion to the third as the second does to the first.

If the Sum consists of several denominations, the first number and third must
be brought into one denomination, and the fourth number will be of the same
denomination with the second; if the first number be ounces, the third must be
ounces, and if the second number be shillings, the fourth number will be
shillings also; now for placing the Question you need only observe that the
number on which the Question depends must be set in the third plac^.

Example.

If 4 Else of Cloth cost 13 s. what will 28 Else of the same Cloth cost?

Here it is easy enough to observe that 28 must be set in the third place,
because the Question lies on that number.

Now to answer this Question (and all others of this nature) you must multiply
the 2d number by the 3d, and divide the product of that multiplication by the
first number, and the Quotient of the division will be the answer to the
question.

If 4 Else cost 13 shillings, what will 28 Else cost?

28 104 26 4) 364 (91 36 ^04 4 0

Here you see 13 s. the second number being multiplied by the third number 28
Else, the product is 364, which being divided by 4 the first number, the
Quotient is 1 shillings, or 4 l. 11 s. and so much will 28 Else cost.

Question 2d.
If 16 Cl. of Tobacco cost 65 l. what will 57 Cl. of the same Tobacco cost?

By the directions given in placing the Sum aforegoing you may readily place
this also, the Question being upon 57, that must be the 3d. number.

If 16 Cl. of Tobacco cost 65 l. what will 57 cost?

57 455 325 16) 3735 (231 32 50 48 25 16 9

Now multiply 65 by 57, and the product will be 3705, which being divided by
16, the quotient will be 331 pounds, and 9 remaining of your division, which
are so many sixteenth parts of a pound.

Now to know exactly what the 9 remaining amounts to in shillings and pence,
multiply it by 20, to reduce it into shillings, and then divide it by 16, the
first number of the Sum, and the quotient will show the odd shillings.

Example.

9 20 16) 180 (11 16. 20 16 4 12 16) 48 (3 48 0

9 multiplied by 20 makes 180, and 180 divided by 16 the quotient is 11 s. but
because there remains 4 of this division you must multiply it by 12 to bring it
into pence, and divide again by 16, so will you find the odd pence;

Example.

4 multiplied by 12 makes 48, which being divided by 16, the quotient is 3, so
your question is answered; for if 16 Cl. weight of Tobacco cost 65 l. then 57
will cost 231 l. 11 s. 3 d.

3d. Question. If 18 Cl. weight of Sugar cost 73 l. what will 130 C. weight of
the same Sugar cost?
Here multiply 73 by 130, and divide by 18, and so proceeding according to the
directions and examples before given, you find that if 18 Cl. of Sugar cost 73
l. then 130 Cl. of the same will cost 527 l. 4 s. 5 d. halfpenny. and 6
eighteenth parts, or one 3d. part of a farthing.

If 18 Cl. cost 73 l. what cost 130?

130 2190 73 (18 9490 (527 l. 90 49 36 130 126 14 l. 20 18) 80 (4 s. 72 8 s. 12
18) 96 (5 d. 90 6 d. 4 l. s. d. facit 527 4 5 far. 18) 24 (1 frrthing 18 6

Sometimes although the first and third numbers are both of one kind, yet they
may be of several denominations, and then you may reduce both the numbers into
the lowest denomination, and must also be both of the same denomination, but if
your number consists of several denominations, then reduce it to the lowest
denomination, or lower, if you think good.

4th. Question. If 153 Flls 3 quarters of Cloth cost 49 l. 13 s. 4 d. what
shall 57 Else, 1 quarter of the same Cloth cost?
First reduce your 153 Else 3 quarters into quarters multiplying by 4, and
taking in the odd three quarters, and the product will be 615 which set for the
first number, then by the Rules before-given, reduce the 49 l. 13 s. 4 d. into
pence, which amounts to 11920, for the second number.

Lastly, 57 Else 1 quarter make 229 quarter for the 3d. number, then state the
Question thus;

5th. Question. If 615 quarters cost 11920 pence, what 229 quarters cost?
Work according to the former directions and examples, and your Answer will be

If 153 Else and a quarter cost 49 l. 13 s. 4 d. then 57 Else and a quarter
will come to 18 l. 9 s. 10 d. halfpenny, and two 123 parts of a farthing.

Now if you are not fully satisfied whether or no the work be exactly
performed, state the question the contrary way.

Example.

The first question was this;

If 4 Else cost 13 s. what will 28 cost?

The Answer was 4 l. 11 s.

Now to know whether you have done the Work aright, state your Question thus:

If 28 Else cost 4 l. 11 s. what shall 4 Else cost?

If 28 Else cost 4 l. 11 s. what shall 4 Else cost?

20 91 4 28) 364 (13 28 84 84 0

Answer is 13 s. which agreeing with the former Question, proves your work to
be true.

FINIS.
H The Breaks a.
writing sample (engraved) sample alphabet showing individual letter strokes
Aabccdeefghiklmnopqrsstvwwxyzz



writing sample (engraved) ABCDEFGHIKLMNOPQRSTVWXY

Keep thy self in a Good tehmper to Commune your hand for Writing

Iealously runn in virtues most happy race

Aabccdeefgghiiklmnopqrrsststvuwxyzz



writing sample (engraved) Fair writing then to Excellence Most does rise
when the pen Is most in Exercise
Diligence Gains intelligence and they Experience To all Right Arts the way.

Evil communications declare Our inward inclinations

Constant continuance in well Doing is commendable




