A PROPOSAL Offered to the COMMITTEE OF THE Honorable House of COMMONS,
APPOINTED To consider of Ways for the better providing for the POOR, and
setting them on Work.
And now under their Consideration.
THAT the Laws now in force about Vagrants, Rogues, Beggars, Lewd Women,
Bastards, etc. and also the Laws about the Settlement of the Poor be
comprehended in one Statute, that so they may be more easily understood by
those who shall undertake the Care of the Poor.

That the Laws about Providing for and Employing the Poor be still in force,
where new Corporations for the Poor are not settled.

That Encouragement be given for erecting Hospitals, Houses of Correction, and
Workhouses for Maintaining and Employing the Poor of this Kingdom, in all the
Counties, Cities, and Towns, under the Management of Corporations, settled
either under the Great Seal of England, or by Act of Parliament; or by the
Justices of the Peace in their Quarter Sessions.

That where these Corporations are settled in Cities or Towns Corporate, the
Poors Rates of all the Parishes be united into One, and equally raised on the
Inhabitants, according to their Estates, both Real and Personal; except in
London, or other very large Places, which may be divided into several
Corporations, by discretion of the Justices, who may bring the Charge to an
Equality, either by joining rich Parishes with poor, or by making the richer
Corporations contribute to the Poorer.

That the Corporations in the Country be not extended so large as to comprehend
a whole County, the Poor thereof being too many for one Corporation to govern,
but rather confined to a Hundred or Hundreds, whose Parishes to be comprehended
in One, and each of them to contribute to the Charge thereof, not by bringing
them to an equal Pound-rate on their Lands and Personal Estates, which I fear
will discourage them from uniting; but by taxing every Parish according to what
it paid before, there not being the same Parity of Reason for this way of
Rating in the Hundreds, as there is in Cities and Towns; because in the
Hundreds the Parishes do not receive an equal Benefit from the Labor of the
Poor of other Parishes, as they do in Cities and Towns; yet this may be
referred to the Justices of the Peace to proportion, which, I humbly conceive,
is all can be done, except you make this Law compulsive.

That the Sums of Money to be raised for this Work, shall not exceed what was
paid in one of the last Three Years for the Maintenance of the Poor in all the
Parishes thus united.

That these Corporations shall be obliged to maintain all the Poor impotent
People within their Jurisdictions; to provide Work for those who are willing,
and to force those to work who are idle, and to assist those poor People whose
Labor will not maintain their Charge.

That Hospitals, and Workhouses, and Houses of Correction, shall be erected in
convenient Places, under the Government of each Corporation; wherein the
impotent Poor shall be provided for; Vagrants and Idle People punished, and
kept at Hard Labor; Young People of both Sexes bred up to work till the Age of
Sixteen, and also taught to read; and the said Corporations shall have power to
bind them out Apprentices, the Boys to the Age of (...) and the Girls to the
Age of (...) or time of Marriage. Which Hospitals, Workhouses, and Houses of
Correction, shall be built at a general Charge, to be raised in proportion,
according as each Parish pays to the Poor.

That the Governors of these Hospitals, Workhouses, and Houses of Correction,
in Cities and Towns Corporate, be the Mayor and Aldermen, together with a
number of Guardians chosen out of each Parish; and in the Hundreds, all the
Justices of the Peace inhabiting therein; also a number of Inhabitants chosen
out of each Parish, in proportion to the Sum of Money it pays; which Choice to
be made once in every year, when one half of them which were first chosen shall
go forth, and the remaining half shall stay in for the next Year: The Electors
in the Cities and Towns Corporate to be such as pay One penny per Week to the
Poor in their own Rights; and in the Hundreds, the Freeholders of Forty
shillings per Annum; and in Case of the Death of any Guardian, another to be
chosen in his room, by the Parish for which he served; which Elections shall be
made on the (...) in Courts held in each Parish by the Justices, or
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, or the Constables.

That these Guardians shall choose a Governor, Deputy Governor, Treasurer, and
Assistants, yearly; and shall hold Courts, and make Bylaws for the better
carrying on this Work; shall appoint how many of their Members shall make a
Court; shall settle the number of their Assistants; and shall adjorn from time
to time; but shall be obliged once in every Calander Month at least to hold a
Court; which shall be held by the Governor, Deputy Governor, or one half of
the Assistants.

That the Court do once in every Year, or once in Six Months, agree how much
Money will be necessary for the Maintaining and Employing their Poor for the
Year or Six Months ensuing, and that this be certified in each City and
Town-Corporate to the Mayor, and Aldermen, of that City and Town-Corporate; and
in every Hundred, to the Justices dwelling within the said Hundred, at a
Meeting to be held for that purpose; who shall proportion the said Sum
regularly on each Parish, and grant out their Warrants to the Churchwardens and
Overseers of the Poor to assess it thereon, and afterward, other Warrants to
collect and pay it in to the Treasurer of the Corporation; and if the Mayor,
and Aldermen, in the Cities and Towns-Corporate, or the Justices of the Peace
in the Hundreds, shall refuse or neglect by the space of (...) Days next after
such Certificate made to them, to issue out their Warrants to the Churchwardens
and Overseers of the Poor to make such Assessments; or after such Assessments
made by the space of (...) Days, to issue out Warrants for the gathering of the
same, and paying it to the said Treasurer, that then the several Corporations
shall by their own Warrants under their Common Seal, require the said
Churchwardens and Overseers to do the same; and if they neglect by the space of
(...) Days after the issuing out such Warrant by the Mayor, and Aldermen, in
the said Cities and Towns-Corporate, or by the Justices of the Peace in the
said Hundreds, or on their neglect or refusal, by the said Corporations, to
make Assessments, and gather and pay the same to the said Treasurer, then the
said Corporations shall have power to levy the same on the Offenders, for the
use of the said Corporations.

That all charitable Gifts given for the use of the Poor, after the erecting of
these Corporations, shall belong to that Corporation, of which the Parish is a
part, to whom it is given.

That each of these Corporations be one Body Politic in Law, and may sue and
be sued, and may, without License in Mortmain, purchase, take, and receive any
Lands, Tenements, or Heriditaments, and transfer the same, and any Goods and
Charttels whatever, for the benefit of the said Corporation.

That the said Courts shall have these powers following, viz.

To Summon before them any Inhabitants within their Jurisdictions, to answer to
Matters relating to the said Corporations.

To appoint a Common Seal or Seals for the benefit of the said Corporations.

To buy Necessaries for putting the Poor at work.

To compel all People who seek to them for Relief, or ought to be maintained by
them, to dwell in their Hospitals and Workhouses.

To inflict reasonable Correction on all poor Persons in their Hospitals and
Workhouses.

To examine what Poor shall come to reside in any of their Parishes, and to
send them by their Warrants to the place of their last legal Settlement, or to
bring them before the Justices in order thereto. (Appeals as before.)

To apprehend Rogues, Vagrants, Beggars, loose and disorderly Persons, and to
cause them to be set at work for (...) Years in their Workhouses, Hospitals,
or Houses of Correction.

To choose and entertain necessary Officers, and to pay them out of their Stock.

To certify, what Money will be necessary for building Hospitals, Workhouses,
and Houses of Correction, and to raise it as before, and when raised, to buy or
build such Hospitals, Workhouses, and Houses of Correction.

To set down and agree on what Terms they will receive Honorary Guardians.

These Corporations not to have power over any Almshouses, Hospitals, or other
charitable Gifts already settled; but that all those Gifts which have been
given in general terms for the use of the Poor, shall be in them.

No Officer in these Corporations, by reason of such Office, shall be liable to
the Penalties mentioned in an Act made 25 Car. 2. for the preventing the
Dangers which may happen from Popish Recusants; because this may keep out many
People, who may be very instrumental in carrying on this work.

The Treasurer of these Corporations to account with such Persons as they shall
appoint; and to make up his Accounts annually.

Forfeitures to be levied by Sale of the Offenders Goods, by warrant under the
Hand and Seal of the Treasurer.

That the Poor employed in the Woollen-Manufactures be paid for their Work in
Money, and not in Goods, by all who do employ them.

That the Rates of Spinning be set every Year by (...) and that the pound of
Wool delivered out to the Poor to be Spun by any Manufacturer, do not exceed 16
oz.

A Clause to secure those from unnecessary Suits who shall Act by virtue of
this Law.

All which is Humbly Submitted to the Wisdom of this Honorable Committee. John
Carry.


