In Effigem Nicholai Culpeper Equitis


The shadow of that Body here you find
Which serves but as a case to hold his mind,
His Intellectual part be pleased to look
In lively described in the Book
Pharmacopoeia Londinensis: OR THE London Dispensatory

Further adorned by the Studies and Collections of the Fellows, now living of
the said COLLEGE.

Whereunto is added,

1. The Virtues, Qualities, and Properties of every Simple.

2. The Virtues and Use of the Compounds.

3. Cautions in giving all Medicines that are dangerous.

4. All the Medicines that were in the Old Latin Dispensatory, and are left out
in the New Latin one, are printed in this fourth Impression in English with
their Virtues.

5. A Key to Galen's Method of Physic, containing thirty three Chapters.

6. What is added to the Book by the Translator, is of a different Letter from
that which was made by the College.

By Nich. Culpeper Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology; living in
Spittle-fields near London.

Scire potestates Herbarum, usumque medendi
Maluit, and mutas agitare (inglorius) arts.
Virgil. LONDON:

Printed for Peter Cole, at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil near the
Royal Exchange. 1653.

Pharmacopoeia Londinensis: OR THE London Dispensatory

Further adorned by the Studies and Collections of the Fellows, now living of
the said COLLEGE.

Wherein you may find,

1. The Virtues, Qualities, and Properties of every Simple.

2. The Virtues and Use of the Compounds.

3. Cautions in giving all Medicines that are dangerous.

4. All the Medicines that were in the Old Latin Dispensatory, and are left out
in the New Latin one, are printed in this fourth Impression in English with
their Virtues.

5. A Key to Galen's Method of Physic, containing thirty three Chapters.

6. What is added to the Book by the Translator, is of a different Letter from
that which was made by the College.

7. In this Impression the Latin name of every one of the Compounds is printed,
and in what page of the New Folio Latin Book they are to be found.

By Nich. Culpeper Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology; living in
Spittle-fields near London.

Scire potestates Herbarum, usumque medendi
Maluit, and mutas agitare (inglorius) arts.
Virgil. LONDON:

Printed for Peter Cole, at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil near the
Royal Exchange. 1653.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Edward Hall Esquire, Justice of the Peace for the
County of Surry; Nich. Culpeper wishes increase of Grace in this World, and a
Crown of Glory in that to come.
Right Worshipful,
LET it not seem strange in so Solemn a Business, in which no less than the
Preservation of Life, Health, and by consequence Wel-being of all the poor
People in this Nation is concerned; in so weighty a business, contrary to all
Presidents in this Nation, which is now Heart-sick of Ignorance, and cries out
aloud for cure; in so Populous a City, and so full of Critics, before so many
Ancient Physicians who might have done the Work better than I, had they not
wanted will; neither could they have wanted that, had they not wanted real Love
to this Nation: in such times (I say) in such a place, and before such People,
for me whose years are few, whose Exercise in the Physical Sphere small, (my
greatest Studies being spent about Natural Philosophy) whose Judgment slender
to venture upon this so great a Work as to attempt to rectify the Judgments of
a whole College, (which is indeed no less needful than great) may seem to some
perhaps, great Arrogance and Presumption, to others no small insolency and want
of discretion: Notwithstanding, the Glory of God being my Aim, and the good of
this languishing Nation my End (I do not call the Nation languishing in respect
of Government, but in respect of Knowledge, as for the Government of this
Nation, God knows what he has to do, and I hope well) which I say languisheth
so sorely under a Disease which now turned Epidemical and rages so extremely
that it sweeps away millions in a year, leaving many woeful Widows, and
Fatherless Children to the protection of those whose mercies are cruelty, and
that is Ignorance in Physic, or want of Knowledge of what may do them good; the
Cure of this Disease cannot be performed neither by Aurum potabile, nor the
Philosophers Stone, but by the real endeavors of a Public Spirit by the Fear
of God, and Love to poor People, by laboring to discharge a good Conscience, by
instructing People what belongs to their Health; this I assure you was the
reason that moved me to adventure into the Stage of the World in this Nature,
and not any sinister ends of my own whatsoever, for it is not unknown to your
Worship that I have incurred many Enemies by my writing, though I do good, and
but my duty; yet I shall ever choose rather to satisfy the Godly minds of real
Common-wealthsmen, in revealing to them what belongs to the Preservation of
their Lives, and the helping of their poor Neighbors, than either wrong my own
Conscience, or rob the whole Nation of what I may and ought to reveal to them: I
confess I have chiefly been reviled of those to whom I have done good, who have
received their greatest Knowledge of Physic by my Writings; I can pity them,
but do not wonder a whit at it; it has been so even in the days of old, when
Christ and his Apostles lived upon Earth, they cast out Devils, they cured
their Diseases, they made the Blind to see, and the Lame to go, for which of
all these good Deeds were they persecuted? doubtless it was done by that
Monster Envy which rules in the children of Disobedience, who having joined to
himself Pride, and Self-interest labors to surpress whatsoever is well done;
but as I have fellowship with Christ and his Apostles in their Sufferings, so I
look to have fellowship with them in that Glory into which no Proud, nor
Envious, nor Self-seeking man shall enter. I can freely (as I hitherto have
done) yet continue doing them good, as being persuaded that by so doing, I am
the more like unto God, who causes the Sun to shine upon the good and the bad,
and the Rain to fall upon the just and the unjust; following that Rule which is
so often repeated in holy Writ, If thy Enemy hunger give him meat, if he be
athirst give him drink, for in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire upon his
head, and the Lord shall reward thee.

Worthy Sir, This Child of mine coming out the fourth time into the World, and
wanting Defense, as most Truths do, cried aloud for a Patron which made me so
bold as to present it at your feet; rather I will assure you, to take a Pattern
of your Patience than any ways to make a purchase of my own praise, that so in
despite of Cavaliers it may be called the God-child of a Peerless Godfather.
You must not expect large incomiums of praise from him whose words and actions
you know always to be so plain, nor an Epistle stuffed as full of Flattery as
an Egg is full of meat, which I hate to give, and you to receive, and God hates
it in whomsoever he finds it; it is sufficient to you, and infinite joy to me,
that your Works declare to the World what you are, even in these times when
rich Pluto is accounted a better Philosopher than learned Plato, when Godliness
is not accounted great Gain, as it was in better times than now are, but Gain
is accounted great Godliness. I had Reasons enough to make me bold to dedicate
it to you, as namely, That Ingenuity of your Spirit, your excellent Endeavors
for the public Good, that admirable Constancy which Honor it self could not
choke; so that your Splendour (like other Justices in Office with you) has not
gone out like a Candle, and left a stinking snuff behind, though it has
pleased God to place you in Authority in such an Age, that calls Virtue Vice,
and Vice Virtue, that calls Good, Evil, and Evil, Good, that strike at the
Devil, and hit Christ in his Saints: To whom rather (these things considered)
should I dedicate these my weak Labors, than to your self, to whom God has
given the Knowledge to discern Virtue from Vice, to love the one and hate the
other, according to that excellent Speech of Plato, Oh Knowledge, how would men
love thee if they did but know thee, for as Health is the Conservation of the
Body, so is Knowledge the Conservation of the Mind, which is too too much
absconded (the more is the pity) from the eyes of this languishing Nation, and
calls aloud for a Cure, for as Plato says in another place, If Virtue could
take upon her a bodily shape, she would be so beautiful as men would be in love
with her; also if Vice could take upon her a Bodily shape, she would be such an
ugly beast all men would loath and disdain her, for if Drunkards have so many
Apish and beastly postures, what would Drunkenness it self have, which is the
Author of them all, if that could appear in a visible form? This I know you are
well versed in; the love of a Real Commonwealth may be read in you even
through a pair of Spectacles glassed with an inch board: this was another
argument moving me to dedicate this Book to you, which tends toward the
furtherance of a Commonwealth, and the pulling down a Monopoly extremely
prejudicial, yet scarce discernable.

I must be brief, because it is brevity you delight in, therefore to use many
words I account it needless; your kind acceptance of this Book, I shall account
such a favor as is never to be forgotten: The God of Heaven and Earth which
has hitherto preserved your Body in so many dangers and difficulties which you
have passed, and your Spirit pure in these backsliding Times, still be your
Guide, and preserve your Spirit, Soul, and Body until the time of your Change
shall come, and present you blameless at the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ,
in whom God has loved you, and washed you from your sins in his Blood.

So prays, Sir Your Worships most humble Servant NICH. CULPEPER.

A Premonitory Epistle TO THE READER.
Courteous READER,
THose things which God did make first in the Beginning without means, He now
preserves by Means, and therefore He has placed Nature in the World which by
Motion acts in all things, according to the quality of the thing acted upon, as
Fire acts upon Wood to make a fire to warm one by, or the like; therefore as
the Cause of Diseases is to be understood to be Natural, so is their Cures also
to be effected in a Natural way; and if you do but consider the whole Universe
as one united Body, and Man an Epitomy of this Body, it will seem strange to
none but Madmen and Fools that the Stars should have influence upon the Body
of Man, considering he being an Epitomy of the Creation, must needs have a
Celestial World within himself; for to wind the strings a little higher, If
there be a Trinity in the Deity (which is denied, but by none but Ranters) then
must there be a Trinity also in all his Works, if there be a Unity in the
Godhead, there must needs be a Unity in all his Works, and a dependancy
between them, and not that God made the Creation to hang together like Ropes of
Sand, so God made but one world, and yet in this one World a Trinity, first
Elementary, which is lowest; Secondly, Celestial, which is next above that;
Thirdly, Intellectual, which is highest in degree, and happy, yea thrice happy
is he that attains to it; if then Man be capable of the Intellectual World as
having an Epitomy of that in himself, whereby he knows that there is a God, and
that God made this World, and Governs it now he has made it, that there are
Angels, and that he bath an immortal Spirit in himself which causes him to
hope and expect immortality; If he have an Epitomy of the Elementary World in
himself, whereby he searches and seeks after the Virtues of Elementary Bodies,
and the various mixtures of Natural things, their Causes, Effects, Times,
Fashions, Events, and how they are produced by the Elements, must he not also
by the same rule have an Epitomy of the Celestial World within himself, by
which he searches out the Motion and Course of the Celestial Bodies, and what
their influence is upon the Elements, and Elementary Bodies; he that denies
this, let him also deny that the whole world was made for man, that so the world
may see what he is; it is palpable to those that fear God, and are conversant
either in his Word or in his Works, that every inferior world is Governed by
its superior, and receives influence from it. God Himself the only First-being,
the Maker and Disposer of all things, Governs the Celestial World by the
Intellectual, namely, the Angels; He governs the Elementary World, and all
Elementary Bodies, by the Celestial World, namely, the Stars; and that is the
reason the influence' of the Stars reaches not to the Mind or Rational part of
Man, because it is an Epitomy of the Intellectual world which is a superior to
them: but because there is now some Dispute about it (I should have said
Cavelling) by such as would fain have their own Knaveries hidden, and therefore
they would fain have the Stars made to stop Bottles, or else for the Angels to
play at bowls with when they had nothing else to do, but not rule the
Elementary world, no, by no means: We shall prove they rule over the Elementary
world, first by Scripture, secondly by Reason.

First, by Scripture: I beseech you read in the first place, Genesis 1. 14, 15,
16, 17, 18. verses, And God said, let there be lights in the Firmament of the
Heaven, to divide the Day from the Night: and let them be for SIGNS, and for
SEASONS, and for DAYS and YEARS. And let them be for Lights in the Firmament
of the Heaven to give light upon Earth: and it was so. And God made two great
Lights, the greater light to RULE the day, the lesser Light to RULE the night,
He made the Stars also. And set them in the Firmament of the Heaven to give
light upon Earth. And to RULE over the day and over the night, and to divide
the light from darkness. To this place also answers that in the 136. Psalm, He
made the Sun to RULE by day, and the Moon and Stars to RULE by night. In these
Scriptures God says He made them to Rule, He set them for Signs, therefore
they must signify something, He set them also for Seasons, for Days, and for
Years: the Scriptures are so clear, they need no Exposition.

But let us see a little what Reason says to the business: It is palbable and
apparent that all Elementary Bodies never stand at a stay, but are ever either
increasing or decreasing: It is as apparent that the Celestial Bodies are not
changed, but remain the very same they were at the first Creation; and if so,
the Elementary Bodies must needs be by Nature Passive, because they are subject
to change, and the Celestial Bodies active because they change not; as a
Carpenter when he hews a Timber-log, the Timber-log must needs change form
according as (...) hewed, but the Carpenter himself changes not.

Secondly, Consider that all Time is measured out by Motion, and that the
Original of all Motion is in the Heavens, for it is the motion of the Sun which
causes day and night, Summer, Winter, Spring, and Harvest, from which
Conversion of Times and Years all changes proceed, both Heat and Cold, Dryness
and Moisture, by which four is caused Life and Death, Generation and
Putrefaction, increase and decrease of Elementary things, for the Elementary
world is the womb of all Elementary Creatures, both Animals, Minerals, and
Vegetables, it conceives them, and nourishes and cherishes them being
conceived: this womb is always full of useful Matter, fit for the forming,
increasing, and conserving Bodies, whether Animal, Mineral, or Vegetable; the
Sun gives a vital seed, and stirs up all to motion and action, quickens, and
defends what it has quickened; the Moon subministers moisture to preserve what
the Sun has Generated from the scorching heat which is caused by motion: both
Sun and Moon make use of the other five Planets (even as the Heart and Brain
make use of the Liver, Spleen, Gall, etc. in the Body of Man) for the effecting
and varying things below, and tempering them diverse ways according to their
several motions, else all the things generated in the Elementary World would be
of one Nature and Quality, and then the world could not subsist; for Man having
all qualities in him, cannot subsist without any one of them: He, and he only
is a Physician that knows which of these qualities offends, by which of the
Celestial Bodies it is caused, and how safely and speedily to remedy it; all
the the rest that practice Physic are but Mountebanks, for there is no
question to be made, but that all Diseases have their original from
super-aboundance or deficiency of Heat, Coldness, Dryness or Moisture; and that
the Elements barely from themselves can cause this, is an opinion more fitting
for a Hog-herd than a Philosopher, for whatsoever is begotten must have a
matter to be begotten of, as well as something to beget it, and this matter
must be proper to receive form, for man cannot make a Timber-log of a Turf, nor
a Book of an Egg-shel, therefore this Matter must naturally be affected to
suffer whatsoever form the Author pleases to give it: the Author of every
Generation must be altogether active, not subject to any adverse principles,
that so he may not run out of one thing into another before he has finished,
and this is proper to the Sun, Moon, and Stars: this will be denied by none
that have lived a Rational Man but one Summer and one Winter, and felt a
difference of heat and coldness, driuess and moisture, caused by the neerness
and remoatness of the Sun, and seen the difference of springing, increasing and
decaying of things upon Earth in those times, for when we see the Lodestone
draws Iron, it shows plainly that Nature has given it efficacy so to do; so
when we see these things done by the Heavens, we must needs think Nature has
given the Heavens power to do so, and seeing those Qualities, Heat, Coldness,
Dryness, and Moisture, are contrary the one to the other, of necessity
sometimes the one must yield, and sometimes the other, and thence comes the
Procreation, Corruption, and Vicissitude of things below; and seeing all likes
rejoice in their likes, and disagree with their dislikes, there must needs be
something in the Heavens agreeable to all this, therefore some part of the
Heavens is said to be Hot, some Cold, some Dry, and some moist, not because
they are so in themselves, but because they work such effects in Elementary
Bodies, as is evident to the experience of them that search after it.

We have now showed you what a Physician ought to be in respect of Knowledge in
the Celestial World: I shall only now show you in a word or two what knowledge
he ought to have in the Elementary and Intellectual worlds, and that very
briefly, and so conclude.

As in the Celestial world he ought very carefully to heed the oppositions and
great conjunctions of the Planets, the Eclipses of the Luminaries, the
Quarterly ingresses of the Sun and the Crisis of Diseases, so in the Elementary
world he ought to heed the Seasons of the Year, whether they be hotter, colder,
dryer, moister than they should be; (...) ought to be very well skilled in
Vegetables and Minerals and how the Earth brings them forth, what is the Office
of the Central Sun, and what is the office of the Celestial Sun, what is the
office of the Central Moon, and what the office of the Celestial Moon in the
production of things here below, and how, and by what Mediums they perform it.

Lastly, In the Intellectual World, he ought to be very frequent, fearing God,
and eschewing evil, for into his hands as the means, has the eternal God of
Heaven and Earth put the lives of those Christians whom, he loved so well that
he redeemed them by the Blood of his only begotten Son: Let him be very
studious in those great Books of God, the Book of the Scripture, and the Book
of the Creatures, let the Glory of God, and the Good of the Creature be his
whole Aim, neither let such a Monster as Covetousness have the least
entertainment in his heart; let him be no respecter of Persons, but go as
willingly to the Poor for nothing, as to the Rich for a reward, Knowing, That
he that gives to the Poor, lends to the Lord, and he shall be sure to have a
good Play Master. To conclude, In all his practices let him consider what he
would have another do to him if he were in like case, and do the like to them:
and to them that follow this Rule, Peace shall be upon them, as upon the Israel
of God.

Ita dixit Nich. Culpeper.

The Names of several Books printed by Peter Cole, at the sign of the
Printing-Press in Cornhil, by the Exchange, London.
Five several Books, by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology.
1 A Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by the College of Physicians of
London. Whereunto is added, The Key to Galen' s Method of Physic. 2 A
DIRECTORY for Midwives; or a Guide for Women. 3 GALEN' s Art of PHYSIC with a
large Comment. 4 The ENGLISH PHYSICIAN; being an AstrologoPhysical Discourse of
the Vulgar Herbs of this Nation; wherein is showed how to cure a man's self of
most Diseases incident to man's Body, with such things as grown in England, and
for threepence charge.

Also in the same Book is showed, 1. The time of gathering all Herbs both
Vulgarly and Astrologically. 2. The way of drying and keeping them and their
Juyces. 3. The way of making and keeping all manner of useful Compounds, made
of those Herbs. 4. The way of mixing the Medicines according to Cause, and
mixture of the Disease, and the part of the Body afflicted.

5 The Anatomy of the Body of Man, Wherein is exactly described the several
parts of the Body of Man, illustrated with very many large Brass Plates.
A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the first Epistle of Peter. By Mr. John
Rogers, Minister of the Word of God at Dedham in Essex. The Wonders of the
Lodestone, by Mr. Samuel Ward of Ipswich. An Exposition on the Gospel of the
Evangelist St. Matthew, by Mr. Ward. Clows Surgery. Marks of Salvation.
Christians Engagement for the Gospel, by John Goodwin. Great Church Ordinance
of Baptism. Mr. Love's Case, containing his Petitions, Narrative, and Speech.
Vox Pacifica, or a Persuasive to Peace. Dr. Prestons Saints submission, and
Satan's Overthrow. Pious man's practice in Parliament Time. A Treatise of the
Rickets, being a Disease common to Children; Wherein is showed, 1. The Essence.
2. The Causes. 3. The Signs. 4. The Remedies of the Disease. Published in Latin
by Dr. Glisson, Dr. Bate, and Dr. Regemorter, now translated into English. Mr.
Symsons Sermon at Westminster. Mr. Feaks Sermon before the Lord Major. Mr.
Phillips Treatise of Hell. -- of Christ's Geneology. Seven Books of Mr. Jeremiah
Buroughs lately published; As also the Texts of Scripture upon which they are
grounded.
1 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4. 11. Wherein is showed,
1. What Contentment is, 2. It is an holy Art and Mystery, 3. The Excellencies
of it, 4. The Evil of the contrary sin of Murmuring, and the Aggravations of
it. 2 Gospel Worship, on Levit. 10. 3. Wherein is showed, 1. The right manner of
the Worship of God in general; and particularly, In Hearing the Word, Receiving
the Lords Supper, and Prayer. 3 Gospel-Conversation, on Phil. 1. 17. Wherein is
showed, 1. That the Conversations of Believers must be above what could be by
the Light of Nature, 2. Beyond those that lived under the Law, 3. And suitable
to what Truths the Gospel holds forth. To which is added, The Misery of those
Men that have their Portion in this Life only, on Psalm. 17. 14. 4 A Treatise of
Earthly-mindedness. Wherein is showed, 1 What Earthly-mindedness is, 2 The
great Evil thereof, on Phil. 3. part of the 19. Verse. Also to the same Book is
joined, A Treatise of Heavenlymindedness, and walking with God, on Genesis 5. 24.
and on Phil. 3. 20. 5 An Exposition, on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh
Chapters of the Prophecy of Hosea. 6 An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and
tenth Chapters of Hosea. 7 An Exposition on the eleventh, twelfth, and
thirteenth Chapters of Hosea, being now Complete.
Twelve several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into one Volumn. Viz.
1 The great Gospel-Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly Office. 2 Satan's Power to Tempt; and Christ's Love
to, and Care of His People under Temptation. 3 Thankfulness required in every
Condition. 4 Grace for Grace; or, the Overflowings of Christ's Fullness received
by all Saints. 5 The Spiritual Actings of Faith, through Natural
Impossibilities. 6 Evangelical Repentance. 7 The Spiritual-Life, and In-Being
of Christ in all Believers. 8 The Woman of Canaan. 9 The Saints Hiding Place in
time of Gods Anger. 10 Christ's Coming is at our Midnight. 11 A Vindication of
Gospel Ordinances. 12 Grace and Love beyond Gifts.
A Congregational Church is a Catholic Visible Church By Samuel Stone, in New
England. A Treatise of Politic Power, wherein 7 Questions are Answered, 1.
Whereof Power is made, and for what ordained; 2. Whether Kings and Governors
have an absolute Power over the People; 3. Whether Kings and Governors be
subject to the Laws of God, or the Laws of their Countries; 4. How far the
People are to obey their Governors; 5. Whether all the People have be their
Governors; 6. Whether it be Lawful to depose an evil Governor; 7. What
Confidence is to be given to Princes. The Compassionate Samaritan. Dr. Sibbs on
the Philippians. The Best and Worst Magistrate, by Obadiah Sedgwick. The craft
and cruelty of the churches Adversaries, by Matthew Newcomin. A sacred
Panygrick, by Steph. Martial. Barriffs Military Discipline. The Immortality of
Man's Soul. The Anatomist Anatomized. King Charles his Case, or an Appeal to all
rational men concerning his Trial. Mr. Owens stedfastness of the Promises. Mr.
Owen against Mr. Baxter. A Vindication of Free Grace: Indeavoring to prove, 1
That we are not elected as holy, but that we should be holy; and that Election
is not of kinds, but persons. 2. That Christ did not by his death intend to
save all men, and (...) those whom he intended to save, that he did not die for
them only if they would believe, but that they might believe. 3. That we are
not justified properly by our believing in Christ, but by our Christ believed
in. 4. That, that which differences one man from another, is not the
improvement of a common ability restored through Christ to all men in general,
but a principle of Grace wrought by the Spirit of God in the Elect. By John
Pawson. Six Sermons, Preached by Dr. Hill, viz.
1. The Beauty and Sweetness of an Olive Branch of Peace and Brotherly
Accommodation budding. 2. Truth and Love happily married in the Saints, and in
the Churches of Christ. 3. The Spring of Strengthening Grace in the Rock of Ages
Christ Jesus. 4. The strength of the Saints to make Jesus Christ their
strength. 5. The Best and Worst of Paul. 6. Gods eternal Preparations for his
dying Saints.
The Bishop of Canterbury's Speech on the Scaffold. The King's Speech on the
Scaffold. The Magistrates Support and Burden. By Mr. John Cardel. Eaton on the
Oath of Allegiance and Covenant, showing that they oblige not.
Weights and Measures in the New DISPENSATORY.
Twenty Grains make a Scruple. Three Scruples make a Dram. Eight Drachms make
an Ounce. Twelve Ounces make a Pound.
THe most usual Measures [amongst us] (quoth the College) are these:

A Spoon which in Syrups holds half an ounce, in distilled Waters three drachms.

A Taster which holds an ounce and an half.

A Congie which (in their former Dispensatory held nine pound, now) holds but
eight pound; viz. just a Gallon: To miss but one Pint in a Gallon is nothing
with a College of Physicians, such Physicians as our times afford. The reason I
suppose is, Because most Nations differ in the quantity of their Measures, and
they quoted their Congius from one Nation before, and from another now; for
indeed their Dispensatory is borrowed a great part of it from Arabia, part from
Greece, some from France, some from Spain, and some from Italy, and now they
vapor with it. Oh brave! should a man that borrowed his Clothes from so many
Broakers in Long-lane be proud of them?

Besides these, they have gotten another antic way of MENSURATION which they
have not set down here, viz. By Handfuls and Pugils. An Handful is as much as
you can gripe in one Hand; and a Pugil as much as you can take up with your
Thumb and two Fingers; and how much that is who can tell? Intruth this way of
Mensuration is as certain as the Weathercock, and as various as men's Fingers
are in length, and the things taken up in dryness or form; for an Handsul of
green Herbs will not be half an Handsul or not above when they are dry: and
your mother-wit will teach you that you may take up more Hay in this manner
than Bran, and more Bran than Sand. And thus much for their Weights, and also
for their Measures: both rediculous and contradictive.

Weights and Measures in the Old Dispensatory.
TWenty Grains do make a Scruple. Three Scruples make a dram (commonly called
a dram) Right Drachms make an Ounce. Twelve Ounces make a Pound.

As for the Colleges Measures I know not well what English Names to give them.
(...) holds in Syrups half an Ounce; in distilled Waters three Drachms. (...)
holds an ounce and an half. Hemina (which also they call Cotyla) contains nine
Ounces. Libra holds twelve Ounces. A Sextary contains eighteen Ounces. A Congie
six Sextaties.

These Measures amongst the Romans contained not just the same quantities; for
their Cyathus contained an ounce and an half, a dram and a scruple. Their
Sextary contained but fourteen ounces, three (...), and half a quarter; and
among the Gracians not so much: It is called a (...) because it is the sixth
part of a Congie. Neither did the Roman Hemina contain altogether seven ounces
and an half. Their Libra I suppose to be that which Galen calls (...), viz. A
Vessel to measure with; it was made of clear Horn, and by certain lines drawn
round it like rings, was divided into twelve equal parts, each part containing
an ounce.

DIRECTIONS.
ALthough I did what I could throughout the whole Book to express my self in
such a language as might be understood by all, and therefore avoided terms of
Art as much as might be, (it being the task of the College to write only to the
Learned and the Nurslings of Apollo, but of my Self to do my Country good;
which is the Center all my Lines tend to, and I destre should terminate in) Yet,

1. Some words must of necessity fall in, which need explanation.

2. It would be very tedious at the end of every Receipt to repeat over and
over again, the way of administration of the Receipt, or ordering your Bodies
after it, or to instruct you in the mixture of Medicines, and indeed would do
nothing else but stuff the Book full of (...).

To answer to both these is my task at this time.

To the first:

The words which need explaining, such as are obvious to my Eye are these that
follow.

1. To distill in Balneo Mariae, is the usual way of distilling in Water. It is
no more than to (...) your Glass-Body which holds the matter to be distilled in
a convenient vessel of Water, when the Water is cold (for fear of breaking) put
a wisp of Straw, or the like under it, to keep it from the bottom, then make
the Water boil, that so the Spirit may be distilled forth; take not the Glass
out till the Water be cold again, for fear of breaking: It is impossible for a
man to learn how to do it, unless he saw it done. 2. Manica Hippocrates,
Hippocrates his Sleeve, is a piece of woolen cloth, new and white, sewed
together in form of a Sugar Loaf. Its use is, to strain any Syrup or Decoction
through, by pouring it into it, and suffering it to run through without
pressing or crushing it. 3. Calcination, is a burning of a thing in a Crucible
or other such convenient vessel that will endure the fire: A Crucible is such a
thing as your Goldsmiths melt Silver in, and your Founders their Metals; you
may place it in the midst of the fire, with coals above, below, and on every
side of it. 4. Filtration, is straining of a liquid body through a brown (...):
Make up the Paper in form of a Funnel, the which having placed in a Funnel, and
placed the Funnel, and the Paper in it in an empty Glass, power in the Liquor
you would filter, and let it run through at its leisure. 5. Coagulation, is
curdling or hardening: It is used in Physic for reducing a liquid body to
hardness by the heat of the fire. 6. Whereas you find Vital, Natural, and
Animal Spirits often mentioned in the Virtues of Receipts, I shall explain what
they be, and what their (...) is in the Body of Man. The actions or operations
of the Animal Virtues, are,
1. Sensitive. 2. Motive.
The Sensitive is
1. External. 2. Internal. The External Senses are
1. Seeing. 2. Hearing. 3. Tasting. 4. Smelling. 5. Feeling.
The Internal Senses are
1. Imagination to apprehend a thing. 2. Judgment, to Judge of it. 3. Memory, to
remember it.

The seat of all these is in the Brain.

The Vital Spirits proceeds from the Heart, and causes in Man Mirth, Joy,
Hope, Trust, Humanity, Mildness, Courage, etc. and their opposites: Viz.
Sadness, Fear, Care, Sorrow, Despair, Envy, Hatred, Stubbornness, Revenge, etc.
by heat Natural or not Natural.

The Natural Spirit nourishes the Body (...) (as the Vital quickens it, and
the Animal gives it Sense and Motion) Its office is to alter or (...) Food into
Chyle, Chyle into Blood, Blood into Flesh, to Form, Engender, Nourish, and
Increase the Body.

7. Infusion, is to steep a gross body into one (...) Liquid. 8. Decoction, is
the Liquor in which any thing is boiled.
As for the manner of (...) or ordering the (...) any sweating, or purging
Medicines, or Pills, or the like, the Table at the latter end of the Virtues of
the Medicines will direct you to what Pages you may find them in, look but the
word [Rules] there. As also in the next Page.

The different forms of making up Medicines, (...) (...) People, that so
Medicines might be more delightful, or at least less burdensome: in such a
case, the Table of Virtues at the latter end will universally furnish you with
the generality of both Simples and Compounds apropriated to the Disease. You
may make the mixtures of them in what form you please; only for your better
instruction at present, accept of these few Rules:

1. Consider, That all Diseases are cured by their contraries, but all parts of
the Body maintained by their likes: Then if heat be the cause of the Disease,
give the cold Medicine apropriated to it, if Wind, see how many Medicines
apropriated to that Disease expel Wind, and use them. (...) (...), for if your
Brain be over heated, and you use such Medicines as cool the Heart or Liver,
you may make mad work. 3. The distilled Water of any Herb you would take for a
disease, is a sit mixture for the Syrup of the same Herb, or to make any (...)
into a Drink, if you affect such liquid Medicines best: if you have not the
distilled water, make use of the Decoction. 4. Diseases that lie in parts of
the Body remot from the Stomach and Bowels, it is in vain to think to carry
away the cause at once, and therefore you had best do it by degrees; Pills, and
such like Medicines which are hard in Body, are fittest for such a business,
because they are longest before they digest. 5. Use no strong Medicines, if
weak will serve the turn; you had better take one too weak by half, than too
strong in the least. 6. Consider the Natural temper of the part of the Body
afflicted, and maintain it in that, else you extinguish Nature, as the Heart is
hot, the Brain cold, or at least the coldest part of the Body. 7. Observe this
general Rule; That such Medicines as are hot in the first degree are most
habitual to our Bodies, because they are just of the heat of our Blood. 8. All
opening Medicines, and such as provoke Urine, or the Terms, or break the Stone,
may most conveniently be given in white wine, because white Wine os it self is
of an opening Nature, and cleanses the Reins gallantly. 9. Let all such
Medicines as are taken to stop fluxes or (...), be taken before meat, about an
hour before, more or less, that so they may strengthen the digestion and
retentive faculty, before the Food come into the Stomach; But such as are
subject to vomit up their meat, let them take such Medicines as stay vomiting
presently after meat, at the conclusion of their Meals, that so they may close
up the mouth of the stomach; and that is the reason why usually men eat a (...)
of (...) after meat, because by its sowrness and binding it closes the mouth
of the stomach, thereby staying belching and vomiting. 10. In taking Purges be
very careful, and that you may be so, observe these Rules, 1. Consider what
the humor offending is, and let the Medicine be such as purges that humor,
else will you weaken Nature, not the Disease. 2. Take notice, if the humor you
would purge out be thin, then gentle Medicines will serve the turn, but if it
be tough and viscous, take such Medicines as are cutting and opening the night
before you would take the Purge. 3. In purging tough humors, sorbear as much as
may be such Medicines as leave a binding quality behind them. 4. Have a care of
taking Purges when your Body is astringent; your best way, is first to open it
by a Clyster. 5. In taking opening Medicines, you may safely take them at
night, eating but a light supper three or four hours before, and the next
morning drinking a draught of warm Posset Drink, and you need not fear to go
about your business. In this manner you may take Lenitive Electuary,
Diacatholicon, Pulp of Cassia, and the like gentle Electuaries, as also all
Pills that have neither Diagrydium nor Colocynthis in them. But all violent
Purges require a due ordering of the Body, such ought to be taken in the
morning after you are up, and not to sleep after them before they have done
working, at least before night; two hours after you have taken them, drink a
draught of warm Posset Drink, or Broth, and six hours after eat a bit of
Mutton, often walking about the Chamber; let there be a good fire in the
Chamber, and stir not out of the Chamber till the Purge have done working, or
not till next day.

Lastly, Take sweating Medicines when you are in bed, covered warm, and in the
time of your sweating drink Posset Drink as hot as you can drink it; if you
sweat for a Fever, boil Sorrel and red Sage in your Posset Drink, sweat an
hour or longer if your strength will permit, then (the chamber being kept very
warm) shift your self all but your Head, about which (the Cap which you sweat
in being still kept on) wrap a Napkin very hot, to repel the vapors back.

I confess these, or many of these Directions may be found in one place of the
Book or other, and I delight as little to write tautology as another, but the
Printer desiring they should be put here, and I considering it might make for
the public good, inserted them; if notwithstanding any will be so mad to do
themselves a mischief, the fault is not mine.

The TRANSLATORS PREFACE to the Catalogue of SIMPLES.
BEfore I begin the Catalogue, I thought good to premise a few words to the
Reader.

1. Let him have a care he mistake not one thing for another; viz. Herbs for
Roots, or either of them for Flowers: If he cast but his eye up to the top of
the Page he shall there see which it is.

2. Let a due time be observed (cases of necessity excepted) in gathering all
Simples; for which take these few Rules. The time to gather all roots is before
the herb run up to seed, for then they are softest, as you may see by
Radishes, carrots, parsneps etc. the roots of which, you may perceive hard when
they run up to seed and not because the sap is then in the root, as the vulgar
hold; for if the sap rose and fell as they hold, then the root must grow in
winter only, as the branches do in Summer, which experience will show to be
falce; for the root grows only in Summer, as the branches do; you see what a
wooden Docter Tradition is: Would not this make every one endeavor to Study a
reason for what he does? and see how our forefathers have been lead by the
noses by Tradition. The truth is, it is the Sun is the author of life and
growth to the wholl Creation, he was ordained of God for that end; when he
comes on this side of the Equator, the trees spring, when he passes to the
south side of the Equator they loose their verdant color and growth also till
the revolution of time bring his presence to revive them; but enough of this in
this place.

Herbs are to be gathered when they are fullest of juice which is, before thy
run up to seed; and if you gather them in a hot sunshine day, they will not be
so subject to putrify: the best way to dry them, is in the Sun, according to
Dr. REASON, though not according to Dr. TRADITION: Such Herbs as remain green
all the year, or are very full of juice, it were a folly to dry at all, but
gather them only for present use, as Housleek, Scurvy Grass etc.

Let Flowers be gathered when they are in their prime, in a sunshine day, and
dried in the sun. Let the Seeds be perfectly ripe before they be gathered.

3. Let them be kept in a dry place; for any moisture, though it be but a moist
air, corrupts them, which if perceived in time, the beams of the Sun will
refresh the herbs and flowers and do the Sun no harm.

4. Take notice, that only the Latin Names, were quoted by the College, and are
to beseen at the beginning of each Simple, in a different Letter; the English
Name, together with the Temperature, and Virtues, were added by the Translator
for the public good.

5. All the Latin Names to one Herb are not set down, most of which are
superfluous, some ridiculons, some Idolatrous; as to attribute one Herb, to the
Virgin Mary, another to St. Peter, and a third to St. Paul: Some blasphemous as
to call one, the holy Ghost, another Allelujah, another, an Herb of the Trinity
etc. So in the Compositions, To call an Ointment, the Ointment of the Apostles:
to call one Plaster, Divine, another, Holy, a third, the grace of God. The
College might have been ashamed of it if they had ever come where shame grew:
but,. 1. The Heathen they dedicated herbs and trees to their Gods. 2. the
Papists they must follow their patriarks and dedicate them to their Saints;
Ours having not wit enough to find out a third, (for their wits were in print
before they were born) they follow the Papists as their holy Fathers as in
absconding their art so in their blasphemies, see how one sin ushers in another.

A CATALOGUE OF THE SIMPLES CONDUCING TO THE DISPENSATORY.
ROOTS.
ACANTHI, Brancae Ursinae. Of Bears-breech, or Brank-ursine; it is meanly hot
and dry, it helps ach and numness of the joints, and is of a binding quality,
good for wounds and broken bones. Dioscorides says, they are profitable for
Ruptures, or such as are bursten, or burnt with fire, a dram of the Root in
Powder being taken in the morning fasting, in a Decoction made with the same
Root and Water.

Acori, Very, Perigrini vulgaris, etc. See Calamus Aromaticus. I shall not, nor
dare not make a long Paraphrase about the sorts of it, one of which is
Water-flag, or Flower-de-luce, which is hot and dry in the second degree,
binds, strengthens, stops fluxes of the belly, and immoderate flowing of the
terms in women, a dram being taken in red wine every morning.

Alljum. Garlic. It is hot and dry in the fourth degree, breeds naughty and
corrupt blood, yet is an enemy to all Poisons, and such as are bitten by cold
venomous beasts, viz. Adders, Toads, Spiders, etc. it provokes urin, and expels
wind.

Alcannae. Of Privet. See the Leaves.

Althaeae. Of Marshmallows: are meanly hot, of a digesting softning nature,
ease pains, help bloody fluxes, the stone and gravel; being bruised and well
boiled in Milk, and the Milk drunk, is a gallant Remedy for the gripings of the
belly, and the Bloody flux: If a Fever accompany the Disease, boil a handful
of common Mallow leaves with a handful of these Roots.

Angelicae. Of Angelica; is hot and dry in the third degree, strengthens the
heart exceedingly, and is a singular remedy against pestilence and poison, half
a dram taken in the morning fasting.

Anchusae. Of Alkanet; cold and dry, binding, good for old Ulcers.

Anthorae. An outlandish root, the counterpoyson for Monkshood, it is an
admirable remedy for the wind-chollick, and resists poison. They that would
know more of it, let them read Guainerius, and Solerius, both which lived near
the places where it plentifully grew.

Apii. Of Smallage. See the Barks.

Aristolochiae. Of Birthwort: of which are three sorts, long, round, and
climing: All hot and dry in the third degree.

The long, being drunk in Wine, brings away Dioscorides.
both birth and afterbirth, and whatsoever a careless Midwife has left
behind. Galen.


The round, being drunk with Wine, helps (besides the former) stuffings of the
lungues, hardness of the spleen, ruptures, convulsions; both of them resist
poison.

I never read any use of the climing Birthwort. Artanitae, Cyclaminis, etc, Of
Sowbread: hot and dry in the third degree, a most violent purge, dangerous;
outwardly applied to the place, it profits much in the bitings of venomous
beasts, also being hung about women in labor, it causes speedy deliverance.
See the Herb.

Arundinis, Vallatoriae, and Saccharinae. Of common Reeds and sugar Reeds. The
Roots of common Reeds applied to the place draw out thorns, case sprains; the
ashes of them mixed with Vinegar, take scurf, or dandrif off from the head, and
prevent the falling off of the hair, they are hot and dry in the second degree,
according to Galen.

I would not have the Reader build too much confidence upon the degrees of
temperature (or more properly intemperature) neither of this, or any other
Simple, because most of them are quoted by Outlandish Authors; and out of
question the difference of the climate may something alter their temperature in
degree.

I never read any virtue of the Root of Sugar Cane.

Ari, etc. Of Cuckow-pints, or Wake-Robin, hot and dry in the third degree. I
know no great good they do inwardly taken, unless to play the rogue withal, or
make sport: outwardly applied, they take off Scurf, Morphew, or Freckles from
the face, and clear the skin, and case the pains of the Gout.

Asclepiadis, vincetoxici. Of Swallow-wort, hot and dry, good against poison,
and gripings of the belly, as also against the bitings of maddogs, taken
inwardly.

Asari. Of Asarabacca: the Roots are a safer purge than the Leaves and not so
violent, I do not much fancy any of them both, ignorant people had better let
them alone than be too busy with what they have no skill in: they purge by
vomit, stool, and urine, they are profitable for such as have Agues, Dropsies,
stoppings of the Liver, or Spleen, green sickness.

Asparagi. Of Sparagus, or Sperage: they are temperate in quality, opening,
they provoke urine, and cleanse the reins and bladder, being boiled in white
wine, and the wine drunk.

Asphodeli, Hastae Regiae, foem. Of Kings spear, or foemale Asphodel. I know no
physical use of the Roots, probably there is: for I do not believe God created
any thing of no use.

Asphodeli, Albuci, maris, of male Asphodel. Hot and and dry in the second
degree. Inwardly taken, they provoke vomit, urine, and the terms in women:
outwardly used in Ointments, they cause hair to grow, cleanse Ulcers, take away
Morphew and Freckles from the face.

Bardanae etc. Of Bur, Clot-bur, or Burdock, Dioscorides.
temperately hot and dry. Helps such as spit blood and matter, bruised and
mixed with Apuleius.
salt and applied to the place, helps the bitings of mad-dogs. It expels wind,
eases pains of the teeth, strengthens the back, helps the running of the
reins, and the whites in women, being taken inwardly.

Behen. alb. rub. Of Valerian, white and red. Mesue, Serapio and other Arabians
say they are hot and moist, in the latter end of the first, or beginning of the
second degree, and comfort the heart, stir up lust. The Graecians held them to
be dry in the second degree, that they stop fluxes, and provoke urine.

Bellidjs. Of Dacies. See the Leaves.

Betae, nigrae, albae, rubrae. Of Beets, black, white, and red; as for black
Beets I have nothing to say, I doubt they are as rare as black Swans. The red
Beet root boiled and preserved in Vinegar, makes a fine cool, pleasing,
clensing, digesting sauce. See the Leaves.

Bistortae etc. Of Bistort, or Snakeweed, cold and dry in the third degree,
binding, the quantity of half a dram at a time taken inwardly, resist
pestilence and poison, helps ruptures, and bruises, stays fluxes, vomiting,
and immoderate flowing of the terms in women, helps inflammations and soreness
of the mouth, and fastens loose teeth, being bruised and boiled in white Wine
and the mouth washed with it.

Borraginis. Of Borrage, hot and moist in Dioscoride.
the first degree, cheers the heart, helps drooping spirits.

Brionae etc. Of Briony both white and black, they are both hot and dry, some
say in the third degree, and some say, but in the first: they purge phlegm and
watery humors, but they trouble the stomach much, they are very good for
dropsies; the white is most in use, and is admirable good for the fits of the
Mother; both of them externally used, take away Freckles, Sunburning and
Morphew from the face, and cleanse filthy Ulcers: It is but a churlish purge,
but being let alone, can do no harm.

Buglossi. Of Bugloss: Its virtues are the same with Borrage, and the Roots of
either seldom used.

Bulbus Vomitorius. A vomiting Root: I never read of it elsewhere by this
general name.

Calami Aromatici. Of Aromatical Reed, or sweet garden flag: It provokes Urine,
strengthens the lungues, helps bruises, resists poison, etc. being taken
inwardly in powder, the quantity of half a dram at a time. In beating of it
be very speedy, for the strength will quickly fly out. You may mix it with
Syrup of Violets, if your body be feverish.

Capparum. Of Cappar Roots. Are hot and dry in the second degree, cutting and
clensing; they provoke the Terms, help malignant Ulcers, case the Toothach,
assuage Swellings, and help the Rickets. See Oil of Cappers.

Cariophillatae etc. Of Avens, or Herb Bennet. The Roots are dry, and something
hot, of a cleansing quality, they keep garments from being moth-eaten. See the
Leaves.

Caulium. Of Coleworts. I know nothing the Roots are good for, but only to bear
the the herbs and flowers.

Centaurij Majoris. Of Centaury the greater. The Roots help such as are
bursten, such as spit blood, shrinking of sinews, shortness of wind, Coughs,
Convulsions, Cramps: half a dram in powder being taken inwardly, either in
Muschadel, or in a Decoction of the same Roots. They are either not at all, or
very scarce in England, our Centaury is the small Centaury.

Cepae. Of Onions. Are hot and dry (according to Galen) in the fourth degree:
they cause dryness, and are extremely (...) for choleric people, they breed
but little nourishment, and that little is naught; they are bad meat, yet good
Physic for phlegmatic people, they are opening, and provoke Urine, and the
terms, if cold be the cause obstructing; bruised and outwardly applied, they
cure the bitings of mad dods; roasted and applied, they help Boils, and
Aposthumes; raw, they take the fire out of burnings; but ordinarily eaten, they
cause headache, spoil the sight, dull the senses, and fill the body full of wind.

Chameleontis albi nigri etc. Of Chameleon white and black. Tragus calls the
Carline Thistle by the name of white Chameleon, the root whereof is hot in the
second degree, and dry in the third; it provokes sweat, kills worms, resists
pestilence and poison, it is given with success in pestilential fevers, helps
the toothach, by being chewed in the mouth, opens the stoppings of the Liver
and Spleen, it provokes urine, and brings down the terms: give but little of it
at a time, by reason of its heat. As for the black Chemeleon, All Physicians
hold it to have a kind of venomous quality, and unfit to be used inwardly, both
Galen, Clusius, Nicander, Dioscorides, and Aegineta. Outwardly in Ointments, it
is profitable for Scabs, Morphew, Tetters, etc. and all things that need
clensing.

Chelidonij, majoris, minoris. Of Celondine, the greater and lesser: The
greater is that which we usually call Celondine: The Root is manifestly hot and
dry, clensing and scouring, proper for such as have the yellow Jaundice, it
opens obstructions of the Liver; being boiled in white Wine, and the Decoction
drunk; and if chewed in the mouth it helps the toothache.

(...) the lesser is that which usually we call Pilewort, which though Galen,
and Dioscorides teach to be hot in the fourth degree, and might happily be so
in those Countries where they lived, yet with us it scarce exceeds the first
degree, the Juice of the root mixed with Honey and snuffed up into the nose,
purges the Head, helps the Hemorrhoids or Piles being bathed with it, as also
does the root only carried about one, being made into an Ointment helps the
Scrophula.
disease in the neck commonly called the Kings Evil.

China, wonderfully extenuateth and dries, provokes sweat, resists
putrefaction, it strengthens the Liver, helps the Dropsy and malignant Ulcers,
Leprosy, Itch, and French-pocks, and is profitable in Diseases coming of
fasting. It is commonly used in diet drinks for the premises.

Cichoris. Of Succory; cools and dries in the second degree, strengthens the
Liver and Veins, it opens obstructions, stoppings of the Liver and Spleen,
being boiled in white Wine and the Decoction drunk.

Colchici. Of Meadow-Saffron. The Roots are held to be hurtful to the stomach,
therefore I let them alone.

Consolidae, majoris, minoris. Consolida major, is that which we ordinarily
call Comfry; it is of a cold quality, yet pretty temperate, of such a
gluttenous quality that according to Dioscorides they will join meat together
that is cut in sunder, if they be boiled with it; it is excellent for all
wounds, both internal and external, for spitting of blood, Ruptures or
Burstness, pains in the back, it strengthens the Reins, it stops the Terms, and
helps Hemorrholds. The way to use them is to boil them in water and drink the
Decoction.

Consolida minor, is that we call Self-heal, and the Latins Prunella. See the
Herb.

Costi utriusque. Of Costus both sorts, being Roots coming from beyond Sea, hot
and dry, break wind, being boyld in Oil, it is held to help the Gout by
anointing the grieved place with it.

Cucumeris agrestis. Of wild Cucumer Roots, or Cowcumber as the vulgar call
them; they purge phlegm, and that with such violence, that I would advise the
Country man that knows not how to correct them, to let them alone.

Cinarae etc. Of Artichokes. The Root purges by Urin, whereby the rank savor
of the body is much amended.

Cynoglossae etc. Of Houndstong. Cold and dry: being roasted and laid to the
fundament, helps the Hemorrhoids, is also good against burnings and Scaldings.

Curcumae. Of Turmerick, hot, in the third degree, opens obstructions, is
profitable against the yellow Jaundice, and cold distempers of the Liver and
Spleen, half a dram being taken at night going to bed in the pulp of a roasted
Apple, and if you ad a little Saffron to it, it will be the better by far.

Cyperi utriusque, longi, rotundi. Of Cyperus grass, or English Galanga, both
sorts, long and round; is of a warming nature, provokes urine, breaks the
Stone, provokes the Terms; the Ashes of them (being burnt) is used for Ulcers
in the mouth, Cankers, etc.

Dauci. Of Carrots. Are moderately hot and moist, breed but little nourishment,
and it extreme windy; I omit what virtues Galen writes of them, as being
confident there was such a difference between them, that our Carrots will never
answer those effects, or if any do, it is the wild kind.

Dentaria majoris etc. Of Tooth-wort, toothed Violets, or Coral-wort; they are
drying, binding, and strengthening; are good to ease pains in the sides and
bowels; also being boiled, the (...) is said to be good to wash green Wounds
and Ulcers with.

Dictamni. Of Dittany: is hot and dry in the third degree, (...) travail in
women, provokes the Terms. (See the Leaves.)

(...). Of Doronicum, a supposed kind of Wolf-bane: I am of opinion that
Serapio and (...) and other Arabian Physicians did not intend that Root we now
use for Doronicum when they wrote so much against it, I shall adhear to the
judgment of (...), which is verified by daily experience; It is hot and dry in
the third degree, strengthens the heart, is a sovereign cordial, and
preservative against the Pestilence; It helps the Vertigo or swimming of the
head, is admirable against the bitings of Venomous beasts, and such as have
taken too much Opium, as also for Lethargies, the Juice helps hot (...) in the
eyes; a scruple of the Root in powder is (...) to take at one time.

(...), Dracunculi. Diverse Authors attribute (...) to this name, it is most
probable Mathiolus.
to me that they mean Dragons, the Roots Dioscorides.
of which cleanse mightily, and take away proud, or dead flesh, the very smell
of them is hurtful for women with Child, outwardly in Ointments, they take away
Scurf, Morphew, and Sunburning; I would not wish any unless very well read in
Physic, to take them inwardly.

Ebuli. Of (...) Elder, Walwort, or Danewort; hot and dry in the third degree;
the Roots are as gallant a purge for the (...) as any is under the Sun, which
besides the Authority of the Ancient, was often proved by the never dying Dr.
Butler of Cambridg, as my self have it in a Manuscript of his. You may take a
dram or two drachms (if the Patient be strong) in white Wine at a tim.

Echij. Of Vipers Bugloss, or Wild Bugloss: I warrant you if Authors had not
differed about this herb, the College would have set down five or six names to
have explained their meaning, as they usually do where they need not: I have
set down the most usual name, and always quote the virtues to what I set down:
They say the root of this being carried in ones hand, no venomous beast will
bite him, (and so they say of Dragons which I forgot before) so that you may
walk without danger amongst Adders, Vipers, and Serpents; (but I believe you
had best have a care you do not tread upon them): this root is cold and dry,
good for such as are bitten by venomous beasts, either being boiled in Wine and
drunk, or bruised and (...) to the place; being also boiled in Wine and drunk,
it increases milk in Nurses.

Ellebori, Veratri, albi, nigri. Of Hellebore, white and black. The root of
white Hellebore, or Sneezwort, being grated and (...) up the nose, causes
Sneezing, kills Rats, and Mice, being mixed with their meat: it is but a
scurvy, churlish Medicine; being taken inwardly, and therefore better let alone
than used; and yet Dr. Bright commends it for such as are mad through
Melancholy. Others are of opinion such harsh Medicines are not convenient for
so sullen an humor, and of that opinion am I my self: If you will use it, for
sneezing, let your head and neck be wrapped hot for fear of carching cold.

Black Hellebore, Bears-foot, or Christmas flower; both this and the former are
hot and dry in the third degree. This is nothing so violent nor dangerous as
the former, Both Galen, and Julius Alexandrinus, report the roots of this
boiled in Vinegar to be an admirable remedy against inveterate Scabs, Itch and
Leprosy, the same helps the Toothache, being held in the mouth, and dropped
into the ears, help deafness coming of Melancholy, and noise in the ears; You
must boil them but very little, for the strength will soon fly out in vapor.
corrected with a little Cionamon (in powder) it purges Melancholy, resists
Madness. Also Pliny, Absyrtus, and Columella, affirm that a piece of root put
into a hole made in the ear of a beast troubled with the Cough, or that has
taken any poison, and drawn quite through next day about that time, helps
them: out of question it is a special thing to rowel Cattle withal.

Enulae Campanae, Helenij. Of Elecampane. Is hot and dry in the third degree,
wholesome for the stomach, resists poison, helps old Coughs and shortness of
breath, helps Ruptures and provokes lust: in Ointments, it is good against
Scabs and Itch.

Endiviae etc. Of Endive. Garden Endive which is the root here specified, is
held to be somewhat colder, though not so dry and cleansing as that which is
wild, it cools hot stomachs, hot livers, amends the blood corrupted by heat,
and therefore must needs be good in Fevers; it cools the Reins, and therefore
prevents the Stone, it opens obstructions and provokes Urine, you may bruise
the root and boil it in white wine, it is very harmless.

Eringij. Of Eringo, or Sea-holy: the roots are moderately hot, something
drying and clensing, bruised and applied to the place, they help the Scrophula,
or diseace in the throat called the Kings Evil, they break the Stone, increase
seed, stir up lust, provoke the Terms etc.

Esulae, majoris, minoris. Of Spurge the greater and lesser; they are both
(taken inwardly) too violent for a vulgar use; outwardly in Ointments they
cleanse the Skin, and take away sunburning.

Filicis etc. Fearn, of which are two grand distinctions, viz. male and
foemale; I suppose they intend the male here, because they adjoyn some other
names to it, which the Greeks attributed only to the male, the foemale is that
which we in Sussex call Brakes; both of them are hot and dry, and exellent good
for the Rickets in children, and diseases of the Spleen, but dangerous for
women with child.

Filipendulae. Of Dropwort, The roots are hot and dry in the third degree,
opening, clensing, yet somewhat binding, they provoke Urine, case pains in the
bladder, and are a good preservative against the Falling sickness.

Foeniculi. Of Fennl: The root is hot and dry, some say in the third degree,
opening; it provokes Urine, and the Terms, strengthens the Liver, and is good
against the dropsy.

Fraxini. Of Ash-tree. I know no great virtues in Physic of the roots.

Galangae, majoris, minoris. Galanga commonly called Galingal, the greater and
lesser: They are hot and dry in the third (...) and the lesser are accounted
the hotter, it strengthens the stomach exceedingly, and takes away the pains
thereof coming of cold or wind, the smell Mathiolus
of it strengthens the brain, it releeves saint hearts, takes away windiness of
the womb, heats the Reins, and provokes lust: you may take half a dram at a
time.

Gentianae, Of Gentian, called so from Gentius a Prince.
his name that first found it out, some call it Felwort, and Baldmoney. It is
hot, clenssng, and scouring, a notable counterpoyson, it opens obstructions,
helps the bitings of venomous beasts, and mad dogs, helps digestion, and
cleanses the body of raw humors; our Chyrurgians use the root in form of a
tent, to open the sore, they are also very profitable for Ruptures, or such as
are burst,

(...). Of Liquoris; the best that is grows in England: it is hot and moist in
temperature, helps the roughness of the Windpipe, Hoarsness, diseases in the
Kidneys, and Bladder, and ulcers in the Bladder, (which in my opinion is a very
difficult thing to cure, although curable) it concocts raw humors in the
stomach, helps difficulty of breathing, is profitable for all salt humors; the
root dried and beaten into powder and the powder put into the eye, is a special
remedy for a Pin and a Web.

Graminis. Of Grass, such as in London they call Couch-Grass, and
Squitch-grass, in Sussex Dog-Grass. It gallantly provokes Urine, and eases the
Kidneys (...) with Gravel, gripings of the belly, and difficulty of Urine. Let
Galen.
such as are troubled with these Diseases, drink (...).
a draught of white Wine, wherein these Roots (being bruised) have been boiled
for their mornings draught; if they find ease, let them thank God, if not, let
them blame me. Bruised and applied to the place, they speedily help green
Wounds.

Hermodactyli. Of Hermodactils. They are hot and dry, purge phlegm, especially
from the joints, therefore are good for Gouts, and other Diseases in the
Joints. Their vices are corrected with long Pepper, Ginger, Cinnamon, or
Mastich: I would not have unskilful people too busy with Purges.

Hyacinthi. Of Jacinths: The Roots are dry in the first degree, and cold in the
second; they stop looseness, bind the belly.

Iridis, vulgaris, and Florentinae, etc. Orris, or Flower-de-luce (after the
French name) both that which grows with us, and that which comes from Florence.
They are hot and dry in the third degree, resist poison, help shortness of the
breath, provoke the terms; the Root being green and bruised, takes away
blackness and blewness of a stroke being applied thereto.

Imperitoriae etc. Of Masterwort. The Root is hot and dry in the third degree;
mitigates the rigor of agues, helps Dropsies, provokes Sweat, breaks
Carbuncles, and Plague-sores being applied to them; it is very profitable being
given inwardly in bruises.

Isatidis, Glasti. Of Woad. I know no great Physical virtue in the Root. See
the Herb.

Labri Veneris, Dipsaci. Fullers-Thistle, Teazle. The Root being boiled in Wine
till it be thick (quoth Discorides) helps by unction the clefts of the
Fundament, as also takes away Warts and Wens. Galen says, they are dry in the
second degree: and I take it all Authors hold them to be cold and dry.

Lactucae. Of Lettice. I know no Physical virtue residing in the Roots.

Lauri. Of the Bay Tree. The Bark of the Root, drunk with Wine, provokes Urine,
breaks the Stone, opens obstructions of the Liver and Galen.
Spleen. But according to Dioscorides is naught for women with Child.

Lapathi acuti, Oxylapathi. Sorrel, according to Galen: but Sharp-pointed-Dock,
according to Dioscorides: But which the College intends, I know not. The Roots
of Sorrel are held to be profitable against the Jaundice. Of Sharppointed Dock;
cleanse, and helps Scabs, and Itch.

Levistici, Of Lovage. They are hot and dry, and exceeding good for any
diseases coming of wind.

(...) albi. Of white (...). The Root is something hot and dry, helps Burnings,
softens the Womb, provokes the Terms; if boiled in Wine, is given with good
success in rotten Fevers, Pestilences, and all Diseases that require
suppuration: (it being outwardly applied) helps Ulcers in the head, and amends
the ill color of the face.

Malvae. Of Mallows. They are cool, and digesting, resist Poison, and help
Errosions, or gnawing of the bowels, or any other part; as also Ulcers in the
Bladder. See Marshmallows.

Mandagorae. Of Mandrakes. A Root dangerous for its coldness, being cold in the
fourth (...), the Root is scarcy, and dangerous for the vulgar to use;
therefore I leave it to those that have skill.

Mechoachanae. Of Mechoacan. It is corrected with Cinnamon, is temperate, yet
drying, purges phlegm chiefly from the head and joints, it is good for old
diseases in the head, and may safely be given even to Feverish bodies, because
of its temperature, it is also profitable against Coughs and pains in the
Reins; as also against the French Pox: the strong may take a dram at a time.

Mei etc. Spignel. The Roots are hot and dry in the second or third degree, and
send up unwholsom vapors to the head; and therefore seeing God has alootted
such plentiful Remedy for those maladies, this Root conduces to the cure of: I
pass it by with silence.

Mezerei etc. Of Spurge Olive, or Widdowwail. See the Herb, if you think it
worth the seeing.

Merorum Celci. Of the Mulberry-tree. The bark of the Root is bitter, hot and
dry, opens stoppings of Liver and Spleen, purges the belly, and kills worms,
boiled in Vinegar, helps the toothache.

Morsus Diaboli, Succisae etc. Devils-bit. See the Herb.

Nardi Spicae, Indicae, Celticae. Of Spiknard, Indian, and Celtique. Celtick
Nard, according to Rondetitius wonderfully provokes Urine. They are both hot
and dry, but I let the degree alone, till the Learned are agreed about it: The
Indian also provokes Urine, and stops fluxes, helps windiness of the Stomach,
resists the pestilence, helps gnawing pains of the Stomach, and dries up
Rhewms that molest the head. The Celtick Spicknard performs the same offices
though in a weaker measure.

Nenupharis, Nymphae. Of Water Lillies. They are cold and dry, and stop lust: I
never dived so deep to find any other virtue the Roots have.

Ononidis, Arrestae Bovis etc. Of Cammock, or Rest-Harrow: so called because it
makes Oxen stand still when they are ploughing. The Roots are hot and dry in
the third degree; it breaks the Stone, ( viz. the bark of it) the Root it self,
according to Pliny, helps the Fallingsickness, according to Mathiolus, helps
Ruptures; you may take half a dram at a time.

Ostrutij. Masterwort: given once before under the name of Imperitoria. But I
have something else to do than to write one thing twice as they did.

Pastinatae, Sativae, and silvestris. Garden and wild Parsnips. They are of a
temperate quality, enclining something to heat: the Garden Parsnips provoke
lust, and nourish as much and more too, than any Root ordinarily eaten; the
Wild are more Physical, (and so are usually all Wild Plants, I could give
reasons for it if I durst spend time and paper) being cutting, clensing, and
opening; they resist the bitings of venomous beasts, ease pains and stitches in
the sides, and are a sovereign Remedy against the Wind Chollick.

Pentaphyllis Of Cinkfoyl: Commonly called Five-leaved, or Five-fingered grass;
the Root is very drying, but very moderately hot: It is admirable against all
Fluxes, and stops blood flowing from any part of the body, it helps infirmities
of the Liver and Lungues, helps putrified ulcers of the mouth, the Root boiled
in Vinegar is good against the Shingles, and appeaseth the rage of any fretting
sores. You may sasely take a dram at a time in any convenient Liquor.

Petacitae. Of butter-bur. The Roots are hot and dry in the second degree, they
are exceeding good in violent and pestilential Fevers, they provoke the Terms,
expel Poison, and kill Worms.

Peucedani, foeniculi porcini. Of Sulphurwort, Hog-fennel, or Hore-strange. It
is very good applied to the navils of Children that stick out, Ruptures; held
in the mouth, it is a present Remedy for the fits of the Mother; it being
tataken inwardly, gives speedy deliverance to women in travail, and brings away
the afterbirth.

Poeoniae, maris, foemellae. Of Peony, male, and foemale. They are meanly hot,
but more drying, the male is more effectual in operation than the foemale (say
Authors) and yet quoth Dr. Reason, why should not the male be best for men, and
the foemale for women? The Root helps women not sufficiently purged after
travail, it provokes the Terms, and helps pains in the Belly, as also in the
Reins and Bladder, Falling Sickness, and Convulsions in children, being either
taken inwardly or hung about their necks. You may take half a dram at a time,
and less for children.

Phu, Valerinae, majoris, minoris. Valerian, or Setwal, greater and lesser.
They are temperately hot, the greater provoke Urine and the Terms, helps the
Strangury, stays Rhewms in the Head, and takes away the pricking pains
thereof. The lesser resists Poison, asswageth the swelling of the Cods, coming
either through wind or cold, helps cold taken after sweating or labor, Wind
Chollick; outwardly it draws out thorns, and cures both Wounds and Ulcers.

Pimpinellae etc. Of Burnet. It does this good, To bring forth a gallant
Physical Herb.

Plantaginis. Of Plantane. The Root is something dryer than the Leaf, but not so
cold, it opens stoppages of the Liver, helps the Jaundice and Ulcers of the
Reins and Bladder. Dioscorides affirms that one Root helps a Quotidian
Ague, three a Tertain, and four a Quartan, which though our late writers hold
to be fabulous, yet there may be a greater truth in it than they are aware of;
yet I am as loath to make Superstition a foundation to build on as any of them,
let Experience be Judge, and then we weigh not modern Jury Men. A little bit of
the Root being eaten, instantly stays pains in the Head, even to admiration.

Polypodij. Of Polypodium, or Fearn of the Oak. It is a gallant, though gentle
purger of Melancholy; Also in the opinion of Mesue (as famous a Physician as
ever I read for a Gallenist) it dries up superfluous Humors, takes away
swellings from the hands, feet, knees, and joints, stitches, and pains in the
sides, infirmities of the Spleen, Rickets: correct it with a few Annis seeds,
or Fennel seeds, or a little Ginger, and then the stomach will not loath it.
Your best way of taking it, is to bruise it well, and boil it in white Wine
till half be consumed, you may put in much, (...) little, according to strength
of the Diseased, it works very safely. I can give no better reason why
Polypodium of the Oak should be the best, unless because it is rarest, it draws
either very little sap from the Oak, or none at all; or if it did, the reason
were as far to seek. I am of opinion, that which grows on the ground is the
best to evacuate Melancholy, but it is more Sympathetical.

Poligonati, sigilli Solomonis etc. Of Solomon's Seal. Let it be no dishonor to
Galen nor Dioscorides that English men have found out in late days that these
Roots may safely be given inwardly; Intruth they may be excused if the
difference of the climates they and we lived, and now live in, be but
considered, neither I hope will my Country men blame me for following only Dr.
Experience in the virtues of this Root: stamped and boiled in Wine it speedily
helps (being drunk I mean, for it will not do the deed by looking upon it) all
broken bones, it is of an incredible virtue that way; as also being stamped and
applied to the place it soon heals all Wounds, and quickly takes away the black
and blew marks of blows, being bruised and applied to the place, and for these,
I am persuaded there is not a better Medicine under the Sun (or as Copernicus
and Kipler will have it above the Sun.)

Porri. Of Leeks. They say they are hot and dry in the fourth degree, they
breed but ill favored nourishment at the best, they spoil the eyes, heat the
body, cause troublesome sleep, and are noisome to the stomach, yet are they good
for something else (than only to stick in Welchmens hats) for the juice of them
dropped into the ears, takes away the noise of them, mixed with a little
Viniger and snuffed up the nose, it stays the bleeding of it; they are better
of the two boiled then raw, but both ways exceeding hurtful for Ulcers in the
bladder; and so are Onions and Garlic.

Prunellorum Silvestrium. Of Slo-bush, or Slo-tree. I think the College set
this amongst the roots only for fashion sake, and I did it because they did.

Pyrethri Salivaris etc. Pelitory of Spain. It is hot and dry in the foutrh
degree, chewed in the mouth, it draws away Rewm in the Toothache; bruised and
boiled in oil, it provokes sweat by unction; inwardly taken, they say it helps
Pal sies and other cold effects in the brain and nerves.

Rhapontici. Reupontick, or Reubarb of Pontus. It takes away windiness, and
weakness of stomach, sighings, sobbings, spittings of blood, diseases of the
Liver and Spleen, Rickets etc. if you take a dram at a time it will purge a
little but bind much, and therefore fit for foul bodies that have fluxes.

Rhabarbari. Of Reubarb. It gently purges Choler from the stomach and liver,
opens stoppings, withstands the Dropsy, Hypocondriack Melancholy, a little
boiling takes away the virtue of it, and therefore it is best given by infusion
only; If your body be any thing strong you may take two drams of it at a time
being slised thin and steeped all night in white Wine, in the morning strain it
out and drink the white Wine; it purges but gently, it leaves a binding
quality behind it, therefore dried a little by the fire and beaten into powder,
it is usually given in Fluxes.

Rhaphani, Domesticae and sylvestris. Of Radishes, Garden and Wild. Garden
Radishes provoke Urine, break the stone, and purge by urine exceedingly, yet
breed very bad blood, are offensive to the stomach, and hard of digestion, hot
and dry in quality. Wild, or Horse Radishes, such as grow in ditches, are
hotter and drier than the former, and more effectual in the premises.

Rhodie Rad. Rose Root, called (I suppose) by that name because of its
sweetness. Stamped and applied to the head it mitigates the pains thereof,
being somewhat cool in quality.

Rhabarbari Monachorum. Patience, MonksReubarb, or BastardReubarb, It also
purges, cleanses the blood, opens obstructions of the liver.

Rubiae tinctorum. Of Maddir. In this were Galen and Dioscorides quite beside
the cushion, in saying this root was opening, and clensing, when clean
contrary; it is both drying and binding, yet not without some opening quality,
for it helps the Yellow Jaundice, and therefore opens the obstructions of the
Liver and Gall; it is given with good success to such as have had bruises by
falls, stops Looseness, the Hemorrhoids, and the Terms in women.

Rusci. Of Knee-holly, or Butchers-broom, or Bruscus. They are meanly hot and
dry, provoke urine, break the stone, and help such as cannot piss freely. Use
them like grass roots.

Sambuci. Of Elder. I know no wonders the root will do.

Sarsae-Parigliae, Of Sarsa-Parilla, or bindweed; somewhat hot and dry, helpful
against pains in the head, and joints, they provoke sweat, and are used
familiarly in drying Diet drinks.

Satyrij utriusque. Of Satyrion, each sort. They are hot and moist in temper,
provoke lust, and increase seed; each branch bears two roots, both spongy,
yet the one more solid than the other, which is of most virtue, and indeed only
to be used, for some say the most spongy root is quite contrary in operation to
the other, as the one increases, the other decreaseth; yet if in your eye they
contend for dignities, put them both in water, and the most solid which is for
use will sink, the other swim.

Saxifragiae albae. Of white Saxifrage; in Sussex we call them Lady-smocks. The
roots powerfully break the Stone, expel wind, provoke Urine, and cleanse the
reins.

Sanguisorbae. A kind of Burnet.

Scabiosaer Of Scabious. The roots either boiled or beaten into powder and so
taken, helps such as are extremely troubled with Scabs and Itch, are medicinal
in the French-pocks, hard swellings, inward wounds, being of a drying,
clensing, and healing faculty.

Scordij. Of Scordium, or Water Germander. See the Herb.

Scillae. Of Squils. See the Vinegar, and Wine of Squils in the Compounds.

Scrophulariae etc. Of Figwort. The roots being of the same virtue with the
(...), I refer you thither.

Scorzonerae. Of Vipers grass. The root cheers the heart, and strengthens the
vital spirits, resists poison, helps passions and tremblings of the heart,
faintness, sadness, and melancholy, opens stoppings of the liver and spleen,
provekes the terms, eases women of the sits of the mother, and helps swimmings
in the head.

Seseleos. Of Seseli, or Hart-wort. The roots provoke mine, helps the falling
sickness.

Sisari, secacul. Of Scirrets. They are hot and moist, of good nourishment,
something windy, as all roots are; by reason of which, they provoke lust, they
stir up apetitite, and provoke urine.

I hope I may without offense forbear mentioning, Comfry, and black Briony,
twice, though the College did not.

Sonchi. Of Sowthistles. See the herb.

Spinae Albae, Bedeguar. I scarce know what name to give it, that will please
the College; Our English, both physicians and Apothecaries, call that ball of
thread that grows upon the Briars, Bedeguar; but the Arabians called our Ladies
thistles, by that name; The roots of which are drying and binding, stops
fluxes, bleeding, takes away cold swellings, and case the pains of the teeth.

Spatulae soctidae. Stinking Gladon, A kind of Flower-de-luce-, called so for
its unsavory smell: It is hot and dry in the third degree; outwardly they help
the Kings Evil, soften hard swellings, draw out broken benes: Inwardly taken,
they help Convulsions, Ruptures, Bruises, Infirimities of the Lungues.

Tamarisci. Of Tamaris. See the berbs, and Barks.

Tanaceti. Of Tansie. The root eaten, is a singular remedy for the Gout: the
rich may bestow the cost to preserve it.

Thapsi etc. A venomous root, outlandish: therefore no more of it.

Tormentillae. Of Tormentil. A kind of Sinkfoil; dry in the third degree, but
moderately hot; exceeding good in pestilences, provokes sweat, stays vomiting,
cheers the heart, expels poison.

(...). Of Tresoyl. See the Herb.

Tribuli Aquatici. OfWater Caltrops. The roots lie too far under water for me
to reach to.

Trachellij. Of Throatwort: by some called Canterbury Bells: by some Coventry
Bells. They help diseases and ulcers in the throat.

Trinitatis herbae. Hearts-ease, or Pansies. I know no great virtue they have.

Tunicis. I shall tell you the virtues when I know what it is.

Tripolij. The root purges phlegm, expels poison.

Turbith. The root purges phlegm, (being hot in the third degree) chiefly from
the exterior parts of the body: it is corrected with Ginger, or Mastick. Let
not the vulger be to busy with it.

Tubernum. Of Toad-stools. Whether these be roots or no, it matters not much:
for my part I know but little need of them, either in food or Phyfick.

Victorialis. An Outlandish kind of Garlic. They say, being hung about the
neck of Cattle that are blind suddenly, it helps them; and defends those that
bear it, from evil spirits.

Swallow-wort, and Teazles were handled before.

Ulmariae, Reginae prati etc. Meadsweet. Cold and dry, binding, stops fluxes,
and the immoderate flowing of the terms in women: you may take a dram at a
time.

Urticae Of Nettles. See the Leaves.

Zedoariae. Of Zedoary, or Setwal, This and Zurumbet, according to Rhazis, and
Mesue, are all one; Avicenna thinks them different: I hold with Mesue; indeed
they differ in form, for the one is long, the other round; they are both hot
and dry in the second degree, expel wind, resist poison, stop Fluxes, and the
terms, stay vomiting, help the Chollick, end kill worms; you may take half a
dram at a time.

Zingiberis. Of Ginger. Helps digestion, warms the stomach, cleers the sight,
and is profitable for old men, heats the joints, and therefore is profitable
against the Gout, expels Wind; it is hot and dry in the third degree.

BARKS.
APis Rad. Of the Roots of Smallage. Take notice here, That the Barks both of
this Root, as also of Parsley, Fennel etc. is all that of the root which is in
use, neither can it properly be called Bark, for it is all the Root, the hard
pith in the middle excepted, which is always thrown away, when the roots are
used. It is something hotter and drier than Parsley, and more medicinal; it
opens stoppings, provokes urin, helps digestion, expels wind, and warms a cold
stomach: use them like Grass Roots.

Avellanarum. Of Hazel. The rind of the tree provokes Urine, breaks the Stone;
the husks anp shells of the Nuts, dried and given in powder, stay the immoderat
flux of the terms in women.

Aurantiorum. Of Orrenges. Both these, and also Lemmons and Citrons, are of
different qualities, the outward bark, viz. what looks red, is hot and dry, the
white is cold and moist, the juice colder than it, the seeds hot and dry; the
outward bark is that which here I am to speak to, it is somewhat hotter than
that either of Lemmons or Citrons, therefore it warms a cold stomach more, and
expels wind better, but it strengthens not the heart so much.

Berber etc. Barberries. The rind of the tree according to Clusius, being
steeped in Wine, and the Wine drunk, purges Choler, and is a singular remedy
for the yellow Jaundice. Boil it in white Wine and drink it. See the Directions
at the beginning.

Cassia Lignea etc. It is something more oily than Cinnamon, yet the virtues
being not much different, I refer you thither.

Capparis Rad. Of Caper Roots. See the Roots.

Castanearum. Of Chestnuts. The bark of the Chestnut tree is dry and binding,
and stops Fluxes.

Cinnamomum. Cinnamom, and Cassia Lignea. Are hot and dry in the second degree,
strengthens the stomach, helps digestion, causes a sweet breath, resists
poison, provokes urin, and the terms, causes speedy delivety to women in
travel, helps Coughs and Defluxions of humors upon the Lungs, Dropsies, and
difficulty of Urin. In Ointments it takes away red pimples, and the like
deformities from the face. There is scarce a better remedy for women in labor,
than a dram of Cinnamon newly beaten into powder and taken in white Wine.

Citrij. Of Pome Citrons. The outward pill, which I suppose is that which is
meant here: It strengthens the heart, resists poison, amends a stinking breath,
helps digestion, comforts a cold stomach.

Ebuli Rad. Of the Roots of Dwarf-Elder, or Walwort. See the Roots.

Enulae. Of Elecampane. See the Roots.

Esulae Rad. See the Roots.

Fabarum. Of Beans. Bean Cods (or Pods, as we in Sussex call them) being
burned, the ashes are a sovereign remedy for aches in the joints, old (...),
Gouts, and Sciaticaes.

Foenicull Rad. Of Fennel Roots. See the Roots, and remember the Observation
given in Smallage at the beginning of the Barks.

Fraxini Rad. Of the Bark of Ash tree Roots. That the virtue lies only in the
Bark of the Root, I suppose it to be only nicety: but the Bark of the tree,
helps the Rickets, is moderately hot and dry, stays Vomitting; being burnt,
the Ashes made into an ointment, helps Leprosy, and other deformity of the
skin, eases pains of the spleen. You may lay the Bark in steep in white Wine
for the Rickets, and when it has stood so two or three days, let the diseased
Child drink now and then a spoonful of it.

Granatorum. Of Pomegranates. The rind or pill, cools, and forcibly binds,
stays Fluxes, and the Terms in women, helps digestion, strengthens weak
stomachs, fastens the teeth, and are good for such whose gums wast. You may
take a dram of it at a time inwardly. Pomegranate flowers are of the same
virtue.

Gatrujaci. See the Wood.

Juglandium Virid. Of green Walnuts. As for the outward green bark of Walnuts,
I suppose the best time to take them is before the Walnuts be shelled at all,
and then you may take Nuts and all (if they may properly be called Nuts at such
a time) you shall find them exceeding comfortable to the stomach, they resist
poison, and are a most excellent preservative against the Plague, inferior to
none; they are admirable for such as are troubled with Consumptions of the
lungues; the rich may keep them preserved; they that cannot do as they would,
must be content to do as they may. viz. dry them and so keep them.

Lauri. Of the Bay tree. See the Root.

Limonum. Of Lemmons. The outward pill is of the nature of Citron, but held not
so effectual; how ever let the poor Country man that cannot get the other, use
this.

Mandragorae. Rad. Be pleased to look back to the Root.

Myrobalanorum. Of Myrobalans - See the Fruits.

Macis. Of Mace. It is hot in the third degree, strengthens the stomach and
heart exceedingly, and helps concoction.

Maceris etc. It is held to be the inner bark of Nutmeg-tree, helps fluxes and
spitting of blood.

Petroselini Rad. Of Parsley Roots. opens obstructions, provokes urine and the
terms, warms a cold stomach, expells wind and breaks the stone, use them as
Grass Roots, and take out the inner pith as you were taught in Smallage roots

Prunelli Silvestris. Of Sloe-tree. I know no use of it.

Pinearum putaminae. Pine-shucks, or husks. I suppose they mean of the cones
that hold the seeds; both those and also the bark of the tree, stop fluxes, and
help the lungues.

Querci. Of Oak-tree. Both the Bark of the Oak, and Acorn Cups are drying and
cold, binding, stop fluxes and the terms, as also the running of the reins,
have a care how you use them before due purging.

Rhaphani. Of Radishes. I could never see any bark they had.

Suberis. Of Cork. It is good for something Paulus.
else besides to stop bottles; being dry and binding, stancheth blood, helps
fluxes, especially the ashes of it being burnt.

Sambuci etc. Of (...) Roots and Branches; purges water, helps the dropsy,

Cort. Medius Tamaricis. The middle Bark of Tamaris, eases the Spleen, helps
the Rickets, you may use them as Ash-tree Bark.

Tilliae. Of Line-tree. Boiled, the water helps burnings.

Thuris. Of Frankincense. I must plead Ignoramus.

Ulmi. Of Elm. Moderately hot and clensing, very good for wounds, burns, and
broken bones. viz. boiled in water and the greived place bathed with it.

WOODS and their CHIPS OR Scobs, properly signifies Saw-dust.
RASPINGS.
A Gallochus, Lignum Aloes. Wood of Aloes; is moderately hot and dry: a good
Cordial: a rich Perfume: a great strengthener to the stomach.

Aspalathus. Rose-wood. There are diverse Bushes called by the name of
Aspalathus: But because the College have set it down amongst the Wood, (I
suppose they mean the Tree) It is moderately hot and dry, stops looseness,
provokes urin, and is excellent to cleanse filthy ulcers.

Bresilium. Brassil. All the use I know of it is, to dye Cloth, and Leather,
and make red Ink.

Buxus. Box. Many Physicians have written of it, but no physical virtue of it:
I suppose the College quoted it only as a word of course.

Cypressus. Cypress. The Wood laid amongst clothes, secures them from moths.
See the Leaves.

Ebenum. Ebeny. It is held by Dioscorides, to clear the sight, being either
boiled in Wine, or burnt the ashes.

Gaujacum, Lignum vitae. Dries, attenuates, causes sweat, resists
putrefaction, is admirable good for the French pocks, as also for Ulcers, Scabs
and Leprosy, it is used in diet drinks.

Juniperus. Juniper. The smoke of the Wood, drives away Serpents; the ashes of
it made into ly, cures Itch, and Scabs.

Nephriticum. It is a light wood and comes from Hispaniola: being steeped in
water, will soon turn it into a blew color; it is hot and dry in the first
degree, and so used as before, is an admirable remedy for the stone, as also
for the obstructions of the liver and spleen.

Rhodium. Increases Milk in Nurses.

Santalum, album, rubrum, citrinum. White, red, and yellow Sanders: They are
all cold and dry in the second or third degree: The red stops defluxions from
any part, and helps inflammations; the white and yellow (of which the yellow is
best) cool the heat of Feaveas, strengthen the heart, and cause cheerfulness.

Sassafras. Is hot and dry in the second degree, it opens obstructions or
stoppings, it strengthens the breast exceedingly, if it be weakened through
cold, it breaks the stone, stays vomiting, provokes urin, and is very
profitable in the French pocks, used in diet drinks.

Tamaris. Is profitable for the Rickets, and Burnings.

Xylobalsamum. Wood of the Balsam tree. Is hot and dry in the second degree,
according to Galen. I never read any great virtues of it.

HERBS AND THEIR LEAVES.
A Brotanum mas, foemina. Southernwood, male and foemale. Is hot and dry in the
third degree, resists poison, kills worms, provokes lust; outwardly in
plasters, it dissolves cold swellings, and helps the bitings of venomous
beasts, makes hair grow: take not above half a dram at a time in powder.

Absinthium etc. Wormwood. Its several sorts, are all hot and dry in the second
or third degrees, the common Wormwood is thought to be hottest, they all help
weakness of the stomach, cleanse Choler, kill Worms, open Stoppings, help
Surfets, clear the Sight, resist Poison, cleanse the Blood, and secures clothes
from Moths.

Abugilissa etc. Alkanet. The Leaves are something drying and binding, but
inferior in virtue to the Roots, to which I refer you.

Acetosa. Sorrel. Is moderately cold and dry, binding, cutteth tough humors,
cools the brain, liver, and stomach, cools the blood in Fevers, and provokes
apetite.

Acanthus. Bears-breech, or Branch ursine. Is temperate, something moist. See
the root.

Adiantum, album, nigrum. Maiden hair, white and black. They are temperate, yet
drying, white Maiden hair is that we usually call Wall-rue; they both open
obstructions, cleanse the breast and lungs of gross slimy humors, provoke urine,
help ruptures and shortness of wind.

Adiantum Aureum, Politricum. Golden Maidenhair; its temperature and virtues
are the same with the former; helps the Spleen; burned, and Ly made with the
Ashes, keeps the hair from falling off from the head.

Agrimonia. Agrimony. Galens Eupatorium: (...).
it is hot and dry in the first degree; binding, it Pliny.
amends the infirmities of the liver, helps such as Dioscorides.
piss blood, helps inward wounds, opens obstructions; outwardly applied it
helps old sores, Serapio.
ulcers etc. Inwardly it helps the Jaundice and the spleen: You may either take
a dram of this or that following at a time inwardly in white, or boil the
herb in white Wine and drink the decoction.

Ageratum. Mesue his Eupatorium. Maudlein. Is hot and dry in the second degree,
provokes urine and the terms, dries the brain, opens stoppings, helps the green
sickness, and profits such as have a cold, weak liver; outwardly applied, it
takes away the hardness of the matrix, and fills hollow ulcers with flesh.

Agnus Castus etc. Chast-tree. The Leaves are hot and dry in the third degree;
expel wind, consume the seed, cause Chastity being only born about one, it
dissolves swellings of the Cods being applied to them, Headache, Lethargy. Also
Dioscorides says a branch of it preserves a traveller from weariness.

Alleluja, Lujula etc. Wood Sorrel. It is of the temperature of other Sorrel,
and held to be more cordial; cools the blood, helps ulcers in the mouth, hot
defluctions upon the lungs, wounds, ulcers etc.

Alcea. Vervain-Mallow. The root helps Aetius.
fluxes and burstness. Dioscorides.


Allium. Garlic. Hot and dry in the fourth degree, troublesome to the stomach,
it duls the sight, spoils a clear skin, resists poison, eases the pains of the
teeth, helps the bitings of mad dogs and venomous beasts, helps ulcers,
leprosies, provokes urine, is exceeding opening, and profitable for dropsies.

Althaea etc. Marshmallows. Are moderately hot and drier than other Mallows;
they help degestion, and mitigate pain, ease the pains of the stone, and in the
sides. Use them as you were taught in the roots whose virtues they have, and
both together will do better.

Alsine. Chickweed. Is cold and moist without Galen.
any binding, aswages swelling, and comforts the sinnews much, and therefore is
good for such as are shrunk up, it dissolves Aposthumes, hard swellings and
helps mangy hands and legs, outwardly applied in a pultis.

Alchymilla. Ladies-Mantle: is hot and dry, some say in the second degree, some
in the third: Outwardly it helps wounds, reduces women's breasts that hang
bagging: inwardly, helps bruises, and ruptures, stays vomiting, and the whites
in women, and is very profitable for such women as are subject to miscarry
through cold and moisture.

Alcanna. Privet; has a binding quality, helps ulcers in the mouth, is good
against burnings and scaldings, cherishes the nerves or sinnews: boil it in
white Wine to wash your mouth, and in hogs grease for burnings and scaldings.

Amaracus, Majorana. Marjoram. Some say it is hot and dry in the second degree,
some advance it to the third. Sweet Marjoram, is an excellent remedy for cold
diseases in the brain, being only smelled to: helps such as are given to much
sighing, eases pains in the belly, provokes urine, being taken inwardly; You
may take a dram of it at a time in powder. Outwardly in Oils or Salves, it
helps Sinnews that are shrunk, Limbs out of joint, all aches and swellings
coming of a cold cause.

Angelica. Is hot and dry in the third degree, opens, digesteth makes thin,
strengthens the heart, helps fluxes, and loathsomness of meat, it is an enemy
to poison and pestilence, provokes the term in women, and brings away the
afterbirth. You may take a dram at a time in powder.

Anagallis, mas, foemina. Pimpernel, male and foemale. They are something hot
and dry, and of such a drawing quality that they draw thorns and splinters out
of the flesh, amend the Galen.
sight, cleanse ulcers, help infirmities of the liver and reins.

Anethum. Dill, is hot and dry in the second degree. Dioscorides says, it
breeds milk in Nurses. But Galen he denies it: Howsoever, it stays vomiting,
eases hiccoughs aswageth swellings, provokes Urine, helps such as are troubled
with the fits of the mother, and digests raw humors.

Apium. Smallage: So it is commonly used; but indeed all Parsley is called by
the name of Apium, of which this is one kind. It is somewhat hotter and drier
than Parsley, and more efficacious; it opens stoppings of the liver, and spleen,
cleanses the blood, provokes the terms, helps a cold stomach to digest its
meat, and is singular good against the yellow Jaundice. Both Smallage and
Clevers may be well used in pottage in the morning instead of Herbs.

Aparine. Goose-grass, or Clevers; they are Dioscorides.
meanly hot and dry, clensing; helps the bitings of venomous beasts, keeps men's
bodies from growing Pliny.
too fat, helps the yellow jaundice, stays Galen.
bleeding, fluxes, and helps green wounds. Tragus.


Aspergula odorata. Woodroof: Cheers the heart, makes men merry, helps
melancholy, and opens the stoppings of the liver.

Aquilegia. Columbines; help sore throats, are of a drying, binding quality.

Argentina. Silver-weed, or Wild Tansie: cold and dry all most in the third
degree; stops Lasks, Fluxes, and the Terms, good against Ulcers, the Stone, and
inward Wounds, it stops the immoderate Flux of the Terms in women, if it be but
worn in their shoos: eases gripings in the belly, fastneth loose teeth;
outwardly it takes away Freckles, Morphew, and Sunburning, it takes away
Inflammations; and bound to the wrests stops the violence of the fits of an ague.

Artanita. Sow-bread: hot and dry in the third degree; it is so dangerous a
purge that I dare not take it my self, therefore would I not advise others:
outwardly in Ointments it takes away Freckles, Sunburning, and the marks which
the Small Pocks leave behind them: dangerous for women with child, yea so
dangerous, that both Dioscorides and Pliny say, it will make a woman miscarry
if she do but stride over it.

Aristolochia, longa, rotunda. Birthwort long and round. See the Roots.

Artemisia. Mugwort; is hot and dry in the second degree; binding: an herb
apropriated to the foemine sex, it brings down the terms, brings away both
birth and after birth, eases pains in the matrix. You may take a dram at a
time.

Asparagus. See the Roots.

Asarum etc. Asarabacca; hot and dry; provokes vomiting, and urine, and are
good for dropsies; they are corrected with Mace or Cinnamon.

A^riplex etc. Orach, or Arrach; it is cold in the first degree, and moist in
the second, says Galen, and makes the belly soluble. Dioscorides says, they
cure the yellow Jaundice. Lycus Neop says, they help such as have taken
Cantharides. Mathiolus says, ( I doubt he was mistaken.
) it purges upwards. and downwards. Hypocrates says, it cools hot aposthumes,
and St. Anthonies fire. It is certainly an admirable remedy for the fits of the
mother and other infirmities of the matrix, and therefore the Latins call it
Vulvaria.

Auricula muris, major. Mouse ear, hot and dry, of a binding quality, it is
admirable to heal wounds, inward or outward, as also ruptures or burstness,
Edg-tools quenched in the juice of it, will cut Iron without turning the edg,
as easy as they will lead, and lastly it helps the swelling of the Spleen,
Coughs, and Consumptions of the lungues.

At^ractilis hirsuta. Wild Bastard-saffron, Distaff-thistle, or
Spindle-thistle; is dry and Galen.
moderately digesting, helps the biting of venomous Dioscorides.
beasts. Mesue says, it is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second, and
cleanses the breast and lungues of tough phlegm: but if the College do intend
Carduus Bened. by this, we shall talk with that by and by.

Balsamita etc. Costmary, Alecost: See Maudlin, of which I take this to be one
sort or kind.

Barba jovis, sedum majus. Housleek or Sengreen: cold in third degree,
profitable against the Shingles and other hot creeping ulcers, inflammations,
St. Anthonies fire, frenzyes, it cools and takes away corns from the toes being
bathed with the juice of it, and a skin of the leaf laid over the place, stops
fluxes, helps scalding and burning.

Bardana. Clot-bur, or Burdock, temperately dry and wasting, something cooling,
it is held to be a good remedy against shrinking of the sinnews, they ease
pains in the bladder, provoke urine. Also Mizaldus says that a leaf applied to
the top of the head of a woman draws the Matrix upwards, but applied to the
soles of the feet draws it downwards, and is therefore an admirable remedy for
suffocations, precipitations, and dislocations of the Matrix, if a wise man
have but the using of it.

Beta, alba, nigra, rubra. Beets, white, black, and red, Black Beets I have, as
yet, as little skill in as knowledge of. The white are something colder and
moister than the red, both of them loosen the belly, but have little or no
nourishment. Simeon Sethi tells a large story of several diseases they breed in
the stomach. I scarce believe him. This is certain, the white, provoke to
stool, and are more clensing, open stoppings of the liver and spleen, help the
vertigo or swimming in the head. The red stay fluxes, help the immoderate
flowing of the terms in women, and are good in the yellow Jaundice.

Benedicta Carrophyllata. Avens: hot and dry, help the chollick and rawness of
the stomach, stitches in the sides, help bruises, and take away clotted blood
in any part of the body.

Betonica vulgaris. Common or wood Betony; hot and dry in the second degree,
helps the falling Galen.
sickness, and all headaches coming of cold, cleanses the breast and lungs,
opens stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, as the Rickets, etc. procures
appetite, helps sour belchings, provokes urine, breaks the stone, mitigates the
pains of the reins and bladder, helps Cramps and Convulsions, resists Poison,
helps the Gout, such as piss blood, madness and headache, kills worms, help
bruises, and cleanses women after their labor. You may take a dram of it at a
time in white Wine, or any other convenient liquor proper against the Disease
you are afflicted with.

Betonica Pauli etc. Paul's Betony, or male Lluellin, to which ad Elatine or
foemale Lluellin which comes afterward; they are pretty temperate, stop
defluxions of humors that fall from the head into the eyes, are profitable in
wounds, helps filthy foul eating Cankers: Pena tells of one of her Country men,
a Shentleman of Wales, who had her nose almost eaten off with the Pocks, yea it
was so pitiful sore it had almost brought her to a Leprosy, and her was cured
by only taking her own country Herb Lluellin inwardly, and applying the Herb
outwardly to the place.

Betonica Coronaria etc. Is Clove Gilliflowers. See the Flowers.

Bellis. Daisies, are cold and moist in the second degree, they ease all pains,
and swellings coming of heat, in Clysters they loose the belly, are profitable
in Fevers, and inflammations of the stones, they take away bruises, and
blackness and blewness: they are admirable in wounds and inflammations of the
lungues or blood.

Blitum. Blites. Some say they are cold and moist, others cold and dry, none
mention any great virtues of them.

Borrago. Borrage: hot and moist, comforts the heart, cheers the spirits,
drives away sadness and melancholy, they are rather laxative than binding;
help swooning and heart-qualms, breed special good blood; help consumptions,
madness, and such as are much weakened by sickness.

Bonus Henricus. Good Henry, or all good; hot and dry, clensing, and scouring,
inwardly taken it loosens the belly, outwardly, it cleanses old sores and
Ulcers.

Botrys. Oak of Jerusalem: hot and dry in the (...) degree, helps such as are
short-winded, cuts and wastes gross and tough phlegm, laid amongst clothes they
preserve them from moths, and give them a sweet smell.

Branca ursina. Bears-breech.

Brionia etc. Briony, white and black: both are hot and dry in the third
degree, purge violently, yet are held to be wholesome Physic for such as have
Dropsies, Vertigo, or swimming in the Head, Falling sickness etc. Certainly it
is a scurvy, strong, troublesome purge, therefore ill to be tampered with by the
unskilful; outwardly in Ointments, it takes away freckles, wrinkles, morphow,
scars, spots, etc. from the face.

Bursa pastoris. Shepherds-purse; is manifestly cold and dry, though Lobel and
Pena thought the contrary; it is binding and stops blood, the terms in women,
spiting and pissing of blood, cools inflammations.

Buglossum. Bugloss. In Sussex (because they must be (...)) called
Languedebeef: in plain English, Oxtongue
Its virtues are the same with Borrage.

Bugula. Bugle, or middle Comfry; is temperate for heat, but very drying,
excellent for falls or inward bruises, for it dissolves (...) blood, profitable
for inward wounds, helps the Rickets and other stoppings of the Liver;
outwardly it is of wonderful force in curing wounds and ulcers, though
festered, as also gangreens and Fistulaes, it helps broken bones, and
dislocations. Or Members out of joint.
To conclude, let my Country men esteem it as a Jewel. Inwardly you may take it
in powder a dram at a time or drink the decoction of it in white Wine, being
made into an ointment with hogs grease, you shall find it admirable in green
wounds.

Buphthalmum etc. Ox eye. (...) says they are commonly used for black
Hellebore, to the virtues of which I refer you.

Buxus. Boxtree. The leaves are hot, dry, and binding, they are profitable
against the bitings of mad dogs, both taken inwardly, boiled and applied to the
place, besides they are excellent to cure horses of the bots.

Calamintha, (...), Palustris. Mountain, and Water Calamint. For the Water
Calamint; see Mints, than which it is accounted stronger. Mountain Calamint, is
hot and dry in the third degree, provokes urine and the terms, hastens the
birth in women, brings away the afterbirth, helps cramps, convulsions,
difficulty of breathing, kills worms, helps the leprosy; outwardly used, it
helps Galen.
such as holds their necks on one side: half a Dioscorides.
dram is enough at one time.

Calendula etc. Marigolds. The Leaves are Hpuleius.
hot in the second degree, and something moist, loosen the belly, the juice
held in the mouth, helps the toothach, and takes away any inflammation, or hot
swelling being bathed with it mixed with a little Vinegar.

Callitricum. Maidenhair. See Adianthum.

Caprisolium. Honysuckles: The Leaves are hot, and therefore naught for
inflammations of the mouth and throat, for which the ignorant people often give
them, and Galen was true in this, let modern Writers write their pleasure. If
you chew but a leaf of it in your mouth, experience will tell you, that it is
likelier to cause than to cure a sore throat, they provoke urine, and purge by
urine, bring speedy delivery to women in travail, yet procure barrenness, and
hinder conception; outwardly they dry up soul ulcers, and cleanse the face from
morphew, sunburning and freckles.

Carduncellus etc. Groundsel. Cold and moist according to Tragus, helps the
Chollick, and pains or gripings in the belly, helps such as cannot make water,
cleanses the reins, purges Choler and sharp humors, the usual way of taking
it is, to boil it in water with (...) and (...).
so eat it, I hold it to be a wholesome and harmless purge. Outwardly it eases
women's breasts that are swollen and inflamed, (or as themselves say) have
gotten an ague in their breasts, as also inflammation of the joints, nerves, or
sinnews.

Carduus B. Mariae. Our Ladies Thistles. They are far more temperate than
Carduus Benedictus, open obstructions of the liver, help the Jaundice and
Dropsy, provoke Urine, break the Stone.

Carduus Benedictus. In plain English, Blessed Thistle; Though I confess it be
better known by Camerarius.
the Latin name: it is hot and dry in the second degree, clensing and opening,
helps swimming Arnoldus villanovanus.
and giddiness in the head, deasness, strengthens the memory, helps griping
pains in the belly, kills worms, provokes sweat, expels poison, helps
inflammation of the liver, is very good in pestilences, and the French-pocks;
outwardly applied, it ripens Plague-sores, and helps hot swellings, the bitings
of mad-dogs, and venomous beasts, and foul filthy ulcers. Every one that can
but make a Carduus posset knows how to use it.

Carlina. See the Roots, under the name of white Chameleon.

Corallina. A kind of Sea-Moss: cold, binding, drying, good for hot gouts,
inflammations; also they say it kills worms, and therefore by some is called
Maw-wormseed.

Cassutha, cuscuta, potagralini. Dodder. See Epithimum.

Caryophyllata. Avens or Herb Bennet. Hot and dry, they help the Chollick,
Rawness of the stomach, Stitches in the sides, Stoppings of the liver, and
Bruises.

Cataputia minor. A kind of Spurge: See Tithymalus.

Cattaria, Nepeta. Nep, or Catmints. The virtues are the same with Calaminth.

Cauda Equina. Horse-tail; is of a binding drying quality, cures wounds, and is
an admirable remedy for sinnews that are shrunk; yea, Galen says it cures
sinnews though they be cut in sunder: but Columbus holds that is incurable
unless they be cut within the Muscle; well then we will take Galen in the
charitablest sense. However this is certain, it is a sure remedy for bleeding
at the nose, or by wound, stops the Terms in women, Fluxes, Ulcers in the Reins
or Bladder, Coughs, Ulcers in the Lungues, Difficulty of breathing.

Caulis, Brassica (...), silvestris. Coleworts, or Cabbages, Garden and Wild.
They are drying and binding, help dimness of the sight, help the spleen,
preserve from drunkenness, and help the evil effects of it, provoke the terms;
they say, being laid on the top of the head, they draw the matrix upward, and
therefore are good for the falling out of the womb. Chrysippus writes a whole
treatise of them, and makes them a universal medicine for every disease in
every part of the body.

Centaurium, majus, minus. Centaury the greater and lesser. They say the
greater will do wonders in curing wounds: see the Root. The lesser is that
which is commonly in Sussex known by the name of Centaury, and indeed so
throughout that part of the nation that I have travailed over; a present remedy
for the yellow Jaundice, opens stoppings of the liver, gall, and spleen purges
choler, helps the Gout, cleers the sight, purges the stomach, helps the
dropsy and green sickness. It is only the tops and flowers which are useful,
of which you may take a dram inwardly in powder, or half a handful boiled in
posset drink at a time.

Centinodium etc. Knotgrass; cold in the second Brass avolus.
degree, helps spitting and pissing of blood, Camerarius.
stops the terms and all other fluxes of blood, vomiting of blood, Gonorrhaea,
or running of Reins, weakness of the back and joints, inflammations of the
privities, and such as piss by drops, and it is an excellent remedy for hogs
that will not eat their meat. Your only way is to boil it, it is in its prime
about the latter end of July or beginning of August: at which time being
gathered it may be kept dry all the year.

Ceresolium vulgar and Myrrhis. Common and great Chervil: Take them both
together and they are temperately hot and dry, provoke urine, they stir up lust
and desire of copulation, comfort the heart and are good for old people, help
pleurisies and pricking in the sides.

Caepaea, Anagallis aquatica. Brooklime, hot and dry, but not so hot and dry as
Watercresses; Tragus says they are hot and moist, but the man dreamed waking,
they help mangy Horses: see Watercresses.

Ceterach etc. Spleenwort; moderately hot, wastes and consumes the spleen, in so
much that Vitruvius affirms he has known hogs that have fed upon it, that have
had (when they were killed) no spleens at all. It is excellent good for
melahcholly people, helps the strangury, provokes urine, and breaks the stone
in the bladder. Boil it and drink the decoction; but because a little boiling
will carry away the strength of it in vapors, let it boil but very little, and
let it stand close stopped till it be cold before you strain it out; this is
the general rule for all Simples of this nature.

Chamaepitys. Ground Pine; hot in the second degree, and dry in the third,
helps the Jaundice, Sciatica, stoppings of the liver, and spleen, provokes the
Terms, cleanses the entrails, dissolves congeled blood, resists poison, cures
wounds and ulcers. Strong bodies may take a dram, and weak bodies half a dram
of it in powder at a time.

Chamaemelum, sativum, sylvestre. Garden and Wild Chamomel. Garden Chamomel is
hot and dry in the first degree, and as gallant a medicine against the stone in
the bladder as grows upon the earth, you may take it inwardly, I mean the
decoction of it, being boiled in white Wine, or inject the juice of it into the
bladder with a syringe. It expels wind, helps belchings, and potently provokes
the terms;used in baths it helps pains in the sides, gripings and gnawings in
the belly.

Chamaedris etc. Germander; hot and dry in the third degree; cuts and brings
away tough humors, opens stoppings of the liver and spleen, helps coughs and
shortness of breath, strangury and stopping of urine and provokes the terms;
half a dram is enough to take at a time.

Chelidonium utrumque. Celondine both sorts. Small Celondine is usually called
Pilewort, it is something hotter and dryer than the former, but not in the
fourth degree as Galen and Dioscorides would have it; they say it helps the
Hemorrhoids or Piles, by only carrying it about one, (but if it will not, bruise
it and apply it to the grief) and from thence it took its (...). Celondine the
greater is hot and dry (they say in the third degree) any away used, either the
juice, or made into an Oil or Ointment, is a great preserver of the sight and
as excellent an help for sore eyes as any is.

Cinara etc. Artichokes. They provoke lust, and purge by urine.

Cichorium. Succory, to which ad Endive which comes after. They are cold and
dry in the second degree, clenfing and opening, they cool the heats of the
liver, and are profitable in the yellow Jaundice, and burning Fevers, helps
excoriations in the Yard, hot Stomachs; and outwardly applied, help hot rewms
in the eyes.

Cicuta. Hemlock; Cold in the fourth degree, poisonous; outwardly applied, it
helps Priapismus, or continual standing of the Yard, the Shingles, St.
Anthonies fire, or any eating Ulcers.

Clematis Daphnoides, Vinca provinca. Peruinkle. Hot in the second degree,
something dry and binding, stops Lasks, spitting of blood, and the Terms in
women.

Consolida masor. Comfry. I do not conceave the Leaves to be so vertnous as the
Roots,

Consolida media. Bugles, of which before.

Consolida minima. Daizes.

Consilida rubra. Golden Rod: hot and dry in the second degree; cleanses the
Reins, provokes Urin, brings away the Gravel; an admirable herb for wounded
people to take inwardly, stops blood etc.

Consolida Regalis. Delphinium. Larks heels, resist poison, help the bitings of
venomous beasts.

Saracenica Solidago. Saracens Consound. Helps inward wounds, sore mouths, sore
throats, wasting of the lungues, and liver.

Coronopus. Buchorn-Plantane, or Sea-Plantane: Cold and dry, helps the
bitings of venomous Aegineta.
beasts, either taken inwardly, or applied to the wound; helps the Chollick,
breaks the Stone.

Cotonaria. Has got many English names. Cottonweed, Cudweed, Chaffweed, and
Petty Cotton. Of a drying and binding nature; boiled in Ly, it keeps the head
from Nits and Lice; being laid among Clothes, it keeps them safe from Moths,
kills Worms, helps the bitings of venomous beasts; taken in a Tobacco-pipe, it
helps Coughs of the lungues, and vehement headaches.

Cruciata. Crossewort. (there is a kind of Gentian called also by this name,
which I pass by) Is drying and binding, exceeding good for inward or outward
wounds, either inwardly taken, or outwardly applied; and an excellent remedy
for such as are bursten.

Crassula. Orpine. Very cool: Outwardly used with Vinegar, it cleers the Skin;
inwardly taken, it helps gnawings of the stomach and bowels, ulcers in the
lungues, bloody flux, and Quinsie in the throat: For which last disease, it is
inferior to none: take not too much of it at a time, because of its coolness.

Crithamus, etc. Sampler. Hot and dry, helps Galen.
difficulty of urine, the yellow jaundice, provokes the terms, helps digestion,
opens stoppings of the liver and spleen.

Cucumis Asininus. Wild Cucummers. See Elaterium.

Cyanus major, minor. Blewbottle, great and small, A fine cooling herb, helps
bruises, wounds, broken veins; the juice dropped into the eye, helps the
inflammations thereof.

Cygnoglossum. Hounds-tongue. Cold and dry; applied to the fundament, helps the
Hemorroids, Dioscorides.
heals wounds, and ulcers, and is a present remedy against the bitings of
Dogs, burnings and scaldings. Some say, if you put the herb under your foot,
within your stocking, no Dog will bark at you.

Cypressus. Chamae cyparissus. Cypress tree. The leaves are hot and binding,
help Ruptures, and Polypus, or flesh growing on the Nose.

Chamaecyparissus. Is Lavender Cotton. Resists poison, kills worms, and withal
take notice how learnedly the College could confound the Cypress tree, and
Lavender Cotton together; and if they say some Authors say Cypressus and
Chamaecyparissus are all one, and withal show you where, then tell them I
thought their brain was in their books not in their heads.

Distamnus Cretensis. Dictamny, or Dittany of Creet, hot and dry, brings away
dead children, hastens women's travail, brings away the afterbirth, the very
smell of it drives away venomous beasts, so deadly, an enemy is it to poison;
it is an admirable remedy against wounds and Gunshot, wounds made with poisoned
weapons, it draws out splinters, broken bones etc. The dose from half a dram
to a dram. They say, the Goats and Deers in Creet, being wounded with Virgil.
Arrows, eat this herb, which makes the Arrows Aeniad. lib. 12.
fall out of themselves: And from thence came the tale in Virgil * about Aeneas.

Dipsacus, sativ. sylv. Teazles, Garden and wild: the leaves bruised and
applied to the temples, Galen.
alay the heat in fevers, qualify the rago in frenzies; the juice dropped
into the ears, kill worms in them, (if there be any there to kill) dropped into
the eyes, cleers the sight, helps redness and pimples in the face being
anointed with it.

Ebulus. Dwarf-Elder, or Walwort: hot and dry in the third degree; wastes hard
swellings, being applied in form of a pultis; the hair of the head being
anointed with the juice of it turns black; the leaves being applied to the
place, help inflammations, burnings, scaldings, the bitings of mad-dogs; mingled
with Bulls suet is a present remedy for the gout; inwardly taken, is a singular
purge for the dropsy and gout. Dr Butler.


Echium. Vipers-buglosse, Vipers-herb, Snakebuglosse, Wall-buglosse,
Wild-buglosse; several Countries give it these several names: it is a singular
remedy being eaten, for the biting of venomous beasts; Continual eating of it
makes the body invincible against the poison of Serpents, Toads, Spiders etc.
however it be administered; It comforts the heart, expels sadness, and
melancholy: It grows abundantly about the Castle walls, at Lewis in Sussex.
The rich may make the flowers into a conserve, and the herb into a syrup; the
poor may keep it dry; both may keep it as a Jewel.

Empetron, Calcifraga, Herniaria etc. Rupture-wort, or Burst-wort; the English
name tells you it is good against Ruptures, and so such as are bursten shall
find it, if they please to make trial of it, either inwardly taken or outwardly
applied to the place, or both. Also the Latin names hold it forth to be good
against the stone, which who so tries shall find true.

Enula Campana. Elicampane. Provokes Urine: See the root.

Epithimum. Dodder of Time, to which ad common Dodder which is usually that which
grows upon Flax: indeed every Dodder retains a virtue of that herb or plant it
grows upon, as Dodder that grows upon Broom, provokes urin forcibly, and
loosens the (...).
belly, and is moister than that which grows upon Mesue.
Flax, that which grows upon Time, is hotter Actuarius.
and dryer than that which grows upon Flax, even in the third degree, opens
obstructions, helps infirmities Serapio.
of the spleen, purges melancholy, releeves Avicenna.
drooping spirits, helps the rickets; that which grows on Flax, is excellent
for agues in young children, strengthens weak stomachs, purges choler,
provokes urine, opens stoppings in the reins and bladder; that which grows upon
Nettles, provokes urine exceedingly. The way of using it is to boil it in white
Wine, or other convenient decoction, and boil it very little, remembering what
was told you before in (...).

Eruca. Rocket, hot and dry in the third degree, Galen.
being eaten alone, causes headache by its heat, procures lust.

Eupatorium. See (...).

Euphragia. Eybright: something hot and dry, the very sight of it refreshes the
eyes; inwardly taken, it restores the sight, and makes old men's eyes young; a
dram of it taken in the morning is worth a pair of Spectacles, it comforts
and strengthens the memory, outwardly applied to the place it helps sore eyes.

Filix foemina. Filicula, polypodium. See the Roots. Filipendula.

Malabathrum. Indian-leaf, hot and dry in the second degree, comforts the
Stomach exceedingly, helps digestion, provokes urine, helps inflammations of the
eyes, secures clothes from moths.

Foeniculum. Fennel, Increases milk in Nurses, provokes Urine, breaks the
stone, eases pains in the Reins, opens stoppings, breaks wind, provokes the
terms, You may boil it in white Wine.

Fragaria. Strawberry leaves, are cold, dry, and binding, a singular Remedy for
inflammations and wounds, hot diseases in the throat, they stop fluxes, and the
terms, cool the heat of the stomach, and inflammations of the Liver. The best
way is to boil them in barley water.

Fraxinus etc. Ash-trees: the leaves are moderately hot and dry, cure the
bitings of Adders, and Serpents, by a certain antipathy (they say) there is
between them, they stop looseness, and stay vomittng, help the Rickets, open
stoppages of the Liver and Spleen.

Fumaria. Fumitory: Cold and dry, it opens and cleanses by Urine, helps such
as are Itchy, and Scabbed, cleers the skin, opens stoppings of the Liver and
Spleen, helps Rickets, Hypochondriak Melancholy, madness, frenzies, Quartan
Agues, loosneth the belly, gently purges Melancholy, and addust choler: boil
it in white Wine, and take this one general rule, All things of a clensing or
opening nature may be most commodiously boiled in white wine. Remember but this
and then I need not write one thing so often.

(...). Goats-rue: Temperate in quality, resists Poison, kills Worms, helps the
Fallingsickness, resists the Pestilence. You may take a dram of it at a
time in powder.

Galion. Ladies-bedstraw: dry and binding, stancheth blood: boiled in Oil, the
Oil is good to anoint a weary Traveller; inwardly it provokes lust.

(...). See the Root.

Genista. Broom: hot and dry in the second degree, clens and open the Stomach,
break the Stone in the Reins and Bladder, help the green sickness. Let such as
are troubled with heartqualms or faintings, forbear it, for it weakens the
Heart and Spirit Vital. See the Flowers.

Geranium. Cranebil, the diverse sorts of it, one of which is that which is
called Muscata, and in Sussex barbariously Muscovy; it is thought to be cool
and dry, helps hot swellings, and by its smell amends a hot brain.

Geranium Columbinum. Doves-foot; helps the wind Chollick, pains in the belly,
stone in the reins and bladder, and is singular good in ruptures, and inward
wounds. I suppose these are the general virtues of them all.

Gramen. (...); See the Root.

Gratiola. Hedge- Hysop, purges water and phlegm, but works very churlishly.
Gesner commends it in Dropsies.

Asphodelus foem. See the Root.

Hepatica, Lichen. Liverwort, cold and dry, excellent good for Inflammations of
the Liver, or any other Inflammations, yellow Jaundice.

Hedera Arborea, (...). Tree and GroundIvy. Tree-Ivy helps Ulcers, Burnings,
Scaldings, the bad effects of the Spleen; the Juice snuffed up in the nose,
purges the head, it is admirable for surfets or headache, or any other ill
effects coming of drunkenness, and therefore the Poets feigned Bacchus to have
his head bound round with them. Your best way is to boil them in the same
liquor you got your surfeit by drinking.

Ground Ivy is that which usually is called Alehoof, hot and dry, the Juice
helps noise in the ears, fistulaes, gouts, stoppings of the Liver, it
strengthens the Reins and stops the terms, helps the yellow Jaundice, and other
diseases coming of stopping of the Liver, and is excellent for wounded people.

Herba Camphorata. Stinking Ground Pine, is of a drying faculty, and therefore
stops defluxions either in the eyes, or upon the Lungues, the gout, cramps,
palsies, aches, strengthens the Nerves.

Herba Moschata. Mentioned even now, me thinks the College should not have
forgotten themselves so soon: How can a man that forgets himself remember his
patient?

Herba Paralysis, Primula veris. Primroses, or Cowslips, which you will. The
Leaves help pains in the head and joints; see the Flowers which are most in use.

Herba Paris. Herb True-love, or One-berry. Pena and (...), affirm it resists
poison. Mathiolus says it takes away evil done by witchcraft, and affirms it
by experience, as also long lingering sickness; however it is good for wounds,
falls, bruises, apostumes, inflammations, ulcers in the privities. Herb
True-love, is very cold in temperature. You may take half a dram of it at a
time in powder.

Herba Roberti. A kind of Cranebil.

Herba venti, Anemone. Wind-flower; the Juice snuffed up the nose purges the
head, it cleanses filthy Ulcers, increases milk in Nurses, and outwardly by
Ointment helps Leprosies.

Herniaria. The same with Empetron.

Helxine. Pellitory of the wall. Cold, moist, clensing, helps the stone and
gravel in the Kidneys, difficulty of Urine, sore throats, pains in the ears the
Juice being dropped in them; outwardly it helps the shingles and St. Anthonies
fire.

Hippoglossum. Horstongue, Tongueblade or Double-tongue. The Roots help the
strangury, provoke urine, case the hard labor of women, provoke the terms, the
Herb helps ruptures and the fits of the mother, it is hot in the second degree,
dry in the first, boil it in white Wine.

Hippolapathum. Patience, or Monks Reubarb: see the Roots.

Hipposelinum. Alexanders, or Alisanders. Provoke urin, expel the Afterbirth,
help the strangury, expel wind.

Horminum, Clary; hot and dry in the third degree; helps weakness in the back,
stops the running of the Reins, and the whites in women, provokes the Terms,
and helps women that are barren through coldness, or moisture, or both, causes
fruitfulness, but is hurtful for the memory. The usual way of taking it, is to
fry it with Butter, or make a Tansie with it.

Hydropiper. Arsmart. Hot and dry, consumes all cold swellings, and blood
congealed by bruises and stripes; applied to the place, it helps that aposthume
in the joints, commonly called a Felon: (but in Sussex, an Andicom) If you put
a handful of it under the saddle upon a tired horses back, it will make him
travel fresh and lustily; strewed in a chamber kills all the Fleas there; this
is the hottest Arsmart, and is unfit to be given inwardly: there is a milder
sort, called Persicaria, which is of a cooler milder quality, drying, excellent
good for putrified ulcers, kill worms: I had almost forgot that the former is
an admirable remedy for the Gout, being roasted between two Tiles and applied to
the grieved place, and yet I had it from Dr Butler too.

Hysopus. Hysop. Helps Coughs, shortness of Breath, Wheezing, Distillations
upon the Lungues; it is of a clensing quality: kills worms in the body, amends
the whole color of the body, helps the Dropsy and Spleen, sore Throats, and
nois in the Ears. See Syrup of Hysop.

Hyoscyamus etc. Henbane. The white Henbane is held to be cold in the third
degree, the black or common Henbane and the yellow, in the fourth: They
stupifie the senses, and therefore not to be takn inwardly; outwardly applied,
they help inflammations, hot gouts; applied to the temples, they provoke sleep.

Hypericon. St. John's wort. It is as gallant a Wound-herb as any is, either
given inwardly, or outwardly applied to the wound; it is hot and dry, opens
stoppings, helps spitting and vomiting of blood, it cleanses the Reins,
provokes the Terms, helps congealed blood in the Stomach and Meseraick Veins,
the Fallingsickness, Palsy, Cramps and Aches in the joints; you may give it in
powder or any convenient decoction.

Hypoglottis Laurus Alexandrina. Laurel of Alexandria, provokes urin and the
terms, and is held to be a singular help to women in travail.

Hypoglossum, the same with Hippoglossum before, only different names given by
different Authors, the one deriving his name from the tongue of a horse, of
which form the Leaf is; the other from the form of the little leaf, because
small leaves like small tongues grow upon the greater, but whether the College
knew this (...) no, is some question.

Iberis Cardamantice. Sciatica-cresses. I suppose so called because they help
the Sciatica, or Huckle bone-gout.

Ingunialis, Aster. Serwort, or Shartwort: being bruised and applied they help
swellings, botches, and venerious buboes in the groyn, whence they took their
name, as also inflammation and falling out of the fundament.

(...). See the Roots.

Isatis, Glastum. Woad. Drying and binding; the side being bathed with it, it
eases pains in the spleen, cleanses filthy corroding gnawing ulcers.

Iva Arthritica. The same with Camaepytis.

Juncus odoratus. The same with Schoenanthus.

Labrum veneris. The same with Dipsacus.

(...). Lettice. Cold and moist, cool the inflammation of the stomach commonly
called heart-burning, provoke sleep, resist drunkenness and take away the ill
effects of it, cool the blood, quench thirst, breed milk, and are good for
chollerick bodies, and such as have a frenzy, or are sienitique, or as the
vulgar say frantic. They are far wholsommer eaten boiled than raw.

Lagobus, Herba Leporina. A kind of Trefoil growing in France and Spain. Let
them that live there look after the virtues of it.

Lavendula. Lavender: hot and dry in the third degree; The temples and forehead
bathed with the juice of it, as also the smell of the herb helps swoonings,
Catalepsis, Falling sickness, provided it be not accompanied with a Fever. See
the flowers.

Laurcola Laurel. The leaves purge upward and downward, they are good for
rhewmatick people to chew in their mouths, for they draw forth much water.

Laurus Bay Tree: the leaves are hot and dry, resist drunkenness, they gently
bind and help diseases in the bladder, help the stinging of Bees and Wasps,
metigate the pain of the stomach, dry and heal, open obstructions of the liver
and spleen, resist the pestelence.

Lappa minor. The lesser Burdock.

(...). Mastick-tree, both the leaves and bark of it stop sluxes, (being hot
and dry in the second degree) spitting and pissing of blood, and the falling
out of the fundament.

Lens palustris. Duckmeat: cold and moist in the second degree, helps
inflammations, hot swellings, and the falling out of the fundament, being warmed
and applied to the place.

Lepidium Piperites. Dittander, Pepper-wort, (...). (...).
or (...): a hot fiery sharp herb, admirable for the Gout being applied to the
place, being (...).
only held in the hand it helps the toothach, and withal leaves a wan color in
the hand that holds it.

Livisticum. Lovage: Clears the sight, takes away redness and freckles from the
face.

Libanotis Coronaria. See Rosemary. Linaria. Toad-flax, or Wild-flax; hot and
dry, cleanse the reins and bladder, provoke urin, open the stoppinps of the
liver and spleen, and help diseases coming thereof: outwardly they take away
yellowness and deformity of the skin.

Lillium convallium. Lilly of the Valley. See the flowers.

Lingua Cervina. Hart's-tongue: drying and binding, stops blood, the terms and
fluxes, opens stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, and diseases thence arising.
The like quantity of Hartstongue, Knotgrass and Comfry Roots being boiled in
water, and a draught of the decoction drunk every morning, and the materials
which have boiled applied to the place, is a notable remedy for such as are
burst.

Limonium. Sea-bugloss, or Marsh-bugloss, or as some will have it Sea-Lavender:
the seeds being very drying and binding, stop fluxes and the terms, help the
chollick and strangury.

Lotus urbana. Authors make some flutter about this Herb, I conceive the best
take it to be Trisolium Odoratum, Sweet Tresoyl, which is of a temperate
nature, cleanses the eyes gently of such things as hinder the sight, cures
green wounds, ruptures, or burstness, helps such as piss blood or are bruised,
and secures garments from moths.

Lupulus. Hops. Opening, clensing, provoke urine; the young sprouts open
stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, cleanse the blood, clear the skin, help scabs
and itch, help agues, purge choler: they are usually boyled-and taken as they
eat Sparagus, but if you would keep them, for they are excellent for these
diseases, you may make them into a Conserve, (as you shall be taught hereafter)
or into a Syrup.

Lychnitis Coronaria: or as others more properly from the Greek write it,
Lychnis. Rose Campion. I know no great physical virtue it has.

Macis. See the Barks.

Magistrantia etc. Masterwort: Hot and dry in the third degree; it is singular
good against poison, pestilence, corrupt and unwholsom air, helps windiness in
the stomach, causes an appetite to ones victuals, very profitable in falls and
bruises, congealed and clotted blood, the bitings of mad-dogs; the leaves
chewed in the mouth, cleanse the brain of superfluous humors, thereby preventing
Lethargies, and Apoplexes.

Malva. Mallows. The best of Authors account wild Mallows to be best, and hold
them to be cold and moist in the first degree; they are profitable in the
bitings of venomous beasts, the stinging of Bees and Wasps etc. Inwardly they
resist poison, provoke to stool; outwardly they assuage hard swellings of the
Privities or other places, in Clysters they help roughness and fretting of the
Guts, Bladder, or Fundament; and so they do being boiled in water and the
decoction drunk, as I have proved in this present Epidemical disease, the
Bloody Flux.

Majorana. See Amaracus.

Mandragora. Mandrakes. Fit fot no vulgar use, but only to be used in cooling
Ointments.

Marrubium, album, nigrum, foetidum. Marrubium album, is common Horehound. Hot
in the second degree, and dry in the third, opens the Liver and Spleen,
cleanses the breast and lungs, helps old Coughs, pains in the sides, Phtisicks,
or ulceration of the lungues, it provokes the Terms, eases hard labor in
Childbearing, brings away the afterbirth. See the Syrups.

Marrubium, nigrum, and foetidum. Black and stinking Horehound, I take to be
all one. Hot and dry in the third degree; cure the bitings of mad-dogs, wast
and consume hard knobs in the fundament and matrix, cleanse filthy Ulcers.

Unless by stinking Horehound the College should mean that which Fuchsius calls
Stachys, if they do, it is hot and dry but in the first degree, and a singular
Remedy to keep wounds from inflammation.

Marum. Herb Mastich. Hot and dry in the third degree, good against Cramps and
Convulsions.

Matricaria. Featherfew. Hot in the third degree, dry in the second; opens,
purges; a singular remedy for diseases incident to the Matrix, and other
diseases incident to women, eases their travail, and infirmities coming after
it; it helps the Vertigo or dissiness of the head, Melancholy, sad thoughts:
you may boil it either alone, or with other Herbs fit for the same purpose,
with which this Treatise will furnish you: applied to the wrists, it helps the
Ague.

Matrisylva. The same with Caprifolium.

Meliotus. Melilot. Inwardly taken, provokes urine, breaks the Stone, cleanses
the Reins and Bladder, cutteth and cleanses the Lungs of tough Phlegm; the juice
dropped into the eyes, cleers the sight, into the ears, mitigates pain and
noise there; the head bathed with the juice mixed with Vinegar, takes away the
pains thereof: outwardly in Pultisses, it asswageth swellings in the privities,
and else where.

Mellissa. Bawm. Hot and dry; outwardly mixed with salt and applied to the
neck, help the Galen.
Kings Evil, bitings of mad-dogs, venomous (...)
beasts, and such as cannot hold their necks as they should do; inwardly it is
an excellent remedy for a cold and moist stomach, cheers the heart, refreshes
the mind, takes away grief, sorrow, and care, instead of which it produces joy
and mirth. See the Syrup.

Mentha sativa. Garden Mints, Spear Mints. Are hot and dry in the third degree,
provoke hunger, are wholesome for the stomach, stay vomiting, stop the terms,
help sore heads in in children, strengthen the stomach, cause digestion; Pliny.
outwardly applied, they help the bitings Galen.
of mad dogs: Yet they hinder conception, and are naught for wounded people,
they say by reason of an antipathy between them and Iron.

Mentha aquatica. Water Mints. Ease pains of the belly, headache, and vomiting,
gravel in the Kidneys and Stone.

Methastrum. Horse-mint. I know no difference between them and Water Mints.

(...), mas, foemina. Mercury, male and foemale, They are both hot and dry in
the second degree, clensing, digesting, they purge watery humors, and further
conception. Theophrastus relates that if a woman use to eat either the male, or
foemale Mercury, two or three days after conception, she shall bring forth a
child either male or foemale according to the sex of the herb she eats.

Mezereon. Spurg-Olive, or Widdow-wail. A dangerous purge, better let alone
than meddled with.

Millesolium. Yarrow. Meanly cold and binding, an healing Herb for wounds,
stancheth Galen.
bleeding; and some say the Juice snuffed up the nose, causes it to bleed,
whence it was called, Nose-bleed; it stops Lasks, and the Terms in women,
helps the running of the reins, helps inflammations and excoriations of the
Yard, as also inflammations of wounds.

Muscus. Moss. Is something cold and binding, yet usually retains a smatch of
the property of the tree it grows on, therefore that which grows upon Oaks is
very dry and binding; Serapio says that it being insused in Wine and the Wine
drunk, it stays vomiting and fluxes, as also the whites in women.

Myrtus. Mirtle-tree. The Leaves are of a cold earthy quality, drying and
binding, good for fluxes, spitting, vomiting, and pissing of blood, stop the
Whites and Reds in women.

Nardus. See the Root.

Nasturtium, Aquaticum, Hortense. Watercresses and Garden-cresses.

Garden-cresses are hot and dry in the fourth Dioscorldes.
degree, good for the Scurvy, Sciatica, hard swellings, yet do they trouble the
belly, ease pains of the Spleen, provoke lust.

Watercresses are hot and dry, cleanse the blood, help the Scurvy, provoke
urine and the terms, break the stone, help the green sickness, cause a fresh
lively color.

Nasturtium Album, Thlaspi. Treacle-mustard. Hot and dry in the third degree,
purges violently, dangerous for women with child: Outwardly it is applied with
profit to the Gout.

Nicotiani. Tobacco. And in reciting the (...)
virtues of this herb, I will follow Clustus, that I know not what better name
to give it, Old headaches, continual headaches: take which ye will.
none should think I do it without an Author. It is hot and dry in the second
degree, and of a clensing nature, the leaves warmed and applied to the head are
excellent good, in * inveterate headaches and Negrims, if the diseases come
through cold or wind, change them often till the diseases be gone, help such
whose necks be stiff, it eases the faults of the breast, Asthmaes or hard
phlegm in tho lappets of the lungues, eases the pains of the stomach and
windiness thereof being heat hot by the fire and applied to it; eases the
pains of the spleen being moistened in vinegar and applied hot to the side,
they loosen the belly and This I know by experience even where many other
medicines have sailed.
kill worms being applied to it in like manner, they break the stone being
applied in like manner to the region of the bladder, help the rickets, being
applied to the belly and sides; applied to the navil they give present ease to
the fits of the mother, they take away cold ach in the joints applied to them,
boiled, the liquor absolutely and speedily cures scabs and itch, neither is
there any better salve in the world for wounds than may be made of it, for it
cleanses, (...) out the filth though it lie in the bones, brings up the flesh
from the bottom, and all this it (...) speedily, it cures wounds made with
(...), and for this Clusius brings many (...) tedious here to relate; It is an
(...) thing for Carbuncles, and Plaguesores, (...) to none; green wounds 'twill
cure in a trico, Ulcers and Gangrenes very speedily, not only in men but also
in beasts: therefore the Indians dedicated it to their god. Taken in a pipe it
has almost as many virtues, it eases (...), takes away the sense of hunger
and thirst, provokes to stool, he says, the Indians will travail four days
without either meat or drink by only chewing a little of this (made up like a
Pill) in their mouths; It eases the body of supersluous humors, opens
stoppings. Monardus also confirms this judgment, and indeed a man might fill a
whole Volumn with the virtues of it. See the Ointment of Tobacco

(...). Money-wort, or Herb Twopence; cold dry, binding, helps Fluxes, stops
the Terms, helps ulcers in the lungues; outwardly it is a special herb for
wounds.

Nymphaea. See the Flowers.

(...). Basil, hot and moist. Simeou Sethi, says the smell of Basil is good for
the head, but Hollerius (and he no mean Physician neither) says the continual
smell of it hurts the brain and breeds Scorpions there, and asfirms his own
knowledge of it, and that is the reason (says he) there is such an Antipathy
between it and (...), which I am confident there is, the truth is, it will
quickly putrify and breed worms. Hollerius says, they are venomous; and
that is the reason the name Basilicon was given to it: The best use that I know
of it, is, it gives speedy deliverance to women in travail. Let them not take
above half a dram of it at a time in powder, and be sure also the birth be
ripe, else it causes abortion.

Oleae folia. Olive-leaves; they are hard to come by here.

Ononis. Rest-harrow. See the Roots.

Ophiogloslon. Adders-tongue: the leaves are very drying, being boiled in Oil
they make a dainty green Balsom for green wounds: taken inwardly, they help
inward wounds.

Origanum. Organy: a kind of wild Marjoram; hot and dry in the third degree;
helps the bitings of venomous beasts, such as have taken Opium, Hemlock, or
Poppy; provokes urine, brings down the terms, helps old coughs; in ointment it
helps scabs and itch.

Oxylapathum. Sorrel. See Acetosa.

Papaver etc. Poppies; white, black, or erratick. I refer you to the Syrups of
each

Parietaria. Given once before under the name of Helxine.

(...). Parsnips. See the Roots.

Persicaria. See Hydropiper: this is the milder sort of Arsmart I described
there: If ever you find it amongst the Compounds, take it under that notion.

Pentaphyllum. Cynkfoil: very drying, yet but meanly hot, if at all; helps
ulcers in the mouth, roughness of the windpipe, (whence comes hoarsness and
Couges etc.) helps fluxes, creeping ulcers and the yellow jaundice; they say
one leaf cures a quotidian ague, three a tertian, and four a quartan: I know it
will cure agues without this curiosity, if a wise man have the handling of it;
otherwise a Cart load will not do it.

Petroselinum. Parsley. See smallage

Pes Columbinus. See Geranium.

Persicarum folia. Peach leaves: they are a gentle, yet a complete purger of
choler, and diseases coming from thence, fit for children because of their
gentleness. You may boil them in whiteWine, a handful is enough at a time.

Pilosella. Mousear: once before, and that is often enough.

Pithyusa. A new name for Spurge, of the last Edition.

Plantago. Plantane. Cold and dry, an herb though common, yet let none despise
it, for the decoction of it, prevails mightily against tormenting pains and
excoriations of the guts, bloody fluxes, it stops the terms, and spitting
Tragur.
of blood, (...), or Consumptions of the Dioscorides.
lungues, the running of the reins, and the whites in women, pains in the head,
and frenzies: outwardly it cleers the sight, takes away inflammations, scabs,
itch, the shingles, and all spreading sores, and is as wholesome an herb as can
grow about a house.

Polium etc. Polley, or Pellamountain: all Dioscorides.
the sorts are hot in the second degree, and dry in the third: helps dropsies,
the yellow-jaundice, infirmities of the spleen, and provokes urine.

Polygonum. Knotgrass.

Polytricum. Maidenhair.

Portulaca Purslain: Cold and moist in the second or third degree; cools hot
stomachs, and (I remember since I was a child that) it is admirable for one
that has his teeth on edge by eating sour apples, it cools the blood, liver,
and is good for hot diseases, or inflammations in any of these places, stops
fluxes, and the terms, and helps all inward inflammations whatsoever.

Porrum. Leeks. See the Roots.

Primula Veris. See Cowslips, or the Flowers, which you will.

Prunella. Self-heal, Carpenters-Herb, and in Sussex Sicklewort. Moderately hot
and dry, binding. See Bugle. So shall I not need to write one thing twice, the
virtues being the same.

Pulegium. Penyroyal: hot and dry in the third degree; provokes urine, breaks
the stone in the reins, (for I take it, the herb is chiefly apropriated to
those parts) strengthens women's backs, provokes the terms, eases their labor
in Childbed, brings away the afterbirth, stays vomiting, strengthens the
brain, (yea the very smell of it) breaks wind, and helps the Vertigo.

Pulmonari, arborea, and Symphytum maculosum. Lunguewort. I confess I searching
Authors for these, found out many sorts of Lungueworts, yet all agreed that
both these were one and the same; and helps infirmities of the Lungues, as
hoarceness, coughs, wheezing, shortness of breath etc. You may boil it in Hysop
water, or any other water that strengthens the Lungues.

Pulicaria. Fleabane; hot and dry in the third degree, helps the bitings of
venomous beasts, wounds and swellings, the yellow Jaundice, the
falling sickness, and such as cannot piss; it being burnt, the smoke of it kills
all the Gnats and Fleas in the chamber, as also Serpents if they be there; it
is dangerous for women with child.

Pyrus sylvestris. Wild Pear Tree. I know no virtue in the Leaves.

Pyrola. Wintergreen. Cold and dry, and very binding, stops fluxes, and the
terms in women, and is admirable good in green wounds.

Quercus folia. Oak Leaves: are much of the nature of the former, stay the
whites in women. See the Bark.

Ranunculus. Has got a sort of English names: Crowfoot, King-kob, Gold-cups,
Gold-knobs, Butter-flowers etc. they are of a notable hot quality, unfit to be
taken inwardly; If you bruise the Roots and apply them to a Plague Sore, they
are notable things to draw the venom to them. Also Apuleius says, that if they
be hanged about the neck of one that is lunatic in the wane of the Moon, the
Moon being in the first degree of Taurus, or Scorpio, it quickly rids him of
his disease.

Raparum folia. If they do not mean Turnepleaves, I know not what they mean,
nor it may be themselves neither, the greatest part of them having as much
knowledge in Simples, as a horse has in Hebrew. Rapum is a Turnep, but surely
Rapa is a word seldom used; If they do mean Turnep-leaves: when they are young
and tender, they are held to provoke urin.

Rosmarinum. Rosemary, hot and dry in the second degree, binding, stops fluxes
help stuffings Scrapio.
in the head, the yellow Jaundice, helps the Dioscorides.
memory, expels wind: See the Flowers.

Rosa Solis. See the Water.

Rosa Alba, Rubra, Damascena. White, Red, and Damask Roses. I would some body
would do so much as ask the College wherefore they set the Leaves down.

Rumex. Dock: all the ordinary sort of Docks are of a cool and drying
substance, and therefore stops fluxes; and the Leaves are seldom used in
Physic.

Rubus Idaeus. Raspis, Rasberries, or Hindberries: I know no great virtue in
the Leaves.

Ruta. Rue, or Herb of grace; hot and dry in the third degree, consumes the
seed, and is an enemy to generation, helps difficulty of breathing, and
inflammations of the lungues, pains in the side, inflammations of the Yard and
Matrix, is naught for women with child: An hundred such things are quoted by
Dioscorides. This I am sure of, no Herb resists poison more. And some think
Mithridates, that renowned King of Pontus, fortified his body against poison
with no other medicine. It strengthens the heart exceedingly, and no Herb
better than this in Pestilential times, take it what manner you will or can.

Ruta Muraria. See Adianthum.

Sabina. Savin; hot and dry in the third degree, potently provokes the terms,
expels both birth and afterbirth, they (boiled in oil and used in Ointments)
stay creeping ulcers, scour away spots, freckles, and sunburning from the face,
the belly anointed with it kills worms in children.

Salvia. Sage: hot and dry in the second or third degree, binding, it stays
abortion in such women as are subject to come before their times, it causes
fruitfulness, it is singular good for the brain, strengthens the senses and
memory, helps spitting and vomiting of blood; outwardly, heat hot with a little
Vinegar and applied to the side, helps stitches, and pains in the sides.

Salix. Willow-leaves; are cold, dry, and binding, stop spitting of blood and
fluxes; the boughs stuck about a chamber, wonderfully cool the air, and refresh
such as have fevers; the leaves applied to the head, help hot diseases there,
and frenzies.

Sampsucum. Marjoram.

Sanicula. Sanicle: hot and dry in the second degree, cleanses wounds and
ulcers.

Saponaria. Sope-wort, or Bruise-wort; vulgarly used in bruises and cut
fingers, and is of notable use in the French-pocks.

Satureia. Savory. Summer-savory, is hot and dry in the third degree,
Winter-savory is not so hot, both of them expel wind gallantly, and that (they
say) is the reason why they are boiled with Pease and Beans, and other such
windy things: it is a good fashion and pity it should be left.

Saxifragia alba. White Saxifrage; breaks wind, helps the chollick and stone.

Scabiosa. Scabious; hot and dry in the second degree, cleanses the breast and
lungues, helps old rotten coughs, and difficulty of breathing, provokes urine
and cleanses the bladder of filthy stuff, breaks Aposthumes, and cures Scabs
and Itch. Boil it in white wine.

Scariola. An Italian name for Succory.

Schoenanthus. Schaenanth, Squinanth, or Chamels-hay; hot and binding. Galen
says it causes headache, believe him that list; Dioscorides says it digests
and opens the passages of the veins: surely it is as great an expeller of wind
as any is.

Scordium. Water-Germander; hot and dry, cleanses ulcers in the inward parts,
it provokes urine and the terms, opens stoppings of the liver, spleen, reins,
bladder, and matrix, it is a great counterpoyson, and eases the breast
oppressed with phlegm. See Diascordium.

Scrophularia. Figwort, so called of Scrophula, the Kings Evil, which it cures,
they say by being only hung about the neck if not, bruise it and apply it to
the place, it helps the Piles or Hemorrhoids, and (they say) being hung about
the neck preserves the body in health.

Sedum. And all his sorts. See Barba Jovis.

Senna. In this give me leave to stick close to Mesue, as an imparaleld Author:
it heats in the second degree and dries in the first, cleanses, purges, and
digesteth, it carries downwards both choler, phlegm, and melancholy, it
cleanses the brain, heart, Liver, Spleen, it cheers the senses, opens
obstructions, takes away dullness of sight, preserves youth, helps deafness (if
purging will help it) helps melancholy and madness, keeps back old age,
resists resolution of the nerves, (...).
pains in the head, scabs, itch, fallingsickness, the windiness of it is
corrected with a little Ginger. You may boil half an ounce of it at a time, in
Water or white Wine, but boil it not too much; half an ounce is a moderate dose
to be boiled for any reasonable body.

Scrpillum. Mother-of-Time, Wild Time; it is hot and dry in the third degree,
it provokes the terms gallantly, as also helps the strangury (...).
or stoppage of urine, gripings in the belly, ruptures, Galen.
convulsions, inflammations of the Liver, Lethargy, and infirmities of the
spleen: boil it in white Wine.

Sigillum Solomonis. Solomon's Seal. See the Root.

Smyrnium. Alexanders of Creet.

Solanum. Nightshade: very cold and dry, binding, it is somewhat dangerous given
inwardly, unless by a skilful hand; outwardly it helps the Shingles, St
Anthonies fire, and other hot inflammations.

Soldanella. Bindweed, hot and dry in the second degree, it opens obstructions
of the Liver, Galen.
and purges watery humors, and is therefore very profitable in dropsies, it is
very hurtful to the stomach, and therefore if taken inwardly it had need be
well corrected with Cinnamon, Ginger, or Annis-seeds etc. Yet the German
Physicians affirm that it cures the dropsy being only bruised and applied to
the navil and something lower, and then it needs not be taken inwardly at all.

Sonchus levis Asper. Sowthistles smooth and rough; they are of a cold watery,
yet binding quality, good for frenzies, they increase milk in Nurses, and cause
the children which they nurse to have a good color, help gnawings of the
stomach coming of a hot cause; outwardly they help inflammations, and hot
swellings, cool the heat of the fundament and privities.

(...) Chirurgorum. Flixweed: drying without any manifest heat or coldness, it
is usually found about old ruinous buildings, it is so called because of its
virtue in stopping fluxes (...) highly commends it, nay elevates it up to the
skies for curing old wounds and fistulaes; which though our modern Chyrurgians
despise, yet if it were in the hands of a wise man, such as Paracelsus was, it
may do the wonders he says it will.

Spinachia. Spinach. I never read any physical virtues of it.

Spina alba. See the Root.

Spica. See Nardus.

Staebe. Silver Knapweed: The virtues be the same with Scabious, and some think
the Herbs too; though I am of another opinion.

Staechas. French Lavender, Cassidony, is a great counterpoyson, open
obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, cleanses the matrix and bladder, brings
out corrupt humors, provokes urine. There is another Staechas mentioned here by
the name of Amaranthus, in English, Golden flower, or Flower-gentle: the
flowers of which expel worms; being boiled, the water kills Lice and Nits.

Succisa, Monsus Dioboli. Devils-bit: Hot and dry in the second degree:
inwardly taken, it eases the fits of the mother, and breaks wind, takes away
swellings in the mouth, and slimy phlegm that sticks to the jaws, neither is
there a more present remedy in the world for those cold swellings in the neck,
which the vulgar call, the Almonds of the ears, than this Herb bruised and
applied to them.

Suchaha. And Egyptian Thorn. Very hard, if not impossible to come by here.

And here the College make another racket about the several sorts of Comfryes,
which I pass by with silence, having spoken to them before.

Tanacetum. Tansie: hot in the second degree, and dry in the third; the very
smell of it stays abortion, or miscarriages in women; so it does being bruised
and applied to their navils, provokes urine, and eases pains in making water;
and is a special help against the Gout.

Taraxacon. Dandelyon, or to write better French, Dent-de-lyon, for in plain
English it is called Lyons-tooth; it is a kind of Succory, and thither I refer
you.

Tamariscus. Tamaris. It has a dry clensing quality, and has a notable virtue
against the Galen.
Rickets, and infirmities of the Spleen, provokes Dioscorides.
the terms.

Telephium. A kind of Orpine.

Thlaspi. See Nasturtium.

Thymbra. A wild Savory.

Thymum. Time. Hot and dry in the third degree; helps coughs and shortness of
breath, provokes the terms, brings away dead children and the afterbirth,
purges phlegm, cleanses the breast and lungues, reins and matrix, helps the
Sciatica, pains in the breast, expels wind in any part of the body, resists
fearfulness and melancholy, continual pains in the head, and is profitable for
such as have the Falling Sickness to smell to.

Thymaelea. The Greek name for SpurgeOlive: Mezereon being the Arabic name.

Tithymalus, Esula etc. Spurge. Hot and dry in the fourth degree; a dogged
purge, better let alone than taken inwardly; hair anointed with the juice of it
will fall off; it kills Fish, being mixed with any thing that they will eat:
outwardly it cleanses ulcers, takes away freckles, sunburning and morphew from
the face.

Tormentilla. See the Root.

Trinitatis herba. Pansies, or Hearts-ease: They are cold and moist both Herbs
and Flowers, excellent against inflamatious of the breast or lungs,
Convulsions, and Falling sickness, also they are held to be good for the French
Pocks.

Trifolium. Trefoil: dry in the third degree, and cold. The ordinary Meadow
Trefoil, (for their word comprehends all sorts) cleanses the guts of slimy
humors that stick to them, being used either in Drinks or Clysters; outwardly
they take away inflammations, Pliny says the Leaves stand upright before a
storm, which I have observed to be true oftener than once or twice, and that in
a clear day, 14. hours before the storm came.

Tussilago. Coltsfoot: something cold and dry, and therefore good for
inflammations, they are admirable good for Coughs, and Consumptions of the
lungues, shortness of breath etc. It is often used and with good success taken
in a Tobacco-pipe, being cut and mixed with a little oil of Annis seeds. See
the Syrup of Coltsfoot.

Valeriana. Valerian, or Setwal See the Roots

Verbascum. Thapsus Barbatus. Mullin, or Higtaper. It is something dry, and of
a digesting, clensing quality, stops fluxes and the hemorroids, it cures
hoarcness, the cough, and such as are broken winded; the Leaves worn in the
shoes provokes the terms, (especially in such Virgins as never had them) but
they must be worn next their feet: also they say, that the Herb being gathered
when the Sun is in Virgo, and the Moon in Aries, in their mutual Antiscions,
helps such of the falling sickness as do but carry it about them: worn under
the feet it helps such as are troubled with the fits of the mother.

Verbena. Vervain; hot and dry, a great opener, clenser, and healer, it helps
the yellow jaundice, defects in the reins and bladder, pains in the head, if it
be but bruised and hung about the neck; all diseases in the secret parts of men
and women; made into an ointment it is a sovereign remedy for old headaches,
called by the name of (...) as also frenzies; it cleers the skin, and causes a
lovely color.

Veronica: See Betonica Pauli.

Violarla. Violet Leaves: They are cool, ease pains in the head proceeding of
heat, and frenzies, either inwardly taken, or outwardly applied, heat of the
stomach, or inflammation of the lungues.

Vitis Vinifera. The Manuted Vine, Vines of different climates, have different
operations. I write of English Vines.
The Leaves are binding and cool withal; the burnt ashes of the sticks of a
Vine, scour the teeth and make them as white as snow; the Leaves stop bleeding,
fluxes, heart-burnings, vomitings, as also the longing of women with child.

Vincitoxicum. Swallow-wort. A pultis made with the Leaves helps sore breasts,
and also soreness of the matrix.

Virga Pastoris. A third name for Teazles. (Thus you see the College will be
surer than the Miller who took his toll but twice.) See Dipsacus.

Virga Auria. See Consolida

Ulmaria. See the Root. Meadsweet.

Umbilious Veneris. Navel-wort; Cold, dry and binding, therefore helps all
inflammations; they are very good for kib'd heels, being bathed with it, and a
leaf laid over the sore.

Urtica: Nettles; an herb so well known, that you may find them by the feeling
in the darkest night: they are something hot, not very hot; the juice stops
bleeding; they provoke lust exceedingly, help difficulty of breathing,
pleurisies, inflammations of the lungues, that troublsome cough that women call
the Chincough; they exceedingly break the stone, provoke urine, and help such
as cannot hold their necks upright. Boil them in white Wine.

Usnea. Moss; once before.

FLOWERS.
BOrrage, and Bugloss flowers, strengthen the heart and brain, and are
profitable in Fevers.

Chamomel flowers, heat and assuage swellings, inflammations of the bowels,
dissolve wind, are profitable given in Clysters or drink, to such as are
troubled with the Chollick, or Stone.

Staechas, opens stoppings in the bowels, and strengthens the whole body.

Saffron powerfully concocts, and sends out whatever humor offends the body,
drives back inflammations, being applied outwardly, increases lust, provokes
urine.

Clove-Gilliflowers, resist the pestilence, strengthen the heart, liver, and
stomach, and provokes lust.

Schoenanth (which I think I touched slightly amongst the Herbs) provokes urine
potently, provokes the terms, breaks wind, helps such as spit or vomit blood,
eases pains of the stomach, reins, and spleen, helps dropsies, convulsions,
and inflammations of the womb.

Lavender-flowers, resist all cold afflictions of the brain, convulsions
falling sickness, they strengthen cold stomachs, and open obstructions of the
liver, they provoke urine and the terms, bring forth the birth and afterbirth.

Hops, opens stoppings of the bowels, and for that cause Beer is better than
Ale.

Bawm flowers, cheer the heart and vital spirits, strengthen the stomach.

Rosemary-flowers, strengthen the brain exceedingly and resist madness, clear
the sight.

Winter-Gilliflowers, or Wall-flowers (as some call them) help inflammation of
the womb, provoke the terms, and help ulcers of the mouth.

Hony-suckles, provoke urine, ease the pains of the spleen, and such as can
hardly fetch their breath.

Mallows, help Coughs.

Red Roses, cool, bind, strengthen both vital and animal virtue, restore such
as are in consumptions, strengthen. There are so many Compositions of them
which maks me the briefer in the Simples.

Violets, (to wit the blew ones, for I know little or no use of the white in
physic) cool and moisten, provoke sleep loosen the belly, resist fevers,
help inflammations, correct the heat of choler, ease pains in the head, help
the roughness of the windpipe, diseases in the throat, inflammations in the
breast and sides, pluresies, open stoppings of the liver, and help the yellow
Jaundice.

Cichory, (or Succory as the vulgar calls it) cools and strengthens the liver:
so does Endive.

Water Lillies ease pains of the head coming of choler and heat, provoke
sleep, cool inflammations, and the heat in seavers.

Pomegranate-flowers, dry and bind, stop fluxes, and the terms in women.

Cowslips, strengthen the brain, senses, and memory, exceedingly, resist all
diseases there, as convulsions, falling sickness, palsies etc.

Centaury, purges choler and gross humors, helps the yellow Jaundice, opens
obstructions of the liver, helps pains of the spleen, provokes the terms,
brings out the birth and afterbirth.

Elder, flowers, help dropsies, cleanse the blood, clear the skin, open
stoppings of the liver and spleen, and diseases arising there from.

Bean-flowers, clear the skin, stop humors flowing into the eyes.

Peach-tree flowers, purge choler gently.

Broom-flowers, purge water, and are good in dropsies

The temperature of all these differ either very little or not at all from the
Herbs. And now I think I have done full out as well as the College, that named
three times as many and gave the virtues of none.

The way of using the Flowers I did forbear, because most of them may, and are
usually, made into Conserves, of which you may take the quantity of a Nutmeg,
in the morning; all of them may be kept dry a year, and Boiled with other herbs
conducing to the cures they do.

FRUITS and their BUDS.
GReen Figs, are held to be of ill juice, but the best is we are not much
troubled with them in England; dry Figs helps coughs, cleanse the breast, and
help infirmities of the lungues, shortness of wind, they loose the belly, purge
the reins, help inflammations of the liver and spleen; outwardly they dissolve
swellings; some say the continual eating of them makes men lousie.

Pine-Nuts, restore such as are in consumptions, amend the failings of the
lungues, concoct phlegm, and yet are naught for such as are troubled with the
headache.

Dates, are binding, stop eating ulcers being applied to them, they are very
good for weak stomachs, for they soon digest, and breed good nourishment, they
help infirmities of the reins, bladder, and womb.

Sebestens, cool choler, violent heat of the stomach, help roughness of the
tongue and windpipe, cool the reins and bladder.

Raisons of the Sun, help infirmities of the breast and liver, restore
Consumptions, gently cleanse and move to stool.

Walnuts, kill worms, resist the Pestilence, (I mean the green ones, not the
dry.)

Capers, eaten before meals, provoke hunger.

Nutmegs, strengthen the brain, stomach, and liver, provoke urin, ease the
pains of the spleen, stop looseness, ease pains of the head, and pains in the
joints, ad strength to the body, take away weakness coming of cold, and cause a
sweet breath.

Cloves help digestion, stop looseness, provoke lust, and quicken the sight.

Pepper, binds, expels wind, helps the chollick, quickens digestion oppressed
with cold, heats the stomach, (for all that old women say, it is cold in the
stomach.)

Quinces, See the Compositions.

Pears are grateful to the stomach, drying, and therefore help fluxes.

All Plums that are sharp or sour, are binding, the sweet are loosning.

Cucumers, or (if you will) Cowcumbers, cool the stomach, and are good against
ulcers in the bladder.

Gauls, are exceeding binding, help ulcers in the mouth, wasting of the gums,
eases the pains of the teeth, helps the falling out of the womb and fundament,
makes the hair black.

Pompions are a cold and moist fruit, of small nourishment, they provoke urine,
outwardly applied, the flesh of them help inflammations and burnings, being
applied to the forehead they help inflammations of the eyes.

Melones, called in London Musk-millions, have few other virtues.

Apricocks are very grateful to the stomach, and dry up the humors thereof,
Peaches, are held to do the like,

Cubebs, are hot and dry in the third degree, they expel wind, and cleanse the
stomach of tough, and viscus humors, they ease the pains of the spleen, and
help cold diseases of the womb, they cleanse the head of slegm and strengthen
the brain, they heat the stomach and provoke lust.

Bitter Almonds, are hot in the first degree and dry in the second, they cleanse
and cut thick humors, cleanse the lungues; and eaten every morning they are held
to preserve from drunkenness.

Bay Berries, heat, expel wind, mitigate pains are excellent for cold
infirmities of the womb, and dropsies.

Cherries, are of different qualities according to their different taste, the
sweet are quickest of digestion, but the sour are most pleasing, to a hot
stomach, and procure appetite to ones meat.

Medlers, are strengthening to the stomach, binding, and the green are more
binding than the rotten, and the dry than the green.

Olives, cool and bind.

English-Currance, cool the stomach, and are profitable in acute fevers, they
quench thirst, resist vomiting, cool the heat of choler, provoke appetite, and
are good for hot complexions.

Services, or (as we in Sussex call them) Checkers, are of the nature of
Medlars, but something weaker in operation.

Barberries, quench thrist, cool the heat of choler, resist the pestilence,
stay vomiting and fluxes, stop the terms, kill worms, help spitting of blood,
fasten the teeth, and strengthen the gums.

Strawberries, cool the stomach, liver, and blood, but are very hurtful for
such as have agues.

Winter-Cherries, potently provoke urine, and break the stone.

Cassia-fistula, is temperate in quality, gently, purges choler and phlegm,
clarrifies the blood, resists fevers, cleanses the breast and lungues, it
cools the reins, and thereby resists the breeding of the stone, it provokes
urine, and therefore is exceeding good for the running of the reins in men, and
the whites in women.

All the sorts of Myrobalans, purge the stomach, the Indian Myrobalans are held
to purge melancholy most especially, the other slegm; yet take heed you use
them not in stoppings of the bowels: they are cold and dry, they all strengthen
the heart, brain, and sinnews, strengthens the stomach, releeve the senses,
take away tremblings and heart-qualms. They are seldom used alone.

Prunes, are cooling and loosning.

Tamarinds, are cold and dry in the second degree, they purge choler, cool the
blood, stay vomiting, help the yellow Jaundice, quench thrist, cool hot
stomachs, and hot livers.

I omit the use of these also, as resting confident a child of three years old,
if you should give it Raisons of the sun or Cherries, would not ask how it
should take them.

SEEDS OR GRAINS.
COriander seed, hot and dry, expels wind, but is hurtful to the head, send up
unwholsom vapors to the brain, dangerous for mad people; therefore let them be
prepared as you shall be taught toward the latter end of the Book.

Fenugreek seeds, are of a softening discussing nature, they cease
inflammations, be they internal or external, bruised and mixed with vinegar they
ease the pains of the Spleen; being applied to the sides, help hardness and
swellings of the matrix; being boiled, the decoction helps scabby heads.

Linseed has the same virtues with Fenugreek.

Gromwel-seed, provokes urine, helps the chollich, breaks the stone, and expels
wind. Boil them in white Wine, but bruise them first.

Lupines, eases the pains of the spleen, kills worms, and casts them out;
outwardly, they cleanse filthy ulcers, and Gangrenes, help scabs, itch, and
inflammations.

Dill seed, increases milk in Nurses, expels wind, stays vomitings, provokes
urine; yet it duls the sight and is an enemy to generation.

Smallage seed, provokes urin and the terms, expels wind, resists poisons, and
eases inward pains, it opens stoppings in any part of the body, yet it is
hurtful for such as have the falling sickness, and for women with child.

Rocket seed, provokes urine, stirs up lust, increases seed, kills worms,
eases the pains of the spleen: use all these in like manner.

Basil seed: If we may believe Dioscorides and Crescentius, cheers the heart,
and strengthens a moist stomach, drives away melancholy, and provokes urine,

Nettle seed, provokes lust, opens stoppages of the womb, helps inflammations of
the sides and lungues, purges the breast: boil them (being bruised) in White
Wine also.

The seeds of Ammi, or Bishopsweed, heat and dry, help difficulty of urine, and
the pains of the chollick, the bitings of venomous beasts, they provoke the
terms, and purge the womb.

Annis seeds, heat and dry, ease pain, expel wind, cause a sweet breath, help
the dropsy, resist poison, breed milk, and stop the whites in women, provoke
lust, and ease the headache

Cardamoms, heat, kill worms, cleanse the reins, and provoke urine.

Fennel seeds, break wind, provokes urine, and the terms, increases milk in
Nurses.

Commin seeds, heat, bind and dry, stop blood, expel wind, ease pain, help the
bitings of venomous beasts: outwardly applied ( viz in plasters) they are of a
discussing nature.

Carrot seeds, are windy, provoke lust exceedingly, and increase seed, provoke
urine and the terms, cause speedy delivery to women in travel, and bring away
the afterbirth. All these also may be boiled in White Wine.

Nigella seeds, boiled in oil and the forehead anointed with it, ease pains in
the head, take away leprosy, itch, scurff, and hepls scald-heads: inwardly
taken they expel worms, they provoke urine, and the terms, help difficulty of
breathing: the smoke of them (being burned) drives away Serpents and venomous
beasts.

Stavesager, kills Lice in the head, I hold it not fitting to be given inwardly.

The seeds of watercresses, heat, yet trouble the stomach and belly, ease the
pains of the spleen, are very dangerous for women with child, yet they provoke
lust; outwardly applied, they help leprosies scaldheads, and the falling off of
hair, as also Carbuncles, and cold ulcers in the joints.

Mustard seed, heats, extenuates, and draws moisture from the brain; the head
being shaved and anointed with Mustard, is a good remedy for the lethargy, it
helps filthy ulcers, and hard swellings in the mouth, it helps old aches coming
of cold.

French Barley, is cooling, nourishing, and breeds milk.

Sorrel seeds, potently resist poison, helps fluxes, and such stomachs as loath
their meat.

Succory seed, cools the heat of the blood, extinguisheth lust, opens
stoppings of the liver and bowels, it allaies the heat of the body, and
produces a good color, it strengthens the stomach, liver, and reins.

Poppy seeds, ease pain, provoke sleep. Your best way is to make an Emulsion of
them with Barly-water.

Mallow seeds, ease pains in the bladder.

Cich-Pease, are windy, provoke lust, increase milk in Nurses provoke the
terms, outwardly, they help scabs, itch, and inflammations of the stones, ulcers
etc.

White-Saxifrage seeds, provoke urine, expel wind, and break the stone. Boil
them in white Wine.

Rue seeds, help such as cannot hold their water.

Lettice seed, cool the blood, restrains lust.

Also Gourds, Citruls, Cucumers, Mellons, Purslain, and Endive Seeds, cool the
blood, as also the stomach, spleen and reins, and allay the heat of fevers.
Use them as you were taught to do Poppy seeds.

Wormseed, expels wind, kills worms.

Ash-tree Keys, ease pains in the sides, help the dropsy, releeve men weary
with labor, provoke lust, and make the body lean.

Peony seeds, help the Ephialtes, or the disease the vulgar call the Mare, as
also the fits of the mother, and other such like infirmites, of the womb, stop
the terms, and help Convulsions.

Broom seed, potently provoke urine, breaks the stone.

Citron seeds, strengthen the heart, cheer the vital spirit, resist pestilence
and poison.

TEARS, LIQUORS, AND ROZINS.
LAdanum, is of a heating molifying nature, it opens the mouth of the veins,
stays the hair from falling off, helps pains in the ears, and hardness of the
womb. It is used only outwardly in (...).

Asa foetida, is commonly used to allay the fits of the mother by smelling to
it, they say, inwardly taken, it provokes lust, and expels wind.

Benzoin, or Benjamin, makes a good perfume.

Sanguis Draconis, cools and binds exceedingly.

Aloes, purges choler and phlegm, and with such deliberation that it is often
given to withstand the violence of other purges, it preserves the senses and
betters the apprehension, it strengthens the liver, and helps the yellow
Jaundice. Yet it is naught for such as are troubled with the Hemorrhoids, or
have agues. I do not like it taken raw. See Aloe Rosata, which is nothing but
it washed with juice of roses.

Manna, is temperatly hot, of a mighty dilative quality, windy, cleanses
choler gently, also it cleanses the throat and stomach. A child may take an
ounce of it at a time melted in milk, and the dross strained out, it is good
for them when they are scabby.

Scamony, or Diagridium, call it by which name you please, is a desperate
purge, hurtful to the body, by reason of its heat, windiness, corroding, or
gnawing, and violence of working, I would advise my country to let it alone
'twill gnaw their bodies as fast as Doctors gnaw their purses.

Opopanex, is of a heating, molifying, digesting quality.

Gum Elemi, is exceeding good for fractures of the skul, as also in wounds, and
therefore is put in plasters for that end. See Arceus his Liniment.

Tragacanthum, commonly called Gum Traganth, and Gum Dragon, helps coughs,
hoarsness, and distillations upon the lungues.

Bdellium, heats and softens, helps hard swellings, ruptures, pains in the
sides, hardness of the sinnews.

Galbanum, hot, dry, discussing; applied to the womb, it hastens both birth and
afterbirth, applied to the navel it stays the strangling of the womb, commonly
called the fits of the mother, helps pains in the sides, and difficuty of
breathing, being applied to it, and the smell of it helps the vertigo or
dissiness, in the head.

Mirrh, heats, and dries, opens and softens the womb, provokes the birth and
after birth; inwardly taken, it helps old coughs, and hoarsness, pains in the
sides, kills worms and helps a stinking breath, helps the wastings of the gums,
fastens the (...); outwardly it helps wounds, and fills up ulcers with flesh.
You may take half a dram at a time.

Mastich, strengthens the stomach exceedingly, helps such as vomit or spit
blood, it fastens the teeth and strengthens the gums, being chewed in the mouth.

Frankincense and Olibanum, heat and bind, fill up old ulcers with flesh, stops
bleediug, but is extreme bad for mad people.

Turpentine purges, cleanses the Reins, helps the running of them.

Styrax calamitis, helps coughs and distillations upon the lungues, hoarsness,
want of voice, hardness of the womb, but it is bad for headaches.

Amoniacum, applied to the side, helps the hardness and pains of the spleen.

Camphire, eases pains of the head coming of heat, takes away inflammations,
and cools any place it is applied to.

JUYCES.
THat all Juyces have the same virtues with the Herbs, or Fruits whereof they
are made, I suppose few or none will deny; therefore I shall only name a few of
them, and that briefly.

Sugar is held to be hot in the first degree, strengthens the Lungues, takes
away the roughness of the Throat, succors the Reins and Bladder.

The Juice of Citrons cools the Blood, strengthens the Heart, mitigates the
violent heat of Fevers.

The Juice of Lemmons works the same effect, but not so powerfully (as Authors
say,)

Juice of Liquoris strengthens the Lungues, helps Coughs and Colds.

I am loath to trouble the Reader with Tautology, therefore I pass to

THINGS BRED OF PLANTS.
OF these, the College names but few, and all of those few have been treated of
before, only two excepted; the First of which is,

Agaricus. Agrick, It purges Phlegm, Choler, and Melancholy, from the Brain,
Nerves, Muscles, Marrow, (or more properly Brain) of the Back, it cleanses the
Breast, Lungues, Liver, Stomach, Spleen, Reins, Womb, Joints, it provokes
Urine, and the Terms, kills Worms, helps pains in the Joints, and causes a
good Color: It is very seldom or never taken alone. See Syrup of Roses with
Agrick.

Lastly, Viscus Quircinus, or Misleto of the Oak, helps the Falling sickness,
being either taken inwardly, or hung about ones neck.

LIVING-CREATURES.
MIllepedes (so called from the multitude of their feet, though it cannot be
supposed they have a thousand,) Sows, Hoglice, (in Sussex they call them
Woodlice:) being bruised and mixed with Wine, they provoke urine, help the
yellow Jaundice; outwardly being boiled in oil, help pains in the ears, a drop
being put into them.

The flesh of I take our English Adder to be the true Viper, though happily not
so venomous as they are in hotter Countries.
Vipers being eaten, clear the sight, help the vices of the nerves, resist
poison exceedingly, neither is there any better remedy under the Sun for their
bitings than the head of the Viper that bit you, bruised and applied to the
place, and the flesh eaten, you need not eat above a dram at a time, and make
it up as you shall be taught in Troches of Vipers. Neither any comparable to
the stinging of Bees and Wasps etc. than the same that stung you, bruised and
applied to the place.

Land Scorpions, cure their own stingings by the same means, the ashes of them
(being burnt) potently provokes urine and breaks the stone.

Earthworms, (the preparation of which you may find toward the latter end of
the Book) are an admirable remedy for cut nerves being applied to the place,
they provoke urine, see the oil of them, only let me not forget one notable
thing quoted by Mizaldus, which is, that the powder of them put into an hollow
tooth, makes it drop out.

Eels, being put into Wine or Beer, and suffered to die in it, he that drinks
it will never endure that sort of liquor again.

Oysters, applied alive to a pestilential swelling, draw the venom to them.

Crab-fish, burnt to ashes, and a dram of it taken every morning helps the
bitings of mad-dogs, and all other venomous beasts.

Swallows, being eaten, clear the sight, the ashes of them (being burnt) eaten,
preserves from drunkenness, helps sore throats being applied to them, and
inflammations.

Grasshoppers, being eaten, ease the chollick, and pains in the bladder.

Hedg-Sparrows, being kept in salt, or dried, and eaten raw, are an admirable
remedy for the stone.

Young Pigeons being eaten, help pains in the reins, and the disease called
Tenasmus.

PARTS OF LIVING CREATURES AND EXCREMENTS.
THE brain of Sparrows being eaten provoke lust exceedingly.

The brain of an Hare being roasted helps trembling, it makes children breed
teeth easily, their gums being rubbed with it, it also helps scald heads and
falling off of hair the head being anointed with it.

The head of a cole black Cat being burnt to ashes in a new pot, and some of
the ashes blown into the eye every day, helps such as have a skin growing over
their sight, if there happen any inflammation, moisten an Oak leaf in water and
lay over the eye; Mizaldus says (by this one only medicine) cured such as have
been blind a whole year.

The head of a young Some Countries call them Gleads, and others Puttocks.
Kite, being burned to ashes and the quantity of a dram of it taken every
morning, in a little water, is an admirable remedy for the Gout.

Crab's-eyes, breaks the stone, and open stoppings of the bowels.

The lungues of a Fox well dried (but not burned) is an admirable strengthner
to the lungues: See the Lohoch of Fox lungues

The liver of a Duck, stops fluxes, and strengthens the liver exceedingly

The liver of a Frog, being dried and eaten, helps quartan agues, or as the
vulgar call them third-day agues.

Cocks stones nourish mightily, and refresh and restore such bodies as have
been wasted by long sickness they are admirable good in Hectic fevers, and (
Galens supposed incurable) Marasmus, which is a consumption attending upon a
Hectic fever; they increase seed, and help such as are weak in the sports of
Venus.

Castorium resists poison, the bitings of venomous beasts, it provokes the
terms, and brings forth both birth and after birth, it expels wind, eases
pains and aches, convulsions, sighings, lethargies, the smell of it allaies the
fits of the mother; inwardly given, it helps tremblings, falling sickness, and
other such ill effects of the brain and nerves: A scruple is enough to take at
a time, and indeed spirit of Castorium is better than Castorium raw, to which I
refer you.

The yard of a stag, helps fluxes, the bitings of venomous beasts, provokes
urine, and stirs up lust exceedingly.

A sheeps or Goats bladder being burnt, and the ashes given inwardly, helps the
Diabetes, or continual pissing.

Unicorns horn, resists poison and the pestilence, provokes urine, restores
lost strength, brings forth both birth and afterbirth.

Ivory, or Elephants tooth, binds, stops the whites in women, it strengthens
the heart and stomach, helps the yellow-Jaundice, and makes women fruitful.

The virtues of Hartshorn, are the same with Unicorns horn.

The bone that is found in the heart of a stag is as sovereign a Cordial, and
as great a strengthner to the heart as any is, being beaten into powder and
taken inwardly, also it resists pestilences and poison.

The scull of a man that was never buried, being beaten to powder and given
inwardly, the quantity of a dram at a time, in Bettony water, helps palsies,
and falling sickness.

That small Triangular bone in the Skul of a man, Called Os triquetrum, so
absolutely cures the falling sickness that it will never come again (says
Paracelsus.)

Those small bones which are found in the fore feet of a Hare being beaten into
powder and drunk in Wine, powerfully provoke urine.

A Ring made of an Elks Claw, being worn helps the cramp.

The fat of a man is exceeding good to anoint such limbs as fall away in flesh.

Goose grease and Capons grease are both softning, helps gnawing sores,
stifness of the womb, and mitigate pain.

I am of opinion that the Suet of a Goat, mixed with a little Saffron is as
excellent an ointment for the Gout, especially the Gout in the knees as any is.

Bears grease stays the falling off of the hair.

Fox Grease helps pains in the ears.

Elks Claws or Hoofs are a Sovereign remedy for the falling sickness, though it
be but worn in a Ring, much more being taken inwardly, but (says Mizaldus) it
must be the Hoof of the right foot behind

Milk is an extreme windy meat, therefore I am of the Opinion of Dioscorides,
viz. that it is not profitable in headaches, yet this is for certain, that it
is an admirable remedy for inward ulcers in any part of the body, or any
corrosions or excoriations, pains in the reins and bladder, but it is very bad
in diseases in the liver, spleen, the falling sickness, vertigo, or dissiness
in the head, fevers, and head aches: Goats milk is held to be better than Cows
for Hectic fevers, Phtisicks, and consumptions, and so is Asses also.

Whey, attenuateth and cleanses both choler and melancholy, wonderfully helps
melancholy and madness coming of it, it opens stoppings of the bowels, helps
such as have the dropsy, and are troubled with the stoppings of the spleen,
rickets, and hypocondriack melancholy: for such diseases you may make up your
Physic with Whey. Outwardly it denseth the skin of such deformities as come
through choler or melancholy, as scabs, itch, morphew, leprosy and c.

Honey, is of a gallant clensing quallity, exceeding profitable in all inward
ulcers, in what part of the body soever, it opens the veins, cleanses the reins
and bladder: he that would have more of the virtues of it, let him read Butler
his Book of Bees, a gallant experimental work. I know no vices belonging to it,
but only it is soon converted into choler.

Wax, softens, heats, and meanly fills sores with flesh, it suffers not the
milk to curdle in women's breasts; inwardly it is given (ten grains at a time)
against bloody-fluxes.

Raw-Silk, heats and dries, cheers the heart, drives away sadness, comforts all
the spirits, both Natural, Vital, and Animal.

As for Excrements, there the College makes shittin work, and paddle in the
turds like Jakes Farmers, I will let them alone for fear the more I stir them
the more they stink.

BELONGING TO THE SEA.
SPerma Caeti, is well applied outwardly to eating Ulcers, the marks which the
small pocks leave behind them, it cleers the sight, provokes sweat; inwardly it
troubles the stomach and belly, helps bruises, and stretching of the nerves,
and therefore is good for women newly delivered.

Amber greese, heats and dryes, strengthens the brain and nerves exceedingly,
if the infirmity of them come of cold, resists pestilence.

Sea-sand, a man that has the dropsy, being set up to the middle in it, it
draws out all the water.

Red Corral, is cold, dry and binding, stops the immoderate flowing of the
terms, bloody-fluxes, the running of the reins, and the whites in women, helps
such as spit and piss blood, helps witchcraft being carried about one, it is
an approved remedy for the falling sickness. Also if ten grains of red Corral
be given to a Child in a little breast-milk so soon as it is born, before it
take any other food, it will never have the falling sickness, nor convulsions.
The common dose is from ten grains to thirty.

Pearls, are a wonderful strengthner to the heart, increase milk in Nurses,
and amend it being naught, they restore such as are in Consumptions, both they
and the red Corral preserve the body in health, and resist fevers. The Dose is
ten grains or fewer; more I suppose because it is dear, than because it would
do harm.

Amber, ( viz. yellow Amber) heats and dryes, therefore prevails against moist
diseases of the head, it helps violent Coughs, helps Consumptions of the
lungues, spitting of blood, the whites in women, it helps such women that are
out of measure unwealdy in their going with child, it stops bleeding at the
nose, helps difficulty of urine: You may take ten or twenty grains at a time

The Froath of the Sea, it is hot and dry, helps scabs, itch, and leprosy,
scald heads etc. it cleanses the skin, helps difficulty of urine, makes the
teeth white, being rubbed with it, the head being washed with it, it helps
baldness, and trimly decks the head with hairs,

METALS, MINERALS, AND STONES.
GOLD is temperate in quality, it wonderfully strengthens the heart and vital
spirits; which one perceiving very wittily inserted those verses.

For Gold is Cordial; and that is the reason,
Your raking Misers live so long a season.
However this is certain, in Cordials, it refists melancholy, faintings,
swoonings, fevers, falling- sickness, and all such like infirmities incident,
either to the vital or animal spirit. What those be, see the directions at the
beginning.

Alum, heats, binds, and purges, scours filthy ulcers, and fastens loose teeth.

Brimstone, or flower of Brimstone, which is Brimstone refined, and the better
for Physical uses, helps coughs and rotten phlegm; outwardly in ointments it
takes away leprosies, scabs, and itch, inwardly it helps the yellow Jaundice,
as also worms in the belly especially being mixed with a little Saltpeter, it
helps lethargies being snuffed up in the nose, the truth is I shall speak more
of this, and many other Simples (which I mention not here) when I come to the
Chemical Oils of them.

Litharge, both of Gold and Silver, binds and dries much, fills up ulcers with
flesh, and heals them.

Lead, is of a cold dry earthly quality, of an healing nature, applied to the
place it helps any inflammation, and dries up humors.

Pompbolix, cools, (...), and binds.

The ston, not the herb.
Jacynth, strengthens the heart being either beaten into powder and taken
inwardly, or only worn in a Ring; Cardanus says it increases riches and
wisdom.

Saphyre, resists Necromantick apparitions, and by a certain divine gift, it
quickens the senses, helps such as are bitten by venomous beasts, ulcers in the
guts, Galen, Dioscorides, Garcias, and Cardanus are my Authors

Emerald, called a Chaste stone, because it resists lust, and will break (as
Cardanus says) if one has it about him when he deflowrs a Virgin; moreover
being worn in a Ring, it helps or at least mitigates the falling sickness, and
vertigo, it strengthens the Garcius.
memory, and stops the unruly passions of men, it takes away vain and foolish
fears, as of Devils, Hobgoblins etc. it takes away folly, anger etc. and
causes good conditions; and if it do so being worn about one, reason will tell
him that being beaten into powder and taken inwardly, it will do it much more.

Ruby (or Carbuncle, if there be such a stone) restrains Cardanus
lust, resists pestilence, takes away idle and foolish thoughts, makes men
cheerful.

Granate, strengthens the heart, but hurts the brain, Cardanus
causes anger, takes away sleep.

Diamond, is reported to make him that bears it unfortunate, It makes men
undaunted (I suppose because Gracius
it is a stone of the nature of Mars) it makes Cardanus
men more secure or fearless than careful, which it does by over-powring the
spirits; as the Sun though it be light it self, yet it darkens the sight in
beholding its body.

Amethist, being worn, makes men sober and stayed, keeps them from drunkenness,
and too much sleep, it quickens the wit, is profitable in huntings, and
fightings, and repels vapors from the head.

Bezoar, is a notable restorer of nature, a great cordial, no way hurtful nor
dangerous, is admirable good in fevers, pestilences, and consumptions, viz.
taken inwardly, for this stone is not used to be (...) as a Jewel; the powder
of it being put upon wounds made by venomous beasts, draws out the poison.

Topas, (If Epiphanius spoke truth) if you put it into boiling water, it does
so cool it that you may presently put your hands into it without harm, if so,
then it cools inflammations of the body by touching of them.

Toadstone, being applied to the place helps the bitings of venomous beasts,
and quickly draws all the Lemnius
poison to it, it is known to be a true one by this, hold it near to any Toad,
and she will make proffer to take it away from you, if it be right, else not.

There is a stone of the bigness of a Bean found in the Gizzard of an old Cock,
which makes him that Lemnius
bears it, beloved, constant, and bold, valiant in fighting, beloved by women,
potent in the sports of Venus.

Nephriticus lapis, help pains in the stomach, and is of great force in
breaking and bringing away the stone and gravel; concerning the powerful
operation of which I shall only quote you one story of many, out of Monardas, a
Physician of note. A certain noble man (quoth he) very well known to me, by
only bearing this stone tied to his arm, voided such a deal of gravel, that he
feared the quantity would do him hurt, by avoiding so much of it, wherefore he
laid it from him, and then he avoided no more gravel; but afterward being
again troubled with the stone, he ware it as before, and presently the pain
eased, and he avoided gravel as before, and was never troubled with the pain of
the stone so long as he ware it. Mathiolus


Jasper, being worn stops bleeding, eases the labor of women, stops lust,
resist fevers and dropsies.

Aetites, or the stone with child, because being hollow in the middle, it
contains another little stone within it, it is found in an Eagles nest, and in
many Dioscorides.
other places; this stone being bound to the left arm of women with child,
stays their miscarriage or abortion, Pliny.
but when the time of their labor comes, remove it from their arm, and bind it
to the inside of their thigh, and it brings sorth the child, and that (almost)
without any pain at all.

Young Swallows of the first brood, if you cut them up, between the time they
were hatched, and the next full Moon, you shall find two stones in their
ventricle, one reddish, the other blackish, these being hung about the neck in
a piece of Stags leather, help the falling sickness, and fevers. The truth is,
I have found the reddish one my self without any regard to the lunation, but
never tried the virtues of it.

Lapis Lazuli, purges melancholy being taken inwardly; outwardly worn as a
Jewel, it makes men cheerful, fortunate, and rich.

And thus I end the Stones, the virtues of which if any think incredible, I
answer, 1. I quoted the Authors where I had them, (...). I know nothing to the
contrary but why it may be as possible as the sound of a Trumpet is to incite a
man to valor, or of a Fiddle to dancing; and if I have added a few Simples
which the College left out, I hope my fault is not much, or at least wise,
venial.

THus much for their old Dispensatory, which with them is now like an old
Almanac out of date: Indeed had not the Printer desired it might not be (and
withal promised me that he would do it in a smaller print that so the Book
might not exceed the former price) I had left out what hitherto has bin
written, having published in print such a The English Physician.
treatise of Herbs and Plants as my Country men may readily make use of, for
their own preservation of health or cure of diseases, such as grow near them
and are easily to be had; that so by the help of my book they may cure
themselves, and never be beholding to such Physicians as the iniquity of these
times affords.

And thus I come to the thing they call their New Dispensatory, or as more
properly it is, their old one new vamped; And first to their Cotalogue of
simples.

A CATALOGUE OF SIMPLES IN THE NEW DISPENSATORY.
ROOTS, of
College. Sorrel, Calamus Aromaticus, Waterflag, Privet, Garlic,
Marshmallows, Aleanet, Angelica, Anthora, Smallage, Aron, Birthwort long and
round, Sowbread, Reeds, Asarabacca, Virginian, Snakeweed, Swallow-wort,
Sparagus, Asphodel male and foemale, Burdocks great and small, Behen, or Bazil,
Valerian white and red, Dazies, Beets, white red and black, Marshmallows,
Bistort, Borrage, Briony white and black. Bugloss garden and wild, Calamus
Aromaticus, our Ladies thistles, Avens, Coleworts, Centaury the less, Onions,
Chameleon white and black, Chelondine, Pilewort, China, Succory, Artichokes,
Virginian Snakeroot, Comfry greater and lesser, Contra yerva, Costus, sweet and
bitter, Turmerick, Wild Cucumers, Sowbread, Hounds-tongue, Cyperus long and
round, toothwort, White Dittany, Doronicum, Dragons, Woody Nightshade, Vipers
Bugloss, Smallage, Hellebore white and black, Endive, Alicampane, Eringo,
Coltsfoot, Fearn male and foemale, Filipendula or Dropwort, Fennel, White
Dittany, Galanga great and small, Gentian, Liquoris, Dog-grass, Hermodactills,
Swallow-wort, Jacinth, Henbane, Jallap, Masterwort, Orris or flower-de-luce
both English and Florentine, Sharp-poynted-dock, Burbock greater and less,
lovage, Privet, White Lillies, Liquoris, Mallows, Mechoacan, Jallap, Spignel,
Mercury, Devils Bit, Sweet Navew, Spicknard, Celtick, and Indian, Water
lillies, Rest-harrow, Sharp-poynted-Dock, Peony male and foemale, Parsneps
garden and Wild, Cinkfoyl, Butter-Burre, Parsley, Hogs-Fennel, Valerian greater
and lesser, Burnet, Land and water Plantane, Polypodium of the Oak, Solomon's
Seal, Leeks, Pellitory of Spain, Cinkfoyl, Turnips, Rhadishes garden and Wild,
Rhapontick, Common Rhubarb, Mouks-rhubarb, Rose-root, Maddir, Bruscus,
Sopewort, Sarsaparilla, Satiryon male and foemale, white Saxifrage, Squills,
Figwort, Scorzonera English and Spanish, Virginian, Snakeweed, Solomon's Seal,
Cicers, Stinking Gladon, Devills-bit, Dandelion, Thapsus, Tormentill, Turbith,
Colts foot, Valcrian greater and lesser. Vervain, Swallow-wort, Nettles,
Zedoary, long and round, Ginger.

Culpeper] These be the Roots the College has named, and but only named, and
in this order as I have set them down. It seems the Coiledg hold a strange
opinion, viz. That it would do an English man a mischeife to konw what the
herbs in is garden are good for, such admirable Commonwealths-men they are, so
infinitely beneficial to their Country; even in the suparlative degree.

For my own particular I aim solely at the benefit of my country in what I do,
and shall impartially reveal to them what the Lord has revealed to me in
Physic: I see my first labors were so well accepted, that I shall not now
give over till I have given my country that which is called the whole body of
Physic, in their own mother tongue; I weigh the ill language of the College no
more than I do a straw under my foot; Wisdom will be justified of all her
children: only I desire them not to grow to proud, but remember who it was
said, Pride goes before a fall, and a haughty mind before destruction.

In ancient times when men lived more in health, simples were more in use by
far than now they are: now compounds take the chief place, and men are far
more sickly then before; The reason I conceive to be the incongruity between
the Colleges compounds and our bodies; It is palpably true that their receipts
were no children of their own brains, but borrowed some from Arabia, others
from Greece, and some few from Italy: I know no reason why they abscorded the
names of the Authors from whence they borrowed them, unless it were either to
make the Generation to come, believe they were their own: or else to put an
exceeding difficulty to all, an (...) impossibility upon most, to find the
verttues of them, as not knowing in what Authors to search for them; The one of
these shows the pride, the other the dishonesty of their hearts.

But to return to my purpose, my opinion is, that those herbs, roots, plants
etc. which grow near a man are far better and more congruous to his nature
than any outlandish rubbish whatsoever, and this I am able to give a reason of
to any that shall demand it of me, therefore I am so capious in handling of
them, you shall observe them ranked in this order.

1. The Temperature of the Roots, Herbs, Flowers etc. are of, viz. Hot, cold,
dry, moist, together with the degree of each quality.

2. What part of the body each root, herb, flower, is apropriated to, viz.
head, throat, breast, heart, stomach, liver, spleen, bowels, reins, bladder,
(...), joints, and in those which heat those places, and which cool them.

3. The property of each Simple as they, bind, open, mollify, harden,
extinuate, discuss, draw out, suppure, cleanse, glutinate, break wind, breed
seed, provoke the terms, stop the terms, resist poison, abate swellings, ease
pain.

This I intend shall be my general method throughout the Simples, which having
finished; I shall give you a paraphrase explaining these terms, which rightly
considered will give the key of Galens way of administering Physic.

The Temperature of the Roots.
Roots hot in the first degree.
Marshmallows, Bazil, Valerian, Spattling poppy, Burdocks, Borrage, Bugloss,
Calamus Aromaticus, Avens, Pilewort, China, Self-heal, Liquoris, Dog-grass,
White-Lillies Peony male and foemale, Wild parsneps, Parsley, Valerian great and
small, Knee-holly, Satyrion, Scorzonera, Skirrets.

Hot in the second degree.
Water-flag, Reeds, Swallowwort, Asphodel male, Carline thistle, Cyperus long
and round, Fennel, Lovage, Spignell, Mercury, Devils-bit, Butter-burr,
Hogs-Fennel, Sarsa-parilla, Squills, Zedoary.

Hot in the third degree.
Angelica, Aron, Birthwort long and round, Sowbread, Asarabacca, Briony, white
and black, Sullendine, Virginian Snake-root, Hermerick, White (...), Doronicum,
Hellebore white and black, Alicampane, Filipendula, Galanga greater and lesser,
Masterwort, Orris, English and Florintine, Restharrow, Stinking Gladon,
Turbith, Ginger.

Hot in the fourth degree.
Garlic, Onnions, Leeks, Pellitory of Spain.

Roots temperate in respect of heat are,
(...), Sparagus, Our Ladies thistles, Eringo, Jalap, (...), Mechoacan,
Garden-Parsnips, Sink-foyl, (...).

(...) cold in the first degree.
Sorrel, Beets white and red, Comfry the greater, Plantane, Rose root, Maddir.

Cold in the second degree.
Alcanet, Dazies, Succory, Hounds-tongue, Endive, Jacinth.

Cold in the third degree,
Bistort and mandrakes, are cold in the third degree, and Henbane in the fourth.

Roots dry in the first degree
Bearsbreech, Burdocks, Red beets, Calamus Aromaticus, Pilewort Self-heal,
Endive, Eringo, Jacinth, Maddir, Knee-holly.

Dry in the second degree.
Waterflag, Marshmallows, Alkanet Smallage, Reeds, Sorrel, Swallow-wort,
Asphodel male, Bazill, Valerian and Spatling-poppy, according to the opinion of
the Greeks, Our Ladies thistles, Avens, Succory, Hounds-tongue, Cyperus long
and round, Fennel, Lovage, Spignel, Mercury, Devils bitt, Butter-burt,
Parsley, Plantane, Zedoary.

Dry in the third degree.
Angellica, Aron, Birthwort long and round, Sowbread, Bistort, Asarabacca,
Briony white and black, Carline thistle, China, Sullendine, Virginian,
Snakeroot, White Dittany, Doronicum, Hellebore white and black, Alicampane,
Filipendula, Galanga greater and lesser, Master-wort, Orris English and
Florentine, Rest-harrow, Peony, male and foemale, Sinkfoyl, Hogs-Fennell,
Sarsa-parilla, Stinking-Gladon, Tormentill, Ginger.

Dry in the fourth degree
Garlic, Onnions, Costus, Leeks, Pellitory of Spain.

Roots moist are,
Bazil Valerian, and Spattling-poppy, according to the Arabian Physicians,
Daisies, white Beets, Borrage, Bugloss, Liquoris, Dog-grass, Mallows, Satyrion,
Scorzonera, Parsnips, Skirrets.

Roots are also apropriated to several parts of the body; and so they,
Heat the head,
Doronicum, Fennel, Jallap, Mechoacan, Spicknard, Celtick, and Indian, Peony
male and foemale.

Neck and throat.
Pilewort, Devils-bit.

Breast and lungues.
Birthwort long and round, Elicampane, Liquoris, Orris English and florentine,
Calamus Aromaticus, Sinkfoil, Squills.

Heart
Angellica, Borrage, Bugloss, Carline thistle, Doronicum, Butter bur,
Scorzonera, Tormentil Zedoary, Bazil, Valerian white and red.

Stomach
Alicampane, Galanga greater and lesser, Spicknard, Celtick, and Indian,
Ginger, Fennel, Avens; Radishes.

Bowels
Valerian great and small, Zedoary, Ginger.

Liver
Smallage, Carline thistle, Sullendine, China, Turmerick, Fennel, Gentian,
Dog-grass, Cinkfoyl, Parsley, Smallage, Sparagus, Rhubarb Rhapontick, Knee-holly.

Spleen
Smallage, Carline thistle, Fearn male and foemale, Parsley, Water-flag,
Sparagus, round Birthwort, Fennel, Capers; Ash, Gentian.

Reins and bladder.
Marshmallows, Smallage, Sparagus, Burdock, Bazil, Valerian, spatling Poppy,
Carline thistle, China, Cyperus long and round, Filipendula, Dog-grass,
Spicknard, Celtick, and Indian, Parsley, Kneeholly, white Saxisrage.

Womb
Birthwort long and round, Galanga greater and lesser, Peony male and foemale,
hogs Fennel.

Fundament
Pilewort.

Joints
Bears-breech, Hermodactils, Jallap, Mecoacan, Ginger, Costus.

Roots cool the Head
Rose Root.

Stomach
Sow thistles, Endive, Succory, Bistort.

Liver and spleen
Maddir, Endive, Cichory.

The properties of the Roots.
Although I confess the properties of the Simples may be found out, by the
ensuing explanation of the terms and I suppose by that means they were found
out at first, and although I hate a lazy Student from my heart, yet to
encourage young Students in the art; I shall quote the chiefest of them, I
desire all lovers of Physic to compare them with the explanation of these
Rules, so shall they see how they agree, so may they be enabled to find out the
properties of all Simples, (yea of such as are not mentioned in the learned
Colleges Apish Dispensatory) to their own exceeding benefit in Physic.

Roots, Bind,
Cyperus, Bistort, Tormentil, Cinkfoyl, Bears breech, Waterflag, Alkanet,
Toothwort, etc.

Discuss
Birthwort, Asphodel, Briony, Capers, etc.

Cleanse
Birthwort Aron, Sparagus, Grass, Asphodel, Sullendine, etc.

Open
Asarabacca, Garlic, Leeks, Onions, Rhapontick, Turmerick, Carline thistle,
Succory, Endive, Filipendula, Fennel, Parsley, Bruscus, Sparagus, Smallage,
Gentian etc.

Extenuate
Orris English and florentine, Capers, etc.

(...)
Garlic, Onions, (...) of Spain etc.

(...)
Mallows, Marshmallows, etc.

Suppure
Marshmallows, Briony, white Lillies, etc.

Glutinate
Comfry, Solomon's seal, Gentian, Birthwort, Daisies, etc.

Expel Wind
Smallage, Parsley, Fennel, Waterflag, Garlic, Costus, Galanga, hogs Fennel,
Zedoary, Spicknard Indian and Celticque, etc.

Breed seed
Waterflag, Eringo, Satyrion, Galanga, etc.

Provoke the terms
Birthwort, Asarabacca, Aron, Waterflag, white Dittany, Asphodel, Garlic,
Centaury the less, Cyperus long and round, Costus, Capers, Calamus, Aromaticus,
Dittany of Creet, Carrots, Eringo, Fennel, Parsley, Smallage, Grass, Alicampane,
Peony, Valerian, Kneeholly, etc.

Stop the terms
Comfry, Tormentil, Bistort, etc.

Provoke sweat
Carline thistle, China, Sarsa parilla, etc.

Resist poison
Angellica, Garlic, long Birthwort, Smallage, Doronicum, Costus, Zedoary,
Cyperus, Gentian, Carline thistle, Bistort, Tormentil, Swallow-wort, Vipers,
Bugloss, Alicampane etc.

Help burnings
Asphodel, Jacinth, white Lillies, etc.

Ease pains
Water-flag, Eringo, Orris, Rest-harrow, etc.

Of Roots, some purge,
Choler
Asatabacca, Rhubarb, Rhapontick, Fern, etc.

Melancholy
Hellebore, white and black, Polypodium.

Phlegm and watery humors
Squils, Turbith, Hermodactils, Jallap, Mechoacan, wild Cucumers, Sowbread,
male Asphodel, Briony white and black, Elder, Spurge, great and small.

How to use your bodies in, and after taking Purges; you shall be taught by and
by:
I quoted some of these properties, to teach you the way how to find the rest,
which the explanation of these terms will give you ample instructions in: I
quoted not al because I would fain have you studious; be dilligent, gentle
Readers be dilligent, who knows but you may come to be Collegiates, or as good
Physicians as Collegiates, before you die.

The BARKS which the College blot paper-with, are these that follow,
Colledg] (...) Nuts, Orrenges, Barberries, Birch-tree, Caper roots, Cassia
Lignea, Chestnuts, Cinnamon, Citron Pills, Dwars-Elder, Spurge Roots, Alder,
Ash, Pomegranates, (...), (...), green Walnuts, (...); Bay, Lemmons, Mace,
Pomegranates, Mandrake roots, Mezereon, Mulberry-tree roots, Sloe-tree roots,
Pinenuts, Fistick-nuts, Poplar tree, Oak, Elder, Sassasras, Cork, Tamaris,
Line-tree, Frankincense, Elm, Capt. Winters Cinnamon.

Culpeper] A. Of these, Captain Winters Cinnamon, being taken as ordinary
Spice, or half a dram taken in the morning in any convenient Liquor, is an
excellent remedy for the Scurvey, the powder of it being snuffed up in the
nose, cleanses the head of Rhewn gallantly.

The Bark of the black Alder-tree, purges choler and phlegm, if you make a
decoction with it: Agrimony, Wormwood, Dodder, Hops, Endive, and Succory roots,
Parsley, and Smallage Roots, or you may bruise a handful of each of them, and
put them in a gallon of new (...), and let them work together, (put the Simples
in a Boulter-bag) Half a pint, more or less, according to the age of him that
drinks it.
a draught being drunk every morning, helps the dropsy, Jaundice, evil
disposition of the body, helps the rickets, strengthens the liver and Spleen,
makes the digestion good, troubles not the stomach at all, causes appetite,
and helps such as are scabby and itchy.

The rest of the Barks that are worth the noting, and the virtues of them are
to be found, in the former part of the book.

Barks are hot in the first degree.
Guajacum, Tamaris, Orrenges, Lemmons, Citrons.

In the Second
Cinnamon, Cassia Lignea, Captain Winters Cinnamon, Frankincense, Capers.

In the Third
Mace.

Cold in the first
Oak, Pomegranates.

In the third
Mandrakes

According to Place, they Heat the Head
Captain Winters Cinnamon.

The Heart
Cinnamon, Cassia Lignea, Citron Pills, Walnuts, Lemmon Pills, Mace.

The Stomach
Orrenge Pills, Cassia Lignea, Cinnamon, Citron Pills, Lemmon Pills, Mace,
Sassafras.

The Lungues
Cassia Lignea, Cinnamon, Walnuts.

The Liver
Barberry-tree, Bay Tree, Capt. Winters Cinnamon.

The Spleen
Caper Bark, Ash-tree Bark, Bay Tree.

The reins and Bladder
Bay Tree, Sassasras.

The Womb
Cassia Lignea, Cinnamon.

Cool the Stomach
Pomegranate Pills.

Purge choler
The Bark of Barberry-tree.

Purge Phlegm and Water.
Elder, Dwarf-Elder, Spurge, Laurel.

To fill up another part of a Page, the College quote a few WOODS, which are
these;
Colledg] FIrr, Wood of Aloes, Rhodium, Brazil, Box, Willow, Cipress, Ebeny,
Guajacum, Juniper, Lentisk, Nephriticum, Rhodium, Rosemary, Sanders, white,
yellow, and red, Sassasras, Tamaris.

Of these some are hot, As,
Wood of Aloes, Rhodium, Box, Ebeny, Guajacum, Nephriticum, Rosemary,
Sassafras, (...).

Some cold, As
Cypress, Willow, Sanders, white, red, and yellow.

Rosemary is apropriated to the Head, Wood of Aloes to the Heart and Stomach,
Rhodium to the Bowels and bladder, Nephriticum to the Liver, Spleen Reins, and
Bladder, Sassafras to the breast, stomach and bladder, Tamaris to the Spleen,
Sanders cools the heart and spirits in seavers.

For the particular virtues of each see that part of the book preceding.

The HERBS which the College spent so much pains and Study, barely to name, are,
The Colledg] SOuthernwood male and foemale, Wormwood, Common, Roman, and such
as bears, Wormseed, Sorrel, wood Sorrel, Maidenhair common, white or wall Rue,
black and golden, Maudlin, Agrimony, Vervain, Mallow, Ladies mantle, Chickweed,
Marshmallows, and Pimpernel both male and foemale, water Pimpernel, Dill,
Angellica, Smallage, Goose-grass or cleavers, Columbines, wild Tansy, or silver
weed, Mugwort, Asarabacca, Wood roof, Arach, Distaffe thistle, Mousear,
Cost-mary, or Alecost, Burdocks greater and lesser, Brooklime, or water
Pimpernal, Beets white, red, and black, Bettony of the wood and water, Daisies
greater and lesser, Blite, Mercury, Borrage, Oak of Jerusalem, Cabbages,
Soldanella, Briony white and black, Bugloss, Bugless, Sheaphards purse, Ox-eye,
Box leaves, Calaminth of the Mountains, and Fens, ground Pine, Wood-bine, or
Honey suckles, Ladysmocks, Marygolds, our Ladies thistles, Carduus, Benedictus,
Avens, small Spurge, Horse tail, Coleworts, Centaury the less, Knotgrass,
Ceterach, Cheyvil, Germander, Chamomel, Chamepitys, foemale Southernwood,
Chelondine, Pilewort, Chicory, Hemlock, garden and Sea Scurvy Grass, Fleawort,
Comfry great, middle, or Bugle, least or Daisies, Sarasens consound, Buck horn,
Plantane, May weed, (or Margweed, as we in Sussex call it) Orpine, Sampeer,
Crolwort, Dodder, Blew bottle great and small, Artichoaks, Houndstongue, Cypress
leaves, Dandelion, Dittany of Creet, Fox leaves, Teazles garden and wild, (...)
Elder, Vipers Bugloss, Lluellin, Smallage, Endive, Alicampane, Horstail,
Epithimum, Groundsel, Hedgmustard, Spurge, Agrimony, Maudlin, Eyebright,
Orpine, Fennel, Sampeer, Filipendula, Indian leaf, Srawberry leaves, Ashtree
leaves, (...), Goats rue, Ladies Bedstraw, Broom, Muscatu, Herb robert, Doves
foot, Cotton-weed, Hedg-bysop, tree Ivy, ground Ivy, or Alehoose, Alicampane,
Pellitory of the wall, Liver-wort, (...), Rupture-wort, Hawkweed, Monks
Rhubarb, Alexanders, Clary garden and wild, Henbane, St. (...), Horstongue, or
double tongue, Hysop, Sciatica-cresses, small Sengreen, Sharewoot, Woad, Reeds,
Schoenanth, Chamepitys, Glasswort, Lettice, Lagobus, Archangel, Burdock great
and small, Lavender, Laurel, Bay leaves English and Alexandrian, Duck meat,
Dittander or Pepper wort, Lovage, Privet, Sea Bugloss, To ad-flax,
Hart's-tongue, sweet Trefoyl, Wood Sorrel, Hops, Willow herb, Marjoram, common
and tree Mallows, Mandrakes, Horehound white and black, herb (...),
Feather-few, Woodbine, Melilot, Bawm, garden and water Mints, Horse-mints,
Mercury, Mezereon, Yarrw, Devils-bit, Moss, sweet Chivil, Myrtle leaves,
Garden and water Cresses, Nep, Tobacco, Moneywort, Water Lillies, Baxil, Olive
leaves, Rest-harrow, Adders tongue, Origanum, Sharp-poynted-Dock, Poppy, white,
black, and red, or Erratick, Pellitory of the wall, Cinkfoyl, Arsmart, spotted,
and not spotted, Peach leaves, Throughwax, Parsley, Hart's-tongue, Valerian,
Mousear, Burnet, small Spurge, Plantane, common and narrow leaved, Mountain and
Cretick Poley, Knotgass, Golden Maidenhair, Poplar leaves and Buds, Leeks,
Purslain, Silverweed, or wild Tansy, Horehound white and black, Prim-roses,
Self-heal, Field Pellitory, or Sneez-wort, Peny-royal, Fleabane, Lungue-wort,
Winter-green, Oak Leaves and Buds, Cinkfoyl, Crowfoot, Rosa solis, Rasberry and
Bramble Leaves and Buds, Docks, Common Rue, or Herb of Grace, Goats Rue, Wall
Rue, or white Maidenhair, Wild Rue, Savin, Ozier Leaves, Garden Sage, the
greater and lesser, wild Sage, Elder leaves and buds, Marjoram, Burnet, (...),
Sopewort, Savory, white saxifrage, Scabious, Cichory, Schoenanth, Clary,
Scordium, Figwort, Housleek or sengreen, the greater and lesser, Groundsel,
Senna leaves and cods, Mother of Time, Solomon's seal, Alexanders, Nightshade,
Soldanella, Sowthistles, smooth and rough, Flixweed, Common spike, spinach,
Hawthorn, Devils bit, Comfry, Tamaris leaves, Tansie, Dandelyon, Mullen or
Higtaper, Time, Linetree Leaves, spurge, Tormentil, common and golden Trefoyl,
Woodsorrel, sweet Trefoyl, Coltsfoot, Valerian, Mullen, Vervain, Paul's Bettony,
Lluellen, Violets, Pansies, Perewinkles, Swallow-wort, Golden rod, Vine leaves,
Meadsweet, Elm-leaves, Navil-wort, Nettles, common and Roman, Archangel, or
dead Nettles, white and red.

Culpeper] A. These be the Herbs as the College set them down to look upon; we
will see if we can translate them in another form for the use and benefit of
the body Man.

Herbs Temperate in respect of Heat, Are
Common Maidenhair, Wal-rue, black and golden Maidenhair, Wood-roof, Bugle,
Goats Rue, Hartstongue, sweet Trefoyl, Flixweed, Cinkfoyl, Trefoyl, Paul's
Betony, Fluellin.

Intemperate, are hot in the first degree, as
Agrimony; Marshmallows; Goosgrass or Cleavers; Distaff thistle; Borrage;
Bugloss; our Ladies thistles; Avens; Cetrach; Chervil; Camomel; Eyebright;
Cowslips; Melilot; Bazil, Self-heal.

In the second degree
Common and Roman Wormwood; Maudlin; Ladies Mantle; Pimpernel, male and
foemale; Dill; Smallage; Mugwort; Costmary; Betony; Oak of Jerusalem;
Marigolds; Cookow flowers; Carduus Benedictus; Centaury the less; Camepitys;
Scurvy Grass; Indian leaf; Broom; Alehoof, Alexanders; Doubletongue, or
tongue-blade; Archangel, or dead Nettles; Bay leaves; Marjoram; Horehound;
Bawm; Mercury; Devils-bit; Tobacco; Parsley; Poley mountain; Rosemary; Sage;
Sanicle; Scabious; Senna; Soldanella; Tansy; Vervain; Peruinkle.

In the third degree
Southernwood, male and foemale; Brooklime; Angellica; Briony, white and black;
Calaminth; Germander: Sullendine: Pilewort: Fleabane: Dwarf-Elder: Epithimum:
Bank-cresses: Clary: Glasswort: Lavender: Lovage: Herb mastich: Feathersew:
Mints: Watercresses: Origanum: biting Arsmart, called in Latin, Hydropiper:
(the College confounds this with Persicaria, or mild Arsmart, which is cold)
Sneezwort: Penyroyal: Rue: Savin Summer and Winter Savory: Mother of Time:
Lavender: Spike: Time: Nettles.

In the fourth degree
Sciatica-cresses: stone crop. Dittander or Pepperwort: Garden-cresses: Leeks:
Crowfoot: Rosa solis: Spurge.

Herbs cold in the first Degree.
Sorrel, wood Sorrel, Arach, Burdock, Sheaphards purse, Pellitory of the wall,
Hawk-weed, Mallows, Yarrow, mild Arsmart called Persicaria; if you be afraid of
mistaking this for the other, break a leaf cross your tongue, that which is hot
will make your tongue smart, so will not this, (and here by the way let me tell
the College one of their errors, and I will tell them but the truth, whereas
they affirm, Persicaria Maculata, or spotted Arsmart to be the Hydropiper, it is
no such matter in our Country, most of the wild Arsmart, though not all, has
blackish spots in the leaves, almost Semi circular, like a half Moon, but to
proceed) Burnet, Coltsfoot, Violets.

Cold in the second Degree.
Chickweed, wild Tansy, or Silver-weed, Daisies, Knot-grass, Succory, Buckhorn,
Plantane, Dandelion, Endive, Fumitory, Strawberry leaves, Lettice. Duckmeat,
Plantane, Purslain, Willow leaves.

In the third Degree.
Sengreen or Housleek, Nightshade.

In the fourth Degree.
Hemlock, Henbane, Mandrakes, Poppies.

Herbs dry in the first Degree.
Agrimony, Marshmallows, Cleavers, Burdocks, Sheaphards purse, our Ladies
thistles, Chervil, Chamomel, Eyebright, Cowslips, Hawkweed, Tongue blade, or
double Tongue, Mclilot, mild Arsmart, Self-heal, Senna, Flixweed, Coltsfoot,
Peruinkle.

Dry in the second Degree.
Common and Roman Wormwood, Sorrel, wood Sorrel, Maudlin, Ladies mantle,
Pimpernel male and foemale, Dill, Smallage, wild Tansy or Silverweed, Mugwort,
Distaffe thistle, Cost-mary, Bettony, Bugle, Cookow flowers, Carduus
Benedictus, Avens, Centaury the less, Chicory commonly called Succory,
Scurvy Grass, Buckhorn, Plantane, Dandelion, Endive, Indian leaf, Strawberry
leaves, Fumitory, Broom, Alehoofe, Alexanders, Archangel or dead Nettles white
and red, Bay leaves, Marjoram, Feather-few, Bawm, Mercury, Devils-bit, Tobacco,
Parsley, Burnet, Plantane, Rosemary, Willow leaves, Sage, Sanicle, Scabious,
Soldanella, Vervain.

Dry in the third Degree.
Southern wood male and foemale, Brooklime, Angellica, Briony white and black,
Calaminth, Germander, Chamepitys, Sullendine, Pilewort, Fleabane, Epithimum,
Dwarff Elder, Bank cresses, Clary, Glaswort, Lavender, Lovage, Horehound, herb
Mastich, Mints, Watercresses, Origanum, Cinkfoyl, hot Arsmart, Poley mountain,
Sneezwort, Peny-royal, Rue, or herb of Grace, Savin winter and summer Savory,
mother of Time, Lavender, Spike, Tansy; Time; Trefoyl.

In the fourth Degree.
Garden cresses; wild Rue; Leeks; Onions; Crowfoot; Rosa solis; Garlic; Spurge.

Herbs moist in the first Degree.
(...); Bugloss; Marigolds; Pellitory of the wall; Mallows; Bazil.

In the fourth Degree.
Chickweed; Arach; Daisies; Lettice; Duckmeat; Purslain; Sow thistles; Violets;
Water Lillies.

Herbs apropriated to certain parts of the body of man, and so they,
Heat the Head; as,
Maudlin; Costmary; Bettony; Carduus. Benedictus; Sullendine; Scurvy grass;
Eyebright; Goats (...); Cowslips; Lavender; Laurel; Lovage; herb Mastich;
Feather-few; Melilot; Sneezwort; Penny royal; Senna; mother of Time; Lavender;
Spike; Time; Vervain, Rosemary.

Heat the Throat.
Archangel white and red; otherwise called dead Nettles; Devils-bit.

Heat the Breast.
Maidenhair; white, black, common and Golden; Distaffe thistle; Time; Betony;
Calaminth; Chamomel; Fennel; Iudian leaf; Bay leaves; Hysop; Bawm; Horehound;
Oak of Jerusalem; Germander; Melilot; Origanum; Rue; Scabious; Peruinkles;
Nettles.

Heat the Heart.
Southernwood male and foemale; Angellica; Woodroofe, Bugloss; Carduus
Benedictus; (...); Goats Rue; Bay leaves; Bawm; Rue; Senna; Bazil; Rosemary;
Alicampane.

Heat the Stomach.
Wormwood common and Roman, Smallage, Avens, Indian leaf, Broom, Schenanth,
Bay leaves, Bawm, Mints, Parsley, Fennel, Time, mother of Time, Sage.

Heat the Liver.
Agrimony, Maudlin, Pimpernel male and foemale, Smallage, Costmary, or Alecost,
our Ladies thistles, Centaury the less, Germander, Chamepiyts, Sullendine,
Sampier, Fox gloves, Ashtree leaves, Bay leaves, Toad-flax, Hops, Hore-hound,
Watercresses, Parsley, Poley mountain, Sage, Scordium, Senna, mother of Time,
Soldanella, Asarabacca, Fennel, Hysop, Spicknard.

Heat the Bowels.
Chamomel, Alehoofe, Alexanders.

Heat the spleen.
All the four sorts of Maidenhair, Agrimony smallage, Centaury the less,
Cetrach, Germander, Chamepitys, Sampier, Fox-gloves, Epithimum, Ashtree, Bay
leaves, Toad flax, Hops, Hore-hound, Parsley, Poley mountain, sage, scordium,
senna mother of Time, Tomaris, Wormwood, Water-cresles, Hartstongue.

Heat the Reins and Bladder.
Agrimony, Maudlin, Marshmallows, Pimpernel male and foemale, Brooklime,
Costmary, Betony, Chervil, Germander, Chamomel, sampier, Broom, Rupture-wort;
Clary, (...), Bay leaves, Toadflax, Hops, Melilot, Watercresses, Origanum,
Peny-royal; scordium, Vervain; mother of Time; Rocket, Spicknard, Saxifrage;
Nettles.

Heat the Womb.
Maudlin Angellica; Mugwort, Costmary, Calaminth, Fleabanc, May (...) or
Marg-weed, Dittany of Creet, Schenanth; Archangel or dead Nettles, Melilot;
Feather-few; Mints; Devils-bit, Origanum; Bazil; Peny-royal; Savin; Sage;
Scordium; Tansy: Time: Vervain, Peruinkles: Nettles.

Heat the Joints.
Cowslips: sciatica-cresses, hot Arsmart: Garden cresses: Costmary, Agrimony,
Chamomel: Saiut John's Wort, Melilot, Watercresses, Rosemary, Rue, Sage,
Stechas.

Herbs cooling the Head.
Wood sorrel, Teazles, Lettice, Plantane, Willowleaves, sengreen, or Housleek,
strawberry leaves, Violet leaves, Fumitory, Water Lillies.

Cool the Throat.
Orpine, strawberry leaves, Privet, Bramble leaves.

Breast.
Mulberry leaves Bramble leaves, Violet leaves, strawberry leaves, sorrel,
Wood Sorrel, Poppies, Orpine, Money-wort, Plantane, Coltsfoot.

Heart
Sorrel, Wood sorrel, Vipers, Bugloss, Lettice, Burnet, Violet leaves,
strawberry leaves- WaterLilles.

Stamach
Sorrel, Wood Sorrel, succory, Orpine, Dandelion, Endive, strawberry leaves
Violet leaves, Hawkweed, Lettice, Purslain, sow thistles, Violet leaves.

Liver
Sorrel, Wood Sorrel, Dandelion, Endive, succory, strawberry leaves, Fumitory,
Liver-wort, Lettice, Purslain, Nightshade, Water Lillies.

Bowels
Fumitoty, Mallows, Buckhorn-Plantane, Orpine Plantane, Burnet.

Spleen
Fumitory, Endive, succory, Lettice.

Reins and Bladder
Knot-grass, Mallows, Yarrow, Money-wort; Plantane, Endive, succory; Lettice,
Purslain, Water Lillies, Housleek, or sengreen.

The Womb
Wild Tansy, Arach, Burdocks, Willow herb, Myrtle Leaves, Money-wort, Purslain,
sow thistles, Endive, succory, Lettice, Water Lillies, sengreen.

The Joints
Willow leaves, Vine leaves, Lettice, Henbane Nightshade, sengreen; or Housleek.

Herbs altering according to property, in operation; some Bind; as;
Amomus; Agnus Castus; sheaphards purse; Cypress; Horstail; Ivy; Bay leaves;
Melilot: Bawm; Mirtles; sorrel; Plantane; Knot-grass; Comfry; Cinkfoyl;
Fleawort; Purslain; Oak leaves, Willow leaves; sengreen; or Housleek; etc.

Open; as;
Garlic; Onions; Wormwood; Mallows; Marshmallows; Pellitory of the wall;
Endive; succory etc.

Soften.
Mallows; Marshmallows; Beets; Pellitory of the wall; Violet leaves; strawberry
leaves; Arach: Cypress leaves: Bay leaves: Felawort: etc.

Harden
Purslain, Nightshade: Housleek, or sengreen: Duckmeat: and most other Herbs
that are very cold.

Extenuate
Mugwort: Chamomel: Hysop. Penyroyal: Stoechas: Time: Mother of Time: Juniper
etc.

Discuss
Southernwood, male and foemale, all the four sorts of Maidenhair:
Marshmallows: Dill: Mallows: Arrach: Beets: Chamomel: Mints: Melilot: Pellitory
of the Wall: Chickweed: Rue: stoechas: Marjoram.

Draw
Pimpernel: Birthwort: Dittany: Leeks: Onions: Garlic: and also take this
general Rule, as all cold things bind and harden, as is apparent by the frost
binding and hardening water and mire; so all things very hot are drawing, as is
clear by the Sun who is the Original of heat, drawing up the dew.

Suppure
Mallaws, Marshmallows, white Lilly leaves etc.

Cleanse
Pimpernel: southernwood: sparagus: Cetrach: Arrach: Wormwood: Beets: Pellitory
of the wall: Chamepitys: Doddar: Liverwort: Horehound: Willow leaves etc.

Glutinate
Marshmallows: Pimpernel: Centaury: Chamepitys: Mallows: Germander: Horstail:
Agrimony: Maudlin: strawberry leaves: Woad: Chervil: Plantane: Cinkfoyl:
Comfry: Bugle: self-heal: Woundwort: Tormentill: Rupture-wort: Knotgrass:
Tobacco

Expel wind
Wormwood; Garlic; Dill; Smallage; Chamomel; Epithimum; Fennel; Juniper,
Marjoram; Origanum; Savory, both winter and summer; and that, I am of opinion,
was the reason in ancient times, women always boiled Savory with their beans
and pease, viz. to expel the windiness of them; it was a good fashion, and
therefore I would not have it left: however this shows that in ancient times,
people were more studious in the nature of Simples, or at the least Physicians
were more honest, I mean more free in imparting their knowledge for the benefit
of the vulgar; at last Honesty began to leave the Earth, and then Ignorance
quickly stepping up in the place of Knowledge, people used them a while for
custom sake, at last they were esteemed superstitious, and quite left off.

I care not greatly, now I am at it, if I quote one more of like nature (I am
confident, were it my present scope, I could quote an hundred) and that is
Tansy.

Tansie is excellent good to cleanse the stomach and bowels of tough viscous
phlegm, and humors that stick to them, which the phlegmatic constitution of the
Winter usually infects the body of man with, and occasions gouts and other
diseases of like nature, and lasting long; this was the original of that custom
to eat Tansies in the Spring, which afterward grew to be superstitious, and
apropriated only to some certain days, as Palm-Sundaies etc. and so at last
the evils of observing days being known, and the virtues of the meat
absconded, it is quite almost left off. For my part, if any think it
superstitious to eat a Tansie in the Spring, I shall not burden their
consciences, they may make the Herb into a Conserve with Sugar, or boil it in
Wine and drink the Decoction, or make the Juice into a Syrup with Sugar, which
they will. But to proceed.

Herbs breed seed
Clary, Rocket, and most Herbs that are hot and moist, and breed Wind.

Provokes the Terms
Southernwood, Garlic, all the sorts of Maidenhair, Mugwort, Wormwood,
Bishopsweed, Cabbages, Bettony, Centaury, Chamomel, Calaminth, Germander,
Dodder, Dittany, Fennel, St. John's Wort, Marjoram, Horehound, Bawm,
Watercresses, Origanum, Basil, Penyroyal, Poley-mountain, Parsley, smallage,
Rue, Rosemary, Sage, Savin, Hartwort, Time, Mother of Time, Scordium, Nettles.

Stop the Terms
Shepheards-purse, strawberries, Mirtles, WaterLillies, Plantane, Housleek or
sengreen, Comfry, Knotgrass.

Resist Poison
Southernwood; Wormwood; Garlic; al sorts of Maidenhair; smallage; Betony;
Carduus Benedictus; Germander; Calaminth; Alexanders; Carline thistle;
Agrimony; Fennel, Juniper; Horehound; Origanum; Penyroyal; Poley-mountain; Rue;
scordium; Plantane.

Discuss swellings
Maidenhair, Cleavers or Goosgrass, Mallows, Marshmallows, Docks, Bawm,
Watercresses, Cinkfoyl, scordium etc.

Ease pain
Dil, Wormwood, Arrach, Chamomel, Calaminth, Chamepitys, Henbane, Hops, Hogs
Fennel, Parsley, Rosemary, Rue, Marjoram, Mother of Time.

Herbs Purging
Choler
Groundsel, Hops, Peach Leaves, Wormwood, Centaury, Mallows, senns.

Melancholy
Ox-eye, Epithimum, Futhitory, senna, Dodder.

Phlegm and Water
Briony, white and black: spurge: both work most violently and are not
therefore fit for a vulgar use: Dwarf Elder: Hedge Hysop: Laurel Leaves: Mercury
Mezereon also purges violently, and so does (...): Elder Leaves senna.

For the particular operations of these, as also how to order the body after
purges, the quantity to be taken at a time, you have been in part instructed
already, and shall be more fully hereafter.

The FLOWERS which the College acquaints you with the Latin names of, only, are
these.
Colledg] VV Ormwood, Agnus Castus: Amaranthus: Dill Rosemary, Columbines:
Orrenges: Balaustins: or Pomegranate flowers: Betony: Borrage: Bugloss,
Marigolds: Woodbine: or Honey suckles: Clove gilliflowers: Centaury the less:
(...): winter-gilliflowers: or Walflowers: succory: Comfry the greater:
saffron: Blewbottle great and small: ( Cynosbatus, Tragus, and Dedonaeus hold
our white thorn to be it: Cordus and Marcellus think it to be Briars: and
Lugdunensis takes for the sweet Bryar: but what our College takes it for: I
know not) Cytinus: ( Dioscorides calls the Flowers of the Manured
Pomgranates: Cytinus: but Pliny calls the Flowers of the wild kind by that
name:) Fox gloves: Vipers Bugloss: Rocket, Eyebright: Beans: Fumitory: Broom:
Cowslips: St. John's Wort: Hysop: Jasmine: or shrub Trefoyl, Archangel: or dead
Nettles white and red: Lavender, Walflowers: or Winter-gilliflowers: Privet:
Lillies: white: and of the valley: Hops: Common and tree Mallows: Featherfew:
Woodbine: or Honeysuckles: Melilot: Bawm, Walnuts: Water Lillies: white and
yellow: Origanum: Poppies: white: and red: or erratick: Poppies, or corn Roses:
so called because they grow amongst Corn, Peony, Honey-suckles: or Woodbine:
Peach-flowers: Prim-roses, self-heal: sloebush: Rosemary flowers: Roses: white,
Damask: and red, sage: E lder: white saxifrage: scabious, siligo (I think they
mean wheat by it: Authors are not agreed about it:) stoechas: Tamaris: Tansy:
Mullen, or Higtaper: Line-tree: CloveGilli-flowers, Coltsfoot, Violets: Agnus:
Castus: dead-Nettles white and red.

That these may be a little explained for the Public good: be pleased to take
notice that of these:
Some are hot in the first degree: as:
Borrage: Bugloss: Betony: Ox-eye: Melilot Chamomel: stoechas.

Hot in the second degree.
Amomus: saffron: Clove-gilli-flowers, Rocket: Bawm, spicknard, Hops:
schenanth: Lavender: Jasmine, Rosemary.

In the third degree.
Agnus: Castus: Epithimum: Winter-gilli-flowers: or Wal-flowers: Woodbine: or
Honey-suckles.

Cold in the first degree.
Mallows: Roses: red: white: and Damask: Violets.

In the second.
(...): or wind-flower: Endive: succory: WaterLillies: both white and yellow.

In the third.
Balaustins: or Pomegranate flowers.

In the Fourth.
Henbane-and all the sorts of Poppies: only whereas Authors say: field Poppies:
which some call red: others: erratick: and corn Roses, are the coldest of all
the others: yet my opinion is: that they are not cold in the fourth degree.

Moist in the first degree.
Borrage: Bugloss: Mallows: succory, Endive.

In the second.
Water Lillies: Violets.

Dry in the first degree.
Ox-eye: saffron: Chamomel: Melilot: Roses.

In the second.
Wind-flower: Amomus: Clove-gilli-flowers, Rocket: Lavender: Hops: Peony:
Rosemary: spicknard.

In the third.
Woodbine, or Honey-suckles: Balaustines: Epithimum: Germander: Chamepitys.

The Temperature of any other flowers not here mentioned are of the same
temperature with the herbs; you may gain skill by searching there for them, you
can lose none.

For parts of the Body they are apropriated to, some heat
The Head, as
Rosemary flowers; selt-heal; Chamomel; Betony; Cowslips; Lavinder; Melilot;
Peony; sage; stoechas.

The Breast
Betony: Bawm: seabious: schaenanth.

The Heart
Bawm: Rosemary-flowers: Borrage: Bugloss: sasfron: spicknard.

The Stomach
Rosemary-flowers: spicknard: schaenanth.

The Liver
Centaury: schaenanth: Elder: Betony: Chamomel: spicknard.

The Spleen
Betony: Wal-flowers.

The Reins and Bladder
Betony: Marshmallows: Melilot: schaenanth: spicknard.

The Womb
Betony: squinanth or schaenanth: sage: Orris or Flower-de-luce.

The Joints
Rosemary-flowers: Cowslips: Chamomel: Melilot.

Flowers as they are cooling, so they cool
The head
Violets, Roses, the three sorts of Poppies, and Water Lillies.

The breast and heart.
Violets, red-Roses, Water Lillies.

The stomach.
Red-Roses, Violets.

The Liver and spleen.
Endive, and Succory.

Violets, Botrage, and Bugloss moisten the heart, Rosemary flowers, Bawm, and
Betony, dry it.

According to property so they, Bind,
Balaustins, Saffron, succory, Endive, red-Roses Melilot, Bawm,
Clove-gilliflowers, Agnus Castus.

Discuss.
Dill, Chamomel; Marshmallows, Mallows, Melilot, stoechas, etc.

Cleanse.
Damask-roses, Elder flowers, Bean-flowers, etc.

Extenuate.
Orris: or Fower-de-luce: Chamomel: Melilot:, stoechas: etc.

Mollify.
Saffron: white Lillies: Mallows: Marshmallows: etc.

Suppure.
Saffron: white Lillies etc.

Glutinate:
Balaustins, Centaury, etc.

Provoke the terms.
Betony: Centaury: Chamomel: Schoenanth, Walflowers, Bawm: Peony: Rosemary,
Sage.

Stop the terms.
Balaustins, or Pomegranate flowers, Water Lillies.

Expel wind.
Dill: Chamomel: Schoenanth: Spicknard.

Help burnings.
White Lillies, Mallows, Marhmallows.

Resist poison.
Betony: Centaury.

Ease pain.
Dill Chamomel. Centaury: Melilot: Rosemary.

Flowers purge Choler.
Peach flowers, Damask Roses, Violets.

Phlegm.
Broom flowers, Elder flowers.

If you compare but the quallities of the Flowers, with the Herbs, and with the
Explanation of these terms at the latter End, you may easily find the
temperature, and property of the rest.

As for the virtues of the flowers, there were but few quoted before, and those
very briefly; I think the reason was, because the Printer was afraid the book
would be too big: I shall therefore give a supply here, to what was wanting
there, and where I was too brief there, I shall be more large here.

The Flowers of Ox-eye, being boiled into a pultis, with a little barley meal,
take away swellings, and hardness of the flesh, being applied warm to the place.

Chamomel flowers heat, discuss, Loosen, and rarifie, boiled in Clisters, they
are excellent in the wind chollick, boiled in Wine, and the decoction drunk,
purges the reins, breaks the stone, opens the pores, casts out chollerick
humors, succors the heart, and eases pains and aches, or stiffness coming by
travailing.

The flowers of Rocket used outwardly, discuss, swellings, and dissolve hard
tumors, you may boil them into a pultis, or Cataplasme, as Scholars call it, But
inwardly taken, they send but unwholsom vapors up to the head.

Hops open obstruction of the bowels, Liver, and spleen, they cleanse the body
of Choler and phlegm, provoke urine. I wonder in my heart how that apish
fashion of drinking Beer and Ale together for the stone, came up, and others
affirm that the disease of the stone, was not in rerum naturam, before Beer was
invented, a gross untruth: for Physicians have written of the stone, that lived
a thousand years before Beer was invented. I deny not but staleness of Beer,
may cause sharpness of urine, otherwise Beer, if mild, is ten times better
drink for such as are troubled with the stone, than Ale, as being more opening.

Jasmine flowers boiled in Oil, and the greived place bathed with it, takes
away cramps, and stiches in the sides: The plant is only preserved here in the
gardens of some few, and because hard to come by, I pass it; If you desire more
virtues of it, be pleased to search it in Dodonoeus.

The flowers of Woodbine, or Honey-suckles, being dried, and beaten into
powder, and a dram, taken in white Wine in the morning, helps the rickets,
difficulty of breathing, provoke urine, and help such as cannot make water: I
would have none make a common practice of taking it, for it cleanses the
uritery vessels, so potently that it may cause pissing of blood.

The flowers of Mallows, being bruised, and boiled in honey (two ounces of the
flowers is sufficient for a pound of honey, and having first clarified the
honey, before you put them in) then strained out, this honey taken with a
Liquoris stick, is an eccellent remedy both for Coughs, Astmaes, and
cansumptions of the Lungues.

Certain FRUITS, mentioned by the College, in this Order.
Colledg] WInter Cherries, Love-Apples, Almonds, sweet and bitter, Anacardia,
Orrenges, Hazel Nuts, the oily Nut Ben, Barberries, Capers, Gumny Pepper, Figs,
Carpobalsamum, Cloves, Cassia Fistula, Chestnuts, Cherries, black and red,
Cicers, white black and red, Pome Citrons, Coculus Indi. (...), Currance,
Cornels, or Cornelian Cherries, Cubebs, Cucumers, garden and wild, Guords, See
the flowers.
Cynobatus, Cypress Cones, Quinces, Dates, Dwarf Elder, Green Figs,
Strawberries, common and Turkey Galls, Acorns, Acorn cups, Pomegranates,
Goos-berries, Ivy, Herb True-love, Walnuts, Jujubes, Juniper berries,
Bay Berries, Lemmons, Orrenges, Citrons, Quinces, Pomegranates, Lemmons,
Mandrakes, Peaches, Stramontum, Apples garden and wild, or Crabs and Apples,
Musk Melones, Medlars, or open Arses, Mulberries, Myrobalans, Bellericks,
Chebs, Emblicks, Citron and Indian, Myrtle berries, Water Nuts, Hazel Nuts,
Chest-nuts, Cypress Nuts, Walnuts; Nutmegs, Fistick Nuts, Vomiting-Nuts, Olives
pickled in brine, Heads of white and black Poppies, Pompions, Peaches, French
or Kidney Beans, Pine Cones, white black and long Pepper, Fistick Nuts, Apples,
and Crabs, Prunes French and Damask, Sloes, Pears, English Currance, Berries of
purging Thorn, Black-berries, Rasberries; Elder-berries, Sebestens, Services or
Checkers, Hawthorn Berries, Pinenuts, Water nuts, Grapes, Goos-berries,
Raisons, Currance.

Culpeper] That you may reap benefit by these, be pleased to consider, that
they are, some of them

Temperate in respect of heat
Raisons of the Sun, Currance, Figs, Pinenuts, Dates, Sebestens.

Hot in the first degree
Sweet Almonds, Jujubes, Cypress nuts, green Hazel Nuts, green Walnuts.

Hot in the second degree
The (...) Ben, Capers, (...), dry Walnuts, dry Hazel Nuts, Fistick nuts.

In the third degree
Juniper Berries, Cloves, Carpobalsamum, Cubebs, Anacardium, bitter Almonds.

In the fourth degree
Pepper, white black and long, Guinny Pepper.

Cold in the first degree
The flesh of Citrons, Quinces, Pears, Prunes, etc.

In the second
Guords, Cucumers, Melons, (or, as they are called in London, Musk Melones, I
suppose for the sweetness of their smell) Pompions, Orrenges, Lemmons, Citrons,
Pomegranates, viz. the Juice of them, Peaches, Prunes, Galls, Apples.

In the third
Mandrakes.

In the fourth
Stramonium.

Moist in the first degree
The flesh of Citrons, Lemmons, Orrenges, viz. the inner rind which is white,
for the outer rind is hot.

In the second
Guords, Melones, Peaches, Prunes etc.

Dry in the first degree
Juniper berries.

In the second
The Nut Ben, Capers, Pears, Fistick nuts, Pinenuts, Quinces, Nutmegs,
Bay Berries.

In the third
Cloves, Galls, etc.

In the fourth
All the sorts of Pepper.

As apropriated to the body of man, so they heat the Head, as
Anacardia, Cubebs, Nutmegs.

The Breast
Bitter Almonds, Dates, Cubebs, Hazel Nuts, Pinenuts, Figs, Raisons of the Sun
Jujubes.

The Heart
Walnuts; Nutmegs; Juniper Berries.

The Stomach
Sweet Almonds; Cloves; Ben; Juniper berries; Nulmegs; Pinenuts Olives.

The Spleen
Capers.

The Reins and Bladder
Bitter Almonds; Juniper Berries; Cubebs; Pinenuts; Raisons of the Sun.

The Womb
Walnuts; Nutmegs; Bay Berries; Juniper berries.

Cool the Breast
Sebestens; Prunes; Orrenges; Lemmons.

The Heart
Orrenges; Lemmons; Citrons; Pomegranates; Quinces; Pears.

The Stomach
Quinces; (...); Cucumers; Guords; Musk Melones; Pompions; Cherries;
Gooseberries; Cornelian Cherries; Lemmons; Apples; Medlars; Orrenges; Pears;
English Currance; Cervices or Checkers.

The Liver
Those that cool the stomach, and Barberries.

The Reins and Womb
Those that cool the stomach, and Strawberries.

By their several Operations; some
Bind, as
The berries of Mirtles; Barberries, Chestnuts, Cornels or Cornelian Cherries;
Quinces; Galls; Acorns; Acorn-cups; Medlars; Checkers, or Services;
Pomegranates; Nutmegs; Olives; Pears; Peaches.

Discuss
Capers; all the sorts of Pepper.

Extenuate
Sweet and bitter Almonds; Bay Berries; Jnniperberries.

Glutinate
Acorns; Acorn cups; Dates; Raisons of the Sun; Currance.

Expel Wind
Bayberries, Juniper berries, Nutmegs, all the sorts of Pepper.

Breed seed
Raisons of the Sun, sweet Almonds, Pinenuts, Figs etc.

Provoke Urine
Winter-cherries.

Provokes the Terms
Ivy Berries, Capers etc.

Stop the Terms
Barberries etc.

Resist poison
Bay berries, Juniper berries, Walnuts, Citrons, commonly called Pome-citrons,
all the sorts of Pepper.

Ease pain
Bay berries, Juniper berries, Ivy berries, Figs, Walnuis, Raisens, (...), all
the sorts of Pepper.

Fruits Purging
Choler
Cassia Fistula: Citron Myrobalans: Prunes: Tamarinds: Raisons.

Melancholy
Indian Myrobalans.

Phlegm
Colocynthis and wild Cucumers purge it violently, and therefore are not rashly
to be meddled withal; I desire my book should be beneficial, not hurtful to the
vulgar; but Myrobalans of all sorts, especially Chebs, Bellericks, and Emblicks
purge phlegm very gently, and without danger.

Of all these, besides what has been formerly mentioned in this Book (to which
I refer you) give me leave to commend only one to you, as of special
concernment, which is Juniper berries; They may be found all the Winter long
plentifully growing on Warley Common in Essex near Brent-wood, about fifteen
miles from London.

Tragus says, the Virtues of Juniper berries are so many, that they cannot be
numbered; amangst which these are some: The Berries eaten (for they are pleasant
in taste) are exceeding good against the biting of Adders, they resist poison,
pestilence, or any infectious disease, help the strangury, and dropsy.
Mathiolus affirms that a lie made with the ashes of Juniper and water, is as
great a provoker of Urine as can be; The Berries expel wind exceedingly, heat
the stomach, help the digestion, provoke the Terms, the Germans make an
universal medicine of them; they help the cough, shortness of breath, weakness
of the lungues, convulsions, cramps, they give easy delivery to women with
child; five or six berries taken every morning preserves the body in health,
helps the chollick and stone, rawness of the stomach, faintings, and
heart-qualms, Madness and frenzies, they (...) then the eyes and help rhewms
there, the yellow jaundice, falling sickness, gout, and palsy.

Take those berries that are ripe, which look black.

SEEDS barely mentioned by the College are, of
Colledg] SOrrel: Agnus Castus: Marshmallows: Bishops weed true and common:
Amomus: Dill: Angellica: Annis: Rose-seeds: Smallage: Columbines: Sparagus:
Arach: Oats: Orrenges: Burdocks: Bazil: Barberries: Cotton: (...): or
Kneebolly: Hemp: Cardamoms greater and lesser: Carduus Benedictus: our Ladies
thistles: Bastard Sasfron: Caraway: Spurge greater and lesser: Coleworts:
Onions: the Kernels of Cherry stones: Chervil: Succory: Hemlock, Citrons:
Citruls: Garden Scurvy Grass: Colocynthis, Coriander: Sampier: Cucumers garden
and wild: Guords: Quinces: Cummin: Cynosbatos: Date-stones: Carrots English and
Cretish: DwarffeElder: Endive: Rocket: bedg Mustard: Orobus: Beans: Fennel:
Fenugreek: Ashtree keys: Fumitory: Broom, Grains of Paradise: Pomegranates,
wild Rue: Alexanders: Barley: white Henbane: Saint Johnswort: Hysop: Lettice.
Sharp-pointed-Dock: Spurge: Laurel: Lentils: (...): Lemons: Ash tree keys:
Linseed: or Flaxseed: Gromwel: Darnel: sweet Trefoyl: Lupines, Master-wort:
Marjoram: Mallows: (...): Melones: Medlars, (...): Gromwel: sweet Navew:
Nigella: the Kernils of Cherries: Apricocks: and Peaches, Bazil: Orobus: Rice:
(...) Poppies white and black: Parsneps Garden and wild: through Wax: Parsley:
English and (...): Burnet: Pease: Plantane: Peony: Leeks: Purslain: Fleawort:
Turnips: Radishes: Sumach: Spurge: Roses: Rue garden and wild: Wormseed:
Saxifrage: Succory: sesami, Hart-wort: common and Cretish, Mustardseed:
Alexanders: Nightshade: staves-ager: Sumach: Treacle: Mustard, sweet Tresoyl:
Wheat: both the fine flower and the brann: and that which I think the College
have almost as much skill in making starch as I have.
Starch is made of: Vetches or Tares: Violets: Nettles common and Roman: The
stones of Grapes: Greek wheat: or spelt Wheat.

Culpeper] That you may receive a little more benefit by these, than the bare
reading of them, which does at the most but tell you what they are; the
following Method may instruct you what they are good for.

Seeds are hot in the first degree.
Linseed, Foenugreek, Coriander, Rice, Gromwel, Lupines.

In the second.
Dill, Smallage, Orobus, Rochet, Bazil, Nettles.

In the third.
Bishops weed, Annis, Amomus, Caraway, Fennel, (and so I believe is Smallage
too, let Aurhors say what they will, for if the herb of Smallage be somewhat
hotter than Parsley, I know little reason why the seed should not be so hot)
Cardamoms, Parsley, Cummin, Carrots, Nigella, Navew, Hart-wort, Stavesager.

In the fourth.
(...), Mustard Seed.

Cold in the first degree.
Barley, etc.

In the second.
Endive, Lettice, Purslain, Succory, Guords, (...), Melones, Citruls, Pompions,
Sorrel, Nightshade.

In the third.
Henbame, Hemlock, Poppies white and black.

Moist in the first degree.

Mallows, etc.

Dry in in the first degree.
Beans, Fennel, Fenugreek, Barley, Wheat, etc.

In the second.
Orobus, Lentils, Rice, Poppies, Nightshade, and the like.

In the third.
Dill Smallages Bishops-weed, Annis, Caraway, Cummin, Coriander, Nigella,
Gromwel, Parsley.

Apropriated to the body of Man, and so they
Heat the head.
Fennel, Marjoram, Peony, etc.

The Breast.
Nettles.

The heart.
Bazil, Rue, etc. Mustard seed, etc.

The stomach.
Annis, Bishops-weed, Amomus, Smallage, Cummin, Cardamoms, Cubebs, grains of
Paradise.

The Liver.
Annis, Fennel, Bishops-weed, Amomus, Smallage, Sparagus, Cummin, Caraway,
Carrots.

The spleen.
Annis, Caraway, Watercresses.

The Reins and Bladder.
Cicers: Rocket: Saxifrage: Nettles: Gromwel.

The Womb.
Peony: Rue.

The Joints.
Water-crafses: Rue: Mustard Seed.

Cool the Head.
Lettice: Purslain: white Poppies.

The Breast,
White Poppies: Violets.

The Heart.
Orrenge: Lemon: Citron: and Sorrel seeds.

Lastly: the four greater and four lesser cold seeds, which you may find in the
beginning of the Compositions, as also the seeds of white and black Poppies,
cool the Liver and spleen, reins, and bladder, womb: and Joints.

According to operation some Seeds,
Bind, as
Rose seeds, Barborries, Sheaphards purse, Purslain, etc.

Discuss.
Dill, Carrots, Linseeds, Fenugreek, Nigella, etc.

Cleanse.
Beans, Orobus, Barley, Lupines, Nettles, etc.

Mollify.
Linseed, or Flax seed, Fenugreek seed, Mallows, Nigella.

Harden.
Purslain seed, etc.

Suppure.
Linseed, Fenugreek seed, Darnel, Barley husked, commonly called french Batly.

Glutinate.
Orobus, Lupines, Darnel, etc.

Expel wind.
Annis, Dill, Smallage, Caraway, Cummin, Carrots, Fennel, Nigella, Parsley,
Hartwort, Worm-seed.

Breed seed.
Rocket, Beans, Cicers, Ashtree keys.

Provoke the terms.
Amomus, Sparagus, Annis, Fennel, Bishops-weed, Cicers, Carrots, Smallage,
Parsley, Lovage, Hartwort.

Break the stone.
Mallows, Marshmallows, Gromwel, etc.

Stop the terms.
Rose seeds, Cummin, Burdock, etc.

Resist poison.
Bishops-weed, Annis, Smallage, Cardamoms, Orrenges, Lemons, Citrons, Fennel,
etc.

Ease pain.
Dill, Amomus, Cardamoms, Cummin, Carrots, Orobus, Fenugreek, Linseed, Gromwel,
Parsley, Panick.

Assuage swellings.
Linseed, Fenugreek seeds, Marshmallows, Mallows, Coriander, Barley, Lupines,
Darnel, etc.

Then the College tell you a tale that there are such things in rerum Natura,
as these Gums, Rozins, Balsams, and Juyces made thick, viz.
Colledg] Juyces of Wormwood and Maudsin, Acacia: Aloes: Lees of Oil: Assa
foetida: Balsam of Peru: and India: Bdellium Benzoin: Camphirt: Caranna:
Colophonia: Juice of Maudlin: Euphorbium: Lees of Wine, Lees of Oil: Gums of
Galbanum: Ammoniacum: Anime: Arabic: cherry trees: Coopal, Elemi: Juniper:
Ivy: Plum-trees: Cambnge: Hypocystis: Labdanum: Lacca: liquid-Amber: (...):
Mastich: Mirrh: Olibanum: Opium: Opopanax: Picebitumen: Pitch of the Cedar: of
Greece: Liquid and dry, Rozin of sirr tree, Larch tree, Pine tree: Pinefruit:
Mastich Venice and Cipress Turpentine: Sugar: white, red, and Christalline, or
Sugar Candy white and red, Sagapen. Juniper, Gum, sanguis draconis: sarcocolla:
scamony, styrax: liquid and Calamitis: Tacha Mahacca: Tartar, Frankincense:
Olibanum: (...): (...). Who would have thought our College of Physitlans were
turned Bird-catchers.

Culpeper.] That my Country may receive more benefit than ever the College of
Physicians intended them from these, I shall treat of them severally.

1. Of the Juyces. 2. Of the Gums and Rosins


Concrete Juyces, or Juyces made thick are either
Temperate, as
Juice of Liquoris, white starch.

Hot in the first degree
Sugar

In the second
Labdanum.

In the the third
Benzoin, Assafoetida.

Cold in the first degree
Sanguis Draconis, Acacia.

In the third
Hypocistis

In the fourth
Opium, and yet some Authors think Opium is hot because of its bitter taste

Aloes and Manna purge Choler gently; and Scamony does purge choler so
violently, that it is no ways fit for a vulgar man's use, for it corrhodes the
Bowels. Opopanax purges phlegm very gently.

Considering I was very brief in the handling the Virtues of these in my former
part, I shall supply here what was wanting there.

White starch gently levigates or makes smooth such parts as are rough, Syrup
of Violets being made thick with it and so taken on the point of a knife, helps
coughs, roughness of the throat, wheezings, excoriations of the bowels, that
same very disease which so lately puzzled the Learned Rabbis of our times, the
Bloody Flux, or the plague in the guts (as their Worships learnedly called it)
I cut my finger the other day, and then had I got the plague in my finger by
the same rule.

Juice of Liquoris helps roughness of the (...) Arteria, which is in plain
English called the Windpipe, the toughness of which causes coughs and
hoarceness, difficulty of breathing etc. It allaies the heat of the stomach and
Liver, caleth pains, soreness and roughness of the reins and bladder, it
quenches thirst, and strengthens the stomach exceedingly: It may easily be
carried about in ones pocket, and eat a little now and then.

Sugar cleanses and digesteth, takes away roughness of the tongue, it
strengthens the reins anti bladder being weakened; being beaten into fine
powder and put into the eyes, it takes away films that grow over the sight.

Labdanum is in operation, thickning, heating and mollifying, it opens the
passage of the veins, and keeps the hair from falling off, the use of it is
(...) external; being mixed with Wine, Mirrh, and Oil of Mirtles, and applied
like a plaistet, it takes away filthy scars, and the deformity the small pocks
leave behind them; being mixed with Oil of Roses, and dropped into the ears, it
helps pains there; being used as a pessary, it provokes the terms, and helps
hardness or stiffness of the womb: It is sometimes used inwardly in such
medicines as ease pains and help the cough; if you mix a little of it with old
white Wine and drink it, it both provokes urine, and stops looseness or fluxes.

Dragons blood, cools, binds and repels

Acacia and Hyposistis do the like.

The juce of Maudlin; (or for want of it Costmary, which is the same in effect,
and better known to the vulgar, some Countries call it Alecost) the juice is
made thick for the better keeping of it; first clarify the juice very well,
before you boil it to its due thickness, which is something thicker than Honey.

It is apropriated to the Liver; and the quantity of adrachm taken every
morning, helps the (...), or evil disposition of the body proceeding from
coldness of the Liver; it helps the rickets, and worms in children, provokes
urine, and gently (without purging) disburdens the body of choler and (...);
it succors the lungues, opens obstructions and resists purifaction of blood.

The rest which are (...) and easy to be had may be found in what goes before;
such as are hard to come by I pass by, as considering it would do the Reader
little good to tell him a long tale of what things are in the East Indies or
Arabla.

Gums are either temperate, as
Lacca, Elemi, Tragatanth etc.

Intemperate, and so are hot in the first degree, as
Bdellium, Gum of (...)

In the second
(...), Mirrh, (...), Frankincense, Olibanum, Pitch, (...), (...),

In the third
Ammoniacum.

In the (...)
Euphotbium.

Gum Arabic is cold.

Colophonia and Styrax soften.

Gum Arabic and Tragacanth, Sandarack or Juniper Gum, and (...) bind.

Gum of Cherry trees, breaks the stone.

Styrax provokes the terms.

Opopanax gently purges phlegm.

Because I was brief in the virtues of these before, I shall supply here what
was wanting there.

From the prickly Cedar when it is burned comes forth that which with us, is
usually known by the name of Tar, and is excellent good for unction eithor, for
scabs, itch, or manginess, either in men or (...); as also against the
leprosy, Tetters, Ringworms, and Scald-heads.

All sorts of Rozins fill up hollow ulcers, and relieves the body ore, pressed
with cold griefs.

The Rozin of pitch tree, is that which is commonly called Burgony-pitch, and
is something hotter and sharper than the former, being spread upon a cloth is
excellent good against old aches coming of former bruises or dislocations.

Pitch mollifies hard Swellings, and brings boyls and sores to suppurstion, it
breaks carbuncles, disperseth Aposthumes, cleanses ulcers of corruption and
fills them with flesh.

(...) heats and mollifies, and that very temperately, being mixed with any
convenient Ointment or Plaster, it helps kernels in the neck and throat,
Scrophula, or that disease which was wont to be called the Kings evil, because
people dreamed waking that the Kings of England could cure it by touching,
which to me is as credible as the History of (...) and the Dragon.

Inwardly taken in any convenient Medicine, it prevokes urine and the terms,
and breaks the stone; it helps coughs and the bitings of venomous beasts, it
helps windiness of the Spleen, and (...) the sides thence coming; both
outwardly applied to the place and inwardly taken, it helps ruptures or such as
are burst, it softens the hardness of the womb, dties up the moisture thereof,
and expels the dead child.

(...) Judaicum is a certain dry pitch which the dead Sea, or Lake of Sadom in
(...) cast forth at certain times, the Inhabitants there about, pith their
Ships with it. It is of excellent use to mollify the hardness of swellings and
discuss them, as also against Inflammations; the smoke of it burnt is excellent
good for the fits of the mother, and the falling sickness; Inwardly taken in
Wine it provokes the terms, helps the bitings of venomous beasts, and dissolves
congealed blood in the body.

Ambergreese is hot and dry in the second degree; I will not dispute the case
whether it be a Gum or not: It strengthens nature much which way soever it be
taken; there are but few grains usually given of it at a time, I suppose rather
for fear it should be too heavy for the purse than too hot for the body; mixed
with a little Ointment of Orrenge flowers, and the temples and forehead
anointed with it, it eases the pains of the head and strengthens the brain
exceedingly; the same applied to the privities helps the fits of the mother,
inwardly taken it strengthens the brain and memory, the heart and vital Spirit,
warms cold stomachs, and is an exceeding: strengthener of nature to old people;
adding vigor to decayed and worn-out spirits, it provokes lust, and (...)
barren women fruitful, if coldness and (...) or weakness be the cause
impediting.

(...) being smelled to, is (...) known to repress the fits of the mother; a
little (...) into an aching tooth, presently eases the pains; ten grains of it
taken before dinner walking half an hour after it, provokes appetire, helps
digestion, strengthens the stomach, and takes away loathing of meat, it
provokes lust exceedingly, and expels wind as much.

Borrax, or Borrace as some call it, besides its virtues it has to sodder Gold,
Silver, and Copper etc. Inwardly given in small quantities, it stops fluxes, and
the running of the reins; being in fine powder, and put into green wounds it
cures them at ounce dressing.

Cambuge, which out of many names, which every Country bestows upon it, the
College are pleased to call Gutta Gamba: Authors are extremely different, both
about its being, what is is, whether a juice or not; If a juice, of what, and
about its operation, whether it work violently or not: for my part I care not
for meddling with an unknown medicine my self, neither would I advise my Country
men.

Caranna outwardly applied, is excellent for aches, and swellings in the nerves
and joints; If you lay it behind the ears, it draws back humors from the eyes,
applied to the temples as they usually do Mastich, it helps the toothache.

Gum Elemi Authors apropriate to fractures in the skull and head. See Arceus
his Liniment.

Gum Lacca being well purified, and the quantity of half a dram taken in any
convenient liquor, strengthens the stomach and liver, opens obstructions, helps
the yellow jaundice and dropsy, provokes urine, breaks the stone in the reins
and bladder.

Liquid Amber is not much unlike liquid Styrax; by unction it warms and
comforts a cold and moist brain, it eases all greifs coming of a cold cause;
it mightily comfort and strengthens a weak stomach, being anointed with
it, and helps digestion exceedingly, it dissolves swellings. It is hot in the
third degree, and moist in the first.

I think it would do the Commonwealth no harm, if I should speak a word or two
of Manna here, although it be no Gum; I confess Authors make some flutter about
it, what it is, some holding it to be the juice of a tree; I am confident it is
the very same condensated that our honey-dews here are, only the Countries
whence it comes being far hotter it fulls in greater abundance: Let him that
desires reasons for it, be pleased but to read Butler his book of Bees, a most
excellent experimental work, where he shall find reason enough to satisfy any
reasonable man. Choose the dryest, and whitest, it is a very gentle purger of
choler, quenches thirst, provokes appetite, eases the roughness of the
throat, helps bitterness in the throat, and often proness to vomit; It is very
good for such as are subject to be costive to put into their drinks in stead of
Sugar, it has no obnoxious quality at al in it, but may be taken by a woman
with child, without any danger, a child of a year old may take an ounce of it
at a time, dissolved in milk, it will melt like Sugar, neither will it be known
from it by the taste.

Mirrh is hot and dry in the second degree, excee ding dangerous for women with
child; It is bitter, and yet al Authors hold it to be good for the roughness of
the throat and windpipe; half a dram of it taken at a time, helps rhewmatick
distillations upon the Lungues, pains in the sides, it stops fluxes, provokes
the terms, brings away both birth and afterbirth, softens the hardness of the
womb: being taken two hours before the fit comes, it helps Agues, Malhiplus
says he seldom used any other medicine for the quartan ague, than a dram of
Mirrh given in Muskadel, an hour before the fit usually came; if you make it up
into pills with Treacle, and take one of them every morning fasting; it is a
sovereign preservative against the pestilence, against the poison of serpents
and other venomous beasts, a singular remedy for a stinking breath, if it arise
from putrefaction of the stomach, it fastens loose teeth, and stays the
shedding off of the hair, outwardly used, it breeds flesh in deep wounds, and
covers the naked bones with flesh.

Olibanum is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first: you may take a
dram of it at a time, it stops looseness and the running of the reins, it
strengthens the memory exceedingly, comforts the heart, expels sadness and
melancholy, strengthens the heart, helps Coughs, Rhewms, and pleurisies; your
best way (in my opinion to take it, is to mix it with conserves of Roses, and
take it in the morning fasting.)

Tachamacha, is seldom taken inwardly, outwardly spread upon leather, and
applied to the navil, it staieth the fits of the Mother, applied to the side,
it mitigates speedily, and in little time quite takes away the pain and
windiness of the spleen; the truth is whatsoever ach or swelling proceeds of
wind or cold raw humors, I know no better Plaster coming from Beyond Sea then
this Gum; it strengthens the brain and memory exceedingly, and stops al such
defluxions thence, as trouble the eyes, ears or teeth, it helps the gout and
Sciatica.

Gum Coopal, and Gum Anime are very like one another, both in body and
operation, the former is hard to come by, the last not very easy, it stops
defluxions from the head, if you persume your Cap with the smoke of it, it
helps the headache and Megrim, strengthens the brain, and therefore the Sinnews.

Gum Tragaganth, which the vulgar call Gum dragon, being mixed with pectoral
Syrups (which you shall find noted in their propper places,) it helps coughs
and hoarceness, salt and sharp distillations upon the Lungues, being taken with
a liquoris stick, being dissolved in sweet Wine, it helps (being drunk)
gnawings in the bowels, sharpness and fretting of the urine, which causes
excoriations either in the reins or bladder, being dissolved in milk and the
eyes washed with it, it takes away wheals and scabs that grow on the eye lids,
it is excellent good to be put in pultisses to sodder wounds, especially if the
nerves or sinnews be hurt.

Sagapen. dissolved in juice of Rue and taken, wonderfully breaks the stone in
the bladder, expels the dead child and afterbirth, cleers the sight, dissolved
in Wine and drunk, it helps the cough, and distillations upon the Lungues, and
the fits of the mother, outwardly in Oils or Ointments, it mightily helps such
members as are out of joint or overstretched.

Galbanum is of the same operation, and also taken from the same plant, viz.
Fennel, Giant.

Gum Arabic, thickneth and cools, and corrects Chollerick sharp humors in
the body, being dissolved in the white of an Egg well beaten, it helps
burnings, and keeps the place from blistering.

Mastich stays fluxes, being taken inwardly any way: Three or four small
grains of Mastich swallowed down whole at night going to bed, is an excellent
remedy for pains in the stomach: Being beaten into powder, and mixed with
conserves of Roses, it strengthens the stomach, stops distillations upon the
lungues, stays vomiting and causes a sweet breath, being mixed with white
Wine and the mouth washed with it, it cleanses the gums of corruption, and
fasteneth loose teeth.

Frankincense being used outwardly in the way of a Plaster, heats and binds,
being applied to the temples, stops the Rhewms that flows to the eyes, helps
green wounds, and fills hollow ulcers with flesh, stops the bleeding of wounds,
though the Arteries be cut, being made into an Ointment with Vinegar and
Hog's Grease, helps the Itch, burnings, ulcers in the head, pains in the ears,
inflammations in women's breasts, commonly called the Ague in the breast; beware
of taking it inwardly, least it cause madness.

Turpentine is hot in the second degree, it heals softens, it discusseth and
purges, cleanses the reins, provokes urine.

Styrax Calamitis is hot and dry in the second degree, it heals, mollifieth,
and concocteth; being taken inwardly helps the cough, and distillation of the
Lungues, hoarceness and loss of voice, helps the hardness of the womb, and
provokes the terms; if you take ten grains of it at a time made up in the form
of a Pill.

Ammoniacum, hot and dry in the third degree, softens, draws, and heats; being
dissolved in Vinegar, strained and applied plaister-wise, it takes away
bunckles and hardness in the flesh, it is one of the best remedies that I know
for infirmities of the spleen, being applied to the left side; being made into
an Ointment with Oil, it is excellent good to anoint the Limbs of such as are
weary; a scruple of it being taken in the form of a Pill losens the belly,
gives speedy delivery to women in travail, helps diseases in the spleen, the
sciatica and all pains in the joints, such as piss blood, and have any humor
afflicting their Breast.

Camphire, it is held by all Authority to be cold and dry in the third degree,
it is of very thin and subtle parts, insomuch that being beaten into very fine
powder it will vanish away into the air, being beaten into powder and mixed
with Oil, and the temples anointed therewith, eases head aches proceeding of
heat, al inflammations whatsoever; the back being anointed with the same, cools
the reins, and Seminal Vessels, stops the running of the reins and whites in
women, the moderate use of Venery, the like it does if it be drunk inwardly
with Betony Water, take but a small quantity of it at a time inwardly, it
resists poison and bitings by venomous beasts; outwardly applied as before and
the eyes anointed with it, stops hot rhewms that flow thither.

Opopanax purges thick phlegm from the most remote parts of the body, viz. the
brain, joints, hands and feet, the nerves and breast, and strengthens all these
parts when they are weak, if the weakness proceed of cold as usually it does;
it helps weakness of the sight, old rotten coughs, and gouts of all sorts,
dropsies, and swellings of the spleen, it helps the strangury and difficulty of
making Urine; provokes the terms, and helps all cold afflictions of the womb,
have a care you give it not to any women with child. The dose is one dram at
most corrected with a little Mastich, dissolved in Vinegar and outwardly
applied helps the passions of the Spleen.

In the next place, the College tells you a sour tale concerning Liquid Juyces
and Tears, which are to be kept for present use; Viz.
College. Vinegar, Juice of Citrons, Juice of sour Grapes, Orrenges,
barberries, Tares of a Birch-tree, Juice of Chermes, Quinces, Pomegranates,
Lemmons, Wood Sorrel, Oil of unripe Olives, and ripe Olives both new and old,
Juice of red and Damask Roses, Wine, Tares of a Vine.

Culpeper] A The Virtues of most of these may be found in the Syrups, and are
few of them used alone, unless it be Vinegar to make sauce, and Wine to drink.

Then the College tells you there are these things bred of PLANTS, and that
every child knows; Viz.
College. AGrick, Jews-ears, the Berries of Cermes, the Spungy substance of the
Bryar, Moss, Viscus Quercinus, Oak Apples.

Culpeper] A. As the College would have you know these, so would I know what
the chiefest of them are good for.

Jews-ears boiled in Milk and drunk, helps sore Throats: it is the opinion of
those that have studied Hermetick Philosophy, That those things which resemble
any parts of man's body, strengthens those parts of the body they resemble, and
help the diseases they are vulgarly incident to, which is an approved truth in
this; for as they resemble the Bar of a man, so being boiled in white Wine, and
the Wine drunk, and the Jews-ears applied to the Ear outwardly, will help
deafness, inflammations, and other infirmities of the Ears.

Moss, is cold, dry, and binding, therefore good for fluxes of all sorts: if
you desire to know more of it, I desire you would see my English Physician.

Our College must have none but Misleto of the Oak used, and what has any body
to do to question them for so doing? let the (...) buy only such, and paysawce
for it; it is nothing to me; but as for the poor Country man, I can tell him
this, and I will tell him but the truth, and am able to prove it when I have
done, That one sort of Misleto is as good as another; it helps the (...)
sickness, and the convulsions being (...) gathered and used.

Oak Apples: (...) says if Oak Apples be broken alonder about the time of
their withering before they have a hole through them, they contain in them one
Living-creature or another, which (...) it be a Fly it signifies War, if a
Spider, Pestilence, if a Magget, Murren of beasts, if a Worm, scarcity of
Victuals, if an Ant, plenty of Corn for us; Ple bind no bodies faith to believe
it, because I never tried it my self; this I say, they are (...) and binding:
being boiled in milk and drunk, they stop fluxes and the terms; and being
boiled in Vinegar, and the body anointed with the Vinegar cures the Itch.

Then the College acquaints you with more wonders, That there are certain
Living-Creatures, called
College. BEES, Woodlite, Silkworms, Stoads, Crabs of the River, little Puppy
Dogs, Grasshoppers, (...), Cathanel, Hedg-hogs, Emets or Ants, Larks, Swallows,
and their young ones, Hors-leeches, Snails, Earthworms, Dish-washers or
Wagtails, House Sparrows, and Hedge Sparrows, Frogs, Scincus, Land Scorpions,
Moles, or Mants, Tortoise of the woods, Tenches, Vipers and Foxes.

Culpeper] A. The part of this crew of Cattle and some others which they have
not been pleased to learn may be made beneficial to your sick bodies, be
pleased to understand, that

Bees being burnt to ashes, and a Ly made with the ashes, trimly decks a bald
head being washed with it.

Snails with (...) on their backs, being first washed from the dirt, then the
shells broken, and they boiled in spring Water, but not (...) at all, for the
(...) will sink of it self, and the water drunk for ordinary drink is a most
admirable remedy for a consumption, and here by the way I cannot but admire at
the simplicity of most Physicians, who prescribe that the snails ought to be
purged from their flime either with salt or bran before they be used, which if
you do, you take away their virtue, for the reason why they cure a consumption
is this, Man being made of the slime of the Earth, the (...) substance recovers
him when he is wasted; if you please to eat the Snails when they are boiled you
may, for they have a very pleasing taste, and it would be very cunningly done of
you, if you did so, especially in these hard times, for then would you have
meat, drink, and medicine all together. Besides this, being (...) and applied
to the place they help the gout, draw thorns out of the flesh, and held to the
Nose help the bleeding thereof.

Frogs. It is a vulgar fashion of the Walloons to catch live Frogs and cut off
their hinder Legs and fry them and eat them; whether they be good meat or no I
know not, but I am sure it is a good medicine for the biting of Serpents: An Oil
made of it is excellent good for the stifness of the Tendons, and the falling
off of hair.

Before I come to the Compounds, lest any should think I go about to hide from
them any thing that might do them good, I have here inserted the living
Creatures, and Excrements, etc. in the order the College left them, (for impose
them they could not for want of Authority; Alack! alack! the King is dead, and
the College of Physicians want power to impose the Turds upon men.) The use of
the Fats and Suets, you shel have if you please but to stay til I come to the
Oils and Ointments; the other which you think not useful for Physic, will
serve to laugh at, the reading of them may make you (...), though the smell of
them might turn your stomach: My self cannot choose but smile to think in what
part of the Apothecaries Shop the College would have them kept, they had need
place them near the Civit pot.

Therefore consider that the College gave the Apothecaries a Catalogue of what
Parts of Living Creatures and Excrements they must keep in their Shops. Viz.
College. THE Fat, Grease, or Suet of a Duck, Goose, Ecl, Bare, Herron,
Thymallos (if you know where to get it) Dog, Capon, (...), wild Cat, Stork,
Coney, Horse, Hedg-hog, Hen, Man, Lion, Hare, Pike or (...), (if they have any
fat I am (...) it is worth twelve pence a grain) Wolf, Mouse of the Mountains,
(if you can catch them) (...), (...), Serpent, Badger, (...) or (...), Bear,
Fox, Vultur (if you can catch them) Album (...), a Dogs Turd, the (...) of a
Hare and a Hog, East and West (...), Butter not (...) and salted, stone taken
out of a man's Bladder, Vipers flesh, fresh Cheese, Castorium, white, yellow,
and virgins wax, the Brain of Hares and Sparrows, Crabs claws, the Rennet of a
Lamb, Kid, a Hare, and a Calf, and a Horse too (quoth the College:) [They
should have put in the Rennet of ah Ass to make a Medicine for their adle
brains; the next time they alter their Dispensarory, let them go take council
of the Butchers, and allow them a place in their Colledg-Garden in Amen-Corner
as they have done their learned Alchymist; truly they would have knocked down
such an Earor like an Ox, and told them no creatures had Rennets, but only such
as sucked: to proceed.] The Heart of a Bullock, a Stag, a Hog, and a Weather;
the Horn of an Elk, a Heart, a Rhinocerot, an Unicorn; the skull of a Man,
killed by a violent death; a Cocks comb [to hang upon their learned heads] the
Tooth of a Bore, an Elephant, and a Seahorse, Ivory, or Elephants Tooth, the
skin a Snake has cast off, the gall of a Hawk, Bullock, a she Goat, a Hare, a
Kite, a Hog, a Bull, a Bear, the cases of Silkworms, the Liver of a Wolf, an
Otter, a Frog, Ising-glass, the guts of a Wolf, and a Fox, the milk of a she
Ass, a she Goat, a Woman, an Ewe, a Heifer, East and West Bezoar, the stone in
the head of a Carp, and a Perch, if there be any stone in an Ox Gall, stone in
the Bladder of a Man, the Jaw of a Pike or Jack, Pearls, the marrow of the Leg
of a Sheep, Ox, Goat, Stag, Calf, common and virgin Honey, Musk, Mummy, a
Swallows nest, Crabs eyes, the Omentum or Call of a Lamb, Ram, Weather, Calf,
the whites, yolks, and shells of Hens Eggs, Emets Eggs, bone of a Stags Heart, an
Ox Leg, Ossepiae, the inner skin of a Hens Gizzard, the Wool of Hares, the
feathers of Partridges, that which Bees make at the entrance of the Hive [to
keep out cold if they make any thing at all, for I assure you I could never
find any yet, and have been a diligent searcher after it] the pizzle of a Stag,
of a Bull, Fox Lungues, fasting spittle, the blood of a Pidgeon, of a Cat, of a
he Goat, of a Hare, of a Partridg, of a Sow, of a Bull, of a Badger, of a
Snail, [they might have been a little plainer; Testudo, which is their word,
signifies any shellfish, as also snails that have shells on their backs; any
thing will serve to cheat the people with] Silk, Whey, the suet of a Bullock,
of a Stag, of a he Goat, of a Sheep, of a Heiser, Sperma (...), a Bullocks
Spleen, the skin a Snake has cast off, the Turds of a Goose, of a Dog, of a
Goat, of Pigeons, of a stone-horse, of a Hen, of Swallows, of Men, of Women,
of Mice, of Peacocks, of a Hog, of a Heiser, the Ancle of a Hare, of a Sow,
Cobwebs, Water shells, as Blatta Bizantia, Buccinae, Crabs, Cockles, Dentalis,
Entalis, mother of Pearl, Mytuli purpurae, Os sepiae, Umbilicus, Marinus, the
stones of a Horse, of a Cock, the hoof of an Elk, of an Ass, of a Bullock, of a
Horse, of a Lion, the piss of a Bore, of a she Goats of a Man or Woman that is
a Maid, and that is not a Maid, the Moss on a Man's skull, Zibeth.

Culpeper] A. The Liver of a Hedg-hog being dried and beaten into powder and
drunk with Wine, strengthens the Reins exceedingly, and helps the dropsy,
convulsions, and the Falling Sickness, together with all fluxes of the Bowels.

The Liver being in like manner brought into pouders strengthens the Liver
exceedingly, and helps the dropsy.

The Heart of a Frog being applied to the Region of the Heart in a burning
Fever, mitigates the fits to admiration.

The Heart of a Lark being bound to the Thigh of those that have the Chollick,
helps them; it does the like also, being eaten.

Then the College tells you these things may be taken from the SEA, As
Coll. AMber-greese, Sea water, Sea sand, Bitumen, Amber, white and yellow,
Jet, Carallinae, Corral white and red, Foam of the Sea, Sponge stone, Pumice,
Sea salt, Spunges, Amber.

METALS, STONES, SALTS, and other MINERALS.
VErt-de-greese, scales of Brass, Aetitis, Alana Terra, Alabaster, Alectorious,
Alum Scisile and Roch, Amethist, Amianth, Ampheliles, Antimony, Leaves and
filings of Silver, Quicksilver, Lapis Armenius, native Arsenick, both white
and red, artifieial Arsnick, white and realgar, Argilla, Asteria, Leaves and
filings of Gold, Belemnites, Beril, Bole-armenick, Borax, Toads-stone, Lapis
Calaminaris, Cadmia, Lime quick and quenched, Vitriol, white, blew, and green,
Steel, Borax (...), Crysopus, Cinabaris, native and artificial, whetstones,
Chalk white and green, Cristal, Diphriges, the rust, dust, scales, and flakes
of Iron, Granate, Mortar, such as walls are daubed with, Hematites,
Heliotropium, Jacinth, Hibernicus, Jasper, Lapis Judaicus, Tiles, Lapis Lazuli,
Lapis Lincis, (...), Litharge of Silver and Gold, Loadstone, Marchasite, or
fire-stone, Marble, red Lead, native and artificial; Mist, Naphtha, Lapis
Nephriticus, Niter, Oaker, yellow and red, Onyx, Opalus, Ophytes, Osteocolla,
Lead white and black, Plumbago, Pompholix, Marchasite realgar, Ruby, red Oaker,
Sal Armoniack, Sal Gem, and Sal Niter, Saphir and Sardine, Selenites, Flints,
Emerald, Smiris, Sori, Spodium, Peuter, Brimstone quick and common, Talch,
Earth of Cimolia, Samos, Lemnos, Sylesia, Topas, Alana Terra, Tutty, Vitriol,
white, blew, and green.

When the ground of our institution required us, then one to one simple, and
sometimes to repeat them in diverse places, it pleased us to note those that
are iterated in a different Character, lest we should seem to make a needless
repetition, or increase our Catalogue for vain glory sake.

Well said College.

Culpeper] A. Also I repeated them twice or thrice when they did, and caused
them to be set down in a different Letter; also I hope it will make to my honor
and not to my disgrace to imitate such a learned College of Physicians.

Of some precious stones I spoke before in the former Edition; I shall here
reduce them all into order, and treat of such as were casually there omitted:
whether they were mentioned by the College or no it matters nothing to me.

Precious Stones alter by a way manifest or hidden.
By a way manifest, they are

Hot in the first degree.
Hemetites, Pyrites, Lapis Asius, Thyites, Smyres, Lapis Schistus.

Precious Stones cold, are in the first degree.
Jacinth, Saphir, Emerald, Cristal, Lapis Samius, Lapis Phrygius.

In the second degree.
Ruby, Carbuncle, Granate, Sardony.

In the fourth degree.
Diamond.

In respect of property, they bind, as Lapis Asius, Nectius, Geodes,
Pumice-stone.

Emollient, as
Alabaster, Jet, Lapis Thrasius.

Stupifie, as
Memphites, Jasper, Ophites.

Cleanse, as
Lapis Arabicus.

Glutinate, as
Galactites, Melites.

(...), as
Morochtus.

Break the stone, as
Lapis Lyncis, Lapis Judaicus, Lapis Sponge.

Retain the fruit in the Womb, as Aetites, Jasper.

Provoke the Terms.
Ostracites.

Stones altering by a hidden property (as they call it) Are
(...), Topas, Lapis Colubrinus, Toad-stone, Emerald, Alectorius, Calcidonius,
Amethist, Saphit, Jasper, Lapis Nephriticus, Lapis Tibernum, Lapis Spongites,
the Stone found in the Maw of a Swallow, Lodestone, Lapis Vulturis, Merlucius,
Corral, Lynturius, Jet, Aetites, the stones of Crabs, Amber, Cristal, etc.

The Lodestone purges gross humors.

Lapis Armenius, and Lapis Laxuli, purge Melancholy.

To speak a word or two of those which were then pretermitted.

A Water-Snake, a string being thrust through her tail, and she hung up, a
Vessel full of Water being set underneath, into which she may put her Head;
after Hollerius.
certain hours, or days, she will vomit up a Stone, which being received in
the vessel full of water will drink it all up, which being bound to the Navil
of one that has the Dropsy, drinks up all the water.

Lapis Calcidonius, being hung about the neck, helps those melancholy
illusions, and melancholy fancies.

In the Indian Sea, are taken certain strong fighting Fish, called Tyburones;
in the Heads of which, are Nicholam (...).
found three or four Stones, sometimes more, very white, great and ponderous,
insomuch, that sometimes they weigh two pound: The powder of this Stone is very
profitable for such as are troubled with the Stone and difficulty of Urine,
breaks the stone in the Reins and Bladder.

Boodstone is a kind of Jasper of diverse colors, (...).
with red spots in it like blood, stops the Terms and bleeding in any part of
the Body.

Hemetites stops blood, the Eyes being often stricken with it, helps bloodshed;
being beaten into powder Dioscorides.
and taken inwardly provokes urine and stops the Terms.

Pyrites, heats and cleanses, takes away dimness of Dioscorides.
sight.

Lapis Asius binds, and moderately corrodes and elenseth filthy ulcers, and
fills them up with flesh; being mixed with Honey, and applied to the place, is
an admirable remedy for the Gout.

Crystal being beaten into very fine powder, and a (...)
dram of it taken at a time helps the bloody flux, stops the whites in women,
and increases milk in Nurses.

Lapis Samius is cooling and binding, it is very comfortable to the stomach,
but it dulls the Senses, Dioscorides.
helps Fluxes of the Eyes and Ulcers: Dioscorides held that it was little
inferior to Lapis Aetites in all his virtues.

That which comes off from a Whetstone of Cypress by whetting, helps baldness;
being taken inwardly with Vinegar consumes the Spleen and helps the
falling sickness.

Geodetes binds and dries; being beaten into powder and mixed with water, and
applied to the place, takes away inflammations of the Testicles.

Pumice-stone being beaten into powder and the Dioscorides.
teeth rubbed with it, cleanses them.

Jet, it is of a softening and discussing nature, it resists the fits of the
Mother.

Lapis Memphites: Dioscorides says, that if it be beaten to powder and made
into an Ointment, and the part of a man which is to be cut off anointed with
it, it takes away the sense of it without any danger.

Lapis Ophites: some of these stones have white lines in them; these are an
admirable remedy both for Headache and Lethargy; all of them being born about
one help the Headache, and the biting of Serpents.

Lapis Arabicus being beaten into powder and made into an Ointment, helps the
Hemorrhoids.

Ostrocites, a dram of it taken in powder provokes Dioscorides.
the terms, being taken after that purgation causes conception; also being
made into an Ointment helps inflammations of the breasts.

Lapis (...) is an admirable stone of the Moon; the Women in Germany wear them
as (...) because they would be fruitful; they cure the falling sickness, and
being bound to trees make them fruitful.

Lapis Amianthus being born about one helps such Dioscorides.
as are bewitched.

Myexis being born about one takes away pains in (...).
the reins and hinders the breeding of the stone.

Lapis Armenius purges Melancholy, and also causes vomiting, I hold it not
very (...) for our English bodies, and therefore I will speak no more of it.

An Explanation of certain Uncupations, comprehending more things than one
under one name.
The five opening Roots.
Smallage, Sparagus, Fennel, Parsley, Kneeholly.

The two epening Roots.
Fennel, Parsley.

The five emollient Herbs.
Marshmallows or Mallows, Beets, Mercury, Pellitory of the wall, Violet
Leaves.

The five Capillary Herbs.
Maidenhair, Wall-rue, Cetrach, Hart's-tongue, Politricum.

The four Cordial Flowers.
Borrage, Bugloss, Roses, Violets.

The four greater hot Seeds, Carminative, or breaking wind.
Annis, Caraway, Cummin, Fennel.

The four lesser hot Seeds.
Bishopsweed, Amomus, Smallage, Carrots.

The four greater cold Seeds.
Citrul, Cucumer, Guord, Melone.

The four lesser cold Seeds.
Succory, Endive, Lettice, Purslain.

Five fragments of precious Stones.
Granate, Jacinth, Sapphire, Sardine, Emerald.

Culpeper] A. I was the more willing to quote these again, although they be
almost the same in their former Dispensatory; 1. Because this is all the good
the Learned College has done their Country, in this their refined
Masterpiece; namely, To tell them that such and such Roots are opening, such
and such Flowers Cordial, or strengthening to the heart, such and such Seeds
break wind, etc. and if any should be so bold as to object against a whole
College of learned Physicians, That they did the generality of the
Commonwealth no good at all, because they wrote it in Latin, which is a
Language understood but by few; it were easily answered, They did it in Latin
to animate people to bring up their children to learning, which is a thing I
wish from my heart were done; what the College does, I know not.

2. Because they have here left out some Ointments, the use of which they would
not have the Chyrurgians know, (the most part of which are no Scholars, (the
more is the pity) and that they know well enough) it were a brave trick if they
could catch old birds with chaff.

KIND READERS,

THE Right Worshipful, the College of Physicians of London in their new
Dispensatory, give you free leave to distill these common Waters that follow,
but they never intended you should know what they are good for.

SIMPLE DISTILLED WATERS.
Of Fresh Roots of
BRiony, Onions, Alicampane, Orris, or Flower-deluce, Turnips.

Of Flowers and Buds of
Southernwood, both sorts of Wormwood, Wood Sorrel, Ladies-Mantle,
Marshmallows, Angelica, Pimpernel with purple flowers, Smallage, Columbines,
Sparagus, Mousear, Borrage, Shepheards-purse, Calaminth, wood-bine or
Honey-suckles, Carduus Benedictus, our Ladies thistles, Knotgrass, Succory,
Dragons, Coltsfoot, Fennel, Goats-rue, Grass, Hysop, Lettice, Lovage, Toadflax;
Hops; (...); Mallows; Horehound; Feathersew; Bawm; Mints; Horsemints;
Watercresses; English Tobacco; white Poppies; Pellitory of the wall; Parsley;
Plantane: (...): Self-heal: Penyroyal: Oak Leaves: Sage: Scabious: Figwort or
Throatwort: Housleek or (...): the greater and lesser: Mother of Time:
Nightshade: Tansie: (...): Valerian

Of Flowers of
Orrenges [if you can get them] Blew-bottle the greater: Beans: Water Lillies:
Lavender: Nut-tree: Cowslips: Sloes: Rosemary: Roses, white (...) and red:
Satyrion: Line-tree: Clove-gilliflowers: Violets.

Of Fruits of
Orrenges: black cherries: (...): Quinces: Cucumers: Strawberries: Winter
Cherries: Lemmons: Rasberries: unripe Walnuts: Apples.

Of parts of living creatures and their Excrements.
Lobsters: (...), (...) Snails: I know not which their word signifies, Cockles,
Snails, Peruinkls, and al such shel-fish: As their former word which I translated
Lobsters, signifies Crabs as well as Lobstars, and I could afford to think they
intend river Crabs here, by 2 or 3 letters of a word, which they ad at the latter
end of it, it being usual with Physicians because they cannot write true latin
to abreviate their words by the middle, that so a man can neither tell what
gender nor what case they are of.
(...): Bullocks dung made in May: Swallows: Earthworms: Magpies: spawm of
Frogs.

SIMPLE WATERS DISTILLED being digested beforehand.
Of the fresh Roots of Nettles. Of the Leaves of
Agrimony: Wild Tansie, or Silverweed, Mugwort, Betony, Marigolds, Chamomel,
Chamepitis, Sullondine, Pilewort, Scurvy -- grass, Comfry the greater,
Dandelyon, Ashtree leaves, Eyebright, Fumitory; Alehoof or ground Ivy,
Horstail, St. John's wort, Yarrow, Moneywort, Restharrow, Solomon's seal, Ros
solis, Rue, Savin, Saxifrage, Hartstongue, Scordium, Tamaris, Mullin, Vervain,
Paul's Betony, Mead sweet, Nettles.

Of the Flowers of
Mayweed: Broom: Cowslips: Butter-bur: Peony: Elder.

Of the Berries of
Broom, Elder.

Culpeper] A. Then the College gives you an Admonition concerning distilling
these (such a one as it is) which being converted into your native language, is
as follows.

We give you warning that these common waters be better prepared for time to
come, either in common stills, putting gaod store of Ashes underneath, the
Roots and Herbs being dryer, etc. Or if they be full of Juice, by I know
whomthey may thank for this way of distillation.
distilling the Juice in aconvenient Bath, that so burning may be avoided,
which hitherto has seldom been: But let the other Herbs, Flowers, or Roots, be
bruised, and by adding Tartar, common Salt, or Leven, be digested, then putting
spring water to them: distill them in an Alembick with his refrigeratory, or
Worm, till the change of the taste show the vrtue to be drawn off, then let the
Oil (if any be) be separated from the Water according (...).

Into the number of these Waters may be ascribed, The Tears of Vines, The
Liquor of the birch tree, May dew.
Culpeper] A. That my Country may receive the benefit of these Waters: I shall
first show the Temperatures, secondly, the virtue es of the most usual and most
easy to come by: If any should take exceptions that I mention not all (for
itis imposible to write to please every body) I answer first I me ntion enough,
secondly; Who ever makes this objection, they show extreme ingratitude, for had
I mentioned but only one; I had revealed more to them than ever the College
intended they should know, or con me thanks for doing, but the best is, I
respect their love, and fear their hatred much at one.

The quallities and apropriation of the simple distilled Waters.
Simple distilled Waters either cool or heat; Such as cool, either cool the
blood or Choler.

Waters cooling the blood.
Lettice, Purslain, Water Lillies, Violets, Sorrel, Endive, Succory, Fumitory.

Waters cooling and repressing chollerick humors, or vapors in the head.

Nightshade, Lettice, Water Lillies, Plantane, Poppies, viz. The flowers both
of white, black, and red Poppies, black Cherries.

The breast and lungues
Violets, Poppies all three sorts, Coltsfoot.

In the heart.
Sorrel, Quinces, Water Lillies, Roses, Violets, green or unripe Walnuts.

In the stomach.
Quinces, Roses, Violets, Nightshade, Housleek, or Sengreen, Lettice, Purslain.

In the River.
Endivc, Succory, Nightshade, Purslain, Water Lillies.

In the Reins and bladder.
Endive, Succory, winter Cherries, Plantane, Water Lillies, Strawberries,
Housleek: or Sengreen, black Cherriea.

In the Womb.
Endive: Succory, Lettice, Water Lillies, Purslain, Roses.

Simple Waters which are hot, concoct either phlegm or Melancholy.

Waters concocting phlegm in the Head are of:
Betony, Sage, Marjoram, Chamomel, Fennel, Calaminth, Rosemary flowers,
Primroses, Eyebright.

In the Breast and Lungues.
Maidenhair, Betony, Hysop, Hore-hound, Carduus Bnedictus, Scabious, Orris, or
Flower-de-luces Bawm, Self-heal, etc.

In the heart.
Bawm, Rosemary.

In the stomach.
Wormwood, Mints, Fennel, Chervil, Time, mother of Time, Marigolds.

In the Liver.
Wormwood: Centaury: Origanum; Marjoram: Maudlin: Costmary; Agrimony: Fennel.

In the Spleen.
Watercresses: Wormwood: Calaminth.

In the reins and bladder.
Rocket: Nettles: (...): Pellitory of the wall: Alicampane: Burnet.

In the Womb.
Mugwort: Calaminth: Peny-royal: Savin: mother of Time: Lovage.

Waters concocting Melancholy in the head: are of
Hops: Fumitory.

The Breast.
Bawm: Carduus Benedictus.

The Heart
Borrage: Bugloss: Bawm: Rosemary.

The Liver.
Endive, Cichory, Hops.

The Spleen,
Dodder: Hart's-tongue: Tamaris: Time.

Having thus ended the apropriation, I shall speak briefly of the virtues of
distilled Waters.

Lettice Wat er cools the blood when it is overheated, for when it is not, it
needs no cooling, it cools the head and Liver, stays hot vapors ascending to
the head, and hi ndring sleep, it quenches immoderate thirst, and breeds milk
in nurses. Distill it in May.

Purslain Water cools the blood and Liver, quenches thirst, helps such as spit
blood, have hot coughs or pestilences.

The distilled Water of water Lilly-Flowers, cools the blood and the bowels,
and al internal parts of the body, helps such as have the yellow Jaundice, hot
coughs or pleuresies, the headache coming of heat, fevers pestilential, and not
pestilential, as also hectic fevers.

The Water of Violet flowers, cools the blood, the heart, Liver, and Lungnes
overheated, and quenches an insatiable desire of drinking; they are in their
prime about the latter end of March, or beginning of April, according as the
year falls out.

The Water of Sorrel cools ths blood, heart, Liver, and spleen; if Venis
Treacle be given with it, it is profitable in pestilential fevers; distill it
in May.

Endive and Succory Water, are excellent against heat in the stomach; If you
take an ounce of either (for their operation is the same) morning and evening
four days one after another, they cool the Liver, and cleanse the blood; they
are in their prime in May.

Fumitory Water is usual with the City Dames, to wash their faces with, to take
away morphew freckles, and Sunburning, inwardly taken it helps the yellow
Jaundice, and Itch, cleanses the blood, provokes sweat, strengthens the
stomach, and cleanses the body of adust humors, It is in its prime in May and
June.

The Water of Nightshade helps pains in the head coming of heat; take heed you
distill not the deadly Nightshade instead of the common, if you do, you may
make mad work; let such as have not wit enough to know them asunder, have wit
enough to let them both alone til they do.

The Water of white Poppies extinguisheth al heat (...) nature, helps headaches
coming of heat, and too long standing in the Sun: Distill them in June or July.

Coltsfoot Watar is excellent for burns to wash the place with it, inwardly
taken it helps Phthisicks, and other diseases incident to the lungues; Distill
them in May or June.

The Water of distilled Quinces strengthens the heart and stomach exceedingly,
stays vomiting, and fluxes, and strengthens the retentive faculty in man.

Demask Rose Water, cools, comsorts, and strengthens the heart; so does red
Rose Water, only with this difference, the one is binding, the other loosening,
if your body be costive, use Damask Rose Water, because it is loosening, if
loose, use red, because it is binding.

White Rose Water is generally known to be excellent against hot rhewms, and
inflammations in the eyes, and for this it is better than the former.

The Water of Red Poppy flowers, called by many Corn-roses, because they grow
so freequently amongst corn, cool the blood, and spirits overheated by drinking
or labor, and is therefore excellent for surfets.

Green Walnuts gathered about the latter end of June, or beginning of July, and
bruiled, and so stilled, strengthens the heart, and resists the pestilence.

Plantane Water helps the headache, being dropped into the ear; it helps the
toothach, helps the Phthisick, dropsy, and fluxes, and is an admirable remedy
for (...) in the reins and bladder, to be used as common drink: the herb is in
its prime in May.

Strawberry Water cools, quenches thirst, clarifieth the blood, breaks the
stone, helps al inward inflammations, especially those in the reins, bladder,
and passages of the urine, it strengthens the Liver, and helps the yellow
Jaundice.

The distilled Water of Dog-grass, or couch-grass as some call it, cleanses the
(...) gallantly, and provokes urine, opens (...) of the Liver and spleen, and
kills worms.

Black Cherry Water, provokes urine, helps the dropsy; It is usually given in
diseases of the brain, as convulsions, falling sickness, palsy, and Apoplexy.

Betony is in its prime in May; the distilled Water thereof is very good for
such as are pained in their heads, it prevails against the dropsy, and al
sorts of fevers, it succors the Liver and spleen, and helps want of digestion,
and evil disposition of the body thence arising, it hastens travail in women
with child, and is excellent against the bitings of venomous beasts.

Distill Sage whilst the slowers be on it; the Water strengthens the brain,
provokes the terms, helps nature much in all its actions

Marjoram is in its prime in June; the distilled Water, is excellent for such
whose brains are too cold, it provokes urine, heats the womb, provokes the
terms, strengthens the memory, and helps the judgment, causes an able brain,
and therefore I commend it to the College of Physicians.

Distill Chamomel Water about the beginning of June: It eases the chollick and
pains in the belly, it breaks the stone in the reins and bladder, provokes the
terms, expels the dead child, and takes away pains in the head.

Fennel water strengthens the heart and brain, dilates the breast, helps the
cough, provokes the terms, increases milk in nurses, and if you wash your eyes
with it, it cleers the sight.

Calaminth Water, hea ts and cleanses the womb, provokes the terms, and eases
the pains of the head; distill it in May.

The Distilled water of Rosemary slowers, helps such as are troubled with the
yellow Jaundice, Asthma; it cleanses the blood, helps concoction, strengthens
the brain and body exceedingly.

Waters of the flowers of Lillies of the valley, strengthens the brain and all
the senses.

The water (...) Cowslip flowers, helps the palsy, and thence they obtained
the name [ Paralysis] takes away pains in the head, the vertigo, and megrim,
and are exceeding good for women with child.

The eyes being washed every morning with Eyebright water, most strangely
cleers and strengthens the sight.

Maidenhair distilled in May, the water cleanses both Liver and Lungues,
clarifies the blood, and break the stone.

Hysop water cleanses the Lungues of phlegm, helps Coughs, and Asthmaes; distill
it in August.

The water of Hore-hound, helps the Cough, and straitness of the breast, it
strengthens the breast, Lungues, and stomach, and Liver; distill it in June.

Carduus water succors the head, strengthens the memory, helps such as are
troubled with vertigoes, and quartan agues, it provokes sweat, strengthens the
heart, and is good in pestilences, and all other fevers of choler; it is in
its prime in May and June.

Scabious water, helps pleuresies, and pains, and prickings in the sides,
Apostthemes, Coughs, pestilence, and straitness of the breast.

Water of Flower-de-luce, is very profitable in dropsies, an ounce being drnnk
continually, morning and evening, as also pains and torments in the bowels.

Bawm water distilled in May, restores memory when it is lost, it quickens all the senses, strengthens the brain, heart, and stomach, causes a merry mind,
and a sweet breath.

The water of Comfry sodders broken bones, being drunk helps ruptures,
outwardly it stops the bleeding of wounds, they being washed with it.

Wormwood water distilled cold, about the end of May, heats and strengthens the
stomach, helps concoction, stays vomiting, kills worms in the stomach, and
bowels, it mitigates the pains in the teeth, and is profitably given in fevers
of Choler.

Mint water strengthens the stomach, helps concoction and (...) vomiting;
distill it in the latter end of May, or beginning of June, as the year is in
forwardness, or backwardness; observe that in all the rest.

Chervil water distilled about the end of May, helps ruptures, breaks the
stone, dissolves congealed blood, strengthens the heart and stomach.

The water of Mother of Time strengthens the brain and stomach, gets a man a
good stomach to his victuals, provokes urine, and the terms, heats the womb; it
is in its prime about the end of June.

The water of Marigold flowers, is apropriated to most cold diseases of the
head, Eyes, and stomach; they are in their vigor when the Sun is in the Lion.

Distilled water of Centaury, comforts a cold stomach, helps in fevers of
choler, which the Greeks (...) (...), and (...) it kills worms, and provokes
appetite to victuals.

Maudlin and Costmary water distilled in May, or June, strengthens the Liver,
helps the yellow (...), opens obstructions, and helps the dropsy.

Watercresses distilled in March, the water cleanses the blood, and provokes
(...) exceedingly, kills worms, outwardly mixed with Honey, it cleers the skin
of morphew and Sunburning.

Distill Nettles when they are in flower, the water helps coughs, and pains in
the bowels, provokes urine, and breaks the stone.

Saxifrage water provokes urine, expels wind, breaks the stone, cleanses the
reins and bladder of gravel; distill them when they are in flower.

The water of Pellitory of the wall, opens obstructions of the Liver and Spleen,
by drinking an ounce of it every morning, it cleanses the reins and bladder,
and eases the gripings of the howels coming of wind; distill it in the end of
May, or beginning of June.

Sinkfoyl water breaks the stone, cleanses the reins, and is of excellent use
in putrified fevers; distill it in May.

The water of Radishes, breaks the stone, cleanses the reins and bladder,
provokes the terms, and helps the yellow Jaundice.

Alicampane water strengthens the stomach and Lungues, provokes urine, and
cleanses the passages of it from gravel.

Distill Burnet in May or June; the water breaks the stone, cleanses the
passages of urine, and is exceeding profitable in pestilential times.

Mugwort water distilled in May, is excelleut in coughs, and diseases
proceeding from stoppage of the terms in women, it warms the stomach, and helps
the dropsy.

Distill Peny-royal when the flowers are upon it; the water heats the womb
gallantly, provokes the terms, expels the Afterbirh, cuts, and casts out thick
and gross humors in the breast, eases pains in the bowels, and consumes phlegm.

The water of Lovage distilled in May, eases pains in the head, and tures
ulcers in the womb being washed with it, inwardly taken it expels wind, and
breaks the stone.

The tops of Hops when they are young, being distilled; the water cleanses the
blood of addust and melancholy humors, and therefore helps Scabs, Itch, and
leprosy, and such like diseases thence proceeding, it open obstructions of the
spleen, helps the rickets, and Hypocondriack melancholy.

The water of Borrage and Bugloss, distilled when their flowers are upon them,
strengthen the heart and brain exceedingly, cleanse the blood, and takes away
sadness, grief, and melancholy.

Doddar water cleanses the Liver and spleen, helps the yellow jaundice.

Tamaris water opens the obstructions, and helps the hardness of the spleen,
and strengthens it.

English Tobacco distilled; the water is excellent good for such as have
dropsies, to drink an ounce or too every morning, it helps ulcers in the mouth,
strengthens the Lungues, and helps such as have Asthmaes.

The water of Dwarffe Elder has the same effects.

Thus have you the virtues of enough of cold waters, the use of which is for
mixtures of other medicines, whose operation is the same, for they are very
seldom given alone; if you delight most in liquid medicines, having regard to
the disease, and part of the body afflicted by it, these will furnish you with,
where withal to make them, so as will please your pallat best.

COMPOUNDS.
SPIRITS and COMPOND DISTILLED WATERS.
Culpeper] A. BEfore I begin these, I thought good to premise a few words: They
are all of them hot in operation, and therefore not to be meddled with by people
of hot Constitutions, when they are in health for fear of Fevers, and adustion
of blood; but for people of cold constitutions, as Melancholy and Phlegmatic
people. If they drink of them moderately now and then for recreation, due
consideration being had to the part of the body which is weakest, they may do
them good; yet in diseases of melancholy, neither strong Waters nor Sack is to
be drunk, for they make the (...) thin, and then up to the head it flies, where
it fills the brain with foolish and fearful imaginations.

2. Let all young people forbear them whilst they are in health, for their blood
is usually hot enough without them.

3. Have regard to the season of the year, so shall you find them more
beneficial in Summer than in in Winter, because in Summer the body is always
coldest within, and digestion weakest, and that is the reason why men and women
eat less in Summer than they do in Winter.

Thus much for people in health, which drink strong waters for recreation.

As for the Medicinal use of them, it shall be showed at the (...) end of every
Receipt; only in general they are (due respect had to the humors afflicting,
and part of the body afflicted) medicinal for diseases of cold, and phlegm,
chilliness of the spirits etc.

But that my Country men may not be mistaken in this, I shall give them some
Symptoms of each Complexion, how a man may know when it exceeds its due (...).

Signs of Choler abounding.
Leaness of body, costiveness, hollow eyes, anger without a cause, a testy
disposition, yellowness of the (...) bitterness in the (...) pains in the (...)
the pulse (...) and stronger (...) ordinary; the (...) higher colored, thinner
and brighter; troublesome sleeps; much dreaming of fire; lightning; anger and
fighting.

Signs of Blood abounding.
The Veins are bigger (or at least they seem so) and fuller than ordinary; the
skin is red, and as it were swollen; pricking pains in the sides and about the
temples; shortness of breath; headache; the pulse great and full; urine high
colored and thick; dreams of blood etc.

Signs of Melancholy abounding.
Fearfulness without a cause, fearful and (...) imaginations, the skin rough
and (...), (...), want of sleep, frightful dreams, (...) in the throat, the
pulse very weak, solitariness, thin (...) urine, often sighing etc.

Signs of Phlegm abounding.
Sleepiness, dullness, slowness, heaviness, cowardliness, forgetfulness, much
spitting, much (...) at the (...), little appetite to meat, and as bad (...),
the skin whiter, colder and smoother than it was wont to be, the pulse flow and
deep, the urine thick and low colored, dreams of rain, floods, and water etc.

These things thus premised I come to the matter.

The first the College presents you with, is

Spiritus et Aqua Absinthii minus Composita. Page 30. Or, Spirit and Water of
Wormwood the lesser Composition.
The Colledg] Take of the Leaves of You may take what Wormwood you pleas; what
care they so they get money, they have their desire.
dried Wormwood two pound; Annis seeds half a pound; steep them in six gallons
of small Wines twenty four hours, then (...) them in an Allembick, (...) to
every (...) of the (...) water two (...) Sugar.

Let the two first pound you draw out be called Spirit of Wormwood; those which
follow, Wormwood Water the lesser Composition.

Culpeper] A. I like this distinction of the Colleges very well, because what
is first stilled out is far stronger than the rest, and therefore very fitting
to be kept by it self, you may take which you please, according as the
temperature of your body, either to heat or cold, and the season of the year
requires.

A. It has the same virtues Wormwood has, only fitter to be used by such
whose bodies are chilled by age, and whose natural heat abateth. You may search
the Herb for the virtues; it heateth the stomach and helps digestion.

The Colledg] After the same manner (only omitting the Annis seeds) is
distilled Spirit and water of Angelica, both Herb and Root; (...), Mints, Sage
etc. The Flowers of Rosemary Clary, Clove-gilli flowers etc. the seeds of
Caraway etc. (...) berries, (...) pills, Lemmons, Citrons etc. (...), Nutmegs
etc.

Culpeper] A. I would some body (that knows their conditions) would do but so
much as ask the College what the meaning of all these et caetera's is.

Spiritus et Aqua Absynthii magis composita. Page 30. Or, Spirit and Water of
Wormwood the greater Composition.
The Colledg] Take of common and Roman Wormwood, of each a pound; Sage, Mints,
Bawm, of each two handfuls; the roots of Galanga, Ginger, Calamus Aromaticus,
Alicampane, of each three drams; Liquor is an ounce, Raisons of the Sun stoned
three ounces; Annis seeds and sweet Fennel seeds, of each three drachms,
Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each two drachms; Cardamoms, Cubebs, of each one
dram: Let the things be cut that are to be cut, and the things bruised that
are to be bruised; all of them infused in twenty four pints of Spanish Wines
for twenty four hours, then distilled in an Allembick, adding two ounces of
white Sugar to every pint of distilled water.

Let the first pint be called Spirit of Wormwood the greater composition.

Culpeper] A. In this Receipt they have only in their new Masterpiece, left
out According to Art, and I commend them, for sure it was advisedly done of
them not to write of what they never had.

A. The Opinion of Authors, is, That it heats the stomach, and strengthens it
and the lungues, expels wind, and helps digestion in ancient people.

Spiritus et Aqua Angelicae magis composita. Page 31. Or, Spirit and Water of
Angelica the greater Composition.
The Colledg] Take of the I bid the^ say Leaves in my last Edition.
Leaves of Angelica eight ounces, of (...) ounces, of Bawm and Sage, of each
sour ounces; Angelica seeds six ounces; sweet Fennel seeds nine ounces: Let the
Herbs being dried and the seeds be grossly bruised, to which ad of the Species
called Aromaticum Rosatum, and of the Species called Diamoschu Dulce, of each
an ounce and an (...); infuse them two days in thirty two pints of Spanish
Wine; then distill them with a gentle fire (according to that art which we never
had) and with every pound mix two ounces of Sugar dissolved in Rose water.

Let the three first pound be called by the name of Spirit, the rest by the
name of Water.

Culpeper] A This Receipt was far different from that Angelica water which they
prescribed in their last Dispensatory; I could at first imagine no reason worth
the quoting, unless it were done to make it dearer, as who should say, seeing
the common people cannot be kept from knowing the virtues of what we have so
long monopolized into our own hands, through the iniquity of the times in
abolishing Kingly Government, which was the only (...) we had to lean upon; yet
will we to work again, and leave never a stone unturned that may uphold us in
our pride and unconscionable domineering: and though we cannot write but it
will be translated into such a language as will be in the reach (...) the (...)
brain, yet will we wind the business so high, that it shall be out of the reach
of his purse; this I thought to be the plain English of it: yet afterward I
found, that their former Dispensatory had a water called Cordial Water, which
here shouldered out, Angelica Water, and having got into its place, stole its
name. Pray do but so much as tell what good it does the vulgar for you to
change the names of Medicines: I (...) a Rat, a new trick to cheat the world.

A. The chief end of composing this Medicine, was to strengthen the heart, and
(...), and therefore is very wholesome in pestilential times, and for such as
walk in stinking airs.

I shall now quote you their former Receipt in (...) former Dspensatory.

Angellica water the greater Composition.
The Colledg] Take of Take the Leaves.
Angellica two pound, Annis seeds half a pound, Coriander and (...) away seeds,
of each four ounces, Zedoary bruised, three ounces, steep them twenty four
hours in six gallons of (...) Wines, then draw out the Spirits, and sweeten it
with Sugar.

Culpeper] A. It comforts the heart, cherishes the vital Spirits, resists
the pestilence, and al corrupt airs, which indeed are the natural causes of al
Epidimical diseases; the sick may take a spoonful of it in any convenient
cordial, and such as are in health, and have bodies either cold by nature, or
cooled by age, may take as much either in the morning fasting, or a little
before meat.

Spiritus Lavendulae compositus. (...). Page 31. Or, (...) Spirit of Lavender.
Matthias.
The Colledg] Take of Lavender flowers one gallon, to which pour three gallons
of the best Spirit of Wine, let them stand together in the Sun six days, then
destil them with an (...) with his refrigeratory.

Take of the flowers of Sage, Rosemary, and (...) of each one handful, the
flowers of (...), (...), Lillies of the valley, Cowslips, of (...); let the
flowers being newly and seasonably gathered, being infused in one gallon of the
best Spirit of Wine, and mingled with the aforegoing Spirit of (...) flowers,
adding the leaves of Bawm, Feather-few, and Orrenge tree fresh gathered; the
flowers of (...), and Orrenge tree, Bay berries, of each one ounce; after
(...), distill it again, after which add, Citron (...) the outward Bark, (...)
seeds husked, of each six drachms, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Mace, Cardamoms, (...),
yellow Sanders, of each half an (...), wood of Aloes one (...), the best (...),
the stones being taken out, half a pound, digest them six weeks, then strain
it, and filter it, and add to it, prepared Pearls two drachms, Emeralds
prepared a scruple, Ambergreese, Musk, Saffron, of each half a scruple, red
Roses dried, red Sanders, of each half an ounce, yellow Sanders, Citron pills
dried, of each one dram; let the Species being tied up in a rag, be hung into
the aforegoing Spirit.

Culp] Although I could have easily been brought to believe, that the College
never intended the company of Apothecaries any good, yet before I read this
Receipt; I could not conceit they willingly intended to impose impossibilities
upon them; I could wish the Apothecaries would desire to be certified by the
College.

A. 1. Whether the Gallon of Lavender flowers must be filled by heap, or by
strike.

A. 2. Next, whether the flowers must be pressed down in the Measure, or not.

A. 3. How much must be drawn off in the first distillation.

A. 4. Where they should get Orrenge leaves and flowers fresh gathered.

A. 5. What they mean by Convenient Digestion.

A. 6. Where you shall find Borrage, Bugloss, and Cowslips (...) together, that
so you may have them al fresh according to their prescript, the one flowring in
the latter end of April, and beginning of May, the other in the end of June,
and beginning of July.

A. 7. If they can make a shift to make it (which is a task almost, if not
altogether, as hard as to piss down Paul's, how, or which way the virtues of it
will countervail the one half of the charge and cost, to leave the pains and
trouble out. (...) Dr. Ignoramus followed Matthias and never considered he
lived in a different Climate.

Spiritus Castorii. Page 32. in the Latin Book. Or, Spirit of Castorium.
The Colledg] Take of fresh Castorium four ounces, Lavender flower an ounce,
the tops of Sage, and Rosemary, of each half an ounce, Cinnamon six drams,
Mace, Cloves, of each two drachms, Spirit of Wine rectified six pound.; digest
them in a Phial filled only to the third part, close stopped with cork and
bladder, in warm ashes for two days, then distilled in A table at the latter
end shall instruct you in all such crabbed words.
Balneo Mariae, and the distilled water kept close stopped.

Culpeper] A. By reason of its heat it is no ways fit to be taken alone, but
mixed with other convenient medicines, apropriated to the diseases you would
give it for; It resists poison, and helps such as are bitten by venomous
beasts, it causes speedy deliver y to women in travail, and casts out the
after birth, it helps the fits of the mother, Lethargies, and Convulsions;
being mixed with white. Wine, and dropped into the ears, it helps deafness, if
stopping be the cause of it: the dose to be given inwardly, is between one
dram, and half a dram according to the age and strength of the patient.

Aqua Petasitidis composita. Page 32. in Latin Book. Or, Compound water of
(...)-Burrs.
The Colledg] Take of the fresh roots of Butter Burr bruised, one pound and an
half; the roots of Angelica, and Master-wort, of each half a pound; steep them
in ten pints of strong Ale, then distill them, till the change of the taste gives
testimony that the strength is drawn out.

Culpeper] A. This water is very effectual, being mixed with other convenient
cordials, for such as have pestilential fevers; also a spoonful taken in the
morning, may prove a good preservative in pestilential times: it helps the fits
of the mother, and such as are short winded, and being taken inwardly, dries up
the moisture of such sores as are hard to be cured.

Aqua Raphani Composita. Page 33. in the Latin B. Compound water of Rhadishes.
The Colledg] Take of the leaves of hoth sorts of Scurvy Grass, of each six
pound; having bruised them, press the (...) out of them, with which mix of the
Juice of Brooklime, and Water-cesses, of each one pound and an half, of the
best white wine eight pound, twelve whole Lemmons, pills and all, fresh (...)
roots four pound, the roots of wild Raddishes two pound; Capt. winters Cinnamon
half a pound, Nutmegs four ounces; steep them altogether and then distill them.

Culpeper] A. In their former Dispensatory, when they had that Ingenuity left
to confess where they had their medicines; I gave them a modest term, and said
they borrowed them from such or such an Author; but now all ingenuity has left
them, and nothing but Self remains in them, and they abscond their Authors; I
know not what to say, unless I should say they: stole them: whether this be
their own or not I know not, it is something like them, a churlish medicine, to
a churlish College; I fancy it not, and so I leave it; I suppose they intended
it for purgation of women in childbed, and it is as fit for it, as a Sow is for
a Saddle.

Aqua Peoniae Composita. Page 33. in the Latin B. Or, Compound water of Peony.
The Colledg] Take of the flowers of Lillies of the valley, one pound; infuse
them in four gallons of Spanish Wine, so long til the following flowers may be
had fresh.

Take of the fore named flowers half a pound, Peony flowers four ounces; steep
them together fourteen days, then distill them in Balneo Mariae til they be
dry, in the distilled liquor, infuse again male Peony roots, gathered And that
is they know not when: I, you will be precise in your time, let it be in the
hour and day of the Sun, he rising in the lion, and the moon applying to his or.
in due time, two ounces and an half, white Dittany, long Birthwort, of each
half an ounce, the leaves of Misleto of the Oak, and Rue, of each two handfuls,
Peony seeds husked ten drachms, Rue seeds three drachms and an half, Castorium
two scruples, Cubebs, Mace, of each two drachms, (...) an ounce and an half,
Squils prepared three drachms, Rosemary flowers six pugils, Arabian (...),
Lavender, of each four pugils, the flowers of Betony, Clove-gilli-flowers, and
Cowslips, of each eight pugils; then adding four pound of the Juice of black
cherries: Distill it in a glass still, til it be dry.

Culpeper] A. It seems the College was shrewdly put to it, to alter the name of
this Receipt, from Langius his Antepileptical water, to Compound water of
Peony, a new trick to cheat the world, and they have also altered some few
things not worth the noting.

A. If the Authority of Erastus, or daily experience will serve the turn, then
was this Receipt chiefly compiled against the Convulsion fits, but the
derivation of the word notes it to be prevalent against the falling sickness
also, for (...) in Greek, signifies Falling sickness; and indeed Erastus and
experience pleads for this also: It is true, the Composition of Erastus differs
from this, and so does another recited by Johannes Langius; but it seems our
Physicians (for some reasons best known to themselves) esteemed this the best
at this time, for their minds are mutable.

A. Well then, having now learned the virtues of the Water, a word or two of
the Use will not be amiss. Erastus was of opinion that both these diseases were
caused by the Moon (and so am I of that opinion also, for I know some at this
time that are constantly troubled with the falling sickness, only at the new
and full Moons; I could give reasons for this judgment of Erastus but I am
unwill ing to be tedious.) Then says he, if the disease come daily, let a
spoonful to it be taken morning and evening, if weakly, then let it be taken
only at the new and full Moon, and at her quartiles to the Sun, if it begin to
wear away, then only twice a month viz. at the new and full Moon will suffice.
It profits also in time of the fit, by rubbing their temples, nostrils, and
jaws with it.

Aqua Bezoartica. 34. in the Latin Book. Or, Bezoar Water.
The Colledg] Take of the leaves of Sullendine roots and al, three handfuls and
an half, Rue two handfuls, Scordium four handfuls, Dittany of creet, Carduus,
of each one handful and an half, Zedoary, and Angellica roots, of each three
drachms, Citrons, and Lemmon pills, of each six drachms, Clove-gilliflowers one
ounce and an half, red Roses, Centaury the less, of each two drachms, Cinnamon,
Cloves of each three drachms, Venis Treacle three ounces, Mithridate one ounce
and an half, Camphire two scruples, Troches of vipers two ounces, Mace two
drachms, wood of Aloes half an ounce, yellow Sanders one dram and an half,
Cardus seeds one ounce, Citron seeds six drachms; let them be cut, and infused
in Spirit of Wine, and Malaga Wine, of each three pound and an half, Vinegar of
Clove-gilli-flowers, juice of Lemmons, of each one pound, and distilled in a
glass still in Balneo Mariae; after it is half stilled off, the residue may be
strained through a linen cloth, and be reduced to the thickness of Honey, and
called the Bezoartick extract.

Culpeper] A. Extracts have the same virtues with the waters they are made
from, only the different form is to please the quaint pallats of such whose
fancy loathes any one particular form.

A. This Bezoar water strengthens the heart, Arteries and spirit vital: It
provokes sweat, and is exceeding good in pestilential fevers, in health it
withstands melancholy and consumptions, and makes a merry blithe cheerful
creature. Of the extract you may take ten grains at a time or somewhat more if
your body be not feverish; half a spoonful of water is sufficient at a time
and that mixed with other cordials or medicines apropriated to the disease that
troubles you, which the Table at the latter end of the Book will direct you to.
And take this for a general rule, when any thing is too hot to take it by it
self, resort to the Table of diseases, which will amply furnish you with what
to mix it, and especially the cold waters, the virtues of which you have amply
in this third Edition: This is Langius Receipt, though the College would have
no body know it.

Aqua et Spiritus Lumbricorum Magistralis. P. 34. L. B. Or, Water and Spirit of
Earthworms.
The Colledg] Take of Earthworms well cleansed, three pound, Snails with shells
on their backs cleansed, two Gallons; beat them in a mortar, and put them into a
convenient vessel, adding stinging Nettles, roots and all, six handfuls, wild
Angellica four handfuls, Brank ursine seven handfuls, Agrimony, Betony, of each
three handfuls, Rue one handful, common Wormwood two handfuls, Rosemary flowers
six ounces, Dock roots ten ounces, the roots of Sorrel five ounces, Turmerick,
the inner bark of Barberries, of each four ounces, Fenugreek seeds two ounces,
Cloves three ounces, Hartshorn, Ivory in gross powder, of each four ounces,
Saffron three drachms, small Spirit of Wine four gallons and an half; after
twenty four hours infusion, distill them in an Alembick. Let the four first
pounds be reserved for Spirit, the rest for water.

Culpeper] A. It Is a mess of Altogether; it may be they intended it for an
Universal medicine.

Aqua Gentianae composita, Page 35. in the Latin B. Or, Gentian Water Compound.
The Colledg] Take of Gentian roots sliced, one pound and an half, the leaves
and flowers of Centa^ry the less, of each four ounces; steep them eight da^^ in
twelve pound of white Wine, then distill them in an Alembick.

Culpeper] A. It conduces to preservation from ill air, and pestilential
fevers, it opens obstructions of the Liver, and helps such as they say are
Liver grown, it eases pains in the stomach, helps digestion, and eases such
as have pains in their bones by ill lodging abroad in the cold, it provokes
appetite, and is excellent good for the yellow jaundice, as also for prickings
or stitches in the sides; it provokes the terms, and expells both birth and
afterbirth; it is naught for women with child: If there be no fever, you may
take a spoonful or taster full by it self, if there be, you may if you please
mix it with some cooler medicine apropriated to the same use you would give it
for.

Aqua Gilberti. Page 35. in the Latin Book. Or, Gilberts Water.
The Colledg] Take of Scabious, Burnet, Dragons, Bawm, Angellica, Pimpernel
with purple flowers, Tormentil roots and all, of each two handfuls; let al of
them being rightly gathered and prepared, be steeped in four gallons of Canary
Wine, still off three gallons in an Alembick, to which ad three ounces of each
of the cordial flowers, Clove-gilli-flowers six ounces, Saffron half an ounce,
Turmerick two ounces, Galanga, Bazil seeds, of each one dram, Citron pills
one ounce, the seeds of Citrons, and Cardus, Cloves, of each five drachms,
Hartshorn four ounces; steep them twenty four hours, and then distill them in
Balneo Mariae; to the stilled water add Pearls prepared, an ounce and an half,
red Corral, Crabs eyes, white Amber, of each two drachms, Crabs claws six
drams, Bezoar Ambergreese, of each two scruples, steep them six weeks in the
Sun in a vessel well stopped, often shaking it, then filter it (you may keep
the p^uders for Sp. cord. temp.) by mixing twelve ounces of Sugar candy, with
six ounces of red Rose water, and four ounces of Spirit of Cinnamon with it.

Culpeper A. I suppose this was invented for a cordial, to strengthen the
heart, to releeve languishing nature, it is exceeding dear; I forbear the dose,
they that have money enough to make it themselves, cannot want time to stady
both the virtues and dose; I would have Gentlemen men to be studious.

A. Only one thing I would demand of the College that makes their brags so much
of minding their Countries good, these same species which they appoint to be
left (after use in this medicine) for Species Cordiales Temperatae. Does the
virtue come out of them in this medicine or not? if not, why are they put in?
if yes, then will the Species cordiales Temperatae be like themselves, viz. good
for nothing but to deceive people.

Aqua Cordialis (...). Page 36. in Lat. B.
The Colledg] Take of the Juice of Borrage, Bugloss, Bawm, Bistort, Tormentil,
Scordium, Vervain, Sharp-pointed dock, Sorrel, Goats Rue, (...), blew Bottle
great and small, Roses, Marigolds, Lemmons, Citrons, of each six ounces, Bnrnet:
Sinksoyl, of each three ounces, white Wine Vinegar one pound, Purslain seeds
two ounces, Citron and Cardus seeds, of each half an ounce, Water Lilly flowers
two ounces, the flowers of Borrage, Bugloss, Violets, (...), of each one ounce,
Diatrion Santalon six (...); let all of them being rightly prepared, be infused
three days, then distilled in a glass still; to the distilled Liquor add earth
of Lemnos Siletia, and Samos, of each one ounce and an half, Pearls prepared
with the juice Citrons, three drachms, mix them, and keep them together.

Culpeper] A. No sooner had I translated their old Dispensatory (which should
have been Authentic til dooms day in the afternoon had not I done it) to work
go they and make another such a one as (...) and then the old one is thrown by
like an old Almanac out of (...); some final alterations they have made in
some medicines (of which this is one) not worth speaking of, yet will they serve
to vapor with, look here quoth they here is such a thing altered, here is a
grain and an half put in, where there was but a grain before, the other is
dangerous and destructive to the Commonwealth, and so care not a straw for
defaming their predecessors; nay some of their own handy works, so they may but
uphold their own interests and unconscionable domineering; thus they serve the
poor people just as a Cat serves a Mouse; first play with them, and then eat
them up.

A. It mightily cools the blood, and therefore profitable in Fevers, and al
diseases proceeding of heat of blood it provokes sleep. You may take half an
ounce at a time, or two drachms if the party be weak.

Aqua Theriacalis. Page 36. in the Latin Book. Or, Treatle Water.
The Colledg] Take of the Juice of green Walnuts, (...) pound; the juice of
(...) three pound, juice of Carduus, Marigolds and Bawm, of each two pound,
(...) Petasitis roots one pound and an half, the roots of (...) one pound,
Angellica and Master-wort, of each half a pound, the leaves of Scordium four
(...), old venis (...), (...), of each eight ounces, Canary Wine twelve pound,
Vinegar six pound, juice of Lemons two pound; digest them two days, either in
horse-dung or in a bath, the vessel being close shut, then distill them in Sand:
in the distillation you may make a theriacal extraction.

Culpeper] A. This water is exceeding good in (...) Fevers, especially
pestilential, it expels venomous humors by sweat, it strengthens the heart
and vitals, it is an admirable counterpoyson, special good for such as have the
Plague, or are poisoned, or bitten by venomous beasts, and expels virulent
humors from such as have the French Pocks. If you desire to know more virtues
of it, see the virtues of Venis Treacle. The dose is from a spoonful to an
ounce.

Aqua Brioniae Composita. Page 37. in the Lat. Book. Or, Briony water Compound.
The Colledg] Take of the juice of Briony roots, four pound, the leaves of Rue,
and Mugwort, af each two pound, dried Savin three handfuls, Feather-few, Nep,
Peny-royal, of each two handfuls, Bazil, Dittany of (...), of each one handful
and an half, (...) pills four ounces, Mirrh two ounces, Castorium one ounce,
(...) Wine twelve pounds; digest them four days in a convenient vessel, then
still them in Balneo Mariae; about the middle of the distillation strain it out,
and make an Hysterical extraction of the residue.

Culpeper] A. A spoonful of it taken eases the (...) of the mother in women
that have them; it potently expels the afterbirth, and clears the body of what
a midwife by heedlesness or accident has left behind, it cleanses the womb
exceedingly, and for that I fancy it much; take not above a taster full at a
time, and that in the morning fasting, for it is of a purging quality, and let
women with child forbear it. This was called Aqua Histerica in their former
Edition; let any body unless it be an Ass be judge if the Colleges intentions
in changing the names only of their medicines, the Ingredients being all the
very (...); If I could not have found out this, I had certainly been as great a
fool as themselves.

Aqua (...). Page 37. in the Latin Book. Or, Imperial Water.
The Colledg] Take of dried Citron, and (...) pills, Nutmegs, Cloves, (...), of
each two ounces, the roots of Cyperus, Orris Florentine, Calamus, Aromaticus,
of each one ounce, Zedoary, Galanga, Ginger, of each half an ounce; the tops of
Lavender, and Rosemary, of each two handfuls, the leaves of Bay, Marjoram,
Bawm, (...), Sage, Time, of each one handful, the flowers of white and Damask
Rose fresh, of each half a handful, Rose water four pound white Wine eight
pound; let al of them being bruised, and insused twenty four hours, then distill
them according to art.

Culpeper] A. You must distill it in a Bath, and not in sand: It seems the
College were but mean practioners in Alchymy, but in this, and many other
Receipts, trusted to that monster called Tradition; therefore take this for a
general Aphorism, All gross bodies stilled in sand, will stink egregiously.
This so gravelled the College that in their new Dispensatory they quite lest
out the manner of distillation.

A. It comforts and strengthens the heart a against Faintings, and Swoonings,
and it is held to be a preservative against Consumptions and Apoplexies. You
may take half a spoonful at a time.

Aqua Mirabilis. Page 38. in Lat. Book.
The Colledg] Take of Cloves, Galanga, Cubebs, Mace, Cardamoms, Nutmegs,
Ginger, of each one dram; (...) of (...) half a pound; Spirit of wine one
pound; white wine three pound; infuse them twenty four hours and draw off two
pound with an Alembick.

Culpeper] A The Simples also of this regard the stomach, and therefore the
water heats cold stomachs: besides Authors say, it preserves from Apoplexies,
and restores speech lost.

Aqua (...). Page 38. in Lat. Book.
The Colledg] Take of Scordium, Scabious, Cardus, (...), of each two handfuls,
Citron and Orrenge Pills, of each two ounces; the seeds of Citrons, Cardus,
Hartwort, Treacle Mustard, of each one ounce; the flowers of Marigolds, and
Rosemary of each one handful: cut them and bruise them grossly, then insuse them
in four pound of white Wine, and two pound of Cardus Water, in a glass stopped
close, and set in the (...) or bath for a fortnight, often shaking it, then
still it in Balneo Mariae. Let the two first pounds be kept by themselves for
use, and the remainder of the distillation by it self: Lastly, mix an ounce of
Julep of Alexandria, and a spoonful of Cinnamon water with each pound.

Culpeper] A. Aqua (...), signifies a Water for Treacle, so then if you put
Diascordium to it, it is a water for Diascordium: well then, we will take it
for a general water for all Physic.

Aqua Caponis. Page 38. in Lat. Book. Or, Capon Water.
The Colledg] Take a Capon the guts being pulled out, cut in pieces the fat
being taken away, boiled in a Do so much some of you that know their qualities,
as ask the^ the meaning of this word, [ sufficient quantity] I told the^ of it
before, but they are too proud to learn.
sufficient quantity of spring water, in a close vessel, take of this broth
three pound, Borrage and Violet Water of each a pound and an half, white Wine
one pound; red Rose Leaves two drachms and an half; the flowers of Borrage,
Violets and Bugloss, of each one dram; pieces of bread hot out of the Oven
half a pound; Cinnamon bruised half an ounce; still it in a glass still
according to art.

Culpeper] A. Diverse Physicians have written several Receipts of this water, as
Gesner, Andr. e Lacuna, Med. Florent. and Coloniens. But the truth is, this
Receipt (although our Physicians conceal it) was borrowed from the Augustan
Physicians, and only because they thought (as I suppose) a Capon must not be
eaten without bread, they added the bread to it, the rest is verbatim from the
Augustan Physicians.

A. The Simples are most of them apropriated to the heart, and in truth the the
composition greatly nourishes and strengthens such as are in consumptions,
and restores strength lost, either by fevers or other sickness: It is a
Sovereign remedy for Hectic fevers, and Marasmos, which is nothing else but a
consumption coming from them; let such as are subject to these diseases hold it
for a Jewel.

Aqua Limacum (...). P. 39. Or, Water of Snails.
The Colledg] Take of the Juice of Or Alehoos, Which is al one.
Ground Ivy, Coltsfoot, Scabious, Lungwort, of each one pound and an half, the
Juice of Purstain, Plantane, Oak of Capadocia if you can get it.
Ambrosia, Paul's Betony, of each a pound; Hogs blood, white Wine, of each four
pound; Garden Snails, two pound; dried Tobacco Leaves, eight; powder of Liquor
is two ounces; of Alicampane, half an ounce; of Orris an ounce; Cotton seeds,
an ounce and (...) half; the greater cold seeds, Annis seeds, of each six
drachms, Saffron one dram, the flowers of red Roses, six pugils, of Violets
and Borrage, of each four (...), (...) them three days warm, and then distill
them in a glass still in sand.

Culpeper] It purges the lungues of phlegm, and helps consumptions there: If
you should happen to live where no beetter nor readier Medicine can be gotten,
you may use this.

Aqua Scordii Composita. Page 29. in the L. Book. Or, Compound Water of
Scordium.
The Colledg] Take of the Juice of Goats-rue, Sorrel, Scordium, Citrons, of
each one pound; London Treacle half a pound; steep it three days and distill
it in sand.

Culpeper] A. A tasterful taken in the morning preserves from ill airs.

Aqua Mariae. Page 39. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Sugar candy a pound, Canary Wine six ounces, Rose water
sour ounces; boylit well into a Syrup, and ad to it Imperial Water two pound,
Ambergreese, Musk, of each eighteen grains; Saffron fitfeen grains; yellow
Sanders infused in Imperial water two drachms; make ae clear water of it.

Culpeper] A. The difference between this and their former Aqua Mariae is this,
Here they appoint Imperial Water, and before Aqua (...), which they very
subtly have left out here: any tooth good Barber, so we may hold up our honor
and gains. Both Receipts are very costly, as far beyond the reach of a poor
man's purse, as of his brains.

Aqua Papaveris Composita. Page 39. in L. Book. Or, Poppy Water Compound.
The Colledg] Take of red Poppies, four pound; sprinkle them with white Wine
two pound; then distill them in a common still: let the distilled Water be
powered upon fresh flowers and repeated three times; to which distilled water ad
two Must they be pe^ny ones, or (...) ones?
Nutmegs sliced; red Poppy flowers a pugil, Sugar two ounces; set it in the Sun
to give it a pleasing sharpness; if the sharpness be more than you would have
it, put some of the same water to it which was not set in the Sun; and then it
will be a pretty water good for nothing.

Aqua Juglandium Composita. Page 40. in L. Book. Or, Walnut Water Compound.
The Colledg] Take of green Walnuts a pound and an half, Rhadish roots one
pound, green Asarabacea six ounces, Rhadish seeds four ounces: let all of them
being bruised be steeped in three pound of white Wine for three days, then
distilled in a leaden still till they be dry; And when you have done so, I pray
ask the College what it is good for, in truth I know not.

Some Waters kind country men, the College have played the men and left out in
their new Dispensatory, which were in their old one; and they are these.
Mathiolus, his Bezoar Water.
The Colledg] Take of Mathiolus his great Antielote, Syrup of Citron Pills, of
each one pound; spirit of Wine distilled five times over, five pound: put all
these in a glass that is much to big to hold them, stop it close that the
spirit fly not out, then shake it together, that the Electuary may be well
mingled with the Spirit, so let it stand a month, shaking it together twice a
week (for the Electuary will settle to the bottom) The month being ended, power
off the clear water into another glass to be kept for your use, stopping it
very close with wax and Parchment, else the strength will easily fly away in
vapors.

Culpeper] A. Mathiolus is very large in commendation of this Water, for (quoth
he) four drachms (that is half an ounce) of this water being taken, either by
it self, or in the like quantity of good Wine, or any other Cordial Water, so
absolutely and speedily cures the bitings of any venomous beasts whatsoever,
that although the danger of death be such, that the patient have lost his
speech, sight, and almost all the rest of his senses, yet will he be rouzed up
like a man out of his sleep, to the wonderful admiration of the beholders which
he says he has proved a If it want 900. of it, it matters not much, it is but
a figur called an Hyperbole: which is as much as to say in English, an Eloquent
Lie.
thousand times. It draws away poison from the heart, and cures such as have
drunk poison, it casts poison out of the stomach by vomit, and helps such as
have the pestilence.

A. For my own particular part, thus much I can testify by experience in the
commendations of it; I have known it given in acute, in peracute fevers with
gallant success, and also in Consumptions, yea, in Hecticks, and in Galens
supposed Which had it bin so, my self had not been alive to have written this
Book.
incurabe Marasmos, neither has it missed the desired effects; and therefore
out of question it strengthens the heart exceedingly, and the spirit vital.
It helps in the falling sickness, apoplexies and convulsion.

A. And then your own genius will tell you, this is fittest for cold
complexions, cold diseases, and such diseases as the heart is most afflicted
in. It is too hot to be taken alone; and half a dram is the most may be taken
at a time.

Cinnamon Water.
The Colledg] Take of bruised Cinnamon a pound and an half, Spanish Wine twelve
pints: Infuse the Cinnamon in the Wine twenty four hours, then distill them in
an (...); draw out three pints of strong Waters (and small as much as you think
sufficient) sweeten it with Sugar sufficiently, and so keep it for your use.

Culpeper] A. The virtues are the same that Cinnamon it self has, to which I
refer you.

Mathiolus his Cinnamon Water.
The Colledg] Take of bruised Cinnamon a pound, put it into a glass still,
pouring upon it four pints of Rose water, a pint and an half of Spanish wine,
stop the still body close, and place it in a warm bath twenty four hours; then
put on the still-head, lute it well, and distill it according to art.

Culpeper] A. Mathiolus appoints Wine of Creet four pints, and that is all the
alteration.

A. The Authors own Judgment is, That it strengthens the brain, heart, liver,
stomach, lungues, spleen, and nerves, quickens the sight, resists poison,
helps bitings by venomous beasts, causes a sweet breath, brings down the
terms in women, and has virtue, attenuating, opening, digesting and
strengthening.

A. The truth is, I believe it prevails in cold diseases, being orderly
regulated in quantity, according to the nature of the disease, the age and
strength of the patient, and the season of the year; have a care of taking too
much of it in fevers.

Cinnamon Water made by Infusion.
The Colledg] Take of Cinnamon bruised, four ounces; Spirit of Wine, two pints;
infuse them together four days, in a large glass close stopped with Cork and a
Bladder, shaking the Glass twice a day.

Dissolve half a pound of white Sugar Candy, in a quart of Rose water; then mix
both these liquors together, then put into them four grains of Musk, and half a
scruple of Ambergreese tied up in a linen rag and hung to the top of the
glass.

Culpeper] In my opinion this latter water is more prevalent for heart-qualms,
and faintings than Mathiolus his, neither is it half so hot, therefore more
safe.

Aqua Coelestis. Mathiolus.
The Colledg] Take of Cinnamon an ounce; Ginger half an ounce; white, red, and
yellow Sanders, of each six drachms; Cloves, Galanga, Nutmegs, of each two
drachms and an half; Mace, Cubebs, of each one dram; both sorts of Cardamoms,
Nigella seeds, of each three drachms; Zedoary, half an ounce; seeds of Annis,
sweet fennel, wild Parsnips, Bazil, of each a dram and an half; Roots of
Angelica, Avens, Calamus Aromaticus, Liquoris, Valerian the less, the leaves of
Clary, Time, Calaminth, Penyroyal, Mints, Mother of Time, Marjoram, of each two
drachms; the flowers of red Roses, Sage, Rosemary, Betony, Stoechas, Bugloss,
Borrage, of each one dram and an half; Citron Pills three drachms: Let the
things be bruised that are to be bruised, and infused fifteen days in twelve
pints of the best spirit of Wine in a glass body well stopped, and then let it
be distilled in (...) Mariae according to art. Adding to the distilled Water,
Pouders of Diambra, (...) dulce, Aromaticum Rosatum, Diamagariton frigidum,
Diathodon Abbatis, powder of Electuary de gemmis, of each three drachms; yellow
Sanders bruised two drachms; Musk, Ambergreese, of each a scruple tied up in a
fine rag; clear Julip of Roses a pound shake them well together, stopping the
glass close with wax and Parchment till it grow clear to be kept for your use.

Culpeper] A. It comfort and (...) the heart, reviveth drooping spirit,
prevails against the plague and all malignant fevers, preserves the Senses;
and restores such as are in Consumptions; It is of a hot nature. Let not the
quantity taken at a time exceed half a dram.

A. Only take this Caution, both concerning this and all other strong waters;
They are not safely given by themselves in Fevers, (because by their hot
quality they inflame the blood, and ad fuel to the fire) but mixed with other
convenient Cordials, and consideration had to the strength, complexion, habit,
age, and sex of the patient: for my own part, I aim sincerely at the public
good in writing of this, and therefore as I would not have Physicians domineer;
so I would not have fools turn Physicians.

Bawm Water: The greater Composition.
The Colledg] Take of (...) a pound, Time, Penyroyal, of each three drachms;
Cinnamon, two drachms; Cardamoms the less one dram: And they are the greater
Cardamoms, as most of the Arabian Physicians held.
Grains of Paradise half an ounce: Sweet Fennel seeds an ounce; Nutmegs,
Ginger, of each a dram; Galanga, (...) drachms; (...) Aromaticus, Cyperus, of
each one dram and an half; Dictamni, half a dram: Let all of them be
bruised and infused in eight pints of Spanish Wine, and six pints of strong
Ale, for twenty four hours together, and then distilled by an Alembick, draw
out of the stronger water three pints.

Culpeper] A. The Simples seem chiefly apropriated to the stomach, and
therefore must needs strengthen cold and weak stomachs, and help digestion:
besides Authors say, It restores memory lost, quickkens all the senses, keeps
away gray hairs and baldness, strengthens the brain, makes the heart
cheerful, and helps the lisping of the tongue, eases the pains of the teeth,
and causes a sweet breath.

Rosa (...).
The Colledg] Take of Nutmegs, Annis seeds, Coriander seeds, of each one ounce;
Galanga, Ginger, Cloves, of each half an ounce; red Rose Leaves, one bandful;
Ros-solis six handfuls; Liquoris two ounces; Cardamoms, Zedoary, Grains of
Paradise, Calamus Aromaticus, of each one dram; red Sanders, Cinnamon, of
each an ounce and an half; of the best Aqua vitae, twelve pints: make an
infusion of them for eight days, (...) strain it and ad to the Liquor, one
pound and an half of Sugar.

Culpeper] A, The Basis of this Medicine, seems to be the Herb Ros-solis, which
is of a drying and binding quality, and apropriated to the Lungues, and
therefore must needs be available for (...), or Consumptions of the Lungues,
and because this herb provokes lust exceedingly, I suppose therefore the Rose
leaves were added, which according to Schol. Salem.
Authors resist lust.

Dr. Stephens Water.
The Colledg] Take of Cinnamon, Ginger, Galanga, Cloves, Nutmegs, Grains of
Paradise, Seeds of Annis, Fennel, Caraway, of each one dram; Herbs of Time,
Mother of Time, Mints, Sage, Penyroyal, Pellitory of the Wall, Rosemary,
flowers of red Roses, Chamomel, Origanum, Lavender, of each one handful; infuse
them twelve hours in twelve (...) of Gascoign Wine, then with an Alembick, draw
three pints of strong Water from it.

Culpeper] A. Authors hold it profitable for women in labor, that it provokes
the terms, and brings away the afterbirth.

Ordinary Aqua vitae.
The Colledg] Distill Ale and Lees of Wine in (...) Alembick (whose worm runs
through cold Water) into small Wine, in ten Congies of which, (...) one pound
of bruised Annis seeds, for twenty four hours, then still it again into strong
water.

Aqua vitae Compound.
The Colledg] Is made of small Wines, in six congies of which, infuse Annis
seeds half a pound; seeds of Fennel, and Caraway, of each two ounces; Cloves,
(...) and Ginger, of each one ounce, and then draw the strong Spirit from it.

Culpeper] A. This is excellent good in my opinion for such as are troubled
with wind.

Vsquebach.
The Colledg] Take of strong Aqua vitae twenty four pints, in which, for four
days infuse a pound of Liquoris, Raisons of the Sun half a pound; Cloves half
an ounce; Mace, Ginger, of each two drachms, strain it and keep it for your use.

Culpeper] A. It strengthens the stomach, and helps indigestion coming of phlegm
and cold.

A. It is possible I may have overslipped some others of their Alterations of
Names; my time is short, and my understanding dull: and the truth is, their new
model shows far more subtilty than honesty.

TINCTURES.
Tinctura Croci. Page 41. in the Latin Book. Or, Tincture of Saffron.
College. TAke two drachms of Saffron, eight ounces of Treacle Water, digest
them six (...), then strain it.

Culpeper] A. See the Virtues of Treacle Water, and then know that this
strengthens the heart something more, and keeps melancholy vapors thence by
drinking a spoonful of it every morning.

Tinctura (...). Page 41. in the Latin Book. Or, Tincture of Castorium.
The Colledg] Take of Castorium in powder half an ounce; Spirit of Castorium
half a pound; digest them ten days cold: strain it, and keep the Liquor for
Tincture.

Culpeper] A. A learned invention! It Is something more prevalent than the
Spirit.

Tinctura Fragorum. Page 41. in the Latin Book. Or, Tincture of Strawberries.
The Colledg] Take of ripe Wood-Strawberries, two pound; put them in a Phiol,
and put so much small Spirit of Wine to them, that it may oretop them the
thickness of four fingers; stop the vessel close, and set it in the Sun two
days, then strain it and press it but gently; power this Spirit to as many
fresh Strawberries, repeat this six times, at last keep the clear Liquor for
your use.

Culpeper] A. A gallant fine thing for Gentlemen that have nothing else to do
with their money, and it will have a lovely look to please their eyes.

Tinctura Scordii. Page 41. in the Latin Book. Or, Tincture of Scordium.
The Colledg] Take of the Leaves of Scordium gathered in a dry time, half a
pound; digest them in six pound of small spirit of Wine, in a vessel well
stopped for three dates, press them out gently, and repeat (...) infusion three
times, and keep the clarified Liquor for use.

So is made Tincture of Sullondine, Rest-harrow, Ros-solis.

Culpeper] A. See the Herbs for the Virtues, and then take notice that these
are better for cold stomachs, old bodies.

Tictura Theriacalis Vulgo Aqua Theriatalis Lugd. per infus. Page 41. in Lat.
Book. Or, Tincture of Treacle.
The Colledg] Take of Canary Wine often times distilled, Vinegar in which half
an ounce of Rue seeds have been boiled, two pound; choice Treasle, the best
Mithridate, of each half a pound; mix them and set them in the Sun, or heat of
a Bath, digest them and keep the Water for use.

Tinctura Cinnamomi, vulgo, Aqua Clareta Cinnam. Page 42. in the Latin Book.
Or, Tincture of Cinnamon.
The Colledg] Take of bruised Cinnamon two ounces; rectified Spirit of Wine two
pound: infuse them four days in a large glass stopped with Cork and Bladder,
shake it twice a day, then dissolve half a pound of Sugar candy by it self in
two pound of Rose Water, mix both Liquors, into which hang a Nodule containing,
Amber greese half a scruple, Musk four grains.

Culpeper] A. This was before amongst the Waters, only there is four ounces of
Cinnamon appointed, and here but two.

Tictura Viridis. Page 42. in the Latin Book. Or, A Green Tincture.
The Colledg] Take of Vert-de-greece, half an ounce; Auripigmentum six drachms;
Alum three drachms; boil them in a pound of white uine till half be consumed,
adding after it is cold the Water of red Roses, and Nightshade, of each six
ounces.

Culpeper] A. This was made to cleanse ulcers, but I fancy it not.

Aqua Aluminosa Magistralis. Page 42. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Plantane and red Rose water, of each a pound; roch Alum
and sublimatum, of each two drachms: Let the Alum and Sublimatum being in
powder boil in the waters, in a vessel with a narrow mouth till half be
consumed; when it has stood five days, strain it.

Culpeper] A. Now they have left out the Quicksilver as I bid them, I like men
will do as they are bid, yet I fancy it not. Follopius invented it, but you
must tell no body.

PHYSICAL WINES.
Vinum Absynthites. Page 43. in the Latin Book. Or, Wormwood Wine.
Colledg] TAke a handful of dried Wormwood for every gallon of Wine; stop it in
a vessel close, and so let it remain in steep: so is prepared Wine of Rosemary
flowers, and Eyebright.

Culpeper] A. It helps cold stomachs, breaks wind, helps the Wind Chollick,
strengthens the stomach, kills worms, and helps the green sickness.

A. Rosemary flower-Wine is made after the same manner that Wormwood Wine is
made.

A. It is good against al cold diseases of the head, consumes phlegm,
strengthens the gums and teeth.

A. Eyebright Wine is made after the same manner.

A. It wonderfully cleers the sight being drunk, and revives the sight of
ancient men: A cup of it in the morning is worth a pair of Spectacles.

A. All other Wines are prepared in the same manner, when the Physician shall
see it fit [quoth the Colledg] in their former, but here they left it out.

A. But what if there be never a Physician worth a rush in 20. 30. 40. or 50.
miles, (as some such places may be found in this Nation) must the poor Country
man lose his cure? truly this charity is according to vulgar Fervent cold: in
such cases let them view the virtues of the Simple the Wine is made of, and
then let them know the Wine of that Simple is far better and fitter for cold
bodies and weak stomachs, than the Simple it self.

A. The best way of taking any of these Wines is, To drink a draught of them
every morning. You may if you find your body old or cold, make Wine of any
other herb, the virtues of which you desire, and make it and take it in the
same manner: I have done, only I would know of the College whether their wooden
wits intend Sack or white Wine to be used in these.

Vinum Cerassorum Nigrorum. Page 43. in Latin B. Or, Wine of Black Cherries.
The Colledg] Take a gallon of the juice of black Cherries, keep it in a vessel
close stopped til it begin to work, then filter it, and an ounce of Sugar being
added to every pound, let it pass through Hippocrates his sleeve, and keep it
in a vessel close stopped for use

Culpeper] A. If ever I knew the like of the College never trust me, here they
go and appoint the Wine of black Cherries with never a drop of Wine in it, and
the juice will not keep without it, above a week or so, and so if you are
minded to make it, you may by that time sing

Alack, alack now have I lost
My pains, my labor, and al my cost.
A. Or I know not, it may be they followed their Patriarks the Papists, as well
in this, as in their reasons, why Physic must not be printed in our mother
tongue; and they were minded to pop you off with the juice, and drink all the
wine themselves: Or to judge as modestly as can be judged, they were so mad
because I had translated their former, that anger so besotted them in this,
that they knew not what they wrote.

Impedit Ira animum ne possit cernere verum.
Unbridled anger takes away men's knowledge; And clouds the The truth (and so it
did the College.)

Vinum Helleboratum. Page 43. in the Latin B. Or, Wine Helleborated.
The Colledg] Take of white Hellebore out small, four ounces, Spanish Wine two
pound; steep it in the Sun in a Pbial close stopped, in the Dog days or other
hot weather.

Culpeper] A. And then it will make a dogged purge, as like the College as a
pomewater is like an apple.

Vinum Rubellum. Page 43. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Stibium in powder one ounce, Cloves sliced two drachms,
Claret Wine two pound, keep it in a Phial close shut.

Vinum Benedictum. Page 43. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Crocus Mettallorum in powder one ounce, Mace a dram,
Spanish Wine one pound and an half, steep it.

Vinum Antimoniale. Pege 43. in the Latin Book. Or, Antimonial Wine.
The Colledg] Take of Regulus of Antimony in powder, four ounces, steep it in
three pound of white Wine, in a glass well stopped, after the first shaking let
the Regulus settle.

Culpeper] A. These three last mentioned are vomits, and vomits are fitting
medicines for but a few, as I told you before, the mouth being ordained to take
in nourishment not to cast out excrements, and to regulate a man's body in
vomiting; and doses of of vomits requires, a deeper study in Physic, then I
doubt the generality of people yet have; I omit it therefore at this time, not
because I gruteh it my Country, but because I would not willingly have them do
themselves a mischeife, I shall shortly teach, them in what diseases vomits may
be used, and then and not til then the use of vomits.

Vinum Scilliticum. Page 44. in the Latin Book. Or, Wines of Squils.
The Colledg] Take of a white Squil of the mountains, gathered about the rising
of the (...) star, cut in thin pieces, and dried for a month, one pound, put
it in a glass bottle, and pour to it eight pound of french Wine, and when it
has stood so four days, take out the Squil.

Culpeper] A. I told told them before that Squils grew by the Sea side, and not
upon mountains; but a man shall, as soon knock a Sponge into a millstone, as any
wit into the head of a conceited fool; and then again it must be gathered at
the rising of the dog star; yes forsooth by all means: truly right worshipful
against the time you are minded to play the anticks again, I will give you as
much directions in this business, as is needful to give men of your Rank and
quallity. Therefore know, that the dogs are two constellations between the
Equator and the South pole, consisting of diverse Stars, two of which are most
remarkable, and of the first magnitude, whereof that in the great dog is called
Syejus: that in the (...), Procyon, each of these two Stars has three risings,
Acronical, Cosmical, and Heliacal, and as many settings. I dare pass my word it
is not the Heliacal rising here meant; If it be, I hope so learned a College is
not to seek of finding such a (...) out, Procyon rises Acronically upon the
fifteen or sixteen of January; Syejus upon the twenty six or twenty seven of
the same month, Procyon rises Cosmically upon the ninteenth of July, and (...)
upon the last day of the same month: the next time you write, pray lay your
noddles together; to study out at which of these times the Squil must be
gathered.

A. The virtues of this are the same with Vinegar of Squils, only it is hotter.

PHYSICAL VINEGERS.
Acetum Distillatum. Page 45. in the Latin Book. Or, Distilled Vinegar.
College FIll a glass or stone Alembick with the best Vinegar to the third
part, separate the (...) with a gentle fire, then increase the fire by degrees,
and perform the work.

Acetum Rosatum. Page 45. in the Latin Book. Or, Rose Vinegar.
The Colledg] Take of red Rose buds gathered in a dry time, the whites cut off,
dried in the shadow three or four days, one pound, Vinegar eight Sextaries;
set them in the Sun forty days, then strain out the Roses, and repeat the
infusion with fresh ones.

After the same manner is made Vinegar of Elderflowers, Rosemary flowers, and
Clove-gilli-flowers.

Culpeper] A. For the virtues of al Vinegers take this one only observation,
they carry the same virtues with the flowers whereof they are made, only as we
said of Wines, that they were better for cold bodies than the bare Simples
whereof they are made, so are Vinegers for hot bodies. Besides Vinegers are
often, nay most commonly used externally, viz. to bath the place, then look a
among the Simples, and see what place of the body the Simple is apropriated
to, and then you cannot choose but know (if you have but a grain of
understanding, more than a beast) both what Vinegar to use, and to what place
to apply (...).

Acetum Scilliticum. Page 45. in the Latin Book. Or, Vinegar of Squils.
The Colledg] Take of that part of the Squil which is between the outward bark
and the bottom, cut in thin slices, and placed thirty or forty days in the
Sun or some remiss heat, then a pound of them (being cut small with a knife made
of Ivory or some white wood) being put in a vessel, and six pound of Vinegar
put to them; set the vessel being close stopped in the Sun thirty or forty
days, afterward strain it, and keep it for use.

Culpeper] A. A little of this medicine being taken in the morning fasting, and
walking half an hour after, preserves the body in health, to extreme old age,
(as Sanius tried, who using no other medicine but this, lived in perfect health
til an hundred and seventeen years of age) it makes the digestion good, a long
wind, a clear voice, an acute sight, a good color, it suffers no offensiye
thing to remain in the body, neither wind, phlegm, choler, melancholy, dung
nor urine, but brings them forth, it brings forth filth though it lie in the
bones, it takes away salt and sour belchings, though a man be never so I would
not have Galens judgment tried in this partiticular, it is far safer to take it
upon his word.
licentious in diet, he shall feel no harm; It has cured such as have the
Phtisick, that have been given over by all Physicians: It cures such as have the
Falling Sickness, gouts, and diseases and swellings of the Joints; It takes
away the hardness of the liver and spleen. We should never have done if we
should reckon up the particular benefits of this medicine; Therefore we commend
it, as a wholesome medicine for soundness of body, preservation of health, and
vigor of mind: thus (...).

Acetum Theriacale Norimberg. Page 46. in Lat. B. Or, Treacle Vinegar.
The Colledg] Take of the roots of Sullendine the greater, one ounce and an
half, the roots of Angellica, Master-wort, Gentian, Bistort, Valerian, Burnet,
white Dittany; Alicampane, Zedoary, of each one dram, of Plantane the greater
one dram and an half, the leaves of Mousear, Sage, Scabious, Scordium,
Dittany of Creet, Cardus, of each half a handful, bark and seeds of Citrons, of
each half a dram, Bole Armenick one dram, Saffron three drachms, Harts-born
one dram and an half; of these let the Saffron, Hartshorn, Dittany, and
Bole, be tied up in a ragge, and steeped with the things before mentioned, in
five pints of Vinegar, for certain days by a temperate heat in a glass well
stopped, strain it, and ad six drachms of the best Treacle to it, shake it
together, and keep it for your use.

Acetum Theriacale. 46. in the Latin Book. Or, Treacle Vinegar.
The Colledg] Add to `the description of Treacle water, Clove-gilli-flowers two
ounces, Lavender flowers an ounce and an half, Rose, and Elder flower Vinegar,
of each four pound, digest it without boiling three days, then strain it
through Hippocrates his sleeve.

Culpeper] A. See Treacle water for the virtues, only this is a little more
cool, a little more fantastical.

DECOCTIONS.
Decoctum Commune pro Clystere. Page 47. in Lat B. Or, A common Decoction for a
Cylster.
The Colledg] Take of Mallows, Violets, Pellitory, Beets, and Mercury, Chamomel
flowers, of each one handful, sweet Fennel seeds half an ounce, Linseeds two
drachms, boil them in a sufficient quantiiy of common water to a pound.

Culpeper] A. This is the common Decoction for all Clysters, according to the
quality of the humor abounding, so you may ad what Simples, or Syrups, or
Electuaries you please; only half a score Linseeds, and a handful of Chamomel
flowers are added.

Decoctum Fpythimi. Page 47. in the Latin Book. Or, A Decoction of Epithimum.
The Colledg] Take of Myrobalans, Chebs, and Inds, of each half an ounce,
(...), Raisons of the Sun stoned, Epithimum, Senna, of each one ounce, Fumitory
half an ounce, Mandlin five drachms, Polipodium six drachms, Turbith half an
ounce, Whey made with Goats milk, or Heisers milk four pound, let them all boil
to two pound, the Epithimum excepted, which boil but a walm or two, then take
it from the (...), and ad black Hellebore one dram and an half, Agrick half a
dram, Sal. Gem. one dram and an half, sleep them ten hours, then press it
strongly out.

Culpeper] A. Here is half a dram of black Hellebore added, and I like the
Receipt never the better for that.

A. It purges melancholy gallantly, as also addust choler, it resists
madness, and al diseases coming of melanchelly, and, therefore let melancholy
people esteem it as a jewel.

A. I cannot but commend it to such of my Countey men as abound with
melancholy humors: Let them take a quarrer of a pint of this in the morning,
and keep by the fire side al day; imagine they take it at six of the Clock,
then let them drink a draught of posset drink at eight, and eat a bit of hot
Mution at twelve, if their bodies be strong, (for people oppressed with
Melancholy, usually go hardly to stool, by reason it is a retentive humor) Let
them mix those Syrups (which I shall quote when I come to them) with it, and I
dare hazard that small credit I have in Physic, that it shall in a few
mornings fetch them out of their Melancholy dumps, which though they may seem
pleasing, yet are no way profitable to the body of man, especially if the body
be troubled also with [ ill tumors] I know not what better word to give [
Cacochynna.]

Decoctum Sennae Gereonis. Page 47. in the Lat. Book. Or, A Decoction of Senna.
The Colledg] Take of Senna two ounces, Pollipodium half an ounce, Ginger one
dram, Raisons of the Sun stoned two ounces, Se bestens, Prunes, of each
twelve, the flowers of Borrage, Violets, Roses, and Rosemary, of each two
drachms; boil them in four pound of water till half be consumed.

Culpeper] A. It is a common Decoction for any purge, by adding other Simples
or Compounds to it, according to the quality of the humor you would have
purged, yet in its self, it chiefly purges melancholy. I shall quote it when I
come at such Compounds as are fit to mix with it.

Decoctum Pectorale. Page 48. in the Latin Book. Or, A Poctoral Decoction.
The Colledg] Take of Raisons of the Sun stoned, an ounce, Seb oftens, Jujubes,
of each fifteen, Dates six, Figs four, french Barley one ounce, Liquoris half an
ounce, Maidenhair, Hysop, Scabious, Coltsfoot of each one handful, boil them
in three pound of water till two remain.

Culpeper A. The medicine is chiefly apropriated to the Lungues, and therefore
causes a clear voice, a long wind, resisteeh coughs, hoarceness, Asthmaes etc.
You may drink a quarter of a pint of it every morning, without keeping any
diet, for it purges not. I shall quote some Syrups fitting to be mixed with
it, when I come to the Syrups.

Decoctum Trumaticum. Page 48. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Agrimony, Mugwort, And why wild? I know no reason, nor a
horse that has a bigger head than I. The garden is best.
wild Angelica, St. John's wort, Mousear, of each two handfuls; Wormwood half a
handful; Southernwood, Betony, Bugloss, (...) the greater and lesser, roots and
all, Avens, both sorts of Plantane, Sanicle, Tormentil with the roots, the buds
of Rasberries and Oak, of each a handful: all these being gathered in May or
June and dilligently dried, let them be cut and put up in skins or papers
against the time of use; then take of the fore named Herbs three handfuls, boil
them in four pound of Conduit water, and two pound of white Wine gently till
half be consumed; strain it, and a pound of Honey being added to it, let it be
scummed and kept for use.

Culpeper] A. (...) sight of a Medicine will do you good, this is as like to do
it as any I know.

Some they have left out in their new Model, which are these that follow:
A Carminative Decoction.
Colledg] TAke of the You must bruise the seeds, else the Decoction will be but
little the (...) for them.
seeds of Annis, Carrots, Fennel, Cummin, and Caraway, of each three drachms;
Chamomel flowers half a handful; (...) of the Sun an ounce and an half: boil
them in two pints of water, till almost half (...) sumed.

Culpeper] A. It is commonly used in Clysters, to such whose bodies are
molested or oppressed with wind, these seeds being added to the former
Decoction.

A Decoction of Flowers and Fruits.
The Colledg] Take five Figs, fifteen Prunes, Jujubes, and (...), of each
twenty, Tamarinds an ounce, the flowers of Roses, Violets, Borrage, Bugloss, of
each a dram; Maidenhair, Hops, Endive, of each half an handful, Liquoris two
drachms: being cut and bruised, boil them in three pints of spring Water to the
consumption of the third part.

Culpeper] A. It strengthens the Lungues, and helps Obstruction.

Lac Virgineum.
The Colledg] Take of Alum four ounces, boil it in a quart of spring Water, to
the third part: Afterward,

Take of Beaten into very fine powder.
Litharge half a pound, white Wine Vinegar a pint and an half; boil it to a
pint, strain both the waters, then mix them together, and (...) them about till
they are white.

Culpeper] A. It takes away Pimples, redness, freckles and sunburning, the face
being washed with it.

A Drink for wounded men.
The Colledg] Take of Crabs of the River calcined, and beaten into very fine
powder, two drachms; the roots of round Birthwort, and of Comfry the greater,
Self-heal, Bay Berries lightly bruised, of each one dram; tie them all up in
a linen cloth, and boil them in three pints of white Wine till the third part
be consumed, adding about the middle of the Decoction, one pugil of The (...)
not the fish.
Perewinkles, then strain it for your use.

This Decoction must be prepared only for the present, when the Physician
appoints it, as also must almost all the rest of the Decoctions.

Culpeper] A. And therefore left my poor wounded Country man should perish for
want of an Angel to fee (...) Too many Physicians in England being like Balaams
Ass, they will not speak unless they see an Angel: yet I accuse not all.
Physician, or if he have it, before the Physician (which in some places is
very remote) can come at him: I have taken the pains to write the Receipt in
his own Mother tongue; he may get any friend to make it: He may drink half a
pint of it in the morning; or if he please to boil it in small Ale instead of
Wine; he would be well the sooner if he drunk no other drink.

SYRUPS. ALTERING SYRUPS.
Syrupus de Absinthio Symplex. Page 49. in Lat. Book. OR Syrup of Wormwood,
Simple.
The College. TAke of the clarified Juice of common Wormwood, clarified Sugar,
of each four pound; make it into a Syrup according to art.

After the same manner, are prepared simple Syrups of Betony, Borrage, Bugloss,
Cardus, Chamomel, Succory, Endive, Hedg-mustard, Strawberries, Fumitory,
Ground Ivy, St. John's wort, Hops, Mercury, Mousear, Plantane, Apples, Purslain,
Rasberries, Sage, Scabious, Scordium, Housleek, Coltsfoot, Paul's Betony, and
other Juyces not sour.

Culpeper. A. See the Simples, and then you may easily know both their virtues
and also that they are pleasanter and fitter for delicate stomachs when they
are made into Syrups.

Syrupus de Absinthio Compositus. 49. in the Lat. B. OR Syrup of Wormwood,
Compound.
The College. Take of common Wormwood meanly dry, half a pound, red Roses two
ounces, Indian Spicknard three drachms, old white Wine, Juice of Quinces, of
each two pound and an half; steep them a whole day in an earthen vessel, then
boil them gently, and strain it, and by adding two pound of Sugar boil it into
a Syrup according to art.

Culpeper. A. Mesue is followed verbatim in this; and the Receipt is
apropriated to cold and phlegmatic stomachs, and in my opinion it is an
admirable remedy for it, for it strengthens both stomach and liver, as also the
instruments of concoction; a spoonful taken in the morning, is admirable for
such as have a weak digestion, it provokes an appetite to ones victuals, it
prevails against the yellow Jaundice, breaks wind, purges humors by urin. It
was Roman Wormwood before, and so Mesue has it, and our College is as well
able to correct Mesue as the Pigmies were to beat Hercules.

Syrupus Acetosus Symplex. Page 50. in the L. Book. OR Syrup of Vinegar Simple.
The College. Take of clear Water four pound, white Sugar five pound, boil them
in a glazed vessel over a gentle fire, scumming it till half the water be
consumed, then by putting in two pound of Wine Vinegar by degrees, perfect the
Syrup.

Culpeper. A. That is, Only melt the Sugar with the Vinegar over the fire, scum
it, but boil it not.

Syrupus Acetosus Simplicior. Page 50. in the L. Book. OR Syrup of Vinegar more
Simple.
The College. Take of white Sugar five pound, white Wine Vinegar two pound, by
melting it in a bath, make it into a Syrup.

Culpeper. A. Of these two Syrups let every one use which he finds by
experience to be best; the difference is but little, I hold the last to be the
best of the two, and would give my reasons for it, but that I fear the Book
will swell too big: They both of them cut phlegm, as also tough, hard, viscous
humors in the stomach; they cool the body, quench thirst, provoke urine, and
propare the stomach before the taking of a vomit. If you take it as a
prepatative for a vomit, take half an ounce of it when you go to bed the night
before you intend to vomit, it will make you to vomit the easier, but if for
any of the foregoing occasins, take it with a Liquoris stick.

Syrupus Acetosus Compositus. Page 50. in the L. Book. OR Syrup of Vinegar
Compound.
The College. Take of the Roots of Smallage, Fennel, Endive, of each three
ounces; the seeds of Annis, Smallage, Fennel, of each one ounce; of Endive half
an ounce, clear Water six pound; boil it gently in an earthen vessel till half
the Water be consumed, then strain and clarify it, and with three pound of
Sugar, and a pound and an half of white wine Vinegar, boil it into a Syrup.

Culpeper. A. This in my opinion is a gallant Syrup for such whose bodies are
stuffed either with phlegm, or tough humors, for it opens obstructions or
stoppings both of the stomach, liver, spleen, and reins; it cuts and brings
away tough phlegm and choler, and is therefore a special remedy for such as
have a (...) at their stomach. Mesue prescribes ten (...) of Water, and a quart
of Vinegar, let every one use which Dr Experience tells him is best.

Syrupus de Agno Casto. Page 50. In the L. Book. O R Syrup of Agnus Castus.
The College. Take of the seeds of Rue, and Hemp, of each half a dram; of
Endive, Lettice, Purslain, Guords, Melones, of each two drachms; of Fleawort
half an ounce, of Agnus Castus four ounces, the Flowers of Water Lillies, the
Leaves of Mints, of each half a handful; Decoction of seeds of Lentils, and
Coriander seeds, of each half an ounce, three pound of the Decoction, boil them
all over a gentle fire til two pound be consumed, ad to the residue being
strained, two ounces Juice of Lemmons, a pound and an half of white Sugar, make
it into a Syrup according to art.,

A. A pretty Syrup and good for little.

Syrupus de Althaea. Page 51. In the L. Book. O R Syrup of Marshmallows.
The College. Take of Roots of Marshmallows two ounces, the Roots of Grass
Sparagus, Liquoris, Raisons of the Sun stoned, of each half an ounce, the tops
of Mallows, Marshmallows, Pellitory of the Wall, Burnet, (...), Maidenhair
white and black, of each a handful red (...) an ounce, of the What they are see
at the end of the Simples, and before the Compounds in this Book.
four greater and four lesser cold seeds, of each three drachms, boil them in
six pound of cleerr Water till four remain, which being strained, boil into a
Syrup with four pound of white Sugar.

Culpeper. A. It is a fine cooling, opening, slippery Syrup, and chiefly
commendable for the chollick, stone, or gravel, in the kidneys or bladder.

A. I shall only give you a Caution or two concerning this Syrup, which for the
forenamed effects, I hold to be excellent.

A. 1. Be sure you boil it enough, for if you boil it never so little too
little, it will quickly be sour.

A. 2. For the Chollick (which is nothing else but an infirmity in the gut
called Colon and thence it takes its name) you had best use it in Clysters, but
for gravel or the stone, drink it in convenient Medicines, or by it self; If
both of them afflict you use it both ways: I assure you this medicine will
save those that are subject to such diseases, both money and misery.

Syrupus de Ammoniaco. Page 51. In the L. Book. O R Syrup of Ammoniacum.
The College. Take of Maudlin and Cetrach, of each four handfuls; common
Wormwood an ounce, the Roots of Succory, Sparagus, bark of Caper Roots, of each
two ounces, after due preparation sleep them twenty four hours in three ounces
of white Wine, Rhadish and fumitory water, of each 2. pound, then boil it away
to one pound eight ounces, let it settle, in four ounces of which whilst it is
warm, dissolve by it self Gum Ammoniacum, first dissolved in white Wine
Vinegar, two ounces, boil the rest with a pound and an half of white Sugar into
a Syrup, adding the mixtures of the Gum at the end.

Culpeper. A. It cools the Liver, and opens obstructions both of it and the
Spleen, helps old Surfets and suchlike diseases, as scabs, itch, leprosy, and
what else proceed from the Liver overheated; you may take an ounce at a time.

Syrupus de Artemisia. Page 51. In the L. Book. O R Syrup of Mugwort.
The College. Take of Mugwort two handfuls, Penyroyal, Calaminth, Origanum,
Bawm, Arsmart, Dictani of Creet, Savin, Marsoram, Germander, St. John's Wort,
(...), Featherfew with the Flowers, Centaury the less, Rue, Bettony, Bugloss,
of each a handful; the Roots of Fennel, Smallage, Parsley, Sparagus, Bruscus,
Saxifrage, Alicampane, Cyperus, Maddir, Orris, Peony, of each an ounce; Juniper
Berries, the seeds of Lovage, Parsley, Smallage, Annis, Nigella, Carpobalsamum
or Cubebs, Costus, Cassia Lignea, Cardamoms, Calamus Aromaticus, the Roots of
Asarabacca, Pellitory of Spain, Valerian, of each half an ounce; being cleansed,
cut, and bruised, let them be infused twenty four hours in fourteen pound of
clear water, and boiled till half be consumed, being taken off from the fire
and rubbed between your hands, whilst it is warm, strain it, and with Honey and
Sugar of each two pound, sharp Vinegar four ounces, boil it to a Syrup, and
perfume it with Cinnamon and Spiknard, of each three drams.

Culpeper. A. It helps the passion of the matrix, and retains it in its place,
it dissolves the coldness wind, and pains thereof, it strengthens the nerves,
opens the pores, corrects the blood, it corrects and provokes the terms in
women. You may take a handful of it at a time.

Syrupus de Betonica Compositus. Page 52. In L. Book. O R, Syrup of Betony
Compound.
The College. Take of Betony three handfuls, Marsoram a handful and an half;
Time, red Roses, of each a handful; Violets, Stoechas, Sage, of each half a
handful; the seeds of Fennel, Annis, and Ammi, of each half an ouce; the roots
of Peony, Polypodium, and Fennel, of each five drachms; boil them in six pound
of river water to three pound, strain it, and ad juice of Betony two pound,
Sugar three pound and an half, make it into a Syrup.

Culpeper. A. It helps diseases coming of cold, both in the head and stomach,
as also such as come of wind, vertigoes, madness, it concocts melancholy, it
provokes the terms in women, and so does the Simple Syrup more than the
Compound. The Composition was framed by the Augustan Physicians. Certainly our
Physicians have but shallow brains, that they are fain to trot as far as
Ausberg in Germany to steal Receipts.

Syrupus Byzantinus, Simple. Page 53. In the Latin Book.
The College. Take of the Juice of the Leaves of Endive and Smallage, of each
two pound; of Hops and Bugless, of each one pound; boil them together, and scum
them, and to the clarified Liquor, ad four pound of white Sugar, to as much of
the Juyces, and with a gentle fire boil it to a Syrup.

Syrupus Byzantinus, Compound. Page 53. In the Latin Book.
The College. Take of the Juyces so ordered as in the former, four pound, in
which boylred Roses two ounces, Liquoris half an ounce, the seeds of Annis,
Fennel, and Smallage, of each three drachms, Spicknard two drams, strain it,
and to the three pound remaining, ad two pound of Vinegar, four pound of Sugar,
make it into a Syrup according to art.

Culpeper. A. They both of them ( viz. both Simple and Compound) opens
stoppings of the stomach, liver, and spleen, help the Rickets in children, cuts
and brings away tough phlegm, and helps the yellow Jaundice: Mesue says the
Compound Syrup is of more effect than the Simple for the same uses. You may
take them with a Liquoris stick, or take a spoonful in the morning fasting.

Syrupus Botryos. Page 53. In the Latin Book. O R Syrup of Oak of Jerusalem.
The College. Take of Oak of Jerusalem, Hedg-mustard, Nettles, of each two
handfuls; Coltsfoot, an handful and an half, boil them in a sufficient quantity
of clear Water till half be consumed; to two pound of the Decoction ad two
pound of the Juice of Turnips baked in an Oven in a close pot, and with three
pound of white Sugar boil it into a Syrup.

Culpeper. This Syrup was composed against Coughs, shortness of breath, and
other the like infirmities of the breast proceeding of cold, for (which if you
can get it) you may take it with a Liquoris stick.

Syrupus Capillorum Veneris. Page 53. In L. Book. O R Syrup of Maidenhair.
The College. Take of Liquoris two ounces, Maidenhair five ounces, steep them a
natural day in four pound of warm water, then after a gentle boiling and strong
straining, with a pound and an half of fine Sugar make it into a Syrup.

Culpeper. A. It opens stoppings of the stomach, strengthens the Lungues, and
helps the infirmities of them. This may be taken also either with a Liquoris
stick, or mixed with the pectoral Decoction like Syrup of Coltsfoot.

Syrupus Cardiacus, vel Julepum Cardiacum. Page 53. O R A Cordial Syrup.
The College. Take of Rhenish Wine two pound, Rose water two ounces and an
half, Cloves two seruples, Cinnamon half a dram, Ginger two scruples, Sugar
three ounces and an half, boil it to the consistence of a Julep, adding
Amber-greese three grains, Musk one grain.

Culpeper. A. He that has read thus far in this Book, and does not know he
must first boil the Simples in the Wine, and then strain them out before he
puts in the Sugar, is a man that in my opinion has not (...) enongh to be
taught to make up a Medicine; and the College in their new Masterpiece has
left it out.

A. If you would have this Julip keep long, you may put in more Sugar, and yet
if close stopped, it will not easily corrupt because it is made up only of Wine;
indeed the wisest way is to order the quantity of sugar according to the That
latitude may be given safely in all Compositions.
pallat of him that takes it.

A. It restores such as are in Consumptions; comforts the heart, cherishes
the drooping spirits, and is of an opening quality, thereby carrying away those
vapors which might otherwise anoy the brain and heart: You may take an ounce at
a time, or two if you please.

Syrupus infusionis Floram Caryophillorum. Page 54. O R Syrup of
Clove-gilliflowers.
The College. Take a pound of Clove-gilliflowers the whites being cut off,
infuse them a whole night in two pound of Water, then with four pound of sugar
melted in it, make it into a Syrup without boiling.

Culpeper. A. In their former they added three pound of Water, if you would
infuse them you must do it at several times.

A. The syrup is a fine temperate syrup, it strengthens the heart, liver, and
stomach, it refreshes the vital spirits, and is a good cordial in fevers; and
usually mixed with other Cordials, you can hardly err in taking it, it is so
harmless a syrup.

Syrupus de Cinnamomo. Page 54. In the L. Book. O R, Syrup of Cinnamon.
The College. Take of Cinnamon grossly bruised, four ounces; steep it in white
Wine, and small Cinnamon water, of each half a pound three days in a glass by
a gentle heat; strain it and with a pound and an half of Sugar boil it gently
to a syrup.

Culpeper. A. This comes something nearer the Augustan Dispensatory than their
former did; it is not altogether the same, for then people would have said they
did nothing, whereas now it is apparent they did something though to little
purpose.

It refreshes the vital spirits exceedingly, and cheereth both heart and
stomach languishing through cold; it helps digestion exceedingly, and
strengthens the whole body. You may take a spoonful at a time in a Cordial.

The College. Thus also you may conveniently prepare syrups (but only with
white Wine) of Annis seeds, sweet Fennel seeds, Cloves, Nutmegs, Ginger etc.

Syrupus Acetositatis Citriorum. Page 54. In L. Book. O R, Syrup of Juice of
Citrons.
The College. Take of the Juice of Citrons, strained without expression and
cleansed a pound, sugar two pound, make it into a syrup like syrup of
Clove-gilliflowers.

Culpeper. A. It prevails against all diseases proceeding from Choler, or heat
of blood, fevers, both pestilential and not pestilential, it resists poison,
cools the blood, quenches thirst, cures the Vertigo, or dissiness in the head.

The College. After the same manner is made syrup of Grapes, Orrenges,
Barberries, Cherries, Quinces, Lemmons, Woodsorrel, Mulberries, Sorrel, English
Currence, and other sour Juyces.

Culpeper. A. If you look the Simples you may see the virtues of them, they all
cool and comfort the heart and strengthen the stomach, syrup of Quinces stays
vomiting, so does also syrup of Grapes.

Syrupus Corticum Citriorum. Page 54. In the L. Book. O R, Syrup of Citron
Pills.
The College. Take of flesh yellow Citron Pills five ounces, the Berries of
Chermes, or the Juice of them brought over to us two drachms, spring water,
four pound, steep them all night, boil them till half be consumed, taking off
the scum, strain it, and with two pound and an half of sugar boil it into a
syrup, let half of it be without Musk, but perfume the other half with three
grains of Musk tied up in a rag.

Culpeper. A. It strengthens the stomach, resists poison, strengthens the
heart, and resists the passions thereof, palpitation, faintings, swoonings; it
strongthens the vital spirits, restores such as are in Consumptions, and
Hectic Fevers, and strengthens nature much. You may take a spoonful at a time.

Syrupus e Coralliis Simplex. Page 55. In the L. Book. O R, Syrup of Corral
Simple.
The College. Take of red Corral in very fine powder four ounces, dissolve it
in clarified Juice of Barberries in the boat of a bath, a pound, in a glass
well stopped with wax and Cork, a digestion being made three or four days,
pour off what is dissolved, put in fresh clarified Juice and proceed as before;
repeat this so osten till all the Corral be dissolved; lastly to one pound of
this Juice ad a pound and an half of sugar, and boil it to a syrup gently.

Syrupus e Coralliis Compositus. Page 55. In L. Book. O R Syrup of Corral
Compound.
The College. Take of red Corral six ounces, in very fine powder and levigated
upon a marble, ad of clarified juice of Lemmons, the phlegm being drawn off in a
bath, sixteen ounces, clarified (...) of Barberries, eight ounces; Sharp wine
Vinegar and juice of Wood Sorrel, of each six ounces; mix them together and put
them in a glass stopped with Cork and Bladder, shaking it every day till it
have digested eight days in a bath or horsdung, then filter it, of which take
a pound and an half; juice of Quinces half a pound, Sugar of Roses twelve
ounces, make them into a syrup in a bath, adding syrup of Clove-gilliflowers
sixteen ounces, keep it for use, omitting the half dram of Ambergrees and
four grains of Musk till the Physician command it.

Culpeper. A. Syrup of Corral both Simple and Compound, restore such as are in
Consumptions, are of a gallant cooling nature, especially the last, and very
Cordial, special good for Hectic fevers, it stops fluxes, the running of the
reins, and the whites in women, helps such as spit blood, and such as have the
Fallingsickness, it stays the terms in women: And indeed it had need be good
for something, for it is exceeding costly. Half a spoonful in a morning is
enough for the body, and it may be too much for the purse.

Syrupus Cydoniorum. Page 56. In the L. Book. O R Syrup of Quinces.
The College. Take of the Juice of Quinces clarified six pound, boil it over a
gentle fire till half of it be consumed, scumming it, adding red Wine three
pound, white sugar four pound, boil it into a syrup, to be perfumed with a
dram and an balf of Cinnamon, Cloves and Ginger of each two scruples.

Culpeper. A. It strengthens the heart and stomach, stays looseness and
vomiting, releeves languishing nature, for looseness take a spoonful of it
before meat, for vomiting after meat; for both as also for the rest, in the
morning.

Syrupus de Erysimo. Page 56. In the L. Book. O R Syrup of Hedg-mustard.
The College. Take of Hedgmustard fresh, six handfuls, the Roots of Alicampane,
Coltsfoot, Liquoris, of each two ounces; Borrage, succory, Maidenhair, of each
a handful and an half, the Cordial Flowers, Rosemary, and Betony, of each half
a handful, Annis seeds half an ounce, Raisons of the Sun stoned two ounces, let
all of them being prepared according to art be boiled in a sufficient quantity
of barley Water and Hydromel, with six ounces of juice of Hedgmustvrd to two
pound and an half, the which with three pound of sugar boil into a Syrup
according to art.

Culpeper. A. It was invented against cold afflictions of the breast and
Lungues, as Astmaes, hoarceness etc. you may take it either with a Liquoris
stick, or which is better, mix an ounce of it with three or four ounces of
pectoral decoction, and drink it off warm in the morning.

Syrupus de Fumaria. Page 56. In the L. Book. O R Syrup of Fumitory.
The College. Take of Endive, common Wormwood, Hops, Dodder, Hartstongue, of
each a handful; Epithimum an ounce and an half; boil them in four pound of
Water till half be consumed; strain it, and ad the juice of Fumitory a pound
and an half; of Borrage, and Bugloss of each half a pound, white Sugar four
pound; make them into a Syrup according to art.

Culpeper. A. The Receipt is a pretty concocter of melancholy, and therefore a
rational help for diseases arising thence, both internal and external; It helps
diseases of the skin, as Leprosies, Cancers, Warts, Corns, Itch, Tetters,
Ringworms, Scabs, etc. and it is the better to be liked because of its
gentleness, For in my experience, I could never find a violent Medicine do
good, but ever harm in a For Melancholy is a sad sullen humor, you had as good
vex a nest of Wasps as
Melancholy disease. It also strengthens the stomach and liver, opens
obstructions, and is a sovereign remedy for Hypocondriack Melancholy. You may
ad an ounce of this to the decoction of Epithimum before mentioned, and order
your body as you were taught there. It helps surfets exceedingly, cleanses,
cools, and strengthens the liver, and causes it to make good blood, and
good blood cannot make bad flesh. I commend this Receipt to those whose bodies
are subject to scabs and Itch. If you please you may take two ounces by it self
every morning.

Syrupus de Glycyrrhiza. Page 56. In the L. Book. O R Syrup of Liquoris.
The College. Take of green Liquoris scraped and bruised two ounces, white
Maidenhair an ounce, dried Hysop half an ounce, steep these in four pound of
hot water, after 24. hours boil it till half be consumed, strain it and
clarify it, and with Honey, Peuids, and Sugar of each eight ounces, make it
into a syrup, adding before it be perfectly boiled, red Rose Water six ounces.

Culpeper. A. It cleanses the breast and lungues, and helps continual Coughs
and Pleuresies. You may take it with a Liquoris stick, or ad an ounce of it or
more to the pectoral Decoction.

Syrupus Granatorum cum Aceto: vulgo, Oxysaccharum simplex. Page 57. in the
Latin Book. O R Syrup of Pomegranates with Vinegar.
The College. Take of white Sugar a pound and an half, Juice of Pomegranates
eight ounces, white Wine Vinegar four ounces, boil it gently into a Syrup.

Culpeper. A. Look the Virtue of Pomegranates amongst the Simples.

Syrupus de Hyssopo. Page 57. in the Latin Book. O R Syrup of Hysop.
The College. Take eight pound of spring Water, half an ounce of Barley, boil
it about half an hour, then ad the Roots of smallage, Parsley, Fennel, Liquoris,
of each ten drams; Jujubes, Sebestens of each fifteen; Raisons of the sun
stoned an ounce and an half; Figs, Dates, of each ten; the seeds of Mallows and
Quinces, Gum Tragacanth tied up in a rag, of each three drachms; Hysop meanly
dried ten drachms, Maidenhair six drachms; boil them together, yet so, that
the Roots may precead the Fruits, the Fruits the Seeds, and the Seeds the
Herbs, about a quarter of an hour; at last, five pounds of Water being
consumed, boil the other three (being first strained and clarified) into a
syrup with two pound and an half of Sugar.

Culpeper. A. You may thank Mesue for it, not the College.

A. It mightily strengthens the By the breast I always mean that which is lled
(...).
breast and lungs, causes long wind, clear voice, is a good remedy against
coughs. Use it like the syrup of Liquoris.

Syrupus Ivae arthriticae, sive Chamaepityos. Page 57. O R Syrup of Chamepitys.
The College. Take of Chamepitys two handfuls; Sage, Rosemary, Poley mountain,
Origanum, Calaminth, wild mints, Peniroyal, Hysop, Time, Rue, Garden and wild,
Betony, Mother of Time, of each a handful; the roots of Acorus, Birthwort long
and round, Briony, Dittany, Gentian, Hogs Fennel, Valerian, of each half an
ounce, the roots of smallage, sparagus, Fennel, Parsley Bruscus, of each an
ounce; Pellitory of Spain an ounce and an half, stoechas, the seeds of Annis,
Ammi, Carraway, Fennel, Lovage, Hartwort, of each three drachms, Raisons of the
sun two ounces; boil them in ten pound of water to four, to which ad Honey and
Sugar of each two pound, make it into a syrup to be persumed with sugar,
Nutmegs, and Cubebs, of each three drachms.

Culpeper. A. I bid them mend this for shame last time, and the truth is, so
they have; before it was a Hodg-podg that could not be made, and now it is a
Hodg-podg only not worth the making.

Syrupus Jujubinus. Page 58. in the Latin Book. O R Syrup of Jujubes.
The College. Take of Jujubes, Violets, five drachms; Maidenhair, Liquoris,
French Barley, of each an ounce; the seeds of Mallows five drachms; the seeds
of white Poppies, Melones, Lettice, [seed of Quinces and Gum Tragacanth tied up
in a rag] of each three drachms; boil them in six pound of rain or spring water
till half be consumed, strain it and with two pound of sugar make it into a
syrup.

Culpeper. A. Those that adore the College as so many little God-a-mighties,
let them ask them what part of the Violets must be put in, for they must
operate as near to their meanings as the men of Benjamin could throw a stone
and not miss; others that do not, may be pleased to make use of the Flowers.

A. It is a fine cooling syrup, very available in Coughs, Hoarsness, and
Pleuresies, Ulcers of the Lungues, and Bladder, as also in all inflammations
whatsoever. You may take a spoonful of it once in three or four hours, or if
you please take it with a Liquoris stick.

Syrupus de Meconio, sive, Diacodium. Page 58. Syrup of Meconium, or, Diacodium.
The College. Take of white Poppy heads with their seeds, gathered a little
after the flowers are fallen off, and kept three days, eight ounces; black
Poppy heads (so ordered) six ounces, rain Water eight pound, steep them twenty
four hours, then boil and press them gently, boil it to three pounds, and with
twenty four ounces of sugar boil it into a syrup according to art.

Syrupus de Meconio Compositus. Page 59. in L. Book. Syrup of Meconium Compound.
The College. Take of white and black Poppy heads with their seeds fifty
drachms; maindenhair fifteen drachms; Jujubes thirty; the seeds of Lettice
forty drachms; of Mallows and Quinces tied up in a rag a dram and an half;
Liquoris five drachms; Water eight pound; boil it according to art, strain it,
and to three pound of Decoction ad sugar and penids, of each a pound, make it
into a syrup.

Culpeper. A. Meconium: The blush of which this Receipt carries in its
frontispiece, is nothing else but the juice of English Poppies boiled till it
be thick: As I am of opinion that Opium is nothing else but the juice of For
such Opium as Authors talks of comes from Utopia.
Poppies growing in hotter Countries (and therefore in all reason is colder in
quality;) and therefore (I speak purely of Meconium and Opium, not of these
syrups) though they be no edg-tools, yet it is ill jesting with them.

A. All these former syrups of Poppies provoke sleep, but in that, I desire
they may be used with a great deal of caution and wariness, such as these are,
are not fit to be given in the beginning of Fevers, nor to such whose bodies
are costive; ever remember my former Motto, Fools are not fit to make
Physicians. Yet to such as are troubled with hot, sharp Rhewms, you may safely
give them; and note this, the last, which is borrowed from Mesue is apropriated
to the Lungues, whose own words (translation excepted) of it are these, It
prevails against dry Coughs, Phtisicks, hot and sharp gnawing Rhewms, and
provokes sleep. It is an usual fashion for Nurses when they have heat their
milk by exercise or strong liquor, (no marvel then if their children be
froward) then run for syrup of Poppies to make their young ones sleep. I would
fain have that fashion left, therefore I forbear the dose; let Nurses keep
their own bodies (...), and their children will sleep well enough, never fear.

Syrupus (...). Page 59. in the Latin Book. Or, Syrup of Bawm.
The College. Take of the Bark of Bugloss Roots an ounce; the (...) of white
Dittany, sinksoyl, scorzonera, of each half an ounce; the Leaves of Bawm,
scabious, Devils-bit, the (...) of both sorts of Bugloss, and Rosemary of each
a handful; the seeds of sorrel, Citrons, Fennel, Cardus, Bazil, of each three
drachms; boil them in four pound of water till half be consumed, strain it, and
ad three pound of white sugar; Juice of Bawm, and Rose Water, of each half a
pound, boil them to a syrup, the which perfume with Cinnamon and yellow sanders
of each half an ounce.

Culpeper. A. The scorzonera Roots, and Bugloss Roots are added, and the
Bettony Roots left out, and Fernelius his name buried in oblivion; that is all
the Alteration: If the name of the wicked shall rot, it is more likely to happen
upon themselves than Fernelius.

A. Always tie perfumes up in a rag, and hang them into the syrup by a string
when it boyls, and hang them by a string in the veslel (be it pot or glass)
that you may keep the syrup in being boiled.

A. It is an excellent Cordial, and strengthens the heart, breast, and stomach,
it resists Melancholy, revives the spirits, is given with good success in
Fevers, it strengthens the memory, and relievs langushing nature. You may
take a spoonful of it at a time.

Syrupus de Mentha. Page 59. in the Latin Book. Or, Syrup of Mints.
The Colledg] Take of the juice of Quinces sweet and between sweet and sour,
the juice of Pomegranates sweet, between sweet and sour, and sour, of each a
pound and an half, dried mints half a pound red Roses two ounces, let them lie
in steep one day, then boil it half away and with four pound of sugar boil it
into a syrup according to art, perfume it not unless the Physician command.

Culpeper.] A. The syrup is in quality binding, yet it comforts the stomach
much, helps digestion, stays vomiting, and is (in my opinion) as excellent a
remedy against sour or offensive belchings, as any is in the Dispensatory: Take
a spoonful of it after meat.

Syrupus de Mucilaginibus. Page 60. in the L. Book. Or, Syrup of Mussilages.
The College.] Take of the seeds of Marshmallows, Mallows, Quinces, of each an
ounce; Gum Tragacanth, three drachms; let these infuse six hours in warm
Decoction of Mallows, white Poppy seeds, and Winter-cherries; then press out
the Mussilage to an ounce and an half; with which (...) and three ounces of the
aforesaid Decoction, and two ounces of sugar, make a syrup according to art.

Culpeper.] A. A spoonful taken by it self, or in any convenient Liquor is
excellent for any sharp corroding humors be they in what part of the body
soever, Phtisicks, bloody Flux, stone in the Reins or Bladder, or Ulcers there,
it is excellent good for such as have taken Purges that are to strong for their
bodies, for by its slippery nature it helps corrosians, and by its cooling,
helps inflammations.

Syrupus Myrtinus. Page 60. in the Latin Book. Or, Syrup of Mirtles.
The College.] Take of Myrtle berries two ounces and an half; Sanders white and
red, sumach, Balaustines, Barberry stones, red Roses of each an ounce and an
half; Medlars half a pound; bruise them in eight pound of water to four; strain
it and ad juice of Quinces and sour Pomegranates, of each six ounces; then with
three pound of sugar boil it into a Syrup.

Culpeper.] A. The syrup is of a very binding, yet comforting nature, it helps
such as spit blood, all fluxes of the belly, or corrosions of the internal
parts, it strengthens the retentive faculty, and stops immoderate flux of the
terms in women: A spoonful at a time is the dose.

Syrupus Florum Nymphaeae simplex. Page 60. Or, Syrup of Water-Lilly-flowers,
simple.
The College.] Take of the whitest of white Water-lilly-flowers, a pound; steep
them in three pound of warm Water, six or seven hours; let them boil a little
and strain them out; put in the same weight of Flowers again the second and
third time; when you have strained it the last time, ad its weight of sugar to
it and boil it to a syrup.

Syrupus Florum Nymphaeae compositus. Page 60. Syrup of Water-lilly-Flowers,
compound.
The College.] Take of white Water-lilly-Flowers half a pound; Violets two
ounces, Lettice two handfuls; the seeds of Lettice, Purslain, and Guords, of
each half an ounce; boil them in four pound of clear water till one be
consumed; strain it, and ad half a pound of red Rose water; white sugar four
pound, boil it into a syrup according to art.

Culpeper.] A. They both are fine cooling syrups, they allay the heat of
Choler, and provoke fleep, they cool the body, both head, heart, liver, reins,
and matrix, and therefore are profitable for hot diseases in either: you may
take an ounce of it at a time when your stomach is empty.

Syrupus de Papavere Erratico, sive Rhubro. Page 61. Or, Syrup of Eratick
Poppies.
The College.] Take of the fresh Flowers of red Poppies two pound, steep them
in four pound of warm spring Water; the next day strain it and boil it into a
syrup with its equal weight in Sugar.

Culpeper.] A. I know no danger in this syrup, so it be taken with moderation;
and bread immoderately taken, hurts; the syrup cools the blood, helps surfets,
and may safely be given in Frenzies, Fevers, and hot Agues.

Syrupus de Pilosella. Page 61. in the Latin Book. Or, Syrup of Mousear.
The College.] Take of Mousear three handfuls, the Roots of Ladies mantle, an
ounce and an half; the Roots of comsry the greater, Maddir, white Dittany,
Tormentil, Bistort, of each an ounce; the Leaves of Wintergreen, Horstail,
Ground Ivy, Plantane, Adders tongue, Strawberries, St. John's Wort with the
Flowers, Golden rod, Agrimony, Bettony, Burnet, Avens, Sinkfoyl the greater,
red Coleworts, Balaustines, red Roses of each a handful; boil them gently in
six pound of of Plantane Water to three, then strain it strongly and when it is
settled, ad Gum Tragacanth, the seeds of Fleawort, Marshmallows, and Quinces,
made into a Mussilage by themselves in strawberry and Bettony Water, of each
three ounces; white sugar two pound, boil it to the thickness of Honey.

Culpeper.] A. Certainly they intended an universal Medicine of this, and may
prove as good as Chrysippus his Coleworts. It is profitable for wounded people
to take, for it is drying and healing, and therefore good for Ruptures.

Syrupus insusionis Florum Paeoniae. Page 62. Or, Syrup of the infusion of
Peony Flowers.
The College.] It is prepared just for all the world like syrup of
Clove-gilliflowers.

Culpeper.] A. See syrup of Meconium for the virtues.

Syrupus de Paeonia Compositus. P. 62. in L. Book. Or, Syrup of Peony Compound.
The College.] Take of the Roots of both sorts of Peony taken up at the full
Moon, cut in slices and steeped in white Wine a whole day, of each an ounce and
an half; Contra yerva half an ounce; Siler mountain six drachms; Elks Claws an
ounce, Rosemary with the Flowers on, one handful; Bettony, Hysop, Origanum,
Chamepitys, Rue, of each three drachms; Wood of Aloes, Cloves, Cardamoms the
less, of each two drachms; Ginger, Spicknard, of each a dram; stoechas,
Nutmegs, of each two drachms and an half; boil them after one days warm
digestion, in a sufficient quantity of distilled Water of Peony Roots, to four
pouud; in which being strained through Hippocrates his sleeves, put four pound
and an half of white sugar and boil it to a syrup.

Culpeper.] A. It is somewhat costly to buy, and as troublesome to make, a
spoonful of it taken helps the Falling Sickness and Convulsions.

Syrupus de Pomis alterans. Page 62. in the L. Book. Or, Syrup of Apples.
The College.] Take four pound of the juice of sweet scented Apples, the juice
of Bugloss garden and wild, of Violet Leaves, Rose water, of each a pound; boil
them together and clarify them, and with six pound of pure sugar, boil it into
a syrup according to Art.

Culpeper.] A. It is a fine cooling syrup for such whose hearts and stomachs
are overpressed with heat, and may safely be given in fevers, for it rather
loosens than binds; it breeds good blood, and is profitable in Hectic fevers,
and for such as are troubled with palpitation of the heart, it quenches thirst
admirably in Fevers, and stays Hiccoughs. You may take an ounce of it at a
time in the morning, or when you need.

Syrupus de Prasio. Page 62. In the Latin Book. Or, Syrup of Horehound.
The Colledg] Take of white Horehound fresh, two ounces; Liquoris, Polipodium
of the Oak, Fennel, and smallage Roots of each half an ounce; white
Maidenhair, Origanum, Hysop, Calaminth, Time, savory, scabious, Coltsfoot of
each six drachms; the seeds of Annis and Cotton, of each three drachms; Raisons
of the sun stoned two ounces, fat Figs ten, boil them in eight pound of
Hydromel till half be consumed, boil the Decoction into a syrup with honey and
sugar of each two pound, and perfume it with an ounce of the Roots of Orris
Florentine.

Culpeper.] A. It is apropriated to the breast and lungues, and is a fine
clenser, to purge them from thick and putrified phlegm, it helps Phtisicks and
Coughs, and diseases subject to old men and cold natures. Take it with a
Liquoris stick. Both this Receipt and the former, Fernelius was the Author of.

Syrupus de quinque Radicibus. Page 63. In L Book. Or, Syrup of the sive
opening Roots.
The College.] Take of the Roots of smallage, Fennel, Parsley, Bruscus,
Sparagus, of each two ounces, spring Water six pound; boil away the third part
and make a syrup with the rest according to art; with three pound of sugar,
adding eight ounces of white white Wine Vinegar toward the latter end.

Culpeper] It cleanses and opens very well, is profitable against
Obstructions, provokes Urine, cleanses the body of phlegm, and is safely and
profitably given in the beginning of Fevers. An ounce at a time upon an empty
stomach is a good dose.

Syrupus Raphani. Page 63. In the L. Book. Or, Syrup of Rhadishes.
The Colledg] Take of Garden and wild Rhadish Roots, of each an ounce; the
Roots of white Saxifrage, Lovage, Bruscus, Eringo, Restharrow, Parsley, Fennel,
of each half an ounce; the Leaves of Bettony, Burnet, Penyroyal, Nettles,
Watercresses, Sampier, Maidenhair, of each a handful; Winter Cherries, Jujubes,
of each ten; the seeds of Bazil, Bur, Parsley of Macedonia, Hartwort, Caraway,
Carrots, Gromwel, the Bark of the Root of Bay Tree, of each two drachms;
Raisons of the sun stoned, Liquoris, of each six drachms; boil them in twelve
pound of water to eight; strain it, and with four pound of Sugar and two pound
of Honey, make it into a syrup and perfume it with an ounce of Cinnamon, and
half an ounce of Nutmegs.

Culpeper] A. A tedious long Medicine for the stone: I wonder why the College
affect such LONG Receipts, surely it will be LONG enough before they be wiser.

Syrupus Regius, alias Julapium Alexandrinum. P. 64 Or, Julep of Alexandria.
The Colledg] Boil four pound of Rose water, and one pound of white sugar into
a Julep.

Julep. of Roses is made with Damask Rose water, in the very same manner.

Culpeper] Two fine cooling drinks in the heat of summer for them that have
nothing else to do with their money.

Syrupus de Rosis siccis. Page 64. In the L. Book. Or, Syrup of dried Roses.
The Colledg] Make four pound of spring Water hot, in which infuse a pound of
dried Roses by some at a time; press them out, and with two pound of sugar boil
it into a syrup according to art.

Culpeper] A. If you boil it, it will lose both In syrups made of Decoctions,
the color is not so material.
color and virtue, and then who but the College would first cry out against
such paltry stuff? I am weary with nothing this in every Receipt, therefore be
pleased to accept of this one general Rule, It is not best to boil any syrups
made of Infusions, but by adding the double weight of Sugar ( viz. two pound of
sugar to each pint of infusion) melt it over a fire only.

A. Syrup of dried Roses, strengthens the heart, comforts the spirits, binds
the body, helps fluxes and corrosions or gnawings of the guts, it strengthens
the stomach, and stays vomiting. You may take an ounce at a time, before meat,
if for fluxes; after meat, if for vomiting.

Syrupus Scabiosae. Page 64. In the L. Book. Or, Syrup of Scabious.
The Colledg] Take of the Roots of Alicampane, and Polypodium of the Oak, of
each two ounces; Raisons of the the sun stoned an ounce, sebestens twenty,
Coltsfoot, Lungwort, savory, Calaminth, of each a handsul and an half;
Liquoris, Spanish Tobacco, of each half an ounce; the seeds of Nettles and
Cotton of each three drachms; boil them all (the Roots being infused in white
Wine the day before) in a sufficient quantity of Wine and Water to eight
ounces; strain it, and adding four ounces of the Juice of Scabious, and ten
ounces of sugar boil it to a syrup, adding to it twenty drops of oil of Sulphur.

Culpeper] A. It is a clensing syrup, apropriated to the breast and lungues;
when you perceive them oppressed by phlegm, crudities, or stoppings, your remedy
is to take now and then a spoonful of this syrup, it is taken also with good
success by such as are itchy or scabby.

Syrupus de Scolopendrio. Page 64. in the L. Book. Or, Syrup of Hartstongue.
The Colledg] Take of Hartstongue three handfuls, Polypodium of the Oak, the
Roots of both sorts of Bugloss, bark of the roots of Capars and Tamaris of each
two ounces, Hops, Doddar, Maidenhair, Bawm of each two handfuls, boil them in
nine pound of spring water to five, and strain it, and with four pound of white
sugar make it into a syrup according to art.

Culpeper] A. It helps the stoppings of Melancholy, opens obstructions of the
Liver and spleen, and is profitable against splenetick evils, and therefore is
a choice remedy for the disease which the vulgar call the Rickets, or
Liver-grown: A spoonful in a morning is a precious Remedy for children troubled
with that disease. Men that are troubled with the spleen, which is known by
pain and hardness in their left side, may take three or four spoonfuls, they
shall find this one Receipt worth the price of the whole Book.

Syrupus de Stoechade. Page 65. in the Latin Book. Or, Syrup of Stoechas.
The Colledg] Take of Stoechas flowers four ounces, Rosemary flowers half an
ounce, Time, Calaminth, Origanum of each an ounce and an half, Sage, Betony of
each half an ounce, the seeds of Rue, Pcony, and Fennel, of each three drachms,
spring water ten pound, boil it till half be consumed, and with Honey and sugar
of each two pound boil it into a syrup, which perfume with Cinnamon, Ginger,
and Calamus Aromaticus, of each two drachms tied up in a rag.

Syrupus de Symphyto. Page 65. in the Latin Book. Or, Syrup of Comfry.
The Colledg] Take of the Roots and Tops of Comfry the greater and lesser, of
each three handfuls, red Roses, Betony, Plantane Burnet, Knot-grass, scabious,
Coltsfoot, of each two handfuls, press the Juice out of them all being green
and bruised, boil it, scum it and strain it, ad its weight of sugar to it that
it may be made into a syrup according to art.

Culpeper] A. The syrup is excellent for all inward wounds and bruises,
excoriations, vomitings, spittings, or pissings of blood, it unites broken
bones, helps ruptures, and stops the terms in women: you cannot er in taking of
it.

Syrupus Violarum. Page 65. in the Latin Book. Or, Syrup of Violets.
The Colledg] Take of Violet Flowers fresh and picked, a pound, clear water
made boiling hot two pound, shut them up close together in a new glazed pot, a
whole day, then press them hard out, and in two pound of the Liquor dissolve
four pound and three ounces of white Sugar, take away the scum, and so make it
into a syrup without boiling.

Syrup of the Juice of Violets is made with its double weight of Sugar like the
former.

Culpeper] A. This latter syrup is far more chargable than the former, and in
all reason is better, although I never knew it used; they both of them cool and
moisten, and that very gently, they correct the sharpness of choler, and give
ease in hot vices of the breast, they quench thirst in acute fevers, and
resist the heat of the disease, they comfort hot stomachs exceedingly, cool the
liver and heart, and resist putrefaction, pestilence and poison. It is so
harmless a syrup you shall hurt your purse by it sooner than your body.

The Colledg] Julep of Violets is made of the water of Violet flowers and sugar
like Julep of Roses.

Culpeper] A. It is cooling and pleasant for the Gentry when they are hot with
walking, for few of them much trouble their study.

PURGING SYRUPS.
Syrupus de Cicborio cum Rhabarbaro. Page 67. Or, Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb.
The College. TAke of whole Barley, the Roots of Smallage, Fennel and Sparagus
of each two ounces, Succory, Dandelyon, Endive, smooth Sowthistles of each two
handfuls, Lettice, Liverwort, Fumitory, tops of Hops, of each one handful,
Maidenhair white and black, Cetrach, Liquoris, Winter Cherries, Dodder of each
six drachms; to boil these take sixteen pound of spring water, strain the
liquor and boil in it six pound of white Sugar, adding toward the end six
ounces of Rhubarb, six drachms of Spicknard bound up in a thin and slack rag,
the which crush often in boiling, and so make it into a syrup according to art.

Culpeper] A. This Receipt (without a name) was borrowed from Nicholaus
Florentinus; the difference is only in the quantity of the Rhubarb, and Spike,
besides the order inverted, whose own aprobation of it runs in these terms.

A. It cleanses the body of venomous humors, as Boyls, Carbuncles, and the
like; it prevails against pestilential Fevers, it strengthens the heart and
nutritive virtue, purges by stool and urine, it makes a man have a good
stomach to his meat, and provokes sleep.

A. But by my Authors leave, I never accounted purges to be proper Physic in
Pestilential Fevers; this I believe, the syrup cleanses the liver well, and is
exceeding good for such as are troubled with Hypocondriack Melancholy. The
strong may take two ounces at a time, the weak one; or you may mix an ounce of
it with the Decoction of Senna.

Syrupus de Epithymo. Page 67. in the Latin. Book. Or, Syrup of Epithimum.
The Colledg] Take of Epithimum twenty drams, Mirobalans, Citron, and Indian of
each fifteen drams, Emblicks, Bellericks, Polypodium, Liquoris, Agrick, Time,
Calaminth, Bugloss, Stoechas of each six drams, Dodder, Fumitory, of each ten
drachms, red Roses, Annis seeds and sweet Fennel seeds of each two drachms and
an half, Would I old see them: truly if ye would have them, I doubt you (...)
go to Arabia where Mesue dwelt.
sweet Prunes ten, Raisons of the sun stoned four ounces, Tamarinds two ounces
and an half; after twenty four hours infusion in ten pints of spring water,
boil it away to six, then take it from the fire and strain it, and with five
pound of fine Sugar boil it into a syrup according to art.

Culpeper] A. It is best to put in the Dodder, Stoechas and Agrick, toward the
latter end of the Decoction.

A. This Receipt was Mesue's, only instead of five pound of Sugar, Mesue
appoints four pound of Sugar and two pound of Sapa (the making of which shall
be showed in its proper place) and truly in my opinion the Receipts of Mesue
are generally the best in all the Dispensatory, because the Simples are so
pertinent to the purpose intended, they are not made up of a mess of Hodgpodg
as many others are: but to the purpose.

A. It purges Melancholy, and other humors, it strengthens the stomach and
Liver, cleanses the body of addust choler and addust blood, as also of salt
humors, and helps diseases proceeding from these, as scabs, itch, tetters,
ringworms, leprosy etc. and the truth is, I like it the better for its
gentleness, for I never fancied violent Medicines in Melancholy diseases. A
mean man may take two ounces at a time, or ad one ounce to the Decoction of
Epithimum.

Syrupus e Floribus Persicorum. Page 68. in L. Book. Or, Syrup of Peach-flowers.
The Colledg] Take of fresh Peach-flowers a pound, steep them a whole day in
three pound of warm water, then boil it a little and strain it out, repeat this
infusion five times in the same (...), in three pound of which dissolve two
pound and an half of Sugar [and boil it into a syrup.

Culpeper] A. It is a gentle Purger of choler, and may be given even in
fevers to draw away the sharp chollerick humors according to the opinion of
Andernacus, whose Receipt (all things considered) differs little from this.

Syrupus de Pomis Purgans. Page 68. in the L. Book. Or, Syrup of Apples,
purging.
The Colledg] Take of the Juice of sweet smelling Apples two pound, the juice
of Borrage and Bugloss of each one pound and an half, Senna two ounces, Annis
seeds half an ounce, Saffron one dram; let the (...) be sleeped in the
Juyce's twenty four hours, and after a walm or two strain it, and with two
pound of white sugar boil it to a syrup according to art, the Saffron being
tied up in a rag, and often crushed in the boiling.

Culpeper] A. Mesue appoints Senna Cods, and so do the Augustan Physicians,
viz. the husk that holds the seeds; and the College altered that, and added the
Annis seeds, I suppose to correct the Senna, and in so doing they did well.

A. The syrup is a pretty cooling purge, and tends to rectify the distempers
of the blood, it purges choler and melancholy, and therefore must needs be
effectual both in yellow and black Jaundice, madness, scurf, Leprosy, and
scabs; It is very gentle, and for that I commend both the Receipt, and Mesue
the Author of it. The dose is from one ounce to three, according as the body is
in age and strength. An ounce of it in the morning is excellent for such
children as break out in scabs.

Syrupus de Pomis Magistralis. Page 68. in L. Book. Or, Syrup of Apples
Magisterial.
The Colledg] Take of the Juice and Water of Apples of each a pound and an
(...), the Juice and Water of Borrage and Bugloss of each nine ounces, Senna
half a pound, Annis seeds, and sweet Fennel seeds of each three (...),
Epithimum and why of Creet? there grew most Time upon Himettus in Greece, and
Hybla in Sycilia, and so by consequence most Epithimum.
of Creet two ounces, Agrick, Rhubarb, of each half an ounce, Ginger, Mace of
each four scruples, Cinnamon two scruples, Saffron half a dram; Infuse the
Rhubaib and Cinnamon apart by it self, in white Wine and Juice of Apples, of
each two ounces, let all the rest, the Saffron excepted, be sleeped in the
Waters above mentioned, and the next day put in the Juyces, which being boiled,
(...) and strained, then with four ounces of white Sugar boil it into a syrup,
crushing the Saffron in it being tied up in a linen rag, the infusion of the
Rhubarb being added at the latter end.

Culpeper] A. Out of doubt this is a gallant syrup to purge addust Choler and
Melancholy, and to resist madness. I know no better purge for such as are
almost, or altogether distracted by Melancholy, than one ounce of this mixed
with four ounces of the Decoction of Epithimum, ordering their bodies as they
were taught.

Syrupus de Rhabarbaro. Page 69. in the Lat. Book. Or, Syrup of Rhubarb.
The Colledg] Take of the best Rhubarb and Senna of each two ounces and an
half, Violet Flowers a handful, Cinnamon one dram and an half, Ginger half a
dram, Betony, Succory and Bugloss Water of each one pound and an half; let
them be mixed together warm all night, and in the morning strained and boiled
into a syrup with two pound of white sugar, adding toward the end four ounces
of syrup of Roses.

Culpeper] A. It cleanses choler and melancholy very gently, and therefore is
fit for children, old people, and weak bodies. You may ad an ounce of it to the
(...) of Epithimum or to the Decoction of Senna. It is a very pretty Receipt
made by the Augustan Physicians.

Syrupus Rosaccus Solutivus. Page 69. in L. Book. Or, Syrup of Roses Sclutive.
The Colledg] Take of spring water boiling hot four pound, Damask Rose leaves
fresh as many as the Water will contain, let them remain twelve hours in
insusion, close stopped; then press them out and put in (...) Rose leaves, do
so God rejoices in odd numbers, quoth one of their Patriarks, I should have
said a Poet.
nine times, in the same liquor, increasing the quantity of the Roses as the
Liquor increases, which will be almost by the third part every time; Take six
parts of this Liquor and with four parts of white Sugar boil it to a syrup
according to art.

Culpeper] A. It loosneth the belly, and gently brings out choler and phlegm,
but leaves a binding quality behind it.

Syrupus e Succo Rosarum. Page 70. in the Lat. Book. Or, Syrup of the Juice of
Roses.
The Colledg] It is prepared without steeping, only with the Juice of Damask
Roses pressed out, and clarified, and an equal proportion of Sugar added to it.

Culpeper] A. This is like the other.

Syrupus Rosaccus Solutivus cum Agarico. Page 70. Or, Syrup of Roses Solutive
with Agrick.
The Colledg] Take of Agrick cut thin an ounce, Ginger two drachms, Sal-Gem one
dram, Polypodium bruised two ounces, sprinkle them with white wine and steep
them two dates over warm oshes, in a pound and an half of the infusion of
Damask Roses prescribed before, and with one pound of sugar boil it into a
syrup according to Art.

Culpeper] A. You had better ad twice so much sugar as is of the infusion, for
fear the strength of the Agrick be lost in the boiling.

A. It purges phlegm from the head, relieves the senses oppressed by it, it
provokes the terms in women, it purges the stomach and Liver, and provokes
urin. Some hold it an universal purge for all parts of the body: a weak body
may take an ounce at a time, and a strong, two ounces, guiding himself as he
was taught in Decection of Epithimum.

Syrupus Rosaccus Solutivus cum Helleboro. Page 70. Or, Syrup of Roses Solutive
with Hellebore.
The Colledg] Take of the bark of all the Myrobalans of each four ounces,
bruise them grossly and steep them twenty four hours in twelve pound of the
infusion of Roses before spoken; Senna, Epithimum, Polypodium of the Oak, of
each four ounces; Cloves an ounce, Citron seeds, Liquoris of each four ounces,
the Take the Roots themselves for if the Bark be to be had, it is very rare.
bark of black Hellebore roots six drachms; let the fourth part of the Liquor
gently exhale, strain it, and with five pound of Sugar and sixteen drachms of
Rhubarb tied up in a (...) rag, make it into a syrup according to Art.

Culpeper] A. You must not boil the black Hellebore at all, or but very little,
if you do you had as good put none in; me thinks the College should have had
either more wit or honesty, than to have left Receipts so woodenly penned to
posterity, or it may be they wrote as they say only to the Learned, or in plain
English for their own ends, or to satisfy their covetousness, that a man must
needs run to them every time his finger aches.

A. The syrup rightly used, purges melancholy, resisleth madness. I wish the
ignorant to let it alone, for fear it be too hard for them, and use them as
coursly as the College has done.

Syrupus Rosaccus Solutivus cum Sena. Page 70. Or, Syrup of Roses Solutive with
Senna.
The Colledg] Take of Senna six ounces; Caraway and sweet Fennel seeds of each
three drachms, sprinkle them with white Wine and infuse them two days in three
pound of the infusion of Roses aforesaid, then strain it, and with two pound of
Sugar boil it into a Syrup.

Culpeper] A. It purges the body of choler and melancholy, and expels the
relicts a disease has left behind it; the dose is from one ounce to two: you
may take it in a Decoction of Senna, it leaves a binding quality behind it.

Surupus de Spina Cervina. Page 71. Or, Syrup of Purging Thorn.
The Colledg] Take of the Berries of Purging Thorn, gathered in September, as
many as you will, bruise them in a stone Mortar and press out the (...), let
the fourth part of it evaporate away in a bath, then to two pound of it, ad
sixteen ounces of (...) Sugar, boil it into a Syrup, which perfume with (...),
Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Annis seeds, in fine powder of each three drachms.

Culpeper] A. Tragus and Pena commend it much against the Dropsy, I know
nothing of it by experience, and I am confident the College when they writ it
knew as little, and therefore I hold it modesty to let it alone, as an upstart
Medicine appointed to try experiences upon poor men's bodies, and if it kill
them, their friends by Law cannot question a Collegiate.

SYRUPS MADE WITH VINEGAR AND HONEY.
Mel Anthosatum. Page 72. in the Latin Book. Or, Honey of Rosemary Flowers.
TAke of fresh Rosemary Flowers a pound, clarified Honey three pound, mix them
in a glass with a narrow mouth, set them in the sun, and keep them for use.

Culpeper] A. It has the same virtues with Rosemary flowers, to which I refer
you, only by reason of the Honey it may be somewhat clensing.

Mel Helleboratum. Page 72. in the Latin Book. Or, Honey Helleborated.
The Colledg] Take of white Hellebore Roots bruised a pound, clear water
fourteen pound, after three days infusion, boil it till half be consumed, then
strain it diligently, and with three pound of Honey boil it to the thickness of
Honey.

Culpeper] A. What a monstrum horrendum, horrible terrible Receipt have we got
here? A pound of white Hellebore boiled in fourteen pints of Water to seven; I
would ask the College (if they would not be angry, or if they be I cannot help
it) whether the Hellebore will not lose its virtue in the twentieth part of
this infusion and decoction (for it must be infused (forsooth) three days to a
minute;) if a man may make so bold as to tell them the truth, A Tailors Goose
being boiled that time, would make a Decoction near as strong as the Hellebore,
but this they will not believe; well then be it so, imagine the Hellebore still
to retain its vigor after being so long tired out with a tedious boiling (for
less boiling would boil an Ox) what should this Medicine do? purge Melancholy
say they, but from whom? from men or beasts? for the Medicine would be so
strong the Devil would not take it unless it were powered down his throat with a
horn. I will not say they intended to kill men cum privilegio, that is too
gross; I charibly judge thus, They fearing their monopoly would not hold as
being built upon a rotten foundation, intended when it failed to turn
Horse-Doctors, and so provided this Receipt against a wet day, For,

A. Either the virtue of the Hellobore will fly away in such a martyrdom, or
else it will remain in the Decoction.

A. If it evaporate away, then is the Medicine like themselves good for nothing.

A. If it remain in, it is enough to spoil the strongest man breathing.

A. 1. Because it is too strong.

A 2. Because it is not corrected in the least, and because they have not
corrected that, therefore I take leave to correct them.

Mel Mercuriale. Page 72. in the Latin Book. Or, Honey of Mercury.
The Colledg] Boil three pound of the Juice of Mercury with two pound of Honey
to the thickness of Honey.

Culpeper] A. It is used as an Emollient in Clysters.

Mel Mororum, vel Diamoron. Page 72. in L. Book. Or, Honey of Mulberries.
The Colledg] Take of the Juice of Mulberries and black berries, before they be
ripe, gathered before the Sun be up, of each a pound and an half, Honey two
pound boil them to their due thickness.

Culpeper] A. It is (...) known to be good for sore mouths, as also to cool
inflammations there.

Mel Nuceum, alias, (...) et Dianncum. P. 72. Or, Honey of Nuts.
The Colledg] Take of the Juice of the outward bark of green (...), gathered in
the dog days two pound, boil it gently till it be thick, and with one pound of
Honey boil it to the thickness of Honey.

Culpeper] A. It is a good preservative in peftilential times, a spoonful being
taken so soon as you are up.

Mel Passulatum. Page 72. in the Latin Book. Or, Honey of Raisons.
The Colledg] Take of Raisons of the Sun cleansed from the stones two pound,
steep them in six pound of warm water, the next day boil it half away and press
it strongly, and with two pound of Honey let the expressed liquor boil to its
thickness.

Culpeper] A. It is a pretty pleasing Medicine for such as are in Consumptions,
and are bound in body.

Mel Rosatum commune, sive Foliatum. Page 73. Or, Common Honey of Roles.
The Colledg] Take of red Roses not quite open two pound, Honey six pound, set
them in the Sun according to art.

Mel Rosatum Colatum. Page 73. in the Latin Book. Or, Honey of Roles strained.
The Colledg] Take of the best clarified Honey ten pound, Juice of frish red
Roses one pound, set it handsomely over the fire, and when it begins to boil,
put in four pound of fresh red Roses, the whites being cut off; the Juice being
consumed by boiling and stirring, strain it, and keep it for use.

Culpeper] A. They are both used for diseases in the mouth.

Mel Rosatum Solutivum. Page 73. in L. Book. Or, Honey of Roses Solutive.
The Colledg] Take of the often Infusion of Damask Roses five pound, Honey
rightly clarified four pound, boil it to the thickness of Honey.

Culpeper] A. It is used as a laxative in Clysters, and some Chyrurgians use it
to cleanse wounds.

The Colledg] After the same manner is prepared Honey of the Infusion of red
Roses.

Mel Scilliticum. Page 73. In the Latin Book. Or, Honey of Squils.
The Colledg] Take one Squill full of Juice, cut it in bits, and put it in a
glass vessel, the mouth close stopped, and covered with a skin, set it in the
Sun forty days, to wit, twenty before and after the rising of the Dog Star,
then open the vessel and take the Juice which lies at the bottom, and preserve
it with the best Honey.

Culpeper] A. A man never shows his folly so much as in meddling with things he
has no skill in: Were it not folly in me to go teach a Smith how to make
nails, or a Farmer how to mend his Land? And what then is it for our learned
College to write of Astronomy, which is a Science they have as much skill in as
Banks his horse? I told them of it last Edition, and now they have mended it as
the Fletcher mended his Bolt, made two faults for one before; what should a
Commonwealth do with such creatures that know nothing, and are too proud to
learn. It belongs to their slaves, viz. the Company of the Apothecaries to ask
them, 1. Which Dog Star they mean, 2. Which rising whether Acronical, Cosmical,
or Heliacal.

The Colledg] Honey of Violets is prepared like as Honey of Roses.

Oxymel Simple. Page 73. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the best Honey four pound, clear water and white Wine
Vinegar of each two pound, boil them in an earthen vessel, taking the scum off
with a wooden Scummer, till it be come to the consistence of a Syrup.

Culpeper] A. Your best way is to boil the Water and Honey first into a Syrup,
and ad the Vinegar afterward, and then boil it again into a Syrup. Observe,
that the later it be before you ad the Vinegar to any Syrup, the sowrer will it
be: so may you please your self, and not offend the College, for they give you
latitude enough.

A. It cuts phlegm, and it is a good preparative against a vomit.

Oxymel Compound. Page 73. in the L. Book.
The Colledg] Take of the Bark of the Root of Fennel, Smallage, Parsley,
Bruscus, Sparagus, of each two ounces, the Seeds of Fennel, Smallage, Parsley,
Annis, of each one ounce, steep them all (the Roots being first cleansed and the
Seeds bruised) in six pound of clear water, and a pound and an half of wine
Vinegar, the next day boil it to the consumption of the third part, boil the
rest being strained, with three pound of Honey into a liquid Syrup according to
art.

Culpeper] A. First, having bruised the Roots and Seeds, boil them in the water
till half be, consumed, then strain it and ad the Honey, and when it is almost
boiled enough, add the Vinegar; and with all my heart I will put it to Dr.
Reason to judge which is the best way of making of it, the Colleges or mine.

Oxymel Helleboratum. Page 74. in the Latin Book. Or, Oximel Helleborated.
The Colledg] Take of Rue, Time, Dittany of Creet, Hysop, Penyroyal, Horebound,
Cardus, the Roots of Celtick Spicknard without Leaves, the inner bark of
Elders, of each a handful, mountain Calaminth two pugils, the Seeds of Annis,
Fennel, Bazil, Roman Nettles, Dill, of each two drachms, the Roots of
Angelica, Marshmallows, Aron, Squils prepared, Birthwort, long, round, and
climing, Turbith, English Orris, Costus, Polypodium, Lemmon Pills, of each an
ounce, the strings of black Hellobore, Spurge, Agrick, added at the end of the
Decoction, of each two drams; the bark of white Hellebor half an ounce, let al
of them being dried and bruised, be digested in a Glass, or glazed vessel close
stopped, in the heat of the Sun, or of a Furnace; Posca, made of equal parts of
Water and Vinegar, eight pound, Sapa two ounces; three days being expired,
boil it a little more than half away; strain it pressing it gently, and ad to
the liquor a pound and an half of Honey-Roses, wherein two ounces of Citron
Pills have been infused, boil it to the thickness of Honey, and perfume it with
Cloves, Saffron, Ginger, Galanga, Mace, of each a dram.

Culpeper] A. It is such a mess of altogether, that a man scarce knows what to
do with it; here are many Simples very Cordial, many provoke the terms, some
purge gently, some violently, and some cause vomiting; being all put together I
verily think the labor and cost if put in an equal balance would outweigh the
benefit; but the Apothecaries must make it, the College commands it.

Oxymel Julianizans. Page 75. in Lat. Book.
The Colledg] Take of the bark of Caper Roots, the Roots of Orris, Fennel,
Parsley, Bruscus, Cichory, Sparagus, Cyperus, of each half an ounce, the Leaves
of Hart's-tongue, Schaenanth, Tamaris, of each half a handful, sweet Fennel Seed
half an ounce, infuse them in three pound of Posca which is something sour,
afterward boil it till half be consumed, strain it, and with Honey and Sugar
clarified, of each half a pound, boil it to the thickness of Honey.

Culpeper] A. This Medicine is very opening, very good against Hypocondriack
Melancholy, and as fit a Medicine as can be for that disease in children
called the Rickets. Children are as humorsom as men (and they are humorsom
enough Experience the best of all Doctors teaches) some love sweet things, let
them take Syrup of Hart's-tongue; others cannot abide sweet things, to their
natures this Syrup suits, being taken in the same manner.

The Colledg] Oximel of Squils simple is made of three pound of clarified
Honey, Vinegar of Squils two pound, boil them according to art.

Culpeper] A. They say they borrowed this Receipt of Nicholaus, but of what
Nicholaus I know not, the self same Receipt is word for word in Mesue whose
commendations of it is this, It cuts and divides humors that are tough and
viscus, and therefore helps the stomach and bowels afflicted by such humors,
and helps sour belchings. If you take but a spoonful in the morning, an able
body will think it enough.

A. View the Vinegar of Squils, and then your reason will tell you this is as
wholesome, and somewhat more toothsom.

Oxymel Scilliticum Compositum. Page 75. in L. Book. Or, Oximel of Squils
Compound.
The College.] Take of Origanum, dried Hysop, Time, Lovage, Cardamoms the less,
Stoechas, of each five drachms, boil them in three pound of Water to one;
strain it, and with two pound of Honey, Honey of Raisons half a pound, Juice of
Briony five ounces, Vinegar of Squils a pound and an half, boil it and scum it
according to art.

Culpeper.] A. Mesue says this is good against the Falling Sickness, Megrim,
Headache, Vertigo, or swimming in the head, and if these be occasioned by the
stomach as many times they are; it helps the Lungues obstructed by humor, and
is good for women not well cleansed after labor, it opens the passage of the
womb. It Is too churlish a purge for a Country man to meddle with: If the
ignorant will be meddling they will meet with their matches, and say I told them
so.

A. Such Syrups as are in their rejected Dispensatory, and left out in this,
(for they love to reject the best and choose the worst, as though they were born
for nothing else but to do mischief) are these that follow.

Culpeper. A. REader, before we begin, I thought good to advertise thee of
these few things, which indeed I had inserted at the beginning of the Syrups
had I not forgotten it.

A. 1. A Syrup is a Medicine of a liquid body, compounded of Decoction,
Infusion, or Juice, with Sugar or Honey, and brought by the heat of the fire,
into the thickness of Honey.

A. 2. Because all Honey is not of a thickness, understand new Honey, which of
all other is thinnest.

A. 3. The Reason why Decoctions, Infusions, and Juyces, are thus used, is,
because thereby,

1. They will keep the longer. 2. They will taste the better.


A. 4. In boiling Syrups have a great care of their just consistance, for if
you boil them too much they will candy, if too little, they will sour.

A. 5. All Simple Syrups have the virtues of the Simples they are made of, and
are far more convenient for weak people, and queazy stomachs.

Syrup of Purslain. Mesue.
The College. TAke of the seeds of Purslain grossly bruised, half a pound, of
the Juice of Endive boiled and clarified two pound, Sugar two pound, Vinegar
nine ounces; infuse the seeds in the juice of Endive twenty four hours,
afterward, boil it half away with a gentle fire, then strain it and boil it
with the Sugar to the consistence of a Syrup, adding the Vinegar toward the
latter end of the Decoction.

Culpeper.] A. It is a pretty cooling Syrup, fit for any hot diseases incident
to the stomach, reins, bladder, matrix, or liver, it thickens phlegm, cools the
blood and provokes sleep. You may take an ounce of it at a time when you have
occasion.

Compound Syrup of Coltsfoot. Renodaeus.
The College.] Take six handfuls of green Coltsfoot, two handfuls of
Maidenhair, one handful of Hysop, and two ounces of Liquoris, boil them in
four pints, either of If I durst spend paper about it, I could easily prove
spring water to be the best by far.
rain or spring water, till the fourth part be consumed, then strain it and
clarify it, to which ad three pound of white Sugar, boil it to the perfect
consistence of a Syrup.

Culpeper.] A. The Composition is apropriated to the Lungues, and therefore
helps the infirmities, weaknesses, or failings thereof, as want of voice,
difficulty of breathing, coughs, hoarsness, cathars etc. The way of taking it
is with a Liquoris stick, or if you please you may ad an ounce of it to the
pectoral Decoction before mentioned.

Syrup of Poppies, the lesser Composition.
The Colledg] Take the heads of white Poppies and black, when both of them are
green, of each six ounces; the seeds of Lettice, the Flowers of Violets, of
each one ounce, boil them in eight pints of Water, till the virtue is out of
the heads, then strain them, and with four pound of Sugar boil the Liquor to a
syrup.

Syrup of Poppies, the greater Composition. Mesue.
The Colledg] Take of the heads of both white and black Poppies, seeds and all,
of each fifty drachms, Maidenhair fifteen drachms, Liquoris five drachms,
Jujubes thirty by number, Lettice seeds forty drams; of the seeds of Mallows
and Quinces (tied up in a thin linen cloth) of each one dram and an half,
boil these in eight pints of water till five pints be consumed; when you have
strained out the three pints remaining, ad to them, Penides and white Sugar of
each a pound, boil them into a Syrup according to art.

Culpeper.] A. All these former Syrups of Poppies provoke sleep, but in that, I
desire they may be used with a great deal of Caution and wariness, such as
these are, are not fit to be given in the beginnings of Fevers, nor to such
whole bodies are coslive; ever remember my former Motto, Fools are not fit to
make Physicians. Yet to such as are troubled with hot, sharp Rhewms, you may
safely give them; and note this, the last, which is borrowed from Mesue is
apropriated to the Lungues, whose own words (translation excepted) of it are
these, It prevails against dry Coughs, Phtisicks, hot and sharp gnawing Rhewms,
and provokes sleep. It is an usual fashion for Nurses when thcy have heat their
Milk by exercise or strong liquor, (no marvel then if their children be
froward) then run for Syrup of Poppies to make their young ones sleep. I would
fain have that fashion left, therefore I forbear the dose; let Nurses keep
their own bodies temperate, and their children will sleep well enough, never
scar.

Syrup of Eupatorium (or Maudlin.) Mesue.
The College. Take of the Roots of (...), (...), and Succory, os each two
(...); Liquoris, (...), Dodder, (...), Roses, os each six drachms; Maidenhair,
(...), or instead thereof the Roots of (...) Mariae, A kind of Thorn growing in
Egypt and Arabia.
(...), or (...) thereof the Roots of Avens, the flowers or roots of Bugloss,
Annis seeds, sweet (...) seeds, Ageratum, or Maudlin, of each five drachms,
(...), (...), of each three drachms, Spicknard, Indian Leaf, or instead of it
put Roman Spike, of each two drachms: boil them in eight pints of water till
the third part be consumed; then strain the Decoction, and with four pound of
Sugar, clarified juice of Smallage and Endive, of (...) half a pound, boil it
into a Syrup.

Culpeper.] A. It Is a strange clause, and the stranger because it comes from a
College of Physicians: that they should set Bedeguar, or instead thereof
Carduus Mariae: It is well known that the Bedeguar used here with us, or rather
that which the Physicians of our times use for Bedeguar, is a thing that grows
upon wild Roses, but the Bedeguar of the Arabians was It is that we call our
Ladies thistle, having white veins in the leaf, and used to be eaten in the
springtime.
Carduus Mariae, and they knew well enough Mesue (whose Receipt this was) was
an Arabian: truly this is just as if they should say, they would have ten
shillings for a visit, or instead of that an angel; there being in deed and in
truth as much difference between Bedeguar and Carduus Mariae, as between
eightpence and two groats.

A. It amends infirmities of the Liver coming of cold, opens obstructions,
helps the Dropsy and evil state of the body, it extenuates gross humors,
strengthens the Liver, provokes urine and is a present succor for
Hypocondriack Melancholy. You may take an ounce at a time in the morning: it
opens, but purges not.

Honey of Emblicks. Augustanus.
The College.] Take fifty Emblick Myrobalans, bruise them and boil them in
three pints of water till two be consumed; strain it, and with the like weight
of Honey, boil it into a Syrup.

Culpeper.] A. It is a fine gentle purger both of phlegm and Melancholy, it
strengthens the brain and nerves, and senses both internal and external, helps
tremblings of the heart, stays vomiting, provokes appetite. You may take a
spoonful at a time.

ROB OR SAPA AND JUYCES.
Culpeper. A. ROB is something an uncouth word, and happily formidable to the
ignorant Countryman in these thieving times; and therefore in the first place,
I will explain the word.

A. 1. Rob or Sapa, is the Juyces of a Fruit, made thick by the heat either of
the Sun or the Fire, that it is capable of being kept safe from putrefaction.

A. 2. Its use was first invented for Diseases in the mouth, (however or for
whatsoever it is used now, it matters not.)

A. 3. It is usually made, in respect of body, something thicker than new Honey.

A. 4. It may be kept about a year, little more or less.

Rob, sive Sapa, simplex. Page 76. in the L. Book. Or, Simple Rob, or Sapa.
The College.] Take of Wine newly pressed from white and ripe Grapes, boil it
over a gentle fire to the thickness of Honey.

Culpeper] A. When ever you read the word Rob, or Sapa throughout the
Dispensatory, simply quoted in any medicine without any relation of what it
should be made, this is that you ought to use.

Rob de Berberis. Page 76. in the Latin Book. Or, Reb of Barberries.
The College.] Take of the Juice of Barberries strained as much as you will,
boil it by it self (or else by adding half a pound of Sugar to each pound of
Juice) to the thickness of Honey.

Culpeper.] A. It quenches thirst, closes the mouth of the stomach, thereby
staying vomiting, and belching, it strengthens stomachs weakened by heat, and
procures appetite. Of any of these Robs you may take a little on the point of a
knife when you need.

Rob de Cerasis. Page 76. in the Latin Book. Or, Rob of Cherries.
The College.] Take of the juice of red Cherries somewhat sourish, as much as
you will, and with half their weight in sugar boil them like the former.

Culpeper.] A. See the virtues of Cherries, and there have you a neat trick to
keep them all the year.

Rob de Cornis. Page 76. in the latin Book. Or, Rob of Cornels.
The Colledg] Take of the juice os Cornels two pound, sugar a pound and an
half, boil it according to art.

Culpeper.] A. Of these Cornel trees are two sorts, male and foemale; the fruit
of the male Cornel, or Cornelian Cherry is here to be used, for the foemale is
that which is called Dogberry, in the North Country they call it Gatter-wood,
and we in Sussex Dog-wood, I suppose because the Berries will make Dogs mad as
some hold; also it is very unwholsom wood, specially for such as have been
bitten by mad Dogs.

A. The fruit of male Cornel, binds exceedingly, and therefore good in fluxes,
bloody fluxes, and the immoderate flowing of the terms in women.

Rob Cydoniorum. Page 76. in the Latin Book. Or, Rob of Quinces.
The Colledg] Take of the clarified juice of Quinces, boil it till two parts be
consumed, and with its equal weight in Sugar boil it into a Rob.

Miva vel Gelatina Eorundem. Page 76. in L. Book. Or, (...) of Quinces.
The Colledg] Take of the juice of Quinces clarified twelve pound, boil it half
away, and ad to the remainder, old white wine five pound, consume the third
part over a gentle fire, taking away the scum (as you ought) let the rest
settle, and strain it and with three pound of sugar boil it according to art.

Culpeper] A. Both are good for weak and indisposed stomachs.

The Colledg] Rob of sour Plums is made as Rob of Quinces, the use of sugar is
indifferent in them both.

Rob of English Currence is made in the same manner, let the juice he
clarified.

Culpeper] A. The virtues are the same with Rob of Barberries.

Rob Baccarum Sambuci. Page 77. in L. Book. Or, Rob of Elder Berries.
The Colledg] Take of the Juice of Elder Berries and make it thick with the
help of a gentle fire, either by its self, or a quarter of its weight in sugar
being added.

Culpeper] Both Rob of Elder Berries, and DwarfElder are excellent for such
whose bodies are inclining to Dropsies; neither let them neglect nor despise
it, if they do it is not my fault: They may take the quantity of a Nutmeg each
morning, 'twill gently purge the watery humor.

The Colledg] In the same manner is made Rob of Dwars Elder, Junipers and Paul's
Betony, only in the last, the Sugar and Juice must be equal in weight.

Succus Glycyrrhizae simplex. Page 77. in Lat. Book. Or, Juice of Liquoris
simple.
The Colledg] Infuse Liquoris Roots cleansed and gently bruised three days in
spring water, so much that it may oretop the Roots the breadth of three
fingers, then boil it a little and press it hard out, and boil the Liquor with
a gentle fire to its due thickness.

Culpeper] A. It is vulgarly known to be good against coughs, cold, etc. and a
strengthener of the Lungues.

Succus Glycyrrhizae Compositus. P. 77. in L. Book. Or, Juice of Liquoris
Compound.
The Colledg] Take of the water of tender Oak leaves, of Scabious of each four
pounds, English Liquoris scraped and bruised two pound, boil them by degrees
till they be soft, then press out the Liquor strongly in a press, to which ad
three pound of Juice of Hysop, and dry it away in the Sun in a broad Earthen
vessel.

Culpeper] A. The virtues are the same with the former, but that the College
loves to be troublesome.

Succus Pronorum sylvestrum. Page 78. in Lat. Book. Or, Juice of Sloes, called
Acacia.
The Colledg] Take of Sloes hardly ripe, press out the Juice and make it thick
in a bath.

Culpeper] A. It stops Fluxes, and procures appetite.

The Colledg] So are the juyces of Wormwood, Maudlin, and Fumitory made thick,
to wit, the Herbs bruised while they be tender, and the juice pressed out and
after it is clarified, boiled over the fire to its just thickness.

LOHOCH, OR ECLEGMATA.
Culpeper. A. BEcause this word also is understood but by few, we will first
explain what it is.

A. 1. The word Lohoch is an Arabic word, called in Greek (...), in Latin,
Linctus, and signifies a thing to be licked up.

A. 2. It is in respect of Body, something thicker than a Syrup, and not so
thick as an Electuary.

A. 3. Its use it was invented for, was against the roughness of the windpipe,
diseases, and inflammations of the Lungues, difficulty of breathing, Colds,
Coughs etc.

A. 4. Its manner of reception is with a Liquoris stick, bruised at end, to
take up some and retain it in the mouth, till it melt of its own accord.

Lohoch de Farfara. Page 79. in the Latin Book. Or, Lohoch of Coltsfoot.
The Colledg] Take of Coltsfoot roots cleansed eight ounces, Marsh-mallow roots
four ounces cleansed, boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, and press the
pulp out through a sive, dissolve this again in the Decoction, and let it boil
once or twice, then take it from the fire, and ad two pound of white sugar,
Honey of Raisons, sourteen ounces, juice of Liquoris two drachms and an half,
stir them stoutly with a wooden pestel, mean season sprinkle in saffron, and
Cloves of each a scruple, cinnamon and Mace, of each two scruples, make them
into a Lohoch according to art.

Culpeper] A. It was invented by an uncertain, or an unrevealed Author for the
Cough, and they that cannot get a better nor a cheaper may freely use this, for
the College gives them leave if they appoint it, not else; those that have read
the Augustan Physicians may read a cheaper there, and those that have not nor
cannot, may know if they please, how they are led by the noses by a company of
College gulls.

Lohoch de Papavere. Page 79. in the Latin Book. Or, Lohoch of Poppies.
The Colledg] Take white Poppy seeds twenty four drachms, sweet Almonds
blanched in Rose water, Pinenuts cleansed, Gum Arabic and Tragacanth of each
ten drachms, juice of Liquoris an ounce, starch three drachms, the seeds of
Lettice, Purslain, Quinces of each half an ounce, Saffron a dram, Penids four
ounces, Syrup of Meconium three pound, make it into a Lohoch according to art.

Culpeper] A. The right Worshipful, the College of Physicians, having found a
Medicine called by this name in the Augustane Dispensatory, did as well as they
could to alter it a little, that so they might make fools beleev it was their
own. It helps salt sharp and thin distillations upon the Lungues; it allaies
the fury of such sharp humors which occasion both roughness of the throat, want
of sleep, and fevers; It is excellent for such as are troubled with Pleuresies
to take now and then a little of it.

Lohoch e Passulis. Page 80. in the Latin Book. Or, Lohoch of Raisons.
The Colledg] Take of male Peony Roots, Liquoris of each half an ounce, Hysop,
(...), Hartstongue, or Cetrach of each half a handful, boil them in spring
water, and press them strongly, and by adding a pund of Raisons bruised, boil
it again, pressing it through a linen cloth, then with a pound of white Sugar
make it into a Lohoch according to art.

Culpeper] A. Although this Medicine be seldom in use with us in England, yet
by report of foreign Physicians, it is very prevalent, both against coughs,
consumptions of the Lungues, and other vices of the breast, and is usually
given to children for such diseases, as also for the The difference of which
two diseases is not much.
convulsions, and falling sickness, and indeed the simples testify no less.

Lohoch e Pino. Page 80. in the Latin Book. Or, Lohoch of Pinenuts.
The Colledg] Take of Pinenuts, fifteen drachms, sweet Almonds, Hazel nuts
gently roasted, Gum- Arabic, and Tragacanth, powder and juice of Liquoris,
white starch, Maidenhair, Orris Roots of each two drachms, the pulp of Dates
seventeen drachms, bitter Almonds one dram and an half, Honey of Raisons,
white Sugar-Condy, fresh Butter, of each two ounces, Honey one pound and an
half, dissolve the Gums in so much Decoction of Maidenhair as is sufficient,
let the rest be mixed over a gentle fire, and stirred that so it may be made
into a Lohoch.

Culpeper] A. Before, the College followed the Augustan Physicians to a hair,
and indeed who can blame them for following wiser men than themselves, now they
have altered the quantities, of the simples, and if you ask them the reason why
they did so, you shall have the same answer Balaam gave when he disputed with
his Ass, ``Oh, that there were a sword in ``my hand that I might kill thee.

A. The Medicin is excellent for continual coughs, and difficulty of breathing,
it succors such as are Asthma, is a diseas when thick tough phlegm stiks in the
lappets of the Lungs.
Asthmatick, for it cuts and attenuates tough humors in the breast.

Lohoch de Portulaca. Page 80. in the Latin Book. Or, Lohoch of Purslain.
The Colledg] Take of the strained juice of Purslam two pound, Troches of terra
Lemnla two drams, Troches of Amber, Gum-Arabick, Dragons blood of each one
dram, Lapis Hematitis, the wool of a Hare tosted, of each two scruples, white
Sugar one pound, mix them together, that so you may make a Lohoch of them.

Culpeper] A. The Medicine is so terribly binding that it is better let alone
than taken, unless in inward bruises when men spit blood, then you may safely
take a little of it; if you would know whence they stole it, it was from
Ausberg: you shall shortly hear the Augustan Physicians come with Hu and Cry
after the College, and cry, STOP THIEVES!

Lohoch e Pulmone Vulpis. Page 81. in Lat. Book. Or, Lohoch of Fox Lungs.

The Colledg] Take of Fox Lungues rightly prepared, juice of Liquoris,
Maidenhair, Annis seeds, sweet Fennel seeds, of each equal parts, Sugar
dissolved in Coltsfoot and Scabious water and boiled into a Syrup, three times
their weight; the rest being in fine powder, let them be put to it and strongly
stirred together, that it may be made into a Lohoch according to art.

Culpeper] A. Look what pains the College has taken in altering this Receipt,
here is a little Scabious water added and that is all: Why should they think
themselves wiser than Mesue, when they are not (God knows) half so honest.

A. Mesue appoints sixteen ounces of Honey, and no Sugar nor uncertain quantity
of any thing, and reason it self will tell you Honey is most densing.

A It cleanses and uniteth ulcers in the Lungs and breast, and is a present
remedy in Phtisicks.

Lohoch sanum et Expertum. Page 81. in L. Book. Or, A sound and well
Experienced Lohoch.

The Colledg] Take of dried Hysop and Calaminth of each half an ounce, Jujubes,
Sebestens, the stones being taken out, fifteen, Raisons of the Sun stoned, Now
they appointed fat Figs as I bid them last time.
fat Figs, Dates, of each two ounces, Linseed Fenugrick seed, of each five
drachms, Maidenhair one handful, Annis seeds, and sweet Fennel seeds, Orris
Roots cut, Liquoris, Cinnamon, of each an ounce; boil them all according to art
in four pound of clear water till half be consumed, and with two pound of (...)
boil it into a syrup, afterward cut and bruise very small Pinenuts five
drachms, sweet Almonds blanched, Liquoris, Gum Tragacanth and Arabic, white
Starch, of each three drachms, let these be put into the Syrup when it is off
from the fire, and stir it about swiftly with a wooden Pestel till it look
white.

Culpeper] A Only Mesue appoints one dram less of Linseeds, and whereas they
appoint white Sugar, he appoints Penids, else the Receipt is verbatim.

A It succors the Breast, Lungs, Throat, and Or wind pipe.
Trachaea Arteria oppressed by cold, it restores the voice lost by reason of
cold, and attenuate thick and gross humors in the Breast and Lungs.

Lohoch Scilliticum. Page 81. in the Latin Book. Or, Lohoch of Squils.

The Colledg] Take three drachms of a Squill baked in past, Orris Roots two
drachms; Hysop, Horehound, of each one dram, Saffron, Mirrh, of each half a
dram, Honey two ounces and an half, bruise the Squill, after it is baked, in
a stone Mortar, and after it has boiled a walm or two with the Honey, put in
the rest of the things in powder, dilligently stirring it, and make it into a
Lohoch according to art.

Culpeper] A. In their former Edition (if they be not ashamed to own it, as
they need not for they cannot mend it) they quoted another Lohoch of Squills,
and said it was Mesue's, but they were beside the cushion, it was this.

Eclegma of Squils. Mesue.

The Colledg] Take of the juice of Squils and Honey, both of them clarified, of
each two ponud, boil them together according to art to the consistence of Honey.

A. And my Descant upon it was this,

A. How the name of Mesue came to be obtruded upon this Receipt I know not;
this I am confident of, Galen was the Author of it, neither is it probable the
College would have given the name of Eclegma, but Lohoch, had it been the
Receipt of an Arabian; neither can it be the Printers fault, for he vapors at
the latter end of the Book, that he has made none, and he has done it in
English, that the vulgar may understand THAT in the Book, though nothing else.

A. Ah ha, quoth they, have we got the rong Sow by the ear, and has he found
out our knavery? it cannot be holp, we will leave out that here, and steal one
from Mesue to put instead of it, which is what they prescribed but now; and
just as I was writing of this I heard my neighbors dogs howl, it may be it was
because he was ashamed of their baseness, or else because if they had that
trick, they had others worse.

A. For the virtues of it see Vinegar of Squils, and Oximel of Squils, only
this is more mild, and not so harsh to the throat, because it has no Vinegar
in it, and therefore is far more fitting for Asthames, and such as are troubled
with difficulty of breathing, it cuts and carries away humors from the breast,
be they thick or thin, and wonderfully helps indigestion of victuals, and
eases pains in the breast; and for this I quote the Authority of Galen.
Always take this as a general Aphorism in Physic, Sour things we offensive to
the Windpipe.

A. Lohochs left out in their new Moddel, because they must be doing.

Lohoch of Coleworts. Gordonius.
The Colledg] Take one pound of the Juice of Coleworts, clarified, Saffron
three drachms, clarified Honey and Sugar, of each half a pound, make of them a
Lohoch according to art.

Culpeper] A. It helps hoarsness, and loss of voice, eases surfets and Headache
coming of drunkenness, and opens obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and
therefore is good for that disease in children which women call the Rickets.

PRESERVED ROOTS, STALKS, BARKS, FLOWERS, FRUITS, PULPS.
TAke of Eringo Roots as many as you will, cleanse them without and within, the
If you would see the pith, you must put on your Spectacles; surely the College
mistook a Tobaccopipe for the pith.
Pith being taken out, steep them two days in clear water, shifting the water
sometimes, then dry them with a cloth, then take their equal weight in white
Sugar, and as much Rose water as will make it into a syrup, which being almost
boiled, put in the Roots, and let them boil till the moisture be consumed, and
it be brought to the due body of a Syrup.

Not much unlike to this, are preserved the Roots of Acorus, Angelica, Borrage,
Bugloss, Succory, Alicampane, Burnet, Satyrion, Sicers, Comfry the greater,
Ginger, Zedoary.

Take of the Stalks of Artichokes not too ripe as many as you will, and
(contrary to the Roots) take only the pith of these, and preserve them with
their equal weight in Sugar like the former.

So is prepared the Stalks of Angelica, Burs, Lettice etc. before they be too
ripe.

Take of fresh Orrenge Pills as many as you will, take away the exterior
yellowness, and steep them in spring water three days at the least, often
renewing the water, then preserve them like the former.

In like manner are Lemmon and Citron Pills preserved.

Preserve the Flowers of But where must we have them?
Citrons, Orrenges, Borrage, Primroses, with Sugar according to art.

Take of Apricocks as many as you will, take away the outer skin and the
Stones, and mix them with their like weight in Sugar, after four hours take
them out, and boil the Sugar without any other Liquor, then put them in again,
and boil them a little.

Other Fruits have the same manner of being preserved, or at least not much
unlike to it, as whole Barberries, Cherries, Cornels, Citrons, Quinces, Peaches,
common Apples, the five sorts of Myrobalans, Hazel Nuts, Walnuts, Nutmegs,
Raisons of the Sun, Pepper brought green from India, Plums Garden and wild,
Pears, Grapes.

Pulps are also preserved, as of Barberries, Cassia Fistula, Citrons, I think
they mean the fruit of Briars, a choaky thing, just like the College, and good
for as little.
Cynosbatus, Quinces, and Sloes, etc.

Take of Barberries as many as you will, boil them in spring Water till they
are tender, then having pulped them through a sive, that they are free from the
stones, boil it again in an Earthen vessel over a gentle fire often stirring
them for fear of burning, till the watery humor be consumed, then mix ten pound
of Sugar with six pound of this Pulp, boil it to its due thickness.

Broom Buds are also preserved, but with Brine and Vinegar, and so are Olives
and Capars.

Lastly, Amongst the Barks, Cinnamon, amongst the Flowers, Roses and Marigolds,
amongst the Fruits, Almonds, Cloves, Pinenuts and Fistick Nuts, are said to be
preserved but with this difference, they are encrusted with dry sugar, and are
more called Consects than Preserves.

CONSERVES AND SUGARS.
The College. CONSERVES of the Herbs of (...), Sorrel, Woodsorrel, the Flowers
of (...), Borrage, Bugloss, Bettony, Marigolds, the tops of (...) the Flowers
of Centaury the (...), (...) flowers, Germander, Succory, the Leaves of (...),
the Flowers of (...) the greater, I know not what they mean by Citraria nor
what by Cynosbatus, unless they mean Bryar flowers which have as much virtue in
the as the College.
(...); Cynosbati, the roots of Spurge, Herbs and Flowers of Eyebright, the
tops of (...), (...), the Flowers of Broom not quite open, Hysop, Lavender,
white Lillies, Lillies of the Valley, Marsoram, Mallows; the tops of Bawm, the
Leaves of Mints, the Flowers of water Lillies, red Poppies, Peony, Peaches,
Primroses, Roses, damask, red, Rosemary, the leaves of Rue, the flowers of
Sage, Elder, Scabious, the Leaves of Scordium, the flowers of Limetree,
Coltsfoot, Violets; with all these are Conserves made with their trebble
proportion of white Sugar, yet note, that all of them must not be (...), some
of them must be cut, (...) and gently (...) some neither cut, beaten, nor
boiled, and some admit but one of them, which every Artist in his Trade may
find out by this Premonition and avoid error.

Culpeper] A. What a half-faced order to make up Conserves do the College here
leave? Indeed it belongs to the Apothecaries Trade, Is it not sufficient for a
gentle man to go to a Smith and bid him shoo his Horse, but he must go about to
teach him how to make his shoos and nails? would he not by meddling with what he
has no skill in, quickly show what a Lubber he is? and what then can one say
of the College? Mutato nomine de te, fabula narratur.

SUGARS. Diacodium Solidum, sive Tabulatum. Page 86.
The Colledg] Take of white Poppy heads, meanly ripe and newly gathered,
twenty, steep them in three pound of warm spring water, and the next day boil
them till the virtue is out, then strain out the Liquor, and with a sufficient
quantity of good Sugar, boil it according to art that you may make it into
Lozenges.

Culpeper] A. This Receipt is transcribed verbatim from the Augustan
Physicians, though the College (through forgetfulness or something else) hide
it, the virtues are the same with the common Diacodium, viz. to provoke sleep
and help thin Rhewms in the head, coughs and roughness of the Throat, and may
easily be carried about in ones pocket.

(...) Simplex, et Perlatum. P. 86. Or, (...) of Sugar, both Simple and (...).
The Colledg] The first is made by pouring the Sugar out upon a Marble; after a
sufficient boiling in half its (...) of Damask Rofe water) And the latter by
adding to every pound of the former toward the latter end of the Decoction,
Pearls prepared and bruised half an ounce, with eight or ten Leaves of Gold.

Culpeper] A. Here the College have left out that blasphemous speech, which I
cannot write without horror, nor an honest man read without trembling, viz. To
call a little Rose Water and Sugar boiled together, THE HAND OF CHRIST: The
truth is, if they had left out the rest of the blasphemies, I should have had
some hopes they would in time turn honest, but I see to my grief they remain:
especially that abominable blasphemy in their Dedicatory Epistle to King James,
which they having not (...) enough to alter, (...) let stand, or else it was
because like Sodom, they would declare their sin and hide it not, but manifest
to the world in the sight of the Sun, that they are not a College of
Christians, but of RANTERS, by calling KING JAMES their GOD; blush O Sun at
such blasphemy. It may be they left it out because King Charles is dead, for
worshipping old Jemmy for God, it is more than probable they worshipped his Son
for Christ; and their Tubelary gods being apud Inferos, gives me some hopes
they will follow them quickly, and so all the Tyrants will go together.

A. It is naturally cooling, apropriated to the heart, it restores lost
strength, takes away burning fevers, and false imaginations, (I mean that with
Pearls, for that without Pearls is rediculous) it has the same virtues Pearls
have.

Saccharum Tabellatum Compositum. Page 86. Or, Lozenges of Sugar Compound.
The Colledg] Take of choice Rhubarb four scruples, Agrick Trochiscated,
Corallina, burnt Hartshorn, Dittany of Creet, Wormseed and Sorrel seed, of each
a scruple, (...), (...), (...), Saffron, of each half a scruple, white Sugar a
pound, dissolved in four ounces of warmwood water, warmwood Wine an ounce,
Cinnamon water a spoonful, with the forenamed poudersmake it into Lozenges
according to art.

Culpeper] A. The title shows you the virtues of it: for my part I think in
penning of it, they made a long Harvest of a little Corn.

Saccharum Penidium. Page 86. in Latin Book. Or, Sugar Penids.
The Colledg] Are prepared of Sugar dissolved in spring water by a gentle fire,
and the whites of Eggs dilligently beaten, and clarified once, and again whilst
it is boiling, then slrain it and boil it gently again, till it rise up in
great bubbles, and being chewed it stick not to your teeth, then power it upon a
Marble, anointed with Oil of Almonds, (let the bubbles first sink, after it is
removed from the fire) bring back the outsides of it to the middle till it look
like larch Rozin, then your hands being rubbed with white starch, you may draw
it into threeds either short or long, thick or thin, and let it cool in what
form you please.

Culpeper] A. I remember Country people were wont to take them for coughs, and
they are sometimes used in other Compositions.

Confectio de Thure. Page 87. in the Latin Book. Or, Confection of Frankincense.
The Colledg] Take Coriander seeds prepared half an ounce, Nutmegs, white
Frankincense, of each three drachms; Liquoris, Mastich, of each two drachms;
Cubebs, Hartshorn prepared of each one dram, Conserves of red Roses an
ounce, white Sugar as much as is sufficient to make it into mean bits.

Culpeper] A. I cannot boast much neither of the rariety nor virtues of this
Receipt.

Saccharum Rosatum. Page 87. in the Latin Book. Or, Sugar of Roses.
The Colledg] Take of red Rose Leaves the whites being cut off, and speedily
dried in the Sun an ounce, white Sugar a pound, melt the Sugar in Rose water
and juice of Roses of each two ounces, which being consumed by degrees put in
the Rose Leaves in Powder, mix them, put it upon a Marble, and make it into
Lozenges according to art.

Culpeper] A. As for the virtues of this, It strengthens weak stomachs, weak
hearts, and weak brains, restores such as are in consumptions, restores lost
strength, stays fluxes, eases pains in the head, ears, and eyes, helps
spitting, vomiting, and pissing of blood; it is a fine commodity for a man in a
Consumption to carry about with him, and eat now and then a bit. This they
mended as I bid them, `tis a comfort they will do something as they are bid.

SPECIES OR POUDERS.
Aromaticum Caryophyllatum. Page 88. in the Latin Book.
College. TAke of Cloves seven drachms, Mace, Zedoary, Galanga the less, yellow
Sanders, Troches, Diarrhodon, Cinnamon, wood of Aloes Indian Spicknard, long
Pepper, Cardamoms the less of each a dram, red Roses four drachms, Gallia
Moschata, Liquoris, of each two drachms, Indian leaf, Cubebs, of each two
scruples, beat them all dilligently into powder.

Culpeper] A. This powder strengthens the heart and stomach, helps digestion,
expels wind, stays vomiting, and cleanses the stomach of putrified humors.
This they have mended also, as I in my former Edition showed them.

Aromaticum Rosatum. Page 88. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of red Roses exungulated fifteen drachms, Liquoris seven
drachms, Wood of Aloes, yellow Sanders, of each three drachms, Cinnamon five
drachms, Cloves, Mace, of each two drams and an half, Gum-Arabick, and
Tragacanth of each eight scruples, Nutmegs, Cardamoms the less, Galanga, of
each one dram, Indian Spicknard, two scruples, make it into powder to be kept
in a glass for use.

Culpeper] They have here only left out the Musk and Ambergreece, viz. Musk one
scruple, Ambergreece two scruples, for fear the Receipt should be too good.

A. It strengthens the brain, heart, and stomach, and all such internal Members
as help toward concoction, it helps digestion, consumes the watery excrements
of the bowels, strengthens such as are pined away by reason of the violence of
a disease, and restores such as are in a consumption.

Pulvis ex Chelis Cancrorum Compositus. Page 89. Or, Powder of Crabs Claws
Compound.
The Colledg] Take of Pearls prepared, Crabs eyes, red Corral, white Amber,
Hartshorn, Oriental Bezoar, of each half an ounce, Powder of the black tops of
Crabs Claws, the weight of them all, beat them into powder which may be made
into Balls with gelly, and theskins which our vipers have cast off, warily
dried and kept for use.

Culpeper] A. This is that powder they ordinarily call Gnscoigns powder, there
are diverse Receipts of it, of which this is none of the worst, thought the
manner of making it up be antic and exceeding difficult if not impossible; but
that it may be had to do a man good when Adders skins cannot be gotten you may
make it up with gelly of Hartshorn, into which put a little Saffron: four, or
five, or six grains is excellent good in a fever to be taken in any Cordial,
for it cheers the heart and vital spirits exceedingly, and make them
impregnable.

Species Cordiales Temperatae. Page 89. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of wood of Aloes, Spodium of each a dram, Cinnamon,
Cloves, bone of a Stags heart, the Roots of Angelica, Avens and Tormentil, of
eath a dram and an half, Pearls prepared six drachms, raw silk tosted, both
sorts of Corral of each two drachms, Jacinth, Emerald, Saphir, of each half a
dram, Saffron a scruple, the leaves of Gold and Silver, of each How big must
they be?
ten make them into powder according to art.

Culpeper] A. Musk and Ambergreece of each half a dram, is here left out; it
was not done for cheapness, for it will still be dear enough; but the world
changes so does the College, the world grows worse and worse so do the College.

A. It is a great Cordial, a great strengthener both of the heart and brain.

Diacalaminthe Simple. Page 89. in the Latin Book.
The Colled] Take of mountain Calaminth, Penyroyal, Origanum, the seeds of
Macedonian Parsley, common Parsley, and Hartwort, of each two drachms, the seeds
of Smallage, the tops of Time of each half an ounce, the seeds of Lovage, black
Pepper, of each an ounce, make them into powder according to art.

Culpeper] A. It heats and comforts cold bodies, cuts thick and gross phlegm,
provokes urin and the terms in women. I confess this differs something from
Galen, but is better at leastwise for our bodies in my opinion than his. It
expels wind exceedingly, you may take half a dram of the powder at a time.
There is nothing surer than that all their Pouders will keep better in
Electuaries than they will in Pouders, and most part of them were quoted
Electuaries by the Authors whence they had them; and into such a body, if you
please you may make it with two pound and an half of white Sugar dissolved in
Rose Water.

Diacalaminthe Compound. Page 89. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Diacalaminthe simple half an ounce, The Leaves of
Horehound, Marjoram, Bawm, Mugwort, Savin dried, of each a dram, Cyperus
Roots, the seeds of Maddir and Rhue, Mace, Cinnamon, of each two scruples, beat
them and mix them dilligently into a powder according to art.

Culpeper] A. This seems to be more apropriated to the foeminine gender than
the former, viz. to bring down the terms in women, to bring away the birth and
afterbirth, to purge them after labor, yet is it dangerous for women with
child.

Dianisum. Page 90. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Annis seeds two ounces and an half, Liquoris, Mastich, of
each an ounce, the seeds of Caraway, Fennel, Galanga, Mace, Ginger, Cinnamon,
(...) five drachms, the three sorts of Pepper, (...) Lignea, Mountain
Calaminth, Pellitory of Spain of each two drachms, Cardamoms the greater,
Cloves, Cubebs, Indian Spicknard, Saffron, of each a dram and an half, make
them into powder.

Culpeper] A. Mesue appointed this to be made into an Electuary, it is chiefly
apropriated to the stomach, and helps the cold infirmities thereof, raw phlegm,
wind, continual coughs, and other such diseases coming of cold. You may safely
take a dram of the Electuary at a time. You may make an Electuary of it with
its trebble weight of clarified Honey.

Pulvis Radicum Ari Compositus. Page 90. Or, Powder of Aron Roots Compound.
The Colledg] Take of Aron Roots two ounces, of common Water-slag and Burnet,
of each one ounce, Crabs Eyes half an ounces Cinnamon three drachms, Salt of
Wormwood, and Juniper of each one dram, make them into powder.

Culpeper] A. And when you have done, tell me what it is good for.

Diaireos Simple. Page 90.
The Colledg] Take of Orris Roots half an ounce, Sugar Candy, Diatragacanthum
frigidum, of each two drachms, make them into powder.

Culpeper] A. I do not mean the Diatragacanthum frigidum, for that is in powder
before. It comforts the breast, is good in colds, coughs, and hoarsness. You
may mix it with any pectoral Syrups which are apropriated to the same diseases,
and so take it with a Liquoris stick.

Dialacca. Page 90. in the Lat. Book.
The Colledg] Take of Gum-lacca prepared, Rhubarb, Schaenanth, of each three
drachms, Indian Spicknard, Mastick, the Juice of Wormwood and Agrimony made
thick, the seeds of Small age, Annis, Fennel, Ammi, Savin, Bitter Almonds,
Mirrh, Costus or Zedoary, the Roots of Maddir Asarabacca, Birthwort long and
round, Gentian, Saffron, Cinnamon, dried Hysop, Cassia Lignea, Bdellium of each
a dram and an half, black Pepper, Ginger, of each a dram, make them into
powder according to art.

Culpeper] A. If the College were made to fast till they could beat this into
powder, they would make such poor -- weak -- Receipts in a little time.

A. According to Mesue you ought to dissolve the Mirrh and Bdellium in Wine,
and together with the simples, beaten in fine powder, make it into an Electuary
with a sufficient quantity of clarified Honey. It strengthens the stomach and
liver, opens obstructions, helps dropsies, yellow jaundice, provokes urine,
breaks the stone in the reins and bladder. Half a dram is a moderate dose; if
the patient be strong they may take a dram in white Wine: let women with
child forbear it.

Pulvis Cardiacus Magistralis. Page 91. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of East Bezoar, Bone of a Stags heart of each a dram and
an half, Magisterium of white and red Corral, white Amber, Magisterium of
Pearl, Hartshorn, Ivory, (...), Earth of Germany, (...) and Lemnos, Elks Claw,
(...) Roots of each a dram, Wood of Aloes, (...) Pills, the Roots of Angelica
and Zedoary, of each two scruples, Leaves of Gold twenty, Ambergreece one
scruple, Musk six grains, mix them and make them into powder.

Culpeper] A. It is too deer for a vulgar purse, yet a mighty Cordial and great
strengthner of the Heart and Vitals in Fevers.

(...). Page 91. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the four greater cold seeds, the seeds of Purslain, white
Poppies, Endive, Sorrel, Citrons, the three (...), Wood of Aloes Ginger, red
Roses (...), the Flowers of (...), Bugtoss, Violets, the (...) of Mirtles, bone
in a Stags heart, Ivory, (...) a (...), (...), of each one dram, both sorts
of Corral, of each half a dram, Pearls, three drachms, Camphire six grains,
make them into powder according to art.

Observe that the four greater cold (...), and the Poppy seeds are not to be
added before the powder be required by the Physician for use. Do so by the
other powder in the Composition of which these pouders are used.

Culpeper.] A. Here may you see what a labarinth the College have run
themselves into through their (...), viz. because they would seem to be
singular in Sayiing contrary to wiser Physicians, they run upon two dangerous
Rocks in this one Receipt, 1. It is a costly Cordial, and not usually above one
dram of it (very seldom half so much) given at one time, and these Seeds
excepted against in their caution, and upon grounds just enough, are not the
tenth part of the Composition, which (a dram being prescribed) is but six
grains, which six grains must be divided into five equal parts (a nice point)
one part for each seed. 2. If this Rock were put off, yet then can you not beat
them into powder alone because they are so moist, and yet is not mended now;
sure they are mad, and there is some hopes they will not live long. They have
left out the Ambergreece six grains, and the Roman Doronicum, instead of which
they put in the like quantity of Contra yerva.

A. As for the virtues of it, Authors hold it to be restorative in
consumptions, to help such as are in hectic Fevers, to restore strength lost,
to help Coughs, Asthmaes, and consumptions of the lungs, and restore such as
have labored long under languishing or pining diseases.

Diambra. Page 92. in the Latin Book.
The College.] Take of Cinnamon, Angelica Roots, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Indian
Leaf, Galanga, of each three drachms, Indian Spicknard, Cardamoms, greater and
lesser of each one dram, Ginger a dram and an half, Wood of Aloes, yellow
Sanders, long Pepper, of each two drachms, Ambergris a (...) and an half,
Musk half a dram, make them all into powder according to art.

Culpeper.] A. Mesue apropriates this to the head, and says, it heats and
strengthens the brain, causes mirth, helps concoction, cherishes the Animal,
Vital, and Natural Spirit, it strengthens the heart and stomach, and resists
all cold diseases, and is therefore special good for women and old men. Your
best way is to make it into an Electuary, by mixing it with three times its
weight of clarifyed Honey, and take the quantity of a Nutmeg of it every
morning. Here also they have left out Doronicum, and put in Angelica Roots;
sure they hate Doronicum as bad as they hate Honesty.

Diamoschu Dulce. Page 92. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Saffron, Galanga, Zedoary, Wood of Aloes, Mace of each
two drachms, Pearls raw Silk tosted, white Amber, red Corral prepared, Gallia
Moschata, Bazill, of each two drachms and an half, Ginger, Cubebs, long Pepper
of each a dram and an half, Nutmegs, Indian Leaf or Cinnamon, Cloves, of each
one dram, Musk two scruples, make them into powder according to art.

Culpeper] A. It wonderfully helps cold afflictions of the brain, that come
without a fever, melancholy and its attendance, viz. sadness without a cause
etc. Vertigo or dissiness in the head, Falling Sickness, Palsies, resolution of
the nerves, Convulsions, Heartqualms, afflictions of the Lungues, and
difficulty of breathing. The dose of the powder is half a dram, or two
seruples, or less, according to the age or strength of him or her that takes
it. Mesue appoints it to be made into an Electuary with clarified Honey, and of
the Electuary, two drachms is the dose; the time of taking it is, in the
morning fasting.

Diamoschu Amarum. Page 92. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Is prepared by adding to the forenamed Wormwood, dried Roses of
each three drams, Aloes half an ounce, Cinnamon two drachms and an half,
Castorium and Lovage of each one dram, make them into powder.

Culpeper] A. Besides the virtues of the former, it purges the stomach of
putrified humors.

Species Dianthus. Page 93. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Rosemary flowers an ounce, red Roses, Violets, Liquoris,
of each six drachms, Cloves, Indian Spicknard, Nutmegs, Galanga, Cinnamon,
Ginger, Zedoary, Mace, Wood of Aloes, Cardamoms the less, the seeds of Dill and
Annis, of each four scruples, make them into powder according to art.

Culpeper] A. It strengthens the heart and helps the passions thereof, it
causes a joyful and cheerful mind, and strengthens such as have been weakened
by long sickness, it strengthens cold stomachs, and helps digestion notably.
The dose is half a dram, you may make it into an Electuary with Honey, and
take two drachms of that at a time.

Diapenidion. Page 93. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Penidies two ounces, Pinenuts, sweet Almonds blanched,
white Poppy seeds, of each three drachms and a scruple, [Cinnamon, Cloves,
Ginger, (which three being omitted it is Diapenidion without Species] Juice of
Liquoris, Gum Tragacanth, and Arabic, white Starch, the four greater cold
seeds (...), of each a dram and an half, Camphire seven grains, make them
into powder.

Culpeper] A. It helps the vices of the breast, coughs, colds, hoarsness, and
consumptions of the lungues, as also such as spit matter. You may mix it with
any pectoral Syrup, and take it with a Liquoris stick, if you fancy the Powder
best; but if the Electuary, you may take a dram of it upon a knifes point at
any time when the cough comes.

Diarrhodon Abbatis. Page 93. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Sanders white and red, of each two drachms and an half;
Gum Tragacanth, Arabic, Ivory, of each two scruples; (...) roots, Maslick,
Indian Spicknard, Cardamoms, Liquoris, Saffron, Wood of Aloes, Cloves, Gallia
Moschata, Annis and sweet Fennel seeds, Cinnamon, Rhubarb, Bazil Seeds,
Barberry seeds, the seeds of Succory, Purslain, the four greater cold Seeds
cleansed, white Poppy seeds, of each one scruple; Pearls, bone of a Stags heart
of each half a scruple; red Roses exangulated, one ounce and three drachms;
Camphire seven grains, make them into powder according to art.

Culpeper] A. It cools the violent heat of the heart and stomach, as also of
the liver, lungues and Spleen, eases pains in the body, and most infirmities
coming to the body by reason of heat. The dose of the Powder is half a dram,
and two ounces of the Electuary, into which with Sugar dissolved in Rose Water
you may make it; and can the College justly say it is destructive to the
Commonwealth?

Diaspoliticum. Page 94. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Cummin seeds steeped in Vinegar and dried, long Pepper,
(...) leaves, of each an ounce, Niter half an ounce, make them into powder.

Culpeper] A. It is an admirable remedy for such whose meat is putrified in
their stomcahs, it helps cold stomachs, cold belchings and windy. You may take
half a dram after meat, either in a spoonful of Muskadel, or in a Syrup of
Mirtles or Quinces, or any Cordial Water whose effects is the same.

Species Diatragacanthi srigidi. Page 94. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Gum Tragacanth two ounces, Gum Arabic an ounce and two
drachms, white starch half an ounce, Liquoris, the seeds of Melones and white
Poppies, of each three drachms, the seeds of Citruls, Cucumers and Guords of
each two drachms, Penids three ounces, Camphire half a scruple, make of them a
Powder according to art.

Also you may make an Electuary of them with a susficient quantity of Syrup of
Violets; but have a care of what was told you before, Of the seeds. (quoth the
College, Before, when all honesty was not fled from them to Heaven.)

A. If you please to put in the cold seeds (which the Reverend College appoints
to be left out, till the Powder come to be used, and then it is impossible to
put them in, as I showed before, page 122.) and so make it up into an
Electuary; then I can tell you what the virtues are: It helps the faults of the
breast and Lungs coming of heat and dryness, it helps Consumptions, Leanness,
Inflammations of the sides, Pleuresies etc. hot and dry Coughs, roughness of the
Tongue and Jaws: but how to make ought of the Receipt as the College have
ordered it, belongs to another Oepidibus and not to me. It is your best way to
make the Electuary very moist, and take now and then a little of it with a
Liquoris stick.

Diatrion (...). Page 94. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the three sorts of Peppers of each six drachms and
fifteen grains, Annis seeds (...), Ginger of each one dram, beat them into
(...).

Culpeper.] A. It heats the stomach and expels wind. Half a dram in powder,
or two drachms in Electuary (for so Galen who was Author of it appoints it to
be made with clarified Honey, a sufficient quantity) if age and strength
permit; if not, half so much, is a sufficient dose, to be taken before meat, if
to heat the stomach and help digestion; after meat, if to expel wind.

Diatrion Santalon. Page 94. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of all the sorts of Sanders, red Roses, of each three
drachms, Rhubard, Ivory, Juice of Liquoris, Purslain seeds of each two drams
and fifteen grains, white Starch, Gum Arabic, Tragacanth, the seeds of
Melones, Cucumers, Citruls, Guords, Endive, of each a dram and an half;
Camphire a scruple, make them into powder according to art.

Culpeper.] A. It is very profitable against the heat of the stomach and liver,
besides it wonderfully helps such as have the yellow Jaundice, and consumptions
of the Lungues. You may safely take a dram of the powder, or two drachms of
the Electuary in the morning fasting; for most of their powder will keep better
by half in Electuaries, and were so appointed by those from whence they stole
them.

Pulvis Haly. Page 95. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of white Poppy seeds ten drachms; white Starch, Gum Arabic
and (...), of each three drachms, the seeds of Purslain, Marshmallows,
Mallows, of each five drachms, of Cucumers, (...), Guords, Citruls, Quinces, of
each seven drachms, Ivory, Liquoris, of each three drachms; Penids, the weight
of them all, make them into powder according to art.

Culpeper.] A. It is a gallant cool Powder, sit for all hot imperfections of
the breast and Lungues, as consumptions, pleuresies, etc.

A. Your best way is to make it into a soft Electuary with Syrup of Violets,
and take it as Diatragacanthum frigidum. They have only taken a little pains to
less purpose to alter the quantities, else it is the same with their former.

Laetisicans. Page 95. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take the flowers of Clove-Bazil, or the seeds thereof, Saffron,
Zedoary, Wood of Aloes, Cloves, Citron Pills, Galanga, Mace, Nutmegs, Styrax
Calamitis of each two drachms and an half, Ivory, Annis seeds, Time, Epithimum,
of each one dram, bone of a Stags heart, Pearls, Camphire, of each half a
dram, (...) of Gold and Silver of each half a scruple, make it into powder
according to art.

Culpeper] A. It causes a merry heart, a good color, helps digestion, and
keeps back old age. You may mix half a dram of it to take at one time, or
less if you please, in any Cordial Syrup, or cordial Electuary apropriated to
the same uses.

Pulvis Bezoardicus Magistralis. P. 95. in L. Book. Or, A Bezoartick Powder
Magisterial.
The Colledg] Take of Sapphire, Ruby, Jacinth, Granates, Emerald of each a
dram, Terra Lemnia, Bole-armenick, red Corral prepared, Pearls prepared of
each two drachms, Zedoary, Unicorns horn, East and West Bezoar, Musk,
Ambergreece, Camphire, Squinanth, Saffron, of each half a dram, yellow
Sanders, Wood of Aloes, Benjamin, of each two scruples, Magisterial Phylonium
four scruples, bone of a (...) heart Citron Pills, Chermes, of each half a
dram, Chemical Oil of Cinnamon and Nutmegs of each five drops, make of them a
most subtle Powder according to art.

Culpeper] A. Surely the College laid all their heads together to invent a
Cordial that should be so dear no body should buy it, I am afraid to look upon
it. It Is a great Cordial to revive the body, but it will bring the purse into
consumption.

Species confectionis Liberantis. Page 96. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Tormentil Roots, the seeds of Sorrel, Endive, Coriander
prepared, Citron, of each one dram and an half, all the Sanders, white
Dittany of each a dram, Bole-armenick, Earth of Lemnos of each three drachms,
Pearls, both sorts of Corral, white Amber, Ivory, Spodium, bone of a Stags
heart, the roots of Scrpentary, Avens, Angelica, Cardamoms, (...), Mace, Wood
of Aloes, Cassia Lignea, Saffron, Zedoary, of each half a dram, Penids, raw
Silk tosted, Emeralds, Jacinth, Granate, the flowers of Water Lillies, Bugloss
and red Roses, of each a scruple, Camphire seven grains, make them into powder
according to art.

Culpeper] A. The Scrpentary Roots are added, and Musk and Ambergreece of each
three grains, left out, because destructive to the Commonwealth.

A. It is exceeding good in pestilential Fevers, and preserves from ill airs,
and keeps the humors in the body from corruption, it cools the heart and
blood, and strengthens such as are oppressed by heat; to conclude, it is a
gallant cool cordial though costly. It being out of the reach of a vulgar man's
purse, I omit the dose, let the Gentry and Nobility study Physic themselves,
so shall they know it, for had they wanted hearts to that study no more than
they wanted time and means, it had been far better for this Commonwealth than
now it is. If a Gentleman have no skill in Physic himself, Dr. Dunce if he
have a Plush Cloak on will serve his turn.

Pulvis Saxonicus. Page 96. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the Roots of both sorts of Angelica, Swallow-wort, (...)
Valerian, Polypodium of the Oak, Marshmallows, Nettles, of each half an ounce,
the (...) of German Mezereon, two drachms; twenty grains of Herb (...)-love,
the Leaves of the same, Roots and all, thirty six; the Roots being steeped in
Vinegar and (...), beat it all into powder.

Culpeper] A. It seems to be as great an expeller of poison, and as great a
preservative against it, and the pestilence as one shall usually read of.
Widdowwail left out by (...), Crato, and (...): and out of question it makes
the Receipt the worse, and not the (...). (...) intend the flower of herb
True Love, thereby distinguishing it from one leaf of the flower, or whether
they mean the flower and branch, is very difficult if not impossible to judge;
for their word [ cum toto] comprehends all, both root, branch, leaf, and flower.

Pulvis Antilyssus. Page 97. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the Leaves of Rue, Vervain, Sage,. Plantane, Polypodium,
common Wormwood, Mints, Mugwort, Bawm, Bettony, St. John's wort, Centaury the
less, of each equal parts, let them all be gathered in their greatest strength,
which is about the full Moon in June, and dried speedily in a Warm Sun, and
renewed yearly, and not beaten to powder till you have occasion to use them.

Culpeper] A. I see now the College is not too old to learn how to dry Herbs,
for before they appointed them to be dried in the shadow; I would they would
learn humility and honesty, and mind the common good, and consider what
infinite number of poor creatures perish daily (whom Christ has (...)
purchased to himself, and bought with the price of his blood) through their
hiding the rules of Physic from them, who else happily might be preserved if
they knew but what the Herbs in their own Gardens were good for; with what face
will they answer for this another day before God and the Lord Jesus Christ and
the holy Angels? a few thoughts of this might put them upon such principles as
might be a lengthning to their Tranquillity; but why do I spend time about them,
seeing there is little hopes they will be honester? for why did they change the
name of this Receipt from a powder against the bitings of Mad-dogs, to Pulvis
Antilyssus? was it not because people should not know what it is good for, but
if they be bitten, they may be mad and hang themselves for all them? I believe
I have hit the nail at head the first blow. A dram of the Powder is
sufficient to take every morning.

Rosatae Novellae. Page 97. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of red Roses, Liquoris, of each one ounce, one dram, two
scruples and an half; Cinnamon, They should have added a quarter of a grain, and
half a guarter.
two drachms, two scruples, and two grains, Cloves, Indian Spicknard, Ginger,
Galanga, Nutmegs, Zedoary, Styrax Calamitis, Cardamoms, Parsley seeds of each
one scruple eight grains, beat them into powder.

Culpeper] A. Excellently penned, even to half a grain.

A. It quenches thirst, and stays vomiting, and the Author says it helps hot
and dry stomachs, as also heat and dryness of the heart, liver, and lungues,
(yet is the powder it self hot) it strengthens the vital spirit, takes away
heart-qualms, provokes sweat, and strengthens such as have labored long under
Cronical diseases. You may take a dram of the Electuary every morning, if
with clarified Honey you please to make it into such a body.

Pulvis Thuraloes. Page 97. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Frankincense a dram, (...) half a dram, beat them
into powder.

Culpeper] A. And when you have occasion to use it, mix so much of it with the
white of an Beat the white of the Egg well first.
Egg as will make it of the thickness of Honey, then dip the wool of a Hare in
it, and apply it to the sore or part that bleedeth, binding it on.

A. In my opinion this is a pretty Medicine, and will stick on till the sore be
thoroughly healed, and then will come off of it self. I remember when I was a
child, we applied such a medicine, (only we left out the Aloes and
Frankincense, and used only Coneys wool and the white of an Egg) to kibed
heels, and always with good success. And why could they not here set down the
yertues and way to use it as they did last time? Do they delight to have the
curses of the Widow and Fatherless, and the last groans of poor dying People
ring in the ears of the Lord God Almighty against them, or did they think I was
dead, they (and their Imps) having so often cursed me to the pit of Hell for
doing my Country good? No, I would have them know that through the prayers of
so many honest people, and so many that bless God for me, my life shall be
lengthned to a longer date than their Charter, and when I die I shall have more
weeping eyes accompanying me to the Grave than all they have friends in the
whole Universe.

Pulvis Hermodactylorum compositus. Page 97. Or, Powder of Hermodactils
compound.
The Colledg] Take of men's bones burnt, Scammony, Hermodactils, Turbith, Senna,
Sugar, of each equal parts, beat them into powder.

Culpeper] A. It Is a devilish purge like themselves good for nothing but to
destroy men; your souls being led to your graves by their directions like sheep
to the slaughter, and know not whither you are going nor what hurts you, or if
you do, are they questionable by law? Dear souls, avoid this Medicine, else the
College will have men's bones enough to burn, it may be they appointed it for
that end: And oh College, College, may I not use the speech of Cicero to you?
Iam vos non stultos ut semper, non improbos ut saepe, sed dementes et insae nos
rebus addicam necessariis, I cannot now accout you sools as always, not wicked
as sometimes, but mad men and lunatic, and prove it by good reasons; would you
offer to appoint such a violent purger without any thing to correct it? God be
merciful to your souls, for if you give such Physic you will kill more men by
half than you cure, and men must give you an angel at least to kill them, when
the hangman would do it at a cheaper rate.

Pulvis Senae Compositus major. Page 98. in L. Book. Or, Powder of Scnna, the
greater Composition.
The Colledg] Take of the seeds of Annis, (...), Fennel, Cummin, Spicknard,
Cinnamon, Galanga, of each half an ounce; Liquoris, Gromwel, of each an ounce,
Senna the weight of them all, beat it into Powder.

Culpeper] A. That this Receipt is gallantly composed none can deny, and is an
excellent purge for such bodies as are troubled with the wind chollick, or
stoppage either of the guts or Kidneys; two drams taken in white Wine will work
sufficiently with any ordinary body. Let weak men and children take less,
keeping within doors, and warm. And why must the College spit their venom in
defacing the name of the deceased Dr. Ralf, Holland with a deleatur? why should
all be accounted their own when nothing indeed is theirs but folly and baseness.

Pulvis (...) Compositus minor. Page 98. in L. Book. Or, Powder of Senna, the
lesser Composition.
The Colledg] Take of Senna two ounces, Cremor Tartar half an ounce, Mace two
scruples and an half, Ginger, Cinnamon, of each a dram and an half, Sal gem
one dram, beat it into powder according to art.

Culpeper] A. This Powder purges melancholy, and cleanse the head; Montagnanus
was the Author of it, only the College something altered the quantities of the
Simples: the following powder works something violently by reason of the
Scammony that is in it, this is more gentle, and may be given without danger,
even two drachms at a time to ordinary bodies. I would not have the unskilful
meddle with the following. Neither is it fitting for weak bodies and children;
such as are strong may take a dram, or a dram and an half, mixing it with
white Wine; let them take it early in the morning after they are up, and not
fleep after it for fear of danger; two hours after let them drink warm posset
drink, and six hours after eat a bit of warm Mutton, let them walk about the
chamber often, and not stir out of it that day.

Diasenae. Page 98. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Senna, Cremor Tartar, of each two ounces, Cloves,
Cinnamon, Galanga, Ammi, of each two drachms; Diacrydium half an ounce, beat it
into powder according to art.

Culpeper] A. Out of question some body had formerly cursed the College for
calling so violent a purge a HOLY POWDER, and therefore now they changed the
name; yet this Use may safely be made of their Doctrine, ``Themselves being
violent, ``count the violentest things the most holy.

Diaturbith with Rhubarb. Page 98. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Turbith, Hermodactils, of each an ounce, Rhubarb ten
drachms, Diacrydium half an ounce, Sanders red and white, Violets, Ginger, of
each a dram and an half, Mastich, Annis (...), Cinnamon, Saffron of each half
a dram, make it into powder.

Culpeper] A. This also purges phlegm and choler. Once more let me desire such
as are unskilful in the rules of Physic, not to meddle with purges of this
nature (unless prescribed by a skilful Physician) lest they do themselves more
mischief in half an hour, than they can claw off again in half a year.

Culpeper] The Pouders they in their new Moddel have played the men and left
out, are these:

The lesser Cordial Powder. Fernelius.
The Colledg] Take of Hartshorn, Unicorns-horn, Pearls, Ivory, of each six
grains: beat them into fine powder; If you mean to keep it, you may increase
the quantity analogically.

The greater Cordial Powder. Fern.
The Colledg] Take of the Roots of Tormentil, Dittany, Clove-gilliflowers,
Scabious, the seeds of Tormentil, Coriander prepared, Citron, Carduus
Benedictus, Endive, Rue, of each one dram; of the three sorts of White, red,
and yellow
Sanders, Been white and red, (or if you cannot got them, take the Roots of
Avens and Tormentil in their steads) Roman A kind of (...).
Doronicum, Cinnamon, Cardamoms, Saffron, the flowers of both sorts of viz.
Borrage and Bugloss.
Bugloss, red Roses, and Water Lillies, Wood of Aloes, Mace, of each two
scruples, Ivory, Spodium, Bone of a Stags heart, red Corral, Pearls, Emeral'd,
Jacinth, Granate, of each one scruple, raw Silk Dried or roasted by the fire.
torrefied, Bole Armenick, Earth of Lemnos, of each half a dram; Camphire,
Amber-greese, Musk, of each (...) grains; beat them into powder according to
art, and with eight times their weight in white Sugar, dissolved in Rose Water,
you may make them into Lozenges, if you please.

Culpeper] A. Both this and the former Powder, are apropriated to the heart,
(as the titles show) therefore they do strengthen that and the vital spirit, and
relieve languishing nature. All these are Cordial Pouders, and seldom above
half a dram of them given at a time, I suppose more for the cost of them than
any ill effects they would work, they are too high for a poor man's purse, the
Rich may mix them with any cordial Syrup or Electuary which they find
apropriated to the same use these are.

A Powder for such as are bruised by a Fall. The Augustan Physicians.
The Colledg] Take of Terra sigillata, Dragons blood, so called; though it be
nothing less, but only the gum of a tree.
Sanguis Draconis, Mummy, of each two drachms; Sperma Ceti one dram; Rhubarb
half a dram: beat them into Powder according to art.

Culpeper] A. You must beat the rest into powder, and then ad the Sperma Ceti
to them afterward, for if you put the Sperma Ceti and the (...) all together,
and go to beat them in that fashion, you may as soon beat the Mortar into
powder, as the Simples. Indeed your best way is to beat them severally, and
then mix them all together, which being done, makes you a gallant medicine for
the infirmity specified in the title, a dram of it being taken in Muskadel,
and sweating after it.

Species Electuarii Diacymini. Nicholaus.
The Colledg] Take of Cummin seeds, (...) a natural day in Vinegar, one ounce
and one scruple; Cianamon, Cloves, of each two drachms and an half; Galanga,
Savory, Calamith, of each one dram and two scruples; Ginger, black Pepper, of
each two drachms and five grains; the seeds of Lovage and Bishops weed.
Ammi, of each one dram and eighteen grains; long Pepper one dram;
Spicknard, Nutmegs, Cardamoms, of each two scruples and an half; beat them and
keep them diligently in powder for your use.

Culpeper.] A. It heats the stomach and bowels, expels wind exceedingly, helps
the wind chollick, helps digestion hindered by cold or wind, is an admirable
remedy for wind in the guts, and helps (...) agues. The powder is very hot,
half a dram is enough to take at one time, and too much if the patient be
feverish; you may take it in white Wine. It is in my opinion a fine composed
Powder.

Species Electuarii Diagalangae. Mesue.
The College.] Take of Galanga, (...) of Aloes, of each six drachms; Cloves,
(...), seeds of Lovage of each two drachms; Ginger, long and white Pepper,
Cinnamin, (...) Aromaticus, of each a dram and an half; Calaminth, and Mints
dried, Cardamoms the (...), Indian Spicknard, the seeds of Smallage, Annis
Fennel, Carraway, of each one dram, beat them into Powder according to art.
Also it may be made into an (...) with white Sugar dissolved in Malaga Wine, or
twelve times the weight of it of clarified Honey.

Culpeper] A. I am afraid twelve times the weight of the weight of the simples
is too much by half, if not by three parts: Honest Mesue appoints only a
sufficient quantity, and quotes it only as an Electuary, which he says
prevails against wind, sour belchings, and indigestion, gross humors and cold
afflictions of the stomach and liver. You may take half a dram of the powder
at a time, or two of the Electuary in the morning fasting, or an hour before
meat. It helps digestion exceedingly, expels wind, and heats a cold stomach.

Species Electuarii de Gemmis frigidi.
The Colledg] Take of Pearls prepared three drachms; Spodium, Ivory, both sorts
of Corral, of each two drachms; the flowers of red Roses a dram and an half;
Jacinth, Sapphire, Emerald, Sardine, Granate, Sanders white red and yellow, the
flowers of Borrage and Bugloss, the seeds of Sorrel and Bazil, both sorts of
Been (for want of them, the Roots of Avens and Tormentil) of each one dram;
Bone of a Stags heart half a dram; Leaves of Gold and Silver of each fifteen:
make of them all a powder according to art, and let it be diligently kept.

Species Electuarii Diamagariton Calidi. Avicenna.
The College.] Take of Pearls and Pellitory of the Wall; of each one dram;
Ginger, Mastich, of each half an ounce; Doronicum, Zedoary, Smallage seeds,
both sorts of Cardamoms, Nutmegs, Mace, of each two drachms; Been of both sorts
(if they cannot be procured take the Roots of Avens and Tormentil) black and
long Pepper of each three drachms; beat them into powder and keep them for your
use.

Culpeper] A. Avicenna prescribes this as an Electuary, and so are most of all
the Colleges Pouders prescribed by those by whom they borrowed them, as I told
you before, and they will keep longer and better in Electuaries than in
Pouders; but people must be fantastical.

A. This (quoth Avicenna) is apropriated to women, and in them to diseases
incident to their matrix, but his reasons I know not; It is Cordial and heats
the stomach.

Lithontribon Nicholaus, according to Fernelius.
The Colledg] Take of Spicknard, Ginger, Cinnamon, black Pepper, Cardamoms,
Cloves, Mace, of each half a dram; Costus, Liquoris, Cyperus, Traganth,
Germander, of each two scruples; the seeds of Ammi.
Bishops weed, Smallage, Sparagus, Bazil, Nettles, Citrons, Saxifrage, Burnet,
Carraway, Carrots, Fennel, Bruscus, Parsley of Macedonia, Burs, Or Hartwort.
Seseli, Asarabacca, of each one dram; Lapis spongiae, Lyncis, Cancri,
Judaici, of each one dram and an half Goats blood prepared an ounce and an
half; beat them all into powder according to art.

Culpeper] A. The truth is, the College have altered this Receipt much, and I
am persuaded have made it much better, Neque enim benefacta malign, detractare
meum est.

A. It heats the stomach, and helps want of digestion coming through cold, it
eases pain in the belly and loins, the A (...) that causethmen to vomit up
their Excrements.
Illiack passion, powerfully breaks the stone in the reins and bladder, it
speedily helps the chollick, strangury, and disury. The dose is from a dram
to half a dram, take it either in white Wine, or Decotion of (...) to the
same purposes.

Pleres Arconticon. Nicholaus.
The Colledg] Take of Cinnamon, Cloves, Galanga, wood of Aloes, Indian
Spicknard, Nutmegs, Ginger, Spodium, Schoenanthus, Cyperus, red Roses outof
question: yet it seems the Coledg either did not know, or did not care which
(...), Violets of each one dcachm, Indian Leaf or Mace, Liquoris, Mastich,
Styrax Calamitis, (...), (...), or Water-Mints, Bazil, Cardamoms, long and
white Pepper, Myrtle berries, and Citron pills, of each half a dram and six
grains, (...), (...) white and red (or if they be (...) take the roots of Avens
and Tormentil in their steads) red Corral, (...) Silk, of each eighteen grains,
Musk six grains, Camphire four grains, beat them into powder according to
(...), and with ten times their weight in Sugar dissolved in Bawm water you may
make them into an Electuary.

Culpeper.] A. It is exceedingly good for (...), melancholy, lumpish, pensive,
grieving, vexing, pining, sighing, sobbing, fearful, careful spirits, it
strengthens weak stomachs exceedingly, and helps such as are prone to faintings
and swoonings, it strengthens such as are weakened by violence of sickness, it
helps bad memories, quickens all the senses, strengthens the brain and Animal
spirit, helps the falling sickness, and succors such as are troubled with
Asthmacs, or other cold afflictions of the lungs. It will keep best in an
Electuary, of which you may take a dram in the morning, or more, as age and
strength requires.

A Preservative Powder against the Pestilence. Montagnan.
The Colledg] Take of all the White, red, end yellow.
Sanders, the seeds of Bazil, of each an ounce and an half; Bole Armenick,
Cinnamon, of each an ounce; the Roots of Dittany, Gentian and Tormentil of each
two drams and an half; the seeds of Citron and Sorrel, of each two drachms;
Pearls, Sapphire, bone of a Stags heart, of each one dram: beat them into
powder according to art.

Culpeper.] A. The title tells you the virtue of it. Besides it cheers the vital
spirit and strengthens the heart. You may take half a dram every morning either
by it self, or mixed with any other convenient composition, whether Syrup or
Electuary.

Diaturbith the greater, without Rhubarb.
The College.] Take of the best Turbith an ounce; Diagridium, Ginger, of each
half an ounce; Cinnamon, Cloves, of each two drachms; Galanga, long Pepper,
Mace, of each one dram: beat them into Powder, and with eight ounces and five
drachms of white Sugar dissolved in Succory Water, it may be made into an
Electuary.

Culpeper] A. It purges phlegm, being rightly administered by a skilful hand. I
fancy it not.

A Powder for the worms.
The Colledg] Take of Wormseed four nunces; Senna one ounce; Coriander seed
prepared, Hearts horn, of each half a dram; Rhubarb half an ounce; dried Rue
two drachms: beat them into Powder.

Culpeper] A. I like this Powder very well, the quantity (or to write more
Scholastically, the dose) must be regulated according to the age of the
patient, even from ten grains to a dram, and the manner of taking it by their
pallat: It is something purging.

ELECTUARIES.
Antidotus analeptica. Page 99. in the Latin Book.
Colledg] TAke of red Roses, Liquoris, of each two drachms and five grains; Gum
Arabic and Tragacanth of each two drachms and two scruples; Sanders white and
red of each four scruples, Juice of Liquoris, white Starch, the seeds of white
Poppies, Purslain, Lettice, and Endive of each three drachms, the four greater
cold seeds husked, the seeds of Quinces Mallows, Cotton, Violets, Pinenuts,
fistick nuts, sweet Almonds, Pulp of Sebestens, of each two drachms, Cloves,
Spodium, Cinnamon, of each one dram, Saffron five grains, Penids, half an
ounce, being beaten, make them all into a soft Electuary with three times their
weight in Syrup of Violets.

Culpeper] A. It restores Consumptions, and Hectic (...), strength lost, it
nourishes much, and restor es radical moisture, opens the pores, resists
choler, takes away coughs, quenches thirst, and resists fevers. For the
quantity to be taken at a time, I hold it needless to trouble the Reader: you
may take an ounce in a day by a dram at a time, if you please; you shall
sooner hurt your purse by it than your body.

Consectio Alkermes. Page 99. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the Juice of Apples, Damask Rose Water, of each a pound
and an half, in which infuse for twenty four hours, raw Silk four ounces,
strain it strongly and ad syrup of the Berries of Chermes brought over to us
two pound, Sugar one pound, boil it to the thickness of Honey, then removing it
from the fire whilst it is warm, ad Ambergreese cut smai half an ounce, which
being well mingled put in these things following in powder, Cinnamon, Wood of
Aloes of each six drachms, Pearls prepared two (...), Leaf-Gold a dram, Musk
a scruple, make it up according to art.

Culpeper] A. They have added the double quantity of Juice of Chermes, whereby
the Medicine is made both hotter and stronger, and if they had doubled the
quantity of Sugar also, that so it need not have boiled away so much, they had
done better; also they have subtracted from the quantity of Musk there being a
dram appointed before, but why they have done so, neither I, nor I think
themselves know; and as little reason can be given why they should leave out
the Lapis Lazuli, unless it be for an Apish opinion they hold, that Lapis
Lazuli purges, whereas indeed, it strengthens the heart exceedingly against
Melancholy vapors. Their former Composition contained of it (being first burnt
in a Crucible, then often washed in Rose Water till it be clean) six drachms.

A. Questionless this is a great Cordial, and a mighty strengthner of the
heart, and spirit vital, a restorer of such as are in consumptions, a resister
of pestilences and poison, a great relief to languishing nature; it is given
with good success in fevers, but give not too much of it at a time, lest it
prove too hot for the body, and too heavy for the purse. You may mix ten grains
of it with other convenient Cordials to children, twenty or thirty to men.

Electuarium e Sassaphras. Page 100. in L. Book. Or, Electuary of Sassafras.
The Colledg] Take of Sassafras two ounces; common Water three pound, boil it
to the consumption of the third part, adding toward the end Cinnamon bruised
half an (...), strain it and with two pound of white Sugar, boil it to the
thickness of a Syrup putting in, in powder, Cinnamon, a dram, Nutmegs half a
scruple, Musk three grains, Ambergreese two and thirty grains, ten Leaves of
Gold, Spirit of Vitriol four drops, and so make it into an Electuary according
to art.

Culpeper] A. It opens obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, helps cold Rhewms
or defluxions from the head to the lungs, or teeth, or eyes; it is excellent in
coughs, and other cold afflictions of the lungues and breast; it helps
digestion, expels wind and the gravel of the kidneys, it provokes the terms,
warms and dries up the moisture of the womb, which is many times the cause of
barrenness, and is generally a helper of all diseases coming of cold, raw thin
humors: you may take half a dram at a time in the morning.

Electuarium de Baccis Lauri. Page 100. Or, Electuary of Bay Berries.
The Colledg] Take of the Leaves of dried Rhue ten drachms, the seeds of Ammi,
Cummin Lovage, Origanum, Nigella, Carraway Carrots, Parsley, Bitter Almonds,
Pepper black and long, wild Mints, Calamus Aromaticus, Bay Berries, Castorium
of each two drachms, Sagapenum half an ounce, Opopanax three drachms, clarified
Honey a pound and an half, the things to be beaten being beaten, and the Gums
dissolved in uine, make it into an Electuary according to art

Culpeper] A. It is exceeding good either in the chollick, or iliack passion,
or any other disease of the bowels coming of cold or wind, it generally eases
pains in the bowels. You may give a dram in the morning fasting, or half an
ounce in a Clyster, according as the disease is.

Diacapparis. Page 101. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Capars four (...), Agrimony Roots, Nigella seeds, Squils,
Asarabacca, Centaury, black Pepper, Smallage, Time of each an ounce, Honey
three times their weight, make into an Electuary according to art.

Culpeper] A. They say it helps infirmities of the spleen, and indeed the name
seems to promise so much; it may be good for cold bodies if they have strength
of nature in them; me thinks it is but odly composed: the next looks more lovely
in my eyes, which is --

Diacinnamomu. Page 101. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Cinnamon fifteen drachms; Cassia Lignea, Alicampane
roots, of each half an ounce; Galanga seven drachms, Cloves, Long Pepper, both
sorts of Cardamoms, Ginger, Mace, Nutmegs, Wood of Aloes, of each three
drachms, Saffron one dram, Sugar five drachms, Musk two scruples, added
according to the prescript of the Physician, and by adding three pound eight
ounces of clarified Honey, boil it and make it into an Electuary according to
art.

Culpeper] A. Diacinnamomum, or in plain English, a Composition of Cinnamon,
heats the stomach, causes digestion, provokes the terms in women, strengthens
the stomach and other parts that distribute the nourishment of the body; a
dram of it taken in the morning fasting is exceeding good for ancient people
and cold bodies, such as are subject to dropsies and diseases of phlegm, or
wind, for it comforts and strengthens nature much. If you take it to help
digestion, take it an hour before meat, do so in all things of like quality.

Diacorallion. Page 101. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Corral white and red, Bole Armenick, Dragons blood, of
each one dram, Pearls half a dram, Wood of Aloes, red Roses, Gum
Tragacanth, Cinnamon of each two scruples, Sanders white and red of each one
scruple, with four times its weight in Sugar dissolved in small Cinnamon water,
make it into an Electuary according to art.

Culpeper] A. It comforts and strengthens the heart exceedingly, and restores
such as are in consumptions, it is cooling, therefore good in Hectic fevers;
very binding, and therefore stops fluxes; neither do I know a better Medicine
in all the Dispensatory for such as have a consumption accompanied with a
looseness. It stops the terms and whites in Women, if administered by one whose
wits are not a woolgathering. Take but a dram at a time every morning,
because of its binding quality, except you have a looseness, for then may you
take so much two or three times a day.

Diacorum. Page 101. In the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the roots of Cicers, Acorus, or Calamus Aromaticus,
Pine-nuts, of each a pound and an half; let the Cicers roots being cleansed, cut
In water says Mesue, though the College left it out. You might boil them in
piss, and yet not swerve from their Receipt.
boiled and pulped, be added to ten pound of clarified Honey, and boiled
(stirring it) to its just thickness, then being removed from the fire ad the
Acorus roots beaten, the Pine-nuts cut, and these following in powder; Take of
black Pepper an ounce, Long Pepper Cloves, Ginger, Mace, of each half an ounce,
Nutmegs, Galanga, Cardamoms of each three drachms, mix them with the Roots and
Honey into an Electuary according to art.

Culpeper] A. The Electuary provokes lust, heats the brain, strengthens the
nerves, quickens the senses, causes an acute wit, eases pains in the head,
helps the falling sickness and convulsions, coughs, cathars, and all diseases
proceeding from coldness of the Brain. Half a dram is enough to take at one
time because of its heat.

Diacydonium Simple. Page 102. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the flesh of Quinces cut and boiled in fair water to a
thickness eight pound, white Sugar six pound, boil it to its just thickness.

Diacydonium with Species. Page 102. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the (...) of Quinces, Sugar of each two pound, white
(...) half a pound, added at the end of the Decoction, it being gently boiled
and the scum taken away, ad Ginger two ounces, white Pepper, ten drachms and
two scruples, bruise them grossly, and boil it again to the thickness of Honey.

Culpeper.] A. Is not this then more a Syrup than an Electuary? Surely either
the College or I doted, when we set this among the Electuaries, and would not
be beaten out of our follies.

Diacydonium Compound, Magisterial, Page 102. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of white Sugar six pound, spring water four pound, clarify
them well with the white of an Eg scumming them, then take of ripe Quinces
cleansed from the rind and seeds, and cut in four quarters eight pound, boil
them in the foregoing Syrup till they be tender, then strain the Syrup through
a linen cloth, vocata Anglice boulter, boil them again to a Gelly, adding
four ounces of white Wine Vinegar toward the end; remove it from the fire and
whilst it is warm, put in these following Species in gross powder, Ginger an
ounce, white Pepper, Cinnamon, Nutmegs of each two drachms; keep it in diverse
bones.

Culpeper.] A. If a man void of partiality should compare this and the former
Receipt together, (...) would find but little difference between them: only a
little Cinnamon and Nutmegs added.

A. The virtues of all these three are, They comfort the stomach, help
digestion, stay vomiting, belching etc. stop fluxes and the terms in women.
They are all harmless, you may take the quantity of a Nutmeg of them at a time,
before meat to help digestion and fluxes, after meat to stay vomiting, in the
morning for the rest.

Consectio de Hyacintho. Page 103. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Jacinth, red Corral, Bole Armenick, Earth of Lemnos of
each half an ounce, the Berries of (...), the Roots of Tormentil and Dittany,
the seeds of Citrons, Sorrel, and Purstain, Sassron, Mirrh, red Roses
exungulated, all the sorts of Sanders, bone of a Stags heart, Hartshorn, Ivory
prepared, of each four scruples, Sapphire, Emerald, Topas, Pearls, raw Silk,
Leaves of Gold and Silver of each two scruples, Camphire, Musk, Ambergreese of
each five grains: with Syrup of Lemmons, make it into a Confection according to
art.

Culpeper] A. It is a great Cordial and cool, exceeding good in acute fevers,
and Pestilences, (...) mightily strengthens and cherrisheth the heart. Never
above half a dram is given at a time, very seldom so much; not because of its
offensiveness, I suppose its chargableness.

Antidotum Haemagogum. Page 103. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Lupines busked two drams, black Pepper five scruples, and
six grains, Liquoris four scruples, long Birthwort, Mugwort, Cassia (...),
Macedonian Parsley seed, Pellitory of Spain, Rhue seed, Spicknard, Mirrh,
Penyroyal, of each two scruples fourteen grains, the seeds of Smallage, Savin,
of each two scruples and thirteen grains, Centaury the greater, Cretish
Carrots, Nigella, Carraway, Annis, Cloves, Alum of each two scruples,
Bay Leaves one scruple, one half scruple and three grains, Wood of Aloes a
scruple and fourteen grains, Schaenanth one scruple and thirteen grains,
Asarabacca, Calamus Aromaticus, Amomum, Centaury the less, the seed of Orrach,
Peony, Fennel, of each one scruple and six grains, Cyperus, Alicampane, Ginger,
Cappar roots, Cummin, Orobus of each one scruple: All of them being beaten into
very fine powder, let them be made into an Electuary according to art, with
four times their weight in Sugar, let it stand one month before you use it.

Culpeper] A. It provokes the terms, brings away both birth and afterbirth,
the dead child, purges such as are not sufficiently purged after travail; it
provokes urine, breaks the stone in the bladder, helps the strangury, disury,
iskury, etc. helps indigestion, the chollick, opens any stoppings in the body,
it heats the stomach, purges the liver and spleen, consumes wind, stays
vomiting; but let it not be taken by women with child, nor such people as have
the Hemorrhoids.

A. Nicholaus I take to be the Author of this fantastical Medicine, (though the
College give it a more general term) and the virtues also are quoted from him.
The dose is from one dram to two drams.

Diasatyrion. Page 104. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Satyrion Roots three ountes, Dates, bitter Almonds,
Indian nut, Pinenuts, Fistick Nuts, green Ginger, Eringo Roots preserved, of
each one ounce; Ginger, Cloves, Galanga, Pepper long and black, of each three
drachms, Ambergreese one scruple, Musk two scruples, Penids four ounces,
Cinnamon, Saffron, of each half an ounce, Malaga Wine three ounces, Nutmegs,
Mace, Grains of Paradise, of each two drachms, Ash-tree Keys, the belly and
loins of Scinks, Borax, Benjamin, of each three drachms, Wood of Aloes,
Cardamoms, of each two drachms, the seeds of Nettles and Onions, the roots of
Avens of each a dram and an half, with two pound and an half of Syrup of
green Ginger make them into an Electuary according to Art.

Electuarium Diaspermaton. Page 104. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the four greater and lesser cold seeds, the seeds of
Sparagus, Burnet, Bazil, Parsley, Winter Cherries of each two drachms, Gromwel,
Juice of Liquoris, of each three drachms, Cinnamon, Mace, of each one dram,
with eight times their weight in white Sugar dissolved in Marsh-mallow water,
make it into an Electuary according to Art.

Culpeper] A. It breaks the stone, and provokes urine. Men may take half an
ounce at a time, and children half so much, in Water of any Herbs or Roots etc.
(or Decoction of them) that break the stone; which the last Catalogue in the
Book ( viz. the Catalogue of Diseases) will furnish you with. I delight to have
men studious.

Micleta. Page 105. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the Barks of (...) the Mirobalans torrefied, of each two
drachms and an half, the seeds of Watercresses, Cummin, Annis, Fennel, Ammi,
Caraway, of each a dram and an half, bruise the seeds and sprinkle them with
sharp white Wine Vinegar, then beat them into powder and add the Myrobalans and
these things that follow, Spodium, Balaustines, Sumach, Mastich, Gum Arabic of
each one dram and fifteen grains, mix them together, and with ten ounces of
Syrup of Mirtles make them into an Electuary according to Art.

Culpeper] A. It gently eases the bowels of the wind Chollick, wringing of the
guts, infirmities of the spleen, it stops fluxes, the Hemorrhoids, as also the
terms in women.

A. A dram or two of this taken in the morning had been a better remedy (I
say amongst their Hodgpodg) than most they gave in the late Epidemical disease,
the bloody flux.

Electuarium Pectorale. Page 105. in the Lat. Book. Or, A Pectoral Electuary.
The Colledg] Take of the juice of Liquoris, sweet Almonds, Hazel Nuts of each
half an ounce, Pinenuts an ounce, Hysop, Maidenhair, Orris, Netile seeds,
round Birthwort of each a dram and an half, black Pepper, the seeds of
Watercresses, the Roots of Alicampane, of each half a dram, Honey fourteen
ounces, make them into an Electuary according to Art.

Culpeper] A. It strengthens the stomach and lungs, and helps the vices
thereof. Take it with a Liquoris stick.

Theriaea Diatessaron. Page 105. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Gentian, Bay Berries, Mirrh, round Birthwort, of each two
ounces, Honey two pound, make them into an Electuary according to Art.

Culpeper] A. This is a gallant Electuary, like the Author, which was Mesue. It
wonderfully helps cold infirmities of the brain, as convulsions,
fallingsickness, dead palseys, shaking palseys etc. as also the stomach, as
pains there, wind, want of digestion; as also stoppings of the Liver, dropsies;
it resists the pestilence, and poisons, and helps the bitings of venomous
beasts. The dose is from half a dram to two drachms, according to the age and
strength of the patient, as also the strength of the diseases; you may take it
either in the morning or when urgent occasion calls for it.

Diascordium. Page 106. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Cinnamon, Cassia Lignea, of each half an ounce, Scordium
one ounce, Dittany of Creet, Tormentil, Bistort, Galbanum, Gum Arabic of each
half an ounce; Opium one dram and an half; Sorrel seeds one dram and an
half; Gentian half an ounce, Bole-Armenick an ounce and an half, Earth of
Lemnos, half an ounce; long Pepper, Ginger, of each two drachms; clarified
Honey two pound and an half; Sugar of Roses one pound, Canary Wine ten ounces;
make them into an Electuary according to Art.

Culpeper] A. It is a well composed Electuary, something apropriated to the
nature of women, for it provokes the terms, hastens their labor, helps their
usual sickness at the time of their lying in, I know nothing better; it stops
fluxes, mightily strengthens the heart and stomach; neither is so hot but it
may safely be given to weak people; and besides provokes sleep. It may safely
be given to young children ten grains at a time; ancient people may take a dram
or more: It is given as an excellent cordial in such fevers as are accompanied
with want of sleep.

Mithridate. Page 106. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Mirrh, Saffron, Agrick, Ginger, Cinnamon, Spicknard,
Frankincense, Treacle Mustard seeds, of each ten drachms; the seeds of
Hart-wort, Opobalsamum, or Oil of Nutmegs by expression, Schenanth, Stoechas,
Costus, Galbanum, Turpentine, long Pepper, Castorium, Juice of Hypocistis (...)
Calamitis, Opopanax, Indian leaf, or for want of it, Mace, of each one ounce;
Cassia Lignea, Poly mountain, white Pepper, Scordium, the seeds of Carrots of
Creet, Carpobalsamum or Cubebs, Troch. Cypheos, Bdellium, of each seven
drachms; Celtick Spicknard, Gum Arabic, Macedonian Parsley seed, Opium,
Cardamoms the less, Fennel seed, Gentian, red Rose Leaves, Dittany of Creet of
each five drachms; Annis seeds, Asarabacca, Orris, Acorus, the greater
Valerian, Sagapen. of each three drachms, Meum, Acacia, the bellies of Scinks,
the tops of St. John's Wort, of each two drachms and an half; Malaga wine so
much as is sufficient to dissolve the Juyces and Gums, clarified honey the
trebble weight of all, the Wine excepted, make them into an Electuary according
to Art.

Culpeper.] A. I have not time to search whether there be any difference
between Damocrates and the College. It was also corrected afterward by
Bartholomew Maranta. Also diverse Authors have spent more time about this and
Venis Treacle (both of them being terrible messes of Altogether) in reducing
them into Classes, than ever they did in saying their prayers. Also Andromacus
has another sort os Methridate. It may be it is that usually called with us
[Venis Mithridate] but because the Electuary is very chargable to be made, and
cannot be made but in great quantities, and only that here prescribed is to be
gotten, or at least, easily to be gotten; I am willing to spare my pains in any
further search.

A. It is good against poison, and such as have done themselves wrong by taking
filthy Medicines, it provokes sweat, it helps continual watrings of the
stomach, ulcers in the body, consumptions, weakness of the limbs, rids the body
of cold humors, and diseases coming of cold, it remedles cold infirmities of
the brain, and stopping of the passage of the senses ( viz. hearing, seeing,
smelling, etc.) by cold, it expels wind, helps the chollick, provokes (...) to
ones victuals, it helps ulcers in the bladder if Galen say true, as also
difficulty of Urine, it casts out the dead child, and helps such women as
cannot conccive by reason of cold, it is an admirable remedy for melancholy
and all diseases of the body coming through cold, it would fill a whole sheep of
paper to reckon them all up particularly. You may take a scruple or half a
dram in the morning, and follow your business; two drachms will make you
sweat, yea one dram if your body be weak, for then two drams may be dangerous
because of its heat: how to order your self in sweating you were taught before,
if you have forgot where, look the Table at latter end.

Phylonium Persicum. Page 107. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of white Pepper, the seeds of white Henbane of each two
drachms, Opium Earth of Lemnos of each ten drachms, (...), Hematitis, Saffron
of each five drachms, Castorium, Indian Spicknard, Euphorbium prepared,
Pellitary of Spain, Pearls, Amber, Zedoary, Alicampane, Troch. Ramach, of each
a dram, Camphire, a scruple, with their trebble weight in Honey-Roses make it
into an Electuary according to art.

Culpeper] A. All the difference is, Mesue appoints Honey, whose commendations
of it is this: It stops blood flowing from any part of the body, the immoderate
flowing of the terms in women, the hemorrhoyds in men, spitting of blood,
bloody fluxes, and is profitable for such women as are subject to miscarry: See
the next Receipt.

A. Now they have made the quantity the same with Mesue, before I think they
followed Wicker.

Phylonium Romanum. Page 107. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of white Pepper, White Henbane seeds of each five drachms,
Opium two drachms and an half, Cassia Lignea a dram and an half, the seeds
of Smallage a dram, Parsley of Macedonia, Fennel, Carrots of Creet of each two
scruples and five grains, Saffron a scruple and an half, Indian Spicknard,
Pellitory of Spain, Zedoary, fisteen grains, Cinnamon a dram and an half,
Euphorbium prepared, Mirrh, Castorium, of each a dram, with their trebble
weight in clarified Honey, make it into an Electuary.

Culpeper] A. It is a most exquisite thing to ease vehement and deadly pains in
what part of the body soever they be, whether internal or external: that
vehemence of pain will bring a fever, and a fever, death, no man well in his
wits will deny; therefore in such diseases which cause vehemence of pain, as
Chollicks, the Stone, Strangury etc. this may be given (ordered by the
discretion of an able brain, for it conduces little to the cure) to mitigate
the extremity of pain, until convenient remedy may be had: (as men pump water
out before they can stop the hole in a leaking vessel.) As for other virtues
which Authors say this Electuary has, I shall pass them by, resting confident
that other remedies may be found out for them in this Book, as effectual, and
less dangerous; and because the former Electuary is not much unlike to this in
some particulars, take the same caution in that also. I would not have the
vulgar meddle with this, nor the former.

Phylonium Magistrale. Page 108. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Opium four ounces, Benjamin, Mirrh; Mummy of each half
an ounce, Spirit of Wine as much as is sufficient to make it into an Opiate.

Culpeper] A I hold their Laudanum to be a better Midicine, for this (being
exceeding dangerous) for an unskilful man to meddle withal, I let it alone, yet
am not ignorant what good it might do to such whose wounds have brought them
into a frenzy, if given by an able hand.

(...) de Ovo. Page 108 in the Latin Book. Or, Electuary of Eggs
The Colledg] Take a Hens Egg new laid and the white being taken out by a
small hole, fill up the void place with Saffron, leaving the yolk in, then the
hole being stopped, roast it in ashes till the shell begin to look black, take
dilligent heed the Saffron burn not for then is the whole Medicine spoiled,
then the matter being taken out dry if so that it may be beaten into powder,
and ad to it as much Powder of white Mustard Seed as it waighs. Then take the
Roots of white Dittany, and Tormentil, of each two drachms, Mirrh, Hearts horn,
Petasitis roots of each one dram, the roots of Angellica and Burnet, Juniper
berries, (...), Camphire of each half an ounce, mix them all together in a
mortar, then ad Venis Treacle the weight of them all, stir them about with a
pestle three hours together, putting in so much Syrup of Lemmons, as is enough
to make it into an Electuary according to art.

Culpeper] A. A dram of it given at a time is as great a help in a
pestilential fever as a man shall usually read of in a Galenist. It provokes
sweat, and then you shall be taught how to use your self: if years do not
permit, give not so much.

Theriaca Andromachi. Page 108. in Lat. Book. or, Venis Treacle.
The Colledg] Take of Troches of Squills forty eight drachms, Troches of
Vipers, long Pepper, Opium of Thebes, Magma, Hedycroi dried of each twenty four
drachms, Red Roses exungulated, Orris, Illirick, juice of Liquoris, the seeds
of sweet Navew, Scordium, Opobalsamum, Cinnamon, Agrick, of each twelve
drachms, Mirrh, Costus, or Zedoary, Saffron, Cassia, Lignea, Indian Spicknard,
Schenanth, Pepper, white and black, Olibanum, Dittany of Creet, Rhapontick,
Stoechas, Horehound, Macedonian Parsley seed, Calaminth, Cypress, Turpentine,
the roots of Cinkfoyl and Ginger of each Six drachms, (...), mountain,
Chamepitis, Celtick Spicknard, Amomus, Styrax Calamitis, the roots of Meum, the
tops of Germander, the roots of Rhapontick, Earth of Lemn os, Indian leaf,
Chalcitis burnt or in stead thereof Roman Vitriol burnt, Gentian roots, Gum
Arabic, the juice of Hypocistis, Carpobalsamum or Nutmegs, or Cubebs, the
seeds of Annis, Cardamoms, Fennel, Hartwort, Acacia or in stead thereof the
juice of Sloes made thick, the seeds of Treacle Mustard, and Ammi, the tops of
Saint John's wort, Sagapen. ofof each four drams, Castorium, the roots of long
Birth-wort, Bitumen, Judaicum, Carrot seed, Opopanax, Centaury the less,
Galbanum of each two drachms, Canary Wine enough to dissolve what is to be
dissolved, Honey the trebble weight of the dry Species, make them into an
Electuary according to art.

Culpeper] A. It is confessed many Physicians have commented upon this Receipt;
as Bartholomaeus Maranta, Galen, Medici Romani, and Medici Bononienses, cum
multis aliis; but with little difference. The virtues of it are, It resists
poison and the bitings of venomous beasts, inveterate headaches, vertigo,
deafness, the falling sickness, astonishment, apoplexes, dullness of sight, want
of voice, asthmaes, old and new coughs, such as spit or vomit blood, such as
can hardly spit or breath, coldness of the stomach, wind, the chollick, and
Illiach passion, the yellow jaundice, hardness of the spleen, stone in the
reins and bladder, difficulty of urine, ulcers in the bladder, fevers
dropsies, leprosies; it provokes the terms, brings sorth both birth and
afterbirth, helps pains in the joints, it helps not only the body, but also the
mind, As vain fears, melancholy etc. and is a good remedy in pestilential
fevers. Thus Galen. You may take half a dram and go about your business, and
it will do you good if you have occasion to go in ill airs, or in pestilential
times; if you shall sweat upon it, as your best way is, if your body be not in
health, then take one dram, or between one and two, or less than one,
according as age and strength is; if you cannot take this or any other sweating
medicine by it self, mix it with a little Carduus or Dragons water, or Angelica
water which in my opnion is the best of the three.

Theriaca Londinensis. Page 110. in Lat. Book. Or, London Treacle.
The Colledg] Take of Hartshorn two ounces, the seeds of Citrons, Sorrel,
Peony, Bazil, of each an ounce, Scordium Corallina of each six drams, the roots
of Angellica, Tormentil, Peony, the Leaves of Dittany, Bay berries, Juniper
berries, of each half an ounce, The flowers of Rosemary, Marigolds, Clove
Gilliflowers, the tops of Saint John's wort, Nutmegs, Saffron of each three
drachms, the Roots of Gentian, Zedoary, Ginger, Mace, Mirrh, the leaves of
Scabious, Devilsbit, Cardus, of each two drachms, Cloves, Opium of each a
dram, Malaga Wine as much as is sufficient, with their trebble weight in
Honey, mix them according to art.

Culpeper] A. The receipt is a pretty cordial, resists the pestilence, and is a
good antidote in pestilential times, it resists poison, strengthens cold
stomachs, helps digestion, and crudities, of the stomach. A man may safely take
two drachms of it in a morning and let him fear no harm.

Diacrocuma. Page 110. in the Latin Book.
Colledg] Take of Saffron, Asarabacca roots, the seeds of Parsley, Carrots,
Annis, Smallage, of each half an ounce, Rhubarb, the roots of Meum, Indian
Spicknard of each six drachms, Cassia Lignea, Costus, Mirrh, Schenanth, Cubebs,
Maddir roots, the juyces of Maudlin, and Wormwood made thick, Opobalsamum, or
oil of Nutmegs of each two drachms, Cinnamon, Calamus Aromaticuus, of each a
dram and an half, Scordium Cetrach, juice of Liquoris of each two drachms and
an half, Tragacanth a dram with eight times their weight in white Sugar,
dissolved in Endive water, and clarified, make it into an Electuary according
to art.

Culpeper] A. Mesue appoints clarified Honey. It is exceeding good against cold
diseases of the stomach, liver, or spleen, corruption of humors, and
putrefaction of meat in the stomach, il-savored color of the body, dropsies,
cold faults in the reins and bladder, provokes urine. Take a dram in the
morning.

PURGING ELECTUARIES.
(...) Laxativa. Page 111. in the. Latin Book.
College. TAke of choice Turbith ten drachms, Diacridium, bark of Spurge roots
prepared, Hermodactils, Red-roses of each five drachms, Cloves, Spicknard,
Ginger, Saffron, long Pepper, Amomus, or for want of it Calamus Aromaticus,
Cardamoms the less, the seeds of Smallage, Parsley, Fennel, Sparagus, Bruscus,
Saxifrage, Gromwel, Carraway, Sal. gem. Galanga, Mace of each a dram, with
their trebble weight of clarified Honey, make them into an Electuary according
to art. Also you may keep the Species by it self, in your shops.

Culpeper] A. It purges phlegm, chiefly from the joints, also it purges the
reins and bladder.

A. I willingly omit the quantity of these purges, because I would not have
foolish women and dunces do themselves and others mischief. For it works too
violently for their uses, and must be prudently ordered, if taken at all, for I
fancy it not at all, but am of opinion it kills more men than cures.

Caryocostinum. Page 111. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Cloves, Costus, or Zedoary, Ginger, Cummin of each two
drachms, Hermodactils, Diacridium, of each half an ounce, with their double
weight of Honey clarified in white Wine, make them into an Electuary according
to art.

Culpeper] A. Authors say it purges hot Rewms, and takes away inflammations in
wounds, I assure you the' Electuary works violently, and may safest be given in
Clysters, and so you may give two or three drachms at a time, if the patient be
strong. For taken orherwise it would kill a horse cum privilegio. I wonder
theColledg is not a shamed to fret men's guts out with outlandish rubbish, and
then they may safely cry out they have the Plague in their guts, and they know
not how to cure them.

Cassia Extracta pro Clysteribus. Page 111. in L. Book. Or, Cassia extracted
for Clysters.
The Colledg] Take of the leaves of Violets, Mallows, Beets, Mercury, Pellitory
of the wall Violet flowers of each a handful, boil them in a (...) quantity of
water, by the benefit of (...) let the Cassia be extracted, and the (...)
washed; Then take of this Cassia so drawn, and boil it to its consistance.
(...) pound, Sugar a pound and an half, boil them to the form of an Electuary
according to art.

Culpeper] A. It is no more than breaking the Canes of the Cassia, and pick out
the pulp (casting away the seeds, boil the pulp in a little of this decoction,
then press it through a pulping sieve, the title shows the use of it: or if you
will take an ounce of it inwardly, you shall find it work with great
gentleness. You may take it in white Wine, it is good for gentle bodies, for if
your body be hard to work upon, perhaps it will not work at all; it purges the
reins gallantly and cools them, thereby preventing the stone and other
diseases caused by their heat.

Electuarium (...) Magistrale Majus. P. 112. Or, The greater bitter Electuary.
The College.] Take of Agrick, Turbith, Species, Hiera Simplex, Rhubarb of each
one dram, choice Aloes unwashed two drachms, Ginger, Crystal of Tartar, of
each two scruples, Orrus Florentine, sweet Fennel seeds of each a (...), Syrup
of Roses, Solutive as much as is sufficient to make (...) into an Electuary
according to art.

Electuarium Amarum Minus. P. 112. in the L. B. Or, The lesser bitter Electuary.
The Colledg] Take of Epithimum half an ounce, the roots of Angelica three
drachms, of Gentian (...), Acorus, of each two drachms, Cinnamon one dram and
an half, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Saffron, of each one dram, (...) six ounces,
with Syrup of Fumitory, Scabious, and Sugar so much as is sufficient to make it
into a soft Electuary.

Culpeper] A. Both these purge choler, the former phlegm, and this melancholy;
the former works strongest, and this strengthens most, and is good for such
whose brains are anoyed. You may take half an ounce of the former if your body
be any thing strong in white Wine, if very strong an ounce, ordering your self
as you were taught before, and the Table at later end will direct you to the
place: a reasonable body may take an ounce of the latter, the weak less. I
would not have the unskilful too busy with purges without advice of a
Physician.

Diacassia with Manna. Page 112. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Damask Prunes two (...) Vlolet-flowers a bandful and an
half, (...) water a pound and an half, boil it (...) to art till half be
consumed, Strain (...) and dissolve in the decoction six (...) of Cassia newly
drawn, Sugar of Violets (...) up of Violets of each four ounces, Pulp of
Tamarinds an ounce, Sugar Candy an ounce and an half, Manna two ounces, mix
them, and make them into an Electuary according to art.

Culpeper.] A. It is a fine cool purge for such as are bound in the body, for
it works gently and without trouble, it purges choler, and may safely be
given in fevers coming of choler: but in such cases, if the body be much
bound, the best way is first to administer a Clyster, and then the next morning
an ounce of this will cool the body and keep it in due temper. I wonder what
they need have put in Sugar of Violets, and Syrup of Violets, why would not the
double quantity of the Syrup have fetved the turn; I protest they will do any
thing, to make their Rceipts dear and difficult, that so they may grow rich by
a lazy life, and uphold themselves in their lawless domineering. A most
unconscionable thing that men should prefer their own greatness before the the
lives of poor men and women; the stones in the street, would cry out against
them shortly, if I should hold my peace.

Cassia Extracta sine foliis (...), P. 113. in L. Book. Or, Cassia extracted
with the leaves of Senna.
The Colledg] Take twelve Prunes, Violet flowers a handful, French Barley, the
seeds of Annis, and bastard Saffron, Polyprdium of the Oak, of each five
drachms, Maidenhair, Time, Epithinum, of each half a handful, Raisons of the
sun stoned half an ounce, sweet Fennel seeds two drachms, the seeds of
Purslain, and Mallows of each three drachms, Liquoris half an ounce, boil them
in a sufficient quantity of water, Strain them, and dissolve in the Decoction,
Pulp of Cassia two pound, of Tamarinds an ounce, Cinnamon three drachms, Sugar
a pound, boil it into the form of an Electuary.

Cassia Extract a cum Foliis Senae. P. 113. in L. Book. Or, Cassia extracted
with the leaves of Senna.
The Colledg] Take of the former Receipt two pound, Senna in powder two ounces,
mix them according to art.

Culpeper.] A. This is also a fine cool purge, gentle, clensing the bowels of
choler and melancholy without any griping, very fit for feverish bodies, and
yet the former is gentler than this. They both cleanse and cool the reins; a
reasonable body may take anounce and an half of the former, and an ounce of the
latter, in white Wine, if they keep the house, or their bodies be oppressed
with melancholy, let them take half the quantity in four ounces of decoction
of Epithium.

Diacarthamum. Page 113. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Ask the^ whether you must put in the (...) seeds or not,
(...) College does not bid them.
Diatragacanthum Frigidum half an ounce, Pulp of preserved Quinces an ounce,
the inside of the seeds of Bastard Saffron half an ounce, Ginger two drachms,
Diagrydium beaten by it self three drachms, Turbith six drachms, Manna two
ounces, Honey Roses, Solutive, Sugar Candy of each one ounce, Hermodactils half
an ounce, (...) ounces and an half, make of them a Liquid Electuary (...) to
art.

Culpeper] A. I (...) what art it must be, wherewith a man should make up an
(...) and have not wherewithal; I tell you truly, that to (...) up an Electuary
of this without more moisture (for here is nor a quarter enough) is a task
harder than al Hercules his twelve labors, abate me but his fetching Cerberus
out of Hell: For my part I shall trouble the Reader no further, but leave the
Receipt to Arnoldus and the College for a pure piece of nonsense. Only let me
admire at the pride and Headstrongness of the College, that will not mend any
error, though as apparent as the Sun is up, when he is upon the Meridian; but
quos perdere (...) Jupiter dementis facit, those whom Jupiter will destroy, he
first makes mad; so their Jupiter, or Juvans pater (as they often in their
Dedicatory Epistle style the King, and the only God they (poor fools) worship,
unless like heathens they worship many gods) being now sent to take his supper
apud inferos, has left such a spirit of madness upon them, which is an
absolute forerunner of their end.

Diaphoenicon. Page 113. in (...) Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the pulp of Dates boiled in Hydromel, Penids, of each
half a pound, sweet Almonds blanched three ounces and an half, to all of them
being bruised and permixed, add clarified Honey two pound, boil them a little
and then strew in Ginger, long Pepper, Mace, Cinnamon, Rue leaves, the seeds of
Fennel and Carrots, of each two drams; Turbith four ounces, Diacridium an ounce
and an half; make of them an Electuary according to art.

Culpeper] A. I cannot believe this is so profitable in Fevers taken downwards
as Authors say, for it is a very violent purge: Indeed I believe being mixed in
Clysters, it may do good in Chollicks and infirmities of the bowels coming of
Raw humors, and so you may give half an ounce at a time.

Diaprunum Lenitive. Page 114. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take one hundred Damask Prunes boil them in water till they be
soft, then pulp them, and in the Liquor they were boiled in, boil gently one
ounce us Violet flowers; strain it, and with two pound of Sugar boil it into a
Syrup; then ad half a pound of the aforesaid pulp, the pulp of Cassia and
Tamarinds of each one ounce; then (...) with it these Pouders following, (...)
white and red, Spodium, Rhubarb, of each three drachms, red Roses, Violets, the
seeds of Purslain, Succory, Barberries, Gum Tragacanth, Liquoris, Cinnamon, of
each two drachms; the four greater cold seeds of each one dram; make it into
an Electuary according to art.

Culpeper] A. It may safely, and is with good success given in acute, burning,
and all other fevers, for it cools much and loosens the body gently; it is
good in agues, hectic fevers and Marasmos. You may take an ounce of it at a
time, at night when you go to bed, three hours after a light supper, neither
need you keep your chamber next day, unless the weather be very cold, or your
body very tender.

Diaprunum Solutive. Page 114. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Diaprunum Lenitive whilst it is warm, four pound;
Scammony prepared two ounces and five drachms; mix them together and make them
into an Electuary according to art.

Seeing the dose of Scammony is increased according to the Author in this
Medicine, you may use a less weight of (...) if you please.

Culpeper] A. (...) they left out now, and left their honesty withal. (...)
therein the College said true, for the Medicine according to this Receipt is
too strong, violent, corroding, (...), fretting, and yet this is that which is
commonly called Duaprunes, which simple people take to give themselves a purge,
being fitter to do them mischief (poor souls) than good, unless ordered with
more discretion than they have; it may be they build upon the vulgar proverb,
That no carrion will kill a Crow. Let me entreat them to have a greater care of
themselves, and not meddle with such desperate Medicines: Let them not object
to me they often have taken it and felt no harm; they are not capable of
knowing what harm it may do them a long time after: let them remember the old
proverb, The pitcher never goes so often to the well, but it comes broke home
at last.

Catholicon. Page 114. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the pulp of Cassia and Tamarinds, the Leaves of Senna, of
each two ounces; Polipodium, Violets, Rhubarb, of each one ounce; Annis seeds,
Penids, Sugar Candy, Liquoris, the seeds of Guords, Citruls, Cucumers, Melones,
of each two drachms, the things to be bruised being bruised, take of fresh
Polypodium three ounces, sweet Fennel seeds six drachms, boil them in four
pound of water till the third part be consumed, strain it, and with two pound
of Sugar boil the Decoction to the thickness of a Syrup, then with the pulps
and powder make it into an Electuary according to art.

Culpeper] A. It is a fine cooling purge for any part of the body, and very
gentle, it may be given (an ounce, or half an ounce at a time, according to the
strength of the patient) in acute, in peracute diseases, for it gently
looseneth the belly and adds strength, it helps infirmities of the liver and
spleen, gouts of all sorts, quotidian, tertain, and quartan Agues, as also
headaches. It is usually given in Clysters. If you list to take it inwardly,
you may take an ounce at night going to bed, in the morning drink a draught of
hot posset drink and go about your business.

A. They have altered the quantities of some of the Simples that are harmless,
for they do wonders as fast as Bell in the Apocripha eat Mutton.

Electuarium de Citro Solutivum. Page 115. in L. B. Or, Electuary of Citrons
Solutive.
The Colledg] Take of Citron Pills preserved, Conserves of the flowers of
Violets and Bugloss, Diatragacanthum frigidum, Diacrydium of each half an
ounce; Turbith five drachms, Ginger half a dram, Senna six drachms; sweet
Fennel seeds one dram; white Sugar dissolved in Rose water and boiled
according to art ten ounces; make a sollid Electuary according to art.

Culpeper] A. Here are some things very cordial, others purge violently, both
put together, make a composition no way pleasing to me; therefore I account it
a pretty Receipt, good for nothing.

Electuarium Elescoph. Page 115. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Diacrydium, Turbith, of each six drachms; Cloves,
Cinnamon, Ginger, Myrobalans, Emblicks, Nutmegs, Polypodium, of each two
drachms and an half, Sugar six ounces, clarified Honey ten ounces, make it into
an Electuary according to art.

Culpeper.] A. Mesue appoints only clarified Honey, one pound and four ounces,
to make it up into an Electuary; and says, it purges choler and phlegm, and
wind from all parts of the body; helps pains of the joints and sides, the
Chollick, it cleanses the reins and bladder: yet I advise you not to take too
much of it at a time, for it works pretty violently, though well corrected by
the pen of a Mesue: let half an ounce be the most, for such whose bodies are
strong, always remembering that you had better ten times take too little, than
once too much. You may take it in white wine, and keep your self warm. If you
would have my opinion of it, I do not like it.

Consectio Hamech. Page 115. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the bark of Citron Myrobalans two ounces; Myrobalans,
Chebs and blacks, Violets, Colocynthis, Polypodium of the Oak, of each one
ounce and an half; Wormwood, Time, of each half an ounce; the seeds of Annis
and Fennel, the flowers of red Roses of each three drachms: Let all of them
being bruised be infused one day in six pound of Whey, then boiled till half be
consumed, rubbed with your hands and pressed out: to the Decoction add juice of
Fumitory, pulp of Prunes, and Raisons of the Sun, of each half a pound; White
Sugar, clarified Honey, of each one pound; boil it to the thickness of Honey,
strewitg in toward the end, Agrick Trochiscated, Senna of each two ounces;
Rhubarb one ounce and an half; Epithimum, one ounce; Diacrydium six drams;
Cinnamon half an ounce; Ginger two drachms, the seeds of Fumitory and Annis,
Spicknard, of each one dram; make it into an Electuary according to Art.

Culpeper] A. The Receipt is chiefly apropriated as a purge for Melancholy and
salt phlegm, and diseases thence arising, as Scabs, Itch, Leprosies, Cancers,
infirmities of the skin, it purges addust humors, and is good against madness,
melancholy, forgetfulness, vertigo: It purges very violently, and is not safe
given alone. I would advise the unskilful not to meddle with it inwardly: You
may give half an ounce of it in Clysters, in melancholy diseases, which
commonly have astringency a constant companion with them.

A. They have now something mended it, as well as they could, they having no
more skill in making up Medicines than a Cow has in dancing.

Electuarium Lenitivum. Page 116. in Lat. Book. Or, Lenitive Electuary.
The Colledg] Take of Raisons of the Sun stoned, Polypodium of the Oak, Senna,
of each two ounces; Mercury one handful and an half; Jujubes, Sebestens of each
twenty; Maidenhair, Violets, French Barley, of each one handful; Damask Prunes
stoned, Tamarinds, of each six drachms; Liquoris half an ounce: boil them in
ten pound of water till two parts of three be consumed; strain it, and dissolve
in the Decoction, pulp of Cassia, Tamarinds, and fresh Prunes, Sugar of
Violets, of each six ounces; Sugar two pound; at last ad Powder of Senna
Leaves, one ounce and an half; Annis seeds in powder two drams to each pound of
Electuary; and so bring it into the form of an Electuary according to Art.

Culpeper] A. It gently opens and mollifies the bowels, bringing forth choler,
phlegm, and melancholy, and that without trouble: It is cooling, and therefore
is profitable in Pleuresies, and for wounded people: A man of reasonable
strength may take an ounce of it going to bed, which will work next morning.

A. And intruth they have done well here to ad the Annis seeds to correct the
Senna; Oh that they would but do so always

Electuarium Passulatum. Page 117. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of fresh Polypodium roots, three ounces; fresh Marsh-Mallow
roots, Senna, of each two ounces, Annis seeds two drachms, steep them all in a
glazed Vessel in a sufficient quantity of spring water, boil them according to
art; strain it and with Pulp of Raisons of the Sun half a pound, white Sugar,
Manna, of each four ounces; boil it to the thickness of a Cydoniate, and renew
it four times a year.

Culpeper] A. The College are so mysterious in this Receipt, a man can hardly
give directions how to make it, for they give only incertainties.

A. You had best, first boil the Roots in three pints of water to a quart, then
put in the Senna, and seeds, boil it to a pint and an half, then strain it and
ad the rest; the Manna will melt of it self as well as the Sugar, indeed you
had best dissolve the Manna by it self in some of the Decoction, and so strain
it because of its dross.

A. It gently purges both choler and melancholy, cleanses the reins and
bladder, and therefore is good for the stone and gravel in the kidneys. I leave
out the dose till the College have learned wit enough to make the Receipt
plainer.

Electuarium e succo Rosarum. Page 117. in L. Book. Or, Electuary of the Juice
of Roses.
The Colledg] Take of Sugar, the juice of red Roses clarified, of each a pound
and four ounces; the three sorts of Sanders of each six drachms, Spodium three
drachms, Diacydonium twelve drachms, Camphire a scruple: Let the Juice be
boiled with the Sugar to its just thickness, then add the rest in Powder and so
make it into an Electuary according to art.

Culpeper] A. It purges Choler, and is good in tertian Agues, and diseases of
the joints; it purges violently, therefore let it be warily given. I omit the
dose, because it is not for a vulgar use. I would not willingly have my Country
men do themselves a mischief; let the Gentry study Physic, then shall they
know what belongs to it. A lazy Gentry makes blockheaded Physicians.

Hiera Picra Simple. Page 117. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Cinnamon, Xylobalsamum, or wood of Aloes, the roots of
Asarabacca, Spicknard, Mastich, Saffron, of each six drachms, Aloes not washed
twelve ounces and an half, clarified Honey four pound and three ounces, mix
them into an Electuary according to art. Also you may keep the Species by it
self in your shops.

Culpeper] A. It is an excellent remedy for vicious juyces which lie furring
the tunicle of the stomach, and such idle fancies and symtomes which the brain
suffers thereby, whereby some think they see, others that they hear strange
things, especially when they are in bed, and between sleeping and waking;
besides this, it very gently purges the belly, and helps such women as are not
sufficiently purged after their travel.

A. Being thus made up into an Electuary, it will be so bitter a dog would not
take it, and the Species kept by it self is not so sweet: your best way (in my
opinion) to take it (for I fancy the Receipt very much, and have had experience
of what I have written of it) is to put only so much Honey to it as will make
it into Pills, of which you may take a scruple at night going to bed (if your
body be not very weak) in the morning drink a draught of hot broth or posset
drink; you need not fear to go about your business, for it will hardly work
till next day in the afternoon, and then very gently. I have found the benefit
of it, and from my own experience I commend it to my Country men.

Hiera with Agrick. Page 117. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Species Hiera, simple without Aloes, Agrick
Trochisheated, of each half an ounce, Aloes not washed one ounce, clarified
Honey six ounces, mix it, and make it into an Electuary according to art.

Culpeper.] A. Look but the virtues of Agrick and ad them to the virtues of the
former Receipt, so is the business done without any further trouble.

Hiera Logadii Page 117. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Coloquintida, Polipodium, of each two drachms,
Euphorbium, Poley mountain, the Seeds of Spurge, of each one dram and an
half, and six grains, Wormwood, Mirrh, of each one dram and twelve grains,
Centaury the less, Agrick, gum Ammoniacum, Indian leaf or Mace, Spicknard,
Squills prepared, Diacrydium of each one dram, Aloes, Time, Germander, Cassia
Lignea, (...) Horehound, of each one scruple and fourteen grains, Cinnamon,
Opopanax, Castoreum, long Birthwort, the three sorts of Pepper, Sagapen.
Saffron, Parsley of each two drachms, Hellibore black and white, of each six
grains, clarified Honey a pound and and half, mix them, and make of them an
Electuary according to art. Let the Species be kept dry in yo ur shops.

Culpeper] A. It takes away by the roots daily evils coming of mellancholly,
falling sickness, vertigo, convulsions, megrim, leprosy, and many other
infirmities; for my part I should be loath to take it inwardly unless upon
desperate occasions, or in Clysters. It may well take away diseases by the
roots, if it take away life and all.

Hiera Diacolocynthidos. Page 118. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Colocynthis, Agrick, Germander, white Horebound, Stechas,
of each ten drachms, Opopanax, Sagapen. Parsley seeds, round Birthwort roots,
white (...) of each five drachms, Spicknard, Cinnamon, Mirrh, Indian leaf or
Mace, Saffron of each four drachms, bruise the Gums in a mortar, sist the rest,
and with three pound of clarified Which is indeed the triple weight.
Honey, three onnces and five drachms, make it an Electuary according to art.

Culpeper.] A. It helps the falling sickness, madness, and the pain in the head
called (...), pains in the breast and stomach whether they come by sickness or
bruises, pains in the loins or backbone, hardness of women's breasts,
putrifactions of meat in the stomach and sour belchings. It is but used seldom
(...) therefore hard to be gotten.

Triphera the greater. Page 110. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Myrobalans, Chebs, Bellericks, Inds, and Emblicks,
Nutmegs, of each five drachms, Watercress seeds, Asarabacca roots, Persian
Origanum, or else Dittany of Creet, black Pepper, Olibanum, Ammi, Ginger,
Tamaris, Indian Nard, Squinanth, Cyperus roots, of each half an ounce, filings
of Steel prepared with Viniger twenty drams, let the Myrobalans be roasted a
little with fresh butter, let the rest being poudered, be sprinkled with Oil of
sweet Almonds, then add Musk one dram, and with their trebble weight in
Honey, make it into an Electuary according to art.

C. A. It helps the immoderat flowing of the terms in women, and the
Hemorrhoids in men, it helps weakness of the stomach and restores color lost,
It frees the body from crude humors, and strengthens the bladder, helps
melancholy, and rectifies the distempors of the spleen. You may take a dram
in the morning, or two if your body be any thing strong, and by that you have
read this, you cannot choose but see a reason, why they set a binding Electuary
amongst the Purges, as also why the name is changed, from Triphera the less, to
Triphera the greater, viz. Because a great piece of ignorance to set it here,
they are like to give Medicines to good purpose, when they know the operations
no better.

Triphera Solutive. Page 119. in the Latin Book
The Colledg] Take of Diacrydium ten drachms, Turbith an ounce and an half,
Cardamoms the less, Cloves, Cinnamon, Alias Macae
Honey of each three drachms, yellow Sanders, Liquoris, sweet Fennel seeds of
each half an ounce, Acorus Schenanth, of each a dram, RedRoses, Citron pills
preserved, of each three drachms, Violets two drachms, Penids four ounces,
white Sugar half a pound, Honey clarified in juice of Apples one pound, make an
Electuary according to art.

Culpeper] A. The Diacrydium and (...), ate a couple of untoward purges, the
rest are all Cordials, but what to make of them all together I know not, and as
little reason do I know, why they should put Honey in twice, unless they
mistook honey for Mace, they have a blessed turn in this world, it is lawful for
them to mistake, but for no body else.

ELECTUARIES left out in their new Masterpiece which is famous for its
baseness.
Athanasia Mithridatis. Galen.
College. TAke of Cinnamon, Cassia, Schoenanth, of each an ounce and an half;
Saffron, Mirrh, of each one ounce; Costus, Meum.
Spignel, Waterflag perhaps they mean. See the root in the Catalogue of Simples.
Acorus, Agrick, Scordium, Carrots, Parsley, of each half an ounce, white
Pepper, eleven grains; Honey, so much as is sufficient to make it into an
Electuary according to art.

Culpeper] A. It prevails against poison and the bitings of venomous beasts,
and helps such whose meat putrifies in their stomach, stays vomiting of blood,
helps old coughs, and cold diseases in the liver spleen, bladder, and matrix.
The College has made some petty alterations in the quantities of the Simples,
but not worth the speaking of. The dose is half a dram.

Electuarium e Scoria ferri is properly those flaks that smiths beat off from
Iron when it is (...) hot.
scoria ferri. Rhasis.
The College.] Take of the flakes if Iron infused in Viniger seven days and
dried, three drams, Indian Spicknard, Schoenanth, Cyperus, Ginger Pepper
Bishops Weed, Frankincense, of each half an ounce, Myrocalans, Indian,
Bellericks, and Emblicks, Honey boiled with the decoction of Emblicks sixteen
ounces: mix them together and make of them an Electuary.

Culpeper] A. I wonder how the quantities of the Myrobalans escaped the great
care, labor, pains, and the industry of the honorable Society the Authors of
that Book, or the vigilance of the vaporing Printer. Rhasis an Arabian
Physician, the Author of the Receipt appoints a dram of each: the medicine
heats the spleen gently, purges melancholy, eases pains in the stomach and
spleen, and stre ngthens digestion. People that are strong may take half an
ounce in the morning fasting, and weak people three drams. It is a good remedy
for pains and hardness of the spleen.

Confectio Humain. Mesue.
The College.] Take of Eyebright two ounces, Fennel seeds five drachms, Cloves,
Cinnamon Cubebs, long Pepper, Mace, of each one dram: beat them all into
powder, and with clarified Honey one pound, in which boil juice of Fennel one
ounce, juice of Celondine and Rue, of each half an ounce, and with the pouders
make it up into an Electuary.

Culpeper.] A. It is chiefly apropriated to the brain and heart, quickens the
senses, especially the sight, and resists the pestilence. You may take half a
dram if your body be hot, a dram if cold, in the morning fasting.

Diaireos Salominis. Nich.
The Colledg] Take of Orris roots one ounce; Penyroyal, Hysop, Liquoris, of
each six drams; Traganth, white Starch, bitter Almonds, Pine Nuts, Cinnamon,
Ginger, Pepper, of each three drachms; fat Figs, the pulp of Raisons of the
Sun, and Dates of each three drachms and an half; Styrax Calamitis two drachms
and an half; Sugar dissolved in Hysop water, and clarified Honey, of each twice
the weight of all the rest: make them into an Electuary according to art.

Culpeper] A. The Electuary is chiefly apropriated to the lungues, and helps
cold infirmities of them, as asthmaes, coughs, difficulty of breathing etc. You
may take it with a (...) stick, or on point of a Knife, a little of it at a
time, and often.

Diasatryon. Nich.
The Colledg] Take of the roots of Look the Roots in the Simples and there you
shall find those directions you have need enough of.
Satyrion fresh and sound, Garden Parsnips, Eringo, Pine Nuts, Indian Nuts, or
if Indian Nuts be wanting, take the double quantity of Pine Nuts, Fistich Nuts,
of each one The Author appoints seven drams.
ounce and an half; Cloves, Ginger, the seeds of Annis, Rockit, viz. The seeds
within them.
Ash Keys, of each five drachms; Cinnamon, the tayls and loins of Scincus, the
seeds of I know not what English name to give it.
Bulbus, Nettles, of each two drachms and an half; Musk seven grains; of the
best Sugar dissolved in (...), three pounds: make it into an Electuary
according to art.

Culpeper] A. Either the College or the Printer, left out Cicer roots seven
drachms, which I think are proper to the Receipt; they also added the loins of
Scincus and the Nettle seeds, and in so doing they did well.

A. It helps weakness of the reins and bladder, and such as make water with
difficulty, it provokes lust exceedingly, and speedily helps such as are
impotent in the acts of Venus. You may take two drachms or more at a time.

Mathiolus his great Antidote against Poysou and Pestilence.
The Colledg] Take of Rhubarb, Rhu-pontick, Valerian Roots, the Roots of Acorus
or Calamus Aromaticus, Cyperus, Cinkfoyl, Tormentil, round Birthwort, male
Peony, Alicampane, Costus, Illirick, Orris, white Chamelion, or Avens, of each
three drachms, the roots of Galanga, Masterwort, white Dictamni, Angelica,
Yarrow, Filipendula or Dropwort, Zedoary, Ginger, of each two drachms;
Rosemary, Gentian, Devils-bit, of each two drachms and an half, the seeds of
Citrons, and Agnus Castus, the berries of Kermes, the seeds of Ash-tree,
Sorrel, wild Parsneps, Navew, Nigella, Peony the male, Bazil, Irio.
Hedge Mustard, Treacle Mustard, Fennel, Bishops-weed, of each two drachms; the
berries of Bay, Juniper, and Ivy, I think they mean that by Smilex aspera.
Sarsaparilla (or for want of it the double weight of Cubebs) Cubebs, of each
one dram and an half; the leaves of Scordium, Germander, Chamepitys, Centaury
the less, Stoechas, Celtick Spicknard, Calaminth, Rue, Mints, Betony Vervain,
Scabious, (...) Benedictus, Bawm, of each one dram and an half, Dittany of
Creet, three (...), Marjoram, St. John's wort, Schaenanth, Horchound, Goats Rue,
Savin, Burnet, of each two drachms; Figs, Walnuts, Fistick nuts, of each three
ounces; Emblick Myrobalans half an ounce, the flowers of Violets, Borrage,
Bugloss, Roses, Lavender, Sage, Rosemary, of each four scruples, Saffron three
drachms, Cassia Lignea ten drachms, Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, of each two drachms
and an half, black Pepper, long Pepper, all the three sorts of Sanders, wood of
Aloes, of each one dram and an half, Hartshorn half an ounce, unicorns-horn,
or in its stead, Bezoar Stone one dram, Bone in a Stags heart, Ivory, Stags
pizzle, Castorium, of each four scruples, Earth of Lemnos three drachms; Opium
one dram and an half, Orient Pearls, Emerald, Jacinth, red Corral, of each
one dram and an half, Camphire two drams, Gum Arabic, Mastich, Frankincense,
Styrax, (...), Sagapenum, Opopanax, Laserpitium or Mirrh, of each two drachms
and an half, Musk, Ambergreese, of each one dram, Oil of Vitriol half (...)
ounce, See the way to make these in their proper places.
Species cordiales temperatae, Diamargeriton, Diamoscu, Diambra, Electuarii de
Gemmis, Troches of Camphire, of Squils, of each two drams and an half, Troches
of Vipers two ounces, the juice of Sorrel, Sowthistles, Scordium, Ecchium
Vipers Bugloss, Borrage, Bawm, of each half a pound, Hypocistis two drachms,
of the best Treacle and Mithridate of each six ounces, Old Wine three pound, of
the best Sugar or choice A wise man will take (...)
Honey eight pound six ounces: These being all chosen and prepared with
diligence and art, let them be made into an Electuary, just as Treacle or
Methridate is.

Culpeper] A. The Title shows you the scope of the Author in compiling it, I
believe it is excellent for those uses: I want time to examine what alterations
the College has made in it, or whether any or none; for particular (...) (to
avoid Tautology) I refer you to his Bezoar Water. The dose of this is from a
scruple to four scruples, or a dram and an half; It provokes sweating
abundantly, and in this or any other sweating Medicine, order your body thus:
Take it in bed, and cover your self warm, in your sweating, drink poslet drink
as hot as you can; if it be for a fever, boil Sorrel and red Sage in the
posset drink, sweat an our or two if your strength will bear it, then the
chamber being kept very warm, shift your self all but your head, about which
(your cap which you sweat in being kept on) wrap a hot napkin, which will be a
means to repel the vapors back. This I for present hold the best method for
sweating in fevers and pestilences, in which this Electuary is very good.

A. I am loath to leave out this Medicine, which if it were stretched out and
cut in thongs would reach round the world.

Requies. Nicholaus.
The Colledg] Take of red Rose Leaves, the whites being cut off, blew Violets,
of each three drachms: Opium of Thebes dissolved in Wine, the seeds of white
Henbane, Poppies, white and black, the roots of Mandrakes, the seeds of Endive,
Purslain, Garden Lettice, I take it to be Fleawort, not Fleabane; the seeds
look just like fleas.
Psyllium, Spodium, Gum Traganth, of each two scruples, and five grains: (...),
(...), Ginger, of each a dram and an half: Sanders, (...), white, and red, of
each a dram and an half: Sugar three times their weight dissolved in Rose
water: Mix them together, and make of them an Electuary according to art.

Culpeper] A. Requies, the title of this Prescript, signifies Rest: but I would
not advise you to take too much of it inwardly, for fear instead of Rest it
brings you to Madness, or at best to Folly: outwardly I confess being applied
to the temples, as also to the insides of the wrests, it may mitigate the heat
in fevers, and provoke the Rest; as also mitigate the violent heat and reging
in Frenzies. I like not the Receipt taken inwardly.

Electuarium Reginae Coloniens.
The Colledg] Take of the seeds of Saxifrage and Gromwel, juice of Liquoris, of
each half an ounce: the seeds of Carraway, Annis, Smallage, Fennel, Parsley of
Macedonia, Broom, Carrots, Bruscus, Sparagus, Lovage, Cummin, Juniper, Rue,
Siler Mountain, the seeds of Acorus, Penyroyal, Cinkfoyl, Bay Berries, of each
two drachms: Indian Spicknard, Schaenanth, Amber, Valerian, Hogs Fennel, Lapis
Lincis, of each a dram and an half: Galanga, Ginger, Turbith, of each two
drachms: Senna an ounce: Goats blood prepared, half an ounce: mix them
together: first beat them into powder, then make them into an Electuary
according to art, with three times their weight in Sugar dissolved in white
Wine.

Culpeper] A. It is an excellent remedy for the stone and wind chollick, a
dram of it being taken every morning; I assure such as are troubled with such
diseases, I commend it to them as a Jewel.

PILLS.
Culpeper. A. PILLS in Greek are called, (...), in Latin, Pilulae; which
signifies little Balls: because they are made up in such a form, that they may
be the better swallowed down, by reason of the offensiveness of their taste.

A. They were first invented for the purging of the head (however Physicians
have since ordered the business) because the matter there offending is not so
soon taken away by any other Physic.

A. Such as have Scammony, otherwise called Diagrydium in them, or Colocynthis,
work strongly, and must be taken in the morning, and the body well regulated
after them, keeping your chamber and a good fire. I shall instruct you in the
dose as I come to them, Such as have neither Colocynthis, nor Diagrydium, may
best be taken in the evening; neither need you keep the house for them.

Pilulae de Agarico. Page 121. in the Latin Book. Or, Pills of Agrick.
The Colledg] Take of Agrick three drams: our own blew Orris roots, Mastich,
Horehound, of each one dram: Turbith five drachms, Species Hiera Picra half
an ounce: Colocynthis, Sarcoc ol, of each two drachms: Mirrh, one dram: Sapa
as much as is sufficient to make it into a Mass according to art.

Culpeper] A. It was invented to cleanse the breast and lungues of phlegm, it
works pretty tithly, therefore requires a good headpiece to direct it. Half a
dram at a time keeping your self warm cannot well do you harm, unless your
body be very weak.

Pilulae Aggregativae. Page 121. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Citron Myrobalans, Rhubarb, of each half an ounce, juice
of Agrimony and Wormwood made thick of each two drachms: Diagridium five
drachms: Agrick, Colocynthis, Polypodium, of each two drachms: Turbith, Aloes,
of each six drams: Mastich, red Roses, Sal. gem. Epithimum, Annis, Ginger, of
each one dram: with Syrup of Damask Roses, make it into a Mass according to
art.

Culpeper] A. It purges the head of choler, phlegm, and Melancholy and that
stoutly; it is good against quotidian agues, and faults in the stomach and
liver; yet because it is well corrected if you take but half a dram at a
time, and keep your self warm, I suppose you may take it without danger.

Pilulae Aloephanginae. Page 121. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Cinnamon, Cloves, Cardamoms the less, Nutmegs, Mace,
Calamus Aromaticus, Carpobalsamum, or Juniper Berries, Squinanth wood of Aloes,
yellow Sanders, red Roses dried, Wormwood, of each half an ounce: Let the
tincture be taken out of these being grossly bruised in spirit of Wine, the
vessel being close stopped, in three pound of this tincture being strained,
dissolve Aloes one pound: which being dissolved add Mastich, Mirrh, of each
half an ounce: Saffron two drachms: Balsam of Peru one dram: the superfluous
Liquor being consumed, either over hot ashes or a bath, bring it into a Mass of
Pills.

Culpeper] A. This Receipt differs much from that which Mesue left to
posterity: perhaps the College followed Renodaeus more closly in it than they
did Mesue: But some question whether Renodaeus: or the College either can
amend the Receipts of Mesue. The chief alterations are: Asarabacca roots,
Indian Spicknard, of each one ounce, is totally left out; besides, all the
Simples till you come to the Wormwood, are set down but half so much in
quantity as Mesue prescribed them: Some other small alterations are also in
most of the quantities. But I must return to my scope.

A. It cleanses both stomach and brain of gross and putrified humors, and sets
the senses free when they are thereby troubled, it cleanses the brain offended
by ill humors wind etc. helps vertigo, and headaches, and strengthens the
brain exceedingly, helps concoction, and strengthens the stomach. I have often
made experience of it upon my (...) body, and always with good success in such
occasions, and therefore give me leave to commend it unto my Country men, for a
wholesome clensing Medicine, strengthening, no ways violent: one dram taken at
night going to bed will work gently next day; if the party be weak you may give
less, if strong, more. If you take but half a dram you may go abroad the next
day, but if you take a dram, you may keep the house, there can be no harm in
that.

Pilulae de Aloe Lota. Page 122. in the Latin Book. Or, Pills of washed Aloes.
The Colledg] Take of Aloes washed with juice of Red-Roses one ounce, Agrick
three drachms, Mastich two drachms, `Diamoschu Dulce half a dram, Syrup of
Damask Roses, so much as is sufficient to make it into a Mass according to art.

Culpeper] A. It purges both brain, stomach, bowels and eyes of putrified
humors, and also strengthens them. Use these as the succeeding.

Aloe Rosata. Page 122. in the Latin Book.
The College.] Take of Aloes in powder, four ounces, juice of Damask Roses
clarified one pound, mix them and (...) them in the Sun, or in a bath, till the
superfluous Liquor be drawn off, digest it, and evaporate it four times over,
and keep the By Mass aiwaies understand the composition brought into such a
thickness, that you may easily with your fingers make it into pills.
Mass.

Culpeper] A. It is a gallant gentle purger of choler, frees the stomach from
superfluous humors, opens stoppings, and other infirmities of the body
proceeding from choler or phlegm, as yellow Jaundice etc. and strengthens the
body exceedingly. Take a scruple or half a dram at night going to bed, you
may walk abroad, for it will (...) work till next day in the after noon.

Pilulae Aurcae. Page 122. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Aloes, Diacrydium, of each five drachms, Red-Roses,
Smallage seeds, of each two drachms and an half; the seeds of Annis and Fennel,
of each one dram and an half, Mastich, Saffron, Troch. Alhandal of each one
dram, with a sufficient quantity of Honey roses, make it into a Mass
according to art.

Culpeper] A. They are held to purge the head, to quicken the senses,
especially the sight, and to expel wind from the bowels, but works something
harshly. Half a dram is the utmost dose, keep the fire take them in the
morning and sleep after them, they will work before noon.

Pilulae Cochiae the greater. Page 122. in the Latin Book.
The College.] Take of Species Hiera Picra ten drachms, Troch. Alhandal three
drachms and an half, Diacrydium two drachms and an half, Turbith, Stechas, of
each five drachms, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Stechas, make it into
a (...) according to art.

Culpeper] A. Gesner, and Math. de Grad. put in only two scruples and a half of
Diagrydium, belike because they would not have it work so violently. But Mesue,
Rhafis, and Nicholaus Myrepsus prescribe two drachms and an half, as here in
the Dispensatory; only Mesue appoints it to be made up with syrup of Wormwood.
It Is held to purge the head, but it is but a dogged purge at best, and must be
given only to strong bodies, and but half a dram at a time, and yet with
great care.

Pilulae Cochiae the less. Page 123. in the Latin Book.
The College.] Take of Aloes, Scammony, Colocynthis, of each one ounce, with
equal parts of Syrup of Wormwood and of purging thorn, make it into a Mass
according to (...).

Pilulae de Cynoglosso. Page 123. in the Latin Book Or, Pills of Houndstongue.
The Colledg] Take of the roots of Houndstongue dried, white (...) seed, Opium
prepared of each half an ounce, Mirrh six drachms, Olibanum five drachms,
Saffron, Castoreum, Styrax Calamitis, of each one dram and an half, with
Syrup of Stoechas, make it into a Mass.

Culpeper] A. It stays hot rhumes that fall down upon the lungues, therefore
is good in Phtisicks, also it mitigates pain: a scruple is enough to take at a
time going to bed, and too much if your body be weak, have a care of opiates
for fear they make you sleep your last.

Pilulae ex (...). Page 123. in the Latin Book. Or, Pills of two things.
The Colledg] Take of Colocynthis, and Scamony, of each one ounce, Oil of
Cloves as much as is sufficient to malax them well, then with a little Syrup of
purging Thorn, make it into a Mass.

Culpeper] A. Surely the College intend to go to Hell, and give Physic to the
Devils, they else would never invent such Pills as this and put Cochiae the
less, without any corrigents at all, in truth it is pity but they should have
the just reward of Perillus, viz. be forced to take them themselves, they being
not only to strong, but also of a base gnawing nature, that so they may gnaw
out their ill conditions.

Pilulaede Eupatorio. Page 123. in the Latin Book. Or, Pills of Eupatorium.
The Colledg] Take of the juice of Maudlin, and Wormwood made thick, Citron
Myrobalans, of each three drachms, Rhubarh three drachms and an half, Mastich
one dram, Aloes five drachms, Saffron half a dram, Syrup of the juice of
Endive, as much as is sufficient to make it into a Mass.

Culpeper] A. Having compared this Receipt of Mesue with reason, I find it a
gallant gentle purge, and strengthening, fitted for such bodies as are much
weakened by diseases of choler. The author apropriates it to such as have
tertain agues, the yellow Jaundice, obstructions or stoppings of the liver;
half a dram taken at night going to bed, will work with an ordinary body, the
next day by noon; the truth is, I was before sparing in relating the doses of
most purging physics because they are to be regulated according to the
strength of the patient etc. Physic is not to be presumed upon by Dunces, lest
they meet with their matches and overmatches too.

Pilulae Foetidae. Page 123. in the Latin Book. Or, Stinking Pills.
The Colledg] Take of Aloes, Colocynthis, Amoniacum, Sagapen. Mirrh, Rue seeds,
Epithymum, of each five drachms, Scammony three drachms, the roots of Turbith
half an ounce, the roots of Spurge the less prepared, Hermodactils of each two
drachms, Ginger one dram and an half, Spicknard, Cinnamon, Saffron,
Castoreum, of each one dram, Euphorbium prepared two (...), dissolve the Gums
in juice of Leeks, and with Syrup made with the juice of Leeks and Sugar, make
it into a Mass.

Culpeper] A. They purge gross and raw phlegm, and diseases thereof arising,
Gouts of all sorts, pains in the backbone and other joints; it is good against
Leprosies, and other such like infirmities of the skin. I fancy not the receipt
much. Both because of its violence and apish mixture.

Pilulae de Hermodactilis. Page 124 in the L. Book. Or, Pills of Hermodactils.
The Colledg] Take of Sagapen. fix drachms, Opopanax three drachms, melt them
in warm juice of Coleworts, so much as is sufficient, then strain it through a
convenient ragg, afterward boil it to a mean thickness, then take of
Hermodactils, Aloes, Citron, Myrobalans, Turbith, Coloquintida, soft Bdellium,
of each six drachms, Euphorbium prepared, the seeds of Rue and Smallage,
Castorium, Sarcocol, of each three drachms, Saffron one dram and an half,
with Syrup of the juice of Coleworts made with Honey, make it into a Mass
according to art.

Culpeper] A. They are good against the Gout and other cold afflictions of the
joints. These are more moderare by half; than Pilulae Foetidae, and apropriated
to the same diseases. You may take a dram in the morning, if age and strength
agree; if not, take less, and keep your body warm by the fire, now and then
walking about the chamber.

Pilulae de Hiera cum Agarico. P. 124. in Lat. Book. Or, Pills of Hiera with
Agrick.
The Colledg] Take of Species Hiera Picra, Agrick, of each half an ounce, Aloes
one ounce, Honey roses so much as is sufficient to make it into a Mass
according to art.

Culpeper] A. Very many are the virtues Authors have been pleased to confer
upon this Medicine, as making it universal, and applying it to all parts of the
body, and almost all diseases in them; proceed they either of choler, phlegm,
or of melanceolly: nay they make it to resist poison, and Epidemicall diseases,
to help the (...), dropsy, and falling sickness; to provoke the terms, and
ease the fits of the mother, to cure agues of all sorts, shortness of breath,
and consumption of the lungues, vertigo, or dissiness in the head, to open
obstructions of the liver and spleen, (...) cure the yellow Jaundice, and
sharpness of urine: to strengthen the brain and memory, and what not; the truth
is, it is as harmless a purge, as most is in their Dispensatory. You may safely
take a scruple at night going to bed, having eat a light supper three hours
before; and you may safely go about your business the next day, for it will not
work too hastily, but very gently; so you may continue taking it a week
together, for it will not do wonders in once taking.

Pilulae Imperiales. Page 124. in the (...) Book. Or, Imperial Pills.
The Colledg] Take of Aloes two ounces, Rhubarb one ounce and an half, Agrick
Senna, of each one ounce Cinnamon three drachms, Ginger two drachms, Nutmegs,
Cloves, Spicknard, Mastick, of each a dram, with Syrup of Violets, make it into
a Mass according to art.

Culpeper] A. It cleanses the body of mixed humors, and strengthens the stomach
exceedingly, as also the bowels, liver, and natural spirit; it is good for cold
natures, and cheers the spirits. The dose is a scruple or half a dram, taken
at night; in the morning drink a draught of warm posset drink, and then you may
go about your business:) both these and such like Pills as these, it is your
best way to take them many nights together, for they are proper for such
infirmities as cannot be carried away at once, observe th is rule in all such
pills as are to be taken at night.

Pilulae de Lapide Lazuli. P. 124. in the Lat. Book. Or, Pills of Lapis Lazuli.
The Colledg] Take of Lapis Lazuli in powder and well washed five drachms,
Epithimum, Polypodium, Agrick, of each an onnce, Scammony, black Hellebore
roots, Sal. gem. of each two drachms and an half, Cloves, Annis seeds of each
half an ounce, Species Hiera Simple, fifteen drachms, with Syrup of the juice
of Fumitory, make it into a Mass according to art.

Culpeper.] A. It purges melancholy very violently, we will not now dispute
the story how, or in what cases violent purges are fit for melancholy, let it
suffice that it is not fit for a vulgar use.

Pilulae Macri. Page 125. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Aloes two ounces, Mastich half an ounce, dried Marjoram
two drachms, Salt of Wormwood one dram, make them all being in powder, into a
Mass according to art with juice of Coleworts and Sugar, so much as is
sufficient.

Culpeper] A. It is a gallant composed Pill, who ever was the Author of it, I
have not time to search, it strengthens both stomach and brain, especially
the nerves and muscles (what they are you shall be instructed in a table by it
self, at the latter end of the Book, as also in all other hard words that
puzzle your brains) and eases them of such humors as afflict them, and hinder
the motion of the body, they open obstructions of the liver and spleen, and
takes away diseases thence coming. Your best way is to take them often going to
bed, you may take a scruple, or half a dram at a time; I commend it to such
people as have had hurts or bruises, whereby the use of their limbs is
impaired, and I desire them to take it often, because diseases in remote parts
of the body cannot be taken away at a time; It will not hinder their following
of their business at all, and therefore is the fitter for poor people.

Pilulae Mastichinae. Page 125. in the Latin Book. Or, Mastich Pills.
The College.] Take of Mastich two ounces, Aloes four ounces, Agrick, Species
Hiera simple, of each one ounte and an half, with Syrup of Wormwood, make it
into a Mass according to art.

Culpeper] A. They purge very gently, but strengthen much, both head, brain,
eyes, belly and reins. Both dose, and order is the same with the former.

Pilulae Mechoacanae. Page 125. in the Latin Book. Or, Pills of Mechoacan.
The Colledg] Take of Mecoacan roots half an ounce, Turbith three drachms, the
leaves of Spurge steeped in Viniger and dried, the seeds of Walwort, Agrick,
(...), of each two (...), Spurge roots prepared, Mastich, of each one dram
and an half, Mace, Cinnamon, Sal. gem. of each two scruples, beat them into
powder, and with white Wine bring them into a Mass. When it is dry beat it into
powder, and with Syrup made with the juice of Orris roots and Sugar, make it
the second time into a Mass for Pills.

Culpeper] A. They purge phlegm very violently. If the disease be desperate, you
may take half a dram, (or a scruple if your body be weak keeping the house)
else I would advise you to let them alone.

Pilulae de Opopanace. Page 125. in the Latin Book. Or, Pills of Opopanax.
The Colledg] Take of Opopanax, Sagapen. Bdelsium, Amoniacum, Hermodactils,
Coloquintida, of each five drachms, Saffron, Castorium, Mirrh, Ginger, white
Pepper, Cassia Lignea, Citron, (...), of each one dram, Scammony two drachms,
Turbeth half an ounce, Aloes one ounce and an half, the Gums being dissolved in
clarified juice of Coleworts, with Syrup of the juice of Coleworts, make them
into a Mass according to art.

Culpeper.] A. It helps tremblings, palsies, gouts of all sorts, cleanses the
joints, and is helpful for such as are troubled with cold afflictions of the
nerves. It works violently, take but half a dram at a time and stir not
abroad.

(...) Rudii. Page 126 in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Coloquintida six drachms, Agrick, Scammony, the roots of
black Hellebore, and Tarbith, of each half an ounce, Aloes one ounce, Diarrodon
abbatis half an ounce, let all of them (the Diarrh. Abb-excepted) be grossly
bruised, and insused eight days in the best spirit of Wine in a vessel close
stopped in the Sun, so that the Liquor may swim at top the breadth of six
fingers: afterward infuse the Diarrh. Abb. in the same (...) four days in
aqua vitae, then having strained and pressed them hard, mix them both together,
Casting the dross away, and draw off the moisture in a glass Alembick, and let
the thick matter remain in a Mass.

Culpeper] A. As this is the dearest, so in my opinion it is most excellent in
operation of all the Pills in the Dispensatory, being of a quick searching
nature, yet though many violent simples be in it, the terrene part is cast
away, and only the tincture used, whereby it is apparent it cannot lie gnawing
in the body so long; It cleanses both head and body of choler, phlegm, and
melancholy: it must not be taken in any great quantity, half a dram is
sufficient for the strongest body; let the weaker take but a scruple, and the
weakest less; keep your chamber: they work very speedily being of a penetrating
nature.

Pilulae Ruffi. Page 126. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Aloes two ounces, Mirrh one ounce, Saffron half an ounce,
with Syrup of the Juice of Lemmons, make it into a Mass according to art.

Culpeper] A. A scruple taken at night going to bed, is an excellent
preservative in pestilential times; also they cleanse the body of such humors as
are gotten by surfets, they strengthen the heart, and weak stomachs, and work
so easily that you need not fear following your business the next day.

Pilulae sine Quibus. Page 126. in the Latin Book. Or, Pills without which --
The Colledg] Take of washed Aloes, fourteen drachms: Scammony prepared six
drachms: Agrick, Rhubarb, Senna, of each half an ounce: (...), red Roses
exungulated, Violet flowers, Doddar, Mastich, of each a dram: Salt of
Wormwood, of each half a dram: with Syrup of the Juice of Fennel made with
Honey, make it into a Mass according to art.

Culpeper] A. It purges phlegm, choler, and melancholy from the head, makes
the sight and hearing good, and gives ease to a burdened brain. Pilulae sine
quibus esse nolo, is in English, Pills without which I will not be: But unless
they worked more gently, I had rather let them alone than take them. I doubt
they were mistaken, it should have been Pilulae sine quibus esse volo, not sine
quibus esse nolo.

Pilulae Stomachicae. Page 126. in the Latin Book. Or, Stomach Pills.
The Colledg] Take of Aloes six drachms: Mastich, red Roses, of each two
drachms: with Syrup of Wormwood, make it into a Mass according to art.

Culpeper.] A. They cleanse and strengthen the stomach, they cleanse but gently,
strengthen much, help digestion. Take them as the former.

Pilulae Stomachicae cum Gummi. Page 127. in L. B. Or, Stomach Pills with Gums.
The Colledg] Take of Aloes an ounce: Senna five drachms: Gum Ammoniacum
dissolved in Elder-flower-Vineger, half an ounce: Mastich, Mirrh, of each a
dram and an half: Saffron, Salt of Wormwood, of each half a dram: with
Syrup of Purging Thorn, make it into a Mass according to art.

Culpeper] A. They work more strongly than the former did, and are apropriated
to such whose stomachs are weakened by surfets; let such take a dram of them
in the morning, and if they can sleep after them, let them. They may take them
by four of the clock, and keep the house all day.

Pilulae e Styrace. Page 127. in the Latin Book. Or, Pills of Styrax.
The Colledg] Take of Styrax Calamitys, Olibanum, Mirrh, Juice of Liquoris,
Opium, of each half an ounce: with Syrup of white Poppies, make it into a Mass
according to art

Culpeper] A. They help such as are troubled with defluxion of Rhewm, Coughs,
and provoke sleep to such as cannot sleep for coughing. Half a scruple is
enough to take at a time, if the body be weak, if strong, they may make bold
with a little more: I desire the ignorant to be very cautious in taking
Opiates; I confess it was the urgent importunity of friends moved me to set
down the Doses; they may do wise men very much good, and therefore I consented:
if people will be mad and do themselves mischief, I can but warn them of it, I
can do no more.

Pilulae de Succino. Page 127. in the Latin Book. Or, Pills of Amber
The Colledg] Take of white Amber, Mastich, of each two drachms: Aloes five
drachms: Agrick, a dram and an half: Long Birthwort, half a dram: with
Syrup of Wormwood make it into a Mass.

Culpeper] A. It amends the evil state of a woman's body, strengthens
conception, and takes away what hinders it; it gently purges choler and
phlegm, and leaves a binding, strengthening quality behind it. Take them as
Imperial Pills.

Pilulae ex Tribus. Page 127. in the Latin Book. Or, Pills of three things.
The Colledg] Take of Mastich two ounces: Aloes four ounces, Agrick, Hiera
Simple of each an ounce and an half, Rhubarb two ounces, Cinnamon two drachms:
with Syrup of Succory, make it into a Mass according to art.

Culpeper.] A. They gently purge choler, and help diseases thence arising, as
itch, Scabs, wheals, etc. They strengthen the stomach and Liver, and open
obstructions; as also help the yellow Jaundice. You may take a scruple or half
a dram at night going to bed, according as your body is in strength; neither
need you fear next day to go about your business.

Pilulae Turpeti Aureae. Page 127. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Turbith two ounces: Aloes an ounce and an half: Citron
Myrobalans, ten drams: Red Roses, Mastich, of each six drachms: Saffron, three
drachms: Beat them all into powder, and with Syrup of Wormwood bring them into
a Mass.

Culpeper] A. They purge choler and phlegm, and that with as much gentleness as
can be desired; also they strengthen the stomach and liver, and help digestion.
Take a setuple or half a dram, according as your body and the season of the
year is, at night, you may follow your business next day.

Laudanum. Page 127. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Thebane Opium extracted in Spirit of Wine, one ounce:
Saffron alike extracted, a dram and an (...) Castorium one dram: Let them
be taken in tincture of half an ounce of Species Diambrae newly made in Spirit
of Wine; add to them Amber greese, Musk of each six grains: Oil of Nutmegs ten
drops: Evaporate the moisture away in a bath, and leave the Mass.

Culpeper] A. It was invented (and a gallant invention it is) to mitigate
violent pains, stop the sumes that trouble the brain in fevers (but beware of
Opiates in the beginning of Fevers) to provoke sleep, take not above two
grains of it at a time, going to bed; if that provoke not sleep, the next night
you may make bold with three. Have a care how you be too busy with such
medicines, lest you make a man sleep till doomsday.

Nepenthes Opiatum. Page 128. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Tincture of Opium made first with distilled Vinegar, then
with Spirit of Wine, Saffron extracted in spirit of Wine, of each an ounce:
Salt of Pearl and Corral, of each half an ounce: Tincture of Spec. Diambrae,
seven drachms: Amber greese, one dram: (...) them into the form of Pills by
the gentle heat of a bath.

Culpeper] A. The Operation is like the former, only it is dearer, and not a
whit better: This is for the Gentry that must pay dear for a thing, else it is
not good.

The PILLS left out by the College in their New piece of Wit, are these.
Pilulae Assaireth. Avicenna.
The Colledg] Take of Species Hiera Picra Galeni an ounce: Mastich, Citron
Myrobalans, of each half an ounce: Aloes two ounces: the Syrup of Stoechas as
much as is sufficient: Make of them a Mass according to art.

Culpeper] A. It purges choler and (...), and strengthens the whole body
exceedingly, being very precious for such whose bodies are weakened by surfers,
or ill diet, to take half a dram or a scruple at night going to bed.

Tills of Bdellium. Mesue.
The Colledg] Take of Bdellium ten drachms: Myrobalans, Bellericks, Emblicks,
and Blacks, of each five (...): flakes of Iron, Leek seeds, of each three
drachms: A kind of Sea shel to be had at the Apo (...).
Choncula Veneris burnt, Corral burnt, Amber, of each a dram and an half:
(...), half an ounce: Not infuse as the College prescribe.
Dissolve the Bdellium in juice of Leeks, and with so much Syrup of juice of
Leeks as is sufficient, make it into a Mass according to art.

Culpeper] A. Both this and the former are seldom used, and therefore are
hardly to be had. Those that please may easily make the former, this is more
tedious; but the Printer will have it put in to stop the mouth of Momus.

Pills of Rhubarb. Mesue.
The Colledg] Take of choice Rhubarb three (...): Citron Myrobalans, Trochisci
Diarhodon, of each three drachms and an half: Juice of Liquoris, and Juice of
Wormwood, Mastich, of each one dram; the seeds of Smallage and Fennel, of
(...) half a dram: Species Hiera Picra Simp. Galeni, (...): with juice of
Fennel And why not calrified? Can they give but a piece of a reason for it? I
am deceived if Mcsue apoint not Fennel water.
not clarified, and Honey so much as is sufficient, make it into a Mass.

Culpeper] A. It purges choler, opens obstructions of the Liver, helps the
yellow jaundice and dropsies in the beginning, strengthens the stomach and
lungues. Take them as Pilulae Imperiales. They are never the worse because the
College left them out.

Pilulae Arabica. Nicholaus.
The Colledg] Take of the best Aloes, four ounces: Briony Roots, Myrobalans,
Citrons, Chebs, Indian, Bellerick, and Emblick, Mastich, Diagrydium,
Asarabacca, Roses, of each an ounce: Castorium, three drachms: Saffron, one
dram: with Syrup of Wormwood, make it into a Mass according to art.

Culpeper.] A. It helps such women as are not sufficiently purged in their
labor, helps to bring away what a careless Midwife has left behind, purges
the head, helps headache, megrim, vertigo, and purges the stomach of vicious
humors, besides Authors say it preserves the sight, and hearing, and preserves
the mind in vigor, and causes joyfulness, driving away melancholy; it is like
it may, but have a care you take not too much of it, a scruple is enough to
take at a time, or half a dram if the body be strong, take it in the morning
about four of the clock, and (if you can) sleep an hour or two after, keep your
self warm by the fire, and order your self as after other purges. I pray be not
too busy with it, and say I warned you of it.

Pilulae Arthriticae. Nicholaus.
The Colledg] Take of Hermodactils, Turbith, Agrick, of each half an ounce:
Cassia Lignea, Indian Spicknard, Cloves, Xylobalsamum, or wood of Aloes,
Carpobalsamum or Cubebs, Mace, Galanga, Ginger, Mastich, Assafoetida, the seeds
of Annis, Fennel, Saxifrage, Sparagus, Bruscus, Roses, Gromwel, Sal. gem. of
each two drachms: Scammony, one ounce: of the best Aloes the weight of them
all: Juice of Chamepitys made thick with Sugar so much as is sufficient, or
Syrup of the Juice of the same, so much as is sufficient to make it into a Mass.

Culpeper.] A. As I remember the Author appoints but a dram of Scammony,
which is but the eighth part of an ounce, and then will the Receipt be pretty
moderate, whereas now it is too too violent. I know well enough it is the
opinion of Doctors that Aloes retards the violent working of Scammony, I could
never find it, and I am the worst in the world to pin my faith upon another
man's sleeve, and I would as willingly trust my life in the hands of a wild bear
as in the hands of that Monster called TRADITION: If but a dram of Scammony
be put in, then may a man safely (if not too much weakened) take a dram of it
at a time, about four in the morning, ordering your self as in the former: but
made up as the College prescribes, I durst not take them my self, therefore
will I not prescribe them to others. It helps the gout and other pains in the
joints, comforts and strengthens both brain and stomach, and consumes diseases
whose original comes of phlegm.

Pilulae Cochiae with Hellebore.
The Colledg] Take of the powder of the Pills before prescribed, the powder of
the bark of the roots of (...) Hellebore, one ounce: make it into a Mass with
Syrup of Stoechas according to art.

Culpeper] A. The former purges the head of phlegm, and therefore is fit for
Lethargies: this of Melancholy, and is therefore fit for mad people, if
Melancholy be the cause.

Pills of Fumitory. Avicenna.
The Colledg] Take of Myrobalans, Citrons; Chebs, and Indian, (...), of each
five drachms: Aloes (...) drachms: Let all of them being bruised, be thrice
moistened with juice of Fumitory, and thrice suffered to dry, then brought into
a Mass with Syrup of Fumitory.

Culpeper] A. It purges Melancholy from the liver and spleen, sharp,
chollerick, and addust humors, salt phlegm, and therefore helps (...) and itch.
Take but half a dram at a time in the morning, and keep by the fire. Be not
too busy with it I beseech you.

Pilulae Indae. Mesue out of Haly.
The Colledg] Take of Indian Myrobalans, black Hellebore, Polypodium of the
Oak, of each five drams: Epithimum, Stoechas, of each six drachms: Agrick,
Lapis Lazuli often washed, Troches Alhandal, Sal. Indi, of each half an ounce:
Juice of Maudlin made thick, Indian Spicknard, of each two drachms: Cloves one
dram: Species hiera picra Simplex Galeni, (...) drachms: with Syrup of the
Juice of Smallage, make it into a Mass according to art.

Culpeper] A. It wonderfully prevails against afflictions coming of
Melancholy, Cancers which are not ulcerated, Leprosy, Evils of the mind
coming of melancholy, as sadness, fear, etc. quartan agues, jaundice, pains
and infirmities of the spleen. I advise to take but half a dram, or a scruple
at a time, and take it often, for melancholy infirmities are not easily
removed upon a sudden, take it in the morning and keep the house.

Pilulae Lucis majores. Mesue.
The Colledg] Take of Roses, Violets, Wormwood, Colocynthis, Turbith, Cubebs,
Calamus Aromaticus, Nutmegs, Indian Spicknard, Epithimum, Carpobalsamum, or
instead thereof, Cardamoms, Xylobalsamum, or wood of Aloes, the seeds of Seseli
or Hartwort, Rue, Annis, Fennel, and Smallage, Schaenanthus, Mastich,
Asarabacca roots, Cloves, (...), Cassia Lignea, Saffron, Mace, of each two
drachms; Myrobalans, Citrons, Chebuls, Indian, Bellerick, and Emblick, Rhubarb,
of each half an ounce: Agrick, Senna, of each five drachms: Aloes succotrina
the weight of them all: with Syrup of the juice of (...) make it into a Mass
according to art.

Culpeper] A. It purges mixed humors from the head, and (...) it of such
excrements as hinder the sight. You may take a dram in the morning, keep your
self warm and within doors, you shall find them strengthen the brain and visive
virtue: If your body be weak take less.

Pills of Spurge. Fernelius.
The Colledg] Take of the Bark of the roots of Spurge the less, steeped twenty
four hours in Vinegar and juice of Purslain, two drachms: Grains of A (...) of
Spurge, three of the seeds of which some Authors (and they good ones too) say,
will give a man a sufficient purge.
Palma Christi torrefied, by number forty: Citron Myrobalans, one dram and
an half: Germander, Chamepitys, Spicknard, Cinnamon of each two scruples; being
beaten into fine powder with an ounce of (...) Traganth dissolved in Rose
water, and syrup of Roses so much as is sufficient, let it be made into a Mass.

Culpeper] A. I could say if I would, and prove it too, that the ounce of Gum
Traganth so dissolved is enough to make six times so much into a Mass, but
because the Receipt (in my eyes) seems more fitting for a horse than for a man,
I leave it.

Pills of Euphorbium. Mesue.
The Colledg] Take of Euphorbium, Colocynthis, Agrick, Bdellium, Sagapenum, of
each two drachms: Aloes five drachms: with Syrup made of the juice of Leeks,
make it into a mass.

Culpeper] A. The Pills are exceeding good for dropsies, pains in the loins,
and Gouts coming of a moist cause. Take not above half a dram at a time and
keep the house.

Pilulae Scribonii.
The Colledg] Take of Sagapenum, and Mirrh, of each two drachms: Opium,
Cardamoms, Castorium, of each one dram; white Pepper, half a dram; Sapa so
much as is sufficient to make it into a Mass according to art.

Culpeper] A. It is apropriated to such as have Phtisicks, and such as spit
blood, but ought to be newly made, a scruple is sufficient taken going to bed.
Galen was the Author of it.

A. I have now done with the Pills, only take notice that such as have
Diagrydium (otherwise called Scammony) in them, work violently and are to be
taken early in the morning, with discretion and administered with due
consideration; the other work more gently, so that you may take a scruple of
them at night going to bed and follow your employments next day without danger.

A. I put in these only to satisfy the desires of the curious, being confident
that the College quoted more by half than needed; and Apothecaries must have
them all in a readiness because the College appoints them; for if a Master, bid
his boy quench out the fire and make a new one, he must do it, because he is
commanded; Oh! that they would once be so wise to see their slavery.

TROCHES.
Culpeper. A. IF any cavil at this name, and think it hardly English; let them
give a better and I shall be thankful: I know no other English name but will
fall far below it.

A. They have gotten many Greek names, almost as many as a Welchman: (...), and
(...). The Latins, besides the Greek name, Trochisci and Pastilli, and
Placentulae.

A. Although a man may make them into what form he pleases, yet they are
usually made into little flat thin cakes, of a scruple or twenty grains in
weight plus minus: some print Images (as of Serpents upon Troches of Vipers)
upon them, some guild them with Leaf-Gold, some do neither.

A. They were first invented by the Ancients, that Pouders being brought into
this form may be kept pure the longer; for the virtues of Pouders will soon
exhale by intromission of air, which the thick body of troches resist; also
such as are pectoral are the (...) carried in ones pocket.

A. Few of them are taken by themselves, but mixed with other Compositions.

Trochisci de Absinthio. Page 129. in the Latin Book. Or, Troches of Wormwood.
The Colledg] Take of Red Roses, Wormwood leaves, Annis seeds, of each two
drachms, Juice of Maudlin made thick, The roots of (...), Rhubarb, Spicknard,
Smallage seeds, bitter Almonds, Mastich, Mace, of each one dram, juice of
Succory so much as is sufficient to make it into Troches according to art

Culpeper] A. Before they used the term Absinthium Ponticum, which is a term
they gave before both to Roman and common wormwood, as I then told them in the
Margin, and they it seems either not knowing what Wormwood Mesue the Author of
the Receipt intended, or what pontick Wormwood, which before they pratled of
was, now quite left out.

A. They strengthen the stomach exceedingly, opens obstructions or stoppings of
the belly or bowels, strengthens digestion, open the passages of the liver,
helps the yellow Jaundice, and consumes watery superfluities of the body. They
are somewhat bitter and seldom taken alone; if your pallat affect bitter
things, you may take a dram of them in the morning: They cleanse the body of
choler, but purge not, or not to any purpose.

Agaricus Trochiscatus. Page 129. in the Lat. Book. Or, Agrick Trochiscated.
The Colledg] Take of Agrick sifted and poudered, three ounces, Steep it in a
sufficient quantity of (...) Wine, in which two drachms of Ginger have been
(...), and make it into Troches.

Culpeper] A. See Troches of Agrick. This being indeed but the way to correct
Agrick, and make it (...) fitter for use, and to perform those virtues Agrick
has, which you may find among the simples.

Trochisci Albi, Rhasis. Page 129, in the Latin Book. Or, White Troches.
The Colledg] Take of Ceruss washed in rosewater ten drachms, Sarcocol three
drachms, white Starch two drachms, Gum Arabic, and Tragacanth, of each one
dram, Camphire half a dram, either with Rosewater, or women's milk, make it
into Troches according to art.

Culpeper] A. They are cool without Opium, but cooler with it, as also very
drying, and are used in injections in ulcers in the yard, and the running of
the reins etc. It seems now the College, is very unwilling that you should
know, that they use to contain half a dram of Opium. If there be an
inflammation you may use them with Opium, if not, without, and the manner of
using them is this, take a dram of the Troches, which having beaten into
powder, mix with two ounces of plantane water, and with a Syringe inject it
into the yard.

Trochisci Alexit (...) Page 129. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Zedoary roots, powder of Crabs claws, of each one dram
and an half, the outward Citron pills preserved and dried, Angelica seeds, of
each one dram, Bole Armenick half a dram, with their trebble weight in
Sugar make them into powder, and with a sufficent quantity of Mussilage of Gum
Tragacanth, made in (...) water distilled, make it into past, of which make
(...)

Culpeper A. The Greeks call all medicines that expel poison Alexiteria, so
then Trochisci Alexiterii, are nothing else but troches to expel poison; this
receipt is far different from what they prescribed before under that name, It
may be I shall find under another name before I have done with the troches,
they use to do such tricks sometimes, (...) I do not; you shall have it at
latter end; mean season, this preserves the body from ill airs, and Epedemical
diseases, as the pestilence, small pocks etc. And strengthens the heart
exceedingly, eating now and then a little, you may safely keep any troches in
your pocket, for the dryer you keep them, the better they are.

(...) Alhandal. Page 130. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Coloquintida freed from the seeds, and cut Small, and
rubbed with an ounce of (...) of Roses, then beaten into fine powder ten
ounces, Gum Arabic, Tragacanth, Bdellium, of each six drachms, (...) the Gums
three or four days in a sufficient quantity of Rosewater till they be melted,
then with the before said pulp, and part of the said Mussilage, let them be
dried in the shadow, then beaten again, and with the rest of the Mussilage,
make it up again, dry them and keep them for use.

Culpeper] A. They are too violent for a vulgar use.

Trochisci Aliptae Moschatae. P. 130. in Lat. Book.
The Colledg] Take of (...) bruised, three ounces, Styrax Calamit is one ounce
and an half, Benjamin one ounce, wood of Aloes two drachms, Amber greese one
dram, Camphire half a dram, Musk (...) a scruple, with a sufficient
quantity of Rosewater, make it into Troches according to art.

Culpeper] A. It is singular good for such as are Asthmatick and can hardly
fetch their breath, as also for young children, whose throat is so narrow that
they can hardly swallow down their milk, A very little taken at a time is
enough for a man's body, and too much for a poor man's purse; for young children,
give them four or five grains at a time in a little breast milk.

Trochisci Alk ckengi Page. 130. in the Latin Book. Or, Troches of winter
cherries.
The Colledg] Take of winter cherries three drachms, Gum Arabic, Tragacanth,
Olibanum, dragons blood, Pine nuts, bitter Almonds, white Starch, juice of
Liquoris, Bole Armenick, white Poppy seeds, of each six drachms, the seeds of
Meloues, Cucumers, Citrulls, Guords, of each three drachms and an half, the
seeds of Smallage and white Henbane, Amber, earth of Lemnos, Opium, of each two
drachms, with juice of fresh winter Cherries, make them into Troches according
to art.

Culpeper] A. They (...) provokes urine, and break the stone. Mix them with
other medicines of that nature, half a dram at a time or a dram if age
permit.

Trochisci Bechici albi, vel, Rotulae Pectorales. 130. Or, Pectural (...)
The Colledg] Take of white Sugar one pound, white Sugar Candy, Penids of each
four ounces, Orris Florentine one ounce, Liquoris six drachms, white Starch one
ounce and an half, with a sufficient quantity of Mussilage, of Gum Tragacanth
made in Rosewater, make them into small troches.

You may add four grains of Ambergreese, and three grains of Musk, to them if
occasion serve.

Trochisci Bechici Nigri. Page 131. in Lat. Book.
The Colledg] Take of juice of Liquoris, white Sugar of each one dram, Gum
Tragacanth, sweet Almonds blanched, of each six drachms, with a sufficient
quantity of Mussilage, of Quinte seeds, made with Rosewater, make them into
Troches according to art.

Culpeper] A. Both this and the former will melt in ones mouth, and in that
manner to be used by such as are troubled with coughs, cold, hoarceness or want
of voice, the former is most in use, but in my opinion the last is most
effectual. You may take them any time when the cough troubles you, and this
convenience you shall find in Troches more than in any other Physic, you may
carry them any whether in your pocket in a paper, without spoiling, though you
travel as far as the East Indies.

Trochisci de Barberis. Page 131. in the Latin Book. Or, Troches of Barberries.
The Colledg] Take of juice of Barberries, and Liquoris made thick, Spodium,
Purstain seeds, of each three drachms, Red-roses six drachms, Indian Spicknard;
Saffron, white Starch, Gum Tragcanth, of each a dram, Citrull seeds elensed
three drachms and an half, Camphire half a dram, with Manna dissolved in
juice of Barberies, make them into Troches according to art.

Culpeper] A. They wonderfully cool the heat of the liver, reins, and bladder,
breast and stomach, and stop looseness, cools the heat in fevers. They are very
fit for bodies that are distempered with heat to carry about with them when
they travail, they may take them at any time; I suppose their mothers wit will
teach them that it is best to take them when the stomach is empty: I cannot
write every thing, neither if I did should I please every body; I had as leeve
undertake (with the Sicilian Philosopher) to teach an Ass to speak, as to teach
a Dunce physic.

Trochisci de Camphora. Page 131. in the Lat. Book. Or, Troches of Camphire.
The Colledg] Take of Camphire half a dram: Saffron two drachms: white Starch
three drachms: red Roses, Gum Arabic, and Tragacanth, Ivory, of each half an
ounce: the seeds of Cucumers husked of Purslain, Liquor is of each an ounce,
with Mussilage of the seeds of Fleawort, drawn in Rose water, make them into
Troches.

Culpeper] A. It is (...) good in burning fevers, heat of blood and choler,
together with hot distempers of the stomach and Liver, and extreme thirst
coming thereby, also it is good against the yellow Jaundice, Phtisicks, and
Hectic fevers. You may use these as the former. They have much altered this,
for they must be doing, though to little purpose.

Trochisci de Capparibus. Page 132. in L. Book. Or, Troches of Cappers.
The Colledg] Take of the Bark of Cappar roots, the seeds of Agnus Castus, of
each six drachms: Ammoniacum, half an ounce: the seeds of Watercresses and
Nigella, the Leaves of Calaminth and Rue, the roots of Acorus and long
Birthwort, the juice of Maudlin made thick, bitter Almonds, of each two
drachms: Hart's-tongue, the roots of round Cyperus, Maddir, Gum Lac. of each one
dram: Being bruised let them be made into Troches according to art, with
Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar and boiled to the thickness of Honey.

Culpeper] A. They open stoppings of the liver and spleen, and help diseases
thereof coming, as Rickets, Hypocondriack Melancholy etc. Men may take a
dram, children a scruple in the morning: you need not ask how children should
take it, it is well if you can get them to take it any how.

Trochisci de Carabe. Page 132. in the Latin Book. Or, Troches of Amber.
The Colledg] Take of Amber an ounce: Hartsborn burnt, Gum Arabic burnt, red
Corral burnt, Tragacanth, Acacia, Hypocistis, Balaustines, Mastich, Gum Lacca
washed, black Poppy seeds roasted, of each two drachms and two scruples:
Frankincense, Saffron, Opium, of each two drachms: with a sufficient qantity of
Mussilage of the seeds of Fleawort drawn in Plantane water, make them into
Troches according to art.

Culpeper.] A. They were invented to stop fluxes of blood in any part of the
body, the terms in women, the Hemorrholds or piles; they also help ulcers in
the breast and lungues. The dose is from ten grains to a scruple.

Trochisci Cypheos for Methridate. Page 132. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Pulp of Raisons of the sun, (...), Turpentine, of each
three ounces: Mirrh, Squinanth, of each an ounce and an half; Cinnamon, half an
ounce: Calamus Aromaticus, nine drachms: the roots of round Cyperus, and Indian
(...), Cassia Lignea, Juniper Berries, (...), Aspalathus or wood of Aloes, two
drachms and an half: Saffron one dram: clarified Honey as much as is
sufficient: Canary Wine a little: Let the (...) and Bdellium be ground in a
Mortar with the Wine, to the thickness of liquid Honey, then ad the (...), then
the pulp of Raisons, then the Pouders; at last with the Honey let them all be
made into Troches.

Culpeper] A. It is excellent good against inward ulcers in (...) part of the
body soever they be. It is chiefly used (...) Compositions, as (...) and (...).

Trochisci de Eupatorio. Page 133. in the Lat. Book. Or, Troches of Maudlin.
The Colledg] Take of the Juice of Mandlin made thick, Manna, of each an ounce:
red Roses half an ounce: Spodium three drachms and an (...): Spicknard three
drachms: Rhubarb, Asarabacca roots; Annis seeds, of each two drachms: Let the
Nard, Annis seeds and Roses be beaten together; the Spodium, Asarabacca and
Rbubarb by themselves; then mix the Manna and Juice of Maudlin in a Mortar, add
the pouders, and with new juice make it into Troches.

Culpeper] A. Obstructions, or stoppings, and swelling above nature, both of
the liver and spleen, (...) cured by the inward taking of these Troches, and
diseases thereof coming; as yellow and black jaundice, the beginning of
dropsies etc. Take them as Troches of Wormwood.

Throches of Gallia Moschata. Page 133. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Wood of Aloes five drams: Ambergreece, three drachms:
Musk, one dram: with Muscilage of Gum Tragacanth made in Rose water make it
into Troches according to art.

Culpeper] A. They strengthen the brain and heart, and by consequence both
vital and animal spirit, and cause a sweet breath. They are of an extreme
price, therefore I pass by the dose.

Trochisci Gordonli. Page 133. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the four greater cold seeds busked, the seeds of white
Poppies, Mallows, Cotton, Pierstain, Quinces, Mirtles, Gum (...) and Arabic,
Fistick Nuts, Pine nuts, Sugar Candy, Penids, Liquoris, French (...) arley,
(...) of Fleawort seeds, sweet Almonds blanched, of (...) two drachms: Bole
Armenick, Dragons blood, Spodium, red Roses, (...), of each half an ounce: with
a sufficient quantity of Hydromel make it into Troches according to art.

Culpeper.] A. They are held to be very good in ulcers of the bladder, and all
other inward ulcers whatsoever, and case fevers coming thereby, being of a
fine cooling, slippery, heating nature. You may mix half a dram of them with
Syrup of Marshmallows, or any other Syrup, or Water apropriated to these uses:
they ease the pains of the stomach much. They have left out the four lesser
cold seeds of each two drachms, and altered some of the quantities of the rest,
if you ask them a reason, they can scarce give you a wise one.

Trochisci Hedychroi Galen, for Treacle. Page 134. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Aspalatbus, or yellow Sanders, the leaves of Mastich, the
roots of Asarabacca, of each two drachms, Rhupontick, Castus, Calamus
Aromaticus, Wood of Aloes, Cinnamon, Squinancth, Opobalsamum or Oil of Nutmegs
by expression, of each three drachms: Cassia Lignea, Indian Leaf or Mace,
Indian Spicknard, Mirrh, Saffron, of each six drachms: Amomus, or Cardamoms the
(...), an ounce and an half: Mastich a dram: Canary Wine as much as is
sufficient: Let the Mirrh be dissolved in the Wine, then add the Mastich and
Saffron well beaten, then the Opobalsamum, then the rest in powder, and with
the Wine, make them up into Troches, and dry them gently.

Culpeper] A. They are very seldom or never used but in other compositions; yet
naturally they heat cold stomachs, help digestion, strengthen the heart and
brain.

Trochisci Hysterici. Page 134. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Assafoetida, Galbanum, of each two drachms and an half:
Mirrh, two drachms: Castorium a dram and an half: the roots of Asarabacca and
long Birthwort, the Leaves of Savin, Featherfew, Nep, of each a dram: Dittany
half a dram: with either the juice or decoction of Rue, make into Troches
according to art.

Culpeper] A. These are applied to the foeminine gender; help fits of the
mother, expel both birth and afterbirth, cleanse women after labor, and expel
the relicts of a careless Midwife. Search what other compositions are
apropriated to the same purpose; you may find them in the Table at the latter
end of the Book; and then you may ad half a dram of this to them.

Trochisci de Ligno Aloes. Page 134. in Lat. Book. Or, Troches of Wood of Aloes.
The Colledg] Take of Wood of Aloes, red Roses, of each two drachms: Mastich,
Cinnamon, Cloves, Indian Spicknard, Nutmegs, Parsnep seed, (...) the greater
and (...), Cubebs, Gallia Moschata, (...), Mace, of each a (...) and an half:
(...), (...), of each (...) a scruple: with (...) of (...) make it into Troches.

Culpeper.] A. It (...) the heart, stomach, and (...), takes away (...)-qualms,
faintings, and (...) breath, and (...) the dropsy. The rich may take half a
dram in the morning.

(...). Page 135. in the Latin Book. Or, Troches of Mirrh.
The Colledg] Take of Mirrh three drachms: the (...) of Lupines five drams:
Maddir roots, the leaves of Rue, wild Mints, (...) of Creet, Cummin seeds, Assa
foetida, Sagapen. Opopanax, of each two drams; Dissolve the Gums in Wine,
wherein Mugwort, has been boiled, or else, Any tooth, good Barber.
(...), then add the rest, and with juice of Mugwort, make it into troches
according to art.

Culpeper] A. They provoke the terms in women, and that with great ease to such
as have them come down with pain. Take a dram of them beaten into powder, in
a spoonful or two of syrup of Mugwort, or any other Composition tending to the
same purpose, which the Table at latter end will direct you.

Sief de Plumbo. Page 135. in the Latin Book. Or, Sief of Lead.
The Colledg] Take of lead burnt and washed, Brass burnt, Antimony Tutty
washed, Gum Arabic and Tragacanth, of each an ounce, Opium half a dram, with
Rosewater, make them being beaten and sifted into Troches.

Culpeper] A. It fills up and cures ulcers in the eyes. If you put it into them
(say authors), but in my opinion it is but a scurvy medicine.

Trochisci Polyidae Androm. Page 135. in Lat. Book.
The Colledg] Take of Pomegranat flowers twelve drachms, Roch album three
drachms, Erankinsence, Mirrh, of each half an ounce, Chalcanthum two drams,
Bulls gall six drachms, Aloes an ounce, with Austere Wine, or juice of
Nightshade or Plantane, make them into Troches according to art.

Culpeper] A. They are very good they say, being outwardly applied, both in
green wounds and ulcers. I fancy them not.

Trochisci de Rhabarbaro. Page 135. in Lat. Book. Or, Troches of Rhubarb.
The Colledg] Take of Rhubarb ten drachms, juice of Maudlin made thick, bitter
Almonds, of each half an ounce, red Roses three drachms; the roots of
Asarabacca, Maddir, Indian Spicknard, the leaves of Wormwood, the seeds of
Annis and Smallage, of each one dram, with Wine in which Wormwood has been
boiled, make them into Troches according to art.

Culpeper] A. They gently cleanse the liver, help the yellow Jaundice and other
diseases coming of choler and stoppage of the Liver. You may take a dram of
them every morning, or if you list not to take them alone, beat them into
powder, and mix them with white Wine.

Trochisci de Santalis. Page 136. in the Latin Book. Or, Troches of Sanders.
The Colledg] Take of the three Sanders, of each one ounce, the seeds of
Cucumers, Guords, Citrulls, Purslain, Spodium, of each half an ounce, red Roses
seven drachms, juice of Barberies six drachms, Bole armenick half an ounce,
Camphire one dram, with Purslain water make it into Troches.

Culpeper] A. The virtues are the same with Troches of Spodium, both of them
harmless.

Trochisci de scilla ad Theriacam. P. 136. in L. Book. Or, Troches of Squills
for Treacle.
The Colledg] Take a Squill gathered about the beginning of July, of a middle
bigness, and the hard part to which the Small roots stick, wrap it up in past,
and (...) it in an Oven, till the past be dry, and the Squill tender, which
you may know by (...) it with a wooden sticks or a bodkin, then take it out and
(...) it in a mortar, adding to every pound of the Squill, eight ounces of
white Orobus, or red Citers in powder, then make it into Troches, of the weight
of two drachms a piece ( your hands being anointed with Oil of Roses;) dry them
on the top of the house, opening toward the Ask the College whether the South
part of the world be toward the shadow, or the North: intruth either the world
is turned upside down, or they or I, are beside the cushion.
South, in the shadow, often turning them till they be well dry, then keep
them in a peuter (...) glass vessel.

Troches of Spodium. Page 136. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of redRoses twelve drachms, Spodium ten drachms, Sorrel seed
six crachms, the seeds of Purslain and Coriander, steeped in Vinegar and dried,
Pulp of Sumach, of each two drachms and an half, Maid wind up the Jack.
white Starch roasted, Balaustines, Barberries, of each two drachms, Gum Arabic
roasted one dram and an half, with juice of unripe grapes, make it into
Troches.

Culpeper] A. They are of a fine cooling, binding nature, excellent in fevers
coming of choler, especially if they be accompanied with a looseness, they also
quench thirst. You may take half a dram, either by themselves, or in any
other convenient medicine.

Trochisci de terra Lemnia. Page 137. in Lat. Book. Or, Troches of Earth of
Lemnos
The Colledg] Take of Earth of Lemnos, Bole Armenick, Acacia, Hyposistis, gum
Arabic tosted, Dragons blood, white Starch, red Roses, Rose seeds, Lap.
Hematitis, red Corral, Amber, Balaustins, Spodium, Purslain seeds a little
tosted, Olibanum, Hartsborn burnt, Cypress Nuts, Saffron, of each two drachms,
black Poppy seeds, Tragacanth, Pearls, of each one dram and an half, Opium
prepared one dram, with Juice of Plantane make it into Troches.

Culpeper] A. Indeed in external applications, if any inflammation, or fever
be, I think it better with Opium than without, else better without than with it.

A. It was invented to stop blood in any part of the body, and for it, it is
excellent: well then, for the bloody flux, take half a dram of them inwardly
(being beaten into powder) in red Wine every morning; for spitting of blood,
use it in like manner in Plantane water; for pissing of blood, inject it into
the bladder; for bleeding at the nose, either snuff it up, or anoint your
forehead with it mixed with oil; for the immoderate flowing of the terms,
inject it up the womb with a syringe, but first mix it with Plantane water; for
the hemorrhoids or wounds, apply it to the place bleeding.

Sief de Thure. Page 137. in the Latin Book. Or, Sief of Frankincense.
The Colledg] Take of Frankincense, Lap. (...), Pompholix, of each ten drachms
Ciruss forty drachms, Gum Arabic, Opium, of each six drachms, with sair water
make it into Balls, dry them and keep them for use.

Culpeper] A. Sief is a general term which the Arabians give to all medicines
apropriated to the eyes, of which this is one, and a good one to dry up rewms
there.

Trochisci e Violis Solutivi. P. 137. in Lat. Book. Or, Troches of Violets
Solutive.
The Colledg] Take of Violet flowers meanly dry, six drachms, Turbith one ounce
and an half, juice of Liquoris, Scammony, Manna, of each two drachms, with
Syrup of Violets make it into Troches.

Culpeper] A. They are not worth talking of, much less worth cost, the cost and
labor of making.

Trochisci de Vipera ad Theriacam. P. 137. in L. B. Or, Troches of Vipers for
Treacle.
The Colledg] Take of the flesh of Vipers, the skin, entrals, head, sat, and
taill being taken away, boiled in water with dill, and a little Salt eight
ounces, white bread twice baked, grated and sifted two ounces, make it into
Troches, your hands being anointed with Opobalsamum, or Oil of Nutmegs by
expression, dry them upon a sieve turned the bottom upwards in an open place,
often turning them till they are well dried, then put them in glass, or stone
pot glazed, stopped close, they will keep a year, yet is it far better to make
Treacle, not long after you have made them.

Culpeper.] A. They expel poison, and are excellent good, by a certain
Sympatheticall virtue, for such as are bitten by an Adder.

Trochisci de Agno Casto. Page 138. in Lat. Book. Or, Troches of Agnus Castus.
The Colledg] Take of the seeds of Agnus Castus, Lettice, redRose flowers,
Balaustins, of each a dram, Ivory, white Amber, Bole Armenick washed in knot
grass water, two drams; Plantane seeds four scruples, Sassafras two scruples,
with Mussilage of quince seeds extracted in water of Water lilly flowers, let
them be made into Troches.

Culpeper] A. Very pretty Troches, and good for little.

These Troches they have left out, and left to be spoiled in the Apothecaries
Shops: it is the wisest way to keep those poor, you would make slaves of.
Trochisci Alexiterii. Renodaeus.
College TAke of the roots of Gentain, Tormentil, Orris Florentine, Zedoary, of
each two drachms; Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, of each half a dram; Angelica roots
three drachms; Coriander seeds prepared, Roses, of each one dram; dried
Citron pills two drachms: beat them all into powder, and with juice of Liquoris
softened in Hippocras, six ounces, make them into a soft Past, which you may
from into either Troches or small rowls, which you please.

Culpeper] A. It preserves and strengthens the heart exceedingly, helps
fainting and failings of the vital spirits, resists poison and the pestilence;
and is an excellent medicine for such to carry about them whose occasions are
to travail in pestilential places and corrupt air, only taking a very small
quantity now and then.

Troches of Annis seeds. Mesue.
The Colledg] Take of Annis seeds, the juice of Maudlin made thick, of each two
drachms; the seeds of Dill, Spicknard, Mastich, Indian leaf or Mace, the leaves
of Wormwood, Asarabacca, Smallage, bitter Almonds, of each half a dram: Aloes
two dtams; (...) of Wormwood so much as is sufficient to make it into Trocbes
according to art.

Culpeper] A. They open obstructions of the liver, and that very gently, and
therefore diseases coming thereof, help quartan agues. You can scarce do amiss
in taking them if they please but your pallat.

Trochisci Diarhodon. Mesue
The Colledg] Take of the flowers of red Roses six drachms; Spicknard, wood of
Aloes, of each two drachms, Liquoris three drachms; Spodium one dram; Saffron
half a dram, Mastich two drachms, make them up into Troches with white Wine
according to art.

Culpepeper A. They wonderfully ease fevers, coming of phlegm, as quotidian
fevers, agues, Epialos, etc. pains in the belly.

Trochisci de Lacca. Mesue.
The Colledg] Take of Gum Lacca cleansed, the juice of Liquoris, (...), Wormwod,
and Barberries all made thick, Rhubarb, long Birthwort, Costus, Asarabacca,
Bitter Almonds, Maddir, Annis, Smalbage, Schoenanth, of each one dram: With
the Decoction of Birth-wort, or Schoenanth, or the juice of Maudlin, or
Wormwood, make them into troaches according to art.

Culpeper] A. It helps stoppings of the liver and spleen, and fevers thence
coming; it expels wind, purges by urine, and resists dropsies. The dose is
between half a dram and a dram, according to the age and strength of the
patient.

Pastilli Adronis. Galen.
The Colledg] Take of Pomegranate flowers ten drachms: Copper is twelve
drachms: (...) Galls, Birthwort, Frankincense, of each an ounce; Alum, Mirrh,
of each half an ounce: it may be they mean white Copperis.
Misy, two drachms: With eighteen ounces of austere Wine make it into (...)
according to art.

Culpeper] A. This also is apropriated to wounds, ulcers, and fistulaes; it
clears the ears, and represseth all excressences of flesh, cleanses the filth
of the bones.

Trochisci Musae. Galen.
The College. Take of Alum, Aloes, Copperis, Mirrh, of each six drachms:
Crocomagma, Saffron, of each three drachms: Pomegranate flowers, half an ounce:
Wine and Honey of each so much as is sufficient to make it up into troches
according to art.

Culpeper. A. Their use is the same with the former.

Crocomagma of Damocrates. Galen.
The College. Take of Saffron, a hundred drams: red Roses, Mirrh, of each fifty
drachms; white Starch, I think they mean Gum Arabic.
Gum, of each thirty drachms; Wine so much as is sufficient to make it into
troches.

Culpeper. A. It is very expulsive, heats and strengthens the heart and stomach.

Trochisci Ramich. Mesue.
The College. Take of the juice of Sorrel, (...) ounces; red Rose Leaves, an
ounce; (...) berries two ounces: boil them a little together, and strain them:
ad to the decoction, Galls well beaten, three ounces: boil them again a little,
then put in these following things in fine powder: take of red Roses an ounce;
yellow Sanders ten drachms; Gum Arabic an ounce and an half; Sumach, Spodium,
of each an ounce; Myrtle berries four ounces: wood of Aloes, Cloves, Mace,
Nutmegs, of each half an ounce; sour Grapes seven drachms: mix them all
together, and let them dry upon a stone, and grind them again into powder, and
make them into small troches with one dram of Camphire, and so much Rose water
as is sufficient, and perfume them with fifteen grains of Musk.

Culpeper. A. They strengthen the stomach, heart, and liver, as also the
bowels, they help the chollick, and fluxes of blood, as also bleeding at the
nose if you snuff but up the powder of them; disburden the body of salt,
fretting, chollerick humors. You may carry them about you and take them at your
pleasure.

Troches of Roses. Mesue.
The Colledg] Take of red Roses, half an ounce: wood of Aloes two drachms:
Mastich, a dram and an half: Roman Wormwood, Cinnamon, Indian Spicknard,
Cassia Lignea, Schaenanth, of each one dram: old Wine, and decoction of the
five opening Roots, so much as is sufficient to make it into troches according
to art.

Culpeper] A. They help pains in the stomach and ill digestion, the Illiack
passion, Hectic fevers, and dropsies in the beginning, and cause a good
color. Use them like the former.

Trochisci Diacorrallion. Galen.
The Colledg] Take of Bole Armenick, red Corral, of each an ounce: Balaustins,
terra Lemnia, white Starch, of each half an ounce: Hypocystis, the seeds of
Henbane, Opium, of each two drachms: juice of Plantane so much as is sufficient
to make them into troches according to art.

Culpeper] A. These also stop blood, help the bloody flux, stop the terms, and
are a great help to such whose stomachs loath their victuals. I fancy them not.

Trochisci Diaspermaton. Galeni.
The Colledg] Take of the seeds of Small age, and Bishops weed, of each an
ounce; Annis and Fennel seeds, of each half an ounce: Opium, Cassia Lignea, of
each two drachms: with rain Water, make it into troches according to art.

Culpeper] A. These also bind, case pain, help the pleuresie.

(...) Pastilli. Galen.
The Colledg] Take of white Starch Balaustins, earth of Samos, juice of
Hypocistis, If it be not Gum Arabic, I know not what it is.
Gum, Saffron, Opium, of each two drachms: with juice of Plantane, make them
into troches according to art.

Culpeper] A. The Operation of this is like the former.

Troches of Agrick.
The Colledg] Take of choice Agrick three ounces; Sal. Gem. six drachms; Ginger
two drachms; with Oxymel Simplex so much as is sufficient, make it into Troches
according to art.

Culpeper] A. The virtues of both these are the same with Agrick, only it may
be more safely given this way than the other; they cleanse the brain of phlegm,
and the stomach of tough thick, viscous humois. The dose is one dram at a
time.

Of the Use of Oils, etc.
BEfore I begin with their Oils, Ointments, and Plasters, give me leave to
swerve a little from the Colleges mode, they swerve ten times more from the
truth: I would but give a few Rules for the Use of them, and I had as good do
it here as any where: and to write but the truth, many City Chyrurgians that I
have talked with, are scarce able to give reason for what they do; it is to be
feared, that those that live in the country far remote, are far less able: to
do all these a curtesy, do I heartily deliver these Rules, and let me never be
acconnted so basely bred, as to forget those kind Ladies and Gentlewomen that
for Gods sake help their poor wounded neighbors, the great God reward them with
a plentiful increase of estate in this world, and eternal Beatitude in that to
come.

The chiefest of all these, Chyrurgicall Antidotaries, I shall divide into
these twelve Chapters, which shall be treated of in this order.

Of Medicines.
Anodine 1 Repelling 2 Attracting 3 Resolving 4 Emollient 5 Suppuring 6
Clensing 7 Incarnative 8 Scarrifying 9 Glutinative 10 Cathereticks 11 Stanching
blood. 12

Chap. 1. Of ANODINES.
SUch Oils, Ointments, and Plasters, as ease pain are called by Physicians
(because you should not know what they mean) Anodines.

All pain is caused by heat, or dryness, or both, for moisture seldom, unless
heat be joined with it causes pain.

Anodines, also some divide into proper and improper, improper Anodines, (if a
man may call them Anodines) they call Narcoticks, for I assure you if crabbed
words would cure (...), our Physicians would come behind none in the world: the
truth is, these words were borrowed from Galen, and are Greek words, and Galen
writing in his mother tongue, they were understood well enough there; ours
retain the same words, only to blind peoples eyes, that so they may not pry
into the Mystery of their Monopoly, for then all the fat were in the fire. But
to proceed.

Proper Anodines are either temperately hot or temperately cold.

Hot Anodines are

Oil of sweet Almonds, Linseed Oil, Oil of Eggs, Oil of Saint John's Wort,
Hen-grease, Ducks grease, Goose grease, Chamomel, Melilot, Fenugreek seeds,
Dill, Bay leaves and berries, Juniper berries, Rosemary, Oils and Ointments
made of them; Oil of Earthworms Oil of Elder, Wax, Turpentine, Ointment of
Marshmallows, Martiatum, Arregon, Resumptivum, Oxycroceum.

If any external part of your body be pained, these, or any of these made into
fomentations, to both the part pained, or into pultifses, or Oils, or Ointments
by adding Hogs grease, or Plasters, by adding Wax, or Rozin, or both to the
Ointment; and applyiug it to the place, ease pain.

But if together with the pain there be an inflammation, then Anodines of a
cooler nature are more convenient, such be Oil Omphacine, viz. Oil of Olives
pressed from them before they be ripe, Poppies, Roses, Violets, Pellitory of
the wall, Fleawort: these, or any of these made into Pultisses, Oils,
Ointments, or Plasters, Ointment of Roses, Unguantnm Album, Populeon,
Refrigerans, Galeni, etc.

Improper Anodines, or Narcoticks which you please, are Medicines of another
nature, and (you may thank the College of Physicians, for training you up in
such ignorance) scarce fit for a vulgar use, till they have learned more skill
in Physic than yet they have; yet be pleased to consider, that in taking away
pains, three things are to be considered; The cause, the pain, the part pained.
To these are medicines apropriated, for some take away the cause, but these
belong not to my present scope; others take away the pain, and meddle not with
the cause, as those proper Anodines I mentioned before: and some take away
neither cause nor pain, but only stupifie the senses, that so it cannot be
felt: these are to be used with abundance of skill and discretion, and never
but in cases of necessity, when the pain is so vehement that Nature is not able
to bear it, or a Fever thereby threatened. Of this Nature, and for this use are
Narcoticks.

Of these some are Simple; As,

Mandrakes, Henbane, Poppies, Opium, Lettice, Sengreen, Nightshade, Camphire,
Hemlock, etc.

Compound are, Oils and Ointments of these, Philonium Persicum, Philonium
Romanum, Pilulae e Cynoglosso, or Pills of Houndstongue, Pilulae e Styrace; and
most Opiates you meet withal in the Dispensatory.

Chap. 2. Of Repelling Medicines.
BY Repelling, or Repulsive Medicines I mean, either,

1. Such as by a cold quality put back the humor. Or, 2. Such as by binding,
strengthen the part afflicted.
They are in quality;
1. Hot and binding. 2. Cold and binding.
They are divided into Simple, and Compound.

Simple Repercussives (which is another term they have)

are Mild, binding. Strong, Hot and

Mild Repulsives are,

Roses, Endive, Lettice, Sorrel, Navel-wort, Purslain, Violets, Water Lillies,
cold water, Whey, Coriander, Cinkfoyl, Trefoyl, Pellitory of the Wall, Apples,
Pears, Whites of Eggs, Horstail, Woodbine.

Strong are,

Teazles, Shepherds purse, Plantane, Nightshade, Sengreen, or Housleeks,
Melones, Guords, Citruls, Duckmeat, Fleawort, Mirtles, Quinces, Pomegranat
rinds and flowers, Sanguis Draconis, Poppy, Opium, Bole Armenick, Ceruss, Terra
Sigillata, Lead, burnt and not burnt, Cypress Nuts.

Hot and binding

Comfry the greater, Wormwood, Centaury, Horchound, Cardamoms, Cyperus grass,
Calamus (...), the (...) of (...) and of (...).

Compounds are,

The Oils and Ointments of these, Refrigerans, Galen, Unguentum Album, Rhasis,
Unguentum (...), (...), (...) de Siccativum rubrum, Unguentum Pectorale, (...).

Chap. 3. Of ATTRACTIVES.
ATTractives (called by the Greeks, (...)) are (...) to (...); for the nature
of Repelling, Repulsive, or Repercussive Medicines, is to drive from the
Circumference to the Center, but of Attractives to draw from the Center to the
Circumference.

They are all hot in temper, and of thin parts.

Attractives draw by
1. Natural Heat. 2. Putrefaction. 3. Hidden Property. 4. Fuga (...).
1. Such as draw by Natural heat are,
1. Simple. 2. Compound.
Simple are,

Onions, Briony, Leeks, Garlic; and now you may know a reason why the cutting
of Onions makes your eyes run a water; Birthwort, Spurge, Southernwood,
Nettles, (...), Gentian, Asphodel, Bdellium, (...), Euphorbium, Watercresses,
(...), (...), Carpobalsamum, Frankincense, (...), (...), Rosemary flowers,
Cabbage; Aqua vitae, Sea water, Ammoniacum, Pitch, Bitumen, Calaminth, Dittany,
Mustard, (...), Galbanum, Pellitory of Spain, Cantharides, Crowfoot, etc.

Compound are,

The Oils and Ointments made of these, Turpentine, Oil of Bricks, Oil of Foxes,
Oil of Bays, Oil of Dill, Oil of Rhue, Peter Oil, Oil of Castorium, Oil of St
John's wort, Ointment of Arregon Matiatum and Agrippa, Mithridate, and Venis
Treacle applied outwardly, for (...), Diachylon magnum, Diachylon cum Gummi, A
Plaster of (...), both Simple and Compound, (...), with many others, which
Reading and Diligence (if they be gentlemen of your acquaintance) will help
you to, and furnish you with.

Such as draw by Putrefaction are,

All Turds in general, especially Pigeons and Goats dung, Leaven, Old Cheese,
etc.

By hidden Property as they call it,

All (...) in general, Amber, Viscus Quercinus, or Mislero, Peony, the
Lodestone; these they (poor fools, being utterly ignorant of the Sympathy and
Antipathy of the Creation, and by consequence of the Magnetic Virtue of
things, upon which the Foundation of Physic is built) call them Hidden
Qualities, and so give Physic by rote, as a Parrot speaks. I could if I durst
tell you of common (...) obvious to the eye of every one, that have a far
greater Magnetic Virtue in them than the Lodestone; but I must be silent till
men learn to be Honester: It is denied me to write all I know.

By Fuga Vacui, or driving away Emptiness.

It is a most certain truth that nature abhors Vacuum or Emptiness, neither is
there such a thing in rerum Natura, let Baptista van Helmont speak his
pleasure; And this way do Cupping glasses, and Horse Leaches draw; and thus may
you draw with a horn.

Chap. 4. Of Resolving Medicines.
THese the Greeks call Diaphoretica, the Latins, Carminativa, and these are
used externally as well as internally; for it is the external use of Medicines
we are to speak of in this place.

Their Use is,
1. To open the Pores. 2. To make the Humor thin. 3. To Evacuate them by Sweat,
which is that they call, Insensible transpiration.
They are,
1. Simple. 2. Compound
The Simple are,
1. Weak. 2. Strong.
Weak are,

Savin, Marjoram, Rosemary, Origanum, Wormwood, Melilot, Arrach, Spicknard,
Chamomel, Dill, Annis, Cummin, Hysop, Fumitory, Elder, Dwarf Elder, Valerian,
Southernwood, Wormwood, (...), Rozin, all sorts of Turds, Turpentine, old
Cheese, Wine, strong-water.

Strong are,

Dittany, Leeks, Onions, Garlic, Vinegar, Aqua vitae, (...) of Spain, all the
hot seeds which you may find ranked in Battalia at the beginning of the
Compounds, Cinnamon, Chervil, Nutmegs Pepper, Crowfoot.

Coupound are,

Oils, Ointments, and all Compositions of the former; Oil of Euphorbium,
Ointment of Bays, Diachylon magnum, and cum Gummi, Emplastrum de Cymino,
Oxicroceum, Emplastrum de Baccis lauri: Of Melilot, Oyutments of (...),
Arregon, and Martiatum.

Chap. 5. Of Emollients.
TEe use of Emollients, is to soften hard places, and bring them to their
pristine estate, of which we spoke more at large in the Simples.

They are,
1. Common. 2. Propper.
Those are common, whose general operation is to soften hard swellings, and
such parts and places of the body, as are hardened by Congralation.

They are Propper which are apropriated to peculiar humors, and belong to my
scope at present; for I intend not a Treatise of Chyrurgery, but to givea
Candle and a Lanthorn, to light you through the Oils, Ointments, and Plasters;
that you may see what a mist the College being balanced with ignorance, and
Sailing by the wind of Authority, has hitherto wrapped you in, and compassed
you round about with: for take this for a general rule, and you (if you have
any Ingenuity in you) must needs confess, Ignorance is encroaching, and seeks
Authority to back it; But wisdom desires to be public, and is always
justified of her children.

To proceed, consider that Emollients are more temperate than Attractives, but
less temperate than Suppuratives; of which more in the next Chapter.

Also take notice that if the tumor be in any principal part of the body, mix
your Emollients with Astringents.

Emollients are either Simple or Compound.

Simple are,

Almost, if not altogether, all Marrows, as of a Stagge, Dog, Horse, Caife,
Bear, Man, Hog, Hen, Goose, Duck, Lion, Goat, etc. The College in their
Simples rattle you up enough of them, one after another, (I promised then to
tell you what they were held to be good for, and now I am as good as my word;
and although I am of opinion, that there is a far nearer and (...) way to cure
diseases than they use, yet this book (if you have but wit enough to be a
Physician) this Book I say, if heedfully read and examined, will so furnish you
with the vulgar rules, that you may be able to understand, that when God shall
enable me to put it forth. A man shall never know any thing of the mysteries of
his Creator, till he knows himself: and he shall never know himself, First,
Till he has the honesty freely to impart to others, what God has freely
revealed to him for the public good; Secondly, Till he has the Discretion to
impart every thing in its due season. But to proceed to Simple Emollents where
I left) Gum Amoniacum, Bdellium, Opopanax, Galbanum, Turpentine, Rozin,
Colophonia, Pitch, the Emollient herbs (you have them in rank and file, at the
beginning of the Compounds) Linseed, Fennugreek seed, white Lilly roots,
Astrach, Figs, Wheat and Barley Meal, Malt, Flower, etc.

Compounds are,

Oils, Ointments, and Plasters, made of all or any of these, Oil of Lillies,
Oil of Chamomel, Oil of Earthworms, Oil of Foxes, Ointment of Marshmallows,
Resumptivum Diachylon, cum muliis aliis.

I shall give a notion or two, and then I have done with this, (you had had
them before had I not forgotten them, and now before I go any further let me
advise those that intend to reap any benefit by my writings, to take a pen and
ink, and note down what ever they find of consequence in them; for I know and
they shall find by experience; that once writing of a thing, seats it better
in the memory, then a hundred times reading of it.)

1. The grease of all males is hotter, then the grease either of foemales, or
Eunuchs, as for exampte; the grease of a Bull is hotter by far, than either the
grease of a Cow or an Ox. 2. The grease of wild Beasts, is hotter then that of
such as are tame or demostical, as the grease of a wild Cat is hotter than that
of a house Cat; judge ye the like of Fowls, the grease of a wild Duck, is
hotter than that of a tame. A word is enough to the wise.
Chap. 6. Of Suppuratives.
THe Greeks call these Peptica. the Lattines Maturantia, we had some talk about
them amongst the Simples.

Their office is by natural heat, to bring the blood and superfluous humors
into matter, to help nature so to concoct a superfluous humor, that it may be
fit to be cast out, to ripen it as the vulgar proverb is.

Emplasticks are af this nature, which we treated of by themselves in the
Simples, and may well be reduced to this head. For,

First, Some close the pores of the body, and so natural heat being kept in is
increased, as the Sulphurious Vapors being kept in the Cloud turn to real fire,
and that is that we call Lightning; So that cortuption of the body being kept
in together putrifies, and turns to matter.

Of this number (for before we told you what Emplasticks were in general, now
we tell you, what particulars are Emplasticks, and a little Ingenuity will find
out more, by (...) the qualities of these) of this number I say, are Mallows,
Marshmallows, yolks of Eggs, Turpentine, Honey, Amoniacum, Galbanum, Labdanum,
Frankincense, Liquid Styrax.

2. As the former forced nature to do the work, so these help nature in it, the
former did it per accidens, these per se, viz. they are friendly to nature, and
conspire together with it to bring the Superfluous matter to form, yea to such
a form as may be cast out, and the body afflicted may thereby be cased.

Such Simples are,

Marshmallow roots, white Lilly roots (which is the best internal medicine of
Gallen's Method, which I know for such an use, for you must note, that I
chiefly speak of external medicines now) Wheat, and Barley, and malt Flower,
(...) Fenugreek seed, Brank Ursine, or Bears breech, Figs, Raisons, Currance,
Dates etc.

As for Compounds, I shall not use any distinction between them, they that do
one may happily do both together, there are besides Compounds made of these
(let me not forget Oil of Lillies, because I fancy it) Unguentum Basilicon)
Diachylon simplex, Diachylon magnum, Diachylon cum Gummi, a Plaster of
Mussilages, your own genius, if it be not dull, (...) you with more.

Chap. 7. Of Clensing Medicines.
CLensing medicines are such as by a drawing quality, have power to draw away
parulentus excrements (which Chyrurgians call the Sanies of a wound) or mattery
quality which arises in all wounds after putrefaction, (and then Chyrurgians
call them ulcers) from the Center of the ulcer, to the circumference, you have
an (...), you would fain cleanse it, for you must make it clean before you can
heal it, clensing medicines were ordained you for hat end.

Of these some are,
1. Simples. 2 Compounds.
Of Simples some are,
1. Weak. 2. Strong.
Weak Simples are,

Honey, Sugar, Salt Urine, especially your own Urine, white Wine, these gently
cleanse all wounds and [ulcers which is indeed nothing else but a wound
putrified, it is neither better nor worse.]

Strong Simples are,

Wormwood, Agrymony, Betony, Smallage, Southernwood, Mirrh, Aloes, Sarcocolla,
Turpentine, bitter Almonds, Vert-de-greece, Bullocks gall, Alicampane, Briony,
the roots of Aron, or Cooko pintles, Gentian, Hellebore, Alum, Whey,
Birthwort, both long and round.

Compounds are.

Oils and Ointments of these, and what has these in them does more or less
cleanse; Oximel, That Plaster which the College like blasphemous wretches call
Divine, that Ointment of twelve ingredients which they are not ashamedwithout
blushing, to call an Ointment of the Apostles, their consciences are so feared,
Unguentum Egiptiacum etc.

Chap. 8. Of Incarnatives.
THe Greeks call Incarnatives Sarcotica.

Their office is to dry, and change the blood that comes to any part into flesh.

They must be hot, and but hot in the first degree; because they must be
friendly to nature, else they cannot be helpful.

They must all be dry, yet so as there must not be a difference in their
dryness, for if the ulcer happen in a dry part of the body, the Sarcotick must
be very dry, and therefore some of them are drying even to the fourth degree:
but if the part of the body where they happen be moist, you must use
Incarnatives, (or Sarcoticks which you please to call them by) that are less
drying.

According to the degrees of Comparison I shall

divide them into,
Mean. Stronger. Strongest.
Mean are Olibanum, Colophonia, Mastick, Aloes, Barley Meal, malt Flower,
Fenugreek seeds; these ought to be applied to moist and dilicate bodies.

Stronger are, Birthwort both long and round, Orris, Meall of Lupines, and
Orobus, these ought to be applied to dry bodies, and hollow wounds.

Strongest are, Centaury the greater and lesser, burnt Lead, Mirrh, these are
apropriated to deep ulcers.

Then according as formerly, I shall divide them into Simple and Compound, If
you search the Simples you may there find their degree of dryness, and be sure
of this, you can loose nothing by diligence and searching, then as the wound
or ulcer abounds with moisture, so let your Incarnatives be suitable for dryness.

Simple Incarnatives are.

Olibanum, Mastich, Aloes, Borax, Colophonia, the meal of Lupines, Barley,
Orobus and malt of Fenugreek, Beans, Wheat, and Lentils, both sorts of
Birthwort, Mirrh, Sarcolla, (...) oil, Betony, Sheephards purse mouse ear,
Saint John's wort Centaury, Sanicle Vervain, Scabious, Burnet Tutty, Gum Arabich
and Tragacanth.

Compounds are.

The compositions of these, Unguentum aurium and Committissae, Plasters of
Bettony, (...), Emplastrum (...), Emplastrum de janua.

Chap. 9. Of Cicatrizing Medicines.
THese the Greeks call Epilotica, the Latins, Cicatrizantes, and we in English
Scarrifying medicines, though the greater half of the nation know not what the
word [Scarrifying] means.

Therefore take notice that a Scarrifying medicine, is such a medicine as
clothes a place again with skin, when the skin is off, and this it does by a
drying and binding quality.

Of these some are Simples, some Compounds.

Simples are,

Galls, Sponge burnt, Litharge, terra Sigillata, or Lemnia, Pomegranate Pills,
or Flowers, Aloes, Cassia Lignea, Pompholix, Spodium, Cypress Nuts, (...),
Frankincense, Lead, Bole (...), (...), Sarcocolla.

Compounds are.

All mixtures of these, unguentum album, Disiccativum Rubrum, Dia Pompholigos,
Emplastrum de Minio, Dia palma, etc.

Chap. 10. Of Aglutinative Medicines.
THe Greeks call Aglutinative medicines, Symphitica, and that is the reason
Comfry is caled Symphitum, because of its Glutenous quallity.

The meaning of the word [Aglutinative] is best known by its use, which is to
dry up that humidity, that is between the lips of a wound, that so it may be
healed.

They are all usually drying in the second degree

Aglutinatives Simple are,

Mastich, Sarcocolla, Frankincense, Mirrh, Colophonia, Bole Armenick, Dragons
blood, terra Lemnia, Saint John's Wort, Rosemarry flowers, Knotgrass, Comfry,
Marjoram, Gum Tragacanth, Gum of Ivy, Gum Elemni, red Wine, Vervain, Yarrow,
wild Tansy, Cranebil, Sanicle, Cobwebs, Horse tail, Sinkfoyl.

Compounds are, the Compositions of these, Diapalma Emplastrum de minio.

And now by comparing these with the Scarrifying medicines, you may see that
they are as like, as one eg is like another: and what a multitude of rules
Physicians have imposed upon you, that so they might make their way difficult
to you.

Chap. 11. Of Cathereticks, Septicks, and Causticks.
They all being as near of kin, as a man and his brother, I have put them all
together, but before I treat of them, I care not greatly, if I explain their
degrees: Therefore take notice that they are all such medicines as have force
to corrode the flesh or skin.

Of these
Cathereticks are meanly strong. Septicks stronger. Causticks strongest.
The mean, if there be any meaness in them, or a more propper term is those which
are least violent, for all that are violent are called Catheritica, or
Corrosives, by vehement drying these consume the excressences of flesh.

They are usually applied to ulcers that have dead flesh in them.

They are
Simple. Compound.
Simple are,

Vert-de-greece, Coperas, or Vitriol, Alum, burnt and not burnt, burnt Salt,
Antimony, Mercury Sublimate and Precipitate, Emphorbium.

Compound are,

Unguentum Egiptiacum, and that which the Devil and his Imps attribute to the
Apostles, as though they performed their cures by Ointments, and not by the
Spirit of God: All Ointments that have the Simples before mentioned in them.

The stronger the Greeks call Septica, or Putrifactive Medicines. By their
vehement heat they ulcerate the skin and yet with little pain.

Such are,

Arsenick, Crowfoot, Spurge, Mustard Seed, Cantharides, Euphorbium.

Causticks are the strongest, and those the Greeks call Escarotica. These have
got a faculty to consume all they come near.

Such are,

Quicklime, sublimated, Arsenick.

Strong be, Lapis infernalis.

I shall give you the use of them all in a very few words, as few as can be
imagined.

The First, Eat away dead flesh. Second, is used to Draw Blisters. Third, Make
Issues.

Chap. Ult. Of Medicines used to stop Blood.
SUch are, Bole Armenick, terra Sigillata, Dragons blood, Crocus Martis, Chalk,
Eggshels, (...), Litharge, Frankincense, Mastick, Aloes, Rozin, white starch,
stones of Raisons, Purslain, Housleek or Sengreen, Horstail, the Herb I always
mean, so called, not the tail of a Horse; the Herb Mousear, not the ears of a
Mouse; Fleawort, white and red Corral, Lapis Hematitis, the Boodstone, dried
blood, Gum Tragacanth, and Arabic, Knotgrass, Cobwebs.

I have now done with my Proaemium to the Oils, Ointments, and Plasters: I
desire you to excuse me for not following one and the same Author in the
Simples, and here; the more you know the variety of Authors, the better
Physicians in time you may come to be. Ville suum enique est nec voto vivitur
uno, and according to these Rules, so understand the Oils, Ointments, and
Plasters following.

OILS.
SIMPLE OILS BY EXPRESSION.
Oil of sweet Almonds.
College. TAke of sweet Almonds not corrupted, as many as you will, cast the
shells away, and blanch them, beat them in a stone Mortar, heat them in a
double Vessel, and press out the Oil without heat.

Culpeper.] A. It helps roughness and soreness of the throat and stomach, helps
Pleuresies, increases seed, eases coughs, and Hectic fevers; by injection,
it helps such whose water (...) them; ulcers in the bladder, reins, and matrix.
You may either take half an ounce of it by it self, or mix it with half an
ounce of Syrup of Violets, and so take a spoonful at a time, still shaking them
together when you take them; only take notice of this: If you take it inwardly,
let it be new drawn, for it will be sour in three or four days.

A. In their new Moddel, they bid you heat them in a double vessel, and then
ptess out the Oil without the help of heat; Oh Heavens! did ever the Sun shine
upon such rediculous creatures! who would think a whole College of Physicians
should dote so young!

Oil of bitter Almonds.
The Colledg] It is made like Oil of sweet Almonds, but that you need not
blanch them, nor have such a care of heat in pressing out the Oil.

Culpeper] A. It opens stoppings, helps such as are deaf, being dropped into
their ears; it helps the hardness of the nerves, and takes away spots in the
face. It is seldom or never taken inwardly.

Oil of Hazel Nuts.
The Colledg] It is made of the Kernels, cleansed, bruised, and heat, and (...),
like Oil of (...).

Culpeper] A. You must put them in a vessel, ( viz: a glass, or some such like
thing) and stop them close that the water come not to them when you put them
into the bath.

A. The Oil is good for cold afflictions of the nerves, the gout in the joints
etc.

The Colledg] So is Oil of Been, Oil of (...), and Oil of Mace drawn.

Oleum Caryinum.
The Colledg] Is prepared of Walnut Kernels, in like manner, save only that in
the making of this sometimes is required dried, old, and rank Nuts.

Oleum Chrysomelinum.
The Colledg] Is prepared in the same manner of Apricocks; so is also Oils of
the Kernels of Cherry (...), Peaches, Pine-nuts, Fistick nuts, Prunes the seeds
of Orienges, Hemp; (...) Saffron, (...), Cucumers, Guords, (...), Dwarf Elder,
Henbane, Lettice, Flax, Melones, Poppy, Parsley, Rhadishes, Rapes, Ricinum,
Sesani, Mustard Seed, and Grape stones.

Culpeper] A. Because most of these Oils is out of use, I took not the pains to
quote the Virtues of them; if any list to make them, let them look the Simples
and there they have them; if the Simples be not to be found in the Book, there
are other plentiful Medicines conducing to the cure of all usual diseases which
are.

Oil of Bays.
The Colledg] Take of Bay Berries ripe, and new gathered, being bruised let
them be boiled in water, and pressed in a press; then bruise them again, and
boil them as before, and take away the Oil that swims at top of the water
according to art. It will soon be rank.

Culpeper] A. This is different from their former manner of Extraction, and in
my opinion worse: Their former manner was thus:

The Colledg] Take of Bay berries, fresh and ripe, so many as you please;
bruise them sufficiently; then boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water,
till the Oil (...) top, which separate from the water and keep for (...).

Culpeper] A. It helps the Chollick, and is a sovereign remedy for any diseases
in any part of the body coming either of wind or cold. For the Chollick you may
take a few drops inwardly in any Compound apropriated to the Chollick: The
Table of diseases will direct you, I love to have (...): Negligent people make
wooden Physicians.

The Colledg] Common Oil of Olives is pressed out of ripe Olives, not out of
the stones.

Oil of Olives Omphacine, is pressed out of unripe Olives.

Oil of Yolks of Eggs.
The Colledg] Boil the Yolks till they be hard, and bruise them with your
hands, or with a Pestle and Mortar; heat them in an Earthen vessel glazed until
they begin to sroath, stirring them dilligently that they burn not; being hot,
put them in a linen bag, and sprinkle them with Aromatic Wine, and press out
the Oil according to art.

Culpeper] A. It is profitable in (...), and malignant ulcers, it causes the
hair to grow, it cleers the skin, and takes away deformities thereof, viz.
Tetters, Ringworms, Morphew, Scabs. I suppose none is so sinple to take it
inwardly to clear their skin, nor to anoint their feet to take away the
deformity of their face.

SIMPLE OILS BY INFUSION, AND DECOCTION.
Oil of Roses Omphacine.
The Colledg] Take of red Roses before they be ripe bruised in a stone Mortar
four ounces, Oil Omphacine one pound; set them in a hot Sun in a glass close
stopped, a whole week, shaking them every day; then boil them gently in a bath;
press them out, and put in others, use them in like manner; do so the third
time, then keep the Oil upon a pound of juice of Roses.

Oil of Roses Complete.
Is made in the same manner with sweet and ripe Oil often washed, and red Roses
fully open, bruised, set in the sun and boiled gently, in a double vessel; only
let the third infusion stand in the sun fourly days, then keep the Roses and
Oil together.

In the same manner is made Oil of Wormwood, of the tops of common Wormwood
thrice repeated four ounces, and three pound of ripe Oil, only the last time
put in four ounces of the juice of Wormwood, which evaporate away by gentle
boiling.

Oil of Dill, of the flowers and leaves of Dill four ounces, complete Oil one
pound, thrice repeated.

Oil of Castoreum, of one ounce of Castoreum, Oil one pound, Wine four ounces,
which must be consumed with the heat of a bath.

Oil of Chamomel (which more than one call Holy) of complete Oil, and fresh
Chamomel flowers, the little white leaves taken away, cut, bruised, and the
vessel covered with a thin linen Cloth, set in the Sun, pressed out, and three
times repeated.

Oil of Wall flowers as Oil of Dill.

Oil of Quinces of six parts, of Oil omphacine, the meat and juice of Quinces
one part: set them in the Sun fifteen days in a glass, and afterward boil
them four hours in a double vessel press them out and renew them three times.

Oil of Alicampane, of ripe Oil and the roots of Alicampane bruised, and their
juice, of each one part, and of generose Wine half a part, which is to be
evaporated away.

Oil of Euphorbium, of six drachms of Euphorbium, Oil of Walflowers, and sweet
Wine, of each five ounces boiling it in a double vessel till the Wine be
consumed.

Oil of Ants, of winged Ants infused in four times their weight of sweet Oil,
set in the sun in a glass forty days, and then strained out.

Oil, or Balsom of St. John's wort simple is made of the Oil of the seeds beaten
and pressed, and the flowers being added, and rightly set in the sun.

Oil of Jesmine is made of the flowers of Jesmine, put in clear Oil and set in
the sun, and afterward pressed out.

Oil of of Orris made of the roats of Orris Florentine one pound, purple Orris
flowers half a pound; boil them in a double vessel in a sufficient quantity of
Decoction of Orris Florentine, and six pound of sweet oil, putting fresh roots
and flowers again and again, the former being cast away as in oil of Roses.

Oil of Earthworms is made of half a pound of Earthworms washed in white Wine,
ripe oil two pound, boiled in a double vessel, with eight ounces of good white
Wine till the wine be consumed.

Oil of Marjoram is made with four ounces of the Herb a little bruised, white
Wine six ounces, ripe oil one pound; mixed together, let them be set in the sun
repeated three times; at last boiled to the consumption of the Wine.

Oil of Mastich, is made of oil of Roses omphacine one pound, Mastich three
ounces, Wine four ounces; boil them in a double vessel to the consumption of
the Wine.

Oil of Melilot is made with the tops of the Herb like oil of Chamomel.

Oil of Mints is made of the Herb and oil omphacine (...) oil of Roses.

Oil of Mirtles is made of Myrtle berries bruised and sprinkled with austere
wine one part, oil omphacine three parts, set in the Sun twenty four days, and
in the intrim thrice renewed, boiled and the berries pressed out.

Oil of Daffadils is made as oil of Roses.

Nard oil is made of three ounces of Spicknard, sweet oil one pound and an
half, sweet white wine and clear water, of each two ounces and an half, boiled
to the consumption of the moisture.

Oil of water Lillies is made of fresh white water lilly flowers, one part, oil
omphacine three parts, repeating the flowers as in oil of Roses.

Oil of Tobacco is made of the juice of Tobacco and common oil, of each equal
parts boiled in a bath.

Oil of Poppies is made of the flowers, heads and leaves of Garden Poppies, and
oil amphacine, as oil of Dill.

Oil of Poplars is made of the buds of Poplar tree three parts, rich white wine
four parts, sweet oil seven parts, first let the buds be bruised, then infused
in the Wine and Oil seven days, then boiled, then pressed out.

Oil of Rue is made, of the herbs bruised and ripe Oil, like Oil of Roses.

Oil of Savin is made in the same manner.

So also is Oil of Elder flowers made.

Oil of Scorpions, is made of thirty live Scorpions, caught when the Sun is in
the Lion, Oil of bitter Almonds two pound, let them be set in the Sun, and
after forty days strained.

Oleum Cicyonium, is made of wild Cucumer roots, and their (...), of each
equal parts, with twice as much ripe Oil boil it to the consumption of the
juice.

Oil of Nightshade, is made of the berries of Nightshade ripe, and one part
boiled in ripe Oil, or Oil of Roses three parts.

Oil of Styrax, is made of Styrax and sweet white Wine, of each one part, Ripe
Oil four parts gently boiled, till the Wine be consumed.

Oil of Violets, is made of Oil Omphacine, and Violet flowers, as Oil of Roses.

Oil of Vervain is made of the herb and Oil, as Oil of Mints.

Culpeper] A. That most of these Oils if not all of them, are used only
externally, is certain; and as certain that they retain the virtues of the
Simples whereof they are made; therefore the ingenious might help themselves.
But because we live in a frigid age, I shall vouchsafe to quote the Virtues of
the chiefest of them.

A. Oil of Roses (the stomach being anointed with it) strengthens it, cools the
heat of it, thickens, takes away inflammations, abates swellings.

A. Oil of Wormwood does moderately heat and strengthen the stomach, being
anointed with it; it procures appetite, opens obstructions, furthers digestion,
and kills worms.

A. Oil of Dill does moderately digest, assuage the pains of the head and
nerves, and procures sleep.

A. Oil of Castorium helps cold diseases of the nerves, deafness being dropped
into the ears, and noise there.

A. Oil of Cham omel strengthens the sinnews, greatly asswageth pain, and
breaks the stone.

A. Oil of Meliot has the same effects.

A. Oil of Walflowers asswageth pains in the breast and reins, sinnews, joints,
and bladder.

A. Oil of Quinces, cools, binds, and strengthens, stops vomiting, looseness and
sweating.

A. Oil of Euphorbium has the same effects with that of Castorium, but works
more forcibly; being snuffed up the nose, it purges the head of phlegm.

A. Oil of Emmats, the privities being anointed with it, provokes lust.

A. Oil of Saint John's Wort, is as good a thing in green wounds as a man can
use.

A. Oil of Orris, does concoct and dissolve, assuage pain of the womb, liver,
and joints; also it strengthens the breast.

A. Oil of Earthworms mollify heat, and assuage pains, and is special good for
such as have been bruised or hurt in their joints.

A. Oil of Marjoram, helps weariness, cold diseases of the brain, noise in the
ears being dropped into them, the bitings of venomous beasts, and provokes the
terms in women.

A. Oil of Mastich, strengthens the brain, stomach, and liver, sinnews, and
veins, stays vomiting, and fluxes.

A. The stomach being anointed with Oil of Mints, stays the weakness, heats
and strengthens it, stays vomiting, helps digestion and provokes appetite.

A. Oil of Mirtles has the same effects with Quinces.

A. Oil of Mirrh preserves any thing from putrefying that is anointed with it,
makes the face fair and, youthful.

A. Nard Oil does heat, digest, and strengthen, resists all cold and windy
diseases throughout the body.

A. Oil of Water Lillies cools and asswageth the violent heat, especially of
the head, reins and bladder, thereby mitigating frenzies, procuring sleep, and
is a good preservative against the stone, and help such women (their backs
being anointed with it) as are subject to miscarry through heat of their reins,
which they may easily know by continual pain in their backs, and swelling of
their legs. Also Oil of poppies have the same virtue.

A. Oil of Rue, heats, and makes thin gross humors, expels wind, helps
palsies, cramps, coldness of the womb and bladder.

A. Oil of Violets cools inflammations, eases the Plurisie, and pains of the
breast.

A. Oil of Nightshade has the same effects with that of water Lillies.

A. Then remember that these Oils must not be given inwardly as men take drink,
but outwardly applied or cast in as injections or Clysters.

One material Oil only, which was in their last Dispensatory; which is, Oil of
Mirrh, which is thus made.
Take certain new-laid Eggs, and boil them till they be hard, then cut them
through the middle, the longest way; take out the yolks, and fill the hollow
place half full of Mirrh; then join the whites together again and bind them
gently with a string, then place them between two dishes, a small grate being
between that they fall not to the bottom; then place them in a Wine-Celler, or
some other cool place under the ground, so will the melted Liquor of the Mirrh
distill down into the inferior dish.

COMPOUND OILS BY INFUSION AND DECOCTION.
Oleum Benedictum. Page 146. in the Latin Book. Or, blessed Oil.
Colledg] TAke of the roots of Cardus and Valerian of each one ounce, the
flowers of Saint John's wort two ounces, Wheat one ounce and an half, old Oil
four ounces, Cipress, Turpentine eight ounces, Frankincense in powder two
ounces, infuse the roots and flowers being bruised, in so much white Wine as is
sufficient to cover them, after two days infusion, put in the Oil with the
Wheat bruised, boil them together till the Wine be consumed, then press it out,
and ad the Frankincense, and Turpentine, then boil them a little and keep it.

Culpeper] A. It is apropriated to cleanse and consolidate wounds especially in
the head.

Oleum de Capparibus. Page 145. in the Latin Book. Or, Oil of Cappers.
The Colledg] Take of the bark of Capper roots an ounce, bark of (...), the
leaves of the same, the seeds of Agnus Castus, Cetrach, or Spleenwort, Cyperus
roots, of each two drachms; Rue one dram, Oil of ripe Olives one pound, white
Wine Vinegar, and white Wine, of each two ounces, cut them and sleep them, and
boil them (two days being elapsed) gently in a bath, then the Wine and
Vinegar, being consumed, strain it, and keep it.

Culpeper] A. The Oil is opening, and heating, absolutely apropriated to the
spleen, hardness and pains thereof, and diseases coming of stoppings there, as
Hypocondriack melancholy, the rickets etc. Bath the breast and afflicted side
with it hot by the fite, and if you please to ad its like weight of ointment of
the opening juyces to it, it will be the better, then if you apply a Virginia
Tobacco leaf to the place, you shall find it an incomparable remedy.

Oil of Castorium compound. P. 146. in Latin book.
The Colledg] Take of Castorium, Styrax Calamitis, Galbanum, Euphorbium,
Opopanax, Cassia Lignea, Saffron, Carpobalsamum or Cubebs, Spicknard, Costus,
of each two drachms; Cyperus, Squinanth, Pepper long and black, Savin Pelletory
of Spain, of each two drachms and an half; ripe Oil four pound, Spanish Wine
two pound, the five first excepted, let the rest be prepared as they ought to
be, and gently boiled in the Oil and Wine, while the Wine be consumed, mean
season the Galbanum, Opopanax, and Euphorbium beaten in fine powder, being
dissolved in part of the Wine, and strained, let them be exquisitely mixed with
it (while the Oil is warm) by often stirring, the boiling being finished put in
the Styrax and Castorium.

Culpeper] A. The virtues are the same with the Simple, only it is held to be
more effectual in the premises.

Oleum Catellorium. Page 146. in the Latin Book. Or, Oil of Whelps.
The Colledg] Take of Sallet Oil four pound, two Puppy Dogs newly whelped,
Earth worms washed in white Wine one pound, boil the (...) till they fall in
pieces, then put in the worms, a while after strain it, then with three ounces
of Cypress Turpentine, and one ounce of Spirit of Wine, perfect the Oil
according to art.

Culpeper] A. It is excellent good to bath those limbs and muscles, that have
been weakened by wounds or bruises.

Oleum Costinum. Page 146. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the roots of bitter Costus, two ounces; Cassia Lignea one
ounce, the tops of Marjorum eight ounces, being bruised, steep them two days
in twelve ounces of sweet white Wine; then with three pound of Sallet Oil
washed in white Wine boil it in Balneo mariae till the Wine be consumed.

Culpeper.] A. It heats, opens obstructions, strengthens the nerves, and all
nervous parts, as muscles, tendons, ligaments, the ventricle; besides these, it
strengthens the liver, it keeps the hairs from turning gray, and gives a good
color to the body. I pray you take notice that this and the following Oils,
(til I give you warning to the contrary) are not made to eat.

Oleum Crocinum. Page 146. in the Lat. Book. Or, Oil of Saffron.
The Colledg] Take of Saffron, Calamus Aromaticus, of each one ounce; Mirrh
half on ounce, Cardamoms nine drachms, steep them six days, (the Cardamoms
excepted, which are not to be put in till the last day,) in nine ounces of
Vinegar, the day after put in a pound and an half of washed Oil, boil it gently
according to art, till the Vinegar be consumed, then strain it.

Culpeper] A. It helps pains in the nerves, and strengthens them, mollifies
their hardness, helps pains in the matrix and causes a good color.

Oil of Euphorbium. Page 147. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Stavesacre, Sopewort, of each half an ounce; Pellitory of
Spain six drachms; dried Mountain Calaminth one ounce and an half, Costus two
drachms, Castorium five drachms, being bruised, let them be three days steeped
in three pound and an half of vine; boil them with a pound and an half of Oil
of Wall flowers, adding half an ounce of Euphorbium, before the wine be quite
consumed, and so boil it according to art.

Culpeper] A. It has the same yertue, only something more effectual than the
Simple.

Oleum Excestrense. Page 147 in the Latin Book. Or, Oil of Exceter.
The Colledg] Take of the leaves of Wormwood, Centaury the less, Eupitorium,
Fennel, (...), Bays Marjo am, Bawm, Nep, Penyroyall, Savin, Sage, Time, of each
four ounces; Southernwood, Bettony, Chamepilys, Lavender, of each six ounces;
Rosemary one pound, the flowers of Chamomel, Broom, white (...), Elders, the
seeds of Cummin, and Fenugreek the roots of Hellebore black and white, the bark
of Ash and Lemmons, of each four ounces; Euphorbium, Mustard, Castorium,
Pellitory of Spain, of each an ounce: Oil sixteen pound, Wine three pound, the
herbs, flowers, seeds, and Euphorbium being bruised, the roots, Barks, and
Castorium cut, all of them infused twelve hours in the Wine and Oil, in a warm
bath, then boiled with a gentle fire, to the consumption of the Wine and
moisture, strain the Oil and keep it.

Culpeper] A. Many people by catching bruises when they are young, come to feel
it when they are old: others by catching cold, catch a lameness in their limbs;
to both which I commend this Sovereign Oil to bath their grieved members with.

Oleum Hirundinum. Page 148. in the Latin Book. Or, Oil of Swallows.
The Colledg] Take of wholl Swallows sixteen, Chamomel, Rue, (...) the greater
and lesser, Bay leaves, Penyroyal, Dill, Hysop, Rosemary, Sage, Saint
John's Wort, Costmary, of each one handful; Common Oil four pound, Spanish Wine
one pound, make it up according to art.

Culpeper] A. (...) if instead of Oil you will put so much May Butter to it as
here is appointed Oil, and boil it with the foregoing Simples, then will it
have both the name and consistance of an Ointment.

A. Both this and the former are apropriated to old brulses and pains thereof
coming, as also to sprains. If you please you may mix them together.

Oleum Hyperici Compositum. Page 148 in Lat. Book. Or, Oil of Saint John's wort
Compound.
The Colledg] Take of the tops of Saint Johnswort four ounces, steep them three
whole days in a pound of old Sallet Oil, in the heat either of a bath, or of
the Sun, then press them out, repeat the infusion the second, or third time,
then boil them, till the Wine be almost consumed press them out; and by adding
three ounces of Turpentine, and one scruple of Saffron, boil it a little and
keev it.

Culpeper] A. See the Simple Oil of Saint Johnswort, than which this is
stronger.

Oleum Hyperici magis Compositum. P. 148. in Lat. B. Or, Oil of Saint John's
wort more Compound
The Colledg] Take of white Wine three pound, tops of Saint John's Wort ripe and
gently bruised, four handfuls, steep them two days in a glass close stopped,
boil them in a bath, and strain them strongly, repeat the infusion three times,
having strained it the third time, aad to every pound of decoction, old Oil
four pound, Turpentine six ounces, Oil of Wormwood three ounces, Dittany,
Gentian, Cardus, Tormentil, Carline, or Cardus Maria, Calamus Aromaticus, all
of them bruised, of each two drachms, Earth worms often washed in white Wine
two ounces, set it in the Sun five or six weeks, then keep it close stopped.

Culpeper A. Besides the virtues of the simple Oil of St. John's Wort, which
this performs more effectually, it is an excellent remedy for old bruises,
aches and sprains.

Oleum Irinum. Page 149. in in the Latin Book. Or, Oil of Orris.
The Colledg] Take of the roots of Orris Florentine, three pound four ounces,
the flowers of Purple Orris, fifteen ounces, Cyperus roots six ounces, of
Alicampane three ounces, of Alkanet two ounces, Cinnamon, Spicknard, Benjamin,
of each one ounce, let all of them being bruised as they ought to be, be (...)
in the Sun, or other hot place, in fifteen pound of old Oil, and four pound and
an half of clear water, after the fourth day, boil them in Balneo Mariae, the
water being consumed, when it is cold strain it and keep it.

Culpeper] The effects are the same with the Simple, only it is stronger, and
better composed here than it was in their former Dispensatory, yet I know no
great reason why this, or any other Oil must be boiled in a bath. I see the
Apothecaries shall never want ignorance nor trouble, if the College can help it.

Oleum Majoranae. Page 149. in the Latin Book. Or, Oil of Marjoram.
The Colledg] Take of Marjoram four handfuls mother of Time two handfuls, the
leaves and berries of Mirtles one handful, Southernwood, water Mints, of each
half an handful, being cut, bruised, and put in a glass, three pound of Oil
Omphacine being put to it, let it stand eight days in the Sun, or in a bath,
close stopped, then strain it out, in the Oil put in fresh Simples, do so the
third time, the Oil may be perfected according to art.

Culpeper] A. It helps weariness and diseases of of the brain and nerves,
coming of cold; it helps the dead palsy, the back ( viz. the region along the
back bone) being anointed with it; being snuffed up in the nose, it helps
Spasmus Cynicus, which is a wrying the mouth aside, it helps noise in the ears
being dropped into them; it provokes the terms, and helps the bitings of
venomous beasts, it is a most gallant Oil to strengthen the body, the back
being anointed with it; strengthens the muscles, they being chafed with it; it
helps headache the forehead being rubbed with it.

Oleum Mandragorae. Page 149. in the Latin Book. Or, Oil of Mandragues.
The Colledg] Take of common Oil two pound, Juice of Mandrake apples, or for
want of them, of the leaves, four ounces, Juice of white Henbane two ounces,
Juice of black Poppy heads three ounces, Juice of Violets, and tender Hemlock,
of each one ounce; Set them all in the Sun, and after the tenth day, boil them
to the consumption of the Juice, then put in Opium finely beaten, and Styrax
Calamitis dissolved in a little Turpentine, of each half an ounce.

Culpeper. A. It is probable the Author studied to invent an Oil extremely
cold, when he invented this. I am of opinion it may be used safely no way but
only to anoint the temples and noses of such as have a frenzy. If by using this
Ointment you see they sleep too long, dip a sponge in Viniger, and hold to
their noses, it may be a means to awake them. It is scarce safe, yet if you let
it alone, it cannot do you harm.

Moschelaeum. Page 149. in the Latin Book. Or, Oil of Musk.
The Colledg] Take two Nutmegs, Musk one dram, Indian leaf or Mace,
Spicknard, Costus, Mastich of each six drachms, Styrax-Calamitis, (...) Lignea,
Mirrh, Saffron, Cinnamon, Cloves, Carpobalsamum, or Cubebs, Bdellium, of each
two drachms, pure Oil three pound, Wine three ounces, bruise them as you ought
to do, mix them and let them boil easily, (...) the Wine be consumed, the Musk
being mixed according to art after it is strained.

Culpeper.] A. It is exceeding good against all diseases of cold, especially
those of the stomach, it helps diseases of the sides they being anointed with
it, the stranguary, chollick, and vices of the nerves, and afflictions of the
reins.

A. The Receipt was made by Nicholaus Alexandrinus, only the College something
altered the quantities and that not worth speaking of.

Oleum Nardinum. Page 150. in the Latin Book. Or, Oil of Nard.
The Colledg] Take of Spicknard three ounces, Marjoram two ounces, wood of
Aloes, Calamus Aromaticus, Alicampane, Cyperus, Bay leaves, Indian leaf or
Mace, Squinanth, Cardamoms, of each one ounce and an half, bruise them al
grossly, and steep them in water, and Wine, of each fourteen ounces, Oil of
Sesamin, or Oil of Olives four pound and an half, for one day, then perfect the
Oil, by boiling it gently in a double Vessel.

Culpeper] A. I wonder why they should put in Oil of Sesamum, or Oil of Olives;
when every body knows Sesamum is a kind of purging pulse, but purge or bind, it
is all one to them it seems; So Authors say it. Will that answer serve the turn
before the Lord God Almighty another day? I left out Oil of Sesamum in the
copy because of that, and if it be made as I have written it, It heats,
attenuates, digests, and moderately binds, and therefore helps all cold and
windy afflictions of the brain, stomach, reins, spleen, liver, bladder, and
womb, being snuffed up the nose it purges the head, and gives a good color
and smell to the body.

Oleum Nicodemi. Page 150. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the seeds or tops of Saint John's wort, old Turpentine, of
each one pound, Litharge six drachms, Aloes, Hepatick, Tutty, of each three
drachms; Saffron one ounce, white Wine four pound, old Oil two pound; The
fourth part of the Wine being consumed in a bath, or sand, or in the Sun, in
the Dog days, after the tenth day strain it, and keep the Oil apart from the
Wine.

Culpeper] A. Both Wine and Oil are exceeding drying, (that the Wine is more
clensing, and the Oil best to skin a sore, your genius (though never so dull)
will tell you) and therefore excellent for sores and ulcers that run much, as
for scabs, itch, small pocks, swine pocks etc.

Oleum Vulpinum. Page 150. in the Latin Book. Or, Oil of Foxes.
The Colledg] Take a fat Fox, of a middle age That was well put in, therefore
when you have caught a Fox, bring him alive to the College, and let them look
in his mouth first and tell you how old he is, so shall your Oil be cum (...).
(if you can get such an one) caught by hunting, about Autumn cut in pieces,
the skin, and bowels taken away, the bones broken, boil him (scumming it
dilligently) in white Wine, and spring water, of each six pound, till half be
consumed, with three ounces of Sea salt, the tops of Dill, Time, and
Chamepitys, of each one handful, after straining hoyl it again with four pound
of old Oil, the flowers of Sage and Rosemary, of each one handful, the Water
being consumed, strain it again, and keep the pure Oil for use.

Culpeper] A. It is exceeding good in pains of the joints, gouts, pains in the
back and reins, it heats the body being afflicted by cold, and hard lodging in
the airs, whereby the joints are stiff, a disease incident to many in these
times.

Oils left out in the new Dispensatory.
Culpeper. THe Receipt is before; the virtues of Oil of Tobacco is, A. It is a
gallant remedy for deep wounds, scabs or itch, as any is under the Cope of
Heaven, and no way prejudicial: See the Ointment.

Oil of Pepper. Mesue.
The College.] Take of long, black, and white Pepper, of each three drachms;
Myrobalans, Chebul, Bellerick, Emblick, and Indian, of each five drachms: the
roots of Smallage and Fennel, of each three drachms and an half; Sagapenum,
Opopanax, Ammoniacum, white Henbane, of each two drachms and an half; Turbith
two drachms; Ginger three drachms; the branches of green Time and green Rue, of
each one handful: infuse them according to art, in a sufficient quantity of
Aqua vitae, Oil of Walflowers otherwise called Winter Gilliflowers two pound:
then boil them to the consumption of the Aqua vitae.

Culpeper] A It helps cold diseases of the nerves, as Palsies, falling
sickness, convulsions, wry-mouths, trembling or shaking palsy, likewise cold
afflictions of the reins, and bladder, yard and womb, gouts and all diseases of
the joints, it (...), makes thin, and cleanses, and therefore it opens
obstructions or stoppings, and breaks the stone.

Oleum Populeum. Nich.
The Colledg] Take of fresh Poplar buds three pound; Wine four pound; common
Oil seven pound two ounces; beat the Poplar buds very well, then steep them
seven days in the Oil and Wine, then boil them in a double vessel till the
Wine be consumed (if you infuse fresh buds once or twice before you boil it,
the medicine will be the stronger) then press out the Oil and keep it.

Culpeper.] A. It is a fine cool Oil, but the Ointment called by that name
which follows hereafter is far better.

OINTMENTS MORE SIMPLE.
Unguentum Album. Page 153. in the Latin Book. Or, white Ointment.
The Colledg] TAke of Oil of Roses nine ounces, Ceruss washed in Rosewater, and
dilligently sersed, three ounces, white Wax two ounces, after the Wax is melted
in the Oil, put in the Ceruss, and make it into an Ointment according to art,
add two drachms of Camphire, made into powder with a few drops of Oil of sweet
Almonds, so will it be camphorated,

Culpeper] A. Some hold it impossible to make it into an Ointment this way:
others hold it not convenient, but instead of Oil of Roses they add so much
Hogs grease; and leaving out the white Wax they make it into an Ointment
without the help of the fire, but it is to be supposed, that it is so long ago
since the College made an Ointment, they have forgot how to make it, but they
are not to be blamed for that, but for commanding in what they have no skill
in, they must go teach how to make Ointments when they have no more skill in
it, than a hobby horse.

A. It is a fine cooling drying Ointment, eases pains, and itching in wounds
and ulcers, and is an hundred times better with Camphire than without it.

Unguentum Egyptiacum. Page 153. in the Latin B.
The Colledg] Take of Vert-de-grease finely poudered, five parts, Honey
fourteen parts, sharp Vinegar seven parts, boil them to a just thickness, and a
redish color.

Culpeper. A. It cleanses filthy ulcers and fistulaes forcibly, and not without
pain; it takes away dead and proud flesh, and dries: The Chyrurgians of our
days use it commonly instead of Apostalorum, to cleanse wounds, it cleanses
more potently indeed, and therefore may be fitter in sanious ulcers, but it
strengthens not so much.

Unguentum Anodynum. Page 153. in Lat. Book. Or, an Ovntment to ease pain.
The Colledg] Take of Oil of white Lillies, six ounces, Oil of Dill and
Chamomel, of each two ounces, Oil of sweet Almonds one ounce; Ducks grease and
Hens grease, of each two ounces, white Wax three ounces: mix them according to
art.

Culpeper] A. I take the Augustan Physicians to be the Authors of this, for
there it is to be found verbatim, only they prescribe no certain quantity of
Wax: Its use is to assuage pains in any part of the body, especially such as
come by inflammations, whether in wounds, or tumors, and for that it is
admirable.

Unguentum ex Apio. Page 153. in the Latin Book. Or, Ointment of Smallage.
The Colledg] Take of the Juice of Smallage one pound, Honey nine ounces, (...)
heat flower three ounces, boil them to a just thickness.

Culpeper] A. It is a very fine, and very gentle clenser of wounds and ulcers.

Liniment of Gum Elemi.
The Colledg] Take of Gum Elemi, Turpentine of the fir tree, of each one ounce
and an half; old Sheeps Suet cleansed two ounces; old (...) grease cleansed one
ounce, mix them, and make them into an Ointment according to art.

Culpeper] A. Although our Chyrurgians usually use this only for wounds and
ulcers in the head, yet he that makes trial shall find it excellent for ulcers,
if not too sanious, in any part of the body, though in the feet, and they are
at the greatest distance from the head; it gently cleanses, and (...) up an
ulcer with flesh, it being of a mild nature and friendly to the body.

Unguentum Aureum. Page 154. in Lat. Book.
The Colledg] Take of yellow Wax half a pound common Oil two pound, Turpentine
two ounces pineRosin, Colophonia, of each one ounce and an half, Frankincense,
Mastich, of each one ounce; Saffron one dram; first melt the Wax in the Oil,
then the Turpentine being added, let them boil together, having done boiling,
put in the rest in fine powder (let the Saffron be the last) and by dilligent
stirring, make them into an Ointment according to art.

Culpeper] A. If you remember, the College commends this Ointment to engender
flesh in the beginning of the Compounds, and indeed it does so; but if you
please to takecounsel of Dr. EXPERIENCE, he will tell you that the former is
worth two of this for that use.

Basilicon the greater. Page 154. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of white Wax, pine Rosin, Heifers Suet, Greek Pitch,
Turpentine, Olibanum, Mirrh, of each one ounce; Oil five ounces, Powder, the
Olibanum and Mirrh, and the rest being melted, make it into an Ointment
according to art.

Basilicon the less. Page 154. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of yellow Wax, fat Rosin, Greek Pitch, of each half a pound;
Oil nine ounces; mix them together, by melting them according to art.

Culpeper] A. Both this and the former, heat, moisten and digest, procure
matter in wounds, I mean, bring the filth or corrupted blood from green wounds;
they cleanse and ease pain.

Ointment of Bdellium. P. 154 in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Bdellium, six drachms; Euphorbium, Sagapen. of each four
drachms; Castorium three drachms; Wax fifteen drachms, Oil of Elder or
Walflowers, ten drachms, the Bdellium, and Sagapen. being dissolved in Water of
wild Rue, let the rest be united by the heat of a has.

Culpeper] A. And why in a bath? the College have a brave time of it, to
appoint what they list, it being sense, or no sense, they are not to give a
reason of it.

A. I confess Mesue appoints it to be made up in the same manner: I do not well
kdow whether it be possible or not; if not, it may be done with the Oil, but
it is ordinary with the College, to appoint impossible things.

Unguentum de Calce. Page 155. in the Latin Book. Or, Ointment of Chalk.
The Colledg] Take of Chalk washed seven times at least, half a pound, Wax
three ounces, Oil of Roses one pound, stir them al together dilligently, in a
leaden mortar, the Wax being first melted by a gentle fire in a sufficient
quantity of the prescribed Oil.

Culpeper. A. It is exceeding good in burnings, and scaldings.

Unguentum Dialthaeae. Page 155. in Lat. Book. Or, Ointment of Marshmallows
The Colledg] Take of common Oil four pound; Mussilage of Marshmallow roots,
Linseeds, and Fenugreek seeds two pound; boil them together till the watery part
of the Mussilage be consumed, then add Wax half a pound, Rozin three ounces,
Turpentine an ounce, boil them to the consistence of an Ointment, but let the
Mussilage be prepared of a pound of fresh roots bruised, and half a pound of
each of the Seeds steeped, and boiled in eight pound of spring Water and then
pressed out. See the Compound.

Unguentum Diapompholygos. Page 155. in Lat. Book.
The Colledg] Take of Oil of Nightshade sixteen ounces, white Wax; washed
Ceruss, of each four drachms, Lead burnt and washed, Pompholix prepared, of
each two ounces, pure Frankinsense one ounce, bring them into the form of an
Ointment according to art.

Culpeper] A. This much differing from the former, you shall have that inserted
at latter end, and then you may use which you please.

Unguentum Enulatum. Page 155. in Lat. Book. Or, Ointment of Alicampane.
The Colledg] Take of Alicampane roots boiled in Viniger, bruised and pulped
one pound, Turpentine washed in their decoction, new Wax, of each two ounces,
old Hogs grease salted ten ounces, old Oil four ounces, common Salt one ounce,
add the Turpentine, to the grease, Wax, and Oil, being melted, as also the
pulp, and Salt being finely poudered, and so make it into an Ointment according
to art.

Unguentum Enulatum cum mercurio. P. 156. in L. B. Or, Ointment of Alicampane
with Quicksilver.
The Colledg] Is made of the former Ointment, by adding two ounces of
Quicksilver, killed by continual stirring (not only with Spittle, or juice of
Lemmons, but with all the Turpentine kept for that intent, and part of the
grease, in a stone mortar.

Culpeper] A. My opinion of this Ointment is (briefly) this, It was invented
for the Itch; without Quick silver it will do no good, with Quick silver it may
do harm.

Unguentum Laurinum commune. P. 156. in Lat. B. Or, Ointment of Baies common.
The Colledg] Take of Bay leaves bruised; one pound; Bay berries bruised, half
a pound, Cabbage leaves four ounces, Neats-foot Oil five pound, Bullocks Suet
two pound, boil them together, and strain them that so it may be made into an
Ointment according to art.

Culpeper] A. Let the leaves and berries being bruised and boiled with the Oil
and Suet till their Juice be consumed, let it be strained and kept.

A. It heats and expels wind, is profitable for old aches, and sprains, but
what good it should do to the itch (for which simple people buy it,) I cannot
imagine.

Unguentum de miniosive rubrum Camphora. P. 156. Or, Ointment of red Lead
The Colledg] Take of Oil of Roses, one pound and an half; red Lead three
ounces, Litharge two ounces, Ceruss one ounce and an half, Tutty three drachms,
Camphire two drachms, Wax one ounce and and half, make it into an Ointment
according to art, in a Pestle and mortar made of Lead.

Culpeper] A. This Ointment is as drying as a man shall usually read of one,
and withal cooling, therefore good for sores, and such as are troubled with
defluxions. I remember once Dr. Alexander Read applied it to my Mothers breast
when she had a Cancer, before it brake long time, but to as much purpose as
though he had applied a rotten Apple; yet in the foregoing infirmities I
believe it seldom fails: they have something altered the quantities, but not
worth speaking off; first melt the Wax in the Oil, then put in the rest in
powder.

Unguentum e Nicotiona, seu Peto. P. 156. in Lat. B. Or, Ointment of Tobbacco.
The Colledg] Take of Tobacco leaves bruised, two pound, steap them a whole
night in red wine, in the morning boil it in fresh Hogs grease, dilligently
washed, one pound, till the Wine be consumed, strain it, and add half a pound
of Juice of Tobacco, Rosin four ounces, (...) to the consumption of the Juice,
adding toward the end, round Birthwort roots in powder, to ounces, new (...)
as much as is sufficient to make it into an Ointment according to art.

Culpeper] A. It would ask a whole Summers day to write the particular virtues
of this Ointment, and my poor Genius is too weak to give it the hundredth part
of its due praise, It cares Tumors, Aposthumes. Wounds, Ulcers, Gunshot,
Botches, Scabs, Itch, stinging with Nettles, Bees, Wasps, Hornets, venomous
beasts, Wounds made with poisoned Arrows etc. Tush! this is nothing -- paulo
majora canamus. It helps Scaldings though made with Oil, Burnings though with
Lightening, and that without any Scar: It helps nasty, rotten, stinking,
putrified Ulcers, though in the legs, whither the humors are most subject to
resort; in Fistulaes though the bone be afflicted it shall scale it without any
instrument, and bring up the flesh from the very bottom: Would you be fair?
your face heing anointed with this, soon will the Redness, Pimples, Sunburning
vanish, a Wonnd dressed with this will never putrify, a Wound made with so
small a weapon that no tent will follow, anoint but with this and you need fear
no danger, If your head ach, anoint your temples with this and you shall have
ease; The stomach being anointed with it, no infirmity dares harbor there, no
not Asthmaes, nor consumption of the lungues; The belly being anointed with it,
helps the Chollick and Illiack passion, the Worms, and what not? it helps the
Hemorrholds or Piles, and is the best Ointment that is, for gouts of all sorts:
finally there may be as universal a medicine made for all diseases, of Tobacco
as of any thing in the world, the Philosophers Stone excepted. O Joubertus!
thou shall never want praise for inventing this medicine, by those that use it,
so long as the Sun and Moon endures.

Unguentum Nutritum, seu Trifarmacum. P. 156. L. B.
The Colledg] Take of Litharge of Gold finely poudered, half a pound; Vinegar
one pound, Oil of Roses two pound, grind the Litharge in a mortar, pouring to
it sometimes Oil, sometimes Vinegar, till by continual stirring the Viniger do
no more appear, and it come to a whitish Ointment.

Culpeper] A. It is of a cooling, drying nature, good for itching of Wounds,
Itch and Scabs, and such like deformities of the skin, as Tetters, Ringworms
etc.

Unguentum Ophthalmicum. Page 157. in Lat. Book. Or, Ointment for the eyes.
The Colledg] Take of Bole Armenick washed in Rose water, one ounce; Lapis
Calaminaris washed in Eyebright water, Tutty prepared, of each two drachms;
Pearls in very fine powder half a dram, Camphire half a scruple, Opium five
grains, fresh butter washed in Plantane water, as much as is sufficient to make
it into an Ointment according to art.

Culpeper] A. It is exceeding good to stop (...) Rhewms that fall down into the
eyes, the eyelids being but anointed with it.

Unguentum ex Oxylapatho. Page 157. in Lat. Book. Or, Ointment of Sharp-pointed
Dock.
The Colledg] Take of the roots of Sharp-pointed Dock boiled in Viniger until
they be soft, and then pulped, Brimstone washed in juice of Lemmons, of each
one ounce and an half, Hogs grease often washed in juice of Scabious, half a
pound, Unguentum populeon, washed in juice of Alicampane, half an ounce, make
them into an Ointment, in a mortar.

Culpeper.] A. It is a wholesome though troublesome medicine for what the Title
specifies, before it was called an Ointment against Scabs, and Itch, now
because none should know what it is good for, it is called an Ointment of
Sharp-pointed Dock; If they were as able, as they are willing: good God what
ignorance would they lead poor man too, but a cursed Cow, has but short horns.

Unguentum e Plumbo. Page 157. in Lat. Book. Or, Ointment of Lead.
The Colledg] Take of Lead, Burnt according to art, Litharge, of each two
ounces, Ceruss, Antimony, of each one ounce, Oil of Roses, as much as is
sufficient, make it into an Ointment according to art.

Culpeper] Take it one time with another, 'twill go near to do more harm than
good.

Unguentum Pomatum. Page 157. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of fresh Hogs grease, three pound, fresh Sheep Suet nine
ounces, Pomewater pared and cut, a pound and nine ounces, Damask Rosewater, six
ounces, the roots of Orris Florentine grossly bruised, six drachms, boil them in
Balneo Mariae till the Apples be soft, then strain it, but press it not, and
keep it for use * then warm it a little again, and What after you have used it?
wash it with fresh Rose Water, adding to each (...), twelve drops of Oil of
Lignum Rhodium.

Culpeper] A. Its general use is, to soften and supple the roughness of the
skin, and take away the the chops of the lips, hands, face, or other parts.

Unguentum Potabile. Page 158. in the Latin Book
The College.] Take of butter without salt a pound and an half, Spermaceti
(...), Tormentil roots, Castorium of each half an ounce, boil them as you ought
in a sufficient quantity of Wine, till the Wine be consumed, and become an
Ointment.

Culpeper] A. I know not what to make of it.

Unguentum Resinum. Page 158. in the Lain Book.
The Colledg] Take of (...), or Rosin of the pine tree, of the purest,
Turpentine, yellow Wax washed, pure Oil, of each equal parts, melt them into an
Ointment according to art.

Culpeper] A. It is as pretty a Cerecloath for a new sprain as most is, and
cheap. Let it not be despised, for I have known a gentlewoman in Sussex do much
good with it, even before their Dispensatory, was ever hatched, or in the Egg.

Unguentum Rosatum. Page 158. in the Latin Book. Or, Ointment of Roses.
The Colledg] Take of fresh Hogs grease elensed a pound, fresh Red roses half a
pound, juice of the same three ounces, make it into an Ointment according to
art.

Culpeper] A. The College give you but a short come off in this Ointment, they
love to be breife and tedious, last time when they were honester, they taught
you how to make it, which was thus,

The College.] Take of Hogs grease well cleansed from the skins a pound; wash it
nine Be sure you miss not one of them.
times in warm water, then as often in cold water; fresh red Roses a pound: mix
them together and so let them stand seven days, then boil them over a gentle
fire, and strain out the Roses, then mix with the Ointment the like quantity of
fresh red Roses, and then let them stand together as many days, then strain
them out having first boiled them; at the last ad juice of red Roses six
ounces, boil them over a gentle fire till the juice be consumed, then strain
it, and make an Ointment according to art.

Culpeper] A. You need do no more than let it stand till it is cold, and you
shall see it is Ointment alone without any further making, now compare but this
with what I wrote before, and see if they do not love to be breife and tedious.

A. It is of a fine cooling nature, exceeding useful in all gaulings of the
skin, and frettings accompanied with chollerick humors, angry pushes, tetters,
ringworms, it mitigates diseases in the head coming of hear, as also the
intemperate heat of the stomach and liver.

(...) Rubrum. Page 158. in the Latin Book. Or, a drying red Ointment.
The Colledg] Take of Oil of Roses, Omphacine, a pound, white Wax five ounces,
which being melted and put in a leaden Mortar, put in, Earth of Lemnos or
Bole-Armenick, Lapis Calaminaris of each four ounces, Litharge of gold, Ceruss,
of each three ounces, Camphire one dram, make it into an Ointment according
to art.

Culpeper] A. It binds and restrains fluxes of humors and is as gallant an
Ointment to skin a sore as any is in the Dispensatory.

Unguentum e Solano. Page 158. in the Lat. Book Or, Ointment of Nightshade.
The Colledg] Take of juice of Nightshade, Litharge washed, of each five
ounces, Ceruss washed eight ounces, white Wax seven ounces, Frankincense in
powder ten drachms, Oil of Roses often washed in water two pound, make it into
an Ointment according to art.

Culpeper] A. It was invented to take away inflammations from wounds, and to
keep people from scratching of them when they are almost well.

Unguentum Tutiae. Page. 158. in the Latin Book. Or, Ointment of Tutty
The Colledg] Take of Tutty prepared two ounces; Lapis Calaminaris, often burnt
and quenched in Plantane water, an ounce, make them being finely poudered into
an Ointment, with a pound and an half of Ointment of Roses.

Cul. A. It is a cooling, drying Ointment apropriated to the eyes, to dry up
hot and salt humors that flow down thither, the eyelids being anointed with it.

Valentia Scabiosae. Page 159. in the Latin Book. A famous Ointment much in use
300. years ago.
The Colledg] Take of the juice of green Scabious pressed out with a scrue, and
strained, through a cloth Hogs grease, of each as much as you will, beat the
Hogs greas in a stone mortar, not grind it, putting in the juice by degrees for
the more commodious mixture and tincture, afterward set it in the Sun in a
convenient vessel, so as the juice may overtop the grease; nine days being
passed, pour of the discolored juice, and beat it again as before, putting in
fresh juice, set in the Sun again five days, which being elapsed, beat it
again putting in more juice, after 15 days more do so again, do so five times,
after which keep it in a glass or glazed vessel.

Tapsivalentia. Page 159. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the juice of Mullen, Hogs grease, of each as much as you
will, let the grease be cleansed and cut in pieces, and beat it with the juice,
pressed and strained, as you did the former Ointment, then keep it in a
convenient vessel nine or ten days, then beat it twice, once with fresh juice,
until it be green, and the second time without juice, beaten well, pouring off
what is discolored, and keep it for use.

Tapsimel. Page 159. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the juice of Sullendine and Mullen, of each one part,
clarified Honey two parts, boil them by degrees till the juice be consumed,
adding (the Physician prescribing) Vitriol burnt, Alum burnt, Ink, and boil it
again to an Ointment according to art.

Culpeper] A. These three last was stolen out of the Manuscripts of Mr. John
Ardern for a Chyrurgian at Newwark upon Trent, though now the College have the
honesty to conceal his name, you may know the virtues of the two former, if you
view but the Simples, as for the latter he quotes a pretty passage of, which is
like to be the (...) because the College conceales it now, and did not before.
it is this, when you are troubled with the Itch, put a little Tapsimel up your
fundament, and the Itching will presently Cease.

OINTMENTS MORE COMPOUND.
Unguentum Agrippa. Page 160. in the Lat. in Book.
The Colledg] TAke of Briony roots two pound, the roots of wild Cucumers, one
pound, Squills half a pound, fresh English Orris roots, three ounces, the roots
of Male Fearn, Dwarffe Elder, water Caltrops, or Aron, of each two ounces,
bruise them all being fresh, and steep them, six or seven days in four pound
of old Oil, the whitest not rank, then boil them and press them out, and in the
Oil me (...) fifteen ounces of white wax, and make it into an Ointment
according to art.

Culpeper] A. It purges excceedingly and is good to anoint the bellies of such
as have dropsies, and if there be any humor of phlegm in any part of the body
that you know not how to remove (provided the part be not too tender) you may
anoint it with this, but yet be not too busy with it, for I tell you plainly
it is not very safe.

Unguentum de Alabastro. Page 160, in the Latin B. Or, Ointment of Alabaster.
The Colledg] Take of of the juice of Chamomel four ounces, the juice of red
Roses, Marshmallow roots, of each two ounces, the juice of Rue, and Bettony, of
each an ounce and an half, Oil of Roses, Omphacine a pound and an half,
Alabaster in very fine powder three ounces, mix them, and let them alone till
the next day, then boil it till the juice be consumed, then with six ounces of
white Wax make it into an Ointment according to art.

Culpeper.] A. I never knew it made, neither know I what to make of it, it is
amongst Victorius his Empericks to be found, and a hundred to one but he says
it is good for something, but I know not for what. There he quotes abundance of
Receipts, and it seems this is one, I have about a hundred of them, but this is
none of them.

Unguentum Amarum. Page 160 in the Latin Book. Or, a bitter Ointment.
The Colledg] Take of Oil of Rue, Savin, Mints, Wormwood, bitter Almonds, of
each one ounce and an half, juice of Peach flowers and leaves, and Wormwood, of
each half an ounce, powder of Rue, Mints, Centaury the less, Gentian,
Tormentil, of each one dram, the seeds of Coleworts, the pulp of Colocynthis
of each two drachms, Aloes Hepatick, three drams, meal of (...) half an ounce,
Mirrh washed in grass Water a dram and an half, Bulls gall an ounce and an
half, with a sufficient quantity of juice of Lemmons, and an ounce and an half
of Wax, make it into an Ointment according to art.

Culpeper A. Do but so much as compare the simples of this Ointment, with my
rules at the beginning of the Oils, and you sh all see pretty sport to laugh
at, the Simples making as great a discord, as a Second and a Seventh in Music,
which can hardly be reduced to harmony, but agrees like a harp and a harrow.

Unguentum Apostolorum. Page 161. in the Latin B. Or, Ointment of the Apostles.
The Colledg] Take of Turpentine, yellow Wax, Rosin, Amoniacum, of each
fourteen drachms, long Birthwort roots, Olibanum, Bdellium, of each six
drachms, Mirrh Galbanum, of each half an ounce, Opopanax, Vert-de-greese of
each two drachms, Litharge nine drachms, Oil two pound, Vinegar enough to
dissolve the gums, make it into an Ointment according to art.

Culpeper] A. It consumes corrupt and dead flesh, and makes flesh soft which is
hard, it clonseth wounds, Ulcers, and Fistulaes, and restores flesh where it is
wanting.

A. Here is our Colleges Religion, ad unguem. King James is their god,
Harts-ease their Trinity, their Divinity and holiness in a couple of Plasters,
these twelve ingredients are their Apostles, their College in Amen Corner,
where they all sing Allelujah, Anglice Woodsorrel together. Unless their hand
of Christ, which is made of Rosewater and Sugar help them, I know not what will
become of them, they have no other remedy to fly too but their Plaster called
the grace of god, to see if that will help at a dead lift.

Unguentum Aregon. Page 161. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Rosemary, Marjoram, mother of Time, Rue, the roots of
Aron, and wild Cucumers, of each four onnces and an half, the leaves of Bay
sage, Savin, Briony roots, of each three ounces, (...), (...), of each nine
ounces, the leaves of wild Cucumers, Nep, of each half a pound, let all of them
being gathered in May, cleansed and bruised, be steeped seven days, in six
pound of Sallet Oil, and a pound of Spirit of Wine, boil them gently till the
Spirit be consumed, then strain the Oil, in which melt Wax sixteen ounces,
Bears grease, Oil of Bays, of each three ounces, Moschaleum half an ounce,
PeterOyl an ounce, Butter four ounces, stir them, and put in these following
things in powder; Mastich, Olibanum, of each seven drachms, Pellitory of Spain,
Euphorbium, Ginger, Pepper, of each an ounce, make them into an Ointment
according to art.

Culpeper. A. It mightily digesteth and makes thin, and (...) not without some
purging quality; and is very comodious against cold afflictions of the body,
but especially of the sinnews, convulsions, falling sickness, pains of the
joints, and great guts; I cannot much commend it, unless I should commend it
for its length and tediousness.

Unguentum de Artanita. Page 162. in Lat. Book. Or, Ointment of Sow-bread.
The Colledg] Take of the Juice of Sowbread, or for want of it, a strong
decoction of the roots, three pound, juice of wild Cucumers, Heifers Butter, of
each a pound, Oil of Orris two pound, Pulp of Coloquintida, four ounces,
Polypodium six ounces, Euphorbium half an ounce: the things to be bruised being
bruised, let them be steeped in a glazed vessel close shut eight days,
afterward boiled in a double vessel till the Juice be almost consumed, then
press it out and dissolve in the Liquor yellow Wax five ounces: whilst it is
warm mix with it Sagapen. dissolved in Vinegar, Bulls gall boiled in a bath to
the thickness of Honey, of each an ounce, then put in these things following in
Powder; Scammony, Turbith, Coloquintida, berries or leaves of Mezereon, Aloes,
of each seven drachms; Sal. Gem. half an ounce; Euphorbium long Pepper, Mirrh,
Ginger, Chamomel flowers, of each three drachms, make them into an ointment
according to art.

Culpeper] A. The stomach being anointed with it, it purges by vomit; the
Belly anointed with it, it purges by stool: the truth is, it is a desperate
kind of purge, yet I hold it as fitting as can be to anoint the bellies of such
as have dropsies, because I conceive it especially purges water, and the water
in dropsies lie near the skin. They have altered it a little, and to as little
purpose. I fancy not such violent Remedies, sometimes they kill, and sometimes
they cure.

Unguentum Catapsoras Page 162. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Ceruss washed in Purslain water, then in Vinegar wherein
wild Rhadish Roots have been steeped and pressed out, Lapis Calaminaris,
Chalcitis, of each six drachms, burnt Lead, Goats blood, of each half an ounce,
Quicksilver sublimated an ounce, the juice of Housleek, Nightshade, Plantane
of each two ounces, Hogs grease cleansed three pound, Oil of Violets, Poppies,
Mandrakes, of each an ounce, first let the Sublimate and Exungia, then the
Oils, Juyces, and Pouders, be mixed, and so made into an Ointment according to
art.

Culpeper] A. The Title shows it to be invented against scabs and itch. But I
delight not in such kind of Medicines, they are Collegiates that appoint them
and may do what they list, nemine contradicence.

Unguentum Citrinum. Page 163. in the Lat. Book. Or, A Citron Ointment.
The Colledg] Take of Borax an ounce; Camphire a dram, white Corral half an
ounce, Alum Plume an ounce, Umbilicus Marinus, Tragacanth, white Starch of
each three drachms, Cristal, Dentalis Eutalis, Olibanum, Niter, white Marble of
each two drachms, Gersa Serpeutaria an ounce, Ceruss six ounces, Hogs grease
not salted, a pound and an half, Goats Suet prepared an ounce and an half, Hens
fat two ounces and an half; Powder the things as you ought to do both together,
and by themselves, melt the fats being cleansed in a stone vessel, and steep in
them two Citrons of a mean bigness cut in bits, in a warm bath, after a whole
week strain it and put in the Pouders by degrees, amongst which, let the
Camphire and Borax be the last, stir them and bring them into the form of an
Ointment.

Culpeper] A. It takes away Pimples, redness, (...), and other deformities of
the face, Scabs in any part of the body; it takes away the redness of the eyes,
and makes a rough skin smooth. It is a terrible tedious piece of stuff, such as
they usually use to make men believe wonders, only here they left out Gipsum
because they could not tell what it was, they should have asked their Brother
Dr. P. S. the Receipt coming from Rome, he could have told them when he was
there to be confirmed in his Religion what the walls were plaistered with, for
Gypsum is the plaster of a wall.

Unguentum Comitissae. Page 163. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the middbe Bark of Acorns, Chestnuts, Oaks, Beans, the
berries of Mirtles, Horstail, Galls, Grapes stones, unripe Services and Medlars
dried, the leaves of Sloe-tree, the Roots of Bistort and Tormentil, of each an
ounce and an half, bruise them grossly and boil them in ten pound of plantane
water till half consumed, then take new yellow wax eight ounces and an half,
Oil of Myrtles simple, two pound and an half; melt them and wash them nine
times in the aforesaid Decoction, being washed and melted put in these
following Pouders, the middle bark of Acorns, Chestnuts, and Oak, Galls, Juice
of Hypocistis, Ashes of the bone of an Ox Leg, Myrtle berries, unripe Grape
stones, unripe Services, of each half an ounce, Troches of Amber two ounces,
with oil of Mastich so much as is sufficient, make it into an Ointment
according to art.

Culpeper.] A. It seems in my eyes a gallant binding Ointment, composed neatly
by a judicious brain. The belly and reins being anointed with it, it stays
abortion, or miscarriage in women though already begun, it strengthens weak
backs exceedingly, and stops the immoderate flowing of the terms, and
hemorrhoids, and falling out of the fundament and womb; finally, for every
occasion that requires binding, I would if I were Eloquent, commend it in the
superlative degree.

Unguentum Martiatum. Page 164. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of fresh Bay leaves three pound Garden Rue two pound and an
half, Marjoram two pound, Mints a pound, Sage, Wormwood, Costmary, Bazil of
each half a pound, Sallet oil twenty pound, yellow wax four pound, Malaga wine
two pound, of all of them being bruised, boiled and pressed out as they ought,
make an Ointment according to art.

Culpeper. A. This is not the Ointment they prescribed before under that name,
nor half so tedious, therefore I like it better: It is a great strengthener of
the head, it being anointed with it; as also of all the parts of the body,
especially the nerves, muscles and arteries.

Unguentum Mastichinum. Page 164. in Lat. Book. Or, An Ointment of Mastich.
The Colledg] Take of Oil of Mastich, Wormwood and Nard, of each an ounce,
Mastich, Mints, red Roses, red Corral, Cloves, Cinnamon, Wood of Aloes
Squinanth, of each a dram, wax as much as is sufficient to make it into an
Ointment according to art.

Culpeper] A. This is like the former, and not a whit inferior to it, it
strengthens the stomach being anointed with it, restores appetite and
digestion. Before it was called a Stomach Ointment.

Unguentum Neapolitanum. Page 165. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Hogs grease washed in juice of Sage a pound, Quicksilver
It were a (...) thing if you could kill quicksilver so, you had better call for
Hogs dung, as the man did in Lumen Chymicum.
strained through Lether, killed with Spittle four ounces, Oil of Bays,
Chamomel and Earthworms, of each two ounces, Spirit of Wine an ounce, yellow
wax two ounces, Turpentine washed in juice of Elicampane three ounces, Powder
of Chamepytis and Sage, of each two drams, make them into an Oyatment according
to art.

Culpeper] A. A Learned art to spoil people: hundreds are bound to curse such
Ointments, and those that appoint them; it is not enough for a man to be plagued
with the pocks, but he must be worse plagued with preposterous Medicines.

Unguentum Nervinum. Page 165. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Cowslips with the Flowers, Sage, Chamepytis, Rosemary,
Lavender, Bay with the Berries, Chamomel, Rue, Smallage, Melilot with the
flowers, wormwood of each a handful, mints, Betony, Penyroyal, Parsley, Centaury
the less, St. John's wort, of each half a handful, Oil of Sheeps or Bullocks
feet, five pound, Oil of Spike half an ounce; Sheeps or Bullocks suct, or the
Marrow of either two pound, the Herbs being bruised and boiled with the Oil and
Suet, make it into an Ointment according to art.

Culpeper.] A. It is apropriated to the nerves, and helps their infirmrties
coming of cold, (which you may find often enough related, I do not love always
to harp upon the same string) as also old bruises; make use of it in dead pal
seys, chilliness or coldness of particular members, such as the Arteries
perform not their office to as they ought; for wind anoint your belly with it;
for want of digestion, your stomach; for the Chollick, your belly; for what
ever diseas in any part of the body comes of cold, esteem of this as a Jewel,
and you shall give me thanks for declaring it, after you have been thankful to
God for raising me up to that end.

Unguentum Pectorale. Page 165. in Lat. Book. Or, A Pectoral Ointment.
The Colledg] Take of fresh Butter washed in Violet water, six ounces, oil of
sweet Almonds four ounces, oil of Chamomel and Violets, white wax, of each
three ounces, Hens and Ducks grease of each two ounces, orris roots two
drachms, Saffron half a dram: the two last being finely poudered the rest
melted and often washed in Barley or Hysop water, make an ointment of them
according to art.

Culpeper] A. It strengthens the breast and stomach, eases the pains thereof,
helps pleuresies and consumptions of the lungues, the breast being anointed
with it. Now they have mended their nonsensical boiling of the Butter.

Unguentum Populneum. Page 166. in Lat. Book. Or, Ointment of Poplar.
The Colledg] Take of fresh black Poplar buds one pound and an half, the
flowers of Violets and Navilwort of the wall, of each three ounces; fresh Hogs
grease three pound, all of them being beaten together, in May let them stand a
while, add the tops of Rasberries, the leaves of black Poppies, Mandrake,
Henbane, Nightshade, Lettice, Housleck, great and small, Burs the greater of
each three ounces, beat them all together, and all of them being mixed, after
ten days with a pound of Rose water, boil it till all the super fluous
humidity be consumed, then strain it and press it out that it may be an
ointment according to art.

Culpeper] A. It is exceeding good in burnings, scaldings, and inflammations, it
asswageth the heat of the head and Kidneys, the temples being anointed with it,
it provokes sleep. They have in their last something altered this, but to
little purpose, or none at all; they must do something as the woman said, when
she sh -- in the house and made it clean again.

Unguentum Resumptivum. Page 166. in Lat. Book.
The Colledg] Take of Hogs grease three ounces, the grease of Hens, Geese, and
Ducks, of each two ounces, Oesipus half an ounce, oil of Violets, Chamomel and
Dill, of each two ounces, fresh Butter a pound, white wax six ounces, Mussilage
of Gum (...), Arabic, Quince seeds, Linseeds, Marsh Mallow roots, of each half
an ounce; let the Mussilages be made in Rose water, and adding the rest, make
it into an ointment according to art.

Culpeper] A. It mightily mollifies without any manifest heat, and is therefore
a fit ointment for such as have Agues, Asthmaes, hectich Fevers, or
Consumptions. It is a gallant ointment to ease pains coming by inflammations of
wounds or Aposthumes, especially such as dryness accompanies, an infirmity
wounded people are many times troubled with. In inward Aposthems, as
pleuresies, is one of them to anoint the external region of the part is very
beneficial.

Unguentum Splanchnieum. Page 166. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of oil of Cappers an ounce, oil of white Lillies, Chamomel,
fresh Butter, juice of Briony and Sow-bread, of each half an ounce, bayl it to
the consumption of the juice, ad Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar two drachms
and an half, Hens grease, Oesypus, Marrow of a Calves leg, of each half an
ounce, Powder of the Bark of the roots of Tamaris and Cappers, Fearn roots,
Cetrach, of each a dram, the seeds of Agnus Castus, and Broom, of each a
scruple, with a sufficient quantity of wax make it into an ointment according
to art.

Unguentum Splanchnicum Magistrale. Page 167. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of the Bark of Capper roots six drachms, Briony roots, orris
Florentine, powder of sweet Fennel seed, Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar, of
each half an ounce, tops of wormwood, Chamomel flowers of each a dram,
ointment of the juice and flowers of orrenges of each six drachms, oil of orris
and Cappers of each an ounce and an half, the things which ought being poudered
and sifted, the rest dilligently mixed in a hot mortar, make it into an
Ointment according to art.

Culpeper] A. Before they called these Unguentum Splenicum, which because every
one that understood any Latin might understand, they invented a hideous name,
Unguentum Splanchnicum.

A. There are some that cannot abide Ointments, yet can easily bear Plasters;
therefore when occasion is given, you may make up the Ointment in form of a
Plaster, by adding a little Wax, Ship Pitch, Cyperus, Turpentine.

A. Both these Ointments are apropriated to the spleen, and ease the pains
thereof, the sides being anointed with them. I fancy not the former.

Unguentum e Succis. Page 167. in the Latin Book. Or, Ointment of Juyces.
The Colledg] Take of Juice of dwarf Elder eight ounces, of Small age and
Parsley of each four ounces, Wormwood and Orris of each five ounces, Common Oil
half a pound, Oil of white Lillies ten ounces, of wormwood and Chamomel of each
six ounces, the fat of Ducks and Hens of each two ounces, boil them together
with a gentle fire till the Juyces be consumed, then strain it and with seven
ounces of white wax, and a little white wine Vinegar, make it into an Ointment
according to art. See Unguentum ex (...) Aperitivis.

Unguentum Samach. Page 168. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Sumach, unripe (...), myrtle Berries, (...), Pomegranate
Pills, (...) Cups, Cypress Nuts, Acacia, (...), of each ten drachms, white Wax
five ounces, Oil of Roses often washed in Alum water, a pound and ten ounces,
make a fine powder of the things you can and (...) them four whole days in
juice of (...) and unripe Services, of each a sufficient quantity, then dry
them by a gentle fire, and with the Oil and wax boil it into an Ointment.

Culpeper] A. It is a gallant drying and binding Ointment, my former Rules will
show you what it is good for, be studious, be studious; besides the stomach
anointed with it stays vomiting, and the belly anointed with it stays
looseness; if the Eundament fall out, when you have put it up again, anoint it
with this Ointment and it will fall out no more; do the like by the womb if
that fall out. They had the honesty before to call it a binding Ointment, now
it has another name, and its place is changed, give God the glory that he has
left a way to do you good in spite of their subtilty, and I shall do the like
that he has made me an Instrument to do it.

Ointments left out in this Dispensatory.
Ointments of Marshmallows Compound. Nich.
The Colledg] Take of Marsh-Mallow Roots two (...); the seeds of Flax and
Foenugreek of each one pound; Pulp of Squils half a pound; Oil four pound; Wax
one pound; Turpentine, Gum of Ivy, Galbanum, of each two ounces, Colophonia,
Rozin, of each half a pound: let the Roots be well washed and bruised, as also
the Linseed, Foenugreek seed and Squills, then steep them three days in eight
pints of Water, the fourth day boil them a little upon the fire, and draw out
the Mussilage, of which take two pound and boil it with the Oil to the
consumption of the juice; afterward, add the Wax, Rozin, and Colophonia; when
they are melted, add the Turpentine, afterward the Galbanum and Gum of Ivy,
dissolved in Vinegar, boil them a little; and having removed them from the
fire, stin them till they are cold, that so they may be well incorporated.

Culpeper] A. They both ( viz. this and the former) heat and moisten; the
latter helps pains of the breast coming of cold and pleuresies, old aches, and
stitches, and softens hard swellings.

Unguentum Diapompholigos nih ili. Nicholaus.
The Colledg] Take of Oil of Roses sixteen ounces; Juice of Nightshade six
ounces: let them boil to the consumption of the juice, then add white Wax five
ounces; Ceruss washed two ounces; Lead burnt and washed, Pompholix prepared,
pure Frankincense, of each an ounce; let them be brought into the form of an
Ointment according to art.

Culpeper] A. It cools an binds, dries, and stays fluxes, either of blood or
humors in wounds, and fills (...) ulcers with flesh; this is much like (...)
Ointment of Nightshade in their last Edition, and of the same operation, and
the very same receipt, they last time called Guilielmus Placentinus Simple
Liniament. Good Lord what shifts are they put too, to cheat this (...)! well,
though I cannot rout the College, yet know all men by this Ointment, I have
put them to their shifts.

Unguentum Refrigerans. Galenus, It is also called a Cerecloath
The College.] Take of white Wax four ounces; Oil of Roses Omphacine a pound;
melt it in a double vessel, then power it out into another, by degrees putting
in cold water, and often (...) it out of one vessel into another, stirring it
till it be white; last of all wash it in Rose Water, adding a little Rose Water
and Rose Vinegar.

Culpeper] A. It is a fine cooling thing, (for what denomination to give it I
scarce know) and exceeding good, yea super-excellent to cure inflammations in
wounds or tumors.

Unguentum e (...) Aperitivis primum. (...).
The Colledg] Take of the juice of (...), (...), Mints, Wormwood, Common
Parsley, Valerian, of each three ounces; oil of Wormwood and Mints, of each half
a pound; yellow Wax three ounces; mix them together over the fire, and make of
them an Ointment. Sometimes is added also the pouders of Calamus Aromaticus,
Spicknard, of each one dram; a little oil of Cappers.

Culpeper] A. It opens stoppages of the stomach and spleen, eases the Rickets,
the breast and sides being anointed with it.

(...) Martiatum. Nich.
The Colledg] Take of the Leaves of Bay and Rosemary, of each eight ounces; Rue
seven ounces; Tamaris fix ounces; the Leaves of Dwarf-Elder, Marjoram, Savin,
Costmary, or else, (...) ater-mints, Sage, Bazil, Polcy-mountain, Calaminth,
Mugwort, Elicampane, Betony, (...)-Ursine, Goose grass or Cleavers, Anemone or
Wind-flower, or for want of it, Pellitory of the Wall, Burnet, Agrimony,
Wormwood, Cowslips, Garden Costus, Elders, Orphine the greater, Housleek the
greater and lesser, Yarrow, Germander, Centaury the less, Plantane,
Strawberries, Called also Syderites, and Ironwort, because of its excelen cy to
cure wounds.
Tetrahit or for Which in London cannot be, because it grows almost in
everyditch.
want of it Golden-rod, Cynksoyl, of each four ounces and an half; the roots of
Marshmallows, the seeds of Cummin, Mirrh, of each three ounces; Foenugreck an
ounce and an half; the seeds of the greater Nettles, of Violets, red or
erratick Poppies, commonly called Corn-roses, Garden Mints, Sorrel, wild Mints,
Maindenhair, Carduus Benedictus, Woodbind or Honeysuckles, Valerian the
greater, sweet Cranebil, or Muschata, Wood Sorrel, Hart's-tongue, Bubthalmum.
Ox-eye, Southernwood, Marrow of a Stag, Styrax Calamitys, of each half an
ounce; Butter ten drachms; Bears and Hens grease, Mastich, Frankincense, of
each one ounce; Nard Oil two ounces; Wax two pound: let the Herbs being green,
be cut, and insused in eight pounds of Oil with Wine for seven days, on the
eighth day let them be boiled almost to the consumption of the Wine, then being
removed from the fire, let it be strained and the Oil put into the pan again,
to which (being a little warmed) ad the Butter, Marrow, Fat, Nard Oil, and Wax,
then the Styrax dissolved in Wine and mixed with a little Turpentine, but let
the Mastich, Mirrh, and Frankincense being heaten into powder be put in last of
all, and when they (...) all will mixed together, keep the Ointment in a vessel.

Culpeper. A. This long Receipt of Nich. Myrepsus, is held to be profitable
against cold afflictions of the brain, nerves, and joints, as shaking palsy,
dead palsy, convulsions etc. it helps numbness of the joints, the gout and
hard tumors of the spleen.

An Ointment for the Worms. Foesius.
The Colledg] Take of Oil of Rue, Savin, Mints, Wormwood, and bitter Almonds,
of each an ounce and an half; juice of the flowers or leaves of Peaches, and
Wormwood, of each half an ounce; Powder of Rue, Mints, Gentain, Centaury the
less, Tormentill, of each one dram; the seeds of Coleworts, the Pulp of
Colocynthis, of each two drachms; Aloes Hepatick, three drachms; the meal of
Lupines half an ounce; Mirrh washed in grass water, a dram and an half;
Bulls, Gall an ounce and an half: with juice of Lemmons so much as is
sufficient, and an ounce and an half of Wax, make it into an Ointment according
to art.

Culpeper] A. The Belly being anointed with it, kills the worms

CERECLOATHS.
Ceratum de Galbano. Page 169. in the Latin Book. Or, Cerecloath of Galbanum.
The Colledg] TAke of Galbanum prepared an ounce and an half, Assafaetid a half
an ounce, Bdellium a dram, Mirrh two drachms, Wax two ounces, (...) seeds a
scruple; Featherfew, Mugwort of each half a dram, dissolve the Gums in
Vinegar, and make it a Cerecloath according to art.

Culpeper] A. Being applied to the belly of a woman after labor, it cleanses
her of any (...) accedentally left behind, helps the fits of the mother, and
other accedents incident to women in that case.

Ceratum (...). Page 169. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Oesypus ten ounces, Oil of Chamomel, and Orris, of each
half a pound, yellow Wax two pound, Rozin a pound, Mastich, (...), Turpentine,
of each an ounce; Spicknard two drachms and an half, Saffron a dram and an
half, Styrax Calamitis, half an ounce, make them into a Cerecloath according to
art.

Culpeper] A. It mollifies and digests hard swellings of the liver, spleen,
womb, nerves, joints, and other parts of the body, and is a great easer of pain.

Ceratum Santalinum. Page 169. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of red Sanders ten drachms, white and yellow Sanders, of
each six drachms, red Roses twelve drachms, Bole Armenick seven drams, Spodium
four drachms, Camphire two drachms, white Wax washed thirty drachms, Oil of
Roses, Omphacine six ounces, make it into a Cerecloath according to art.

Culpeper] A. It wonderfully helps hot infirmities of the stomach, liver, and
other parts, being but aplied to them.

PLASTERS.
Culpeper] A I Hope no body is so simple to eat Plasters. The general (...) of
application is to the grieved place. You may melt them in any earthen dish, and
so spread them upon a cloth or white leather.

Emplastrum ex Ammoniaco. Page 170. in the Lat. B. Or, A Plaster of Ammoniacum
The Colledg] Take of Amoniacum, Bran well sifted, of each an ounce, Oyntmen t
of Marshmallows, Mellilot Plaster compound, roots of Briony, and Orris in
powder, of each half an ounce, the fat of Ducks Geese, and Hens, of each three
drachms, Bdellium, Galbanum, of each one dram and an half, Perrozin, Wax; of
each five ounces, Oil of Orris, Turpentine, of eaah half an ounce, boil the
Fats and Oil with Mussilage of Linseed, and Foenugreek seed, of each three
ounces, to the consumption of the Mussilage, strain it, and add the Wax, Rozin,
and Turpentine, the Ointment of Marshmallows with the Plaster of Meliot, when
it begins to be cold, put in the Amoniacum, dissolved in Vinegar, then the
Bdellium in powder, with the rest of the pouders, and make it into a Plaster
according to art.

Culpeper] A. By [Plaister] always understand not a Plaster spread upon a
cloth, but a roll made to spread such a one withal.

A. It softens and asswageth hard swellings, and scatters the humors offending,
applied to the side it softens the hardness of the spleen, asswageth pains
thence arising.

Emplaistrum e Baccis Lauri. Page 170. in Lat. B. Or, a Plaster of Bay berries.
The Colledg] Take of Bay berries husked Turpentine of each two ounces,
Frankincense, Mastich, Mirrh, of each an ounce, Cyperus, Costus, of each half
an ounce, Honey warmed and And why not scummed? I had forgot, the College is
not bound to give a reason for what they do.
not scummed, four ounces, make it into a Plaster according to art.

Culpeper] A. It is an excellent Plaster to ease any pains coming of cold or
wind, in any part of the body, whether stomach, liver, belly, reins, or
bladder. It is an excellent remedy for the Colic and wind in the bowels.

Emplastrum Barbarum Magnum. P. 171. in Lat. B.
The Colledg] Take of dry Pitch eight pound yellow Wax six pound and eight
ounces, Perrosin five pound and four ounces, Bitumen, Judaicum, or Mummy four
pound, Oil one pound and an half, Vert-degrease, Litharge, Ceruss, of each
three ounces, (...) half a pound, Roch Alum not burnt an ounce and an half,
Burnt four ounces, Opopanax, Scales of Brass; Gal banum, of each twelve,
drachms, Aloes, Opium; Mirrh, of each half an ounce, Turpentine two pound,
Juice of Mandrakes, or else dried Bark of the root, six drachms, Vinegar five
pound, let the Licharge, Ceruss, and Oil, boil to the thickness of Honey, then,
incorporate with them, the pitch being melted with Bitumen in powder, then add
the rest, and boil them according to art, till the Viniger be consumed, and it
stick not to your hands.

Culpeper] A. It helps the bitings of men and beasts, eases the inflammations
of wounds, and helps infirmities of the joints, and gouts in the beginning.

Emplastrum de Betonica. Page 171. in the Lat. Book. Or, A Plaster of Betony.
The Colledg] Take of Betony Burnet, Agrimony, Sage, Penyroyal, Yarrow, comfry
the greater, Whether by Galletrium, they mean wild Clary or garden, is some
question.
Clary, of each six ounces, Frankincense, Mastich, of each three drachms,
Orris, round-Birthwort, of each six drachms, white Wax, Turpentine, of each
eight ounces, Per-rosin six ounces, Gum (...), I know no other Oil of Fir
unless they mean Turpentine, and that was once before.
Oil of fir, of each two ounces, white Wine three pound, bruise the herbs,
boil them in the Wine, then strain them, and add the rest, and make them into a
Plaster according to art.

Culpeper] A. It is a gallant Plaster to unite the skul when it is cracked, to
draw out pieces of broken bones and cover the bones with flesh; It draws filth
from the bottom of deep ulcers, rest ores flesh lost, cleanses, digesteth, and
dries.

Emplastrum Coesaris. Page 171. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of red Roses one ounce and an half, Bistort roots, Cipress
Nuts, all the Sanders, Mints, Coriander seeds, of each three drachms, Mastich
half an ounce, Hypocistis, Acacia, Dragons blood, Earth of Lemnos,
Bole-Armenick, red Corral, of each two drachms, Turpentine washed in Plantane
water, four ounces, Oil of Roses three ounces, white Wax twelve ounces,
Perrosin ten ounces, Pitch six ounces, the juice of Plantane (...), and (...),
of each an ounce, the Wax, Rosin, and pitch, being melted together, add the
Turpentine and Oil, then the Hypocistis, and Acacia dissolved in the Juyces, at
last the Pouders, and make it into a Plaster according to art.

Culpeper] A. It is of a fine, cool, binding, strengthening nature, excellent
good to repel (...) or vapors that ascend up to the head, the hair being
shaved off and it applied to the crown.

Emplastrum Catagmaticum the first. P. 172. in Lat. B.
The Colledg] Take of juice of Marshmallow roots six ounces, Bark of Ash
treeroots, and their leaves, the roots of Comsry the greater, and smaller with
their leaves, of each two ounces, Myrtle berries, an ounce and an half, the
leaves of Willow, the tops of St. John's wart, of each an handful and an half,
having bruised them, boil them together in red Wine, and Smiths water, of (...)
two pound, till half be consumed, strain it, and ad Oil of Mirtles, and Roses,
Omphacine, of each one pound and an half, Goats (...) eight ounces, boil it
again, to the consumption of the decoction, strain it again, and add Litharge
of Gold and Silver, red Lead, of each four ounces, yellow Wax one pound,
Colophonia half a pound, boil it to the consistance of a Plaster, then add
Turpentine two ounces, Mirrh, Frankincense Mastich, of each half an ounce, Bole
Armenick, Earth of Lemnos, of each an ounce, stir them about well, till they be
boiled, and made into an Emplaister according to art.

Catagmaticum the second. Page 173. in the Lat. B.
The Colledg] Take of the roots of Comfry the greater, Marshmallows, Missleto
of the Oak, of each two ounces, Plantane, Chamepitys, St. John's Wort, of each a
handful, boil them (...) parts of black Wine, and Smiths water, till half be
consumed, strain it, and add Mussilage of Quince seeds, made in tripe water,
Oil of Mastich, and Roses, of each four ounces, boil it to the consumption of
the Humidity, and having strained it, ad Litharge of Gold four ounces, boil it
to the consistance of an Emplaister, then ad yellow Wax four ounces, Turpentine
three ounces, Colophonia six drachms, Ship-pitch ten ounces, pouders of
Balaustines, Roses, Myrtle, Acacia, of each half an ounce, Mummy, Androsamum,
Mastich, Amber, of each six drachms, Bole Armenick, fine flower, Frankincense,
of each twelve drachms, Dragons blood two ounces, make it into a Plaster
according to art.

Culpeper. A. Both this and the former are binding, and drying, the former
rules will instruct you in the use.

Emplastrum Cephalicum. Page 173. in the Lat B. Or, A Cephalic Plaster.
The Colledg] Take of Rosin two ounces, black Pitch one ounce, Labdanum,
Turpentine, flower of Beans, and Orobus, Doves dung, of each half an ounce,
Mirrh, Mastich, of each one dram and an half, Gum of Juniper, Nutmegs, of
each two drams, dissolve the Mirrh, and Labdanum in a bot mortar, and adding
the rest, make it into a Plaster according to art. If you will have it
stronger, ad the pouders, Euphorbium, Pellitory of Spain, and black Pepper, of
each two scruples.

Culpeper] A. It is proper to strengthen the brain and repel such vapors as
anoy it, and those pouders being added it dries up the superfluous moisture
thereof, and eases the eyes of hot scalding vapors that anoy them.

Emplastrum de Cerussa. Page 174. in the Latin Book. Or, A Plaster of Ceruss.
The Colledg] Take of Ceruss in fine powder, white Wax, Sallet Oil, of each
three ounces, ad the Oil by (...) to the Ceruss, and holy it by continual
stirring over a gentle fire, till it begin to swell, then ad the Wax, cut
small, by degrees, and boil it to (...) just consistance.

Culpeper] A. It helps burns, dry scabs, and hot ulcers, and in general what
ever sores abound with moisture.

Emplaistrum ex Cicuta (...). P. 174. L. (...). Or, A Plaster of Hemlock with
Amoniacum.
The Colledg] Take of the juice of Hemlock four ounces, Vinegar of Squills, and
Ammoniacum, of each eight ounces, dissolve the Gum in the juice, and Vinegar,
after a due infusion, then strain it, into its just consistance according to
art.

Culpeper] A. I suppose it was invented to mitigate the extreme pains, and alay
the inflammations of wounds, for which it is very good; Let it not be applied to
any principal part.

Emplastrum e Cinnabari. Page 174. in the Latin B.
The Colledg] Take of Cinnabaris an ounce and an half, Euphorbium,
Auripigmentum, of each two drachms and an half, beat them into fine powder, and
unite them with Galbanum, Burgundy, Pitch, of each two ounces and an half,
Plaster of Mussilages three ounces, Unguentum Egiptiacum half an ounce, make
it into a Plaster without boiling.

Culpeper] A. I wonder what this poisonous Plaster was invented for, unless to
Poison men's wounds, and set the cure as fast backward, as a months well
dressiug can set it forward, to eat out dead flesh it cannot, for that is
belonging to Ointments, dead flesh is usually in hollow ulcers, and a Plaster
cannot come at it; but imagine it could, yet would such a Plaster as this
poison the flesh round about.

Emplastrum e Crusta Panis. P. 174. in the Lat. Book Or, A Plaster of a crust
of Bread.
The Colledg] Take of Mastich, Mints, Spodium red Corral, all the Sanders of
each one dram, Oil of Mastich, and Quinces, of each one dram and an half, a
Crust of Bread tosted, and three times steeped in red Rose Vinegar, and as
often dried, Labdanum, of each two ounces, Rosin four ounces, Styrax Calamitis
half an ounce, Barley meal five drachms, make them into a Plaster according to
art.

Culpeper] A. I shall commend this for as gallant a Plaster to strengthen the
brain as any is in the Dispensatory, the hair being shaved off and it applied
to the crown; also being applied to the stomach it strengthens it, helps
digestion, stays vomiting and putrefaction, of the meat there. Montagnana was
the Author of it, not the College.

Emplastrum e Cymino. Page 174. in the Latin Book Or, A Plaster of Cummin.
The College.] Take of Cummin-seed, Bay ber ies, yellow Wax, of each one pound,
Per-rosin two pound, common Rosin three pound, Oil of Dill half a pound, mix
them, and make them into a Plaster.

Culpeper.] A. I am of opinion here is not half Oil enough to make it into a
Plaster; they that make of it know better than I; I judge but by reason, they
know by experience.

A. It asswageth swellings, takes away old aches coming of bruises, and applied
to the belly, is an excellent remedy for the wind chollick. This I have often
proved, and always with good success.

Emplastrum Diacasciteos. Page 175. in the L. B.
The Colledg] Take of Hogs grease, fresh and purged from the skins two pound,
Oil of Olive omphacine, Litharge of Gold beaten and sifted, of each three
pound, white Vitriol burnt and purged four ounces: Let the Litharge, grease,
and oil boil together with a gentle fire, with a little Plantane water, always
stirring it to the consistence of a Plaster, into which ( being removed from
the fire) put in the Vitriol and make it into a Plaster according to art.

Culpeper] A. Before it was to be made in this manner: First let the Litharge
boil with the Oil and Grease a long time, continually stirring it with the
branch of a Palm or other tree of a binding nature, as Oak, Box, or Medlar,
which is new cut, that so the virtue of the Spatula may be mixed with the
Plaster, cutting off the top and the rind, even to the wood it self; the
mixture being thus made thick by boiling and stirring, and removed from the
fire, put in white Copperis for want of true Chalcitis in powder, and so make
it into a laudable mass for an Emplaister.

A. It is a very drying, binding Plaster; profitable in green wounds to hinder
putrefaction, as also in pestilential sores after they are broken, and
ruptures; as also in burnings and scaldings.

A. Before it was called Diapalma, because of the branch of the Palm Tree, and
Diacaleiteos, because of the Calcitis in it; but now neither of both be in: me
thinks such a Learned College might in three days hard study, have invented a
new name.

Diachylon Simple. Page 175. in Lat. Book.
The Colledg] Take of Mussilage of Linseed, Foenugreek seed, Marsh mallow
roots, of each one pound; old Oil three pound; boil it to the consumption of
the Mussilage, strain it, and ad Litharge of Gold in fine Powder, one pound and
an half; boil them with a little water over a gentle fire always stirring them
to a just thickness.

Culpeper] A. It is an exceeding good remedy for all swellings without pain, it
softens hardness of the Liver and Spleen, it is very gentle like the Author of
it [ Mesue] very moderate and harmless, and it may be therefore neglected by
the fantastical Chyrurgians of our age.

Diachylon Ireatum. Page 175. in Lat. Book.
The Colledg] Ad one ounce of Orris in Powder to every pound of Diachylon
simple.

Diachylon magnum. Page 175. in Lat. Book.
The Colledg] Take of Mussilage of Raisons, fat Figs, Mastich, Mallow Roots,
Linseeds and Foenugreek seeds, Birdlime, the Juice of Orris and Squills, of
each twelve drachms and an half, Oesypus or Oil of sheeps seet, an ounce and an
half; oil of Orris, Chamomel, Dill of each eight ounces; Litharge of Gold in
fine powder one pound; Turpentine three ounces; Per-rozin, yellow Wax, of each
two ounces: boil the Oil with the Mussilages and Juyces to the comsumption of
the humidity, strain the Oil from the Facies and by adding the Litharge boil it
to its consistence; then ad the Rozin and Wax; Lastly, it being removed from
the fire, ad the Turpentine, Oesypus, and Birdlime, make of them a Plaster by
melting them according to art.

Culpeper] A. It dissolves hardness and inflammations.

Diachylon magnum cum Gummi. Page 176. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of (...), (...), Ammoniacum, of each two ounces, dissolved
in Wine, and added to the Mass of Diachylon magnum; first boil the Gums being
dissolved, to the thickness of Honey.

Culpeper] A. This is the best to dissolve (...) swellings of all the three.

Diachylon Compositum, five Emplastrum (...) Mucilaginibus. Page 176. in the
Latin Book. Or, A Plaster of Mucilages.
The Colledg] Take of Mucilages of the middle bark of Elm, Marsh-mallow roots,
Linseed and Foenugreek seed of each four ounces and an half, Oil of Chamomel,
Lillies, and Dill, of each an ounce and an half; Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Sagapex.
(...) of each half an ounce, new wax twenty ounces, Turpentine two ounces
Saffron two drachms, dissolve the Gums in (...), and make it into a Plaster
according to art.

Culpeper] A. It ripens swellings and breaks them, and cleanses them when they
are broken. It is of a most excellent ripening nature.

Emplastrum Diaphoenicon hot. Page 176. in L. B.
The Colledg] Take of yellow Wax two ounces, Per-rozin, Pitch, of each four
ounces, Oil of Roses and Nard, of each one ounce, melt them together, and add
Pulp of Dates made in Wine four ounces, (...) of Quinces boiled in red wine an
ounce, then the Pouders following; Take of bread twice baked steeped in Wine
and dried two ounces, Mastich an ounce, Frankincense, wormwood, red Roses,
Spicknard, of each two drachms and an half, wood of (...), Mace, Mirrh, washed
Aloes, Acacia, Troches of Gallia Moschata, and earth of Lemnos, Calamus
Aromaticus, of each one dram, Labdanum three ounces, mix them and make them
into a Plaster according to art.

Culpeper] A. It strengthens the stomach and Liver exceedingly, helps fluxes,
apply it to the places grieved, your mother wit will teach you not to apply it
to the Nose for fluxes, nor yet to the soles of your feet to strengthen your
stomach.

Diaphoenicon cold. Page 177. in Lat. Book.
The Colledg] Take of Wax four ounces, Ship Pitch five ounces, Labdanum three
ounces and an half; Turpentine an ounce and an half; oil of Roses one ounce,
melt these and ad Pulp of (...) almost ripe boiled in austere Wine four ounces;
flesh of Quinces in like manner boiled, Bread twice baked, often steeped in red
Wine and dried of each an ounce; Styrax Calamitys, Acacia, Unripe Grapes,
Balaustines, yellow Sanders, Troches of Terra Lemnia, Mirrh, wood of Aloes of
each half an ounce, Mastich, red Roses, of each an ounce and an half, Austere
Wine, as much as is sufficient to dissolve the juyces, make it into a Plaster
according to art.

Culpeper] A It strengthens the belly and liver, helps concoction in those
parts, and distribution of humors, stays vomiting and fluxes.

Emplastrum Divinum, Page 177. in Lat. Book. Or, A Divine Plaster.
The Colledg] Take of Lodestone four ounces, Ammoniacum three ounces and three
drachms; Bdellium two ounces; Galbanum, Mirrh, of each ten drachms; Olibanum
nine drachms; Opopanax, Mastich, Long Birthwort, Vert-de-greece, of each one
ounce; Litharge, common Oil, of each a pound and an half; new Wax eight ounces:
Let the Litharge in fine Powder be boiled with the Oil to a thickness, then ad
the Wax, which being melted, take it from the fire, ad the Gums dissolved in
Wine or Vinegar, strain it, then ad the Mirrh, Mastich, Frankincense,
Birthwort, and Load stone in Powder; Last of all the Vert-degreese in Powder,
and make it into a Plaster according to art.

Culpeper] A. It is of a clensing nature, exceeding good against malignant
Ulcers, it consumes corruption, engenders new flesh, and brings them to a scar.

A. Herein lies the Colleges Religion, if you would know what it is; for they
are neither Presbiterians, nor Independants.

Emplastrum Epispasticum. Page 177. in Lat. Book
The Colledg] Take of Mustard seed, Euphorbibium, Long Pepper, of each a dram
and an half; Staves-acre, Pellitory of Spain, of each two drachms; Ammoniacum,
Galbanum, Bdellium, Sagapon. of each three drachms, Mustyou put them whole into
the Plaster?
whole Cantharides five drachms; Ship-pitch, Rozin, yellow Wax, of each six
drachms; Turpentine as much as is sufficient to make it into a Plaster.

Culpeper] A. Many people use to draw blisters in their necks for the toothach,
or for Rhewns in their eyes, if they please to lay a Plaster of this there, it
will do it.

Emplastrum a nostratibus, Flos Vnguentorum Dictum. Page 178. in the Latin
Book. Or, Flower of Ointments.
The Colledg] Take of Rozin, Per-rozin, yellow wax, Sheep suet, of each half a
pound, Olibanum four ounces, Turpentine two ounces and an half; Murh, Mastich
of each an ounce; Camphire two drachms; white Wine half a pound, boil them into
a Plaster.

Culpeper] A. I found this Receipt in an old Manuscript written in the year
1513. the quantity of the Ingredients but very little altered (except
analogically) and the virtue of it thus described verbatim.

A. Yt is well clensande and well sowdande and generande the flesh, and heland
more in eight days then any other Trete woll do in a monyth, for yt will
soffer noe corruption in a wound, ne noe dead flesh to bide thereyn; also yt
is good for headache and for wind in the brayn, and for all mannyr posthymes
in the head, or in the body, for swelling of the ears, or of the cheeks, for
all mannyr of synowes that is grieved, or breysyd, or sprung, and yt woll draw
out yrne or splynts of trees, or thorns, or broken bones, or any other things
that may grow in a wound, and yt is good for bytyng of (...) bests, and yt
(...) and healls all mannyr of boches without fawt, and yt is good for sester
or canker, and for noli me tangere, and yt drawys out all mannyr of akyng in
the lyver or reins, or mylt, and helpyth the emerauds.

A Plaster of Gum Elemi. Page 178. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Gum Elemi three ounces; Per-rozin, Wax, Ammoniacum, of
each two ounces; Turpentine three ounces and an half; Malaga Wine so much as is
sufficient, boil it to the consumption of the Wine, then ad the Ammoniacum
dissolved in Vinegar.

Culpeper] A. The operation is the same with Arceus Liniment.

A Plaster of Lapis Calaminaris. Page 178. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Lapis Calaminaris prepared an ounce, Litharge two ounces,
Ceruss half an ounce, Tutty a dram, Turpentine six drachms; white Wax an
ounce and an half; Stags suet two ounces; Frankincense five drachms; Mastich
three drachms; Mirrh two drachms; Camphire a dram and an half, make it up
according to art.

Culpeper.] A. Before they set down Stags suet twice, and now they left out a
sufficient quantity of it; do not they know that both Lapis Calaminar is and
Litharge are of an exceeding drying nature? and that six drachms of Turpentine
and two ounces of Stags suet is not half enough to make only them two into a
Plaster? If they do know it, why do they set it so down? if they do not know
it, why do they meddle with what they have no skill in? and yet forsooth it is
two-penny treason to swerve from their rediculous Receipts; so imperious they
are, just like a Spaniard that will not leave his magestical gate, even when he
is whipped at carts tail.

Emplastrum ad Herniam. Page 178. in the Lat. Book
The Colledg] Take of Galls, Cipress Nuts, Pomegranate pills, Balaustines,
Acacia, the seeds of Plantane, Fleawort, Watercresses, Acorn cups, Beans
torrified, Birthwort long and round, Mirtles, of each half an ounce, let these
be poudered, and steeped in Rose Vinegar, four days, then torrified and dried,
then take of Comsry the greater and lesser, Horse tail, Woad, Cetrach, the
roots of Osmond Royal, Fearn, of each an ounce, Frankincense, Mirrh, Aloes,
Mastich, Mummy, of each two ounces, Bole-Armenick washed in Vinegar, Lap.
Calaminaris prepared, Litharge of Gold, Dragons blood, of each three ounces,
Ship-pitch two pound, Turpentine six ounces, or as much as is sufficient to
make it into a Plaster according to art.

Culpeper] A. The Plaster is very binding and knitting, apropriated to
ruptures or bursteness, as the title of it specifies; it strengthens the (...)
and womb, stays abortion, or miscarriage in women, it consolidates wounds, and
helps all diseases coming of cold and moisture. If you mix a little Diapalma
with it, it will stick the better.

Emplastrum Hystericum. Page 179. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Bistort roots one pound, Wood of Aloes, yellow Sanders,
Nutmegs, Barbery Kernels, Rose seeds, of each one ounce, Cinnamon, Cloves,
Squinanth, Camomel flowers, of each half an ounce, Frankincense, Mastich,
Alipta Moschata, Gallia Moschata, Styrax Calamitis, of each one dram, Mosch
half a dram, yellow Wax one pound and an half, Turpentine half a pound,
Moschaleum four ounces, Labdanum four pound, Ship-pitch three pound, let the
Labdanum and Turpentine, be added to the pitch and Wax, being melted, then the
Styrax, lastly the rest in powder, and sisted, that they may be made into a
Plaster according to art.

Culpeper] A. I know not justly what they mean by that word [ Anthera] in the
Receipt, unless they mean the hairy threeds in the middle of the Rose, which
usually Country People call (though faslv) Rose seeds: As I take it
Apothecaries call them by an apish name Anthera Rosarum, of the Greek (...),
the flowers of Roses. But indeed Ancients, as Galen etc. gave the word Anthera
to many Compound medicines that had no Roses at all in them: but I cannot stand
to dispute the story here. The plaster being applied to the navil, is a means
to withstand the fits of the mother in such women as are subject to them, by
retaing the womb in its place.

Emplastrum de Mastiche. Page 179. in the Latin Book. Or, A Plaster of Mastich.
The Colledg] Take of Mastich three ounces, BoleArmenick washed in black Wine,
an ounce and an half, red Roses six drachms, Ivory, Myrtle berries, red Corral,
of each half an ounce, Turpentine, Colophonia, Tachamahacca, Labdanum, of each
two ounces, yellow Wax half a pound, Oil of Mirtles, four ounces, make it a
Plaster according to art.

Culpeper] A. It is a binding Plaster, strengthens the stomach, being applied
to it, and helps such as loath their victuals, or cannot digest it, or retain
it till it be digested.

Emplastrum de Meliloto Simplex. Page 180. in Lat. B. Or, A Plaster of Melilot
Simple.
The College.] Take of Rosin eight pound, yellow Wax four pound, Sheeps Suet
two pound, these being melted, add green Melilot cut small, five pound, make it
a Plaster according to art.

Culpeper] A. It is a gallant drawing and healing Plaster, no way offensive to
any part of the body, it cleanses wounds of their filth, ripeneth swellings,
and breaks them, and cures them when it has done, it is special good for those
swellings vulgarly in London called Felons, in Suffex Andicoms, only have a
care of applying it to the legs, because of its drawing quality, to any other
part of the body, in a sore that has any putrefaction in it, it is none of the
worst Plasters.

Implastrum de Meliloto Compositum. P. 180. in L. B Or, A Plaster of Melilot
Compound.
The Colledg] Take of Melilot flowers six drams, Chamomel flowers, the seeds of
Fenugreek, Bay berries husked, Marshmallow roots, the tops of Wormwood and
Marjoram, of each three drachms, the seeds of Smallage, Ammi, Cardamoms, the
roots of Orris, Cyperus, Spicknard, Cassia Lignea, of each one dram and an
half, Bdellium five drachms, beat them all into fine powder, the Pulp of Twelve
Figs, and incorporate them with a pound and an half of Melilot Plaster Simple,
Turpentine an ounce and an half, Amoniacum dissolved in Hemlock Vinegar, three
ounces, (...) five drachms, Oil of Marjoram, and Nard, of each half an ounce,
or a sufficient quantity, make it into a Plaster with a hot mortar and pestle,
without boiling.

Culpeper] A. It mollifies the hardness of the stomach liver spleen, bowels and
other part of the body; it wonderfully asswageth pain, and eases Hypocondriack
melancholy, and the Rickets.

Emplastrum de minio Compositum. P. 180. in Lat. B. Or, A Plaster of red lead
Compound.
The Colledg] Take of Oil of Roses, Omphacine twenty ounces, Oil of Mastich two
ounces, Suet of a Sheep and a Calfe, of each half a pound, Litharge of Gold and
Silver, red Lead, of each two ounces, a taster full of Wine, boil them by a
gentle fire, continually stirring it, till it grow black, let the fire be
hottest toward the latter end, then add Turpentine half a pound, Mastich two
ounces, Gum Elemi one ounce, white Wax as much as is sufficient, boil them a
little, and make them into a Plaster accordiag to art.

Culpeper. A. It potently cures wounds, old malignant ulcers, and is very
drying.

Emplastrum de minio Simplicius. Page 181. in Lat. B. Or, A Plaster of red
Lead Simple.
The Colledg] Take of red Lead nine ounces, Oil of red Roses, one pound and an
half, white Wine Vinegar six ounces, boil it into the perfect body of a
Plaster.

It is prepared without Vinegar thus, Take of red Lead one pound, Oil of Roses
one pound and an half, Wax half a pound, make it into a Plaster according to
art.

Culpeper] A. It is a fine cooling healing Plaster, and very drying.

Emplastrum Metroproptoticon. Page 181. in Lat. B.
The Colledg] Take of Mastich one ounce and an half, Galbanum dissolved in red
Wine and strained, six drachms, Cypress, Turpentine two drachms, Cypress Nuts,
Galls of each one dram and an half, Oil of Nutmegs by expression one dram,
Musk two grains and an half, Pitch scraped off from old Ships, two drachms and
an half, (...), the Galbanum, Pitch, Turpentine, and Mastich, gently in a hot
mortar and Pestle, toward the end, adding the Oil of Nutmegs then the rest in
powder, last of all the Musk mixed with a little Oil of Mastich upon a Marble,
and by exact mixture make them into a Plaster.

Culpeper] A. It was invented (as I suppose) to comfort and strengthen the
retentive faculty in the stomach and belly, and therefore stays looseness and
vomiting, and helps the fits of the mother, being applied to the navill.

Emplastrum Nervinum. Page 181. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Oil of Chamomel, and Roses, of each two ounces, of
Mastich, Tur pentine, and Linseeds, of each an ounce and an half, Turpentine
boiled four ounces, Suet of a By all means let a Sowgelder view it first.
Gelt Calse, and of a He Goat, of each two ounces and an half, (...): Bettony,
Horstail, (...) the less, of each an handful, Earthworms washed and cleansed in
Wine, three ounces, tops (...). John's (...) a handful, Mastich, Gum Elemi,
Maddir roots, of each (...) drachms, Ship-pitch, (...), of each an ounce and an
half, Litharge of Gold and Silver, of each two ounces and an half, red Lead two
ounces, Galbanum, Sagapen. Amoniacum, of each three drams, boil the Roots,
Herbs, and (...), in a pound and an half of Wine, till half be consumed, then
press them out, and boil the decoction again, with the Oils Suets, Litharge,
and (...) Lead, to the consumption of the Wine, then ad the (...) dissolved in
Wine, afterward the Turpentine, Rosin, Pitch, and Mastich, in powder, and make
them into a Plaster according to art.

Culpeper. A. It strengthens the brain and nerves, and then being applied to
the back, down along the bone, it must needs add strength to the body.

Emplastrum Oxycroceum. Page 182. in the Latin B.
The Colledg] Take of (...), Ship-pitch, Colophonta, yellow Wax, of each four
ounces, Turpentine, Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Mirrh, Olibanum, Mastich, of each one
ounce and three drachms, let the Pitch and Colophonia be melted together, then
ad the Wax, then (it being removed from the fire) the Turpentine, afterward
the Gums dissolved in Vinegar, lastly the Saffron in powder, well mixed with
Vinegar, and so make it into a Plaster according to art.

Culpeper] A. It is of a notable sostening and discussing quality, helps broken
bones, and any parts (...) with cold, old aches, stifness of the limbs by
reason of wounds, ulcers, fractures, or dislocations, and dissipates cold
swellings.

Emplastrum de Ranis. Page 182. in the Latin Book. Or, a Plaster of Frogs.
The Colledg] Take six Live Frogs, Worms washed in white Wine, three ounces and
an half, Oil of Chamomel, Dill, Spicknard, (...), of each two ounces, Oil of
Saffron one ounce, of Bays, one ounce and an half, the fat of an Hog, and a
Calf, of each one pound, Vipers (...) two ounces and an half, (...) five
drachms, Frankincense ten drachms, Juice of the roots of (...), and Dwarff
Elder, of each two ounces, Squindnith, Stoechas, Mugwort, of each one handful,
Wine two pound, boil them to the consumption of the Wine, strain it, and ad one
pound of Litharge of Gold, Turpentine three ounces, white Wax as much as it
sufficient to make it into a Plaster, adding in the (...) when it is removed
from (...) fire, Liquid Styrax an ounce and an half, stirring it about with
spatule; (...), the Mass being warm, ad Quicksilver four ounces, killed in the
Turpentine, and Liquid Styrax, and incorporate them very well together.

(...). Page 183. in the Lat. Book.
The Colledg] Take of wild Cucumer roots three ounces, Sulphur vivum,
Cummin-seeds, of each two ounces, Euphorbium one ounce and an half, beat them
all into very fine powder, which incorparate with Burgundy, Pitch twenty eight
(...), over a gentle fire, stirring it with a (...), adding at the end, (...)
of Sow-bread three ounces, make it into a (...) according to art.

Culpeper] A. This Plaster will go near to cure, what ever it is applied to,
but a halter will do it a great deal sooner, and cheaper.

Sparadrap seu tela Galteri. Page 183. in the Latin B.
The Colledg] Take Oil of Roses half a pound, Rams Suet four ounces, Wax ten
ounces, (...), Per-rosin, Frankincense, Mastich, of each two ounces, Bole
Armenick, fine Flower, of each one ounce, boil the Oil, Suet, and Litharge
together, and when they are well incorparated, then make them all into a
Plaster according to art, in which being hot dip your tents.

Culpeper] A. I never knew it used, yet it dries.

Emplastrum Stephaniaion. Page 183. in the Latin B
The Colledg] Take of Labdanum half an ounce, Styrax, (...) Gum, of each two
drachms, Amber, Cypress, Turpentine, of each one dram, red Corral, Mastich,
of each half a dram; the flowers of Sage, red Roses, the roots of Orris
Florentine, of each (...) scruple, Rosin washed in Rosewater, half an ounce,
the Rosin, (...), (...) Gum, and Turpentine, being gently beaten in a hot
(...), with a hot (...), sprinkling in a few drops of red Wine, till they are
in a body, then put in the (...), and by (...), make them into an exact
Plaster.

Emplastrum Sticticum. Page 184. in Lat Book.
The Colledg] Take of Oil of Olives six ounces, yellow Wax an ounce and an
half, Litharge in (...) four ounces and an half, Ammoniacum, (...), of each
half an ounce, (...), (...), Oil of Bays, Lapis (...), both sorts of (...),
Mirrh, Frankincense, of each two drachms, (...) Turpentine an ounce: Let the
Oil, Wax, and Litharge, be boiled (...) till (...) stick not to your fingers,
then the mass being removed from the fire, and cooled a little, and the Gums
dissolved in while Wine (...), which evaporate away by boiling, strain it
strongly, then ad the (...), (...), and Oil of (...), (...) it may be made into
a Plaster according to art.

Culpeper] A. It strengthen the nerves, draw out corruption, take away pains
and (...), and restores strength to members that have lost it: the last is most
effectual.

(...). Page 184. L. B. Or, A Stomach Plaster.
The Colledg] Take of Mints, (...), (...), Bay leaves, of each a dram, (...),
(...) Roses, yellow (...), of each two drachms, Calamus (...), wood of (...),
(...) flowers, (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), of each a dram, Mastich
three drachms, Cloves two drams (...) an half, Oil of Mints an ounce and (...),
Oil of Nard an ounce, Oil of (...) a dram, Rozin, Wax, of each fonr ounces,
(...) three ounces, Styrax half an ounce, make it into a Plaster.

Culpeper.] A. Both this and the other of that name which you shall have by and
by, strengthen the stomach exceedingly, help digestion, and stay vomiting.

(...). Page 185. in Lat. Book.
The Colledg] Take of dry pitch two (...), Wax one pound, Per-vozin, half a
pound, (...) of Foenugreek, roots of black Chameleon or Briony of each four
ounces, (...) seeds, (...) two ounces, make it into a (...) according to art.

Culpeper] A. A pretty Plaster and good for little.

Such Plasters as their Worships (being wise) thought fit to leave out, are
these.
Emplastrum (...), or (...). Nich. Alex.
The Colledg] Take of Pitch scraped from a Ship that has been a long time at
Sea, yellow wax, of each seven drachms; Sagapenum six drachms; Ammoniacum,
Turpentine, Colophonia, Saffron, of each four drachms; Aloes, Olibanum, Mirrh,
of (...) three drachms; Styrax Calamitys, Mastich, Opapanax, Galbanum, Alum,
the seeds of (...), of each two drachms; the setlings or feeces of liquid
Styrax, Bdellium, of each one dram; Litharge half a dram.

Culpeper] A. It is of a gentle emollint nature, prevails against stoppings of
the stomach coming of cold, hardness of the spleen, coldness of the liver and
matrix.

Emplastrum Gracia Dei. Nicholaus. Or, the Grace of God.
The Colledg] Take of Turpentine half a pound; Rozin one pound; white Wax four
ounces; Mastich an ounce; fresh Betony, (...), and (...), of each a handful:
Let the Herbs being bruised, (...) sufficiently boiled in white Wine, the
Liquor pressed out, in which let the Wax and Rozin be boiled to the consumption
of the Liquor; being taken from the fire, let the Turpentine be mixed with it;
lastly the Mastich in powder, and so make of them a Plaster according to art.

Culpeper] A. It is excellent good in (...) and green ulcers, for it keeps back
(...), (...) and joyneth wounds, fills up ulcers with flesh. Alas poor men,
they have left out the Grace of God; it seems they are past Grace.

Emplastrum de Janua, or of Betony. Nicholaus.
The (...)] Take of (...) of Betony, Plantane, and Smallage, of each one pound;
Wax, Pitch, Rozin, Turpentine, of each half a pound: boil the Wax and Rozin in
the Juyces with a gentle fire, continually stirring them till the Juice be
consumed, then ad the Turpentine and Pitch, continually stirring it till it be
brought into the consistence of a Plaster according to art.

Culpeper] A. (...) (...) (...) of (...) (or (...) I am mistaken) it matters
not much which. It is a gallant plaster for pains in the head, and to recruit
an (...) brain, helps green wounds, (...) inflammations, strengthens the liver.

Emplastrum Isis Epigoni. (...).
The Colledg] Take of (...) wax an hundred drachms; Turpentine two hundred
drachms; scales of Copper, (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), of each eight
drachms; (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), of each (...) and (...) half; (...)
Oil (...) pound, sharp Vinegar (...) much (...), let the metals (...)
dissolved in the Sun (...), (...) put in those (...) last of all the (...), and
make them all (...).

Culpeper] A. (...) (...) ulcers (...). I know no (...) but why it (...) well
serve for other parts of the body.

A (...) of (...). Nich. (...).
The Colledg] Take of (...), (...), (...), (...), of each six (...), (...),
(...), (...), (...), (...), (...) of each three (...), (...), (...), Styrax
Calamitis, Alum; (Rondeletius appoints, and we for him) Bitumen, Foenugreek,
of each two drams; the feeces of Liquid Styrax, Bdellium, Litharge, of each
half a dram: Let the Litharge being beaten into Powder, be boiled in a
sufficient quantity of Water, then add the Pitch, which being (...), ad the Wax
and (...), (...), (...), (...), (...) and feeces being mixed with the
Turpentine, last of all the Colophonia, Mastich, Frankincense, Bdellium, Alum,
Mirrh, and Foenugreck in Powder, let them be made into a Plaster.

Culpeper] A. It strengthens the stomach, and helps digestion.

Emplastrum nigrum. August. Called in High Dutch Stichpflaster.
The Colledg] Take of Colophonia, Rozin, ShipPitch, white Wax, Roman Vitriol,
Ceruss, Olibanum, Mirrh, of each eight ounces; Oil of Roses seven (...); (...);
(...), Mummy, of each two ounces; Earth of Lemnos, Mastich, Dragons blood, of
each one ounce; the fat of an Heron one ounce,; the fat of Akind of Fish.
Timullus three ounces; Loadstone prepared two ounces; Earthworms prepared,
Campbire, of each one ounce: make them into a Plaster according to art.

Culpeper] A. It is very good (say they) in green wounds and pricks.

Emplastrum Sanctum. Andr. e Cruce. A. A holy Plaster composed by Andrew of
the Gollows.
The Colledg] Take of Per-rozin twelve ounces; Oil of Bays, Turpentine, of each
two ounces; Gum (...) four ounces: Let the Rozin and Gum be melted over the
fire in a brass pan stirring it with a brass instrument, then ad Oil of Bays
and Turpentine, boil it a little, then put it in a linen bag, and that which
drops through keep in a glazed pot for your use.

Culpeper] A. The virtues are the same with Arceus his Liniment.

Emplastrum sine Pari.
The Colledg] Take of Frankincense, Bellium, Styrax, of each three drachms;
Ammoniacum, Galbanum of each one dram and an half; Ship pitch, six drachms;
the Marrow of a Stag, sat of Hens and Geese, of each two drachms; Sulphur (...)
washed in Milk, Hermodactils in powder, of each a dram and an half: Let the
Gums be dissolved in white Wine, (not in Vinegar, because that is inimical to
the nerves) and with two parts of Oil of Roses complete, and one part of Oil of
Eggs, and a little Oil of Turpentine, make it into a Plaster according to art.

A Plaster for the Stomach. Mesue.
The Colledg] Take of wood of Aloes, Wormwood, Gum Arabic, Mastick, Cyperus,
Costus, Ginger, of each half an ounce; Calamus Aromaticus, Olibanum, Aloes of
each three drachms; Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, Spicknard, Nutmegs, Gallia
Moschata, Schananthus, of each one dram and an half; with Rob of Quinces make
it into an Emplaster: And when you have spread it upon a Cloth, perfume it
with wood of Aloes, and apply it to your stomach.

A Cerecloath of Ammoniacum.
The Colledg] Take of Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar an ounce; Unguentum de
Althaeae, Melilot Plaster, of each half an ounce; Bran an ounce; powder of the
Roots of Briony, and Orris, of each half an ounce, the Grease of Ducks, Geese,
and Hens, of each three drachms; Oil of Orris one ounce and an half: Let them
boil gently in the Mussilages of Lin and Foenugrelk seeds so much as is
sufficient: by adding Wax four ounces, make it into a Cerecloath according to
art.

Culpeper.] A. It asswageth swellings, or ripens und breaks them, and eases
pains thereby coming.

Ceratum Stomachium. Galen.
The Colledg] Take of red Roses, Mastich, of each twenty drachms: dried
wormwood fifteen drachms: Spicknard ten drachms: Wax four ounces: Rose Water so
much as is sufficien: Oil of Roses a pound and an half: Let it boil so till it
be like an Ointment: Then ad Oil of Roses eight ounces; Wax fourteen ounces;
the Pouders before mentioned (excepting the Mastich which must be melted in the
Oil of Roses) of all of them used in this manner, make a Cerecloath according
to art.

Culpeper] A. It strengthens the stomach and liver, eases their pains,
provokes appetite to ones meat, and helps digestion.

A. And thus you see I have left out Vigo his nonsense, or his most excellent
Plaster of Vinegar and Saffron in which is no Saffron, there being other
things in the book rediculous enough, if you are disposed to laugh.

CHEMICAL OILS, AND OTHER CHEMICAL LIQUORS.
OIL of HERBS and FLOWERS.
Culpeper] A. I Desire you to take notice before I begin, that Chemical Oils
generally are not to be taken alone by themselves by reason of their vehement
heat and burning, but mixed with other convenient medicines.

A. 2. They carry the very same virtues the Simples do, but are far more
prevalent, as having far more spirit in them and far less earthly dross.

A. 3. The general way of taking them, is to drop two or three drops of them
in any convenient liquor or other medicine, which the last Table will fit you
with, and so take it; for some of them are so hot (as Oil of Cinnamon) that two
or three drops will make a dish of pottage so hot of the Simple that you can
hardly eat them.

Oil of Wormwood.
The College.] Take of dried Wormwood a pound, spring water twenty pound, steep
them twenty four hours, and distill them in a great Alembick, with his
refrigeratory, or a Copper one with a Worm, let the Oil be separated from the
Water with a Funnel, or seperating glass as they call it, and let the Water be
kept for another distillation.

Let two or three of the first pounds of Water be kept for the Physicians use,
both in this, and other Chemical Oils drawn with Water.

Culpeper.] A. Your best way to learn to still Chemical Oils, is to learn of an
Alchymist: for I rest confident the greatest part of the College had no more
skill in Chemistry than I have in building houses, but having found out certain
models in old rusty Authors, tell people S O they must be done. I can teach a
man S O, how to build a house: first he may lay the foundation, then rear up
the sides, then join the rafters, then build the Chimneyes, tile the top, and
plaster the walls; but how to do one jot of this I know not: And so play the
College here: for the Alchymists have a better way by far to draw them: the
truth is, I am in a manner tied to their method here, from which I may not step
aside; if my Country kindly accept this, (which is the beginning of my labors)
I may happily put forth something else for the Ingenious to whet their wits
upon; Only here I quote the Oils in the College order, and then quote the
virtue of the chiefst of them, that so the Reader may know by a penny how a
shilling is coined.

The Colledg] In the same manner are prepared Oils of Hysop, Marjoram, Mints,
garden water Cresses, Origanum, Peny-royal, Rosemary, Rue, Savin, Sage, Savory,
Time etc. the Flowers of Chamomel, Lavender etc.

Culpeper] A. I shall instance here only Oil of Lavender, commonly called Oil
of Spike, which helps the running of the reins they being (...) with it; it
expels worms, two drops of it being taken in Wine, the region of the back being
anointed with it, it helps the Palsy. For all the rest see the virtues of the
Herbs themselves.

After the same manner are made Oil of dried Barks.
The Colledg] Of Orrenges, Citrons, Lemmons; But it is better prepared of the
Barks, being green and full of Juice, separated from the internal white part,
bruised, and with a sufficient quantity of Simple distilled water, so will the
Oil be drawn easter, and in greater plenty, and no less fitting for the
Physicians use.

Oil or fat of Roses, commonly called Spirit of Roses.
The Colledg] Take as many fresh Damask Roses as you will, infuse them twenty
four hours, in a sufficient quantity of warm water, after you have pressed them
out, repeat the infusion certain times, till the Liquor be strong enough, which
distill in an Allembick with his refrigeratory, or a Copper with his worm,
separate the Spirit from the water, and keep the water for another infusion.

So may you draw Spirit from Damask Roses, pickled in Salt, as also Spirit of
red Roses.

Culpeper] A. It Is a good perfume.

OIL of SEEDS.
Oil of Dill. Seeds.
The Colledg] Take of Dill seeds bruised two pound, spring Water twenty pound,
steep them twenty (...), then (...) them in a Copper Still, or an Allembick with
his (...), separate the Oil from the Water with a (...), and keep the water for
a new distillation.

So also is prepared Oil of the seeds of Annis, Laraway, Cummin, Carrots,
Fennel, Parsley, Saxifrage, etc.

Culpeper] A. Oil of Annls seeds although it be often given and happily with
good success in vertigoes or dissiness in the head, yet its chief operation is
upon the breast and lungues, it helps narrowness of the breast, rawness and
wind in the stomach, all infirmities there, coming of cold and wind,
strengthens the nerves; six drops is enough at a time, taken in broth or any
other convenient liquor.

(...). As Annis seeds are apropriated to the breast, so are Fennel seeds to
the head, the Oil of which cleanses the brain of cold infirmities, (...),
iudisposition of the body, numbness, want of motion, also it helps the stomach
and expels wind.

A. Cummin seeds, the Oil of them is a great expeller of wind, nothing better;
it also wonderfully caseth pains of the spleen, pains in the reins and bladder,
stopping of urine especially if it come of wind, and is a present remedy for
the chollick; for the way of taking of them see Annis seeds.

The Colledg] So also are made Oil of Spices, as of Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace,
Nutmegs, Pepper etc.

Culpeper] A. One or two drops of Oil of Cinnamon is (...) to take at a time,
and is exceeding good for such as are in consumptions. See [Cinnamon] among the
Simples.

A. Oil of Maco is excellent good for Rhewms in the head: and Oil of Pepper for
the Chollick.

The Colledg] Also Oils of Aromatical woods, as of Sassafras, and Rhodium, etc.

OIL of BERRIES.
Oil of Juniper Berries.
The Colledg] Take of fresh Juniper berries fifty pound, bruise them and part
them in a wooden Vessel, with twenty four pound of spring water, sharp leaven
one pound, keep them in a Cellar three months, the vessel being close stopped,
then distill them in an Allembick, with a sufficient quantity of Simple water,
after the Oil is separated, keep the water for a new distillation.

After the same manner is made Oil of Bay berries, Ivy berries etc.

Or you may draw Oil from the aforenamed berries bruised and steeped twenty
four hours in warm water, adding six pound of water, or if the berries be very
dry, ten pound of water to each pound of berries, and stilling them as before.

Culpeper] A. Oil of Juniper berries, prevails wonderfully in pains of the
yard, and running of the reins, the falling sickness, it is a mighty
preservative against the pestilence, and all evil airs, it purges the reins,
provokes urine, breaks the stone, helps the dropsy: the quantity to be taken
at a time in any convenient liquor, is three or four drops; outwardly by
unction it helps the gout; two or three drops dropped upon the navil helps the
Chollick.

A. Oil of Bay berries helps the Chollick and Illiack passion.

A. Oil of Ivy berries helps cold (...) of the joints, the (...) one, and
provokes the terms (...). Use them as Juniper Oil.

Oil of Turpentine.
The Colledg] Take of Venis Turpentine as (...) as you will, put it into an
Allembick, with four times its weight in common Water, still it with a
convenient fire, and draw off a white thin Oil like water, the Colophonia will
remain in the bottom of the vessel, this Oil (...) be drawn into a bath, (...)
from burning in a (...) still.

Culpeper] A. It is wonderful good in cold afflictions of the nerves, and all
diseases coming of cold and wind, it corrects the cold afflictions of the
lungues, as Asthmaes, difficulty of breathing etc. A dram being taken in the
morning: outwardly it adorns the body, takes away the prints of scabs, and the
small pocks, chops in the skin and breasts of women, and deafness being dropped
into the (...).

Oil of (...)
The Colledg] Take of Mirth bruised, (...) of each six pound, dissolve them in
sixty pound of spring water, and still them in a Copper still, (...) bick.

Culpeper] It keeps wounds (and all things else (...) Fioravantus) from (...),
it (...) the (...) and youthful, quickly cures wounds, and (...) dropped into
the ears.

Oil of Guajacum.
The Colledg] Take of (...) in gross powder, as much as you will, put it in a
retort, and still it in Sand, the Oil that cames first out, because (...) and
sweeter keep it by its self, which by (...) with much water will yet be sweeter.

The same things are to be observed in the distillation of Box, and Oak, and
other solid woods, as also Oil of Tartar, with its (...) Spirit, which (...) be
distilled out of Crystal of Tartar in the same (...).

Oil of Wax.
The Colledg] Take of yellow Wax melted one pound, with which mix three pound
of Tiles in powder, draw out the Oil in Sand with a (...), which rectify with
water.

Culpeper] A. I am of Opinion that Oil of Wax, is as singular remedy for burns,
and (...) ulcers, as any is, or need to be.

The Colledg] After the same manner is (...) Oil of Fats, and Gums, and Rosins,
which cannot be (...) into powder, as Ammoniacum, (...), (...), Sagapen, Liquid
Styrax, Tacha (...) etc.

Oleum Latericium Phylosophorum. Page 190. in L. B.
The Colledg] Take of Bricks broken in pieces, as big as an Hens egg, heat
them red hot, and (...) them in old Oil, where let them lie till they be (...),
then beat them into fine Powder, and still them in a glass retort, with a fit
receiver, give fire to it by degrees, and keep the Oil in a glass Close stopped.

Culpeper] A. The Oil will quickly penetrate, and is a sovereign remedy for the
gout, and all cold afflions in the joints or nerves, cramps, epilepsies, or
falling sickness, palsies; it mollifies hard swellings, dissolves cold
swellings, as also cold distempers of the spleen, reins and bladder.

Oleum Succini. Page 191. in the Latin Book. Or, Oil of Amber.
The Colledg] Take of yellow Amber one part, burnt Flints, or powder of Tiles
two parts, distill them in a retort in Sand, keep the while clear Oil which
comes out first by it self, then distill it on, till all come out, keep both
Oils severally, and rectify them with water: gather the Salt of Amber which
sticks to the neck of the retort, and being purged by Solution, Filtration, and
Coagulation, according to art keep it for use.

Culpeper] A. It speedily helps all afflictions of the nerves, and convulsions,
falling sickness etc. Being given in convenient liquors, it is a singular
remedy against poison and pestilent air, diseases of the reins and bladder, the
fits of the mother; the nose being anointed with it, the chollick; it causes
speedy labor to women in travail being taken in Vervain Water, it strengthens
the body exceedingly, as also the brain and senses and is of an opening nature.

The Colledg] (...) is distilled oil of Hold learned College do not go about to
teach an Alchymist thus in your chemical shop you have erected in in your
College garden, if you do, you will break your brains, and so of fools turn
mad men.
Jet, and of Gums and Rosins, which may be poudered, as Benjamin, Mastich,
Frankincense, etc.

Culpeper] A. Having perused these Oils following, I would willingly have left
them quite (...), I mean, the manner allotted by the College to make them.

A. 1. Because I fear they and the truth are Separatists.

A. 2. Because the Ignorant will know as well how to make them as they did
before, when I have done what I can.

A. 3. As to Alchymists (to whose profession the making of them belongs) I
shall seem like Phormio the Philosopher, who never having seen (...), undertook
to (...) Military (...) before (...), who was one of the best Soldiers in the
world; But I am in a manner forced to it. He that is able to understand the
Receipt, is able to understand that the failings are not mine, but the
Colleges.

Oleum (...) Butyrum Antimonii. Page 191. in Lat. B. Oil or Butter of Antimony.
The Colledg] Take of crude Antimony, Mercury sublimate, of each one pound,
beat them into powder, and put them in a glass retort, with a large neck, give
fire by degrees into a reverberatory, or else in Sand, the Fat will distill down
into the receiver, that part of which that sticks to the neck of the (...),
will (...) be melted, by putting a gentle fire under it; let this fat be
rectified in a small retort, and kept either in an open Phiol, or in a Celler
or other moist place, that it (...) be (...) Oil, which must be kept in a
vessel close stopped.

Oleum Arsenici. Page 191. in Lat. Book. Or, Oil of Arsenick.
The Colledg] Take of Christalline, Arsenick first sublimated with Colcother
alone, mix it with an equal part of Salt of Tartar, and Saltpeter, calcine it
between two pots, the uppermost of which, has a hole through, till no smoke
(...), dissolve the matter so calcined in warm water that you may draw out the
salt, moisten the Powder which resides at the bottom with Liquor Tartari, and
dry it by the fire, do so three times, then dissolve the matter again that you
may draw out the salt, and there will remain a white powder and fixed, which
being kept in a moist place will dissolve into a moist substance like Oil or
Butter.

Oleum Salis. Page 192. in the Latin Book. Or, Oil of Salt.
The Colledg] Take of French, or Spanish Bay salt, as much as you will,
dissolve it in water and filter it, and having then put it in a Copper vessel,
mix with the Brine fine Powder of tiles (...) bricks two or three times the
weight of the Salt before it was dissolved, and set it upon hot coals, and let
the water evaporate away (continually stirring it) till it be very dry, (...)
put the Powder into a glass Retort well luted, placed in a furnace with a fit
receiver, giving fire by degrees, to the height, for the space of twelve hours,
so shall you have an Oil, or sharp spirit of Salt in the receiver, rectify
this by separating the (...) in a retort in sand, and keep it close stopped for
use.

Culpeper] A. Being mixed with Turpentine and applied outwardly, it helps the
gout; three drops taken every morning in convenient Liquor, preserves youth,
consumes the dropsy, resists fevers, convulsions, and the falling sickness;
being mixed with Oyhtments, it is exceeding good in ruptures and dislocations.

Oleum Sulphuris. Page 192. in the Latin Book. Or, Oil of Sulphur.
The Colledg] It is prepared in a Bell still by (...) burning and consuming of
Brimstone, by which a sharp spirit beating against the sides of the still, will
turn into liquor, and (...) down like water or oil, the orderly disposing of
the still and (...), and other commodities belonging to this operation, we
leave to the (...) of the Artificer.

Culpeper] A. Prevails against diseases coming of cold, putrefaction or wind,
fevers, ague, tertian, quartan or quotidian, pestilence; wounds and ulcers,
affects of the brain, mouth, teeth, liver, stomach, spleen, matrix, bladder,
entrails, and arteries coming of abundance of humors or putrefaction; outwardly
applied it helps (...), ulcers of the mouth, and (...); the way to take it
inwardly is thus, dip the top of a feather in the Oil, and wash it in the
liquor or decoction you give it in; in quotidian agues, give it in wine, in
which Rosemary or Mints or both have been (...); in (...) in (...). Centaury
has been boiled; in quartan agues, in Bugloss water; in all of them a little
before the fit come: in pestilences, in Wine in which Rhadishes have been
boiled, mingled with a little Venice Treacle; in the falling sickness, with
decoction of Betony or Peony; in coughs with decoction of Nettle seed and
Hysop, both of them made with Wine; for phlegm in Wormwood Water; for the wind
chollick, in Chamomel flower water; for dropsies and cold livers, in Selondine
water and Honey; for the (...) and stoppage of the spleen, in Tamamaris Water:
for the French pox, in Fumitory or Broom-flower water: against worms, in Grass
or Wormwood water: for the fits of the mother, in decoction of Betony or
Featherfew in Wine: for suppression of Urine, in decoction of Garlic with
Wine: for the gout, in decoction of Chamepitys Wine; in wounds and ulcers, the
place is lightly to be touched with a feather wet in the Oil: if a hollow
toothach, put a drop into it, if all your teeth ach make a decoction of Mints
in Wine and put a drop or two of this Oil to it, and hold it warm in your mouth.

Oleum Vitrioli. Page 192. in the Latin Book. Or, Oil of Vitriol.
The Colledg] Take Ungarick or English Vitriol of the best, as much as you
will, melt it in an Earthen vessel glazed, and exhale away all the moisture,
continually stirring it, and so bring it into a yellow powder, which is to be
put in earthen Retorts that will endure the fire, placed in an open furnace,
give fire by degrees, even to the height for three days, till the receiver
which before was full of smoke be clear, rectify the liquor from the (...) in
sand, and keep the strong and pouderous Oil by it self.

Culpeper] A. It must be mixed with other medicines, for it kills being taken
alone; it asswageth thirst, allayeth the violent heat in fevers and
pestilences, and a few drops of it gives a pleasant grateful taste to any
medicine.

Aqua fortis. Page 192. in the Latin Book.
The Colledg] Take of Vitriol prepared, as for Oil of Vitriol two pound; Salt
peter purged one pound; beat them together, and put them in a Retort well
luted, place it in a furnace with a large receiver, and giving fire to it
distill it by degrees for twenty four hours, rectify the water in sand.

Aqua Mellis. Page 193. in Lat. Book. Or, Water of Honey.
The Colledg] Take of the best Honey sour pound; dry Sand two pound: distill it
in a glass still, so capacious that the matter take up only the fist part of
it, draw off the phlegm in a bath, then increase the fire, and draw off the
yellowish water.

Culpeper.] A. Paracelsus advises it to be drawn five times over, and calls it
Quintessence of Honey, and extols the virtues of it to the skies; says, it
will revive dying men: which Mr. Charles Butler of Hamshire also affirms.

Liquor seu Liquamen Tartari, seu Oleum Tartari Per Deliquium. Page 193. in
Lat. Book. Or, Liquor of Tartar.
The Colledg] Take of Tartar of white Wine calcined till it be white as much as
you will, put it in Hypocrates his sleeve, and hang it in a moist Celler that
the Tartar may dissolve, putting a vessel under it to receive it, dissolve what
remains in the sleeve in common water, filter it, and evaporate it away till it
begin to be like Alum, then use that like the former.

Culpeper] A. This is common to be had at every Apothecaries. Virgins buy it to
take away the Sunburn and freckles from their faces. It takes off the rust from
Iron, and preserves it bright a long time.

Oleum Mirrhae per Deliquium. Page 193. in L. B. Or, Oil of Mirrh.
The Colledg] Boil Hens Eggs till they be hard, then cut them through the
middle of the length, take out the yolk and fill the Cavities half full of
beaten Mirrh, join them again and bind them gently with a thread, place them
between two dishes in a moist place, a grate being put between, so will the
Liquor of the Mirrh distill down into the lower dish.

Culpeper] A. You had both it and its virtues before.

Only Oil of Tartar Chemical is left out.
Oil of Tartar.
The Colledg] Take of Tartar so much as you will, put it into a large Retort,
with that proportion, that (...) the third part of the vessel be fid distill it
in Sand with a strong fire; afterward (the Oil being first separated from the
water, or spirit, of Tartar) rectify it with much water, to correct the smell
of it; let it stand open a long time in the Sun.

CHEMICAL PREPARATIONS MORE FREQUENT IN USE.
Antimonium cum Nitro calcinatum. Page 194. Or, Antimony calcined with Niter.
Colledg] TAke of the best Antimony one part, pure Niter two parts, bruise the
Antimony, then ad the Niter to it, bring them both into Powder, which burn in a
Crucible, which will be most conveniently done if you put it in the red hot
Crucible, with a ladle or such a like instrument, then take it out and beat it
again and mix it with the same quantity of Niter as before, put it into the
Crucible upon hot coals, and putting into it a live coal, fire it, stirring it
with an iron thing that it may burn all about equally, and when there needs put
in more fresh coals, bruise it the third time, and with the like quantity of
Niter use it as before, at last beat it into powder, wash it in pure water and
keep it for use.

Chalybs Praeparatus. Page 194. in Lat. Book. Or, Steel prepared.
Take of filings of Steel cleansed with a Loadstone, as much as you will,
moisten them twelve times with sharp white Wine Vinegar, dry it in the Sun or a
dry air, beat it in an iron mortar, and levigate it upon a Marble with a little
Cinnamon water, and so bring it into a very fine powder and keep it for use.

Crystal of Tartar. Page 195. in the Latin Book.
Take of Tartar of white, or Rhenish Wine as much as you will, beat it in gross
powder, and wash it from the dross in water, then boil it in a sufficient
quantity of spring water, after you have taken away the scum, filter it, being
somewhat warm through a brown paper into a glass warmed before, least it break,
then place it in a Cellar, that the Crystal may stick to the sides of the
glass, the which wash in pure water and keep for use.

Crocus Martis. Page 195. in the Latin Book.
Heat pieces of Iron or Steel red hot, and thrust them into a great heap of
Brimstone, a bazon of water being set underneath, the mettle will run out like
Wax, which being separated from the Sulphur, beat into very fine powder in an
Iron mortar, which put into foursquare earthen pans, not above afingers breadth
in deepness, set it at the flame of a reverberatory three or four days, till
it look red like a Sponge, the tops of which take away with an Iron, set the
rest at the fire again, till it look so all of it.

Crocus Metallorum. Page 195. in the Latin Book.
Take of the best Antimony, and salt Peter, of each equal parts, beat them into
powder severally, then mix them together, put them into a hot crucible with a
ladle, or other convenient instrument, let it be beaten till the noise cease,
then remove it from the fire and cool it, then the vessel being broken,
separate it from the white crust at top, and keep it for use.

Flos Sulphuris. Page 196. in the Latin Book Or, Flower of Brimstone.
Take of the best Brimstone, and beat it with equal parts of Colcothar of
Vitriol, put it in a long earthen still, a head of glass large enough being put
over it, give fire to it in sand by degrees, stirring it with a Hares foot, it
will be the purer if you iterate it with new Colcothar.

Lapis infernalis. Page 196. in the Latin Book.
Take of Ly of which black Soap is made, and (...) it to a stone in a frying
Pan, do not consume all the humor, when it is cold cut it in the form of dice,
and keep it in a glass close stopped.

Otherwise. Take of Vitriol calcined to redness two ounces, Salarmoniack one
ounce, Tartar calcined to whiteness, quick Lime, of each three ounces, sprinkle
all of them being beaten, with Ly made of Figtrees, or Spurge, or Soap, strain
it often till almost all the matter be dissolved, then boil it in a brass
vessel, till the moisture be consumed, that which is left keep close stopped
for use.

Lapis seu Sal Prunellae. Page 196. in the Latin Book.
Take of pure salt peter one pound, put it in a crucible, and place coals
round about it, that the niter may flow like mettle, then put in by degrees two
ounces of flower of Brimstone, after the Brimstone is consumed, pour the Niter
out into a brass basin, when it is cold keep it in a glass close stopped.

Magisterum of Pearl and Corral. Page 196. in L. B
Take of Pearl or Corral, as much as you will, levigate it into very subtle
powder, to which put such a quantity of Spirit of radicate Vinegar, that it may
overtop it the breadth of three or four fingers, digest it in ashes till it be
dissolved, then pour off the Liquor, and put in fresh till the residue be
dissolved, filter it, and put a little Liquor of Tartar to it, so will a white
powder fall down to the bottom of the glass, which being separated from what is
dissolved, is to be washed, first with spring water, then with Bawm or Borrage
water. Radicate Vinegar is that which is distilled with Bay Salt in Sand.

Mercurius Sublimatus Corrosivus. P. 197. in Lat. B. Mercury Sublimate
Corrosiye.
Take of Vitriol purified by Solution, Filtration, and Coagulation, and
calcined till it be yellow one pound, Bay Salt in like manner (...) and dried,
(...) in like (...) purified, of each half a (...), crude Mercury cleansed by
straining through a (...), one pound, bruise them all in a wooden mortar, with
a wooden Pestle, till the Salis are in powder, and no bits of the Mercury are
seen, which will be best (...) if you do it at diverse times; as for example
sake, taking Vitriol and Mercury, of each one ounce, Salt and Nyter, of each
half an ounce at a time, and so forth, till the whole matter be brought into a
powder and mixed, then put this matter into a glass body, so capacious that it
fill not above the one half of it, place the glass a little above the middle in
Sand, in a conveniint Furnace, give fire to it by degrees, even to the height,
twelve or sixteen hours being passed, the sublimated Mercury will stick to the
top of the glass, which being separated and bruised, sublimate by it sels the
second and third time, and oftener if it be too impure, till it be as white as
snow, and no dross mixed with it.

Mercurius dulcis Sublimatus. Page 198. in Latin B.
Take of Mercury sublimated as before four ounces crude Mercury three ounces,
bruise them, and grind them in a wooden mortar, with a wooden pestle, till they
be perfectly mixed, put them into a long Phiol, which place above the middle in
Sand, put first a gentle fire under it, then increase it by degrees six hours,
that the Mercury may be driven from the bottom, into the middle region of the
Phiall, which being separated from that at top and bottom, sublime it the
second time, and the third if need be, till it have lest its acromony, and be
freed from all impurity, and be as white as snow.

Mercurius dulcis precipitated. Page 198. in Latin B.
Take of crude Mercury, driven from Sea salt in a retort, one part: Aquafortis
of our description two parts, make a dissolution according to art, mean season
provide brine of Sea salt, and fair water as strong as you can make it, filter
it, and put your solution of Mercury into this brine, and forth with a white
powder will precipitate, which is to be washed from its acrimony in Simple
distilled water, or warm spring water, dried and kept in a glass for use.

Mercurius praecipitatus Corrosivus. Page 198. in L. B. Or, Corrosive
precipitate.
Make a dissolution of crude Mercury, and Aqua fortis as before, then evaporate
it till it be dry, at last increase the fire and stir the matter with an Iron,
till it be red, keep it in a glass for use.

Mercurius vitae. Page 198. in the Latin Book.
Take of butter of Antimony distilled according to our prescript, put it into
clear water, which will forthwith be white, a milk white powder will
precipitate, which is to be (...) by much washing in warm water, and dried by a
gentle beat and kept for use.

Regulus Antimonii. Page 199. in the Latin Book.
Take of crude Antimony, Salt peter, (...) of (...) equal parts, beat the
Antimony a part in (...), with an Iron Pestle, then ad the rest in powder, put
this powder by degrees with a (...) Crucible, placed amongst (...) coals, after
its (...) shake the Crucible gently, that the Regulus may sink to the bottom,
which being taken out and (...) by degrees, and freed from the dross, keep for
use.

Salcharum (...): Page 199. in the Latin Book.
Put as much red Lead as (...), and put so much Vinegar to it, as may over
(...) it the breadth of four fingers, warm it, and stir it a good while, after
it is settled, pour off the (...), and put (...), do it so often (...) no more
sweetness be drawn from it, put all the liquors, (...) let thom settle, then
exhale it away in a glass, (...) consumed, or until, it being set in a Cellar,
the Cristal appear, which having taken out, exhale it again, and set it in a
Cellar or cold place, till more, (...), do so till no more appear, then
dissolve the Cristal in clear water, filter and coagulate it.

Sal Vitrioli. Page 199. in the Latin Book. Or, Salt of Vitriol.
Reduce Ungarick, or English Vitriol being (...) in a crucible into (...), of
an obscure purple (...), which powder cast by degrees into a large glass, in
which is either distilled, or other very clear (...) it continually with a
stick, till the water which was at first hot, is cold, then let it stand twenty
four hours, then filter it, lastly (...) it in a glass (...), and coagulate it
according to art.

Turpethum Minerale. Page 200. in the Latin Book.
Take of crude Mercury, Oil of Vitriol separated from all the phlegm, of each
equal parts, still them in (...), increasing the fire by degrees, till all the
(...) be flown up in the air, a white Mass remaining in the bottom, which being
separated from the crude Mercury, wash in spring water, and forth with it will
(...) yellow, wash it in warm water from all its (...), dry it, and keep it for
use.

Tartarum Vitriolatum. Page 200. in the Latin B.
Take of liquor of Tartar four ounces, into which drop by drops two ounces of
Oil of Vitriol, well rectified, so will a white powder fall to the bottom, which
dry, and keep for use.

Vitriolum album depuratum. Page 200. in the Lat. B. Or, White Vitriol cleansed.
Dissolve white Vitriol in clear water, filter it, and coagulate it.

Vitrum Antimonii. Page 200. in the Latin Book.
Take of good Antimony in fine powder, and put it (...) a large stone vessel,
put fire under, til it grow into clots, beat it, and do so again, and again,
always stirring it til it resemble white ashes, and smoke not at al, then take
of this half a pound, Corax half an ounce, put them in a crucible, the which
cover with a Tile, set it in a strong fire, till there flow a matter like
water, then put it into a brass or copper vessel, and keep the glass for use.

THE GENERAL WAY OF MAKING EXTRACTS.
EXTRACTS may be made almost of every Medicine, whether Simple, as Herbs,
Flowers, Seeds; or Compound, as Species or Pills: Therefore take of any
Medicine cut or bruised, or prepared as the infusion requires, and power to it
Spirit of Wine, or distilled water, as the Pbysition commands, let it stand in
infusion in the heat of a bath, two days more or less according as the
thickness or thinness of the (...) requires until the tincture be sufficient,
then separate the liquor and put in more as before, do so till the Medicine
afford no more tincture; put all these Liquors together and filter them and
exhate the humidity to the heat of a bath, till the matter be left at the
bottom of the thickness of Honey to which if the Physician prescribe, you may
add two scruples or half a dram of its own proper, or other convenient (...) to
every ounce of Extract that so it may keep the longer.

THE WAY OF MAKING SALTS.
Salt Volatle, or Essential, is thus made.
TAke of any Plant when it is fresh and full of Juice a sufficient quantity,
bruise it in a wooden Mortar, and a great deal of clear water being added, boil
it till half be consumed, strain (...) decoction, press it strongly and boil it
to the thickness of Honey, set it in a glass or glazed vessel in a cold place
eight days at least, and a Cristal Salt will arise like Sal. Gem. which gather
and wash with its proper water, and dry for your use. Thus is Salt made of
wormwood, Cardus, Mugwort, and other bitter Herbs; but of other Herbs with much
difficnlty.

Salt fixed, or Elementary, is thus made.
It consists in four things, Calcination, Solution, Filtration, Coagulation.

Burn the matter you would make salt of into white ashes, and berein sometimes
you must have a care (...) by too hasty burning they run to glass; then with
(...) water make the ashes into ly to draw out the Salt, filter the Ly and boil
it in an (...) vessel by a (...), that the water may be exhaled and the Salt
left; which Solution, Filtration, and Coagulation being repeated certain times
it will be free from all impurity, and be very white.

Thus is prepared Salt of Plants, and parts of living Creatures amongst which
these excel; Salt of wormwood, Time, Rosemary, Centaury the less, (...),
Cardus, Masterwort, Parsley, Rest-harrow, Ash, Dwarf Elder, Box, (...), St.
John's wort, Cichory, Sullendine, Scurvy Grass, Betony, Maudlin, Bawm, Cetrach
etc.

PREPARATIONS OF CERTAIN SIMPLE MEDICINES.
The way of Preparing Fats.
TAke of fresh fat, the veins, strings, and skins being taken away wash them so
often in fair water till they be no longer bloody, then beat them well, and
melt them in a double vessel, strain them and power off the water, keep it in a
glass in a cold place; it will endure a year.

So is also prepared Marrow taken out of fresh bones, especially in Autumn.

The burning of Brass.
Lay flakes of Brass in an earthen vessel, interposing Salt or Brimstone
between each of them, so lay flake upon flake burn them sufficiently and wash
the Ashes with warm water till they be sweet.

The washing of Aloes.
Put as much Aloes in powder in a glass, as you will, putting a sufficient
quantity of warm water to it, that it may overtop it two or three fingers
thickness, stirring it about with a Spatule, that the purer part of the Aloes
may be mixed with the water, that being poured off, put in fresh warm water,
and stir it in like manner, that the dross may be separated, gather those
waters together, evaporate the Humidity, and keep the Mass.

The preparation of Bole Armenick.
Grind it small, and dissolve it so often in Rose water, till the dross and Sand
be taken away, dry it in the Sun, and keep it being dried.

Foecula Brioniae.
Take of Bryony roots scraped, bruised, and the juice pressed out, which being,
let it stand still a while in a vessel, a white powder like Starch will fall
from the bottom, from which pour the water, and let it dry for use.

So is Gersa Serpentaria prepared of Aron roots, and Foecula of the roots of
Radishes, and Orris.

May Butter.
About the latter end of May, take fresh Butter without Salt, and in a glazed
earthen vessel, set it in the Sun, that it may be all melted, strain it through
a rag without pressing, set it in the Sun again, strain it again, and keep it a
year.

The preparations of Lapis Calaminaris.
Heat it red hot three times in the fire, and quench it as often in Plantane
and Rose water, at (...) levigate it upon a Marble, and with the same waters
make it into Balls.

The washing of Lime.
Bruise quicklime, put it in a pan, and mix it with sweet water, and when it is
settled to the bottom, change the water, and mix it again, do so seven or eight
times, filtring it every time, at last do it with Rose water, and dry the Lime.

The preparation of Corral, Pearls, Crabs Eyes, and other precious Stones.
Beat them in a steel mortar, and levigate them on a Marble, putting a little
Rose water to them, till they are in very fine powder, then make them into
Balls.

The preparation of Coriander seed.
Steep them twenty four hours in sharp Vinegar, then dry them. So may you
prepare (...) seed.

The burning of Hearts horn, Ivory, and other bones.
Burn them in a crucible till they e white, then beat them into powder, and
wash them with Rose water, at last levigate them on a Marble, and make them
into Troches, you may dissolve Camphire half an ounce in the last pound of Rose
water, if you please.

A new Preparation of them
Hang them by a thread in a vessel of Aqua vitae, so as that they touch not the
Liquor, then putting on the head distill it, and the vapors ascending will make
them easy to be brought into powder, after many distillations.

The way to make Elaterium.
Take of wild Cucumers almost ripe, and cut them with the knife upwards, and
gently press out the juice with your foremost fingers, let it run through a
sieve into a clean glazed vessel, let it settle, and power off the clear water
into another vessel, dry the setlings in the Sun and keep them for use; if you
will you may keep the clear water for Unguentum de Artanita.

The Preparation of the bark of Spurge Roots.
Cleanse them and infuse them three days in sharp Vinegar, then dry them. So
are Laurel leaves, Mezereon, and other things of that nature prepared.

The Preparation of Euphorbium.
Take of Euphorbium purged from the dross and poudered, put it in a glass and
put so great a quantity of Juice of Lemmons to it, that it may overtop it three
or four fingers; then place them in a hot bath, till the Euphorbium be
dissolved in the Juice, strain it through a rag, place it in a bath again, and
evaporate away the juice, and keep the Euphorbium for use.

The Preparation of Black Hellebore Roots.
Steep such black Hellebore Roots as are brought to us, the woody pith being
taken away, three days in juice of Quinces by a moderate heat, then dry them
and lay them up.

The Preparation of Goats blood.
Take a Goat of a middle age, and feed him a month with Burnet, Smallage,
Parsley, Mallows, Lovage, and such like things, kill him in the end of Summer,
about the Dog days, then take the blood which flows out of his Arteries and
let it settle, pouring off the water, dry the blood in an Oven.

The Burning of young Swallows.
Kill young Swallows so as the blood may flow upon their wings, then sprinkle
them with a little Salt and burn them in a new glazed vessel, and keed the
ashes for use.

So are burned Hedg-bogs, Frogs, Toags, and the like creatures.

The Preparation of Lacca.
Take of Lacca not cleansed, for otherwise your labor were vain, bruised a
little, and boiled in water in which the Roots of long Birthwort, and Squinanth
of each equal parts have been boiled, till the purer part swim at top and the
dross sink to the bottom, keep that purer part, put it in a Glass and cover it,
and evaporate the moisture either by the heat of the Sun, or of a (...), and
being dry keep it for your use.

The preparation of Lapis (...).
Let Lapis Lazult being beaten into very fine powder, be so often washed in
water, continually stirring it, till the water (after washing) remain clear
without any other taste than its own.

The preparation of Litharge.
Let the Litharge be ground into very fine powder in a mortar, then pour clear
water upon it, and stir it up and down till it be troubled and thick, then pour
off that water into another vessel, and put in fresh water to the powder of the
stone, (...) up and down till it be thick, and pour that water off to the
former; do this so often till nothing but dross remains in the mortar, the
thinner substance being all mixed with the water you poured off, let that stand
and settle, so will the pure Litharge remain in the bottom, pour the water off
gently, dry the Litharge and grind it upon a Marble so long, till no harshness
can be discorned in it by your tongue.

The preparation of Earthworms.
Slit them in the middle and wash them so often in white wine till they be
cleansed from their impurity, then dry them and keep them for your use.

The preparation of Sows or Wood-lice.
Take of Wood-lice as many as you will, wash them very clean in pure white
wine, then put them in a new glassed pot, which being shut close put into a hot
oven, that so they may be dried with a moderate heat to be beaten into powder.

The manner of preparing Oesypus.
Take of Wool unclensed which was taken off from the Neck, Ribs, and
Shoulder-pits of the Sheep, put it into warm water often times, and wash it
dilligently til all the fatness be come off from it into the water; afterward
press it out and lay it by, then pour that fat and filthy water out of one
vessel into another, holding the vessel on high, pouring and repouring till it
be froathy; let the froath settle, then take away the fat that swims on the
top, pour it and repour it as before till it be froathy, then again take away
the fat that swims at the top, do so, so often till no more froath appear, nor
fat swim at top; then take the (...) with the froath and wash it up and down
with your hand in clear water, so often and so long till the filth be washed
from it, which may be known by the water remaining clear, and the fat being
tasted do not bite your tongue, then keep it in a thick and clean pot in a cold
place.

The Preparation of Opium.
Dissolve the Opium in Spirit of Wine, strain it and evaporate it to its due
consistence.

Powder of Raw Lead.
Beat your Lead into very thin Plates, and cut these thin Plates into very
small pieces, the which steep three days in very sharp Vinegar, changing the
Vinegar every day, then take them out, and dry them, without burning them, and
take a little pains with them in a mortar to bring them into very fine Powder.

The washing of Lead.
Stir about water in a Leaden Mortar with a Leaden Pestle, and labor at it to
some purpose, till the water look black and thick; strain out this water, dry
it, and make it into balls.

The burning of Lead.
Take as many thin Plates of Lead as you please, put them into a new earthen
pot, lay them plate upon plate with Brimstone between each plate, then put the
Pot in the fire, and stir the Lead about with an Iron Spatule when the
Brimstone burns, until you have brought it all into (...), the which wash in
clean water and keep for your use.

The Preparation of Fox Lungues.
Take of the fresh Lungues of a Fox, the Aspera Arteria being taken away, wash
them dilligently in white wine, in which Hysop and Scabious has been boiled,
then dry them in an Oven so moderately hot that no part of them may be burned,
then keep them in a glass stopped with wax.

The Preparation of Scammony.
Take the Core out of a Quince and fill the vaid place with powder of Scammony,
then join the (...) together again, and wrap it up in Past, bake it in an Oven,
(...) it under the ashes; afterward take out the Scammony and keep it for use.
This is that which is vulgarly called Diacrydium or Diagrydium.

Another way of Preparation of Scammony with Sulphur.
Take of Scammony (...) small, as much as you will, spread it upon a brown Paper
and hold it over (...) coals upon which you have put Brimstone, stir the
Scammony about all the while till it begin to melt or look white; and this is
called Scammony (...).

The Prepatation of Squils.
Take a great Squil whilst it is green, casting away the outward rinds, (...)
it in past and (...) it in an oven till it be tender, which you may know if you
pierce it through with a Bodkin, then take it out of the oven and take off all
the slakes one by one (leaving (...) part which is hard, behind) draw a cord
through them, and bang them in a dry place, at that distance the one, from the
other, that one may not touch another, til they be dried; yet take this caution
along with you, That you ought not to cut nor pierce them with any Iron
Instrument, but with Wood, Ivory, or Bone.

Washed Tartar.
Take of bruised Tartar as much as you will, pour cold and clear spring water
to it, stir it up and down, then let it settle, pour off that water and pour on
more, use it as before, and repeat the usage so long till the water remain
clear after washing.

Boiled Turpentine.
Take of Venice Turpentine a pound, to which pour twenty four pound of Water,
in which, boil it so long till it be thick, and being cold may be rubbed in
powder like Rozin and beaten like Glass.

The Preparation of Tutty.
Tutty is prepared the same way that Lapis Calaminaris is; tie it up in a clean
Linen cloth, which shake up and down, drawing it this way and that way in a
vessel full of clean water, till the thinner and more profitable part come out
into the water, and the thicker and impurer remain in the cloth; then let it
settle, and power off the water gently from it; repeat this operation so often,
till nothing good for any thing remain in the cloth: Then take what you bave
purified, sprinkle it with a little Rose water, make it into Troches to be kept
for use.

A CONCLUSION.
I Have now (courteous Reader) led thee through the Colleges reformed and
refined Dispensatory; I assure thee not led thereto by any envious principles
against them, for I bear them more good will, and love them better than they
love themselves; only I hate selvishness in whomsoever I find it. If thou
find me here and there a little lavish in such expressions as many like not,
I pray pardon that, it is my Dialect, I cannot write without it: I assure thee
it was not premediated: If thou think I did it for gain, thou art so far
wide from the truth, that unless thou change thy opinion, it is to be feared
truth and you will not meet again in a long time. I have taken up this World as
Travelers takes up an Inn, not as a Freeholder takes a Dwelling: I take no
care for Victuals before I am hungry, nor new Clothes before my old lack
mending. I have read in some Authors that Mammon which signifies Covetousness
is the master Devil over those that tempt men to sin, and I partly believe it:
I have read also in Hosea, 4. 12. That those that make the Earth their
happiness, go a whoring from under their God, which made me terribly afraid,
lest in one act, I should commit two evils, forsake the fountain of
Living-waters, and buy my self a Cestern that would hold none. I have a very
simpathetical Spirit, and could either weep with Heraclitus or laugh with (...)
to see men spend all their pains about the gains of this world, and when they
have done, must die and leave it (as Solomon says) they know not to whom,
whether he will be a wise man or a fool; therefore mistake me not, but judge of
me as I am: I desire not to spend the strength of an immortal Spirit in seeking
after what has no worth in it, which may make me worse, cannot make me better.
There was a tale lately told me of a Lady of a great estate, that was so
extreme foolish, that she would ride in the Coach-box and drive the Horses,
whilst the Coachman rid in the Coach: you think this was a great madness; yet
a greater madness by odds it is, for a man that is Heir to an Eternal Being to
make himself a slave to the Earth, which must perish: I will assure you it was
a higher principle than all these, moved me to write, viz. Pure love to that
Nation in which I was born and bred; of which I may justly say, If the Spirit
of God said Israel was destroyed for want of knowledge when sin reigned but
single, how much more this Nation when it reigns by troops? I weigh not the ill
language of those that mind earthly things; I wish them all the riches their
hearts can desire, for they have all their wit (...) it is comfortable enough
for me that I am beloved of the honest: my reward I expect hereafter in that
place whereinto no Earthly-minded nor selfish man shall come.

Nich. Culpeper.

FINIS.
A SINOPSIS of the KEY of GALENS Method of Physic.
Page THe Scope of the whole Work. 301

Sect. 1.
Of the Temperature of Medicines.
Of Temperate Medicines what they are. 302 Their Use Ibid Of Hot Medicines.
Of Medicines hot in the first degree ibid Use 1. Reduce the body to natural
heat. ibid Use 2. To mitigate pain ibid Use 3. To take away weariness and help
Fevers. 303 A Caution ibid Use 4. To help digestion and breed good blood. ibid
Of Medicines hot in the second degree.
What they are ibid Use 1. To help moist (...) ibid Use 2. To take away (...)
ibid Use 3. To open the pores ibid Of Medicines hot in the third degree.
Use 1. To cut tough humors ibid Use 2. To provoke sweat ibid Use 3. To resist
poison ibid Of Medicines hot in the fourth degree.
Use. To cause Inflammations, and to cause Blisters. ib. Of cold Medicines. Of
Medicines cold in the first degree.
Use 1. To qualify the heat of food ibid Use 2. To assuage the heat of the
Bowels ibid A Caution ibid Of Medicines cold in the second and third degrees.
Use 1. To assuage the heat of choler 394 Use 2. To take away the inflammations
of hot swellings ibid Use 3. To cause sleep ibid Of Medicines cold in the
fourth degree.
Use 1. To mitigate desperate pains by (...) the Senses ibid Of Moistning
Medicines.
Use 1. To help the roughness of the throat 304 Use 2. To make the inward parts
of the body (...) ibid Of Drying Medicines.
Use. To strengthen the Members of the Body 304 Cautions ibid

Sect. 2.
Of the Apropriation of Medicines to the several parts of the Body.
THe (...) of Authors 305

Chap. 1
Of Medicines apropriated to the Head.
Their Difference ibid Cautions in their use ibid Of Medicines apropriated to
the Brain. ibid Directions in their use 305, 306 Of Medicines apropriated to
the Eyes.
The opinion of Astrologers 306 The election or choice of Medicines for the
Eyes 306 Of Medicines apropriated to the Mouth and Nose. 306 Cautions for their
Use ibid The manner of the Medicines ibid Medicines apropriated to the Ears.
ibid What they are, and why they are so ibid Medicines apropriated to the
teeth. ibid What they are, and why they are so ibid

Chap. 2
Of Medicines apropriated to the Breast and Lungs.
What they are 307 The Opinion of other Authors ibid The Authors Opinion ibid

Chap. 3
Of Medicines apropriated to the Heart.
What the office of the Heart is 1 To cherish life. 307 2 To add vigor to the
affections ibid The afflictions of the Heart. 1 Excessive heat 308 2 Poisons
ibid 3 Melancholy vapors ibid What Cordials are. ibid 1 Such as metigate the
heat in Fevers. ibid 2 Such as resist (...). ibid 1 By Antipathy between the
Medicine and the poison ibid 2 By Sympathy between the Medicine and the Heart
ibid (...) Such as strengthen the Heart ibid 4 Such as refresh the Spirits ibid

Chap. 4
Of Medicines apropriated to the stomach
The infirmities of the stomach ibid 1 Appetite lost ibid 2 Digestion weakened
ibid 3 The Retentive Faculty corrupted ibid Medicines apropriated to the
stomach, are 1 Such as provoke Appetite ibid 2 As help Digestion ibid 3 Such as
help the Retentive Faculty ibid A way to find these ibid Cautions in the use of
them ibid

Chap. 5
Of Medicines apropriated to the Liver.
What they are. 309 How to know them ibid How to use them ibid Chap. 6. Of
Medicines apropriated to the Spleen. What the office of the Spleen is 309 What
medicines apropriated to the Spleen are ibid How they must be used ib. Chap. 7.
Of medicines apropriated to the Reins and Bladder. 310 What they are. Their
Use. Cautions. ibid Chap. 8. Of medicines apropriated to the womb. How they
ought to be used 310 Chap. 9. Of Medicines apropriated to the Joints. What they
are. How they ought to be used 311

Sect. 3.
Of the Properties or Operations of Medicines
Chap. 1. Of Emollient Medicines 312 What they are. Their use. ibid How they
(...) known 1 By their taste. 2 By their feeling ibid Chap. 2. Of hardening
Medicines 312 Their Qualities. Their Use ibid Chap. 3. Of loosning Medicines
313 Loosning Medicines described. Their use. ibid Chap. 4. Of medicines making
thick and thin. Described 313 The use of medicines making thin To open the
pares. To mitigate pain. To assuage swellings ibid The use of Medicines making
thick 314 Chap. 5. Of medicines opening the mouths of the vessels 314 Their
description. Their use. How they are known. ibid Chap. 6. Of attenuating
medicines. Their use: 1 To open obstructions. 2 To cleanse the breast of phlegm.
3 To provoke the terms. ib. Chap. 7. Of drawing Medicines 315 Their use: 1 To
draw thorns and splinters out of the flesh. 2 To draw corrup humors from the
Bowels. 3 To call the offending humors to the outward parts of the Body. 4 By
them the crisis of the disease is much helped forward. 5 To draw poison out of
the body. 6 To heat parts of the body which are over cooled ibid Chap. 8. Of
discussive medicines. 315 What they are. Their use. Cautions in their use. How
they are known. ibid Chap. 9. Of Repelling medicines. 315 What they are ibid
How they are known. 316 Their uses are, 1 To help hot swellings. 2 To ease
Headaches coming of heat. 3 To take away the windy vapors of fevers. ibid The
time of giving repelling medicines. ibid Cautions in giving them ibid Chap. 10.
Of burning medicines. 316 Their degrees in heat ibid Their uses: 1 To restore
Limbs wasted away. 2 To burn off hair. 3 To dissolve hard tumors, (...) warts
and the like. 4 To help Gouts and (...). 5 To help Fistulaes etc. ibid Cautions
in using these medicines. ibid Chap. 11. Of clensing medicines. 316 Their
definition. Their difference. Their use. ib. Chap. 12 Of Emplasters. What they
are. Their use. 317 Chap. 13 Of suppuring medicines What they are. Their use.
Their time of use. 317 Chap. 14 Of medicines provoking urine. What urine is 317
The cause of the stoppage of Urine ib. What Diuretics are. 1 Such (...)
conduce to separate the blood. 2 Such as open the passages of urin. 318 How
each of these may be known. Their use. ibid Chap. 15 Of medicines provoking the
terms. Their use and manner of using 318 Chap. 16 Medicines breeding or taking
away milk. Their Description 318 Their Use ibid Chap. 17. Of medicines
regarding the Seed Their Description. Cautions in giving them. Their use 319
Chap. 18 Of Medicines easing pain Their description 319 The manner of using
them ibid Chap. 19 Of Medicines breeding flesh. Their uses. Their differences
320 Chap. 20 Of Glutinative Medicines. Their use 320 Chap. 21 Of Scarrifying
Medicines Cautions in their use. 320 Chap. 22 Of Medicines resisting poison.
What they are 1 Such as strengthen Nature 320 2 Such as oppose the poison ibid
3 Such as violently thrust it out of the Body. ib. Cautions in the use of these
Medicines ibid Chap. 23 Of Medicines adorning the Body. 1 The Face. 2 The Skin.
3 The Hair. 4 The Teeth. 5 The Head, Scurf, Dandrif. 321 Chap. 24 Of Purging
Medicines Cautions concerning Purging 322 The choice of purging Medicines 323
Medicines Purging, 1 Phlegm. 2 Watery Humors. 3 Choler. 4 Melancholy ibid In
all these, to what Bodies such Purges are general, and such as are strong
should be given ibid Of the time of purging 324 Of the Correcting purging
medicines. ibid How to order your Body both before and after Purges ibid
Inconveniences that arise to the Body by violent Purges ibid The way how to
prevent them. ibid The way how to remedy them ibid Of the way or manner of
Purging 325

A KEY TO GALEN'S Method of Physic.
The General Use of PHYSIC.
I Shall desire thee, who ever thou art, that intendest the Noble (though too
much abused) Study of Physic, to mind heedfully these following Rules, which
being well understood, show thee the Key of Galen and Hippocrates there Method
of Physic: He that uses their Method, and is not heedful of these Rules, may
soon Tinker-like, mend one hole and make two; cure one Disease, and cause
another more desperate.

That then thou may understand what I intend, It is to discover in a general
way of the manifest Virtues of Medicines,

I say of the Manifest Virtues, and Qualities, Viz. Such as are obvious to the
Senses, especially to the Taste and Smell: For it has been the practice of most
Physicians, (I say not of all) in these latter ages as well as ours, to say,
when they cannot give, nor are minded to study a Reason, Why an Herb, Plant,
etc. has such an operation, or produces such an effect in the Body of Man: It
does it by an hidden quality: For they not minding the whole Creation, as one
United Body, not knowing what belongs to (...) Influence, nor regarding that
excellent Harmony the only wise God has made in a composition of Contraries
(in the knowledge of which consists the whole ground and foundation of Physic)
no more than a Horse that goes along the street regards when the Clock strikes,
are totally led by the Nose by that Monster TRADITION, who seldom begets any
Children but they prove either Fools or Knaves, and this makes them so brutish
that they can give a Reason for the operation of no Medicine, but what is an
Object to Sense; this their Worships call Manifest, and the other Hidden,
because it is hidden from them, and always will if they search no further
after it than hitherto they have done. A Commonwealth is well holp up with
such Physicians, that are not only so ignorant, but also so careless of knowing
the foundation upon which the whole Fabric of Physic ought to be built, and
not upon Tradition. They profess themselves Galenists: I would civilly encreat
them but seriously to peruse, and labor to be well skilled in the Astronomy of
Galen and Hippocrates.

I confess, and am glad to think of it, That all Ages have afforded some wise
Physicians, well skilled in the Principles of what they profess, of which this
our Age is not wanting, and they begin to increase daily. As for others, my
comfort is, That their whole Model will not stand long, because it is (...) upon
the Sand. And if I be not mistaken in my Calculation, there are searching times
coming, and with speed too, in which every building that is not built upon the
Rock shall fall. The Lord will make a quick search upon the face of the Earth.

But to return to my purpose
It is the Manifest Qualities of Medicines that here I am to speak to, and you
may be pleased to behold it in this order.

Sect. 1. Of the Temperature of Medicines. Sect. 2. Of the Apropriation Sect.
3. Of the Properties

Sect. 1. Of the Temperature of Medicines.
HErbs, Plants, and other Medicines manifestly operate, either by Heat,
Coldness, Dryness, or Moisture, for the world being composed of so many
qualities, they and only they can be found in the world, and the mixtures of
them one with another.

But that these may appear as clear as the Sun when he is upon the Meridian, I
shall treat of them severally, and in this order.

1. Of Medicines Temperate. 2. Of Medicines Hot. 3. Of Medicines Cold. 4. Of
Medicines Moist. 5. Of Medicines Dry.
Of Medicines Temperate.
IF the world be composed of Extremes, then it acts by Extremes, for as the man
is, so is his work: therefore it is impossible that any Medicine can be
temperate, but may be reduced to Heat, Cold, Dryness, or Moisture, and must
operate (I mean such as operate by manifest quality) by one of these, because
there is no other to operate by, and that there should be such a temperate
mixture, so exquisitely of these qualities in any Medicine, that one of them
should not manifestly excel the other, I doubt it is a Systeme too rare to find.

Thus then I conclude the matter to be, Those Medicines are called Temperate
(not because they have no excess of Temperature at all in them) which can
neither be said, to heat nor cool so much as will amount to the first degree of
excess, for daily experience witnesses that they being added to Medicines,
change not their qualities, they make them neither hotter nor colder.

They are used in such Diseases where there is no Their Use.
manifest distemper of the first qualities, viz. Heat and Cold, for example, In
obstructions of the Bowels, where cold Medicines might make the Obstruction
greater, and hot Medicines cause a Fever.

In Fevers of Phlegm, where the cause is cold and moist, and the effect hot and
dry, in such use, temperate Medicines, which may neither increase the Fever by
their heat, nor condensate the Phlegm by their coldness.

Besides, Because Contraries are taken away by their Contraries, and every Like
maintained by its Like, They are of great use, to preserve the constituion of
the Body temperate, and the Body it self in strength and vigor, and may be used
without danger, or fear of danger, by considering what part of the Body is
weak, and using such temperate Medicines as are apropriated to that part.

Of Medicines Hot
THe care of the Ancient Physicians was such that they did not labor to hide
from, but impart to posterity, not only the temperature of Medicines in
general, but also their degrees in temperature, that so the distempered part
may be brought to its temperature, and no further; for all things which are of
a Galen. de simp. med. sacul. lib. 3 cap. 12.
contrary temperature, conduce not to cure, but the strength of the contrariety
must be observed, that so the Medicine may be neither weaker nor stronger, than
just to take away the distemper; for if the distemper be but meanly hot, and
you apply a Medicine cold in the Fourth Degree, it is true you may soon remove
that distemper of Heat, and bring another of Cold twice as bad.

Then Secondly, Not only the distemper it self, but also the part of the body
distempered must be heeded, for if the Head be distempered by Heat, and you
give such Medicines as cool the Heart or Liver you will bring another Disease
and not cure the former.

The Degrees then of Temperature are to be diligently heeded, which ancient
Physicians have concluded to be Four, in the first qualities, viz. Heat and
Cold, of each of which we shall speak a word or two severally.

Of Medicines Hot in the first Degree.
THose are said to be hot in the first Degree which induce a Moderate and
Natural heat to the Body, and to the Parts thereof, either cold by Nature, or
cooled by accedent, by which Natural heat is cherished when weak, or restored
when wanting.

The first Effect then of Medicines hot in the first Effect. 1.
Degree is, by their sweat and temperate heat, to reduce the Body to its
natural heat, as the fire does the external parts in cold weather, unless the
affliction of cold be so great that such mild Medicines will not serve the turn

The Second Effect is, The Mitigation of pain arising Effect. 2.
from such a distemper, and indeed this effect has other Medicines, some that
are cold, and some that are hotter than the first degree, they being rationally
applied to the distemper, these Medicines the Greeks call (...), and shall be
spoken of in their proper places. In this place let it suffice that Medicines
hot in the first degree, make the offending humors thin and expel them by
sweat, or insensible transpiration, and these of all other are most congruous
or agreeable to the Body of Man, for there is no such equal temperature of heat
and cold in a sound Man, but heat exceeds, for we live by heat and moisture,
and not by cold.

Medicines then which are hot in the first degree, are such as just correspond
to the Natural heat of our Bodies; such as are hotter or colder, are more
subject to do mischief, being administered by an unskilful hand, than these
are, because of their contrariety to Nature; whereas these are grateful to the
Body by their moderate heat.

Thirdly, These take away weariness, and help Fevers, Effect. 3.
being outwardly applied, because they open the pores of the Skin, and by their
gentle heat prepare the humors, and take away those fuliginous vapors that are
caused by Fevers.

Yet may discommodities arise by heedless giving Discomodities.
even of these, which I would have young Students in Physic to be very careful
in, lest they do more mischief than they are aware of, viz. It is possible by
too much use of them, to consume not only what is inimical in the Body, but
also the substance it self, and the strength of the spirits, whence comes
faintings, and sometimes death: Besides, by applying them to the parts of the
Body they are not apropriated to, or by not heeding well the complexion of the
Patient, or the Natural temper of the part of the Body afflicted, for the Heart
is hot, but the Brain temperate.

Lastly, Medicines hot in the first Degree, cherishes Effect. 4.
heat in the internal parts, help Concoction, breed good Blood, and keep it in
good temper, being bred.

Of Medicines hot in the Second Degree.
HAving spoken of Medicines hot in the First Degree, it follows now in order to
speak of those that are hot in the Second; These are something hotter than the
Natural temper of a Man.

Their Use is for such whose Stomach is filled with Use.
moisture, because their faculty is to heat, and dry, they take away
obstructions or stoppings, open the pores of the skin, but not in the same
manner that such do as are hot in the First Degree, for they do it without
force, by a gentle heat, concocting, and expelling the humors, by strengthening
and helping Nature in the work, but these cut tough humors, and scatter them by
their own force and power when Nature cannot.

Of Medicines hot in the Third Degree.
THose which attain the Third Degree of heat, have the same faculties with
those before mentioned; but as they are hotter, so are they more powerful in
their operations, for they are so powerful in heating and cutting, that if
unadvisedly given they cause Fevers; Their Use is to cut tough and compacted
Use.
humors, to provoke sweat abundantly, hence it comes to pass that all of them
resist poison.

Of Medicines hot in the Fourth Degree.
THose Medicines obtain the highest degree of heat, which are so hot that they
burn the Body of Man being outwardly applied to it, and cause inflammations, or
raise blisters; as Crowfoot, Mustardseed, Onions, etc. Of these more hereafter.

Of Cooling Medicines.
PHysitiant have also observed Four Degrees of Coldness in Medicines, which I
shall briefly treat of in order.

Of Medicines Cold in the First Degree.
THose Medicines which are least cold of all, obtain the First Degree of
Coldness, and I beseech you take notice of this, That seeing our Bodies are
nourished by heat, and we live by heat, therefore no cold Medicines are
Naturally, and Per se (as (...) call it) friendly to the Body, but what good
they do our Bodies, they do it per accedens, viz. by removing an unnatural
heat, or the Body heated above its Natural temper.

The giving then of cold Medicines, to a Man in his Natural temper, the season
of the year also being but moderately hot, extinguisheth Natural heat in the
Body of Man.

Yet have these a necessary Use in them too, though not so frequent as Hot
Medicines have; and that may be the reason why an All-wise God has furnished
us with far more Hot Herbs and Plants etc. than Cold.

Their Use is first, In Nourishments, that so the Use 1.
heat of Food may be qualified, and made fit for a weak Stomach to digest, and
therefore are Sallets used in Summer.

Secondly, To restrain and assuage the heat of the Use (...)
Bowels, and to cool the Blood in Fevers.

Therefore if the distemper of heat be but gentle, Medicines cold in the first
degree will Suffice; also Children, and such people whose Stomachs are weak,
are easily hurt by cold Medicines.

Of Medicines Cold in the Second and Third Degrees.
SUch whose Stomachs are strong, and Livers hot may easily bear such Medicines
as are cold in the second degree, and in cases of extremity find much help by
them: as also by such as cool in the third degree, the extremity of the disease
considered; for by both these the unbridled heat of Choler is assuaged. Use 1.


Also they are outwardly applied to hot swellings, Use 2.
due consideration being had, That if the Inflammation be not great, use those
that are less cool; if the Inflammation be vehement, make use of Medicines cold
in the second or third degree; Always let the Remedy correspond to the just
proportion of the Affliction.

Thirdly, Sometimes the Spirits are moved inordinately Use 3.
through heat, thence follows immoderate watchings, if not deprivation of the
Senses: this also must be remedied with cold Medicines; for cold stops the
pores of the Skin, makes the humors thick, represseth Sweat, and keeps up the
Spirits from fainting.

Of Medicines Cold in the Fourth Degree.
LAstly, The Use of Medicines cold in the Fourth Degree, is, To mitigate
desperate and vchement Pains, by stupifying the senses, when no other course
can be taken to save life: Of the Use of which more hereafter.

Of Moistning Medicines.
THere can be no such difference found amongst Moistning Medicines, that they
should surpass the Second degree. For seeing all Medicines are either hot or
cold; neither heat nor cold, seeing they are extremes, can consist with
moisture, for the one dries it up, the other condensates it.

Philosophers therefore call Moisture and Dryness, Passive qualities, yet have
they their operation likewise; for moist Medicines lenifie and make slippery,
Use.
ease the Cough, and help the Roughness of the Throat: These operations are
proper to Medicines moist in the First Degree.

Those which are moister, take away Naturally strength, help the sharpness of
humors, make both Blood and spirits thicker, loses the Belly, and fit it for
purgation.

The immoderate or indiscreet use of them duls the Body, and makes it unfit for
action.

Of Drying Medicines.
DRying Medicines have contrary faculties to these; viz. To consume moisture,
stop fluxes, and make such parts dry as are slippery, they make the Body and
Members firm, when they are weakened by too much moisture, that so they may
perform their proper functions.

Yet although the Members be strengthened by drying medicines, they have,
notwithstanding their own proper moisture in them, which ought to be conserved,
and not destroyed, for without it they cannot consist: If then this moisture be
consumed by using, or rather over-use of drying Medicines, the Members can
neither be nourished, nor yet perform their proper actions.

Such Medicines as are dry in the third degree, being unadvisedly given, hinder
the parts of the Body they are apropriated to, of their nourishment, and by
that means brings them into a Consumption.

Besides, There is a certain moisture in the Body of Man, which is called
Radical Moisture, which being taken away, the parts must needs die, seeing
natural heat and life also consists in it; and this may be done by too
freequent use of medicines dry in the De Simpl. Med. Facult. Lib. 5. Cap. ult.
fourth degree: And it may be this was the Reason of Galen his writing. That
things dry in the fourth degree must of necessity burn; which is an effect of
heat, and not of dryness, unless by burning, Galen mean consuming the Radical
moisture,

The Use then of drying Medicines is only to such Bodies and parts of the Body
as abound with moisture, in which observe these Rules,

1. If the moisture be not extreme, let not the medicine be extreme drying. 2.
Let it be proper to the part of the Body afflicted; for if the Liver be
afflicted by moisture, and you go about to dry the Brain or Heart, you may
sooner kill than cure.
Thus have we briefly spoken of the first Qualities of Medicines, and in the
general only; and but briefly, because we shall always touch upon them in the
Exposition of the other Qualities, in which you must always have an eye to
these.

Sect. 2. Of the Apropriation of Medicines to the several Parts of the Body.
Ancient Physicians also kept a grievous racket about this, some denying any
specifical virtues at all in Medicines, or any congruity to certain parts of the
Body, but were of Opinion that such as strengthen the Head must needs
strengthen the Bowels and all other parts of the Body, by the same Rule,
because being ignorant of the influence of the Heavens, they would give no
Reason for the contrary, and so whatsoever is obnoxious to one part of the Body
must needs be obnoxious to all the rest, by the same Rule.

Others hold them to be apropriated to the particular parts of the Body by an
hidden property as they call it, because their ignorance in Astronomy knew not
what to make of it, or how the Midicines operated and their experience
testifying that they had distinct operations upon distinct parts of the Body.

Others have labored to find out a middle way between both these, and they hold
that what Medicines strengthen one part of the Body, must needs in some measure
strengthen all the rest, yet so as that it is peculiarly apropriated to that
Part of the Body which it strengthens, and their reason is, Because the
substance of the Medicine agrees with the substance of that Part of the Body
which it strengthens, and every one almost that has but wit enough to eat an
Eg, knows that the substance of all Parts of the Body are not alike. This
argument has some weight in it, though in my Opinion it falls a little too
low, for it is a certain truth, the Sympathy, and Antipathy in the Creation is
the cause both of all Diseases, and also of the operations of all Medicines,
However I may intertex my Opinion of what Physicians call [hidden Qualities]
now and then with it, yet my scope shall be to treat chiefly of this at this
time, till time and oppertunity (together with the will of my Creator) give me
leave to digest what they call [hidden Qualities] into such a form that others
may understand it as well as my self: I am sickly and have no body to help me,
I can do things no faster than I can.

That the Qualities and Use of these Medicines may be found out, and understood
by every one, and so my Country reap the benefit of my Labor, they shall find
them presented to their view in this Order.

Medicines apropriated,
1. To the Head. 2. To the Breast and Lungues. 3. To the Heart. 4. To the
Stomach. 5. To the Liver. 6. To the Spleen. 7. To the Reins and Bladder. 8. To
the Womb. 9. To the Joints.
CHAP 1. Of Medicines apropriated to the Head.
BY [ Head] is usually understood all that part of the Body which is between
the top of the Crown, and the uppermost joint of the Neck; yet are those
Medicines properly called Cephalical which are apropriated to the Brain, not to
the Eyes, Ears nor Teeth; neither are those Medicines which are proper for the
Ears proper also for the Eyes, therefore (my intent being to write as plain as
I can) I shall subdivide this Chapter into these parts.

Medcines apropriated --
1. To the Brain. 2. To the Eyes. 3. To the Mouth. and Nostrils. 4. To the
Ears. 5. To the Teeth.
For what Medicines are apropriated to an unruly Tongue, is not in my power at
present to determine.

Of Medicines apropriated to the Brain.
BEfore we treat of Medicines apropriated to the Brain, it is requisite that we
discribe what the nature and affection of the Brain is.

The Brain which is the Seat of Apprehension Judgment, and Memory, the Original
of Sense and Motion, is by nature temperate, and if so, then you will grant me
that it may easily be afflicted both by Heat and Cold, and it is indeed more
subject to afflictions by either of them, than any other part of the Body, for
if it be afflicted by heat, Sense and Reason is immoderately moved, if by cold,
they languish, and are dulled, to pass by other symptoms which invade the Head,
if the Brain be altered from its proper temper.

Also this is peculiar to the Brain, that it is delighted or offended by
sinels, sights, and sounds, but I shall meddle no further with these here,
because they are not Medicines.

Cephalical Medicines may be found out from the Affections of the Brain it
self. The Brain is usually oppressed with moisture in such afflictions;
therefore give such Medicines as very gently, warm, cleanse, cut, and dry; but
withal, let them be such as are apropriated to the Head, such as Physicians say
[by an hidden quality] strengthens the Brain.

Again, if you consider the situation of the Brain, you shall find it placed in
the highest part of all the Body; therefore it is easily afflicted with hot
vapors, this punishes a man with watchings and headache, as the former did
with sottishness and sleepiness; in such cases use such Cephalects as gently
cool the Brain.

To make Cephalects of Narcoticks, or slupifying Medicines is not my iutent,
for I am confident they are inimical both to Brain and Senses. Of these, and
such Medicines also as purge the Brain, I shall speak by and by. To return to
my purpose.

Some Cephalicks purge the Brain, some heat it, some cool it, some strengthen
it; but how they perform this Office peculiarly to the Brain, most Physicians
confess they could neither comprehend by Reason, nor discribe by Precepts, only
thus, they do it by an hidden quality, either by strengthening the Brain,
thereby defending it from Diseases, or by a certain Antipathy between them and
the Diseases incident to the Brain.

Lastly, For the Use of Cephalicks, observe, if the Brain be much afflicted,
you cannot well strengthen it before you have purged it, neither can you well
purge the Brain before you have cleansed the rest of the Body, it is so subject
to receive the vapors up to it; give cooling Cephalicks when the Brain is too
hot, and hot Cephalicks, when it is too cold.

Beware of using cooling Medicines to the Brain when the Crisis of a Disease is
near: How that time may be known, I shall (God asisting me) instruct you
hereafter, I cannot do all things at one time; let it suffice now, that
according as the Discase afflicting your Head is, so let your remedy be.

Of Medicines apropriated to the Eyes.
TAke such Medicines as are apropriated to the Eyes under the name of [ Ocular
Medicines] I do it partly to avoid multiplicity of words, and partly to
instruct my Country Men in the Terms of Art belonging to Physic, (I would have
called them [ Ophthalmicks] had not the word been troublesome to the reading,
much more to the understanding of a Country man) as I even now called such
Medicines [ Cephalicks] as were apropriated to the Brain.

Ocular Medicines are two fold, viz. such as are referred to the Visive
Virtues, and such as are referred to the Eyes themselves.

Such as strengthen the Visive Virtue or the Optic Nerves which convey it to
the Eyes (say Doctors) do it by an hidden Virtue, into the reason of which no
man can dive, unless they should fetch it from the Similitude of the substance;
And yet they say a Goats Liver conduces much to make one see in the night, and
they give this Reason, Because Goats see as well in the night as in the day.
Yet is there no affinity in temperature nor substance between the Liver and the
Eyes; However Astrologers know well enough that all Herbs, Plants, etc. That are
under the Dominion of either Sun or Moon, and apropriated to the Head, be they
hot or cold they strengthen the Visive Virtue, as Eyebright which is hot,
Lunaria or Moonwort which is cold.

As for what appertains to the constitution of the Eyes themselves seeing they
are exact in sense, they will not endure the least inconvenience, therefore
such Medicines as are outwardly applied to them (for such Medicines as
strengthen the visive Veertues are all given inwardly) let them neither hurt by
their hardness nor gnawing quality, nor be so tough that they should stick to
them, Therefore let Oculiar Medicines be neither in Pouders nor Ointments,
because Oil it self is offensive to the Eyes, and how pleasing Pouders are to
them you may perceive your self by but going into the dust.

Medicines apropriated to the Mouth and Nose.
APPly no stinking Medicine to a Disease in the Nose, for such offend not only
the Nose, but also the Brain; neither administer Medicines of any ill taste to a
Disease in the Mouth, for that subverts the Stomach, because the tunicle of the
mouth and of the Stomach is the same; And because both Mouth and Nostrils are
ways by which the Brain is cleansed, therefore are they infected with such
vices as need almost continual clensing; and let the Medicines you apply to
them be either pleasant, or at least, not ungrateful.

Medicines apropriated to the Ears.
THe Ears are easily afflicted by Cold, because they are always open,
therefore they require hot Medicines. And because they are of themselves very
dry, therefore they require Medicines which dry much

Medicines apropriated to the Teeth.
VEhement heat, and vehement cold is inimical to the Teeth, but they are most
of all offended by sharp and four things, and the reason is, because they have
neither Skin nor Flesh to cover them, they delight in such Medicines as are
clensing and binding, because they are troubled with Defluxions and Rhewms upon
every light occasion, and that is the reason the common use of fat and sweet
things, soon rots the Teeth.

CHAP. 2. Of Medicines apropriated to the Breast and Lungues.
THe Medicines apropriated to the Breast and Lungues, you shall find called all
along by the name of [ Pectorals] that is the term Physicians give them, when
you hear them talk of Pectural Syrups, Pectoral Rowls, or Pectoral Ointments,
now you know their Use.

They are diverse, some of which regard the part afflicted, others the matter
afflicting.

But although sometimes in Ulcers of the Lungues we are forced to use binding
Medicines, to join the Ulcer, yet are not these called Pectorals, because
binding Medicines are extreme hurtful to the Breast and Lungues, both because
they hinder ones fetching his breath, and also because they hinder the avoiding
that Phlegm by which the Breast is oppressed.

Such Medicines are called Pectorals, which are of a The next Section will
instruct you in the term.
lenifying Nature, for by their operation is the breath the easier fetched, and
what sticks to the Stomach the easier spit out.

Neither yet is the way or manner of provoking this same spitting always one
and the same, for sometimes the matter is so thin that it cannot be cast up by
the motion of the Lungues, but it slips besides. Again, Sometimes it is so
thick that it cannot be cast out by the narrow Arteries of the Lungues. These
then are the genuine operations of Pectorals, viz. Some to make the thin matter
thicker, others to make the thick matter thinner.

Besides, Those which make thin matter thicker are of two sorts, viz. Some are
mild and gentle, which may safely be administered, be the matter hot or cold
which offends, (the degrees of temperature will satisfy, which such be among
the Simples, neither shall you want instructions among the Compounds) Others
are very cold, which are used only when the matter offending is sharp.

But because such Medicines as conduce to the cure of the Phtisicks (which is
an Ulceration of Lungues and the disease usually called, The Consumption of the
Lungues) are also reckoned in amongst Pectorals. It is not amiss to speak a
word or two of them.

In the cure of this disease are three things to be regarded.

1. To cut and bring away the Concreated Blood. 2. To cherish and strengthen
the Lungues. 3. To conglutinate the Ulcer.
And indeed some particular Simples will perform all these, and Physicians
confess it; which shows the wonderful Mystery the All-wife God has made in
the Creation, That one and the Same Simple should perform two contrary
Operations on the same part of the Body; for the more a Medicine cleanses the
more it conglutinates; And it is wisely done of Physicians to shut their Eyes
against such a Mystery, and against Astrology also, which is one means to
reveal it, they make a long Harvest of little Corn, and get the more money by
it. They usually in such cases first use Medicines which are more clensiing;
lastly, Medicines more binding and strengthen the Lungues all the time.

To conclude then, Pectoral Medicines are such as either cut and cleanse out the
compacted humors from the Arteries of the Lungues, or make thin Defluxions
thick, or temper those that are sharp, help the Roughness of the Windpipe, or
are gently lenitive and softning, being outwardly applied to the Breast.

CHAP. 3. Of Medicines apropriated to the Heart.
THese are they that are generally given under the notion of Cordials, take
them under that name here.

The Heart is the seat of the vital Spirit, the fountain of life, the original
of infused heat, and of the natural affections of man.

So then these Two Things are proper to the Heart.

1. By its heat to cherish life through out the Body. 2. To add vigor to the
Affections.
And if these be proper to the Heart, you will easily grant me, that it is the
property of Cordials to administer to the Heart in these Particulars.

Of Cordials, some cheer the Mind, some strengthen the Heart, and refresh the
Spirits thereof, being decayed.

Those which checr the Mind are not one and the same; for as the Heart is
variously disturbed, either by Anger, Love, Fear, Hatred, Sadness, etc. So such
things as flatter Lovers, or appease the Angry, or comfort the Fearful, or
please the Hateful, may well be called Cordials; for the Heart, seeing it is
placed in the middle between the Brain and the Liver, is wrought upon by
Reason, as well as by Digestion; yet these, because they are not Medicines, are
beside my present scope.

And altough it is true, That Mirth, Love, etc. are actions, or motions of the
Mind, not of the Body; yet many have bin induced to think such Affections may
be wrought in the Body by Medicines, which some hold is done by an hidden
property (the old Bush ignorant Physicians have run into) Others that denied
any hidden quality in Medicines, held it to be done by Enchantment, and that is
the only way of a thousand to lead people in ignorance, viz. To tell them (when
they cannot give, nor will not study a reason of a thing) It is Diabolical, and
done by Sorcery. I could give a Reason of the former, if it were my present
scope to speak of hidden properties; a very short time will discover the latter
to be the greatest of Falsehoods. But to return to my purpose.

The Heart is chiefly afflicted by too much heat, by Poison, and by stinking
Vapors, and these are remedied by the second sort of Cordials, and indeed
chicfly belong to our present scope.

According to these Three Afflictions, viz.
1. Excessive heat. 2. Poison. 3. Melancholy vapors.
Are Three kinds of Remedies which succor the afflicted Heart:

Such as
1. By their cooling Nature mitigate the heat of Fevers. 2. Resist Poison. 3.
Cherish the vital Spirits when they (...).
All these are called Cordials.

1. Such as cool the Heart in Fevers, yet is not every thing that cools
Cordial, for Lead is colder than Gold, yet is not Lead Cordial as Gold is, some
hold it Cordial by hidden Quality, others by Reason, Because it cheers a man's
heart to see he has gotten Money, an Apish Reason, unbeseeming a Scholar; for
Pearls, taken inwardly, cool the heart, and cheer it exceedingly, and such a
frigid Reason will no ways hold in that, what Medicines do by hidden Quality
is not my task at present, it may be hereafter, only here let it suffice, that
cool Cordials are such Medicines as are apropriated to the Heart, and let the
Heart be afflicted with heat, else take them not, for fear of Cordials they
prove ruptures, for the Heart is maintained by heat, and not by cold. 2. Such
as resist Poison, There is a twofold resisting of Poison.
1. By an Antipathy between the Medicine and the Poison. 2. By a Sympathy
between the Medicine and the Heart. Of the First we shall speak anon, in a
Chapter by it self. The latter belongs to this Chapter, and they are such
Medicines, whose nature is to strengthen the Heart, and fortify it against the
Poison, as Rue, Angelica, etc. For as the operation of the former is upon the
Poison, which afflicts the Heart, so the operation of the latter is upon the
Heart afflicted by the Poison.

To this Classis may be referred all such Medicines, as strengthen the Heart,
either by Astral influence, or by likeness of substance, if there be such a
likeness in Medicines, for a Bullocks heart is of like substanceto a Man's, yet
I question whether it be Cordial or not.

3. And lastly, Such as refresh the Spirits, and make them lively and active,
both because they are apropriated to that Office, and also because they drive
stinking and Melancholy vapors from the Heart, for as the Animal spirits be
refreshed by fragant smells, and the Natural Spirits by Spices; so are the vital
Spirits refreshed by all such Medicines as keep back Melancholy vapors from the
Heart, as Borrage, Bugloss, Rosemary, Citron Pills, the Compositions of them,
and many others, which this Treatise will amply furnish you with.
CHAP. 4. Of Medicines apropriated to the Stomach.
BY Stomach, I mean that Ventricle which contains the Food till it be concocted
into Chyle.

Medicines apropriated to the Stomach are usually called Stomachicals.

The infirmities usually incident co the Stomach are Three.

1. Appetite lost. 2. Digestion weakened. 3. The retentive Faculty corrupted.
When Appetite is lost, the man feels no hunger when his Body needs Nourishment.

When Digestion is weakened it is not able to concoct the meat received into
the Stomach, but it putrifies there.

When the retentive Faculty is spoiled, the Stomach is not able to retain the
Food till it be digested, but either vomits it up again, or causes Fluxes.

Such Medicines then as remedy all these, are called Stomachicals. And of them
in order.

1. Such as provoke Appetite are usually of a sharp or sourish taste, and yet
withal of a grateful taste to the Pallat, for although loss of appetite may
proceed from diverse causes, as from Choler in the Stomach, or putrified humors
or the like, yet such things as purge this Choler or humors, are properly
called Orecticks, not Stomachicals; the former strengthen Appetite after these
are expelled. 2. Such Medicines help Digestion as strengthen the Stomach,
either by convenient heat, or Aromatical ( viz. spicy) faculty, by hidden
property, or congruity of Nature; by which last, the inner skin of a Hens
Gizzard dried and beaten to Powder and taken in Wine in the morning fasting is
an exceeding strengthener of Digestion, because those Creatures have such
strong Digestions themselves. 3. The retentive Faculty of the Stomach is
corrected by binding Medicines, yet not by all binding Medicines neither, for
some of them are adverse to the Stomach, but by such binding Medicines as are
apropriated to the Stomach.
For the Use of these.

1. Use not such Medicines as provoke Appetite before Use 1.
you have cleansed the Stomach of what hinders it. 2. Such Medicines as help
Digestion (which the Use 2.
Greeks call (...)) give them a good time before meat that so they may pass to
the bottom of the Stomach (for the digestive Faculty lies there) before the
food come into it. 3. Such as strengthen the retentive Faculty, give Use 3,
them a little before meat, if to stay Fluxes; a little after meat, if to stay
vomiting.
CHAP. 5. Of Medicines apropriated to the Liver.
BE pleased to take these under the name of Hepaticks, for that is the usual
name Physicians give them, and these also are of Three sorts.

1. Some the Liver is delighted in. 2. Others strehgthen it. 3. Others help its
vices.
The Pallat is the Seat of taste, and its Office is to judge what Food is
agreeable to the Stomach, and what not, by that is both the Quality and
Quantity of Food fit for the Stomach discerned: the very same Office the
Meseraick Veins perform to the Liver.

Sometimes such Food pleases the Pallat which the Liver likes not (but not
often) and therefore the Meseraick Veins resuse it, and that is thereason some
few men fancy such food as makes them sick after the eating thereof.

1. The Liver is delighted exceedingly with sweet things, draws them greedily,
and digesteth them as swiftly, and that is the reason Honey is so soon turned
into Choler. 2. Such Medicines strengthen the Liver, as (being apropriated to
it) very gently bind, for seeing the Office of the Liver is to concoct, it
needs some adstriction, that so both the heat and the humor to be concocted may
be stayed that so the one slip not away, nor the other be scattered. Yet do not
Hepatical Medicines require so great a binding faculty as Stomachicals do,
because the passages of the Stomach are more open than those of the Liver, by
which it either takes in Chyle, or sends out Blood to the rest of the Body,
therefore Medicines which are very binding are hurtful to the Liver, and either
cause obstructions, or hinder the distribution of the Blood, or both.

3. The Liver being very subject to obstructions, Medicines which withstand
obstructions, or open them being made, are truly Hepatical, and they are such
as cut and extenuate without any vehement heat (to these we shall speak in
their proper places) and yet they retain a faculty both gently binding, and
clensing. Sometimes Inflammation follows the obstruction, and then must you use
Hepatical Medicines, which cool, cleanse, and extinuate.

In using these have a special care that your cooling Medicines be so tempered
with heat, that the digestive faculty of the Liver be not spoiled, and that the
Diaphragma (which is very near unto it) be not so cooled that it hinder the
fetching of breath.

And thus much for the Liver, the Office of which is to concoct Chyle (which is
a white substance the Stomach digests the food into) into Blood, and distribute
it by the Veins to every part of the body, whereby the Body is nourished, and
decaying flesh restored.


CHAP. 6. Of Medicines apropriated to the Spleen.
IN the breeding of Blood are three Excrements most conspicuous, viz. Urine.
Choler, and Melancholy.

The proper seat of Choler is in the Gall.

The Urine passes down to the Reins or Kidneys, which is all one.

The Spleen takes the thickest or melancholy blood to it self.

I hope shortly to give you the exactest piece of Anatomy now extant, in your
own mother tongue, wherein you may as perfectly see these and all other
internal operations of your Body, as you can your Faces in a Looking Glass. But
to return.

This Excrement of Blood is twofold: for either by excessive heat, it is
addust, and this is that the Latins call Atra bilis: or else it is thick and
earthly of it self, and this properly is called Melancholy humor.

Hence then is the nature of Splenical Medicines to be found out, and by these
two is the Spleen usually afflicted, for Atra bilis (I know not what distinct
English name to give it) many times causes Madness, and pure Melancholy
causes obstructions of the Bowels, and tumors, whereby the concoction of the
Blood is viciated, and Dropsies many times follow.

Medicines then peculiar to the Spleen must needs be twofold also, some
apropriated to Atra bilis, others to pure Melancholy; but of purging either of
them, I shall omit till I come to treat of Purging in a Chapter by it self.

1. Such Medicines are Splenical, which by cooling and moistning temper Atra
bilis: let not these Medicines be to cold neither, for there is no such heat in
Atra bilis as there is in Choler, and therefore it needs no such excessive
cooling; amongst the number of these are such as we mentioned amongst the
Cordials, to repel Melancholy vapors from the Heart, such temper and assuage
the malice of Atra bilis. 2. Those Medicines are also Splenical, by which
Melancholy humors are corrected and so prepared, that they may the more easily
be evacuated; such Medicines are cutting and opening, and they differ from
Hepaticals, in this, that they are no ways binding, for the Spleen being no
ways addicted to concoction, binding Medicines do it harm, and not good. 3.
Sometimes the Spleen is not only obstructed, but also hardened by Melancholy
humors, and in such cases Emolient Medicines may be well called Splenicals; not
such as are taken inwardly, for they operate upon the Stomach and Bowels, but
such as are outwardly applied to the Region of the Spleen. And although
sometimes Medicines are outwardly applied to hardness of the Liver, yet they
differ from Splenicals, because they are binding, so are not Splenicals.


Chap. 7. Of Medicines apropriated to the Reins and Bladder.
THe Office of the Reins is, To make a separation between the Blood and the
Urin, to receive this Urine thus separated from the Blood, is the Bladder
ordained, which is of a sufficient bigness to contain it, that so a man may go
about his business and not be always pissing.

Both these parts of the Body officiating about the Urin, they are both usually
afflicted by the vices of the Urin.

The Urin is oppressed
1. By Stones. 2. By Inflammation. 3. By thick Humors.
Medicines apropriated to the Reins and Bladder are usually called Nephriticals
and are Threefold; some cool, others cut gross humors, and a third sort breaks
the Stone.

In the Use of all these, take notice, That the constitution of the Reins and
Bladder is such, That they abhor all binding Medicines, because they cause
stoppage of Urine.

The truth is, I shall speak of all these apart in so many Chapters by
themselves, only let it suffice here, That Physicians confess some Medicines
perform these by an hidden (...), and even break the hardest Stone; but no man
(they say, because they cannot themselves) can give a Reason how, nor why they
do it.

And Secondly, take notice, That the Reins and Bladder being subject to
Inflammations endure not very hot Medicines.

Thirdly Because the Bladder is further remote from the Center of the Body than
the Kidneys are, therefore it requires stronger Medicines than the Kidneys do,
lest the strength of the Medicine be spent before it be come to the part
afflicted.

Chap. 8. Of Medicines apropriated to the Womb.
THese Physitlans call Hystericals, and to avoid multiplicity of words, take
them in this disconrse under that notion,

Take notice that such Medicines as provoke the Terms, or stop them when they
flow immoderately, (...) properly Hystericals, but shall be spoken to by and by
in a Chapter by themselves.

As for the Nature of the Womb, it seems to be much like the nature of the
Brain and Stomach, for experience teaches that it is delighted with sweet and
Aromatical Medicines, and flies from their contraries.

For example: A Woman being troubled with the Fits of the Mother, which is a
drawing of the Womb upwards, apply sweet things, as Civit, or the like, to the
place of Conception, it draws it down again, but apply stinking things to the
Nose, as Assafoetida, (...) the like, it expels it from it, and sends it down
to its proper place.

Again, Sometimes the Womb of a Woman falls out, in such cases, sweet scents
applied to the Nose, and stinking things to the privy passage, reduces it to
its proper place again, and this made some Physicians of Opinion that the Womb
of a Woman was capable of the sense of smelling. For my part I believe nothing
less; only it does it by apropriation to that part of the Body, for the Stomach
is also offended with stinking things, not because it smells them, but because
they are obnoxious to that part of the Body, judge the like by the Womb; it is
offended by stinking things, and strengthened by sweet: for smell is one of the
Touch-stones by which Nature tries what is convenient for its self; yet, that
the Womb has much affinity with the Head is most certain, and undeniable by
this argument, Because most Cephalic Medicines conduce to the cure of Diseases
in the Womb, neither is the Womb often afflicted, but the Head principally
suffers with it.

Chap. Of Medicenes apropriated to the Joints.
The Joints are usually troubled with Cephalic Diseases, and then are to be
cured by Cephalic Medicines.

Medicines apropriated to the Joints, are called by the name of Arthritical
Medicines.

The Joints, seeing they are very Nervous, require Medicines which are of a
heating and drying Nature, with a gentle binding, and withal such as by a
peculiar virtue are apropriated to them, and ad strength to them. It is true,
most Cephalicks do so, yet because the Joints are more remote from the Center,
they require stronger Medicines.

For removing pains in the Joints this is the Method of proceeding.

Pains is either taken away, or eased, for the true cure is to take away the
cause of the pain, sometimes the vehemence of the pain is so great that you
must be forced to use Anodines (for so Physicians call such Medicines as ease
pain) before you can meddle with the cause, and this is usually when the part
pained is inflamed, for those Medicines which take away the cause of pain being
very hot, if there be any Inflammation in the part pained, you must abstain from
them till the Inflammation be taken away.

Also the manner of easing the pain is twofold, for if you regard only the
pain, use Anodines, but if you regard the Inflammation, use cooling Medicines;
because by them, not only the heat is assuaged, but also the Flux of Blood to
that part is stopped, especially if you mix some repelling Medicine with it. We
shall speak of all these in the next Section.

Only here take notice, That such Medicines as take away the cause of pain from
the Joints, are of very thin substance and forcible in cutting and drawing; and
when you see the cause is taken quite away, then use such as bind and
strengthen the Joints, that so (...) may prevent defluxions for the time to
come. And thus much for the Second Section.

Sect. 3. Of the Properties or Operations of Medicines.
THat I may be as plain as can be in this (for I desire to be understood of
all) I shall devide this SECTION into these Chapters, Viz.

Of MEDICINES.
Chap. (...). 1 Hardening. 2 Loosning. 3 Making thin, and thick. 4 Opening the
Vessels. 5 Attinuating. 6 Drawing. 7 Discussing. 8 Repelling. 9 Burning. 10
Clensing. 11 Emplasticks. 12 Suppuring. 13 Provoking Urin. 14 Provoking the
Terms. 15 Breeding Milk. 16 Regarding the Seed. 17 Easing Pain. 18 Breeding
Flesh. 19 Glutinative. 20 Scarrifying. 21 Resisting Poison. 22 Adorning the
Body. 23 Purging. 24

Of all these in order, and in the same order they are set down.

Chap. 1. Of Emollient Medicines.
THe various mixtures of Heat, Cold, Dryness, and Moisture in Simples, must of
necessity produce variety of Faculties, and Operations in them, which now we
come to treat of, beginning first at Emollients.

What is hard and what is soft, most men know, but few are able to express;
Philosophers define that to be hard which yields not to touching, and soft to
be the contrary; An Emollient, or softning Medicine (which is all one) is such
a Medicine as reduces a hard substance to its proper temperature.

But to leave Philosophy, and keep to Physic; Physicians describe hardness to
be twofold.

1. A distention or stretching of a part by too much fullness. 2. Thick humors
which are destitute of heat, growing hard in that part of the Body into which
they flow.
So many properties then ought Emollient Medicines to have, viz. to moisten
what is dry, to discuss what is stretched, to warm what is congealed by cold,
yet properly, that only is said to mollify which reduces a hard substance to
its proper temper.

Dryness and thickness of humors being the cause of hardness, Emollient
Medicines must of necessity be hot and moist; and although you may peradventure
find some of them dry in the Second or Third Degrees, yet must this dryness be
tempered and qualified with heat and moisture, for Reason will tell you that
dry Medicines make hard parts harder.

Besides, In Scirrhous humors (in which Emollients are most in use) various
Symptoms appear, so that the hardness being not Simple, the Emollients are not,
nor ought not to be always one and the same, as for example: Sometimes the
Swelling abounds with moisture, and then the Medicine must be dryer, not to
mollify the swelling, but to consume the moisture; Sometimes the humor is so
tough, that temperate Medicines will not stir it, then must the Medicine be the
hotter, these things are accedental according as the humor offending is; it
follows not for all this, that Emollient Medicines should not be temperately
hot and moist in their own Nature; for general Rules are not to be accounted
false, because a man must sometimes swerve from them, for this is the true use
of all Rules, viz. To vary them according to the various Symptoms of the
Disease, and herein is the judgment of the Physicians tried.

Lastly, Molifying Medicines are known, 1. By their taste, 2. By their feeling.

1. In taste, they are near unto sweet, but Fat and Oily, they are neither
sharp, nor austere, nor sour, nor salt, neither do they manifest either
binding, or vehement heat, or cold to be in them. 2. In feeling you can
perceive no roughness, neither do they stick to your Fingers like Birdlime, for
they ought to penetrate the parts to be mollified, and therefore many times if
occasion be, are (...) Medicines mixed with them.
Chap. 2. Of Hardening Medicines.
GALEN in Lib. 5. De Simpl. Med. Facult. Cap. 10. determins Hardening Medicines
to be cold and moist, and he brings some arguments to prove it, against which
other Physicians contest.

I shall not here stand to quote the Dispute, only take notice, That if
softning Medicines be hot and moist (as we showed even now) then hardening
Medicines must needs be cold and dry, because they are contrary to them.

The Universal course of Nature will prove it for dryness and moisture are
passive qualities, neither can extremities consist in moisture as you may know,
if you do but consider that dryness is not attributed to the Air, nor Water,
but to the Fire, and Earth. 2. The thing to be congealed must needs be moist,
therefore the Medicine congealing must of necessity be dry, for if cold be
joined with dryness, it contracts the pores that so the humors cannot be
scattered.
Yet you must observe a difference between Medicines drying, making thick,
hardening, and congealing, of which differences a few words will not do amiss.

1. Such Medicines are said to dry, which draw out, or drink up the moisture,
as a (...) drinks up water. 2. Such Medicines are said to make thick, as do not
consume the moisture, but ad dryness to it, as you make Syrups into a thick
Electuary by adding Pouders to them. 3. Such as congeal, neither draw out the
moisture not make it thick by adding dryness to it, but contract it by vehement
cold, as Water is frozen into Ice. 4. Hardening disfers from all these, for the
parts of the Body swell and are filled with Phlegmatic humors, or Melancholy
Blood, which at last grows hard.
That you may clearly understand this, observe but these two things.

1. What it is which works. 2. What it works upon.
That which works is outward cold, that which is wrought upon is a certain
thickness and dryness of humors, for if the humor were fluid as water is it
might properly be said to be congealed by cold, but not so properly hardened.
Thus you see cold and drines to be the cause of hardening. But enough of this
(perhaps some may think too much) This hardening being so far from being useful,
that it is obnoxious to the Body of Man, I pass it without more words. I
suppose when Galen wrote of hardening Medicines, he intended such as make thick,
and therefore amongst them he reckons up, Fleawort, Purslain, Housleek, and the
like, which assuage the heat of the humors in Swellings, and stop subtle and
sharp Defluxious upon the Lungues, but of these more anon.

CHAP. 3. Of Loosning Medicines.
BY Loosning here, I do not mean Purging; not that which is opposite to
Astringency, but that which is opposite to stretching: I knew not suddenly what
fitter English Name to give it, than Loosning or Laxation, which latter is
scarce English.

The Members are distended or stretched diverse ways, and ought to be loosned
as many, for they are stretched sometimes by dryness, sometimes by cold,
sometimes by repletion or fullness, sometimes by swellings, and sometimes by
some of these joined together. I avoid terms of Art as much as I can, because
it would profit my Country but little, to give them the Rules of Physic in
such English as they understand not.

I confess the Opinion of Ancient Physicians has been various about these
Loosning Medicines. Galen's Opinion was, That they might be referred either to
moistning, or heating, or mollifying, or evacuating Medicines, and therefore
ought not to be referred to a Chapter by themselves.

It Is like they may, and so may all other Medicines be referred to heat, or
coldness, or dryness, or moisture: But we speak not here of the Particular
properties of Medicines, but of their Joined properties, as they heat and
moisten.

Others, they question how they can be distinguished from such as mollify,
seeing such as are loosning, and such as are emollient, are both of them hot
and moist.

To that, thus: Stetching and Loosning are ascribed to the movable parts of the
Body, as to the Muscles and their Tendons, to the Ligaments, and Membranae; But
softness and hardness to such parts of the Body as may be felt with the hand: I
shall make it clear by a Similitude: Wax is softened being hard, but
Fiddle-strings are loosned being stretched. And if you say that the difference
lying only in the parts of the Body, is no true difference; then take notice,
that such Medicines which loosen, are less hot and more moistning than such as
soften, for they operate most by heat, these by moisture.

The truth is, I am of Opinion, the difference is not much, nay, scarce
sensible, between Emollient and Loosning Medicines, Only I quoted this in a
Chapter by itself, not so much because some Authors do, as because it conduces
to the increase of knowledge in Physic, for want of which this poor Nation is
almost spoiled.

The chief Use of Loosning Medicines is in Convulsions and Cramps, and such
like infirmities which cause distention or stretching.

They are known by the very same marks and tokens that Emollient Medicines are.

CHAP. 4. Of Medicines making thin and thick.
MEdicines which rarify, or make thin, are such which open the pores of the
skin, and make them wider, they are not so moist as Emollient Medicines are,
but of thin and subtle parts, they are hot, but not so hot that they should
draw the matter to them, or discuss it, as we shall show when we come to speak
of those Faculties.

Such as make thick are contrary to these, these are cold and stop the pores of
the skin.

These Galen would have to be moist, neither is there any difference between
his Description of hardening Medicines, and such as make thick.

1. The Use of Rarifying Medicines is, to open the Use., 1.
pores of the skin, and make them wider, that so the vapors arising from Blood
overheated may pass out, and that was the Reason Wrestlers in ancient times
came to their exercise with their Bodies anointed, that so the vapors caused by
stirring their Bodies might pass out, and not cause Fevers or other mischief
to the Bowels by being kept in. 2. Rarifying Medicines conduce much to the
mitigation of pain, for the pores of the Skin being opened, the matter causing
the pain is the easier expelled.
Again, In swellings, it is not only the plenty of humors that causes pain,
but the dryness, hardness, or stretching of the Skin, therefore seeing
Medicines which rarify or make thin, do both loosen and mollify, they must of
necessity by these operations mitigate pain.

Also there is much profit in the use of thickning Medicines, for they make the
Skin firm, thereby not only the better resisting cold, but also they stop too
much sweating, and desolution of the spirits that way, which often happens to
them that are weak.

CHAP 5. Of Medicines opening the Mouths of the Vessels.
THese Galen thought to be hot, but of thick parts and biting.

Let none admire that thickness should be attributed to Medicines of an opening
substance, seeing thickness seems rather to stop than to open. For answer to
this, you must consider the manner of opening obstructions, and of opening the
mouths of the Vessels is different, Obstructions require cutting Medicines by
which the thickness of the matter obstructing is made thinner, therefore the
Medicine ought not to be thick, but of thin substance that it may the better
penetrate (I do not mean of a thin Body, like water, for that causes
Obstructions rather then take them away, but of thin parts, viz. Making thin)
But those Medicines which are said to open the mouths or passages of the
Vessels, are of thick parts, that they may not only penetrate, but also
strengthen the passages by which they pass, therefore Galen besides heat,
appointed thickness of parts and sharpness, or biting, as Pepper bites, for
such a sharp heat is very effectual to penetrate, and cannot stop in the least;
for although the Skin be easily contracted by gentle Medicines, the Vessels
cannot be shut but by things vehemently binding, and therefore let these
Medicines of thick substance be also moist, for moisture cannot so forcibly
bind as to stop the mouths of the Vessels.

The Use of opening Medicines may be easily gathered Use.
from the use of the Vessels to be opened, for seeing their use is to hold
Blood, which sometimes offend in quantity, sometimes in quality, such
infirmities are to be remedied by opening Medicines.

They are easily known by taste, being sharp and piercing, and bite the tongue,
but such as are stopping, are cold and binding, and contract the tongue in
tasting of them.

CHAP. 6. Of Attenuating Medicines.
THe use of Attenuating Medicines is to open the obstructions of the Bowels.

The Bowels are obstructed or stopped by tough and viscus humors, hence then it
is clear that Attenuating, or Extenuating Medicines ought to be thin of
substance, but whether they ought all to be hot or not, is some question, for
indeed many cold Medicines cut tough humors and open obstructions, as Vinegar,
Endive, Succory, and the like. I shall not enter into the Dispute here whether
all cold things bind or not, and therefore some hold Vinegar to be hot in it
self, and cool only by accedent; we know Wine is hot, and Vinegar is nothing
but corrupted Wine, and we know as well that putrefaction turns things usually
into a contrary quality, and besides if you ask Physicians how one Simple can
perform two contrary operations, they presently run into the old bush, It does
it (say they) by a hidden quality.

The use of Attenuating Medicines is to open the Bowels, to cleanse the Breast
of Phlegm, co expel the Terms, etc.

Your best course is, first to cleanse the body by some gentle purge before you
use Attenuating Medicines, lest they seize upon the Blood and cause Fevers, or
other mischeifs as bad.

They are in taste sharp, sour, or bitter, yet such as being tasted dilate the
tongue, and contract it not.

Chap. 7. Of Drawing Medicines.
THe Opinion of Physicians is concerning these as it is concerning other
Medicines, viz. Some draw by a manifest quality, some by a hidden, and so
(quoth they) they draw to themselves both humors and thorns, or splinters that
are gotten into the Flesh, however this is certain, they are all of them hot,
and of thin parts; hot because the Nature of heat is to draw, of thin parts
that so they may penetrate to the humors that are to be drawn out.

Their Use is various, viz.

1. That the Bowels may be disburthened of corrupt Use, 1.
humors. 2. Outwardly used, by them the offending humor 2.
(I should have said the Peccant humor, had I written only to Scholars) is
called from the internal parts of the Body to the Superficies. 3. By them the
Crisis of a Disease is much helped 3.
forward. 4. They are exceeding profitable to draw forth Poison 4.
out of the Body. 5. Parts of the Body overcooled are cured by these 5.
Medicines, viz. By applying them outwardly to the place, not only because they
heat, but also because they draw the spirits by which life and and heat are
cherished to the part of the Body which is destitute of them, you cannot but
konw that many times parts of the Body fall away in Flesh, and their strength
decays as in some peoples Arms or Legs, or the like, the usual Reason is,
Because the vital Spirit decaies in those parts, to which use such Plasters or
Ointments as are attractive (which is the Physical term for drawing Medicines)
for they do not only cherish the parts by their own proper heat, but draw the
Vital and Natural spirits thither, whereby they are both quickened and
nourished. They are known almost by the same tokens that Attenuating Medicines
are, seeing Heat, and thinness of parts is in them both, they differ only in
respect of quantity, thinness of parts being most proper to Attenuating
Medicines, but Attractive Medicines are hotter.


Chap. 8. Of Discussive Medicines.
BY Discussive Medicines I intend such as the Greeks call (...) commonly
Physicians call them by the names of Diaphoreticks; in plain English, they are
such Medicines as provoke Sweat, or as work by insensible transpiraton, which
is another term they give to Sweating. I quote these terms, and explain them,
because I would not have my Countrymen hood-winked with strange terms; I am
half of Opinion it is one way by which they are trained up in slavery.

The nature of Discussing (or Sweating) Medicines is almost the same with
Attractive, for there are no discussive Medicines but are attractive, nor
scarce any attractive Medicine but is in some measure or other discussing. The
difference then is only this; That discussive Medicines is hotter than
attractive, and therefore nothing else need be written of their nature.

Their Use may be known even from their very Use.
Name; for diseases that come by repletion or fullness, are cured by evacuation
or emptying, yet neither Note.
Blood nor gross humors are to be expelled by Sweating or insensible
transpiration (as they call it) but the one requires Blood-letting, the other
Purgation; but Serosus or thin humors and filthy vapors, and such like
superfluities, are to be expelled by sweat, and be wary in this too, for many
of them work violently, Caut. 1.
and violent Medicines are not rashly to be given.

Besides, Swellings are sometimes made so hard by Caut. 2.
sweating Medicines, that afterward they can never be cured; For what is Thin
being by such Medicines taken away, nothing but what is perfectly hard remains:
If you fear such a thing, mix Emollients with them.

Again, Sometimes by using Discussives, the humors Caut. 3.
offending (which Physicians usually call the Peccant humor) is driven to some
more noble part of the Body, or else it draws more than it discusseth; in such
cases, concoct and attenuate the matter offending before you go about to
discuss it.

From hence may easily be gathered at what time of the Disease Discussive
Medicines are to be used, viz. about the declining of the disease, although in
diseases arising from heat of blood, we sometimes use them in the increase and
state of them.

They are known by the same marks and tokens attenuating Medicines are, viz. by
their burning and biting quality, they being very hot and of thin parts, void
of any biting quality, therefore they contract not the Tongue in tasting of
them.

Chap. 9. Of Repelling Medicines.
REpelling Medicines are of Contrary operation to these three last Mentioned,
viz. Attenuating, Drawing, and Discussive Medicines; It Is true, there is but
little difference between these three, some hold none at all; and if you will
be so nice, you may oppose them thus. And so Medicines making thick correspond
to Attenuating Medicines, or such as make thin, repelling Medicines are opposed
to such as draw, and such as retain the humors and make them tough, are oppisit
to such as discuss, some hold this niceness needless.

2. The sentence of Authors about Repulsive Medicines is various:

For seeing an Influxion may be caused many ways: A Repulsive has got as many
defenitions.

For such things as cool, bind, stop and make thick, stay Influxions, and
therefore Repulsives are by Authors opposed. not only to Attractives, but also
to Attenuating, and Discussing Medicines.

But properly such things are called Repulsives, which do not only stay
Inflaxions, (for so do such Medicines which step and and make thick) but such
as drive the humors flowing to, or inherent in the place, to some other place.

The (...) is, Binding is inherent to Repulsives, so is not coldness nor making
thick: Yet such as are binding, cold and thin in operation are most effectual.

Your taste will find Repulsives to be, tart, or sharp, or austere, with a
certain binding which contracts the Tongue.

Their Use is manifold, as in hot Tumors, Headaches Use, 1.
or the like.

By these in Fevers are the Vapors driven from the Use, 2.
Head: Vinegar of Roses is notable.

They are most commodious in the beginning and Time of giving.
increase of a disease, for then Influxions are most rife.

But seeing that in the cure of Tumors there are two Scopes, 1 That that which
flows to it may be repelled. 2 That that which is already in it may be
discussed: Repulsives are most commodiously used in the beginning, discussives
in the latter end.

In the middle you may mix them with this Proviso, That Repulsives exceed in
the beginning, Discussives in the latter end.

If the matter offending be of a venomous quality, Caut. 1.
either abstain from Repulsives altogether, or use Purging first, lest the
matter fly to the Bowels and prove dangerous, especially if the Bowels be weak.
2.


Also forbear Repulsives, if the pain be great. 3.


Lastly, Have a care lest by Repulsives you contract the Pores so much, that
the matter cannot be removed by Discussives.

Chap. 10. Of Burning Medicines.
SUch Medicines are called by the Greeks (...), that (...) so vehement hot that
they burn the Skin like fire or scalding (...). Physicians to keep the People
in ignorance that so they may the better make slaves of them, use the Greek
name [ (...)]

Yet these also are distinguished by their degrees, for some are milder, and
only cause redness to, or (...) upon the skin, others burn both skin and flesh,
and are used to make Issues.

The mildest are many times used to such Limbs as Use 1.
are wasted away.

To burn off Hair, to dissolve hard and callous tumors, Use, 2.
to consume Warts, and Polypus which is a fleshy excressence growing in the
Nose, in the cure of Gouts, and Lethargies.

Fistulaes and malignant Ulcers are restrained this Use, 3.
way, and dangerous defluxion of humors to the superficies of the Body and many
things of the like Nature.

Yet must this sort of Medicines be used very circumspectly, Caut. 1.
lest it cause either Fevers or Convusions, therefore use it not at all till
the Body be first well purged.

If you use it to restore Limbs, temper it with milder Caut. 2.
things.

Lastly, Have a care lest the parts adjacent be inflamed, Caut. 3.
which you may both prevent and remedy by anointing them with cool Ointments.

Chap. 11. Of Clensing Medicines.
CLensing Medicines can neither be defined by heat, nor coldness,, because some
of both sorts cleanse.

A clensing Medicine then is of a terrene quality, which takes away the filth
with it and carries it out.

Here to avoid confusion, a difference must be made between wathing (...).
Definition.


A thing which (...), carries away by Fluxion, as a man washes the dirt off
from a thing.

A clensing Medicine by a certain roughness or nitrous quality, carries away
the compacted filth with it.

This also is the difference between clensing and discussing Medicines, the one
makes thick humors thin, and so scatters them, but a clensing Medicine takes
the most tenacious humor along with it, without any alteration.

Besides, Of clensing Medicines some are of a gentler nature which the Greeks
call (...), some are more vehement called (...).

These are not known one and the same way, for some are sweet, some salt, and
some bitter.

The Use of clensing is external, as the use of Purges internal.

They are used to cleanse the Sanies and other filth of Ulcers, yea and to
consume and eat away the Flesh it self, as burnt Alum, Prescipetate, etc.

When these must be used, not only the affects of the Ulcers, but also the
temperature of the Body will tell you.

For if you see either a Disease of fullness, which our Physicians call [
Plethora] or corrupted humors which they call [ Cacochyma] you must empty the
Body of these, viz. fullness by bleeding, and corrupt humors or evil state of
the Body, by purging before you use clensing Medicines to the Ulcer, else your
cure will never proceed prosperously.

In the Ulcer, pain to be eased, some part of the Ulcer to (...), Flux to be
stopped, or Inflammation to be ceased will instruct a prudent Artificer.

Chap. 12. Of Emplasters.
BY (...) here, do I mean things glutinative, and they are clean contrary to
things clensing, They are of a fat glutenous or tenareous substance. They
differ from things stopping because they do not stop the pores so much, as
stick to them like Birdlime.

They have a certain glutenous heat, tempered both with coldness and moisture.

From these, Plasters take their names.

Their taste is either none at all, or not discernable whether hot or cold but
sat, insipid or without taste or sweet, viscous in feeling.

Their use is to stop flowing of Blood and other Use.
Fluxes, to cause suppuration, to contain in the heat, that so tumors may be
ripened.

Also they are mixed with other Medicines, that they may the better be brought
into the form of an Emplaster, and may stick the better to the Members.

Chap. 13. Of Suppuring Medicines
THese have a great affinity with Emolients, like to them in temperature, only
Emollients are mething hotter.

Yet is there a difference as apparent as the Sun is when he is upon the
Meridian, and the use is manifest. For,

Emollients are to make hard things soft; but what Suppures, rather makes a
generation than an alteration of the humor.

Natural heat is the efficient cause of Suppuration, neither can it be done by
any external means.

Therefore such things are said to suppure, which by a gentle heat cherish the
inbred heat of man.

This is done by such Medicines which are not only temperate in heat, but also
by a gentle viscosity, fill up or stop the Pores, that so the heat of the part
affected be not scattered.

For although such things as bind hinder the dissipation of the Spirits, and
internal heat, yet they retain not the moisture as Suppuring Medicines properly
and especially do.

The heat then of Suppuring Medicines is like the internal heat of our Bodies.

As things then very hot, are ungrateful either by biting, as Pepper, or
bitterness: in Suppuring Medicines, no biting, no binding, no nitrous quality
is perceived by the taste (I shall give you better satisfaction both in this and
others, by and by)

For Reason will tell a man, that such things hinder rather than help the work
of Nature in Maturation.

Yet it follows not from hence, That all Suppuring Medicines are grateful to
the taste, for many things grateful to the taste provoke Vomiting, therefore why
may not the contrary be?

The most frequent use of Suppuration is, to ripen (...)
Phlegmonae, a general term Physicians give to all swellings proceeding of
Blood, because Nature is very apt to help such cures, and Physic is an art to
help, not to hinder Nature.

The time of Use is usually in the height of the disease, when the flux is
stayed, as also to ripen matter that it may be the easier purged away.

Chap. 14. Of Medicines provoking Urin.
THe causes by which Urine is suppressed are many.

1. By too much drying, or sweating, it may be consumed. 2. By heat or
inflammation of the Reins, or passages whereby it passes from the Reins, it may
be stopped by compression.
Urin is the thinnest part of Blood, separated from the thickest part in the
Reins.

If then the Blood be more thick and viscous than ordinary, it cannot easily be
separated without cutting and clensing Medicines.

This is for certain, That Blood can neither be separated nor distributed
without heat.

Yet amongst Diuretics are some cold things, as the four greater cold Seeds,
Winter-Cherries, and the like.

Although this seem a wonder, yet may it be, and both stand with truth.

For cool Diuretics, though they further not the separation of the Blood one
jet, yet they cleanse and purge the passages of the Urin.

Diuretics then are of two sorts:

1. Such as conduce to the separation of the Blood. 2. Such as open the Urinal
passages.
The former are biting (and are known by that taste) I know not a better word
for Acer, than biting like Pepper.
very hot and cutting, whence they penetrate to the Reins, and cut the gross
humors there.

Bitter things, although they be very hot and cut gross humors, yet are they of
a (...) and terrene substance, than is convenient to provoke Urin.

Hence then we may safely gather, That bitter things are not so moist nor
penetrating as such as bite like Pepper.

Those cold things which provoke Urin, though they bite not, yet have they a
nitrous quality whereby they open and cleanse,

For the Use of these the Title will instruct you, only, lest they carry the
humors they find in the Veins to the Reins and so make the stopping the
greater, purge those places they must pass through before you administer them.

CHAP. 15. Of Medicines provoking the Terms.
THose Medicines have a great affinity with those before going.

For such as provoke the Terms, provoke also Urine, their Nature is almost the
same, viz. Hot and of thin essence.

Only thus much, to provoke the Terms not only the Blood is to be attenuated,
but the mouths of the Vessels also to be opened.

Such as open those Vessels carry a certain terrene quality with them, whereby
they not only penetrate, but also penetrating dilate the Vessels, and carry
away the filth with them.

Things provoking the Terms ought to be hot in the third Degree, and yet not
very dry.

That there is an appointed time for the Terms to come down: every Woman that
is but sixteen years old can tell you.

Be sure you administer the Medicine at the time they should come down, else
you will do no other good than weaken Nature.

Neither must those things be neglected which may bring the Body into a fit
temper for such a business

If the Body be full of ill humors, purge them out first before you administer
hot things, lest you (...) the crude humors into the Veins.

By avoiding the Menstruis the Body is made lighter, and nature disburthened,
health (...), (...) procured.

The retaining of them breeds Dropsies, Fallingsickness, and other cruel
Diseases, yea sometimes Madness.

Hippocrates denies any Women have the Gout so long as they have the Terms

Chap. 16. Medicines breeding, or taking away Milk.
Seeing Milk is bred of Blood, there is no question to be made but the way to
increase Milk, is to increase the Blood.

Yet though Blood be very copious, it does not always follow that Milk must of
necessity be so too, for the Blood may be naught, or not fit to be turned into
Milk, or impedited that it cannot.

Those things are properly said to breed Milk, which breed much Blood, and it
good, and have a moderate cutting faculty also.

Such things then as breed Milk are hot and of thin parts, yet differ much from
those that provoke Urine or the Terms. The other Being vehemently hot, these
which breed Milk temperately hot.

And if dryness be adverse to the provoking of the Terms, certainly it is most
adverse to breeding (...) Medicines which breed Milk, are in (...) either (...)
or sweet.

For seeing both Blood and Milk are temperate, or at least very moderately hot,
they must be bred of such things as are not unlike to them in Nature.

Such things as lessen Milk must needs be contrary to such things as increase
it.

This is done by drying or thickning the Blood.

They are known by taste, bitter, sharp, tart, (...), etc. and whatsoever is
excessive either in heat or cold.

If the Body be full of evil juice, purge it before you go about to breed Milk,
for the more you nourish impure. Bodies the more you offend them.

Chap. 17. Of Medicines regarding the Seed.
AS Milk, so also Seed takes his Original from Blood.

Therefore of necessity nourishing meats (...) much Seed, because they beget
much Blood.

This is the difference between such things as breed Milk, and such as breed
Seed, Seed requires a more windy (...) than the other does.

For this faculty ought to be in Seed, that being heat with spirits it may
cause the Yard to stand.

Such Medicines are temperately hot and moist.

Also to provoke one to the sports of Venus, we use such things as stir up the
veneral faculty.

These are hotter than those that increase Seed, yet not so dry that they
should consume the Seed.

Take notice of this (...), that some things dull Venus by cold, and some over
power her by (...).

The one of those (...) the Seed, the other makes it torped and sluggish,
stays the Itching.

For the Seed of Man is subject to as many contingents as the Man himself is.

It is not my (...) here to treat of them, for such things as make Seed either
thinner or thicker, are not properly said to breed Seed.

For the time, when Seed should be increased; I need say nothing, unless I
should say when a Man has got a pretty (...).

If the Body be vicious, let it first be purged, let Seed be entreased before
it be provoked.

Biting things lessen the Seed, stir up the Venerial parts to expulsion, cause
Itching, or tickling of the (...), therefore they are good to be used a little
before the act, otherwise the constant use of them, consumes and (...) the Seed.

Observe thus much, that one and the same Medicine does not suit with every
complexion, for example, If the person be (...) let the Medicine be the hotter.

The use of these Medicines is the propagation of Mankind, for the desire of
Children inches many to Copulation, but the pleasure that is in the (...) ten
times more.

Chap. 18. Of Medicines casing Pain.
THere is no dispute of the story but that which causes the disease causes
the pain, as also what (...) the disease caseth the pain.

Yet are those properly called (...), (which is the Physical term for such
Medicines) which barely regard the pain, both cause and disease remaining.

These are temperate for heat, and thin for essence.

For seeing they are to be applied both to hot and cold effects, they ought not
to vary much from temperature.

They something excel in heat, and so they ease pain, because they open the
pores, and loosen the skin.

But they also cool because they let out those hot fuliginous vapors which
cause the pain.

Such things as case pain by (...), are called (...), not (...); (...), not
(...).

They do not take away the pain at all, (...) cause sleep, or so dull the senses
that they cannot (...) it.

They are administered at such times when the Symptoms are so grievous that they
threaten a (...) danger than the disease is.

If in giving them, you fear a greater fluxion will come to the part afflicted,
mix some things with them, which are medicinal for the disease.

If the pain lie in the skin, let the anodines beliquid; the deeper it lies,
the more solid let them be, lest their virtue be discussed before they come at
the part afflicted.

CHAP. 19. Of Medicines breeding Flesh.
THere are many things diligently to be observed in the cures of Wounds and
Ulcers, which incur and hinder that the cure cannot be speedily done, nor the
separated parts reduced to their natural state.

Viz. Fluxes of Blood, (...), Hardness, Pain and other things besides our
present scope.

Our present scope is, To show how the cavity of Ulcers may be filled with
Flesh,

Such Medicines are called (...), Sarcoticks.

This, though it be the work of Nature, yet it is helped forward with
Medicines, that the Blood may be prepared, that it may the easier be turned
into Flesh.

These are not Medicines which breed good Blood, nor which correct the
intemperature of the place afflicted, but which defend the Blood and the Ulcer
it self from corruption in breeding Flesh.

For Nature in breeding Flesh produces two sorts of excrements, viz. serosus
humors, and purulentus dross.

Those Medicines then which cleanse and consume, these by drying are said to
breed Flesh, because by their helps Nature performs that Office.

Also take notice that these Medicines are not so drying that they should
consume the blood also as well as the Sanies, nor so clensing that they should
consume the Flesh with the dross.

Let them not then exceed the first Degree unless the Ulcer be very moist.

Their difference are various according to the part wounded, which ought to be
restored with the same Flesh.

The softer then and tenderer the place is, the gentler let the Medicines be.

Chap. 20. Of Glutinative Medicines.
THat is the true cure of an Ulcer which joins the mouth of it together.

That is a glutinative Medicine, which couples together by drying and binding,
the sides of an Ulcer before brought together.

These require a greater drying faculty than the former, not only to consume
what flows out, but what remains liquid in the flesh, for liquid flesh is more
subject to flow abroad than to stick together.

The time of using them, any body may know without teaching, viz. when the
Ulcer is cleansed and filled with Flesh, and such symptoms as hinder are taken
away.

For many times Ulcers must be kept open that the Sanies, or sords that lie in
them may be purged out, whereas of themselves they would heal before.

Only beware left by too much binding you cause pain in tender parts.

Chap. 21. Of Scarrifying Medicines.
THe last part of the cure of an Ulcer is to cover it with Skin, and restore
the place to its prestin beauty.

Such Medicines the Greeks call Epulotica.

This also is done by things drying and binding.

They differ from the former thus, in that they meddle with the Flesh no
further than only to convert it into Skin.

Before you administer Epuloticks, let not only the Ulcer but the places
adjacent be (...) viewed, lest ill Symptoms follows.

Chap. 22. Of Medicines resisting Poison.
SUch Medicines' are called Alexiteria, and Alexipharmaca, which resist Poison.

Some of these resist Poison by Astral influence, and some Physicians (though
but few) can give a reason of it.

These they have sorted into three Ranks.

1. Such as strengthen Nature that so it may (...) the Poison the easier. 2.
Such as oppose the Poison by a contrary quality. 3. Such as violently thrust it
out of doors.
Such as strengthen Nature against Poison either do it to the whole Body
universally, or else strengthen some particular part thereof.

For many times one particular part of the Body is most afflicted by the
Poison, suppose the Stomach, Liver, Brain, or any other part, such as cherish
and strengthen those parts being weakened, may be said to resist Poison.

Such as strengthen the Spirits, strengthen all the Body.

Sometimes Poisons kill by their quality, and then are they to be corrected by
their contraries.

They which kill by cooling are to be remedied by heating, and the contrary,
they which kill by corrhoding are to be cured by lenitives such as temper their
acrimony.

Those which kill by Induration, or Coagulation require cutting Medicines.

Also because all Poisons are in motion, neither stay they in one till they
have seized and oppressed the Fountain of Life, therefore have they invented
another faculty to stay their motion, viz. Terrene and Emplastick.

For they judge, if the Poison light upon these Medicines, they embrace them
round with a viscous quality.

Also they say the ways and passages are stopped by such means, to hinder
their proceeding, take Terra Lemnia for one.

Truly if these Reasons be good, which I leave to future time to determine, it
may be done for a little cost.

Some are of opinion that the safest way is to expel the Poison out of the
Body, so soon as may be, and that is done, by Vomit, or Purge, or Sweat.

You need not question the time, but do it as soon as may be; for there is no
Parlying with Poison.

Let Vomiting be the first, Purging the next, and Sweating the last. This is
general. But,

If thou do but observe the nature and motion of he Venem, that will be thy
best Instructor.

In the Stomach it requires Vomiting, in the Blood and Spirits Sweating; if the
Body be Plethorick, Bleeding; if full of evil humors, Purging.

Lastly, The Cure: being ended, strengthen the parts afflicted.

Thus our common Physicians, But out of question, Medecines whose operation is
by Astral influence, are both safest and speediest, not only in this but in all
other Diseases, but this is beside my present scope, and Physicians confess is
hid from their eyes, that belongs to my own Model, which I trust in God I shall
live to perfect. This is that that cures diseases per se, the other per
accidens; this Moderns quite neglected: some Ancients were groping at it,
though left it not to posterity.

Chap. 23. Of Medicines Adorning the Body.
SUch Medicines as adorn the Body, adding Comeliness and Beauty to it, are
called in Greek (...).

Beauty is a blessing of God, and every one ought to preserve it; they offend
as much that neglect it, as they do that paint their Faces.

They are apropriated to the Skin, Hair, and Teeth.

The Skin is pestered with Spots, Pimples, Freckles, Wrinkles and Sunburning.

The Hair either falls off, or hangs not as it should do.

The Teeth are either loose, or fall out, or stink, or are black.

Spots and Sun-burning, as also blackness of the Teeth are to be taken away by
clensing Medicines, of which before.

Redness of the Face proceeds from diverse causes, therefore are the remedies
as diverse.

If of heat, cool the Blood; if it be impacted to the Skin, use extenuating
Medicines; if of both, use both.

If the failing be extrinsecal, use extrinsecal Medicines; if intrinsecal, let
the remedy be so also.

Wrinkles are taken away by Laxative, Lenient, and Emollient Medicines.

For falling off of Hair, correct the pravity of the humor that causes it.

Gentle heat breeds hair, and preserves it; clensing and corrhoding Medicines
take it away.

Drying and binding Medicines cause Hair to curl.

Clensing things make the Teeth clean, binding things strengthen them, but have
a care they have not a blackish quality with them, which is incident to many
binding Medicines.

Clensing and discussing Medicines take Scurf or Dandrif from the Head.

In all these, see the Bowels be clean, else local Medicines are applied in
vain.

In preserving Hair, only two things are considerable.

1. To contract the pores. 2. To see that the Hair have nourishment.
Chap. 24. Of Purging Medicines.
MUch jarring has been amongst Physicians about Purging Medicines, namely
whether they draw the humors to them by a hidden quality, which in plain
English is, they know not how; or whether they perform their office by a
manifest quality, viz. By heat, dryness, coldness, or moisture; It is not my
present scope to enter the lists of a Dispute about the business, neither seems
it such a hidden thing to me that every like should draw its like, only to make
the matter as plain as I can, I subdivide this

Chapter into these following Parts.

1. Cautions concerning Purging. 2. Of the choice purging Medicines. 3. Of the
time of taking them. 4. Of the correcting of them. 5. Of the manner of Purging.
Cautions concerning Purging.
IN this, first consider diligently, and be exceeding cautious in it too, what
the matter offending is, what part of the Body is afflicted by it, and which is
the best way to bring it out.

Only here by the way first, have a care of giving Vomits, for they usually
work more violently, and afflict the Body more than Purges do, therefore are
not fit for weak Bodies, be sure the matter offending lie in the tunicle of the
Stomach, else is a Vomit given in vain.

Secondly, Vomits are more dangerous for Women than Men, especially such as are
either with Child, or subject to the Fits of the Mother. This is the first
Caution.

Secondly, What Medicine is apropriated to the purging of such a humor, for
seeing the offending matter is not alike in all, the purging Medicine ought not
to be the same to all. I shall speak more of this anon. As also of the diverse
ways whereby Medicines draw out or cast out humors, viz. By lenifying,
clensing, provoking Nature to expulsion, and (which is stranger than the
Doctors hidden Quality) some purge by binding, but indeed and in truth such as
are properly called purging Medicines, which besides these faculties have
gotten another, by which they draw, or call out the humors from the most remote
parts of the Body, whether these do it by heat, or by an hidden quality,
Physicians are scarce able to determine, it being very well known to modern
Physicians though the Ancient denied it, that many cold Medicines purge: For my
part I shall forbear the Dispute here, not because I am not able to answer it,
but because I would train up my Country men first a little better in the
Grounds of Physic, it being my Opinion that young Physicians as well as young
Christians ought not to be led into doubtful Disputations. This is the Second
Caution.

Thirdly, There is this Faculty in all the Purges of Galen's Model (because he
gives the whole Simple, which must needs consist of diverse qualities, because
the Creation is made up of, and consists by a harmony of contraries) there is
(I say) this Faculty in all Purges of that Nature, that they contain in them a
substance which is inimical both to the Stomach and Bowels, and some are of
opinion this does good, namely, Provokes Nature the more to expulsion; the
reason might be good if the Foundation of it were so, for by this reason Nature
her self should purge not the Medicine, and a Physician who takes his name from
(...) which signifies Nature, should help Nature in her business and not hinder
her. But to forbear being critical, this substance which I told you was
inimical to the Stomach, must be corrected in every Purge; And this is my Third
Caution.

Fourthly, The choice of Purging Medicines is very difficult, they are not
Physic for every Ignoramus to prescribe, for some purge gently, some
violently, some are apropriated to Phlegm, some to Choler, some to Melancholy,
and some to Water, or serosus humors: Consider this but duly, and withal, what
mischief may accrue by giving a Medicine purging Choler, in a Disease
proceeding of Phlegm or watery humors, you may easily see without a pair of
Spectacles, that it cannot but weaken the Spirits exceedingly, and abate
Natural heat, which is all Nature has to help her self in such a case, as also
hinder the clarification of the Blood which is done by Choler, thereby
increasing the Disease, and opening a gap to let out Life, and let in Death; It
were vain to recite what mischiefs may follow the giving of violent Purges to
weak Bodies, or to strong Bodies where the humor offending is not tough and
viscous, but fluid and easy to be carried away, I shall touch upon them by and
by, only here you may see reason enough, why I am so long upon this Subject.

Lastly, When you perfectly know the humor offending, the convenient Medicine,
and fit correction for it, the time and manner of using it remains to be
enquired into.

These I thought to premise by way of Caution before I come to the matter it
self intended, and so much the rather because people from one Generation to
another have been so trained up in ignorance by Physicians who have absconded
the Method of Physic from them, that now like mad men (oppression having
almost, if not altogether made them so) when they all any thing, they take any
Purge what their next Neighbor advises them to, right or wrong it is no matter,
their wit in, and consideration of the business being much at one.

Of the Choice of Purging Medicines.
WE told you before, that purging Medicines were apropriated to certain humors,
the redundancy or overflowing of which causes diseases in the Body of Man, of
these such as proceed from Blood are not to be remedied by Purging.

The Humors to be purged are Four, viz.

Phlegm. Watery Humor. Choler. Melancholy.
According to the quality of these are Purging Medicines to be chosen.

Before I come to them, give me leave to premise one word or two, I shall only
here quote Purging Simples because I am now upon the Simples, I shall touch
upon the Purging Compounds when I come unto them, and if any ask why I meddle
with no other Medicines than what the College makes use of, tell them the
reason is, Because the College have so ordered the matter, that a man can buy
no other for his money.

The most noted qualities of Purging Medicines. I shall first give you a
Synopsis or Joynt-view of Purging Simples usually to be had.

Secondly, speak as briefly as I can of their Properties.

Purging Simples work
Gently. Strongly.
Such as work gently, either (...) Choler, As,
Wormwood, Centaury, Aloes, Hops, Mercury, Mallows, Peach leaves and flowers,
Damask Roses, Blew Violets, Cassia Fistula, Citron Mirobalans, Prunes,
Tamarinds, Rhubarb, Rhapontick, Manna.

Purge Phlegm, As,
Hysop, Hedge Hysop, Bastard Saffron, Broom flowers, Elder flowers, Myrobalans,
Bellerick, Chebs, and Emblicks, the Seed of Bastard Saffron and Broom, Jallap
and Mechoacan.

Watery Humors.
The Leaves, Bark and Roots of Elder, and Dwarf Elder, or Walwort, Elder
Flowers, Broom Flowers, Agrick, Jallap, Mechoacan, Orris, or Flower-deluce
Roots.

Melancholy.
Senna, Fumitory, Dodder, Epithimum, Indian Myrobalans, Polipodium, Whey, Lapis
Lazuli etc.

Violent Simples purge Choler, As
The Seeds of Spurge, the Bark and Root of the same, Scammony, Elaterium.

Phlegm and Water.
Elaterium, Euphorbium, Spurge, Opopanax, Sarcocolla, Briony Roots, Turbith,
Hermodactils, Colocynthis, Wild Cucumers, Sowbread, Mezereon, Squils.

Melancholy.
Hellebore white and black.

Secondly, In all these observe, That such as are gentle are only to be given
to delicate and tender bodies, whether the body be weak naturally, or caused
so by sickness, above all give not vomits to weak stomachs, for the Fundament
is ordained by nature to avoid the Excrements and not the mouth, which was
ordained to take in, not to vomit out, therefore use vomits as seldom as may be.

But for the Election of Purges, Let such as are apropriated to phlegm and
Melancholy be mixed with such things as are thin in substance, and of a
cutting quality, because these humors are tough, gentle Medicines will serve to
evacuate Water and Choler usually, I say [usually] because sometimes water
requires such Medicines, as are of force to call them from the extreme parts of
the Body, and such must needs be violent in operation. I entreat all young
Students in Physic to be very careful in administering violent Medicines, and
that never without due preparation of the Body beforehand, never unless the
humor be so repugnant that it will not yield to gentler: And oh! that simple
people would learn to be but so wise as to let them alone, and not take them
themselves, the evil they may do them (if not regulated by an abler brain than
dwells in their skuls) is certain, the good very uncertain; for such violent
Medicines as purge Choler if immoderately taken, first draw the Choler, then
the Phlegm, afterward the Melancholy, then they cuase corrosions and draw the
blood; Such as purge Phlegm and Water violently when they have drawn that, then
they draw the Choler, then Melancholy, they then corrode, and so either by
excoriation or opening the mouths of the Veins, bloody Fluxes also follow, and
many times the disease ends in the Grave; and so also the immoderate Purgation
of Melancholy, first draws Choler (I mean after the Melancholy is evacuated)
then Phlegm, and ends as the other do, but I think this is enough to wise men.
To return.

If you prepare the body beforehand (you will not want instructions how to do
it in the COMPOUNDS) then gentler Medicines will serve the turn, and therefore
such Medicines as purge Water, ad but cutting Medicines to them, and they purge
Phlegm.

And then again, I desire you to take notice that such Medicines as have a
binding quality in them are very hurtful to tough Phlegm, and Melancholy,
because the humors themselves being tough they make them the tougher, but they
are most proper for choler and putrified (...), because the first of them
often causes Defluxions, the second a looseness.

Again, Another thing I thought good to give notice of, and so much the rather
because I have seen it printed in English, and heard it contended for by
Students in Physic, yet is the conceit very dangerous, viz. That the
operations of Purging Medicines may be known by their colors, for say they,
white Medicines purge Phlegm; black, Melancholy; and yellow, Choler: I confess
some Ancient Physicians were of this apish Opinion, which in no wise holds true
in the general, though in some particulars it may.

Of the time of Purging.
IT was the Opinion of Hippocrates always to prepare the Body with hot and
cutting Syrups before the purging Medicine be given, with this Proviso, That
the matter be not so hot that it be thrust into the Veins and cause Fevers.

If your Purge must be strong, take some lenitive Purge, or else a Clyster
before you take it, lest the passages being not opened, the matter being
violently expelled be stopped in its passage, and so either Chollicks, or
vehement Belly-ach, or worse mischief follow.

Let it be two hours ere you drink, and four or five ere you eat after you have
taken a Purge, and let your Stomach be empty when you take them.

1. Lest being mixed with the nourishment they lose their force, and so Nature
convert them into nourishment, thereby corrupting the Blood.

2. All Purges are enemies to Nature, and if you mix them with food, Nature
detains them the longer, and by consequence is the more prejudiced by them.

3. It is very unfitting to molest Dame Nature with two several motions at one
time, viz. To expel the Purge and the obnoxious humor with it, and also at the
same time to nourish the Body.

As for Lenitives or gentle Purges, and many Pills, they may safely be taken at
night, as you were taught in the first part of my Directory, to which I refer
you for Directions in all Purges, and I shall have a word or two to say
concerning Vomits before I have done this Book: I refer it here therefore to
its proper place.

I shall here conclude with this Caveat, Never take sweet things after Purges,
because the Liver draws them so greedily that they soon turn the Purge to
aliment, which if any thing will bring mischiefs more than enough to the Body,
this will.

Of the correcting of Purging Medicines
IN Purging Medicines are many things considerable which are either to be
helped forwards or corrected, for of Purges some work too slowly, others too
violently.

Or to be a little more distinct, some vices of a Purge may be known before it
is given, and others not till after, I shall begin with the first.

There is this almost properly in all Purges, that they are obnoxious to the
Stomach, and indeed to Nature it self, therefore mix some things with them
which strengthen the Heart and Stomach.

Again, The gentlest Purgers that are have one discommodity in them that they
are easily turned to Wind, therefore mix such things with them as expel wind
(the former Rules amongst the Simples will furnish you with enough and more
than enough of either) for although they be not windy of themselves, yet by
their heat they stir up wind, though they meet with Phlegm, or Melancholy.

Violent Purges by their Acrimony or sharp gnawing quality are inimical to the
Bowels, which must in no wise be corrected with binding Physics, for that will
mend them as the Fletcher mends his Bolt, viz. Spoil all, and that by keeping
them so long in the Body; such things as make slippery, lenifie, and something
thicken, are proper corrigents for them, such are Quince Seeds, Mallows, Gum
Tragacanth, and the like.

After the Purge is given, it may offend on either hand, viz. By working either
not at all, or too violently, If it work not at all, take hot Broaths; if they
will not do the deed, use a Clyster.

Various and manifold are the evils that a Purge working too violently may
afflict upon the Body of Man, and very dangerous, for such may produce these,
or any of these consequences, and poor silly people that take them, never know
whence they come.

1. Fevers 2. Vehement Headache. 3. Vertigo or Dissiness in the Head. 4.
Weakness of Sight. 5. Weakness of Digestion. 6. Loss of Appetite. 7. Ulcers in
the Bowels. 8. Hiccoughs. 9. Bloody Fluxes. 10. Tenasmus. 11. Weakness of the
Body. 12. Convulsions.
If you feel these, or any of these Symptoms after Purging, you may give a
shrewd guess, either your Purge was not proper for your Disease, or else
wrought too violently.

It is not my present Task to show you how to remedy these, the Table at the
latter end will instruct you with Medicines for each, and you cannot be more
unwilling to pay for one thing twice, than I am to write it.

For preventing such evils as these are (or others which perhaps a man might
find in Authors) accept of these following Aphorisms.

1. Be sure you strengthen the Heart, for if that fail, all will be naught. 2.
When you perceive your Purge works too violently, you may then know Nature has
got an Enemy that is too hard for her, therefore make as much have as you can
to expel him, ease your Body of the Purge so soon as you can, for the longer it
stays in your Body, the more inimical it proves, either poisoning it, or
leaving such Symptoms behind it as we mentioned even now, which may be done by
drinking much Barley Water (or for want of it take any warm Water, that is
clean, as Spring Water or the the like) wherein the Seeds of Fleawort, or
Quince Seeds, or Gum Tragacanth is dissolved, for that makes the passages
slippery, and hinders excoriation of the Bowels: Country people that know not
how to get these, may boil two handfuls of Mallows in a quart of Water to a
pint, and drink it up, if that help not, let them drink another. 3. If you find
the Mouths of the Veins be opened, which you may know if much blood come from
you without any skins, then take a Clyster made only of new Milk, a dram of
Mastich in powder being added to it. 4. Oil of sweet Almonds taken inwardly, an
ounce at a time, and as often as you will, is excellent in such a case, but let
it be newly drawn. 5. Juice of Quinces, Syrup of Quinces, Preserved Quinces, or
that which in Suffex the Gently call Marmilade is very good; according to (...)
in such a case to be taken often. 6. (...) the Belly and Stomach with Oil of
Roses as hot as can be endured, after which sprinkle the powder of Mastich, or
for want of it powder of Galle, or red Rose Leaves upon them; if you apply any
Rose Cake to the Belly in such a case it would do good. Lastly, If for all this
the matter grow desperate and will not be stopped, Mesue leaves two remedies
more, which he desires may be the last that are used; and truly so do I, only I
shall quote his last first, because I hold it (of the two) the safest.

His last (but my first) is this; To take three grains of Laudanum, or if your
Body be weak, but two.

The Second is, To take a Vomit, thereby to divert the humors from their
unbridled Course downward.


Of the Way, or Manner of Purging.
VArious is the way, and manner of Purging, according to the variety of the
humor offending; concerning which, take these few and brief Rules, which may
serve you as a Candle and Lanthorn to light you through the dark mist of your
ignorance, which Physicians have envelupted you in, till such time as the Sun
of Light begin to rise upon you.

1. If the humors be to be drawn from remote parts of the Body, as the Head,
Arms, Feet, or the like, let the Purge be made up in a hard form as Pills are,
for by that means it stays the longer in the Body, and is in all reason
therefore the better able to perform its Office. 2. If the afflicting humor lie
in the Bowels, or parts adjacent, use liquid Medicines, for they operate
speediest, and the Bowels are soon hurt by Purging Medicines. 3. The infusion
of such Medicines as leave a binding quality behind them, or their Decoction is
most fitting to be used, for it is the earthy (quality of them which binds,
much of which is cast away in an Infusion or Decoction, but all of it taken if
you take the body of the simple. Such Purging Medicines as do leave a binding
quality behind them, the chiefest of them are these, Aloes, Wormwood, Damask
Roses, Rhubarb, Rhapontick, all the five sorts of Myrobalans, Prunes,
Tamarinds, etc.

If the matter be tough, viseous, and long (...), it is impossible to carry it
away all at once, your way then is to take gentle Purges, and take them often;
for if the Purge be too strong, it will weaken Nature so, that the House (I
mean the Body) will fall down before you can cleanse it of the filth; and of
such a Nature usually is Melancholy.

As for the Doses of Purges it is impossible to prescribe such general Rules,
but they must of necessity do far more harm than good, for particulars you may
if you please find them, in the first part of the Book concerning Simples, and
in that part concerning Compounds.


FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE TO THE ENGLISH NAMES IN THE Catalogue of Simples. A
directs to the first Column, B to the second, the Number to the Page.
ROOTS.
A
ALkanet b 3 Angelica b 3 Anthora b 3 Asarabacca a 4 Asphodel Male a 4 --
Female a 4 Avens b 4 Artichoaks b 5 B
Bay Tree b 7 Bears-breech a 3 Birthwort Long b 3 -- Round a 4 Branck-Ursine a
3 Beets b 4 Bistort b 4 Borrage b 4 Burdock a 4 Briony b 4 Bugloss b 4 Brakes b
6 Butter-bur a 8 Bruscus b 9 Butchers broom b 9 C
Calamus Aromaticus b 4 Capers b 4 Carrots b 5 (...) white a 5 -- Black a 5
Chelondine (...) a 5 -- Lesser a 5 China a 5 (...) b 4 Centaury a 5 Costus b 5
Corralwort b 5 Cucumers wild b 5 Cyperus long b 5 -- Round b 5 Chamock a 8
Cinkfoyl a 8 Canterbury, or Coventry Bells b 10 D
Danewort a 6 Doronicuns a 6 Dittany a 6 Dragons a 6 Dwarf-Elder a 6 Dropwort b
6 E
Elicampane b 6 Endive b 6 Eringo b 6 F
Fearn b 6 Filipendula b 6 Flower-de-luce a 3 Fullers thistle b 7 Figwort a 10
Fennel a 7 G
Garlic a 3 Galanga greater a 7 -- Lesser a 7 Gentian (...) 7 Grass a 7 Ginger
b 10 Gladen stinking a 10 H
Hartwort a 10 Hermodactils a 7 Hellebore white a 6 -- Black b 6 Houndstongue b
7 Horestrange b 8 Hogs-Fennel b 8 I
Jacinth a 7 K
Knee-holly b 9 L
Ladies Thistle a 10 Liquoris a 7 Lillies white b 7 Lovage b 7 Leeks a 9 M
Marshmallows b 3 Meddow Saffrom b 5 Masterwort b 7 Mallows b 7 Mandrakes b 7
Mechoacan b 7 Mezereon a 8 Mulberry a 8 Monks Rubarb b 9 Meadsweet b 10 O
Onions a 5 Orris a 7 P
Parspips a 8 Patience b 9 Plantane b 8 Petasitis a 8 Peony b 8 Pellitory of
Spain a 9 Pollipodium b 8 R
Reeds common a 4 -- Sugar a 4 Restharrow a 8 Rhapontick a 9 Rubarb a 9
Radishes b 9 Rose roots b 9 S
Sarsaparilla b 9 Satyrion b 9 Saxifrage white b 9 Scabious b 9 Scorzonera a 10
Setwal b 10 Seseli a 10 Scirrets a 10 Sowbread a 4 Swallow-wort a 4 Sparagus a
4 Snakeweed b 4 Sullendine a 5 Succory b 5 Spurge b 6 Sharp-pointed-dock b 7
Sorrel b 7 Spignel b 7 Spurge-Olive a 8 Spicknard a 8 Sulphur-wort b 8 Solomon's
Seal a 9 T
Tansie a 10 Teazles b 7 Toothwort b 5 Turmerick b 5 Tormentil a 10 Throatwort
b 10 Toadstools b 10 Tripolium b 10 Turbith b 10 V
Valerian white b 4 -- Red Vipers bugloss a 6 Valerian great b 8 -- Small b 8
Vipers grass a 10 Victorialis b 10 W
Waterflag a 3 Wake-robin a 4 Walwort a 6 Water Lillies a 8 Widdow-wail a 8 Z
Zedoary b 10

BARKS.
A
Ash-tree b 11 B
Barberries a 11 Beans b 11 C
Cassia Lignea a 11 Chestnuts a 11 Cinnamon a 11 Citrons b 11 Cork b 12 E
Elder b 12 Elm b 12 H
Hazel a 11 L
Lemmons b 12 Line-tree b 12 M
Mace a 12 O
Oak b 12 Orrenges a 11 P
Parsley roots a 12 Pine-nuts a 12 Pomegranates b 11 S
Smallage roots a 11 T
Tamaris b 12 W
Walnuts b 11

WOODS.
Brazil a 12 Cypress a 12 Ebeny a 12 (...) a 12 Rhodium b 12 Sanders red b 12
-- white b 12 -- yellow b 12 Rosewood a 12 Sassafras b 12 Tamaris b 12 Wood of
Aloes a 12 Nephriticum b 12

HERBS.
A
Adders-tongue a 22 Agrimony a 13 Agnus Castus a 13 Alkanet a 13 Angelica a 14
Asarabacca b 14 Arrach b 14 Alecost b 14 Avens a 16 Artichoaks a 17 Ash-tree
leaves b 18 Alehoof a 19 Alexanders b 19 Arsmart b 19 B
Bay Tree a 20 Balm a 21 Bazil a 22 (...) a 13 (...) b 14 Burdock b 14 Betony a
15 Blites a 15 Borrage a 15 Briony a 15 Bugloss b 15 Bugle b 15 Box-tree b 15
Brooklime b 16 (...)-Plantane a 17 Blew-bottle b 17 Burstwort a 18 Broom b 18
Butter-flowers a 23 Brulsewort b 23 Bindweed a 24 C
Cabbages a 16 Calaminth b 15 Carduus benedictus a 16 Cassidony b 24 Catmints a
16 Centaury b 16 Cetrach b 16 Chamomel b 16 Chelondine a 17 Chervil b (...)
Chickweed b (...) Cleavers a 14 Columbines a 14 Costmary b 14 Corrallina a 16
(...) a 16 Chamepitys b 16 Comfry a 17 Cotton-weed a 17 Cudweed a 17 Crosswort
b 17 Cypress-tree b 17 Cranebill b 18 Cowslips b 22 Clary b 19 Cinkfoyl b 22
Coltsfoot a 25 Cammels hay b 23 Crowfoor a 23 D
Dandelyon b 24 Dasies a 15 Dill a 14 Distaf-Thistle b 14 Dictamni b 17
Dwarf-Elder a 18 Dodder a 18 Doves-foot b (...) Double-tongue b 19 Dittander a
20 Duckmeat a 20 Docks a 23 Devils-bit b 24 Dittany b 17 E
Elicampane a 18 Epithimum a 18 Eyebright a 18 F
Fennel b 18 Fumitory b 18 Featherfew a 21 Fleabane a 23 Figwort a 24 Flixweed
a 24 G
Garlic b 13 Good Henry a 15 Goos-grass a 14 Groundsel a 16 Germander a 17
Groundpine b 17 Golden rod a 17 Goats Rue b 18 Gold knobs a 23 H
Herb twopence a 22 Hart's-tongue b 20 Harts-ease a 25 Housleek b 14
Honey-suckles b 15 Herb Bennet a 16 Horstail a 16 Hemlock a 17 Houndstongue b
17 Hedg-hysop a 19 Hors-tongue a 19 Hysop b 19 Herb Mastich a 21 Hops b 20
Horehound b 20 Higtaper a 25 I
Indian leaf b 18 Ivy a 19 K
King Cob a 23 Knapweed b 24 Knotgrass b 16 L
Ladies Mantle a 18 Lluellin a 15 Ladies Thistle a 16 Larks heel a 17 Lavender
Cotton b 17 Ladies Bedstraw b 18 Liver-wort a 19 Laurel of Alexandria a 20
Lavender a 20 Laurel a 20 Lettice a 20 Lovage a 20 Lungwort a 23 M
Marigold b 15 Maidenhair a 13 Maudlin a 13 Marshmallows b 13 Marjoram b 13
Mousear b 14 Mugwort a 14 Muschata b 18 Masterwort b 20 Mastick-tree a 21
Mallows b 20 Mandrakes b 20 Melilot a 21 Mints a 21 Mercury a 21 (...) b 21
Moss b 21 Mirtle-tree b 21 Moneywort a 22 Mother of Time a 24 Mullin a 25 N
Navil-wort b 25 Nep a 16 Nettles b 25 Nightshade a 24 O
Oak of Jerusalem a 15 Ox-eye b 15 Orpine b 17 One-berry a 19 Origany Origanum
a 22 P
Pansies a 25 Patience b 19 Paul's Bettony a 15 Pimpernel a 14 Perewinkle b 25
Primroses b 22 Pellitory of the wall a 19 Pepper-wort a 20 Penyroyal b 22 Peach
leaves b 22 Plantane b 22 Poppies a 22 Poley-mountain b 22 Purslain b 22 R
Rocket a 18 Ruptue wort a 18 Rosemary a 23 Roses a 23 Rue a 23 S
Sampier b 17 (...) consound a 17 Sage b 23 Sanicle b 23 Savin b 23 Savory b 23
Saxifrage b 23 Schaenanth b 23 Southernwood a 13 Sorrel a 13 Smallage a 14
Silverweed a 14 Sowbread a 14 Sengreen b 14 Shepherds-purse b 15 Spleenwort b
16 Sullendine a 17 Succory a 17 Strawberry leaves b 18 Stinking Groundpine a 19
Saint John's Wort b 19 Sciatica-cresses b 19 Star-wort a 20 Share-wort a 20 Sea
Bugloss b 20 Sea Lavender b 20 Sweet Trefoyl b 20 Self-heal b 21 Sicklewort b
22 Sopewort b 23 Scordium (...) 23 Senna a 24 Sow-thistles a 24 Spinach b 24
Stoechas b 24 Spurge b 24 Swallow-wort b 25 T
Tamaris b 24 Tansie b 24 Teazles b 17 True-love a 19 Tongue-blade b 19
Toad-flax a 20 Treacle-mustard b 21 Tobacco b 21 Turnips a 23 Time b 24 Trefoyl
a 25 V
Vervain-mallows b 13 Vipers bugloss a 18 Vervain a 25 Violet leaves b 25 Vine
leaves b 25 W
Watercresses b 21 Walwort a 18 Wormwood a 13 Wood Sorrel b 13 Woodroof a 14
Wild Tansie a 14 Wild-flower a 19 Woad a 20 Widdow-wail b 21 Winter-green a 23
Willow leaves b 23 Y
Yarrow b 21

FLOWERS.
Bawn a 26 Balaustins 26 Borrage 26 Bugloss 26 Beans 26 Broom 26 Centaury 26
Chamomel 26 Clove gilliflowers 26 Cowslips 26 Elder flowers 26 Hops 26
Honey-suckles 26 Lavender flowers 26 Mallows 26 Peach-tree 26 Rosemary 26 Roses
26 Saffron 26 Stoechas 26 Schaenanth 26 Succory 26 Walflowers 26 Water Lillies
26 Winter gilliflowers 26

FRUITS. BUDS.
Apricocks 27 Bay Berries 27 Barberries 27 Bitter Almonds 27 Capers 27 Cassia
Fistula 27 Checkers 27 Cherries 27 Cloves 27 Cucumers 27 Cubebs 27 Currance
English 27 Dates 27 Figs 27 Galls 27 Medlars 27 Melones 27 Myrobalans 27
Nutmegs 27 Olives 27 Pepper 27 Pears 27 Plums 27 Pinenuts 27 Pompions 27 Prunes
27 Quinces 27 Raisons 27 Sebestens 27 Services 27 Strawberries 27 Tamarinds 27
Walnuts 27 Winter cherries 27

SEEDS.
Annis 28 (...)-tree 28 Bazil 28 Bishops-weed 28 Broom 28 Cardamoms 28 Carrots
28 Coriander 28 Cummin 28 Chich-pease 28 Dill 28 Fenugreek 28 Fennel 28 French
barley 28 Four greater cold Seeds 28 Citrons 28 Gromwel 28 Lettice 28 Linseed 28
Lupines 28 Mallows 28 Mustard Seed 28 Nettles 28 Nigella 28 Peony 28 Poppy 28
Purslain 28 Rocket 28 Rue 28 Smallage 28 Stavesager 28 Sorrel 28 Succory 28
Watercresses 28 White Saxifrage 28 Wormseed 28

GUMS, ROZINS.
Aloes 29 (...) 29 Ammoniacum 29 Bdellium 29 Benzoin 29 Camphire 29 Diagrydium
29 Elemni 29 Frankincense 29 Galbanum 29 Labdanum 29 Manna 29 Mastich 29 Mirrh
29 Olibanum 29 Opopanax 29 Sanguis Draconis 29 Scammony 29 Styrax Calamitis 29
Traganth 29 Turpentine 29

JUYCES.
Citrons 29 Lemmons 29 Liquoris 29 Sugar 29

PLANTS.
Agrick 30 Misleto 30

LIVING CREATURES.
Crabfish 30 Earthworms 30 Eels 30 Grasshoppers 30 Hedg-sparrows 30 Oysters 30
Pigeons 30 Sows 30 Swallows 30 Vipers 30 Woodlice 30

PARTS OF LIVING CREATURES.
Bears grease 31 Bone in a Stags heart 31 Bone in a Hares foot 31 Brain of
Sparrows 31 Brain of Hares 31 Cats head 31 Crabs eyes 31 Cocks stones 31
Castorium 31 Ducks liver 31 Ducks grease 31 Elks claws 31 Fox lungues 31 Fox
grease 31 Frogs liver 31 Goats Bladder 31 Goats suet 31 Goose grease 31 Capons
grease 31 Hartshorn 31 Honey 32 Ivory 31 Kites head 31 Man's skull 31 Man's fat
31 Milk 31 Os Triquetrum 31 Stags pizle 31 Sheeps bladder 31 Raw silk 32
Unicorns horn 31 Wax 32

BELONGING TO THE SEA.
Amber 32 (...) 32 Foam of the Sea 32 Pearls 32 Red Corral 32 Sea sand 32
Sperma Ceti 32

METALS. STONES.
(...) 33 Alum 33 Amethist 33 Bezoar 33 Brimstone 33 Carbuncle 33 Cocks stone
33 Diamond 33 Emerald 33 Granate 33 Gold 33 Jacinth 33 Jasper 33 (...) 34 Lead
33 Litharge 33 Nephriticus 33 Pompholix 33 Ruby 33 Sapphire 33 Swallows (...) 34
(...) 33 (...) 33

A TABLE of the COMPOUNDS in the Order they are set down in every Classis. A
directs to the first Column, B to the second, the Number to the Page.
SPIRITS, and COMPOUND DISTILLED WATERS.
SPiritus et Aqua Absinthii minus Composita: Or spirit and Water of Wormwood
the lesser Composition. b 62 Spiritus et Aqua Absynthii magis Composita: Or
spirit and Water of Wormwood the greater Composition a 63 Spiritus et Aqua
Angelicae magis Composita: Or spirit and Water of Angelica the greater
Composition ibid Spiritus Lavendulae Compositus or Compound spirit of Lavender.
b 63 Spiritus Castorii: or spirit (...) Cistorium a 64 Aqua (...) Composita Or
Compound Water of Butter-burs. ibid Aqua Rhaphani composita Or, Compound Water
of Rhadishes. b 64 Aqua Peoniae composita: or, Compound Water of Peony ibid
Aqua Bezoartica: Or, (...) a 65 Aqua et spiritus Lumbricorum Magistralis: Or,
Water and spirit of Earthworms. b 65 (...) Gentianae composita: or (...) Water
Compound ibid Aqua (...): or, Gilberts Water ibid Aqua (...) frigida (...). a
66 Aqua Theriacala. Or, (...) Water ibid Aqua Brioniae composita. Or, (...)
Water Compound b 66 Aqua Imperialis: Or, (...) Water (...) Aqua Mirabilis a
(...) Aqua (...) ibid (...) Or, Capon Water. b Aqua Limacum Magistr. Or, Water
of snails ibid Aqua Scordii composita: Or, Compound Water of Scordium. b 67
Aqua Mariae ibid Aqua Papaveris composita: Or, Poppy Water Compound ibid Aqua
Juglandium Composita: Or, Walnut Water compound ibid Mathiolus, his Bezoar
Water a 68 Cinnamon Water ibid Mathiolus, his Cinnamon Water b 68 Cinnamon
Water made by Infusion ibid Aqua Coelestis ibid Bawm Water a 69 Rosa solis ibid
Dr, Stephens Water b 69 Aqua vitae ordinary ibid Aqua vitae compound ibid
Usquebach ibid TINCTURES.
Tinctura Croci: Or, Tincture of saffron. a 70 Tinctura Castorii: Or Tincture
of Castorium 70 Tinctura Fragorum: Or, Tincture of straw-berries 70 Tinctura
Scordii: Or, Tincture of scordium 70 Tinctura Theriacalis: Or Tincture of
Treacle b 70 Tinctura Cinnamomi: Or Tincture of Cinnamon 70 Tinctura Viridis:
Or, a green Tincture 70 Aqua Aluminosa Magistralis 70 (...) WINES.
Vinum Absynthites: Or, Wormwood Wine a 71 Vinum Cerassorum (...): Or, Wine of
black Cherries ibid Vinum Helleboratum: Or, Wine Helleborated. b 71 (...)
Rubellum ibid (...) ibid Vinum (...): Or, Antimonial Wine ibid Vinum
Scilliticum: Or Wine of Squills a 72 PHYSICAL VINEGERS.
Acetum distillatum: Or, Distilled Vinegar a 72 Acetum Rosatum: Or, Rose
Vinegar ibid Acetum Scilliticum: Or, Vinegar of Squils. ibid Acetum Theriacale:
Or, Treacle Vinegar b 72 Acetum Theriacale: Or Treacle Vinegar b 73 DECOCTIONS.
Decoct a commune (...): Or A Common Decoction for a Clyster a 73 Decoctum
Epithimi: Or, A Decoction of Epithimum ibid Decoctum Sennae Gereonis: Or,
Decoction of Senna b 73 Decoctum Pectorale: Or, A (...) Decoction. ibid
Decoctum Trumaticum a 74 A Carminative Decoction a 74 A Decoction of Flowers
and (...) ibid Lac Virginium ibid A Drink for wounded men b 74 SYRUPS. ALTERING
SYRUPS.
Syrupus de Absynthio simplex: Or, syrup of Wormwood simple a 101 Syrupus de
Absynthio (...): Or, syrup of Wormwood compound ibid Syrupus Acetosus simplex:
Or, syrup of Vinegar simple ibid Syrupus Acetosus simplicior: Or, syrup of
Vinegar more simple. b 101 Syrupus Acetosus compositus: Or, syrup of Vinegar
compound ibid Syrupus de Agno Casto: Or, Syrup of Agnus Castus a 102 Syrupus de
Althaea: Or Syrup of Marshmallows ibid Syrupus de Ammoniaco, Or syrup of
Ammoniacum ibid Syrupus de Artemisia: Or syrup of Mugwort b 102 Syrupus de
Betonica composita: Or, syrup of Betony compound ibid Syrupus Byzantinus,
simple. ibid Syrupus (...), Compound. a 103 Syrupus Botryos: Or, syrup of Oak
of Jerusalem. ibid Syrupus Capillorum Veneris: Or, syrup of Maidenhair ibid
Syrupus Cardiacus, vel Julepum Cardiacum: Or, A Cordial syrup ibid Syrupus
insusionis Floram Caryophillorum: Or, Syrup of Clove gilliflowers b 103 Syrupus
de Cinnamomo: Or, syrup of Cinnamon ibid Syrupus Acetositatis Citriorum; or
syrup of Juice of Citrons ibid Syrupus Corticum Citriorum: Or, syrup of Citron
Pills a 104 Syrupus e Coralliis simplex: or, syrup of Corral simple ibid
Syrupus e Coralliis Compositus: or, syrup of Correl compound ibid Syrupus
Cydoniorum: or, syrup of Quinces b 104 Syrupus de Erysima: or, syrup of
Hedg-mustard ibid Syrupus de Fumaria: or, syrup of Fumitory ibid Syrupus de
Glycyrrhiza: or syrup of Liquoris a 105 Syrupus Granatorum cum Aceto: Or, syrup
of Pomegranates with Vinegar ibid Syrupus de Hyssopo: Or, syrup of Hysop ibid
Syrupus Ivae arthritioae, (...): or, syrup of (...) b 105 Syrupus (...): or
syrup of Jujubes ibid Syrupus de Meconio, (...): or, syrup of Meconium, or
(...) ibid Syrupus de (...): or syrup of Meconium compound ib. Syrupus
Melissophilli: or syrup of Bawm a 106 Syrupus de Mentha: or, syrup of Mints b
106 Syrupus de Mucilaginibus: or syrup of Mucilages b 106 Syrupus (...): or,
syrup of Mirtles ibid Syrupus (...) Nymphaeae simplex: or, syrup of
Water-Lilly-flowers simple ibid Syrupus Florum (...) compositus: or syrup of
Water-lilly-flowers compound ibid Syrupus de Papavere Erratico, sive Rubro: or,
syrup of Erratick (...) a 107 Syrupus de Pilosella: or, syrup of Mousear ibid
syrupus infusionis florum Paeoniae: or syrup of the infusion of Peony flowers
ibid syrupus de Paeonia compositus: or, syrup of Peony compound ibid syruyus de
Pomis alterans: or, syrup of Apples b 107 syrupus de Prasio: or, syrup of
Horehound ibid syrupus de quings Radicibus: or, syrup of the five opening
Roots. ib. syrupus Raphani: or, syrup of Rhadishes a 108 syrupus (...), alias
(...) Alexandrinum; or, Julep of Alexandria ibid syrupus de Rosis siccis: or,
syrup of dried Roses ibid syrupus scabiosae: or syrup of scabious ibid syrupus
de scolopendrio: or syrup of Hartstongue b 108 syrupus de (...): or, syrup of
stoechas ibid syrupus de symphito: or, syrup of Comfry ibid syrupus Violarum:
or, syrup of Violets ibid PURGING SYRUPS.
syrupus de Cichorio cum Rhabarbaro: or syrup of (...) with rhubarb. a 109
syrupus de Epithyme: or, syrup of Epithimum ibid syrupus e Floribus (...): or,
syrup of Peach-flowers b 109 syrupus (...) Purgans: or syrup of Apples, Purging
ibid syrupus (...) Magistralis: or, syrup of Apples (...) a 110 syrupus de
Rhabarbaro: or, syrup of Rhubarb ibid syrupus Rosaceus solutivus: or, syrup of
Roses solutive ibid syrupus e succo Rosarum: or, syrup of the (...) of (...) b
110 syrupus (...) solutivus cum Agarico: or, syrup of Roses solutive with
Agrick ibid syrupus Rosacens solutivus cum Helleboro: or, syrup of Roses
solutive with (...) ibid syrupus Rosaceus solutivus cum sena: or, syrup of
Roses solutive with senna ibid syrupus de spina (...): or, syrup of Purging
Thorn a 111 SYRUPS MADE WITH VINEGAR AND HONEY.
Mel Anthosatum: or Honey of Rosemary-flowers a 111 Mel Helleboratum: or Honey
Helleborated ibid Mel Mercuriale: or, Honey of Mercury b 111 Mel Mororum, vel
Diamoron: or, Honey of Mulberries ibid Mel Nuceum, alias, Diacaryon et
Dianucum: or Honey of Nuts. ibid Mel Passulatum: or, Honey of Raisons ibid Mel
Rosatum commune, sive foliatum: or, common Honey of Roses a 112 Mel Rosatum
Colatum: or Honey of Roses strained ibid Mel Rosatum solutivum: or Honey of
Roses solutive ibid Mel Scilliticum: or Honey of Squils ibid Oxymel simple ibid
Oxymel compound ibid Oxymel Helleboratum: or, Oximel Helleborated b 112 Oxymel
Julianizans ibid Oxymel Scilliticum compositum: or Oxymel of Squils Compound. a
113 Syrup of Purslain a 113 Compound syrup of (...) ibid Syrup of Poppies, the
lesser Composition b 113 Syrup of Poppies, the greater Composition ibid Syrup
of Eupatorium a 114 Honey of Emblicks b 114 ROB, or SAPA, and JUYCES.
Signification and use a 115 Rob, sive Sapa, simplex: or, Simple Rob, or Sapa
ibid Rob de Berberis: or, Rob of Barberries ibid Rob de Cerasis: or, Rob of
Cherries ibid Rob de Cornis: or Rob of Cornels. ibid Rob Cydoniorum: or, Rob of
Quinces b 115 Miva, vel Gelatina Eorundem: or, Gelly of Quinces ibid Rob
Baccarum Sambuci: or, Rob of Elder Berries ibid Succus Glycyrrhizae simplex:
or, Juice of Liquoris simple ibid Succus Glycyrrhizae compositus: or, Juice of
Liquoris Compound. a 116 Succus Pronorum (...): or, Juice of sloes, called
Acacia b 116 LOHOCH, or ECLEGMATA.
Signification and use a 116 Lohoch de Farfara: or Lohoch (...) Coltsfoot ibid
Lohoch de (...): or Lohoch of Poppies. b 116 Lohoch e Passulis: or, Lohoch of
Raisons ibid Lohoch e Pino: or, Lohoch of Pine-nuts a 117 Lohoch de Portulaca:
Or, Lohoch of Purslain ibid Lohoch e Pulmone Vulpis: or, Lohoch of Fox Lungues
ibid Lohoch sanum et Expertum: or, A sound and well experienced Lohoch b 117
Lohoch Scilliticum: or, Lohoch of Squils ibid Eclegma of Squils ibid Lohoch of
Coleworts b 118 PRESERVES.
The way to make them 118 CONSERVES and SUGARS.
The general way to make Conserves a 119 Diacodium Solidum, sive Tabulatum ibid
(...) Tabulatum simplex, et Perlatum: Or, (...) of sugar, both simple and
pearled b 119 Saccharum Tabellatum compositum: Or, Lozenges of sugar compound
ibid Saccharum Penidium: or, sugar of Penids a 120 Confectio de Thure: or,
Confection of Frankincense ibid Saccharum Rosatum: or, Sugar of Roses b 120
POUDERS.
Aromaticum Caryophillatum a 121 Aromaticum Rosatum ibid Pulvis ex Chelis
Cancrorum compositus: or Powder of Crabs Claws compound ibid Species Cordiales
(...) b 121 Diacalaminthe simple ibid Diacalaminthe compound ibid Dianisum a
122 Pulvis Radicum Ari compositus: or Powder of Aron Roots compound ibid
Diaircos simple ibid Dialacca ibid Pulvis Cardiacus Magistralis ibid
Diamargariton frigidum b 122 Diambra ibid Diamoschu Dulce a 123 Diamoschu
Amarum ibid Species Dianthus ibid Diapenidion ibid Diarrhodon Abbatis b 123
Diaspoliticum ibid Species Diatragacanthi frigidi ibid Diatrion Pipereon a 124
Diatrion santalon ibid Pulvis Haly ibid (...) ibid Pulvis Bezoardicus
Magistralis: or A Bezoartick Powder Magisterial b 124 Species consectionis
Liberantis ibid Pulvis Saxonicus ibid Pulvis Antilyssus a 128 Rosatae Novellae
ibid Pulvis Thuraloes ibid Pulvis Hermodactilorum compositus Or, Powder of
Hermodactils compound b 128 Pulvis (...) compositus major: Or, Powder of senna,
the greater composition ibid Pulvis senae compositus minor: Or, Powder of
senna, the lesser composition ibid Diasenae a 126 Diaturbith with Rhubarb b 126
The lesser Cordial Powder a 126 The greater Cordial Powder ibid A Powder for
such as are bruised by a fall ibid Species Electuarii Diacymini b 126 Species
Electuarii Diagalangae ibid Species Electuarii de Gemmis frigidi a 127 Species
Electuarii Diamargariton Calidi ibid Lithontribon ibid Pleres arconticon b 127
A preservative Powder against the Pestilence ibid Diaturbith the greater,
without Rhubarb ibid A Powder for the worms ibid EECTUARIES.
Antidolus analeptica a 125 Confectio Alkermes ibid Electuarium e Sassaphras:
or Electuarie of Sassafras b 125 Electuarium de Baccis Lauri: or, Electuary of
Bay Berries ibid Diacapparis ibid Diacinnamomu 129 Diacorallion ibid Diacorum
ibid Diacydonium simple b 129 Diacydonium with Species ibid Diacydonium
compound, Magisterial ibid Confectio de Hyacintho ibid Antidotum Haemagogum
ibid Diasatyrion a 130 Electuarium Diaspermaton ibid Micleta b 130 Electuarium
Pectorale: or, A Pectoral Electuary ibid Theriaca Diatessaron ibid Diascordium
ibid Mithridate a 131 Phylonium Persicum b 131 Phylonium Romanum ibid Phylonium
Magistrale ibid Electuarium de Ovo: or, Electuary of Eggs a 132 Theriaca
Andromachi: or, Venice Tread ibid Theriaca Londinensis: or, London Tread b
132 Diacrocuma ibid PURGING ELECTUARIES.
Benedicta Laxativa a 133 Caryocostinum ibid Cassia extracta pro Clysteribus:
or, Cassia extracted for Clysters. ibid Electuarium amarum Magistrale majus:
Or, the greater bitter Electuary. b 133 Electuarium Amarum minus: Or, The
lesser bitter Electuary ibid Diacassia with Manna ibid Cassia extracta fine
foliis senae: or, Cassia extracted without the leaves of senna a 134 Cassia
extracta cum foliis senae: or, Cassia extracted with the leaves of senna ibid
Diacarthamum ibid Diaphoenicon b 134 Diaprunum lenitive ibid Diaprunum solutive
ibid Catholicon a 135 Electuarium de Citro solutivum: or Electuary of Citrons
solutive ibid Electuarium Elescoph. ibid Confectio Hamech b 135 Electuarium
Lenitivum ibid Electuarium Passulatum a 136 Electuarium e succo Rosarum; or,
Electuary of the Juice of Roses ibid Hiera Picra simple ibid Hiera with Agrick
b 136 Hiera Logadit ibid Hiera Diacolocynthidos ibid Triphera the greater ibid
Triphera solutive b 137 Electuarium e scoria ferri a 137 Confectio Humain b 137
Diaireos Solominis ibid Diasatyrion a 138 Mathiolus his great Antidote against
Poison and Pestilence ibid Requies b 138 Electuarium Reginae Coloniens ib.
PILLS.
Pilulae de Agarico: or, Pills of Agrick a 139 Pilulae Aggregativae ibid
Pilulae Aloephanginae b 139 Pilulae de Aloe lota: or, Pills of washed Aloes a
140 Aloe Rosata ibid Pilulae aureae ibid Pilulae Cochiae the greater ibid
Pilulae Cochiae the less ibid Pilulae de Cynoglosso: or, Pills of Houndstongue
b 140 Pilulae ex dnobus: or, Pills of two things ibid Pilulae de Eupatorio: or,
Pills of Eupatorium ibid Pilulae (...): or, stinking Pills. ibid Pilulae de
Hermodactilis: or, Pills of Hermodactils a 141 Pilulae de Hiera cum Agarico:
or, Pills of Hiera with Agrick ibid Pilulae Imperialis: or, Imperial Pills ibid
Pilulae de Lapide Lazuli: or, Pills of Lapis Lazuli b 141 Pilulae Macri ibid
Pilulae Mastichinae: or, Mastich Pills ibid Pilulae Mechoacanae: or, Pills of
Mechoacan ibid Pilulae de Opopanace: or, Pillr of Opopanax a 142 Pilulae Rudii
ibid Pilulae Ruffi ibid Pilulae sine (...): or, Pills without which -- b 142
Pilulae stomachicae: or, stomach Pills ibid Pilulae stomachicae cum Gummi: or,
stomach Pills with Gums ibid Pilulae styrace: or, Pills of styrax. ibid Pilulae
de Succino: or, Pills of Amber a 143 Pilulae ex tribus: or, Pills of three
things ibid Pilulae Turpeti aureae ibid Laudanum b 143 Nephenthes Opiatum ibid
Pilulae assaireth. a 143 Pills of Bdellium ibid Pills of Rhubarb b 143 Pilulae
Arabica a 144 Pilulae Arthriticae ibid Pilulae Cochiae with Hellebore ibid
Pills of Fumitory b 144 Pilulae Indae ibid Pilulae Lucis majores ibid Pills of
Spurge ibid Pills of Euphorbium a 145 Pilulae Scribonii ibid TROCHES.
The meaning of the word a 145 Trochisci de Absinthio: or, Troches of Wormwood
ibid Agaricus Trochiscatus: or, Agrick Trochiscated b 145 Trochisci albi:
Rhasis. or, white Troches. a 146 Trochisci Alexiterii ibid Trochisci Albandal
ibid Trochisci Aliptae Moschatae ibid Trochisci Alkekengi: or, Troches of
Winter Cherries b 146 Trochisci Bechici albi, vel, Rotulae Pectorales: or,
Pectoral Rouls ib. Trochisci Bechici nigri b 146 Trochisci de Barberis.: or,
Troches of Barberries ibid Trochisci de Camphora: or, Troches of Camphire a 147
Trochisci de Capparibus: or Troches of Cappers ib. Trochisci de Carabe: or,
Troches of Amber ib, Trochisci Cypheos for Methridate. b 147 Trochisci de
Eupatorio: or, Troches of Maudlin ib. Throches of Gallia Moschata ib. Trochisci
Gordonie ib. Trochisci Hedychroi a 148 Trochisci Hysterici ib. Trochisci de
Ligno Aloes: or, Troches of Wood of Aloes ib. Trochisci e Mirrha: or, Troches
of Mirrh ib. Sief de Plumbo: or, Sief of Lead. b 148 Trochisci Polyidae Androm.
ib. Trochisci de Rhabarbaro: or, Troches of Rhubarb ibid Trochisci de santalis:
or, Troches of Sanders ib. Trochisci de scilla ad Theriacam: or Troches of
Squils for (...) ib. Troches of Spodium a 149 Trochisci de Terra Lemnia: or,
Troches of Earth of Lemnos ib. Sief de Thure: or, Sief of Frankincense b 149
Trochisci e Violis solutivi: or, Troches of Violets solutive ib. Trochisci de
Vipera ad Theriacam. or, (...) of Vipers for Treacle. ib. Trochisci de Agno
Casto: or, Troches of Agnus Castus ib. Trochisci Alexiterij a 150 Troches of
Annis seeds ib. Trochisci Diarrhodon ib. Trocisci de Lacca ib. Pastilli Adronis
b 150 Trochisci Musae ib. Crocomagma of Damocrates ib. Trochisci Ramich ib.
Troches of Roses a 151 Trochisci Diacorallion ib. Trochisci Diaspermaton b 151
Hamoptoiei Pastilli ib. Traches of Agrick ib. Of the Use of Oils.
Of Medicines 151 Chap. 1. Of Anodines 152 Chap. 2. Of Repelling Medicines. ib.
Chap. 3. Of Attractives 153 Chap. 4. Of Resolving Medicines. ib. Chap. 5. Of
Emollients 154 Chap. 6. Of Suppuratives ib. Chap. 7. Of clensing Medicines 155
Chap. 8. Of Incarnatives ib. Chap. 9. Of Cicatrizing Medicines 156 Chap. 10. Of
Glutinative Medicines ib. Chap. 11. Of Cathereticks, Septicks, and Causticks
ib. Chap. Ult. Of Medicines used to stop blood 157

OILS.
SIMPLE OILS BY EXPRESSION.
Oil of sweet Almonds a 158 Oil of bitter Almonds ib. Oil of Hazel Nuts ib.
Oleum Caryinum b ib. Oleum CChrysomelinum ib. Oil of Bays ib. Oil of Yolks of
Eggs a 159 SIMPLE OILS BY INFUSION AND DECOCTION.
The way to make them 159 The Virtues of them particularly. 160 COMPOUND OILS
BY INFUSION AND DECOCTION.
Oleum Benedictum: or, blessed oil a 161 Oleum de Capparibus: or, Oil of
Cappers ib. Oil of Castorium compound ib. Oleum Catellorium: or, Oil of Whelps
61 Oleum Costinum ib. Oleum Crocinum: or, Oil of saffron ib. Oil of Euphorbium
ib. Oleum Excestrense: or Oil of Exceter a 162 Oleum Hirundinum: or, Oil of
swallows ib. Oleum Hiperici (...): or, Oil of St. John's wort compound ib. Oleum
Hyperici magis compositum: or oil of saint John's wort more compound ib. Oleum
Irinum: or, Oil of Orris b 162 Oleum Majoranae: or, Oil of Marjoram ib. Oleum
Mandragorae: or, Oil of Mandrakes ib. Moschelaeum: or, Oil of Musk. a 163 Oleum
Nardinum: or, Oil of Nard ib. Oleum Nicodemi b 163 Oleum (...): or, Oil of
Foxes ib. Oil of Pepper a 163 Oleum Populeum a 164 OINTMENTS MORE SIMPLE.
Unguentum album: or white Ointment a 164 Unguentum Egyptiacum ib. Unguentum
Anodinum b 164 Unguentum ex (...): or Ointment of Smallage ibid Liniment of
(...) Elemi ibid Unguentum Aureum ibid Basilicon the greater a 165 Basilicon
the less ib. Ointment of Bdellium ib. Unguentum de Calce: or, Ointment of Chalk
ib. Unguentum (...): or, Ointment of Marshmallows ib. Unguentum (...) b 165
Unguentum Enulatum: or, Ointment of Alicampane ib. (...) cum Mercurio: or,
Ointment of Alicampana with Quicksilver ib. Unguentum (...) commune: or
Ointment of Bays, common ib. Unguentum de Minio, sive rubrum Camphora: or,
Ointment of red Lead ib. Unguentum e (...), seu Peto: Or, Ointment of Tobacco.
a 166 Unguentum Nutritum, seu Trifarmacum ib. Unguentum Ophthalmicum: Or,
Ointment for the Eyes b 166 Unguentum ex Oxylapatho: Or, Ointment of sharp
pointed Dock ib. Unguentum e Plumbo: or, Ointment of Lead ib. Ungnentum Pomatum
ib. Unguentum Potabile ib. Unguentum Resinum a 167 Unguentum Rosanum: or,
Ointment of Roses ib. Desiccativum rubrum: or, a drying red Ointment ib.
Unguentum e Solano: or, Ointment of Nightshade ib. Unguentum Tutiae: or,
Ointment of Tutty b 167 Valentia Scabiosae ib. Tapsivalentia ib. Tapsimel ib.
OINTMENTS MORE COMPOUND.
Uunguentum Agrippa a 168 Ungunentum de Alabastro: Or, Ointment of Alabaster
ib. Unguentum (...): or, a bitter Ointment ib. Ungutntum Apostolorum: or,
ointment of the Apostles b 168 Unguentum Aregon ib. Unguentum de Artanita: or,
Ointment of Sow-bread a 169 Unguentum Catapsoras ib. Unguentum Citrinum, or, a
Citron Ointment ib. Unguentum Comitissae b 169 Unguentum Martiatum ib.
Unguentum Mastichinum: or, an Ointment of Mastich ib. Unguentum Neapolitanum a
170 Uuguentum (...) ib. Unguentum Pectorale: or, a Pectoral Ointment ib.
Unguentum Populneum: or, Ointment of Poplar ib. Unguentum Resumptivum b 170
Unguentum Splanchnicum ib. Unguentum Splanchnicum Magistrale ibid Unguentum e
Succis: or, Ointment of Juyces a 171 Unguentum Sumach b 171 Ointment of
Marshmallows compound a 171 Unguentum (...) ib. Unguentum (...) b 171
Unguentum e Succis Aperitivis primum ib. Unguentum Martiatum a 172 An Ointment
for the worms b 172 CERECLOATHS.
Ceratum de (...): or, (...) of Galbanum a 172 Ceratum Oesypatum ib. Ceratum
Santalinum b 172 PLASTERS.
Emplastro ex Ammoniaco: or, A Plaster of Ammoniacum a 173 Emplastrum e Baccis
Lauri: or, a Plaster of Bay berries ib. Emplastrum Barbarum magnum ib.
Emplastrum de Retonica: or, A Plaster of Betony b 173 Emplastrum Caesaris ib.
Emplastrum Catagmaticum the first a 174 Catagmaticum the second ib. Emplastrum
Cephalicum: or, a Cephalic Plaster ib. Emplastrum de Cerussa: or, a Plaster
of (...) ib. Emplastrum ex Cicuta cum Ammoniaco: or, a Plaster of Hemlock with
Ammoniacum b 174 Emplastrum e Cinnabari ib. Emplastrum e Crusta Panis: or, A
Plaster of a crust of Bread ib. Emplastrum e Cymino: or, a plaster of Cummin
ib. Emplastrum Diacalciteos a 175 Diachylon simple ib. Di achylon Ireatum ib.
Diachylon magnum ib. Diachylan magnum cum (...) b 175 (...), sive (...) e
Mucilaginibus: or, A Plaster of Mucilages ib. Emplastrum Diaphoenicon, hot ib.
(...), cold ib. Emplastrum (...): Or, A Divine Plaster a 176 Emplastrum (...)
ib. Emplastrum (...) Flos, (...) dictum: or, Flower of Ointments. ib. A
Plaster of Gum (...) b 176 A Piaister of Lapis Calaminaris ib Emplastrum ad
(...) ib Emplastrum Hystericum a 177 Emplastrum de (...): (...), a Plaster of
Mastich ib. Emplastrum de (...) simplex: or A Plaster of Melilot simple ib.
Emplastrum de Meliloto (...) or, A Plaster of (...) compound ib. Emplastrum de
Minio (...) or, a Plaster of red Lead compound b 177 Emplastrum de (...): or,
a Plaster of red (...) simple ib Emplastrum (...) ib. Emplastrum Nervinum a
178 Emplastrum (...) ib. Emplastrum de Ranis: or, a Plaster of (...) ib.
Emplastrum Sicyonium ib. (...) seu (...) b (...) Emplastrum Stephaniaion ib.
Emplastrum (...) ib Emplastrum Stomachicum (...) or, a stomach Plaster ib.
Emplastrum Tonsoris b 179 Emplastrum Ceroma a (...) Emplastrum Gracia Dei: or,
(...) Grace of God ib. Emplastrum de (...), or, of (...) ib. Emplastrum Isis
(...) b (...) A Plaster of Mastich ib. Emplastrum (...) ib. A holy Plaster a
180 Emplastrum sine Pari ib. A Plaster for the stomach ib. A Cerecloath of
Ammoniacum. b (...) Ceratum Stomachium ib. CHEMICAL OILS.
The way to distill Oil of Herbs and Flowers a 181 Oil of Wormwood ib. Oil of
dried Barks b (...) Oil or fat of Roses ib. Oil of Seeds ib. Oil of Spices a
182 Oil of Woods ib. Oil of Berries ib. Oil of Turpentine b 182 Oil of (...)
ibid Oil of (...) ibid Oil of Wax ibid Oleum Latericium Phylosophorum ibid
(...) Succini: or, Oil of Amber a 183 (...) Antimonii: Oil or Butter of
Antimony ib. (...): or, Oil of Arsenick b 183 Oleum Salis: or, Oil of Salt ib.
Oleum Sulphuris: or, Oil of Sulphur ibid Oleum (...): or, Oil of Virriol a 184
Aqua fortis ibid Aqua fortis: or, Water of Honey b 184 (...) seu Liquamen
(...), seu Oleum Tartari per Deliquium: or Liquor of Tartar ibid Oleum (...)
per (...): or, Oil of Mirrh ibid Oil of Tartar ibid CHEMICAL PREPARATIONS.
(...) cum Nitro calcinatum; or, Antimony calcined with Niter a 185 Chalybs
(...) Or, Steel prepared ibid Crystal of (...) ibid Crocus Martis ibid Crocus
(...) ibid (...), Or, Flower of Brimstone b 158 Lapis infernalis ibid Lapis seu
(...) ibid Magisterum of Pearl and (...) ib Mercurius Sublimatus Corrosivus;
Or, Mercury Sublimate Corrosive a 186 Mercurius (...) ibid Mercurius dulcis
(...) ibid Mercurills (...) Or, Corrosive precipitate ibid Mercurius (...) ibid
Regulus (...) b 186 Saccharum (...) ibid Sal Vitrioli Or, Salt of Vittiol ibid
Turpethm Minerale ibid Tartarum Vitriolatum ibid Vitriolum album de puratum;
Or, white (...) ibid Vitrum Antimonii ibid THE WAY OF MAKING EXTRACTS. THE WAY
OF MAKING SALTS,
Salt Volatle a 187 Salt fixed ibid PREPARATIONS OF CERTAIN SIMPLE MEDICINES.
The way of Preparing Fats a 187 The burning of Brass b 187 The washing of
(...) a 188 The preparation of (...) armenick ibid (...) ibid May Butter ibid
The preparation of Lapis Calaminaris ibid The washing of Lime ibid The
Preparation of Corral, Pearls, (...) Eyes and other precious Stones ibid The
preparation of Coriander seed ibid The burning of Hartshorn, Ivory, and other
Bones ibid A new Preparation of them b (...) The way to make (...) ibid The
preparation of the (...) of Spurge Roots ibid The Preparation of (...) ib The
preparation of black Hellebore Roots ibid The preparation of Goats blood ib.
The burning of Young Swallows ibid The Preparation of (...) ibid The
preparation of Lapis (...) a 185 The preparation of Litharge ibid The
preparation of Earthworms: ibid The preparation of (...) or woodlice ibid The
manner of preparing (...) ibid The preparation of Opium ibid Powder of Raw
(...) ibid The washing of Lead ibid The burning of Lead ibid The Preparation of
Fox Lungues. b 185 The preparation of (...) ib. Another way of preparation of
Scamony with Sulphur ibid The preparation of (...) ibid Washed (...) ibid
Boiled Turpentine ibid The preparation of Tutty ibid

A CATALOGUE or TABLE of the DISEASES treated of in the Dispensatory.
A
A Bortion hinders, 13 23 24 33 131 160 169 176. Ach 3 13 28 31 44 65 162 165
171 175 178. See Pain. Adders sting, see (...) beasts Addust choler 109 124
Addust humors 60 135. Afterbirth 3 (...) 14 15 17 19 21 22 23 24 26 28 29 31
61 64 65 66 69 122 130 131 132 144 148 172. Agues naught for, 21 27 Ague in the
breast 16 21. see inflammation Agues 4 7 8 14 18 20 22 31 60 107 128 134 135 136
139 140 141 144 150 170 (...). Air corrupted, or infected see infection Almonds
of the Ears 24 29. Andicom, see Felon. Anger causes 33. Anger asswageth 33.
Appetite provokes 10 13 14 15 20 21 27 38 61 65 101 109 115 116 131 151 160
170 180. and restores. S. Anthonies fire 14 16 19 24 Aposthumes 5 13 14 19 23
60 166 170 176. Appoplexes 20 60 67 132. Asthma 21 44 60 61 68 73 117 122 127
132 137 146 166 170 182. Astonishment 132. B
Back strengthens 4 5 16 19 22 141 160 162 169. Baldness 4 13 32 69.
Barrenness 15 19 31 125 131. Belly-ach 13 16 18 21 127 173 176. Belly-ach see
Bowels Belly loosens 14 15 18 20 21 22 26 27 109 110 114 129. Belching 15 16 72
106 113 114 123 127 129 136. Beauty ads 18 20 25 26 28 61 72 132 137 151 159
161 169 182. Birth facilitates 3 4. Bees stinging 20 30 166. Bleeding stops 8 9
10 12 14 15 16 18 20 21 25 28 29 32 33 60 128 131 149 150. Bladder 4 6 7 8 14
15 16 18 20 21 23 24 25 27 28 29 30 31 32 60 61 102 105 113 122 127 130 132 133
135 136 137 137 138 147 149 460 463 164 173 182 183. Blackness and blewness 9
15 Blood cleanses 6 8 13 14 20 26 59 60 61. Blood congealed 15 16 19 20 60 165.
Blood 13 15 17 20 22 27 28 29 59 60 66 113. Bloody Flux 3 17 20 22 32 48 106
130 131 147 149 150 151. Black jaundice 110 147. Body cools in general, see the
particular parts over-pressed with heat. Boyls, 5 20 109 166 176. see
Carbuncles. Bots in horses 15, Binds 3 7 10 12 13 15 20 24 27 28 31 33 170 171.
Bones broken 3 9 10 12 15 29 60 108 173 176 178. Bowels 8 14 17 25 28 31 44 59
60 61 121 128 140 141 145 150 177. Bowels excoriated 7 48. Brain 7 22 23 24 26
27 28 30 32 60 61 68 69 114 120 121 122 123 127 130 140 141 143 147 148 151 172
174 176 178 182 183 Brain cools 13 18 20. Brain heateth 9 13 129. Brain
dries 13. Breath, shortness of breath, 67 13 15 16 17 19 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
46 64 72 73 103 105 106 113 118 123 137 141 182. Breast cold 12. Breast
inflamed, see inflammation. Breast 12 13 14 15 21 23 24 25 26 24 28 30 32 60 105
107 109 117 118 122 124 139 147 160 170 171 182 182 Breath stinking 11 27 28 29
60 68 69 147 148. Bubo, or swelling in the groyn, see swelling Bruised 4 7 9 10
11 13 15 16 19 20 23 32 108 161 162 170 175. Burns 3 5 7 12 13 14 17 18 19 27
60 165 166 170 174 182. Burstness, see Ruptures 3 5 7 13 14 17 18 20 176. C
Cancers 135 144. Cachexia, or ill disposition of the body Canker 5 15 176.
Cathers 113 129 Carbuncles 7 16 22 28 109 see plague-sores. Choler 9 11 13 16
18 20 22 24 26 27 29 30 31 38 44 48 72 73 101 107 109 110 111 128 126 129 133
134 135 136 139 140 141 142 143 144 145 147 173. Chollick 3 8 10 16 17 18 23 26
27 28 30 44 46 60 71 102 126 127 125 130 131 132 134 135 139 150 158 163 166
170 175 182 183 184. Catalepsis 20. Chollerick humors 20 73. Chap'd lips and
hands 166. Chincough 25. Cods swollen 8 13 Conception strengthens 143 Colds 8 29
102 116 122 123 146. Color ill, see beauty Consumption 11 12 15 25 26 27 31 32
33 44 65 66 68 69 103 104 111 117 120 121 122 123 124 125 129 131 141 170 182.
Concoction, see digestion. Cough 5 6 7 10 14 16 17 21 22 23 25 26 27 29 32 33
44 46 48 59 60 61 73 103 105 106 107 113 114 116 117 118 120 122 123 125 129
132 137 142 146 158. Convulsion 4 5 8 10 15 21 24 25 26 28 31 32 46 46 61 64 68
107 117 123 129 130 136 163 168 172 183. Corrosions of the bowels, see bowels.
Corruption, see Putrefaction Corns on the feet 14. Cramp 5 15 19 21 31 44 46
160 183. see convulsions Crudities, see indigestion. D
Dandrif, see scurf Dead flesh 6 164. Deafness 6 16 64 132 142 158 160 182.
Dead child, see birth Diabetes 16 28 31 Defluxions 12 166. Digestion, see
indigestion Dislocations 15 178 183. Dissury, see urine stopped Dogs biting 4 5
7. Dropsy, 4 5 6 7 9 12 13 14 15 16 18 19 22 24 26 27 28 31 32 33 38 46 60 61
111 114 122 129 130 132 141 144 145 147 148 150 151 168 169 182 183 184.
Drunkenness 19 20 30. Drunkenness preserves from 16 19 20 27 30 33. E
Ears 6 17 18 19 30 31 120 144 150 176. Excoriations, see the place excoriated
Excoriation of the Yard, see the Yard Evil spirits 10. Eyes 6 7 10 12 13 14 15
16 17 18 19 20 21 22 24 26 27 30 31 32 46 60 61 68 71 72 120 125 132 237 140
141 142 144 149 167 174 176. F
Fainting 4 7 10 33 46 66 68 104 108 127 150 Falling Sickness bad for 28.
Falling Sickness helps 7 8 10 15 18 19 20 23 24 25 26 30 31 32 33 34 46 60 65
68 69 72 113 117 123 127 129 130 132 136 141 163 167 182 183. Fatness 14 31 32
167. Falls, see bruises Fevers 4 5 6 7 12 13 15 17 23 26 27 28 29 31 32 33 34
59 60 61 64 65 66 68 69 103 104 106 107 109 114 116 119 124 125 126 129 132 133
134 138 143 147 149 183 184. Fear 27 33 127. Felon 19 177. Fighting 33. Fistula
15 19 24 150 159 164 166 168 183. Phlegm 4 5 7 10 14 15 19 23 24 27 29 30 33 38
44 60 61 71 72 101 103 107 108 110 113 114 121 122 126 127 129 133 135 139 140
141 142 143 160 168. Fleas 19 23. Flux 3 4 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 20 21 22
23 25 26 27 28 31 60 106 108 115 116 120 129 130 131 160 171 175 176 177. Folly
33. Forgetfulness 16 18 23 26 33 60 69 106 127 135 141. Freckles 4 14 15 20 23
25 60 73 169 184. French pox 5 7 9 12 15 16 23 25 66 184. Frenzies 14 17 18 20
22 23 24 25 46 107 131 138 160 163. Face 7 158 160 166 169. Fundament 7 21 24.
Fundament falling out 20 27 169 171. G
Gall 9 16. Gangrenes 15 22 28 183. Gnats 23 Gout 7 10 11 15 16 18 19 20 21 24
31 46 72 135 140 141 144 145 158 163 166 172 173 182 183. Gripings of Belly 3 4
7 16 17 24 60 61 108 126 130. Gravel 3 7 17 19 33 61 102 125 136.
Green Sickness 4 13 16 18 21 71. Gums 27 29 71. Gunshot 17 166. H
Hands scabby, see scabs. Hardness see swellings Head strengthens 14 19 23 27
32 33 61 71 140 141 144 163. Headache helps 1 7 8 9 13 15 17 19 21 22 24 25 26
27 28 29 31 39 60 61 107 113 118 120 129 132 135 137 139 144 160 162 166 167
169 176 179. Heads scabby, see scabs and scald heads Heat of the stomach, see
stomach Health preserved 72 121. Hypochondriacal melancholy 18 32 61 105 109
112 114 147 161 177. Heart 4 6 10 11 12 15 16 18 21 24 26 29 31 32 33 44 60 61
63 65 66 67 68 70 103 104 106 107 108 109 114 119 121 122 123 124 128 120 125
129 129 131 142 147 148 150 160. Heart-qualms 15 27 28 46 68 123 128 148.
Heart-burnings 17 20 25. Hectic fevers 31 59 67 107 122 125 129 134 147 151
158 170. Humors 4 7 8 13 14 17 22 26 27 44 73 137 151. Hemorrhoids helps 5 9
17 24 25 130 131 136 147 149 166 169 176. Hemlock eaten Hiccoughs 14 107
Hoarsness 7 23 25 29 73 105 111 118 122 123 146. Hair 18 25 27 28 29 31 159
161. Horses that are mangy 16 Hornets stinging 166. Hnnting 33. Hogs 16 I
Iliack passion 127 125 132 151 166 182. Indigestion 7 11 12 13 17 18 21 27 28
38 46 60 63 65 69 70 72 101 103 106 118 121 123 124 126 127 125 129 130 132 139
142 243 145 148 151 160 170 174 176 179 180. Infection 124 132 145 182 183.
Inflammations 4 7 12 14 15 16 18 19 20 21 22 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 33 60 111 116
123 133 146 149 160 164 167 170 171 173 174 179. Inflammation in the privities,
15 16 19 23 25 26 28 106 Inflammation in the eyes, see eyes Inflammation of the
Liver, see Liver Inflammation in the stomach 25. Joints 7 9 10 11 13 15 16 19 27
30 72 132 135 141 142 144 158 160 162 163 164 168 172 173 182 183 Joynt-ach 19
22 172 Itch 5 6 7 9 12 18 20 22 23 24 28 32 33 38 60 61 102 105 108 109 135 136
143 144 163 165 166 167 169 Kibes 25 128. Kings evil 5 6 10 24. Kidneys 7 19 21
102 128 125 136 170. L
Leanness 28 123. Legs scabby, see scabbed Leprosies 5 6 11 12 13 15 19 28 32
33 61 102 109 110 132 135 136 141 144. Lethargy 13 20 24 28 31 33 64 144 482.
Lice causes 27. Lice kills 17 24 28. Ligaments 161. Liver 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 12
13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 26 27 28 29 30 31 44 59 60 61 65 68 72 101
102 103 105 107 108 109 110 113 114 118 122 123 124 128 127 125 130 132 135 137
139 141 143 144 145 147 148 148 150 160 161 163 167 172 173 175 176 177 179 180
183 184. Lisping 69. Longing of women 25. Lunary, see madness Lust provokes 4 6
7 8 9 10 13 16 17 18 21 25 26 27 28 29 31 33 38 69 129 137 160 Lust stays 8 28
33. Lungues 4 8 10 11 12 13 14 15 17 19 21 22 23 24 25 27 28 29 30 31 32 46 60
61 63 67 68 69 73 74 103 105 106 107 113 114 116 117 122 123 124 128 125 130
139 141 144 170 182 182. M
Mad-dogs biting 7 13 15 16 17 18 20 21 30. Madness 6 15 18 23 24 26 31 46 73
102 110 135 136 138. Marasmos 31 67 68 134. Mare 28. Megrim 21 60 113 136 144.
Melancholy 6 8 9 10 14 15 16 18 21 24 27 28 30 31 33 34 61 65 70 72 73 102 106
108 109 110 111 114 123 126 127 125 131 132 133 134 135 136 137 139 141 142
144. Memory, see forgetfulness. Mice 6. Mother fits 4 8 10 14 15 21 24 25 28 29
31 64 66 141 172 177 183 184. Moaths 12 13 15 17 18 20. Morphew 4 5 6 14 15 25
32 60 61 159. Mouth sore 4 17 111 112. Mouth swelled, see swellings N
Navil 8. Nerves, see sinews. Nits, 17 24. Noise in the ears 9 19 21 160 162.
Numbness, 3 172. Necks stiff 21 Nurses to breed milk 6 12 14 18 19 20 24 28 60.
O
Obstructions or stoppings 13 16 17 18 19 20 23 26 28 101 141 164. Opium taken
5 22. P
Pain eases 3 6 13 20 22 31 44 135 141 164 178. Palsy 9 19 26 31 46 60 123
130 142 160 163 170 172 181 183. Passion, see Anger Perfume, 163 181.
Pestilence 3 4 5 6 7 8 10 14 16 18 20 23 26 27 28 30 31 32 33 46 59 60 61 63 64
65 66 68 103 109 111 124 125 129 130 132 137 142 145 150 175 182 183 184.
Pimples 11 18 74 166 169. Pissing blood 13 15 20 32 44 108 120. Pissing
disease, see Diabetes. Plague Sores 7 11 22 23 66 69. see Carbuncles. Poisonous
weapons, 17 22. Pleuresie 16 25 26 59 105 116 123 135 151 158 160 170 171.
Pock-holes 14 32 146 163 182. Poison 3 4 5 6 7 8 10 11 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
23 24 28 30 31 33 46 64 66 68 103 104 109 124 125 130 131 132 137 141 149 150
166 183. Preparations for a vomit 101 Privities, see Womb, Yard. Priapismus 17.
Phtisick 21 22 31 60 69 70 105 106 107 114 140 145 147 166. Putrefaction 12 132
136 160 174 175 176. Purge 110. Q
Quinsie 17. R
Rats 6. Rhewms of the stomach 17 Reins 4 5 6 7 8 9 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
23 24 25 26 27 28 30 31 32 44 61 101 107 113 122 127 132 133 135 136 138 139
141 147 160 163 164 173 176 182 183. Rhewm 8 46 60 106 114 125 133 140 142 149
166 176. Rhewm in the head 8 9 20 38 119 173 182. Riches 33 34. Rickets 4 6 8 9
11 12 15 18 21 24 25 38 44 61 103 108 112 118 147 161 171 177. Ringworms 109
159 166 167 Roughness of the skin see Sunburning Rowelling Cattle, 6 Rules for
Purges 73 74 Opening simples 18 To stop fluxes 104 To stay vomiting 112
Ordering the body after sweating 138 Taking pills 139
Running of the Reins 4 12 16 19 21 22 27 29 32 140 181 182. Ruptures 3 4 5 6 7
8 10 13 14 17 18 19 20 24 29 60 107 108 175 176 183. S
Sadness 10 18 21 32. Scurf 4 6 28 110. Scabs 5 6 7 9 12 13 18 20 21 22 23 24
28 29 32 33 38 61 102 105 108 109 110 135 143 144 159 163 166 169 174 182.
Scalding 5 13 14 17 18 19 165 166 170 175. Scald heads, 28 31 32. Sciatica 11
16 19 21 24 145. Scrophula 6. Skull broken 29. Seed increases 6 9 28 31 158.
Seed consumes 13. Serpents diverse ways 12 23 28 Serpents biting, see venomous
beasts Sinews 5 9 13 16 19 30 102 114 129 141 142 160 161 163 168 169 170 172
178 182 183. Sides pained 13 16 17 21 23 26 28 29 135 163. Shingles 8 17 19 22
24. Sighing 9 13 31 127. Sinews shrinking 13 14 16 24 27 29 31 32 158 178.
Scurvy 21 38. Sight, see Eyes. Sleep provokes, see watching Sneezing 6 Small
pox, the maks of them, see pock-holes. Sores, see wounds and ulcers. Spiders 3
17. Spleen 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 26 27 28 29
30 31 32 38 44 59 60 61 68 72 101 102 103 108 118 123 125 129 130 132 135 137
141 147 161 163 171 172 173 175 177 179 182 183 184. Sprains 4 162 165 167.
Spitting blood 4 5 9 12 15 16 17 19 20 22 23 26 27 32 59 106 108 120 123 131
132 145 149. Spirit vital 10 26 28 32 63 68 104 106 121 122 128 126 125 147
150. Spirit animal 26 32 122 127 147. Spirit natural 32 109 122 141 Spirit
spent, see strength lost, and fainting. Splinters, see thorns. Spots in the
face, see freckles. Stomach 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 (...) 24
25 26 27 28 29 30 31 33 46 59 60 60 63 65 68 69 70 71 101 103 104 106 107 109
110 113 115 120 121 121 122 123 123 127 (...) 130 (...) 132 136 137 139 140 141
142 143 144 145 147 148 150 151 158 160 163 166 167 169 170 171 172 174 175 177
179 180 182 183. Strangury, 8 16 17 19 20 24 46 127 130 131 163. Stinking
breath, see bowels. Stitch 8 15 16 23 44 60 65. Stone 3 5 6 7 8 9 11 12 13 15
16 17 18 19 21 22 23 25 27 28 30 31 33 44 46 60 61 102 106 122 127 130 131 132
136 139 146 160 164 182. Sunburning 4 6 14 15 23 25 60 61 73 166 184. Surfets
13 19 60 102 105 107 142 143 149. Strength lost, 3 19 31 103 119 122 125 178.
Sweat causes 5 7 9 10 12 16 32 60 65 66 128 131 132 138 (...). Swellings 4 8 9
10 13 14 15 18 19 20 21 23 24 27 26 29 44 147 160 166 171 172 173 175 176 177
180 183. Swellings in the Privities, see Womb and Yard. Swoonings 33 66 104 127
184. Swelling in the mouth, 24. T
Teeth on edg, 22. Teeth loose 4 11 14 29 33 183. Teeth, to make them fall out
30 To make teeth white 25 32 Teeth, to breed easily 31 Teeth strengthens 27
Tenasmus 30 Tetters 5 109 159 166 167 Terms provokes 4 5 6 7 8 10 12 13 14 16
17 18 19 21 22 23 24 25 26 28 30 31 46 60 61 65 68 69 102 110 112 121 125 129
130 131 132 141 160 182. Terms stops 3 4 5 6 7 9 10 11 12 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
21 22 23 26 27 32 61 106 108 115 129 129 130 131 137 147 148 149 151 169 (...)
(...) 128 125 147 184. Throat sore 14 17 18 19 26 29 30 48 116 117 119 158.
Throat norrow 146 Toads 3 17 33. Toothach 4 5 6 8 9 10 13 15 20 27 60 69 71 121
176 184. Trembling 31 142 163 Tumors, see swellings. Tongue rough 27 123. V
Venomous beasts 3 4 6 7 8 13 14 16 17 18 20 21 22 23 28 30 31 33 46 60 64 66
68 130 132 137 149 160 162 166 173 176. Vertigo or dissiness in the head 6 10
15 16 21 23 29 31 33 60 102 104 113 123 132 135 136 139 141 (...). Veins broken
5 17. Veins opens 23 29 32. Ulcers 3 4 5 7 8 12 13 14 15 16 17 19 20 21 22 23
25 28 29 31 32 33 64 70 72 131 147 150 119 163 164 166 167 168 171 173 174 176
177 178 179 183 184. Ulcers in the Reins and bladder 16 27 60 106 131 132 147
158. Ulcers in the mouth 5 8 13 22 26 27 28 61 183. Ulcers in the Throat 10.
Ulcers in the Lungs 16 22 see Phtisicks Ulcers in the Privities 19 61 158.
Ulcers in the Eyes 148. Vomiting provokes 4 14 71 Vomiting stops 4 10 11 12 13
14 18 21 22 25 27 28 60 104 106 108 114 121 128 129 130 137 160 168 170 174 176
177 179. Vomiting blood 19 23 26 29 108 120 132 137. Voice 29 68 72 73 105
(...) (...) 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
32 44 46 (...) 61 72 101 107 109 110 114 121 122 130 131 132 141 146 150 182
184. W
Warts 7. Watching 19 20 26 28 66 106 107 109 113 114 116 119 131 142 143 160
170. Wasps stinging 20 30 166. Wens 7. Wheals 143. Wheezing 19 23 48. Weariness
13 22 44 160 162 Whites in women 4 13 19 21 22 23 27 28 31 32 129. Wind 3 4 5 7
9 10 11 12 13 17 18 19 23 24 26 27 28 29 31 46 61 63 69 71 72 101 121 122 124
126 127 125 129 130 131 135 140 150 160 165 173 182 183 Windpipe 7 22 26 27.
Witchcraft 19 32. Wisdom 33 129. Womb 7 14 20 21 22 23 24 26 27 28 30 31 60
107 111 112 113 125 133 137 160 163 164 172 179 183. Womb inflamed, see
inflammations. Womb fallen out 14 16 27 169 171. Women's travel 6 8 11 15 17 19
21 22 23 26 28 29 31 33 46 60 64 69 122 230 131 132 183. Womb swelled, see
swellings Womb hardened 13 29 44. Women's breasts, see breasts. Women newly
delivered, and not well purged 15 113 136 144. Worms 5 8 10 13 15 16 17 18 19
21 23 24 27 28 29 30 33 60 61 61 71 160 166 172 181 184. Wounds 3 5 6 7 8 9 12
13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 29 32 107 108 112 133 135 148 150 160 161
163 164 165 166 167 168 170 171 173 174 175 176 177 178 179 180 182 183 184.
Wry mouths 162 163 Wry necks 15 21 25 Y
Yard 20 21 24 25 164 182 Yard excoriated 17 21 Yellow jaundice 5 7 8 9 11 13
14 15 16 17 19 22 23 26 27 29 30 31 33 38 46 59 60 61 65 101 103 110 122 124
132 140 141 143 144 145 147 148. Youth preserves 24 124 (...).

FINIS.

