Peter Alexiovitz the present Grand Czar of Moscovie Anno aetat. 27.



THE Ancient and Present STATE OF MUSCOVY, CONTAINING A Geographical,
Historical and Political ACCOUNT Of all those NATIONS and TERRITORIES Under the
JURISDICTION of the Present CZAR.

With SCULPTURES, and a New MAP.

By J. C. M. D. Fellow of the Royal Society, and a Member of the College of
Physicians, LONDON.

LONDON, Printed for A. Roper, at the Black Boy; and A. Bosvile, at the Dyal;
both over against St. Dunstan's Church, in Fleet Street, MDCXCVIII.

To my Honored Friend Sir EDMUND WARCVP, Of OXFORDSHIRE, Knight.
I Am fully persuaded there is a certain Sympathy betwixt Travellors. As for my
part, I am very free to make this ingenious Confession, that as the first
motive of my courting your acquaintance, was the extraordinary Character you
had acquired ^n your Travels abroad; so the History of Italy, wherewith you
have obliged the World some Years ago, did raise in me a ^ertain Ambition of
being received among ^he number of your Friends. The con^ruity there is betwixt
all Histories, though ^f different Nations, and far distant Coun^ries, will be, I
hope, a sufficient Plea for ^his Address to you; it is true, this Rela^^on will
not afford the same variety of ^eautiful Structures, Gardens, Statues and ^ther
Niceties as that of Italy; neverthe^ess the more remote the Manners, Reli^ion
and Policy of the Muscovit^s are from ^ther Nations of Europe, the more
abstruse their History and surprising in the event, among a Nation guided for
the most part ^eerly by instinct, and consequently hur^ed on to one extreme or
another, the more, I say, they may deserve our particular observation at this
juncture of time. But besides this motive peculiar to my self* there are also
several other Obligations, for which, by the general acknowledgment o^ all true
English Men, your Native Country stands indebted to you, and never ought to be
Buried in Oblivion. The ear^ly Proofs you gave at your younger Years* both of
your Capacity and Readiness to serve your Country, in the Treaty of the Isle of
Wight, in the Year 1647. and 1648^ were the fore runners of a long
Concatenation of Services, you and your Family have since heaped upon the
Kingdom of England* There are as yet many living Testimonies o^ your successful
endeavors in the Restoration of K. Charles II. of Blessed Memory; and, as the
University of Oxford, showed their readiness in acknowledging your Services to
the Public, by investing you in the Year 1670. with the Dignity of a Doctor of
the Civil Laws, in honorem Principis Auriaci, now our present King; so, i^ was
questionless, both upon the score o^ your Merits and Ability, that by the
particular Commands of his then Majesty^ and Privy Council, and the Lords
Spiritual^ and Temporal in Parliament Assembled^ you were appointed for the
searching into^ and prosecuting the Discovery of that mos^ horrid Popish Plot,
carried on against the Life of K. Charles II. and the Government. I will not
enlarge my self here upon the singular Benefit the Government received at that
time by your Care and Vigilance, to your no small charge and hazard; the
public Testimonies, and reiterated Recommendations to his then Majesty, from
the House of Peers, are sufficient Evidences of these Eminent Services, you did
to the Government, during the prosecution of that Conspiracy: But there is one
thing more, which, in my Opinion, ought before all others, not to be passed by
in silence; I mean your continuance in Westminster, during the greatest Plague
England ever felt. What could be a more evident proof of your undaunted Courage
and entire Devotion to the service of your Native Country, than to tarry at a
time of so eminent a Danger, in the midst of a great many Thousands expiring
round about you; where in Conjunction with Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey, you were
appointed by His then Majesty's Commission, to take care in Quality of Justices
of Peace, of the Out-Parishes, to the great Satisfaction of the Public. Your
two Sons Col. Lenthall Warcup, and Capt. Edm. Warcup, at the Unfortunate, but
Glorious Day of Battle at Steenkirke in Flanders, in the Year 1693. gave such
illustrious Demonstrations* of being true Inheritors of your Courage and Love
to their Native Country, that their fall was generally lamented, and their
Names have ever since been placed in the most Honorable Remembrances of all
those who esteem it a Glory, to Sacrifice their Lives for the Defense of their
Country. Being confined to the compass of a Letter, I am forced to deprive my
self of the satisfaction, of giving the due praises to their Memory, but in
lieu of them, I will offer to the^r Names as a perpetual remembrance of their
Bravery the following Words of the Honorable Sir James Vernon; There was never
(said he, speaking to you, of your Sons) a Battalion behaved themselves better,
than that which your Son commanded; nor any Officer so universally regretted as
he was: And I do not doubt, but your younger Son would have trod his Brother's
Footsteps, had he not soon after met with the same Fate. They have given
(continues he) the best Account of the Life they received from you: And I, who
have a more numerous Stock of Sons than yours was, know not what better to wish
for them, than that they may run the same Hazards, in the same Cause; and may
be so loved, and so missed. Thus, recommending my self to the Continuation of
your Friendship, I rest,

SIR, Your most Faithful, and Humble Servant, J. CRULL. Med. D.

THE PREFACE.
AMongst a great many other Advantages, which the English Nation enjoys under
the Auspicious Reign of His present Majesty, the Influence this Crown has in
Foreign Affairs, may be looked upon as one of the most considerable, whether in
respect of the Honor, or Benefit, which is from thence derived to the
Generality of the People of England. For, whereas our Intestine Broils, and the
Carelessness of the two preceding Reigns, had rendered the Interest of this
Island almost as much divided from that of other States of Europe, as it is
separated from the Neighboring Countries by the Ocean, it must be
acknowledged, that it is chiefly owing to the incomparable Valor of His
present Britannick Majesty that the English have re-gain'd their Ancient
Reputation abroad; and that in so eminent a Degree, that even the most potent
Princes, in far distant Countries, looking upon this Kingdom as one of the most
considerable in Europe, show a more than ordinary Deference to His Majesty of
Great Britain. It is, withont Question, upon that Score, we have seen so lately
one of the greatest Princes in the World leave, for some Time, his own Country,
and, maugre the Tediousness of so great a Journey, came to visit this Island.
As I am well assured that this Journey of His present Czarrish Majesty is
without a Parallel in the Russian Empire, so it was that which gave the first
Opportunity of engaging my Thoughts in the following Treatise. I was not
insensible there were many Obstacles to be surmounted, in an Undertaking of
this Nature: And I was not ignorant, that the Want of Learning, and the Natural
Propensity of the Muscovites in general to Jealousy and Secrecy, would render
it, at least, very difficult, if not quite impractieable, to give an exact
Account of so vast an Empire, composed out of several Nations, distinguished in
their Languages, Religion and Manner of Living. These Considerations were so
prevailing with me, as to check my first Inclinations, in hopes that some Body
or another would lay hold on so favorable an Opportunity of giving a true
Description of a Country which has been but superficially known hitherto in
England.

But perceiving that no Body would venture to engage himself in the Design, I
took a Resolution to undertake the Task, though never so difficult, rather than
to let slip so seasonable an Opportunity, as offered it self, by the Arrival of
His present Czarrish Majesty in England, of giving the Public the best Account
I could of the Russian Empire. The Vastness of its Territories (a great many
whereof are quite unfrequented by Strangers) did put me under an absolute
Necessity of having Recourse to those of several Nations in Europe, that have
had the Opportunity of Traveling in Muscovy. For, as I was fully resolved to
insert nothing in this Treatise, but what I had received upon the Credlt of
those that had been Eyewitnesses of their own Relations; so I was obliged to
consult the Travels, and most especially the Embassies, of the English,
Germans, French, Dutch, and other Nations, into those Parts. And, for as much
as it is obvious, that scarce ever any one Foreigner did visit one half of this
spacious Empire, I was put under an indispensable Necessity of supplying the
Defects of one, with the Relations of others, who had (according to their
several Occasions) taken different Roads in their Travels through Muscovy. But
here it was, I found my self engaged in ^hese Difficulties, which were not
easy to be surmounted: For, in comparing the several Relations of different
Persons, and Nations, (...) found it a very difficult Task to reconcile, in
some measure, the various Descriptions of Places, especially in what relates to
their Situations and Distances; occasioned, doubtless, by the most stupid
Ignorance and Jealousy of those Muscovites from whom they had received their
Intelligence. The History of Muscovy it self, even that of the last Age, is
entangled in such Perplexities, in point of Chronology, that some of the best
Historians of our Age (whom I will forbear to name) have been surprised into
some Mistakes of this nature. For the rest; As the Manners and Customs of the
Muscovites, as well as their Religion and Policy, are very different from most
other Nations in Europe; and either not at all, or, at least, but superficially
known in these Parts; so the ensuing Relation may, in all probability, serve,
not only to instruct, but also to divert the curious Reader. I must confess,
the present Muscovian Empire might well have deserved a Treatise suitable, in
Bulk, to its vast Extent: But the Eagerness which most of my Friends showed in
the Publishing of it at this Season, obliged me t^ contract it into as narrow a
Compass as the Matter would allow of: Which, as it ha^ been done with all the
Brevity imaginable* so I have been very careful in not passing b^ any thing of
Moment, which I believed might be material, and tend to the Satisfaction o^ the
Reader. It was for this Reason also, (...) thought it most expedient to divide
the whole into two distinct Volumes; the first of which contains a Description
of those several Nations, and vast Territories, under the Obedience of the
present Grand Czar of Muscovy; together with their Laws, Customs, Manner of
Living, Religion, and Policy: With an Account of the Origin of the Russian
Empire, and its Increase, till the Death of that famous Tyrant John Basilovits,
toward the Latter End of the last Age. But the various and most surprising
Revolutions, which, after the Death of this Grand Tyrant, happened in the
Muscovian Empire, either in Consideration of their various Vicissitudes, or the
Strangeness of their Events, surpassing not only what former Ages have
delivered of this kind, but hardly to be paralleled by Posterity, I reserved
the full and exact Relation of them to the Second Volume; with a Continuation
of the Muscovite History, and the whole State of Affairs, from the Year 1613,
(when the Family of the present Czar first ascended the Throne,) till the
Arrival of His Czarrish Majesty in this Kingdom.

ERRATA.
PAge 7. line 24. for 50000. read 60000. p. 29. l. 6. f. great, r. some. p. 45.
l. 20. f. be, r. is. p. 49. l. 2. f. two, r. no. p. 55. l. 15. f. pice, r.
piece. p. 61. l. 13. f. found, r. forced. p. 6^. l. 14. f. having, r. being. p.
65. l. 13. f. Imposter, r. Imposture. l. 23. f. Impostor, r. Imposture. p. 81.
l. 19 f. often, r. Use of (...). p. 83. l. ult. f. as, r. which. p. 92. l. 2.
f. before, r. but. p. 100. l. 34. f. some other of their Customs, r. some of
their other Customs. p. 101. l. 28. f. Nest, r. Stye. p. 108. l. ult. f. what,
r. which. p. 110. l. 31. f. ox, r. or. p. 329. l. 36. f. again, r. against.

MOSCOVY, or RUSSIA etc.

map of Russia

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Ancient and Present State OF Muscovy.
CHAP. I.
Of the Territories belonging to the Grand Czar of MUSCOVY.
MVscovy was formerly the Name properly belonging to one Province only, of the
Russian Empire, of which Musco is the Capital City. But, as it is observable in
France that the Province of that Name has communicated its Name, and includes
all the rest of (...) French King's Dominions, so Muscovy compre^^^ds now
adays, all those vast Provinces under the Grand Czar's Obedience. This vast
Country (a Part of the Ancients Sarmatia Europaa) was heretofore known by the
Name of Roxolania, Russia, or White Russia, from whence the Name of Russians,
given to the Muscovites, has its derivation. It is without question the
greatest Empire of all Europe, its length being near Six Hundred, and its
breadth above Three Hundred Leagues. The extent of the Russian Empire.
Northward it extends it self to the Frozen Sea, beyond the Artique Circle; on
the East it has the River Oby, on the South the Crim and Precopian Tartars,
and toward the West it borders upon Poland, Livonia, and Sweden; its whole
extent being from the 46 to 66 degrees of Latitude, and from the 55 to the
80th. degree of Longitude; Considering the vast distance of the several
Provinces which compose this great Empire, it is easy to be imagined, that of
necessity there must be a great difference as to the length of Days, Heat and
Cold, and no small variety of Seasons, Soil and Fruits, according to their
several Climates, of which we shall have occasion to say more hereafter, when
each of them will be treated of in particular. Nevertheless it is generally
excessive Cold in the Winter, and the Heats in the Summer, during the space of
two or three Months, very intense and violent. The Country is generally flat
and Sandy, full of Trees and Woods, so that Muscovy, in a manner, appears to be
one continual Forest, irrigated by a great multitude of Lakes and Rivers, which
renders it incomparably pleasant in the Summer, and extremely commodious for
Traveling and Trading in the Winter.

The Lakes most remarkable for their bigness, The most (...) Muscovy.
are, 1. Ivanosera, which is as much as to say, John's Lake* is situated in the
great Forest of Epiphanow, in the Province of Resan, 500 English Miles long. 2.
Biele^sera, near 50 Miles in compass, Ilmin, or Ilmen, 200 Miles long, and as
many broad, near the City of Novogo^od Veliki. Toward the West, near the
Confines of Finland, there are* two more, not far distant from one another, and
of great extent, the first is called Ladoga or Laduga, which contains several
small Islands, and great store of Fish, its Compass being near 300 Leagues, The
second is called Onega, near 250 Miles long, and 80 broad; besides a great many
others not to be mentioned in this place, there being so prodigious a number of
Lakes and Brooks all over Muscovy, that scarce four or five Leagues can be
traveled there without seeing some of them on all sides.

It is particularly observable in Muscovy, that most of its Rivers, even those
of the first Rank, take their original from Lakes. The River Volga it self, The
Chief^^^ (...) Muscovy.
the biggest in Europe, if not in the World, owes its first offspring to a
Lake, called Fronow, in the Province of Roscovie, and derives its name from
another Lake, at some few Miles distance from the former, called Volga, through
which it passes, and after having traversed many Provinces, and received a
great number of small Rivers, it disembogues near Astrachan into the Caspian
Sea. The next considerable River is the Boristhenes or Ni^per; it takes its
source in the same Province of Roscovie, where the Volga does, and discharges
it self into the Euxine Sea. The River Oby taking its source from the Lake
Catisco, traverses the Deserts of Tartary, from South to North-west, and having
served as a boundary betwixt that Country and the Muscovian Territories,
discharges it self into the Frozen Sea. Besides these, there are two
considerable Rivers of the same name, called Duina* (i. e.) Twain or Two, the
first being the confluence of two Rivers, viz. of the Jagel and S^cogna,
disembogues into the white Sea, near the Famous City of Archangel. The second,
Duina, owes its name and offspring to a Lake of the same Name, a few Miles
distant from the Boristhenes or Ni^per, and falls about four Leagues from Riga
in Livonia into the Baltique. Not to mention here the Rivers of Mosca and Occa,
and others of less note, wherewith this Country is stocked, which for the most
part loose themselves either in the Volga, or in the other abovementioned
Rivers, and will be more particularly taken notice of in their proper places.
The Territories under the obedience of the Czars of Muscovy, Muscovy divided in
four Parts
are commonly divided into four several Parts.

The first is the Northern Muscovy, bordering on Sweden, which contains seven
very large Provinces, viz. The Muscovite Lapland, Dwina, Plesk^w, Kargapol,
Wologda, Novogorod Veliki, and Bi^leja Osera.

The second Part is the Northern Muscovy, bordering on the Tartars, divided
into sixteen Provinces, viz. that of Candora, Juhora or Juhorski, New-Holland,
near the Straight of Nassaw or Weigats, Petzora, Obdora, Vstioug, Perniski,
Wiatka, Wachines, the Principalities of Bielski, Smolensko and Severia, or
Novogorod Seuierski, part of the Palatinate of Kiow, the Dukedom of Kraina, and
lastly, the Province called Pole; Besides which, it contains three different
Sorts of People, called Czeremissi Logovoi, Czeremissi Nagorni, and the
Morduates.

The third Part is, that of the Southern Muscovy, comprehending ten very large
Provinces; viz. that of Muscovy, properly so called, the Dukedoms of Werotin,
Rezan, Welodi, Jaroslow, Sasdel, Rostow, Twere and Roscow, besides the Province
of Nise-Novogorod.

The fourth and last, is the Muscovian Tartary, divided into nine Parts, viz.
into the four Kingdoms of Astrachan, Bulgar, Casan and Siberia, into the four
Provinces of Lucomoria, Loppia, Pegahorda, and Javalhahordo, the ninth Part
containing eight different Sorts of People, viz. the Samoyedes, Tingoeses,
Vigulei, Scibanski, Tustiouski, Calami, Hugneski, and Tartars-Cornubii.

Formerly the Sovereigns of Russia bore the Title of Great Dukes, Titles of the
Czars of Muscovy, and their Coat of Arms.
but, since they have extended their Conquests among the Neighboring Tartars,
the Russians salute their Princes, with the Title of Weliki Knez, that is,
Great Lord, in imitation of the Turkish Grand Seignior; and that of Czar, or
his Czarish Majesty. And though the Word Czar in the Russian Language, signifies
as much as a King, the Russians nevertheless, having understood, that the Chief
among the Christian Princes of Europe, is styled by the Name of Kaysar (derived
from the Name of him, who laid the first Foundation of the Roman Monarchy) the
Great Duke's Interpreters make use of the same Word, when they recite their
Master's Titles, the affinity which is in the sound of the two Words of Caesar
and Czar, having questionless furnished them with an Opportunity, to commit
this wilful Mistake in Etymology. The Arms which they make use of in their
Great Seal, ever since the Reign of that Famous Tyrant John Basilovitz, are
likewise made in imitation of the Roman Emperors, viz. A double-headed
Spread-Eagle (the Wings only somewhat less than the Imperial Eagle) having on
the Breast, in an Escutcheon, one on Horseback, fighting with a Dragon,
representing, as they say, the Archangel, St. Michael, in the same manner, as
in these Parts we used to represent St. George. Above and betwixt the
Eagles-heads are three Crowns, viz. that of Muscovy, and the two Tartarian
Kingdoms of Casan and Astrachan. The whole Title of the Muscovian Czars runs
thus: Great Lord, Emperor and Grand Duke, Conservator of all the Great, and
Little, and White Russia; of Muscovy, K^avie, Volodimerie, Nofgorod, Emperor
of Casan, Emperor of Astrachan, Emperor of Siberia, Lord of Pscove, Great
Duke of Lithuania, Smolensko, Twersco, Volinsko, Podolsko, Vghorsco, Permsco,
Veatsco, Bolgarsco, etc. Lord and Great Duke of Nofgorod in the lower
Countries, of Chernigo, Resansco, Polotsco, Rostofsco, Yerostofsco,
Beloozarsco, Oudorsco, Obdorsco, Condinsco, Wetepsco, Mstisclaaco, and all the
Northern Parts; Lord of the Country of Iversco, of Cartalinsco, and of
Gruzinsco; and of the Country of Cabardinsco; of the Dukes of Cercasco and
Igorsco; Lord and Monarch of several other Dominions, and Provinces, East,
West, and North, which are his Inheritance from Father to Son. Most of these
Provinces being of a vast Extent, and all of them (except very few) in the
possession of the Czars of Muscovy; it is manifest, that, whether, in respect
of the vast Extent of their Empire, or in regard of the absolute Power they
have over their Subjects Lives and Fortunes, they may be paralleled at least,
if not preferred, to the Emperor of the Turks.

CHAP. II.
Of the Southern Muscovy in particular, with a Description of its Chief Cities.
MVscovy, as has been mentioned in the foregoing Chapter, being commonly
divided into four Parts. viz. in the two Northern Parts, bordering on Sweden
and Tartary, the Southern Muscovy, and the Tartarian Kingdoms, under the
Obedience of the Russian Empire; we will in this Chapter treat of the Southern
Muscovy in particular, reserving its more Northern Provinces to the following,
and the Description of the Tartarian Kingdoms of Astrachan, Casan, Siberia, and
other Tartarian Countries, Muscovy, pr^p^^ly so called.
to the Fourth and Fifth Chapters. The Southern Muscovy comprehends ten
Provinces. The first is the Province of Muscovy, properly so called, which has
communicated its Name to the whole Empire; it is a flat Country, beautified
with great store of Forests (most of them of Firrs and Beechtrees) Lakes and
Rivers, abounding in every thing requisite for the Sustenance of Human Life;
the Forests abounding with Honey, and all sorts of Game, as the Plains do with
Grass and Corn, and the Rivers and Lakes furnish the whole Country with a
prodigious quantity of all so^ts of Fish, except Carps, which are not to be
found here, or if they are in some places, they eat harsh, and are quite
neglected in a Country where they have such store of the best Fish in the World.

The Capital City of this Province is Musco, A Description of the City of Musco.
the Metropolis of the whole Empire, to which it has given its Name; as it has
derived its own from the River Moska, which passes through and divides that
part of the City, called Strelitza Sla^oda, from the rest, and after having
received the two small Rivers of Neglina and Yagusa, and joined its Current
with the River Occa, falls afterward into the great River Wolga. It is
situated in a very fair Plain, betwixt the three abovementioned Rivers; its
Figure is almost Circular, containing in its Circumference Fifteen or Sixteen
Miles at least, though, by reason of the Conflagrations which frequently happen
in this City, both its form and extent do not continue many Years in the same
condition. It lies almost in the Center of the whole Empire, being at an equal
distance from the Frontiers, which on either side are above 600 Miles. Its
Elevation is 55 Degrees and 36 Min. Latitude: Its Longitude 66 Degrees. Before
the Crim Tartars in the Year 1571 destroyed it, and the Poles burnt it to the
Ground all but the Castle, in the Year 1611. it was doubtless much bigger than
it is now; nevertheless, there being by computation numbered near ^0000 Houses;
^0000
this, with the largeness of its Streets, and the Intervals betwixt the Houses,
makes it one of the greatest and most considerable, though not the most Populous
Cities of Europe. The City of Musco, like most of all the other Towns in
Muscovy, is built all of Wood, except the Palaces of Persons of the first Rank,
some Churches and Chapels, and the Houses of some very Rich Merchants, which
are of Brick or Stone, it being the general Custom throughout all Muscovy to
build their ^ouses of Wood, made up of Beams and Cross-pieces of Firr, laid and
joined one upon another, the vacuities being filled up with Moss; they are
covered with Barks of Trees, upon which they sometimes lay another covering of
Turffs, the better to defend themselves against the Injuries of the
Winter-Season. The Streets of the City of Musco are very spacious, and handsome
enough in dry Weather, but after the least Rain very dirty, and would for some
time of the Year be rendered quite unpassable, were it not for the great
quantity of Firr Posts, which being laid cross the Streets like a Bridge, serve
instead of a Pavement. The combustible Matter, of which their Houses are
composed, together with the carelessness and disorderly Housekeeping of the
Muscovites (they being much given to Drunkenness) makes their Houses very
subject to the mischances of Fire. In the City of Musco there are certain
Intervals left from place to place, and the sooner to quench the fury of the
Flames, the Guards and Watch in the Nightime carry Poll-axes, wherewith they
instantly break down the next adjoining Houses to those that are on fire.
Notwithstanding all these precautions, there is seldom a Week without some
damage done by Fire, which however the Muscovites are the less disturbed at, by
how much more common it is, and may be repaired without any considerable Loss
to the Owners; their Furniture consisting commonly of a few Benches only (which
also serve instead of Beds) and some Earthen or Wooden Dishes; And as for their
Houses, they are almost as soon repaired as lost, there being a certain Market
without the white Wall of this City, where at a very easy rate (Wood being so
over-plenty in this Country) they buy a House of what bigness they please,
ready built, which, in a little time is taken down, and transported to the
Place, where the other House stood before.

The whole Body of this great City is divided into four distinct Quarters or
Circuits. Musco divided into four Quarters.


The first, which the Muscovites call Cataygorod, or the Mid-City, Cataygorod,
or the Mid-City.
is situated in the center of the others, being divided from the rest by a
Brick Wall, called Cresne Stenna, or red Stone, and surrounded almost by the
two Rivers of Mosca and Neglina, the first passing by it on the South, and
joining with the latter on the North-side behind the Castle. The Castle of
Musco.
The Castle of the Grand Dukes, called Cremelena by the Russians, takes up near
one half of it, being at least two Miles in circumference, and very well
fortified with a triple strong Wall, very well mounted with Cannon, and
strengthened by a very good Ditch. The Palace it self stands at the further end
of the Castle, next adjoining to that of the Patriarch, being built of Stone
after the Italian manner, about Fifty Years ago; notwithstanding which, the
Czars used, during the Winter-Season, to eat and to sleep in some Apartments
made of Wood, as being less moist than the others. Besides that, there are
several Boyars, who have great Places at Court, and live within the Castle in
very fair Houses of Stone; there are several Convents of Monks and Nuns, and
near Fifty Churches and Chapels of Stone, the chiefest of which are those of
St. Mary's, St. Nicholas, and that of St. Michael, Famous for the Tombs of the
Great Dukes of Russia. Among a great many other Steeples, which adorn these
Churches, and are all covered with Copper, and large Crosses gilt on the top of
them, which ^eing burnished by the heat of the Sun, gives them (...)
Resemblance of Gold at a distance, two are most ^articularly worth taking
notice of, being both in ^he center of the Castle; The first, called Juan
^elike, or Great John, was built by Czar John Basi^vitz, standing by it self,
covered with Copper ^ilt, its height being computed to be near the same ^ith
that of St. Mark's in Venice. The second is ^nly Remarkable for its Great Bell,
which being ^ot to be managed, but by the hands of Thirty Men, (...) seldom
made use of, but on great Festivals, and (...) honor the Entrance or Audience
of a great Am^assador. There are also within the compass of ^e Castle kept
several of the Courts of Justice, ^e Exchequer, and the Grand Magazine of
Pro^^sion and Ammunition. Immediately without the ^ates of the Castle Walls, is
a very fair Church on ^^e South side, called St. Trinity, or Jerusalem, which
appeared so extraordinary a piece of Archi^^cture to that great Tyrant John
Basilovits, that, as soon as it was finished, he caused the Architect's Eyes to
be pulled out, to prevent his attempting any thing like it hereafter. The
Castle is faced by a very fair spacious Place, the chief Market of the whole
City, and place of Resort, not only for Buyers, but for Persons of all degrees,
eve^ (...) the very Slaves. The midst of it is taken up for the most part with
Sempstresses Shops, and, (...) store of other Women-Traders, who, (...) of
selling Rings, set with Rubies and (...) endeavor to vend their hidden (...).
But, what is the most regular and beautiful, is, that each particular Street
leading to this Marketplace, has a certain Trade allotted by it self, so that
the Merce^ does not intermingle with the Woollen-Draper, no^ the Linnen-Draper
with the Goldsmith, Furrie^, Tailor, or Shooemaker, but every Trade having its
proper Station, the Buyer may, with the greatest convenience in the World, in
an instant, cast his Eyes upon such Commodities, as will serve his occasion. It
ought not to be forgotten here, that the Painters have none of the meanest
Station among the rest here, for their Employment being to furnish the
Muscovites with the Images of Saints, they deal with their Chapmen by way of
Exchange, or Trucking, where they are sure to make their own Market; for a
Musc^vite looking upon it as a point of Conscience, to buy or bargain for a
Saint, seldom refuse^ the Painter's demand. The remaining part of this inner
Circuit or Quarter of the City is taken up with the Houses of the Principal
Merchants, besides th^se of some Kn^z and Muscovian Lords.

The Second Quarter, Czaargorod, or the Royal City.
which includes the First i^ a Semicircle, is called Czaargorod, or the City
Royal* the little River Neglina passes through it, being enclosed in a
particular Wall, called Biela Stenna, o^ the White Wall. Here is the Arsenal,
and the Place called Poggana, appointed for the Casting of Gun^ and Bells, in
which the Muscovites are not behind^ hand with any other European Artificers.
In th^^ part also live a great many Kn^z, Lords, and Gentlemen, besides a
prodigious number of Traders of all sorts; the rest is filled up with Butchers,
Bakers, Drinking-Houses, Corn-Chandlers, Meal-shops, and the Grand Duke's
Stables.

The Third Quarter, which running from the East all along the North-side to the
West, The Third Quarter of Musco, called Skoradom.
includes the Quarter of Czaargorod, is called Skoradom, the little River
Jagusa runs through it, and afterward falls into the River Mosca. In this
Quarter is the abovementioned place for selling and buying of Houses.

The Fourth and Last Circuit is that called Strelitza Slavoda, The fourth
Quarter, called ^trelitza Slavoda.
or the Suburbs of the Musketeers belonging to the Great Duke's Guards, who
have this part of the Town assigned them for their Place of Abode. It lies on
the other side of the River Mosca, Southly from that part of the City, called
Cataygorod; its Ramparts and Bastions being all of Wood, were designed against
the Irruptions of the Tartars.

Musco is inhabited not only by Muscovites, but also by a great number of
Tartars, Persians, and Greeks, the latter being most agreeable to the
Muscovites, both in Religion and Manners, are preferred by them before all
other Strangers. They allow nevertheless the public Exercise of Religious
Worship, not only to the Lutherans, and other Protestants, but also to the
Turks, Persians, and Tartars, except the Jews, and formerly the Roman
Catholics.

There is a large Slaboda or Suburb without the City Gate of Prokoski, The
Suburb called Nova Inasemska Slaboda.
called Nova Inasemska Slaboda, where most of the Foreign Christians live
together, every one according to their own Country Fashion, in which place the
Germans, English, and Dutch, etc. do most commonly reside. Besides the Grand
Duke's Palace and the Castle, that, which appears most beautiful to the Eyes of
Strangers, is the great number of Churches and Chapels in the City and Suburbs
of Musco, of which their being Two Thousond in number (every Lord having his
private Chapel, and each Street, one at least, some two or three) built of
Stone, and of a Circular Figure, whose Steeples being all covered with Copper,
make a most glorious glittering show at a distance, especially if you happen to
approach the Town in a bright Sun-shiny day.

The next City of Note in this Province, is called Columna, Columna.
situated on the right side of the River Mosca, about 70 English Miles distance
from the City of Musco by Land, it being near Sevenscore Miles by Water. It is
of a considerable bigness, and environed with a very fair Stone Wall and
Towers; (a thing not very common in Muscovy) it is the Residence of a Weywode,
or Russian Governor, which shows it to be one of the most considerable of the
Province. It is to be observed, that there is but one Bishop in all Muscovy,
who keeps his Residence in this City. But what is most Remarkable here, is,
that about three Miles above this Place near the Convent of Kolutin Serge
Monarstir, founded by one Sergius, (a great Saint among the Muscovites.) The
River Occa.
The Mosca falls into the River Occa, which coming from the South, is not only
much large^ and broader than the former, but having, beside^ that, on both
sides a Noble Country, very populou^ and fruitful, and a great number of fair
Oaks o^ both shores (which are looked upon as a Rarity (...) Muscovy) renders
it the most delightful in the World. Two days Journey from Columna, near the
Borders of the Province of Rhesan, is the City of Peresla or Preski, seated
upon the very Banks of the River Occa, at 42 Degrees 42 min. Elevation, being
governed by its particular Weywode or Governor. There are also in this
Province some other^ less considerable, which for brevity's sake we must pass
by in silence.

The second Province of the Southern Muscovy, (...) the Province of Werotin,
Werotin.
having borrowed its Name from the Capital City of the same Name; besides
which, it has two Cities more, the first called Croom, the latter Arvel, all
three of them so inconsiderable, as not to deserve a particular Description
here.

The third Province is, the Dukedom of Rhesan, betwixt the two Rivers of Don
and Occa, lying Southward from Muscovy, Rhesan.
from which it is divided by the River Aka, being one of the most fruitful
Provinces of all Muscovy, abounding in Wheat, Honey, Fish, and all manner of
Venison and Fowl Its Capital City is called likewise Rhesan, formerly a very
considerable Place, which had given its name to the whole Province; but was in
the Year 1568, totally destroyed, as was the greatest part of that Dukedom by
the Crim-Tartars. The Great Duke having taken into Consideration the Fertility
of the Country, all along the River Occa, which from thence extends its self to
that great Trench, which serves for a Fence against the irruptions of those
Barbarians on that side; and having got together, the dispersed Inhabitants,
and furnished them with Materials, he ordered the building of a new City, at
forty Miles distance from the former, which is called Peresla Resanski, because
a great many Inhabitants of the City of Peresla, heretofore mentioned, came
hither to settle themselves; Notwithstanding which, the old City of Rhesan,
retains to this day the Honor of being the Seat of an Archbishop. Besides
which, this Province has also the Cities of Domkagorod, Corsira and Tulla, the
latter being situated upon a River of the same Name.

The fourth is the Province of Wolodimer, Wol^dimer.
formerly the Chiefest of whole Muscovy. The Capital City had its name from its
first Founder, Prince Wolodimer, who lived in the Year 928, and was from ^hence
communicated to the whole Province, which ^e situated in the most fruitful
Country of all Mus^ovy, above 150 Miles Eastward from Musco, be^ween the two
Rivers of Occa and Wolga. This City, which is situated near the River Clesna,
was ^or a considerable time the Residence of the Great Dukes of Muscovy, till
the Imperial Seat was transferred to Musco by Prince Danilou Mich^elovits,
since which time, it is much decayed from its former Splendour, the Ruins of its
Walls and Houses, being undeniable demonstrations of its former Greatness. Unto
this Province are annexed the two Tartarian Principalities of Cassinou and
Mordwa; Cassinou and Mordwa.
The Capital City of the first is Cassinogord, situated on the right side of
the River Occa, as one comes from Musco, surrounded with a great many goodly
Villages and Monasteries, most pleasantly seated among the Woods. The chief
City of the second is Moruma, being inhabited partly by Muscovites, partly by
Tartars; but altogether under the Subjection of the Grand Duke. It is situated
on the left side of the River Occa; the River Clesna, which comes from
Wolodimer, falls into it, at about 10 or 12 Miles distance.

The fifth Province is Nisenovogorod, Nis^^ovogorod.
having received its Name, (as most others in this Country) from its Capital
City, called Nisenovogorod: Th^^ City being built at the conflux of the two
Gre^ Rivers Occa and Wolga, at 56 degrees 28 min. ne^^ 500 Miles distant from
the City of Musco by Land, and above 700 by Water, received its Name from the
Famous City of Novogorod, the Inhabi^ants (...) which were by Order from the
Great Duke Bas^^^* translated to this Place. It is true, it falls far sho^^ in
bigness of what the City of Novogorod was (...) former Ages; nevertheless it
has very strong Towers and Walls of Stone, and the Suburbs exceed (...) bigness
the City it self, being near three Miles (...) circumference, and inhabited by
Tartars, Muscovites, and some Dutch, the most of them Merchants; the latter of
which have here a Protesta^^ Church, whereas the City is for the most part take
up with Military Officers, Victuallers, Sutlers, and^^ being all under the
Government of a Weywode. The next City in this Province is Basiligorod, built
like wise by the Great Duke Basili, (who gave it (...) Name) and made it a
Frontier-place against the Incursions of the Tartars, called Ceremisses, of
who^ we shall have occasion to speak immediately; It (...) situated at 55 degrees.
51 min. at the foot of a Mountain, on the right side of the Volga (to reckon
from its source, the same being to be understood from all the other places
mentioned in this Treatise) at the falling in of the small River Sura,
heretofore the common Boundary betwixt the Muscovites and the Tartars of Casan.
Since the Muscovites have extended their Conquests over the Tartars on that
side, even to the Caspian Sea, this place has been neglected, its Walls being
quite ruined, and its Edifices altogether of Wood, it resembles now more a
great Village than a City.

The Tartars Ceremisses, The Tartars Ceremisses.
whom we mentioned just now, having their Habitation on both sides of the River
Wolga, betwixt this place and the Kingdom of Casan, it will not be amiss to
give a short Account of them in this Place. They are a Nation barbarous,
treacherous, and cruel, living upon Robbery, and addicted to Sorcery. Their
Food is Honey, and wild Fowl they take in the Woods, and Milk which their
Pastures furnish them with, they (...) not inhabit Houses, but most wretched
Huts. Those that live on the right side of the River Wol^a, are called Nagorni,
or Mountaineers, as those ^nhabiting on the left side, are called Lugoivi, from
their Meadows, which supply them on both ^ides of the River with Hay. They are,
generally ^peaking, Heathens, using neither Circumcision ^or Baptism. They give
a Child its Name from ^he first Person they meet that Day, when this ^eremony
is to be performed, which is six Months after its Birth. They acknowledge an
Immortal ^od, the Author of all Good, who ought to be ^dor'd, but ridicule the
Immortality of the Soul. ^ho' they do not believe a Hell, they dread the ^evil,
as the Author of all their Misfortunes, whom therefore they pretend to appease
with Sa^ifices. Their chief Devotion and Pilgrimages, which they do to the
Devil, is performed at a place, ^^lled Nemda, amongst the Fenns, where every
body (...) obliged to carry a Present. When they Offer ^^eir Sacrifices to God,
they kill a Horse, an Ox, or a Sheep, some of the Flesh thereof, being roasted,
and put into a Dish, and holding in the other Hand another Vessel filled with
Hydromel, or some other Liquor, both is cast into a Fire made for that purpose,
before the Skin of the Creature that is Sacrificed, being extended upon a Pole,
laid a cros^ two Trees. This Skin they adore in order to interceed for them
with God, unto whom they also make sometimes their Address, the whole Subject
of their Devotion tending to some Convenience (...) another of this Life, but
most commonly to the augmenting the number of their Cattle. They pay a great
Veneration, even to Adoration, to the Su^ and Moon, whom they believe the
Authors of the Productions of the Earth. They make use of no Churches, Priests
or Books, their Sacrifices and other religious Exercises, being performed near
some Torrent or another. Polygamy is used among^ them, even so as to Marry two
or three Sisters at (...) time. Their Women and Maids are all wrapped up i^ a
piece of coarse white Cloth, scarce any thing being to be seen but their
Faces; The Men wear a lon^ Coat, made of Linen Cloth, under which th^^ wear
Breeches; they all shave their Heads; the young Men, who are unmarried, leaving
howeve^ for distinctions sake, a long Tress of Hair, hangi^^ upon their Back.
Their Language is peculiar (...) themselves, having no relation with that of
the ^ther Neighboring Tartars, or with the Turkish (...) Muscovian Languages,
tho some of them, that a^^ conversant with the Muscovites, have attained so^^
knowledge of their Tongue. But it is time to return to the Description of the
five remaining Provinces of the Southern Muscovy, which being mu^^ less
considerable than those we have described before, we will treat of with all the
brevity imaginable, scarce any thing but the Names of their (...) Places being
to be known by Foreigners.

The sixth therefore is the Province of Jarostve (...) Jarostaf, Jarostaf.
having, besides its Capital City of the sam^ Name, two Cities, called Ri^iena
and Nova Rom^

The seventh is Susdal, Susdal.
having also borrowed its Name from its Capital City of that Name, which (...)
also the Seat of an Archbishop; besides which, (...) contains the Towns of
Jorgowitz and Castro^mow.

The Eighth is called Rosthou, Ro^thou.
its Capital City is Vglitz. These three Dukedoms were for a considerable time
appropriated to the use of, and enjoyed by the younger Brothers of Muscovy,
till under the Reign of John Basilovitz, viz. in the Year 1565. they were
reunited to the Crown of Muscovy.

North-east of the City of Musco is the Ninth Province belonging to the
Southern Muscovy, Twere.
cal^ed Twere; it has received its Name from the Capital City Twere* as the
latter is indebted for its Name to the River Twere, which, together with ^he
River of Volga passes by it, the City being si^uated at the side of a Hill.
About Forty Miles from hence more to the North, is another Town, ^alled
Torsock, built likewise on the descent of a ^ill, not altogether so big as
Twere, but surrounded ^ith Ramparts and Bastions of Wood. Both of ^^em have
their particular Weywode o^ Governor.

The tenth and last of these Provinces is Roshovie, Roshovie.
^aving not any thing Remarkable but its Capital City ^f that Name, if it were
not for the three famous ^ivers of Volga, the Dwina, and the Boristhenes, which
have their rise in this Province.

CHAP. III.
Of the Northern Provinces of Muscovy.
THE Northern Provinces of Muscovy being divided into those which border upon
Sweden, and those bordering upon Tartary, Muscovi^^ Lapland.
we will begin with the first; where the Muscovian Lapland offers it self to
our consideration: It is subdivided into three lesser Provinces; the first,
called Mouremankois, has the Cities of Kola, the Capital of the Province, and
Swanchet. The second, called Terskoi, where is the City of Jokena, and
Polin-os^ro. The third, called Bellamoresko, contains the Cities of Kondulatz,
Omay, and Komi.

The Second in Order of the great Northern Provinces belonging to Muscovy, is
the Province of Dwina, Dwina.
having derived its Name from the River Duina, which having its rise at the
conflux of the Rivers of Jagel and Sachona, falls into the White Sea near the
City of Archangel. This Province being the greatest and most Northern on the
Swedi^^ side of Muscovy, was in former Ages subject to the Dukes of Novogorod,
and had but one City, calle^ Duina, in the very center of it; But since the
English, Dutch, and Hanseatick Towns removed the^ Traffic from the City of
Narva to Archangel, the Province is become one of the most considerab^^ of the
Russian Empire, as the City of Archang^^ is now the Staple of the whole
Continent of M^^scovy, by reason of its safe and commodious H^^bour.

The City of Archangel, or St. Michael Archan^^^ an Archbishop's Seat, Archangel
and now the Capital of (...) Province, is situated at the Mouth of the Ri^^^
Duina on the left side as you enter it from the W^^^ Sea, where it makes the
Island of Podesemski. (...) none of the largest, but withal so populous, that
no other place in whole Muscovy is comparable to it, by reason of the great
concourse of Merchants which flock thither from the circum^acent Provinces, to
truck their Commodities, which consist in Corn, Caviarr, Furrs, Hemp, Russia
Leather and Wax, against Cloth, Velvets, Damask, Spices, Tin, Lead, Wine, and
Strong Water, imported by the English, Dutch, and Hamburghers; so, that
sometimes 300 or 400 Ships are to be seen of several Nations in the Port of
Archangel, the Customs of which are said to amount Yearly to near 200000 l.
Sterling. It is above Sevenscore Years ago since the English began to remove
their Trade from Narva to this place. For, King Edward VI. having set out a
Fleet for the establishing a Trade in some unknown Country, they having
followed the Northern Passage, were at last brought into the Port of Archangel;
John Basilovitz, the then Grand Czar of Muscovy, being very desirous to draw
the English Traffic thither, ^o encourage their Undertaking, granted them a
Privilege of Commerce without any Custom or Impost; so, that in the Year 1555.
the English settled a Company there, under the Direction of one Mr.
Killingworth, and the Muscovy Trade has been ever since continued from that
place, to the great Advantage of the English Nation; though at the same time, it
cannot be denied, but that, since the Year 1591. when the Town became a Mart,
the Dutch and Hamburghers have interfered with the English in their Commerce.
It has a considerable Castle, which was built in the Year 1506. and the Town
being for the most part reduced to Ashes in the Year 1663. is since that time
restored to a more flourishing condition than before. In the Gulf which the
Sea makes near the Mouth of the beforementioned River Dwina, there are three
small Islands, called Soloska, Anger, and Colova; the first whereof was
heretofore Famous for the Sepulcher of a Muscovian Saint, whose Body was about
Fifty Years ago translated from thence to the City of Musco. Besides this and
the beforementioned City of Dwina, St. Nicholas, Lapas, and Korela, are the
most worth taking notice of in this Country.

The next considerable in Rank, though not in Order, Pleskou.
of these Northern Provinces, is the Dukedom of Pleskou, having taken its Name
from its Capital City called Pleskou; The Muscovites call it Pskou, from a Lake
about two or three Miles distant from it, from whence arises a River of the
same name, which runs by the City, and has communicated its Name not only to
this City, but the whole Province. Both the City and Duchy were formerly
governed by their own Princes, till in the Year 1509. the Great Duke John
Basilovits reunited both to the Crown of Muscovy. The Town is not extraordinary
large, but very convenient and pleasant, by reason of the nearness of the
River, and the Lake. It has besides this two Cities more, called Ostrow and
Opolsko.

The Province of Wologda, Wologda.
which sometime belonged to the Dukes of Novogorod, is since reunited to the
Crown of Muscovy; its Capital City has the same Name with the Province, both of
them having borrowed their Names from the River Vologda, which having its rise
near the famous City of Novogorod Veliki, disembogues in the Baltic Sea. The
City of Wologda, or Vologda, is one of the most considerable in those Parts,
not only by reason of its bigness and strength, being surrounded with a very
strong Wall, but also of its Commerce. It is situated on the left Shore of the
River Sucagna, raised upon the very Banks of it, which River running by Tetma
and Vstiga, runs some Miles below the latter into the abovementioned River
Dwina, which renders it very convenient for Trading, and consequently very
populous. There are two Cities more in this Province, called Socsoa, and
St^litz.

The Province of Vstiugha, Ustiugha.
lying betwixt the Provinces of Dwina and Wologda, was also subject to the
Dukes of Novogorod, till, like all the rest in those Parts, it was united to
the Crown of Muscovy. The Capital City here is likewise called Vstiugha, from
the Word Vst, which signifies as much as the Latin Word Ostium, or the Mouth of
a River, and Jugh; it being not far distant from the conflux of the River Jugh
and Sucagna, built upon the very Banks of the latter, which at some Miles below
this place exo^erates it self in the River Dwina, as we have m^n^ioned before.
It has its own Weywode or Governor. This Province is famous for the best black
Foxes it affords, above all others in Muscovy. It has two Cities more, called
Kollas, and Dobri^a.

The next Province, both for Rank and Situation, is Novogorod Veliki, No^ogorod
Veliki*
owing its Name to its Capital City, likewise called Novogorod Veliki. It is
seated in a very fair spacious Plain, at 58 degrees 23 min. Elevation, upon the
Wologda, or Vologda (a River different from the Volga.) The River Vologda.
The River Vologda has its rise out of the Lake of Ilmen, about three Miles
above this City, from whence, crossing the Lake of Ladoga, it passes in its way
through the River Niova, the Boundary betwixt Muscovy and Sweden on that side,
near the City of Noteburgh, till at last, by the Gulf of Finland it exonerates
it self into the Baltic Sea. This River is of great Advantage to this City,
affording not only great store of all sorts of most excellent Fish at a very
cheap rate, but also, being Navigable from its very source, and the Country
round about very fruitful, abounding in Wheat, Flax, Hemp, Wax, and Honey, but
especially in Russia Leather, which is looked upon here to be better dressed
than in any other part of Muscovy, makes this City to be reputed one of the
chief Trading Cities in the whole Empire. It was in former Ages governed by its
own Princes, who having extended their Conquests over several of the adjacent
Provinces, as has been mentioned before, this City was looked upon as one of
the most Potent and celebrated of Europe, so that it was grown into a Proverb
in those Parts: Who can oppose God, and the Great City of Novogorod? The
Hanseatick Towns had in those days an Office of Address in this City, so that
it was not only frequented by the Livonians and Muscovites, but also by the
Danes, Germans, and Swedes. It was Surnamed Veliki, which signifies Great,
there having been some who have compared it for greatness with Rome it self.
It Is true, they have in this much over-shot the Mark, nevertheless the great
extent of the Ruins of the Ancient Walls, and the number of its Steeples yet
remaining, are sufficient Proofs of its fo^mer Glory, and that its present
condition falls incomparably short of what it was before its destruction, the
City being now only surrounded with a Wooden Wall, and the Houses built of the
same Materials. The first that put a stop to the Grandeur of this Place, was
Vithold, Great Duke of Lithuania, and at that time General of the Polish Army,
who, in the Year 1427. obliged it to pay a considerable Tribute to that Crown.
About Fifty Years after, the Great Duke of Muscovy, John Basili Grotsdin,
famous for his Ty^anny, after a War of Seven Years, having defeated their Army
in the Year 1477. forced them to do him ^omage, and to receive a Muscovian
Governor, and soon after put a fatal period to this Great and Po^ent City.
For, having considered with himself, that its Inhabitants would not fail to
take hold of the first Opportunity to recover their Liberty, went thither in
Person, under pretense of establishing the Greek Religion, which he pretended
to be in danger by the contrivances of the Roman Catholics, being encouraged
in his Design by Theophilus, the then Archbishop of the City, he had no sooner
entered the City, but it was, by his Order, pillaged, and the Inhabitants
transported from thence into other places of Muscovy, but especially to
Nise-Novogorod, which we have spoke of before, in whose stead he planted there
a Colony of Muscovites. The Booty which he got there was incredible, having,
besides all sorts of Rich Stuffs, and other sumptuous Movables, carried away
Three Hundred Wagons loaded with Gold, Silver, and Jewels. About Fourscore
Years after, Viz. in the Year 1569. the then Great Duke of Muscovy, John
Basilowitz, having conceived the same Suspicion, entered the City with an Army,
and after he had caused an infinite number of People to be trampled to Death by
the Horses Feet, and some Thousands killed by the Sword, such a multitude of
dead Bodies were thrown into the River Wolgda, that its Current being stopped,
the Neighboring Fields were overflown round about the Town. The stench of the
dead Carcasses caused such an Infection in the Air, that, what had escaped the
Fury of the Soldiers, was destroyed either by the Plague or Famine, no body
daring to venture to carry thither any Provisions; But that which was the most
inhumane of all, was, that even the few remnants that had escaped his former
Cruelty, the Plague, and Famine, (having fed upon dead Carcasses) were at last
all cut to pieces by the Tyrant's Soldiers. Notwithstanding all these
Calamities sustained, its advantageous Situation for Commerce, has, in process
of time, drawn thither a considerable number of new Inhabitants, by whose
Industry it is brought into that State it appears now, which, though it must only
be looked upon as a mere Shadow of that great Body, it represented in former
Ages, nevertheless, next to the City of Archangel, it may pass for one of the
most considerable Trading Towns in those Parts. For, besides the Wooden
Fortifications, we have mentioned before, it has a Castle on the other side of
the River, opposite to the City, and joined to it by a Bridge; This Castle is
surrounded by a strong Stone Wall, being the Residence both of the Weywode and
the Metropolitan, who has the Management of Ecclesiastical Affairs over this
Province. Over against this Castle, on the same side of the River with the
City, is a Monastery, dedicated to St. Anthony; The Muscovites relate most
surprising Miracles of this Saint, among the rest they show a great Millstone
lying against the Wall of the Convent, upon which, they say, St. Anthony
performed his Voyage from Rome to Novogorod; Viz. by going down the Tiber; This
Stone Ship having carried him (if any body will believe it) over the Seas, from
the Mediterranean to the Baltic, where he went up the Volgda, and at last took
up his (...) Nov^gorod. There is another Monastery (...) Place, called Perumiki
Monastir, what they (...) of it, as it appea^^ m^re c^e^ible, so it ought not
to be passed by (...). It is related, that before Novogorod and the ad^^^ent
places were converted to the Christian (...), these Pagans used to Sacrifice to
a certain Idol, called Perun, or the God of Fire, Perun signifying in the
Muscovian Language, as much as Fire. This Idol was represented with a
Thunder-bol^ in his hand, near which was kept a constant Fire of Oak, which was
never to go out, at the peril of their Lives, who had the charge of it. After
the Inhabitants had embraced Christianity, the Idol was thrown into the River,
its Temple razed, and this Convent built on the same place where the Temple of
the Idol stood before. There is also in this Province the City of Ladoga,
situated on this side of the Lake Ladoga, (from whence it has its Name) which
is there-abouts near Threescore Miles broad; and, on the other side of it, at
about 80 Miles distance, the City of Laba, the utmost Frontier-Town of the
Muscovites on that side. About seven Miles on this side of Ladoga, in the River
Wolgda, there is a most dangerous Cataract or fall of Water among (...) Rocks,
and at six Miles thence another, not far from the Monastery called Nicolai
Nepostitz, where the Water runs with such violence, that a Hundred Men scarce
are able to draw a laden Boat up the River, and often are cast away in either
of these two places.

Next to the Province of Novogorod, something more Northward, Bela Osera
is the Duchy of Bela Osera, a Province so full of Woods, Rivers, and Fenns,
that it is scarce accessible, except in Winter, when the Rivers and Fenns are
frozen; Its Capital City being of the same Name with the Province; Besides
which, it has the Cities of Stara Russo, Glebowa, and Grodsesko.

The Province of Kargapol, Kargapol.
bordering upon this to the North-West, has nothing Remarkable but its Capital
City, which has given the Name to the Province.

To the South-West of it is the Dukedom of Smolensko, Smolensko
it borders on the South upon the Province of Severia, to the East, upon
Muscovy, properly so called, on the West is Lithuania, and to the North the
Province of Novogorod Veliki and Livonia. Its Capital City is likewise called
Smolensko (having communicated its Name to the Province) seated upon the River
Boristhenes, The River Boristhenes.
or Ni^per. This River rises in the Province of Ros^hovie, near a Village
called Dmiepersko, about Fifty Leagues from the Lake of Fronowe (the first
source of the River Volga) and after it has taken its course Southward, it
turns near Wiesma toward the East* by the Cities of Prohobus, Smolensko,
Orsha, Dubrowna, and Mohilow, from whence it returns again to the South, and
passing by Kiovi^ near the Cyrcasses (quite different from the Circassian
Tartars) and thence to the City of Otzakow, belonging to the Precopian Tartars,
it falls into the Euxine Sea. At the very bank of this River is a
well-fortified Citadel, with a very good Ditch, and a Noble Counterscarp well
pallisado'd, belonging to the City of Smolensko; but the City it self has but a
single Wall without a Ditch. The Muscovites took it from the Poles in the Year
1514. But was recovered near a ^undred Years after by the Poles, under their
King Sigismund. In the Year 1633. the Great Duke Michael Federovits besieged ^t
with an Army of above 100000 Men, Si^e of Smolensko
among whom were several Thousand Germans, besides a considerable number of
Muscovites, disciplined after the German way, and commanded by German, English,
Scots, and French Officers, with a vast Train of Artillery, consisting of 300
Cannon, and all other things requisite to carry on the Siege with the utmost
vigor; under the Command of a Polander, called Herman Slein, who had been
rebaptized in Muscovy, and by his Treachery (as it was supposed) lost the whole
Army. For, the Germans having soon made a Breach in the Wall, were for giving
an Assault, which being opposed by the General, they were seconded by the rest
of the Foreign Officers; whereupon, having mounted the Breach, they were very
near Masters of it, when the General, turning his Cannon against them, forced
them to retreat, alleging, that it was not for the Honor of his Czarish
Majesty, that a handful of Foreigners should carry away the Glory of the Siege.
In the mean while the King of Poland having gathered a Body of Five or Six
Thousand Poles, posted his Forces on several Avenues which led to the Muscovian
Camp, by which they must of necessity receive their Provision, without the
least Opposition made by the Muscovites, (who, without much difficulty, might
have prevented the Poles) so, that having sufficient leisure given them to
Fortify themselves, the Muscovian Army was in a little time reduced to that
Extremity, for want of Provisions, that their General (who never so much as
attempted to force the Poles out of their Posts) was forced to make a shameful
Capitulation for himself and the whole Army, with all the Artillery and
Baggage, to Surrender at Discretion, and to leave sufficient Hostages for the
Ransom of all the Officers and Soldiers, which was accordingly paid by the
Great Duke. The General, relying upon the Favor of the Archbishop, and some
other great Men at Court, who were suspected to have had a hand in this
Treachery, returned to Musco, not without hopes of being protected against what
the Officers might lay to his charge. But both the People and Soldiers being so
incensed against him, that every thing seemed to tend to a general
Insurrection, his Head was in the Year next following, cut off in the
Marketplace before the Castle, where also his Son, who had a considerable
Command under his Father, in the Siege, was stripped stark naked, and whipped to
Death, and the nearest of his Relations banished into Siberia. Notwithstanding
this Disgrace, the Successor of Michael Federovitz, Czar Alexis Michaelovitz,
took it from the Poles by composition, in the Year 1654. Since which time the
Muscovites remain in possession of it. Besides the City of Smolensko, it has
the Cities of Prohobus, situated upon the Nieper; W^sma, seated upon a River of
the same name, Mosaysko and Niewieltz.

Siberie or Severia (a Province different from the Kingdom of Siberia in
Tartary) is of a very large extent, Severia.
being formerly Governed by its own Princes, who were nevertheless tributary to
the Kings of Poland, upon the account of Lithuania, of which this Dukedom had a
Dependence. It is situated betwixt the Province of Smolensko, the Precopian
Tartary, Podolia and Lithuania, South-west of Smolensko. The Prince of Siberie
having revolted from the Crown of Poland, under Casimir, Son of Jagellon their
King, put himself under the Protection of the Czars of Muscovy, till the Great
Duke Basili ejected the Duke of Siberie, and united the Province to his Crown.
The chief City of this Duchy is called Novogorod Sieberski, that is to say,
The new City of Siberia, to distinguish it from two or three others, called
Novogorod, under the Czar's obedience. The other Cities of note belonging to
this Province are: Czerrigou, Bransko, Starodub and Petivola. But now we must
turn our Course more North-East, Wiatka^
where the Province of Wiatka is situated upon the Confines of the Tartars
Ceremisses, sirnam'd Logovi; its Capital City is of the same Name, both of them
being denominated from the River Wiatka, which falls into the River Kama.

The next Province bordering upon Wiatka, toward the Siberian Tartars, is
Permia, being counted one of the greatest of Muscovy. Its Capital City is
called, Permia Veliki, situate upon the River Vishora, which at about 60 Miles
distance from this place, The River Kama.
falls into the River Kama. This River has its rise in this Province, and about
60 miles beyond Casan, falls into the River Volga. The Inhabitants of this
Province have a Language and Character peculiar to themselves; they eat no
Bread, but feed upon Herbs; they pay their yearly Tribute to the Great Duke, in
Horses and Furs. Their next Neighbors to the North-East, are the Tartars of
Tumen, bordering upon Siberia, inhabiting the Province of Candora; Candora.
its chief City is Warchaturia, situated upon the River Tura; besides which, it
has the City of Tumen, near the conflux of the two Rivers Tumen and Tura.

Further to the North is the Province Petzora, Petzora.
which extends it self toward the North-East, all along the Frozen Sea. The
River of Petzora (which has given its name to the Province) falls by six
several Channels into the Sea, near a little City, called, Pustiziero. On both
sides of it are the Mountains, The Riphean Mountains
which the Ancients called Ripheans or Hyberboreans, and by the Muscovites, are
called Zimnopojas, that is the Girdle of the Earth, which afford the best
Sables and Hawks in all Muscovy, but the cold is so violent and durable in this
Province, that the Rivers are frozen up above nine Months in the year.

The Province of Obdorie, Obdorie.
derives its name from the River Oby, which having its Source from the Great
Lake Cataisko, and running from East to North, The River Oby.
falls into the Frozen Sea. Both these Provinces border upon the Samojedes, of
whom we shall have occasion to speak more hereafter.

Among the Northern parts of Russia, Juhora.
are also reckoned: The Province of Juhora, famous for nothing, but that the
Hungarians are said to have their offspring out of this Country.

The Province of Wachines, Wachines
only noted for its two Fortresses, called Cameni and Pensolog. The
Principality of Bielski, Bielski.
derives its name from the Capital City, Biela.

The Duchy of Kraina has the two Cities, Kraina.
Jalatz and Brasowa.

The Province of Pole, Pole.
the City of Bretock and Bogenaer; Not to mention here the Pa^atinate of Kiow,
Kiow.
which lying upon the Borders of Podolia and Lithuania, (...) part of it is
under the Obedience of the Crown of Poland.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Tartarian Kingdoms of Casan and Astrachan, with an Account of the Great
River Volga, and the Caspian Sea.
THE Kingdoms of Casar and Astrachan, with some other Tartarian Provinces,
under the Subjection of the Czar of Muscovy, The River Volga.
being situated near the famous River Volga; it will not be amiss to join the
Description of those Countries with that of the said River.

There is in the Province of Roshovie, (of which mention has been made in the 2
Chapter) Ten miles from its Capital City, bearing the same Name, in the Great
Forest of Wolkowskiles, a Lake, called Vronow, or Fronowo, out of which rises a
River, that, ten Miles from that Place, falls into another Lake, called Volga,
which gives it its name, it being thence forward, called Volga or Wolga; It is
doubtless, the same which Ptolomy calls Rha, and the Tartars, Edel; the
greatest River in Europe, being from its Source to the Caspian Sea, into which
it exonerates it self, above 2900 Miles long. It is to be observed, that this
River, from its Source to the City of Nise Novogorod, running for above 400
Miles through the Southern part of Muscovy, carries but an indifferent Stream,
and touches upon few places of note, till being increased by the River Occa,
near the abovementioned place, it is Four thousand five hundred Geometrical
feet wide, at the meeting of these two Rivers. We have in the foregoing Chapter
described that City, and Basiligorod, belonging to the Ceremisses, both
bordering upon that River; and being obliged to give an acco^^^ in this Chapter
of the Tartarian Provinces of Casan and Astrachan, we will follow the Tract of
this great River as far as ^o the Caspian Sea, and begin with the Tartarian
Kingdom of Casan.

Forty miles distant from the City of Basiligorod, The Kingdom of Casan.
is the City of Kusmademianski, situate at the foot of a Mountain, on the right
side of the River, the whole Country thereabouts being like one continued
Forest of Elms of an extraordinary compass. Forty miles further down the River,
and on the same Shore, is the City of Sabakzar, the most pleasant for its
Situation in those Parts; and 25 Miles lower, after you have passed two or
three small Islands, on the left side of the Volga, a little City, called
Kockshage. On the same side, some Miles lower, is the City of Suiatski, built
on the A^cent of a Hill. The Castle and some Churches are of Stone, the rest of
the Buildings and Fortifications, of Wood. It (...) 20 Miles on this side of
the City of Casan, the Shore all along betwixt these two places, being covered
with chalky and Sandy Mountains.

The City of Casan is seated in a fruitful Plain, The City of Casan.
in 55 degree 38 min. Elev. seven Miles distant from the River Wolga, upon the
River Casanska, which has given the name both to the City and Province. It is a
very large City, but its Houses and Fortifications (as most all others in those
parts) of Wood. But the Castle and its Fortifications, which consist in four
Bastions, and a good many Towers, is of Stone, the River serving for a Ditch
about it. The Garrison is composed of Muscovites only, under their own Weywode,
but the City is inhabited both by Tartars and Muscovites, who have their own
Governor. The Province of Casan lies on the left side of the River Volga,
bordering to the East upon Astrachan, to the North upon the Siberian Tartars.
It was heretofore Subject to the Cham of Tartary, till it was conquered by the
Muscovites, in the following Manner:

The Great Duke Basili Ivanovits (Father to that famous Tyrant Ivan Basilovits)
after a signal Victory obtained over these Tartars, The Conquest of Casan.
had constituted one Sheale their Governor, against, whom, with the assistance
of the Crim Tartars, they made an Insurrection, and forced him out of the
Country; Flushed with this Success, they marched into the Southern Muscovy,
under the conduct of two Brothers, Mendligeri and Sapgeri, who forced the
Muscovites, that were Encamped near the River Occa, to Retreat under
Noviogorod. There being nothing in their way to stop their March to the City of
Musco, the same was besieged, taken, and plundered; and the Castle also forced
to capitulate (being first reduced to the utmost extremity) upon very hard
conditions, viz. That the Great Duke and his Subjects should be Tributaries to
them for ever; and as a Sign of this their Subjection, the Great Duke should be
obliged to smite his Head before the Statue of Mendligeri, erected for that
purpose in the Market place of the City, as often as the Tribute should be paid
to the Tartars. The Great Duke having been forced by an unavoidable necessity
to confirm these Articles by his Letters Patents, the two Brothers parted,
Sapgeri choosing Casan for the Seat of his Empire, Mendligeri, being the Elder,
the City of Crim. But, the latter having in view no less than the Conquest of
the whole Muscovy, marched soon after against the City of Rhesan, and having
summoned John Kowar, the Weywode of the Castle, to surrender, unto whom he
represented how the Great Duke his Master, was become his Subject; the
Governor pretending to be quite ignorant of the Matter, desired that some more
satisfactory Proof might be given him, before he could resolve upon a
Capitulation. Mendligeri imagining, that nothing could be more convincing than
the Great Duke's own Letters Patents, sent them to the Governor, who extremely
glad of having got so favorable an opportunity, to recover, by this Stratagem,
the Great Duke's original Letters, sent word to the Besiegers, that he was
resolved to keep both the Letters and Castle to the last drop of Blood. Neither
was he behind hand in his Promises, but with the Assistance of a certain
Italian Connoneer, he so Galled the Tartars, that having forced them to Retreat
from before the Town and Castle, he sent the Letters to the Court of the Great
Duke. The people being overjoyed at so lucky and unexpected an Accident, broke
down the Statue; and the Czar taking Courage by the Example of his Subjects,
besieged the City of Casan; but, after much Blood shed on both sides, was
forced to raise the Siege. After the Death of the Great Duke Basili Ivanovitz,
his Son, John Basilovitz, being desirous to revenge the Affront his Father had
received before Casan, began his Reign with the Siege of that City. The place
was for the space of two Months, battered furiously, when he offered them very
advantageous Conditions, which they having refused in hopes of Succor from the
Crim Tartars, the Great Duke, not to loose Time, ordered his Mines to be
sprung, which succeeded so well, that a vast Number of Tartars were buried in
their own Ruins; During this Consternation, the General Assault was given, and
the Place carried by Storm, the 9th of July, in the Year 1552. not without a
great Slaughter, the Tartars defending themselves with the utmost Bravery, in
two several Retrenchments within the City, after the Enemy had made themselves
Masters of the Breach; and, at last, seeing all past Recovery, they forced
their Way out of one of the Gates, through the Muscovian Camp, and got on the
other side of the River Casanska. The Czar knowing the Importance of the Place,
which made him Master of the whole Province, ordered immediately the Breaches
to be Repaired, and some considerable Additions to be made to the Castle; ever
since which, it has remained in the Possession of the Muscovites, the Tartars,
who are allowed to live in the City, not daring, under severe Punishments, to
set a foot between the Walls of the Castle. The Country hereabouts is extremely
fertile, especially of all sorts of Fruit, Melons growing there of an
extraordinary Taste, coming in bigness near to our Pompions, but not very
populous, by reason of the frequent Incursions of the Cosacks.

It is to be observed, that the course of the River Wolga, The course of the
River Volga
from the City of Nise Novogorod to Casan, is East and South Eastward, but
from thence to the City of Astrachan, and so further to the Caspian Sea; its
current runs from North to South.

About 60 Miles below Casan, the River Kama, coming North-East out of the
Province of Permia, The River Kama.
falls on the left side into the River Wolga, and about 30 Miles lower the
River Zerdick, being a branch of the River Kama, falls also into the same
River. At about 30 Miles distance from hence is situate, on a little Ascent,
the City of Tetus, on the right side of the Shore, resembling, by its
disorderly Buildings, rather a great Village, than a City.

Twenty five Miles lower, not many Miles from the opposite Shore of the River
Wolga, is the River Vtka, which rises near the City of Bulgar, The Province of
Bulgar.
the capital of a Tartarian Province, to which it had given its name.

Some Miles lower is an Island, called Staritzza, being above 15 Miles long,
and not far below this the Ruins of a considerable City among the Tartars,
called Vrenoskora. It is a place very delightful for its Situation, and famous
to this day, for the Burying of one of their Saints, to whom they pay a great
deal of Devotion.

A good many Miles lower, at the right side of the River Volga, are likewise to
be seen the Ruins of two other great Cities, not far distant from one another,
very pleasantly seated near the River side; the first was called Simberska
Gora, the second Arbeuchim, from an adjacent Mountain, that retains the same
name to this day; they were both destroyed by Tamerlan, being situate under the
53 degrees. El^v. The River Wolga is hereabouts (as most all along from its very
Source to the Caspian Sea) full of Sand-banks and small Islands, which lying
scattered up and down on both Shoars, render its passage very difficult, and
sometimes unpassable for Vessels of great Burden, who are obliged to go for
the most part in the Months of May and June, when, by (...) of the Snow being
melted, and the Rivers, which fall into it, being thaw^d, the Waters of (...)
River swell up to an extraordinary hight; so, (...) often they afford a passage
to the Boats over the (...) Islands. The River Volga contains a prodigious
Store of Fish, of all Sorts, (a very good Commodity in Mus^ovy, by reason of
the great number of their Fast-days) which both the Tartars and Muscovites
catch with a Cord, but in a different manner. The Tartars fasten to the end of
a long Cord a pretty big Stone, which sinks to the bottom, several great pieces
of Wood being fastn'd to the other end, (...).
which swim upon the Water. All along this great Cord, many littles ones are
fastn'd, at some distance from one another, each of these has at the end a
good^ook, baited with a certain Fish, which they know the rest to be greedy of,
by which Invention they catch often Fish of ten, twelve, and more foot long.
The Muscovites take also a Cord, with a ^ook fastn'd to the end of it; this
Cord is ty^d about a piece of a well plain^d Board, tinned over, its ^igness
about 4 or 5 Inches square, which being dragg^d behind a Boat by the reflection
of the Sun, resembles the Scales of Fish, by which means they draw up Fish of a
very great seize to the Bait and into the Snare. Among other Fish, wherewith
this River abounds, the Sturgeon is none of the least considerable, whose Eggs
afford that Ragout, which the Italians call Cavayar, (...).
and the Muscovites, (...); the Eggs are put into a Paste, being prepared 10 or
12 days with Salt; This Commodity affords a considerable Trade to Muscovy,
being exported from thence to all Parts of Europe, where it is looked upon as
the best of this kind, for which reason, the Czar keeps this Trade to himself.

Some Miles below the abovementioned ruined places, the Shore on both sides of
the River is very Mountainous, yet not ^o, but that the Valleys afford very
pleasant Pastures. The first that appears on the right hand is a Mountain, out
of which the Muscovites get great store of Salt, which being prepared in
certain Huts at the foot of the Mountain, is sent from thence by the River to
M^s^o. Almost opposite to this is another Mountain, at the foot of which, the
River Vssa falls into the Wolga; On both sides are very fine Meadows, bordering
upon the Shore, but at some distance from thence are very thick Woods, a place
of retreat for the Cosacks, which makes it very dangerous for Travellors. Below
this lies the Mountain Diwiagora, or Maids-mountain, which being divided into
several steepy' Hills of various colors, and bearing Pine-trees in so regular
an Order, as if they had been planted there on purpose, makes it appear very
pleasant to the eye. At the foot of this, rises another, which reaches near 40
Miles along the River. But, what is most remarkable here, The Cy^^^ Valley.
is the Valleys betwixt them, which being stored with Apple Trees affords very
good Cider, being called by the Muscovites Jabla-New-quas, which is as much to
say, as Drink of Apples. Some of these Mountains reach a great way into the
Country, others bordering only upon the Riverside. At the left side of the
River, about two Miles from the Shore, lies the City of Samara, belonging to
the abovementioned Tartarian Province of Bulgar, and above 300 Miles distant
from the City of Casan. Its Form is square, its Buildings all of Wood, except
the Churches and Monasteries, which are three in number. The River of Samar,
from whence it derives its name, falls about three Miles below into the Volga:
About 100 Miles from hence is the Mountain of the Cosacks, being all bare
without any Wood, it serves for a retreating place to the Cosacks, living upon
the Don or Tanais, and has from thence got its denomination. Betwixt this and
the City of Saratof, (above 200 Miles distant from hence) are abundance of
small Islands in this River, so that at certain Seasons it has been fordable,
and consequently very incommod^ous for Ships of Burden, who at such places are
obliged to unload part of their Cargo in smaller Boats, which they carry along
with them for that purpose. The City of Saratof is situate in a very fair large
Plain, about four Miles from the Riverside upon a Branch of the Wolga. It is
inhabited by Muscovite Soldiers, who are put there as a Guard against the
Incursions of the Tartars called Kalmuches, Tartars Kal^uches.
Inhabiting a vast Tract of Ground which extends toward the Caspian Sea,
betwixt this River and the River Jaika.

About Three Hundred Miles lower, 50 Miles on this side the City of Zariza, The
River Tanais.
the River Don (the Tanais of the Ancient Geographers) advances within a days
Journey near the River Volga; as some Miles below the said City, behind a
certain Island, called the Isle of Zerpinsko, there falls a little River,
called Kamous (which rises out of the beforementioned River Don) into the River
Volga, but it being very shallow, affords scarce passage for small Boats;
Notwithstanding which, there are some who affirm, that it might be rendered more
Navigable, and consequently a Communication be established betwixt these two
considerable Rivers.

Near the first of these two abovementioned places, The first Branch of the
Wolga
before you come to the City of Zariza, near Achtobska Vtska, the River Volga
divides it self into two Branches, whereof one taking its course to the left,
into the Country, carries its Stream for a Mile to the North-East, quite
contrary to the Current of the great River, but afterward reassuming its
former course, returns to the South-East, till it falls into the Caspian Sea.
About 40 Miles from hence, at 5 Mile distance from the Riverside, are to be
seen the Ruins of a great City* formerly called Zaaresgorod, that is to say,
the (...) Royal, built, as it is related, by Tamerlain; Its Palace and Walls
were all of Brick, which have furnished the City of Astrachan, for these many
Years, with Materials for their Walls, Churches, and Monasteries. A few Miles
from this Place lies the City of Zariza, at the bottom of a Hill, on the right
side of the River, 49 Degrees and 42 min. Elevation. It is fortified with
several Bastions and Towers, but all of Wood; it being a Frontier-Garison
against the Neighboring Tartars and Cossacks, and inhabited only by Soldiers,
who also serve for a Convoy to the Vessels passing this way up and down the
River. All abouts here, and even as far as Astrachan it self, the Country
(except the beforementioned Island of Zerpinsko, which is Twelve Miles long,
and furnishes the Cattle belonging to the Garrison, with Grass) the Soil is so
barren, that it affords no manner of Corn, which defect however, is easily
supplied by help of the River; the fertile Grounds about Casan furnishing these
Parts, and even the City of Astrachan with Wheat at a very cheap rate. About
Sixscore Miles below the City of Zariza, the River Wesowi, near a small Island
of the same Name, falls into the Wolga, on the right side, as does the River
Wolodinerski Vtsga 30 Miles lower.

At Forty Miles distance from hence, The (...) Branch o^ the Wolga
the River Wolga casts out its second Branch on the left side, called
Achtobenisna Vtsga, which afterward joins with the Branch called Achtobska,
which we mentioned before. From this Place down on both sides of the River, as
far as Astrachan, there grows a prodigious quantity of Liquorice of a very
large size, Liqu^rice.
its stalks being as thick as a lusty Man's Arm, and sometimes above four Foot
high, the Seeds lying in Cods upon the stalks; yet is this inferior, both in
bigness and sweetness, to that which grows in Asia, near the River of Araxes.
Twenty Miles lower is the City of Szornogar, seated on the right side of the
River, upon a high Shore, near a vast Plain, without any Trees or Eminencies;
its form is apiece, fortified with Wooden Towers and Ramparts, it serves
for a Frontier-Garison against the Tartars and Cosacks. About 120 Miles hence
is the Mountain^ o^ Polowon, so called, because half way betwixt Zariza
beforementioned, and Astrachan.

Not many Miles lower is a third Branch of the Volga, Third and fourth Branch
of the Volga.
called Buchw^stova, which falls into the two precedents; And Twenty Miles from
thence the River Wolga makes a fourth Branch on the left side of it, called
Danitoska Vtsga, which does not mingle with any of the other three, but
disembogues by a particular Channel into the Caspian Sea.

Near 60 Miles on this side of Astrachan, The fifth Branch of the Wolga
is the fifth Branch of the Volga, called Mituska, which, at some distance from
the main River, being again divided into two less Branches, the one is united
with the Danilofska Vtsga, just now mentioned; the other, after having
continued its course for some Miles, falls again into the main River.

Five and twenty Miles on this side of Astrachan is the Isle of Busan, The
sixth and seventh Branch of the Volga.
Ten Miles below which is the sixth Branch of the River Wolga, called Baltzick,
as is three Miles lower the seventh, called Knilusse, which makes the Isle of
Dilgoi, within which the City of Astrachan is seated; And after having
encompassed this Island, it falls by several Channels into the Caspian Sea.

The City of Astrachan is situate upon the utmost Bo^ders betwixt Europe and
Asia, The City of Astrachan
in this place, divided by the River Volga. It is seated on the River side in
the Isle of Dilgoi, made there by the two Branches of the River, as has been
said before, under the Elevation of 26 degrees. 22 min. It is of a c^nsiderable
bigness, and now all inhabited by Muscovites, the Inhabitants of the Country
being Tartars, who are not permitted to live within the compass of the Walls
(which is 8000 Geometrical Feet about) but in the adjacent Suburbs, which are
fenced in only with Pallisadoes. The Fortification^ are all very high, and of
Stone, which at a distance make a very gallant appearance, especially toward
the Riverside, by reason of a great number of Turrets and Steeples of Stone;
but the Houses within the City being all built of Wood, and very low, its
inside does not appear answerable to the rest. There is accounted to be a great
Artillery in this place of 500 Brass Cannon, and Mortars proportionable. The
Garrison, in time of Peace, commonly amounts to 5000 Men, under the Command of
two Weywodes, and other Officers. This City being seated upon the Confines of
the two most considerable Parts of the World, it must needs be a Place of great
Commerce, it being, besides the Muscovites, frequented not only by the
Neighboring Tartars, but also by the Persians, Armenians, and Indians, the
last of which have a particular place assigned them within the City. It was
taken by Assault in the Year 1554. by the Great Duke John Basilovits, who
having two Years before conquered the Tartars of Casan, turned his Arms against
those of Nagaja, then inhabiting this City and the Country round about it.
Having secured his Conquest over them by taking their Capital City, he
surrounded it with a strong Wall, and the Czar Michael Federovits added to it
besides some new Fortifications, that part of the City which is called
Str^litzagorod, or the City of Soldiers, they having their Quarters assigned
them in this part of the City. But before we leave this Kingdom, it will not be
beyond our purpose to give a short Description both of the Country and its
Inhabitants.

It is past all question that the Tartars were unknown to the Ancient
Geographers, The Tar^ars of (...)
which were by them comprehended under the general Name of Scythians and
Sarmatians, though it be manifest that the Tartars consist of several Nations,
distinguished in their Names, Language, and manner of Life. Those of Nagaja,
with the Tartars of Casan, before mentioned, and some others betwixt the River
Wolga and the Don or Tanais, are said to have been Indians, who having revolted
from their (...), did about the Year 1212. settle themselves near the Euxine
Sea, upon the Palus Meotides, the Place of Habitation of the Ancient Getae;
from whence they extended their Conquests, first, to the River Don, and from
thence at last to the Wolga, near which they inhabit to this day. Those of
Nagaja, of whom we are to treat at present, are seated betwixt the two Rivers
of Wolga and Jaika, as far as the Caspian Sea. The City of Astrachan is their
principal City, built, as they say, by a Tartar King, whose Name being
Astra-Chan, gave it the Name of Astrachan. Before this Country was conquered by
the Muscovites, it was inhabited altogether by Tartars, but now the latter are
not permitted to abide in the Capital City, or to build any new ones, nor to
fortify their Towns or Villages with Walls.

They live for the most part in Huts made of Bullrushes or Canes, Their manner
of Living.
which are commonly round, seldom exceeding twelve or thirteen English Yards in
compass, on the top of which they have holes, most like our Chicken-coops,
serving them instead of Chimneys, nevertheless the least of these Huts has a
Faulcon or Hawk, the Tartars being great Masters in this Sport. The Muscovites
call these Nagajan Tartars Polutski, or Vagabonds, as having no fixed Habitation
in the Summer, when they ramble up and down, according as they meet with the
best convenience for their Cattle, which beginning to fail in one place, their
Huts are put into Carts, and their Wives, Children, and Goods upon Camels,
Horses, or Oxen, and so removed to another. Toward the Winter they begin to
reassemble, and to live in several Troops near Astrachan, where being furnished
with Arms by the Muscovites (which however after the Frosty Season is past,
they are obliged to redeliver, not being otherwise permitted to have any Arms,
either Defensive or Offensive) they stand upon their Mutual Defense against the
Malmuck Tartars, and those Inhabiting upon the River Jaika. They pay no Tribute
to the Grand Czar, but are obliged to serve him in his Wars; they are governed
by petty Princes and Judges of their own, and in time of War by their own
Commanders; The Great Duke, to secure their Allegiance to him, always keeps
some of their Princes or Myrses as Hostages in the Castle of Astrachan.

They are generally Mahometans, (...).
of the same Sect with the Turks, except some few that have received the
Muscovian Religion. They are used to ^ow some of their Children, like the
Nazarites, to God, or some Saint or other. These are distinguished from others
by a Ring which the Girls wear in their Nostrils, the Boys in the right Ear.
They live upon what their Cattle, their Hunting, and Fishing supply them
withal; they make use of Fish dried in the Sun, instead of Bread, though they
make also Cakes of Meal and Rice. Among other things they eat Camel's and
Horseflesh, and Mare's Milk is in great esteem with them. Their Drink is
generally Milk and Water, though, besides Wine, Hydromel, and Aqua-vitae, there
is indifferent good Beer at Astrachan. Their Cattle is of a very large size,
not unlike to that of Poland. Their Sheep have great fat Tayls, weighing
sometimes Thirty pounds, their Ears hanging down like to our Dogs in Europe.
Their Horses are however but small, and not well shaped, but very hardy and
strong. The Tartars themselves are of an ill shape, low and fat, with large
Faces, and little Eyes, of an Olive color, full of wrinkles in their Faces,
they wear little Beards, and keep their Heads shaved; but the Women are much
handsomer. Their Garment is a loose Coat of some course Cloth, over which they
wear a short sort of Cloak of Sheep's-Skin, the woolly side outward, with a
Cap of the same upon their Heads, which commonly is chosen of a black color.
The Women are clad in white Linen Cloth, with plaited Coifs upon their Heads,
on both sides of which, as an Ornament, hang a great many Muscovian
Penny-pieces. The Climate in those Parts is very hot, the Heats in the Months
of September and October much exceeding our Dog Days; notwithstanding which,
the Winter, which seldom exceeds two Months here, is so cold, that this large
River is commonly frozen up, and bears Sledges.

The Island of Dolgoi, upon which the City of Astrachan is built, is all over
Sandy, and barren, and, except it be some Gardens and Grounds cultivated with
particular care by the Inhabitants of Astrachan, produces nothing fit for
Sustenance. The Continent on the right hand exceeds, if possible, the Isle in
barrenness, but on the left there are some very good Pastures.

On this side of the Wolga Westward, Deserts near Astrachan.
toward the Euxine Sea, lies a vast Desert above 350 Miles long, and to the
South another near 400 Miles long, stretching all along the Caspian Sea. In
these Deserts is neither City nor Village, nay, not so much as a Tree or Hill,
there being nothing to be seen but one continued vast Plain, covered here and
there with a little Grass, for the space of 300 Miles there being not any Water
to be met withal but what the little River Kisilar, and some standing Pools of
Salt Water afford. Notwithstanding which, these Deserts produce a prodigious
quantity of Salt. For within Ten, Fifteen, and Thirty Miles of Astrachan,
Salt Pits.
there are large Salt-Veins, which being congealed by the Sun, swim upon the
surface of the Water, of the thickness of a Finger, as fine and clear as Rock
Crystal. These Salt Pits hereabouts are by the Inhabitants called, Mozakofski,
Kainkowa, and Gwostofski, and produce such abundance of Salt, that upon the
spot one may have a Hundred weight under two pence, which being from thence
carried to the Wolga, is transported into other Parts. Besides which, the Isle
of Dolgoi about Astrachan and some other parts of this Province, as also of
Circassia (of which we shall have occasion to speak in the next following
Chapter) are stored with excellent Fruit, not yielding either in beauty or
taste to any, The Fruits of Nagaja
even not to those of Persia and the Indies. Their Apples, Quinces, Nuts,
Peaches, and Melons exceed the rest in goodness, but especially a certain kind
of Melons, whose Rind being of a lively green color, the Meat Carnation, and
the Seeds black, are the most pleasing both to the Eye and Palate, and are sold
at a very cheap rate, two or three of them being to be bought for a Penny. It
is not above Fourscore Years ago since any Grapes were to be seen in those
Parts, but the Persians having brought some Sets thither, which were first
planted by a Monk, a German by birth, in the Garden belonging, to his Convent,
situate in the Suburbs of Astrachan; this small Stock has been since improved
and increased to that degree, that not only the Walks and Arbours of the
Gardens, but also about the Houses of the Inhabitants are planted with Vines,
which growing to an extraordinary bigness there, affords not only great store
of Grapes for their present use, but also a superplus for most Excellent Wine.
Besides which, near Astrachan, and all along the Wolga, there grows abundance
of Simples, and very large; The Herb Esula is hereabouts as high as a Man,
Esula and Angelica.
and the Root of Angelica as big as a lusty Man's Arm. About 30 Miles beyond
Astrachan is one of the best Fishing-places upon the River Wolga, which
furnishes that City with Salmons, Sturgeons, White Fish, and many other sorts
of delicious Fish, and the small Islands hereabouts great variety of Wild Fowl;
and though the Country hereabouts is not very fertile in Corn, (which in these
Parts is trodden out by Oxen and Horses) they are supplied with that
sufficiently from about Casan by the River, all which makes this City one of
the most pleasant and convenient for its Situation in Europe.

The Mouth of the River Wolga is about 60 Miles below Astrachan. The Mouth of
the Wolga.
From its Entrance into the Caspian Sea, for the space of near 30 Miles into
the Sea, there are scattered a great number of Islands, very small, but all
covered with Reeds or Canes, which has occasioned some to affirm, that the
Wolga has as many Mouths as there are Islands hereabouts. The bottom of the Sea
is here very muddy, and the Water very shallow as far as to the Promontory of
Suchator, situate on the right hand from the Wolga, 100 Miles beyond Astrachan,
and 200 Miles on this side of the City of Terki (of which more in the next
Chapter) the first place, near which there is a tolerable Harbor in the
Caspian Sea.

About 40 Miles from this City is the Isle of Tzenzeni, situate in 43 degrees 5
min. Elevation. Its length being from North-East to South-East about 15 Miles.
Here is the first Harbor of the Caspian Sea, from the Mouth of the River
Wolga. From this Island may be seen in the Continent toward the South-West
high Mountains reaching up to the very Clouds, Mount Caucasus.
called by the Circassians Salatto, being the Mount of Caucasus of the Ancients
in the Province of Colchis, now called Mengrelia, famous in Ancient Times for
the Expedition of Jason; as the height of this Mountain has furnished the Poets
with that Fiction of Prometheus having from thence conveyed the Fire, stolen
from the Sun, down upon the Earth. The Mountain of Taurus and Ararat are so
near to it, that they appear like one continued Mountain, which crosses all
Asia, from Mengrelia to the Indies. The Mount Ararat is one entire vast Rock,
exceeding in height Mount Caucasus it self, The Mountains Taurus and Ararat.
its top being covered with Snow Summer and Winter. It is said to be the same,
upon which Noah's Ark rested after the Deluge; the Armenians, who call it
Messina, believing to this day, that there are some remainders of that Ark upon
this Mountain, but by length of time all petrified; which, how agreeable or
disagreeable to Truth, is impossible to be determined, the Mountain being so
surrounded with Precipices, that it is unaccessible. These high Mountains are a
great direction to the Mariners in those Parts, most of whom having little or
no Understanding of the Compass; the different Prospect they afford toward the
Caspian Sea, The Caspian Sea.
serve as an Instruction to the Pilots, to discover where-abouts they are.

The Caspian Sea was in ancient times known by the name of Chosar, having
derived its name from the eldest Son of Thogarma, who was the Son of Gomer, and
Grand child of Japhet, third Son to Noah. It is now adays known by various
names, according to the diversity of the Inhabitants and Provinces bordering
upon it. Some Geographers have called it the Sea of Travisthan; the Greek and
Latin Authors, the Hyrcanian Sea, as also Mare Caspium and Caspianum; the
Muscovites name it Gualenskoi-more. Its length from South to North, viz. from
the mouth of the River Wolga, below the City of Astrachan, to Ferebath in the
Province of Mesenderan, reaching eight degrees to the Aquator, making 120
German, or 600 English Miles; Its breadth from the Province of Chuarasm or
Karragon to Shirwan, viz. from West to East is six degrees, making 90 German,
or 450 English Miles; and though according to the opinion both of the ancient
and most modern Geographers, its length be reckoned quite contrary to this,
viz. from West to East, and its breadth from North to South, nevertheless upon
the most exact Enquiry that could possibly be made, the first account has been
found most congruous both with the Persian Registers of Longitudes and
Latitudes, and with the true Situation of the Maritim Provinces adjoining to
that Sea. There is also another Error introduced by Pomponius Mela, Pliny, and
some of their followers, as Strabo, Macrobius, and others, who affirm the
Caspian Sea to be a Sinus, or Gulf of the Indian or Tartarian Sea, or to have
a communication with the Euxine Sea, and by the River Tanais, with the Palus
Meotides. But according to the best Survey made by some Europians of late
Years, of this Sea, and the constant Report of the Persians, bordering upon it,
it seems to be now passed all Dispute, that the Opinion of Herodotus, and
Aristotle, who affirm, that the Caspian Sea is a particular Sea by it self, not
having any communication with other Seas, is the most credible; it being on all
sides so encompassed with Land, that it deserves the name of the Mediteranean
in a more strict sense, than that which is commonly known by that name. Besides
the great Rivers of Wolga, Araxis, Cyrus, the Jaika and Jems, the Nios, the
Oxus, and the Orxentes, near a hundred other Rivers of less note, fall into
this Sea; and notwithstanding all these prodigious Accessions of Waters, it is
not sensibly increased; which may seem to furnish a probable Argument to those,
who assert, that the Waters of these Rivers must needs be conveyed thence by
some great and considerable Passages, or open communication with other Seas.
The Persians are of opinion, that under the Mountains near Ferebath, betwixt
the Provinces of Tauristan and Mesendan, there is a Gulf where these Waters
are swallowed up, and conveyed away under the Earth. But, why may not the same
reason take place here, which is alleged for the Oceans not overflowing the
Earth by the accession of so many Rivers? viz. That, besides the Mists, which
consume a great part, the rest is conveyed by infinite secret Channels through
the Earth back again to the Source of the Fountains and Rivers, so that by the
help of those Veins of the Earth, these Waters being purified of their Filth,
and separated by this continual Percolation from their Salt, are by an
interrupted circulation reconveyed to the same Fountains and Rivers.

The Caspian Sea being either quite undiscovered, The Caspian Sea not very well
known to the Ancients.
or but superficially known to the ancient Greeks and Romans, before the latter
carried their Arms beyond the Euphrates, it is no wonder if the relations those
Authors have left us about it, are for a great part not consonant to Truth, and
some modern Writers, misguided by their Authority, and having taken the rest
perhaps upon hearsay, have inferted a great many things, which are
contradicted by Experience. What Curtius relates concerning the Caspian Sea,
being fresher than the Ocean, proves a mistake, it being full as Salt as the
Waters of the Ocean; though upon the Coast of Hyrcania (now called Kilan) the
Water is only brackish, because of the mixture of a great many Rivers which
fall into this Sea on that side; which may probably have led the abovementioned
Author into that Error, though the same may be observed in the Ocean; especially
upon the Coast of Holland and Zealand, by reason of the fresh Waters of diverse
Rivers, which exonerate themselves thereabouts. What the same Author relates of
a vast number of Serpents in this Sea, is positively contradicted by the
Inhabitants of the Province of Kilan, and others bordering upon that Sea:
Pomponius Mela, in his Geography speaks of a vast number of Monsters, which he
calls Belluae, abiding in this Sea, which he alleges for one main Reason, why
it is scarce Navigable; whereas it is sufficiently known, that the true Reason
why the Persians, Tartars and Muscovites, seldom venture far into this Sea, and
that only in Summer, is, that their Barks and Boats are so small and wretchedly
built, that they dare not venture far from the Shore; Besides, that this Sea
has very few Havens, to wit, that betwixt the Isle of Tzenzeni and the
Continent, near Terki, beforementioned, the Havens of Baku, Lenkeran and
Ferebath, none of the safest; the Haven near the City of Minkischack, on the
side of the Grand Tartary, being the best in this Sea; so that the Inhabitants
bordering upon it, being generally very bad Seamen, and not well skilled in the
Compass, it is their own Ignorance, and the Danger of this Sea, that keeps them
near the Shore, not the Terror of these Monsters; those other Europaeans that
have of late years sailed deeper into the Caspian Sea, having neither seen nor
heard any thing like it, except they would take the Sea-dogs, which are in
great numbers near the mouth of the Wolga, for such prodigious Monsters. Errors
of Modern Authors concerning the Caspian Sea.
By the Experience of those also, it is sufficiently contradlcted what
Petrejus, in his History of Muscovy, relates with so much confidence, that the
Water of the Caspian Sea is as black as Ink; that it is full of Islands well
stocked with Inhabitants, and a great number of Cities and Villages; The Water
being of the same color with that of all other Seas, and there being not one
Island in it, that has either City or, Village; and, if the Persians, Tartars
and Muscovites living thereabouts, may be believed, there is only the Isle of
Ensil near Ferebath, which having very good Pastures, the Neighboring
Inhabitants, who keep their Cattle there, have a few Huts to defend them
against the Injuries of the Weather, during the time their Cattle Grases there.
Of the same stamp is what Contarinus, in his Travels, and Father Bizarous in
his History of Persia, relate concerning a certain round Fish without a Head,
to be found in this Sea, of an Ell and a half Diameter, of which, they say,
there is drawn a certain Oil, which the Persians use in their Lamps, and to
greese their Camels; whereas there are at the foot of the Mountain of Barmach,
near the City of Baku, whole Rivulets of an Oily substance, by them called
Nefte, Nefte.
which furnish them with a sufficient quantity of this Kind for that Use, at a
much cheaper Rate, it being from thence transported into the other Parts of the
Kingdom. I am apt to believe that they are fallen into this Error by the
superficial Description of a certain Fish in the Caspian Sea, called Naka, The
Glutton.
or Glutton, which has some resemblance to that mentioned by them; for, it has
not only a very short Nose, but the whole Head is, as it was, within the Belly,
and its Tail being round, and its length and breadth near the same, and
sometimes of six or seven Foot, it comes pretty near a circular Figure. This
Fish will fasten it self with the Tail under the Fisher-men's Boats, so as to
overturn them, as will also the white Fish, which makes the Fishermen be very
cautious of the^^ They catch the first with the Liver of Beef (...) Mutton,
which the Fish much delights in, th^^ they put as a Bait upon Iron Hooks, tied
to good strong Cords, and so draw him to the Shore. But I cannot imagine upon
what authority they have founded their Relation, when they say that there is
(...) other Fish in the Caspian Sea, it being sufficiently known by Experience,
that the Caspian Sea is very well Stored not only with abundance of Salmons,
Sturgeons and Herrings, but also with several Kinds of Fish, as are caught in
Rivers, and kept in Ponds, as Barbels, Breams and Trouts. Before we leave the
Caspian Sea, it will perhaps not be amiss to take notice of a certain Species
of wild Geese, or (rather Cormorants) which are found in great numbers on that
Shore, especially toward the mouth of the River Wolga. They are like other
Geese as to their Color, Legs, Neck and Feet, but the bulk of their Bodies
exceeding the Swans. Their Bills are fork'd at the end, being a Foot and half
long, and near two Inches broad, the whole Body of some of them being above
seven Foot in length from the Head to the Feet. But what is most remarkable in
them, is, that under their Bills, they have a shrivelled Skin hanging,
resembling a Bagg, which, when dilated, contains more or less three Gallons of
Liquor, this they make use of for a Rescrontory for such Fish they take, which
they afterward swallow down at leisure. On the same Shore is also frequently
seen that kind of Fowl, Onocratalus,
which Pliny calls Onocratalus, their Beaks are long and round, but at the
extremity flat, in the form of a Spoon beaten out. When it puts its Beak into
the Water, it makes a most hideous Noise, almost like an Ass, whence, without
doubt it had its Name. I had almost forgot to tell you, that the Caspian Sea
neither Ebbs nor Flows, which may serve as additional Argument to maintain our
beforementioned Assertion; that it has no communication or correspondence with
any other Sea.

CHAP. V.
Of the Tartars of Dagesthan and Circassia; of Siberia, and some other
Tartarian Provinces betwixt China and Muscovy.
THE Tartars of Dagesthan and Circassia, inhabit that Country known to the
Ancients under the name of Albania, which reaches all along the Shore of the
Caspian Sea, from the end of the Deserts of Astrachan (mentioned in the
foregoing Chapter) to the City of Derbent, Circassia.
on the confines of Persia; The Dagesthan Tartars are subject neither to the
Persians, nor Muscovites, the Mountains which they inhabit serving them for a
Fence against these two Potent Neighbors; But the Circassian Tartars, divided
from the former by the River Bustro (which Ptolomy calls Gerrus) bordering upon
the Kingdom of Astrachan, and being subject to the Jurisdiction of the Grand
Czar of Muscovy, we will treat of them first, taking our course from the great
Deserts of Astrachan, first to the River Bustro, and from thence to the
Frontiers of Persia.

The Country of Circassia is situate all along the coast of the Caspian Sea,
from the South-West to North-East, encompassing it about in form of a Cressent,
and making a very spacious Bay. The Circassians are possessed of that Part of
Albania, which has for its Frontiers on the East and West Side the Caspian Sea
and Mount Caucasus, and on the South and North the River Bustro, and the
Deserts of Astrachan. Very few Historians, whether Ancient or Modern, have made
any mention of them; some having assigned their Habitations beyond the Mount
Caucasus, near the Euxin Sea; whereas they are more properly to be called, the
Caspian Sarmatians. Their Capital City is Terki, The City of Terki.
above 300 Miles from Astrachan by Land, situate near three Miles from the
Shore of the Caspian Sea, upon a small River, called Timenski (a Branch of the
great River Bustro) which being formerly called Terck, has given the name to
this City; it is seated in a very spacious Plain, very fenny toward the
Seaside, under 43 degrees. 23 min. Elev. It is in compass about two Miles, well
fortified with Ramparts and Bastions of Earth, after the modern Way, stored
with Cannon, and has always a considerable Garrison in it of Muscovites, under
the Command of a Weywode, the Tartarian Prince, who resides here, having 500 of
them allowed him for his Guard. Since the Reduction of those Parts under the
obedience of the Czars of Muscovy, they have put in all Places of Strength, not
only their Garrisons, but also Governors, Magistrates and Priests, for the
exercise of the Christian Religion. Notwithstanding this, the Circassian
Tartars are Governed by their own Princes, Lords and Judges, who administer
Justice in the Czar's Name; and, in Matters of Importance, not without the
Presence of the Weywode, or Russian Governor, being all obliged to take the
Oath of Allegiance to his Czarish Majesty. The Men are not unlike the Nagajan
Tartars, but not so broad-fac'd, their Hair is black and long, their Complexion
yellowish, they shave the midst of their Heads, from the Forehead to the Neck,
leaving a small Lock at the Crown. The Women here are excellently well shaped,
have no^ only good Lineaments in their Faces, but also of a clear and smooth
Complexion, which with their black Hair hanging down in two Tresses on both
sides of their Faces, makes them appear very agreeable. The Circassian Tartars
are less barbarous than those of Dagesthan, having in some measure abated from
their former Barbarism, The Habi^ of the Circassians.
since their conversing with Christians. The Men's Apparel is near the same with
the Nagajans, their Caps being only something larger, their Cloaks being
likewise of coarse Cloth or Sheepskins, fastn'd only at the Neck with a
String, which being not large enough to cover the whole body, they turn it
according to the Wind and Weather. The Women wear about their Heads a black
Coif, covered with a fine white Cloth tied under the Chin. The Widows have
hanging in their Necks an Ox-bladder full blown, covered with a piece of Cotton
of several colors. The Women wear all of them, during the Summer, nothing but
a Smock of diverse colors, which being cut so deep before, that one may see
down below their Navels, and their Faces being always uncovered (contrary to
the Custom of those Parts) this, with their good Humor, and Familiarity they
use in Conversation, makes them very desirable, notwithstanding which, they
have acquired the Reputation of being very chaste, though they seldom want
Opportunity of hornifying their husbands, it being looked upon as a piece of
common Manners among them, in a Husband, to go out of the doors, as soon as any
body comes to speak with his Wife; so, that, whether this Continency of theirs
be founded upon their own Generosity to recompense their Husbands for the
Confidence they put in them, or more upon Fame than real Truth, we will not
pretend to determine in this Place. Their Language they have common with the
other Neighboring Tartars, though the chief among them are also not ignorant of
the Muscovian. They are Pagans; for, though the Ceremony of Circumcision is
received among them, yet have they neither Priests, A^choran, or Churches, like
other Mahometans; Every one here offers his own Sacrifice at pleasure, for
which they have some certain Days, established rather by Custom, than any
positive Commands. The most Solemn Sacrifices they offer at the Death of their
nearest Friends, especially if they be of an Eminent Rank among them. Upon such
an Occasion, both Men and Women meet in the Field, to be present at the
performance of the Sacrifice, which is a He-Goat. The first thing they do, is,
to cut off its Privy Members, which they cast against a Wall, and if they stick
against it, the Goat is judged fit to Sacrifice, if not, they are obliged to
kill another, till such time they are satisfied in its fitness by the
beforementioned Trial; Then they proceed with the Ceremonies, fleaing it, and
stretching the Skin with the Head and Horns on, upon a Cross on the top of a
long Pole, planted commonly in a Quick-set ^edge, to keep the Cattle from it.
Near this the Sacrifice is offered, by boiling and roasting the Flesh, which
they afterward eat. The Feast being over, the Men rise, and after having
adored the Skin, and muttered out certain Prayers, the Women withdraw, and the
Men conclude the whole with drinking good store of Aqua-vitae, generally to
that degree, that they seldom part without being as drunk as Beasts, and
sometimes not without fighting. They are very Ceremonious in their Burials, and
adorn their Sepulchers with Pillars. Over those of Persons of Quality they
build certain little Houses, but only of Wood, the Boards whereof are commonly
painted of several colors, and placed Chequer-wise, upon the Roof of which are
to be seen some Statues, but very mean, and sometime some Pictures, poorly
done, representing commonly the Hunting of some Wild Beast or another.

The Tartars of Dagesthan inhabit now adays that part of Albania, Tartars of
Dagesthan
from whence Thalestris, the famous Queen of the Amazons came to give a Visit
to Alexander the Great in Hyrcania, to obtain that Kindness, which Ladies, though
never so desirous of, seldom care to beg. They inhabit a Tract of Ground of
above 200 Miles, all along the Caspian Seashore from, the City of Derbent, the
utmost Frontier-Town of Persia, on that side, extending Northward as far as to
the River Bustro near the City of Terki, the Capital of Circassia. They are
called Dagesthan, or Mountain Tartars, from the Word Dag, which signifies in
their Language as much as a Mountain; because they live between the Mountains,
and in the Plains at the foot of these Mountains, which are very fruitful and
pleasant, except it be toward the Seaside, where it is all Heathy and Barren.

These Tartars are generally of a tawny, dark Complexion, Their Shape
enclining to black; they are very strong, and well-set in their Limbs, but
very ugly in their Faces, having long black Hair hanging down over their
Shoulders. The Women wear the Hair tied up in a great many Tresses, which hang
down about their Heads, much after the manner of the Persians, but are not kept
so much under Restraint, having their Faces uncovered, and not being shy of
being seen by Strangers. Those who live toward the Northern part of this
Province, are called Kaitack, as those that inhabit the more Western Parts, are
called Kamuck.

Their Form of Government is that which is most worth Observation, Their
Government.
it having a great Resemblance with those, which in very Ancient Times were
established in the Western Parts of Europe. For, the whole Country is divided
into a great many Petty Lordships, each of them under the Jurisdiction of its
proper Lord or Myrsa, who, though Hereditary, is nevertheless not Absolute, but
his Authority controuled by that of some of the chief Men among them. All these
Petty Lords acknowledge one, whom they call Schemkal, for their Supreme Head.
He succeeds not by Inheritance, but by Election. For, after the Death of a
Schemkal, all these Petty Lords or Myrsa's meet, and being set down in a Ring,
one of their Priests casts a Golden Apple among them, the first Person which is
touched by this Apple, is their Schemkal, to whom, by common consent, they pay
their Respect, but no absolute Obedience. They are generally very Barbarous,
Savage, and Mischievous, living most upon Robberies, and exacting Contributions
from the Caravans that pass that way from Persia. A great part of their
Livelihood is, for the Men to steal Children, not sparing even their nearest
Relations, whom they sell to the Neighboring Persians, leaving the care of
their Cattle to their Wives. They have an odd Custom at their Weddings; to wit,
for every Man there present to shoot his Arrow into the Floor, where they are
left, till they are rotten, or fall of themselves. They are all Mahometans,
using Circumcision, and all other Ceremonies of the Turks.

Their Clothing is a long close Coat, Their Habit.
commonly of a dark gray, or black coarse Cloth, over which they wear a Cloak
of the same Stuff, and sometimes of Sheep's-Skin. They wear a square Cap sewed
together of a great many pieces; their Shoes being for the most part made of
Horses Hides, sewed only together a-top at the Instep. The poorest among them
is provided with a Coat of Mail, Head-pice and Buckler, besides a Scymitar,
Javelin, Bow and Arrows.

The Metropolis of the whole Country is the City of Tarku, Tarku.
situated within the Mountain among steepy Rocks, which are as hard as Flint,
and afford several most pleasant Springs to the City, which contains about 1200
Houses, built of Brick-stone baked in the Sun, after the Persian manner, but
not so high; It is the Residence of one of their Petty Princes, but is not
surrounded with any Fortifications, not so much as a Wall. Next to this, the
most frequented places of this Country are Rustain, Boinack, and Andre, being
three several Principalities, lying in the Road betwixt Persia and the River
Wolga. The Town of Boinack is situate upon the ascent of a steepy Hill near the
Seaside. That of Andre is built upon a rising Ground near the River Koisu (by
Ptolomy called Albanus) which rises out of Mount Caucasus; Its Waters are very
muddy, and its Current very swift. The most Remarkable thing here is a certaing
Spring of seething Water, which arising near the Town, and falling at some
distance into a Pool, makes the Water fit for Bathing. About some Miles lower,
the River Koisu lets out a Branch, by the Inhabitants called Askai (probably
the River Caesius of Ptolomy) which running with a very slow Current, at last
is reunited with the said River near the Sea. The River Bustro, mentioned in
the beginning of this Chapter, (known by the name of Gerrus in Ptolomy) is the
Boundary betwixt the Circassian and Dagesthan Tartars; And, about 25 Miles
before its entrance into the Caspian Sea, is divided into two Branches, the
first of which, being called Terck, or Timenski, has given the Name to the City
of Terki, the Metropolis of Circassia. The second Branch is called Kiselar,
very near as b^oad as the other, but not so deep, being fordable for the most
part of the Summer. But before we leave the Frontiers of the Russian Empire on
this side, it may perhaps not be beyond our scope, to insert here short
Description of the City of Derbent, both for its Antiquity's-sake, and its
being the Frontier-Town of Persia, upon the Confines of the Dagesthan Tartars,
especially since we intend to treat of some other Parts, bordering upon
Muscovy, in the next following Chapters.

The City of Derbent is situate in the Province, Derbent.
called by the Persians Lengerkunan, upon the very Shore of the Caspian Sea,
which sometimes washes its Walls, under the 41 degr. 51 min. of Latitude. Its
length reaches from East to West, near five Miles, but its breadth is not
proportionable to its length. It is not only the Frontier-place of Persia,
lying upon its utmost Confines on this side, but may well be called the Gate of
it, reaching from the Mountain quite down to the Sea-shoar. The whole City is
divided into three distinct Quarters; The first, is the Mid-City, which the
Persians affirm to be built by Alexander the Great, as also that Wall which
surrounds the City on the South Side. These Walls are of a great height, and
about six Foot broad, and at a distance appear as if they were built of the
best Freestone in the World; but, according to the Relation of the
Inhabitants, the Stones of it are made of Mussle-shells and small pieces of
Freestone, beaten and molded together into Bricks, which, by the long tract of
Time, are reduced to that degree of hardness, as to exceed Marble it self.
There is, even to this day, upon one of the Gates, remaining an Inscription,
resembling the Syriack* Character, as there appears in another Place some
Arabic words, but so defaced by length of Time, as not to be legible. The
Castle, which lies upon the top of the Mountain, is also related to owe its
Foundation to that Great Conqueror, and is now always kept by a very good
Garrison of Persians. The second Quarter reaches up to the foot of the
Mountain, being the most Populous, as the lower Town, which reaches to the
Seaside, is not much frequented now, being formerly inhabited by Greeks, but,
ever since the Persians regained it from Mustapha, the Turkish Emperor,
converted into Gardens. The whole Body of the City is encompassed with a very
strong Wall, so broad, that a Wagon may drive on them without Inconvenience.
The Inhabitants are all Mahometans, except some Jews, whose chief Business is
to buy such stolen Children as the Neighboring Dagesthan Tartars bring thither,
or else some Turks or Muscovites, which they having picked up in some
Encounters, they send thither to Market, to be from thence further carried into
Persia. The Mountain above the City, being for the most part covered with Wood,
affords another piece of Antiquity, to wit, the Ruins of a Wall, which, if the
Inhabitants may be believed, formerly served for a Communication betwixt the
Caspian and Euxin Seas, and extended it self near 300 Miles in length. Thus
much is ce^tain, that in the Ruins appear now in some places six foot high, in
some others two or three, the Tract being quite lost in others; And, on some of
the adjacent Hills are to be seen the Ruins of several old Castles of a four
square Form, two of which remain unde^o^^sh'd to this day, and are Garrisoned by
the Persians. There is a remarkable Monument of another kind near this City, to
wit, the Sepulcher of Tzumtzume, of whom the Persians relate the following
Fable out of their Poet, Fiesull: They relate, that Essi (this being the Name
they give to our Savior) coming into those Parts, found thereabouts a certain
Dead Man's Skul, which having taken particular Notice of, he desired of God,
whose Favorite he was, to bring the deceased Person to Life again; which being
done accordingly, Essi then asked him, who he was; he answered, that his Name
was Tzumtzume, that he had been the most Powerful King of that Country, where
he had kept a vast Court, composed of a great many Thousands Musicians, Pages,
and other Servants. At last Tzumtzume, having asked Essi, who he was, and what
Religion he professed, Christ made answer, I am Essi, and by the Religion I
profess, all the World is to be saved. If this be true, replied Tzumtzume, I
declare my self for that Religion, but desire that I may die immediately, being
unwilling to live now without Subjects in a place where I was so powerful
before. Essi having granted his Request, he died instantly, and his Sepulcher
remains here to be seen to this day, under a Tree of an extraordinary bigness,
next adjoining to which is a Scaffold erected of ten Foot high, and sixteen
Square. On the other side of the City are to be seen some Thousands of Tombs,
covered with Stones, half round, Cylinder-wise, but exceeding the ordinary
Stature of Men, having all of them Arabic Inscriptions. It is reported, that
in former Ages, yet since the Time of Mahomet, there was a certain King in
Media, named Kassan, who being engaged in War against the Tartars of Dagesthan,
received there a signal Overthrow, and caused the Bodies of the Officers killed
in this Battle to be buried in these Tombs. The Relation seems to be not
altogether fictitious, there being near the Seaside, at some distance from the
rest, forty others, exceeding the beforementioned Tombs in bigness, and
encompassed with a Wall, which having each its Banner, are said to be the
Sepulchers of so many Lords of the first Rank, and other Holy Men, that came
along with them, where the Persians and Tartars of both Sexes come to pay their
Devotions by kissing these Sepulchers, and laying their Hands upon them, while
they are at Prayers. But it is time to return to the Tartarians, under the
Grand Czar's Obedience, and among them, to say something of the Province of
Siberia.

This Province which lies quite Northward from Muscovy, Siberia.
betwixt the Provinces of Obdora and Jugoria, bordering toward the North upon
the Samojedes, is of a great extent, but not very populous, being inhabited by
Tartars. Its Capital City, being also the Seat of an Archbishop, is Tobol,
built upon a rising Ground, near a small River; and, except some Muscovites,
inhabited by Tartars. On the Frontiers of the Calmuck Tartars, is the City of
Daour; And far beyond Tobol is Chnesortski, the chief place of Commerce in the
whole Province for Sables, and other sorts of Firrs, the Products of this
Country. The Natives are a poor and wretched sort of People, notwithstanding
that they have in some Parts good Corn Fields, and great Store of Fish. But the
chief and most precious Commodity of this Country, besides other Furrs, are the
Skins of Sables. These Animals they catch either with Traps, not unlike to
those we catch our Rats with; or by spreading of Nets under the Trees, where
they feed, which being cut down, they are entangled in the Nets; In the Winter
they have also a Way of hunting them with Dogs. They were formerly Pagans,
being Governed by their own Czar or King, till near 150 Years ago, they were
subdued by Czar Jobn Basilovits in the following manner: A certain Famous
Pirate among the Cosacks, living near the River Wolga, whose Name was Jormack
Timorhof, having taken a Ship laden with Ammunition, and belonging to the Czar,
was for fear of being pursued and discovered, fled for Shelter into a certain
Island, near the River Kama, which coming from Permia (one of the Northern
Provinces of Muscovy) falls below Casan into the River Wolga. This Island
belonging then to a certain Muscovian Merchant, he proposed to him no less than
the Conquest of some of those Tartarian Countries, lying more toward the
North; and being furnished by him with Arms, Ammunition, and other Necessaries,
he, with about five or six hundred of his Followers went up the River Tagit,
and from thence to the River Tura, where having possessed himself of a small
Island, called Japouchin, he marched from thence to the City of Tumen, which he
also took without much opposition. Being flushed with this Success, he directed
his March straight ways to Tobol, the M^tropolis of the Province, and then the
Residence of the Siberian King, where having also met with very little
Resistance, he soon became Master of the Place: But being not contented with
thi^ extraordinary Success, and proposing to himself no less than the Conquest
of the whole Province, he lost soon after both his Life and Conquests. For,
having pursued the flying Enemy a great way beyond the City of Tobol, all along
the River Irtish, 300 of his Men, whom he had sent out on purpose, to Atrack
the Enemy at a certain pass, being drawn into an Ambush, were all killed upon
the Spot, so, that Jormack with the rest, being about 200, was forced to retire
into a small Island there abouts, where he Entrenched himself as well as he
could. But the Tartars having by their late Victory, got new Courage, and being
informed of what number of Men he had with him, Attacked him by Night, where he
with all his Followers, except 40, who found means to get into Muscovy, were
either drowned or cut to pieces. The remnants of Jormack's Party, being at last
come to the City of Musco, and having given to the Czar a relation of what had
past in Siberia, it was thought advisable to give them some Forces, thereby to
enable them to try their Fortune a second time. Having therefore obtained 600
Men, with Ammunition, and other Necessaries suitable to such an Expedition, they
marched directly toward the City of Tobol, the Metropolis and Residence of the
Prince of Siberia; and having a second time possessed themselves of it without
much opposition, they took quite other measures to secure their Conquests, from
what Jormack had done before; for they so strongly fortified themselves there,
that they soon were beyond all apprehension of being Attacked by the Tartars,
and being afterward reinforced with new Supplies of Men, and other
Necessaries, by their frequent Incursions so fatigued the Neighboring Tartars,
that they were (...) to submit themselves under the Czar's Protection; though it
is not altogether improbable, but that the Necessity of vending their Sables
and other Furrs to the Muscovites, might be their Chief Motive of surrendering
themselves under the Czar of Muscovy's Subjection. Since which time, the
Muscovites have built in these Parts several Cities, fortified after the
Russiian Fashion; and much imp^oved others, as Narim, and the great City of
Tooina, on the other side of the River Oby; The Castle of Comgoscoi, upon the
River Telta, and others.

Since the Conquest of Siberia, it is chiefly to the Muscovites we are
beholding for the particular Discovery they have made of that vast Extent of
the Northern Countries, that lie betwixt the River Oby (which traverses this
Province, and has been mentioned before) and the Famous Chinese Wall, which
divides that Famous Empire from the Grand Tartary. For the Muscovites having
once been made sensible of the prodigious Quantities of all Sorts of precious
Furrs, as the Sables, Martins and black Foxes those Countries afforded, and the
vast Profit that must needs arise to their own Country, by engrossing the
Traffic of those Commodities, have left no stone unturned, not only to make
the best Discovery they could of those Tartarian Nations, but also by settling
a fair Correspondence with them, to open to themselves a free passage into
China. Among the Tartarian Nations which inhabit that vast Tract of Ground
betwixt Siberia and China, the Tartars of Calmuck, of Mongul and Bogdoi, are
the most considerable, whether for the extent of the Countries they inhabit, or
the prodigious number of their Inhabitants. The first discovery of these Parts
has chiefly been owing to the Industry of those employed by the Muscovites in
Sable Hunting, whom they in their Language call Yachutehiki, or Hunters of
Sable Martins; These are for the most part, composed not only out of
Malefactors or Criminals, but also out of some Officers or Boyars, who for some
reason or another, having fallen under the Grand Czar's Displeasure, and being
banished into those places where these Creatures are caught, the hopes of Gains
has by degrees drawn them further and further after the Search of these
Creatures, even as far as the River Yamour, where, for their better
Convenience, the Muscovites not many years ago, have built a Fort in a certain
Island of that River, which has occasioned no small Contests betwixt them and
the Chinese. Besides the two ways of catching these Creatures by the Trap and
Net, mentioned before, they observe this Method in these remote Parts: There is
a certain number of Men Armed with Cross-bows, engaged for this Service, during
the space of seven Years, and divided under certain Officers; One of these
Officers goes abroad, at least once a Week with his Hunters and Dogs in Search
after these precious Creatures, which commonly are lurking among the little
Islands, which they kill with their Cross-Bows, not making use of any
Firearms, for fear of endamaging the Furrs; What is thus caught is all for the
Czar's Use, except a certain Allowance, the Officers have for their Pains,
which however, they are obliged to divide in proportion with their Huntsmen, to
encourage them in prosecuting the Game with the utmost diligence; The eagerness
after which has at last opened to them the Knowledge of those several Roads,
which insensibly have led them to the very Borders of China. But we will return
to those Tartarian Nations, and begin with the Tartars Calmucks, or Calmouches.

These Tartars inhabit a vast extent of Country, The Tartars Calmucks.
between the two Rivers of Volga and Jaika extending from Astrachan toward the
Caspian Sea, and bordering upon the Country of the Tartars of Mongul. They are
divided into an infinite number of Hordes* every one under their particular
Chan or Kan, who all of them acknowledge the Authority of one, who is their
Principal Chan; he is called Otchicurtican, and derives his Pedigree from the
Great Tamerlan. He is a very Potent Prince, and lives in very great Splendour,
being formidable both to the Neighboring Tartars, and Muscovites themselves;
the latter of which keep a considerable Garrison at Saratof, on the River Volga,
to hinder their Excursions on that side; and during the Winter Season, are
obliged to furnish the Nagajan Tartars about Astrachan, with Arms to defend
themselves against the Inroads of these Tartars. Formerly they used to come
every Winter to ravage the Country of the Nagajans, but since these by the
assistance of the Muscovites, have made them sensible of the effects of their
Firearms and Canons, they content themselves with coming once a Year in the
great Plains of Astrachan, for the convenience of Food for their Cattle, at a
Season, when the more Northern parts, which they inhabit, are quite destitute
of it. This is commonly done with no less than a hundred thousand Men, and they
seldom return without having received their usual Present of Bread, Aqua-vitae
and Tobacco, from the Governor of Astrachan. There is no question to be made,
but that the Muscovites are powerful enough to curb the Insolency of these
Vagabonds, if it were not out of a consideration of the Benefit they receive
from the Traffic of their Furrs and Horses, which they bring in great
Quantities to Astrachan, and that they are very serviceable to the Czar in his
Wars, being accounted the nimblest a^ Encamping and Decamping in the World, as
being accustomed to it by the frequent Incursions they make into all the
Neighboring Countries. It is chiefly for this Reason, that the Muscovites.
looked upon it as a piece of Policy, rather to allay their Fierceness by some
Presents (which however, by continuance of Time, they now demand as an
Obligation) than to engage in a War against a Multitude of Vagabonds, who have
nothing to loose; they having no Houses or fixed Habitations, much less any
Cities, but living Winter and Summer in Tents, made of Felts, in which however,
both for neatness and convenience, they exceed all the Neighboring Nations,
even those that have settled Habitations. These as well as all the other
Nations of Great Tartary, even to the Indies, are Pagans, except those of
Bokara and Samarkand, who are Mahometans. All the rest of the Pagan Nations
acknowledge for the Supreme Head of their Religion, in the same, if not in a
more absolute manner as the Roman Catholics do the Pope, a certain High
Priest, whom they call Dalae-Lama, or Lamalamalow.

The constant Residence of this Impostor is in a very strong Castle, The Pagan
Pope.
near the City of Barantola in the Tarturian Province of Tanchut, which reaches
from the Tartars of Calmuck and Mongul, between China and Persia, to the
Indies, and is Governed by a great Prince, whom they call Deva. This Pagan
Pope, the spiritual Father of the whole Great Tartary, is worshipped by these
Idolatrous Nations, by prostrating themselves before him, and adoring him, like
a God; neither are any Strangers permitted to approach him, unless they are
ready to pay him the same Devotion. The Chinese themselves show a great deal
of Veneration to him, and whenever he vouchafes to come into China, he is
received with the greatest Respect and Honor imaginable, and never returns
without vast Presents. He has his Vicars or Vicegerents residing in several of
the Tartarian Provinces, unto whom they pay the same Adoration, as to the
Dalae-Lama, or Lamamalamalow himself; These Patriarchs, or what else you will
call them, are by the Tartarians called Coutusta Lamas, and assume among other
Prerogatives, an Authority to themselves of composing such Differences, as may
arise among the Under Chans, either by themselves, or by such Judges as they
are pleased to appoint. The chief thing which contributes toward the
maintaining the great Veneration these Pagans have for the Dalae-Lama, is, that
they have been persuaded into a Belief, that he is immortal, and only renews,
like the Moon. This Impostor is carried on in the following manner: As soon as
they perceive this Dalae or Chief Priest, to be in danger of his Life, those
that have the management of this Business, make it their whole care to find out
among the other Lama's or Vicars, one who most resembles him in Person; who,
immediately after the Death of the first (whose dead Body is carefully
concealed) is set up in his Room, and declared to be the same Dalae-Lama, but
only renewed in his Person; and this Impostor is the more difficult to be
discovered, by the common People, they being but rarely allowed to see this
High Priest, unless it be at a distance, when he gives them his Benediction.

I cannot but take notice here of the Opinion, Priest Jean.
which some, that have of late years traveled into those Parts, have conceived
of this Dalae-Lama, to wit, That he is that same Priest Jean, who has made so
much noise in the World, and has been so variously represented by Historians.
Thus much is certain, that if every thing be duly weighed as it ought to be,
concerning the Title and other Things, which by many Authors are attributed to
their Priest Jean, the same may in most points be said of this Dalae-Lama; so,
that I see no reason why we may not with more Justice place him in Asia, than
these Authors have look^d for him in Abyssina, where, with all their Endeavors
and Shifts, they have never been able to find him out hitherto.

The Portugeses were the first that received, and afterward communicated this
erroneous Opinion to the rest of Europe; it being certain, that the more
an^ient Authors, who have made any mention of this Priest Jean, have placed him
always in Asia, though they have differed both as to his Name, and place of
Residence. And thus far Baltazar Tellez, Nicolas Godigno, and some others, who
have been for a considerable time resident in Ethiopia, and consequently had
the better Opportunity to be informed concerning this Matter, agree with the
Ancients, that this Priest Jeen is not to be heard of in those Parts. The
Portugeses were first led into this Error by one Pieter de Coulan, who being
sent by their King John II. to discover the East Indies by Land, after having
traversed a great part of Asia and the Indies, could not hear the least Tidings
there of this so Famous Priest Jean; But, in his return homeward, coming to
Cairo, was informed, that in Ethiopia, there was a very Potent Prince, who was
a declared Protector of the Christians, having always a Cross carried before
him. This Relation agreeing in a great measure with what had been published
before concerning Priest Jean, was the sooner received as Authentic, first, in
Portugal, and afterward all over Europe. The Jesuit ^. Kirker, has shown us
out of the Latin Chronology* of the Kings of Abyssina, That there is not the
least mention made there of this Priest Jean; and if we search narrowly into
the Ancient Authors, that have had occasion to speak (...) him, we shall find
that the greatest part of them have placed him betwixt the Country of the
Monguls and China, though perhaps in several Provinces; which difference might
perhaps arise from thence, that in former Ages this Priest Jean had his several
Vicars, as the Dalae-Lama has now, which might be taken by some for the Head it
self. St. Antonius, in the third Tome of his History, places this Priest Jean
in the Greater or Upper India, from whence, he says, he drove back the Tartars,
that invaded the Christians in those Parts. Those who have assigned him his
Reign in Kitay, have questionless comprehended that vast Country, situate
betwixt the Rivers of Volga and the Oby, as far as China, under that Name, as
the Muscovites do to this day; especially since Marcus Paulus Venetus, who
resided several Years with the Great Chan of the Tartars, places Priest Jean in
the same Kingdom of Tanchut, where the Dalae-Lama has his Residence to this
day. Both the Ancient and Modern Authors have been strangely puzzled in finding
out the true Etymology of the Word Priest Jean, but in my Opinion, that of
Scaliger is the most probable, who derives it from the Persian Word
Prestegiani, which signifies as much as Apostolic, and might easily by
Corruption be transformed into Priest Jean by such of the Europaeans, as did
not understand its true signification. There is but two Objections of any
moment to be made against this Assertion: The first is, that the same Priest
Jean, who is so much celebrated throughout Europe, and his Subjects, were
Christians; whereas the People Inhabiting now adays the Great Tartary, are
Idolaters; The second is, that Priest Jean was a Temporal Prince. As to the
first, it is to be observed, that, though at present that vast Country is
altogether possessed by Infidels or Pagans, nevertheless it is very probable,
that in more Ancient Times, the Christian Religion was introduced into those
Parts as well as others, and continued there for a considerable time, there
being certain Remnants of Christianity to be met with to this day, among some
of its Inhabitants. There is a Country in those Parts, called by the Moors in
derision, Kiaferstan, that is, The Country of the Infidels, the Inhabitants of
which are called to this day, Christians of St. Thomas; and, though no Christians
now, yet have retained Baptism for their Children, have painted Crosses in
their Churches, and bear three Red Crosses, made with the Tincture of
Sanders-Wood, in their Foreheads. I think it is almost beyond question, that in
the thirteenth Age, there was a vast number of Christians in Tartary, their
Emperor Cublai, having embraced the Christian Religion, and his Brother waged
War with great Success against the Caliph of Babylon and other Infidels. In the
fourteenth Age several of Franciscan Monks, who were sent to the Great Chan,
converted in the Kingdom of Thibet (which is next to that of Tanchut) a great
number of Pagans; and it is Remarkable, what F. Andrada, a Portugese Jesuit
relates, That in the Year 1624. when he traveled in those Parts, he found
among the Inhabitants some corrupted Idea's of Christianity; as a certain sort
of Confession of that Christian Faith, their Ancestors had professed in former
Ages. And I think it no less worth Observation, that this Dalae or High Priest
of the Tartarian, bears the Name of Lama, which in the Tartarian Language
signifies a Cross, and that the Tartars of Bogdoi, who acknowledge among the
rest the Authority of this Dalae, wear always Crosses about them, which they
call Lama's, and keep them with a great deal of Reverence. As to the second
Objection, of this Dalae not being a Temporal Prince now, this may be ascribed
to the Wars and Revolutions of a Country inhabited by several distinct Nations,
so as being first corrupted, and at last quite degenerated from their Ancient
Religion into a Barbarous Idolatry, and thereby the whole face of Affairs
changed; this Successor of Priest Jean, from being a Monarch, might become the
Head of a New Religion, or rather Idolatry.

But, Tartars of Mongul.
it is time, after this Digression, to proceed in the Description of the
Tartarian Provinces between Muscovy and China, and among them to the Tartars of
Mongul. These Tartars inhabit a very large Tract of Ground from the Western
sources of the River Yamour to the Calmuck Tartars, from whom they are however
separated by great Deserts, and border to the South-East and East upon
Turquestan and China. They are subdivided into three great Provinces, each of
them being under the Jurisdiction of its particular Chan or Taiso, who are all
three of the same Family, and cultivate a very good Understanding betwixt one
another, having several Under- Chans under their Jurisdiction. The first and
chiefest of these Chans is called Tchetchinga, his Territories lie betwixt
China and the Tartars of Bogdoi. They inhabit neither Towns nor Villages, their
Houses, which are but few in number, lying scattered here and there, without
any regularity. They are very troublesome to their Neighbors inhabiting about
the Lake Dalai, and all along the River Szelinga; one of their Under- Chans,
called Becroesain, Territories bordering upon that River. It is in the
Territories of this Chan Tchetchinga, that the Coutousta Lama, or the Vicar of
the Dalae Lama, has his Residence, being respected here as the Patriarch of all
the Monguls, and adored almost like a Deity. He follows them wherever they
ramble, and it is to him they refer the decision of all their Differences;
these Tartars being naturally of a very mild and pliable Temper. The second of
the Principal Chans, is called Octiervikan, and the third, D' Jan Gari, but
their Territories lying out of the way of Commerce, and consequently being
unfrequented by Strangers, are nothing near so well known as the first. They
are very jealous of the Tartars of Bogdoi, since they have made themselves
Masters of China, but these stand in little fear of them, as having the
Advantage of their Firearms against them, with the use of which the Monguls
are altogether unacquainted; and the Deserts betwixt them and the Calmucks or
Calmuches, serve for a Barrier to both Nations. They keep a very good
Correspondence with the Muscovites, by reason of the Neighborhood of Siberia,
where they drive a great Trade with the Muscovites, especially in Cattle,
wherein their chiefest Wealth consists, their Country being all over watered
with a great number of small Rivers, which all empty themselves into the River
Szelinga, and render their Meadows extremely fertile and ^it for Pasturage.

The Tartars of Bogdoi, Tartars of Bogdoi.
by the Chinese, called the Eastern Tartars, inhabit a vast Country, divided
under the Jurisdiction of several Chans or Tayso's; but the Province, called,
Diutchari by the Muscovites, whose Inhabitants conquer^d China, makes them the
most Famous of all the rest of the Tartars. This Province lies betwixt the
Eastern Seas, and the two great Rivers, Chingala and Yamour. They were formerly
so inconsiderable, as to be Tributaries to the Chinese, till they made
themselves both known and feared, by subduing six of the Chinese Provinces; and
would in all likelihood, have soon made themselves Masters of the whole Empire
at that time, had not the Chinese called in to their Aid the Yousbecks, who
having expelled the Tartars of Bogdoi, did not only settle themselves there,
but also put upon the Throne the Family of Ivena; which having swayed the
Scepter of this spacious Empire, till the Year 1368, was expelled by the
Chinese, and the Imperial Diadem bestowed upon the Family of Tayminga. After
this Family had reigned very peaceably for near the space of 300 Years, the
same Diutchari or Bogdoi Tartars, in the Year 1644, re-entred China with a vast
Army, and at last, reduced the whole Empire, under their Obedience. The first
Emperor of the Tartarian Race, was Chunchi their Prince, the Chief of the
Family of Taitsingva, who reigns at present in China. The Tartars of Bogdoi, as
also the Inhabitants of the Province Dauri are not near so rich in Cattle as
the Monguls, their Horses being but very small, and never Shooed by their
Owners, but they drive a considerable Trade in Sables and black Foxes Skins, as
also in Rubies and Pearls, which the Rivers, Argus, Yamour and Chingala, afford
them. Their Houses are built of nothing but Earth, and they resemble both in
their Stature and Faces most of the Europaean Tartars, but especially those of
Crim, except that they are much more civilized, by reason of their continual
Commerce with the Chinese. Their Speech and the Characters they make use of,
have a very near resemblance to the Vulgar Dialect of the Persians, but they
have above sixty Letters in their Alphabet, and write and read from the top
downward, like the Chinese. They scarce profess any certain Religion, but wear
most of them Crosses, which they keep in great Veneration, and are great
Enemies of the Mahometans. Both Guns, and Gunpowder is in use among them; but
not so frequently, neither with the same Dexterity, as in Europe, they having
not attained to the same perfection in the Composition of the latter, so, that
it being but of little Strength, and their Great Artillery, which is very
indifferently cast, not very suitable to their rambling way of living, they
more frequently make use of the same Arms as the rest of the Tartars.

Besides these three different Sorts of Tartars, we have spoken of, there are
several others, as the Tostiouski, Watski, or Vigulci, Barbanski or Scibanski,
Tyrgyski, Tingoesi, and others, who inhabit about the Lakes, and all along the
Rivers between Siberia and the Tartars of Mongul. They most of them agree in
Physiognomy and Language with the Calmuck Tartars, so, that in all probability
they are so many separate Hordes, formerly belonging to that Nation, but by
conversation and trading with the Muscovites, at last brought over to the
Jurisdiction of the Russian Empire.

The Tingoeses were first discovered to the Russians, Tingoeses
in the Year 1605, when some of the Muscovite Hunters, guided by some Siberian
Tartars, and a few Samoyedes (of whom we shall speak at large in the following
Chapter) after having passed many Rivers and several Deserts, came at last to a
River, called Jenissay (where the Muscovites have since built a City of the
same name) exceeding in bigness the River Oby it self, which having on the East
high Mountains (some of which cast out Fire) and on the West very fertile
Plains, these were the Habitations of the Tingoesi, living in wretched
Cottages, disposed into several small Hordes or Companies. The River overflows
the adjacent Plains in the Spring, during which time, the Inhabitants retire
into the Mountains, and return to the Plains with their Cattle, as soon as the
Waters are fallen: They found them of a very gentle and mild Disposition,
having at the persuasion of the Samoyedes, soon submitted themselves to the
Muscovian Government; but, what is very observable, is, that these Tartarians
have great swollen Throats, like in Italy, the Inhabitants under the Alps.

All the Tartars in those Parts are of a swarthy Complexion, inclining to an
Olive color: They have broad Faces, flat below, but rising on the upper part,
their Eyes very small, but brisk and sparkling; they have very short and flat
Noses, wearing a little Hair upon their upper Lips or Chins. The Stature and
Proportion of their Bodies is very large, something above the common Size, they
are clean and well proportioned in their Limbs; their Air, though somewhat stern
and resolute, yet carries not any marks of Cruelty or Savageness along with it.
Their Habits resemble that of most all the other Tartars, both Europaeans and
Asiaticks, being made in the nature of a Cassock or large Vest, fitted to their
Bodies, but the Materials are for the most part only Sheepskins. About the
Waste they wear a Cord or small Girdle, wherein hangs their Bow and Quiver,
which are their constant Companions, wherever they go. Their Heads are shaved
to the Crown, where they preserve a good Tuft of Hair, thick enough to make two
good Locks, one of which hangs down before, the other behind. Upon their Heads
they were no other Covering, than a round Cap, or rather Bonnet, made of the
same Stuff with their Habits; only that on the top of it, there is a pretty
large Tuft of red, white or green Silk, or perhaps of some other color,
according to the Custom of such Hordes, as they belong to; these Hordes wearing
these different colored Tufts, as a certain mark, whereby to distinguish
themselves from one another. Their Chief Men among them, especially such as
live in those places where the Sables and Martins are caught, make their
Garments either of those Furrs, or else of Dog-Skins, and sometimes, especially
during the Winter, they join both together. They generally wear the Hair of the
Dogs (of which they keep a great number) outermost making the Furrs of the
Sables or Martins the Lining to the other; not, but that they are sufficiently
sensible, how much the first exceed the latter, both in Beauty and Value; but,
say they, We do not think it just, that the Dog, who in his lifetime had been
so serviceable to us, in finding out and catching the Sables or Martins, should
be debased after his death, below those he conquered, but that his past Service
ought to be remembered, by preferring him after his death before his enemy,
which he vanquished when alive.

It is easy to be imagined, that the Muscovites, after they had hunted out
these so far distant Countries, did not acquiesce here, but left no Stone
unturned till they had made themselves an easy Passage through those Tartarian
Countries to the Empires of China and Japan. To obtain this end, they used to
send frequently their Ambassadors, and sometimes Messengers on some Pretense or
another, into those Parts, who having taken several ways, at last made the
Passage betwixt the Russian Empire and China tolerably commodious to their
Merchants, who now Travel from the City of Musco to Pekin, the Capital City of
the Chinese Empire, in less than Four Months time, with Convenience enough,
especially since the Muscovites, for the convenience of their Caravans, have
built several Cities and Forts, as the City of Genessay or Jenessay, among the
Tingoeses, upon the River of that Name; The City of Szelinga, upon the River of
the same Name, besides several Fortresses, the last of which is called Albazin,
built upon the River Yamour, three Months Journey from the City of Musco, and
but three Weeks Traveling from Pekin, the Metropolis of China.

When the Muscovian Merchants undertake this great Journey, How the Muscovite
Travel into China.
they commonly take the Advantage of the Winter-Season, which being the most
commodious in Muscovy for Traveling, by reason of the Rivers and Lakes (which
in the Summertime are no small Obstacles to Travelers) being all frozen over,
they usually set out toward the latter end of February, or the beginning of
March, when the Snow being well beaten, they Travel in Sleds from the City of
Musco to Tobol, the Capital City of Siberia, to wit, above 800 English Miles in
less than three Weeks. From hence they continue their Journey by Land to the
utmost Frontie^s of Siberia, and from thence to the Tostiouski, a Horde of
Tartars, under the Subjection of the Muscovites. Here they change their
Carriage (which they send back into Siberia) for one much more swift and
commodious. For whereas the Muscovite Sleds are usually drawn but by one Horse,
they make use in those Parts of a certain Beast, called the Reen, or Rain-Deer,
which they put in their Sleds, and to make it go the more swift, they tie a
great Dog behind, that by his barking, The Reen, or Rain-Deer.
scaring the poor Beast, makes it run with that swiftness, that it carries the
Sleds Six or Sevenscore Miles a day.

This Creature (probably the Tarandius of the Ancients) is by the Modern Latins
called Rangifer, from the Word Reen, which is the Name given it by the
Laplanders, who, as likewise the Samoyedes, and some other Northern Nations,
make a considerable Advantage of these Beasts, not only in their Sleds, but
also by making Clothes of their Skins. It is as big as a large Stagg, but much
stronger, with a very high Breast, where the Hairs, which are of a grayish
color, inclining to white, are very long and rough. They have cloven Hoofs,
the Horn of which is as hard as Iron, so that making at every step an
Impression in the Ice, they go as securely, as if they were shooed with
Frost-Nails, or walked upon the Ground, and that with such swiftness, that they
often Travel 150 Miles a day, their Horns are higher than those of the Elk, and
larger than a Stagg. They have on the Forehead two Browanklers, wherewith in
the Winter they dig up the white Moss from under the Snow for their Food, and
break the Ice, to get Water to quench their Thirst. For the rest, they are very
Sociable Creatures, feeding in Herds, and easily tamed, and made serviceable
for the draught of Sleds, which they perform with an incredible swiftness.

By the help of these Creatures the Muscovian Merchants Travel with great
Expedition, as long as the Ice continues to bear, to the City of Genessay or
Jenessay, built by the Muscovites upon a River of the same Name, for the
convenience of Travelers. From thence they take Boat to go up the two Rivers,
Lake of Biakala.
Tongusi and Augara, to the Lake of Baikala, where both these Rivers have their
rise.

The Waters of this Lake are extraordinary clear, but what makes the Passage
over it very difficult and tedious, is, that it being surrounded on all sides
with very high Rocks, and the Winds being thereby checked, they blow so
variously, and from several Points at a time, that they put the Masters of the
Vessels to a great deal of danger and trouble; so, that though its breadth be not
30 Miles over, yet are they obliged to spend sometimes a whole Week in passing
it.

After they have got over this Lake, they immediately enter toward the South,
the Country of the Mongul Tartars, Sleds with Sails.
where being furnished with Mules and Dromedaries, they continue their Journey
toward the Confines of China, which is commonly done in fifteen or sixteen
days.

But, before we part with our Traveling Merchants, I cannot forbear to mention
here a certain way they use in those Parts of easing these Reens or Sled-Stags
in their Travels, it being the more surprising, the less any thing of that
Nature is practiced among the Europaeans, though I remember to have some Years
since, seen something, not unlike to it in Holland, viz. a certain Machine,
driven forward by the help of Sails upon a Level. This is performed by the help
of Sails, which when the Wind favors, they put up in their Sleds, so that by
this means they are driven along, sometimes over the Land covered with Snow,
sometimes over the Rivers frozen with Ice; the Dog and Deer supplying the
defect of the Wind in a Country all Level, Why the Muscovites Travel by Land
into China
(such as is that vast Tract of Ground betwixt Siberia and Mount Caucasus) as
the Oars in a Vessel, when becalmed, or laboring against the Wind.

It will perhaps seem strange to those, who have some knowledge of these
North-Eastern Parts, that whereas these Traveling Merchants might with more
Ease, and less Charge, take the Advantage of those great numbers of Rivers,
which are betwixt China and Muscovy, they should choose the way by Land, as
being both more chargeable and troublesome. But, besides, that it is
sufficiently evident out of what has been said, that the Grand Tartary betwixt
China and Muscovy, is not so Desert, as has been imagined, there are
insurmountable Obstacles in these Rivers, which are sufficient to deter even
the best Seamen in the World, much more the Russians, who are hitherto not the
most expert in Sea-Affairs. Not to mention here an almost infinite number of
Rivers, whose Names are not so much as known in Europe, the most considerable,
both for the abundance of Water, and extent of their Course, are the Rivers
Oby, Genessay, or Jenessay, Lena, and Yamour. The two first have this
Inconveniency, that, where they disembogue into the Sea, they are almost all
the Year long, so choked up with whole Mountains of Ice, that they are
extremely dangerous, besides which, the latter of the two is toward the Mouth
of it so full of Cataracts, or Water-falls, at some Leagues distance from one
another, occasioned by the Rocks, whose tops being all over covered with most
delicious Flowers, by their odoriferous scent, perfume the circumjacent Air,
that they cannot be passed without unlading the Vessel, which cannot be done
without great Charge; The Mouth of the River Lena lying more Easterly, is not
so much pestered with Ice as the former, and its Course much more easy, yet
the vast number of Rocks and Shelves, which lie very close to one another at
the very Entrance of it out of the Sea, renders it very dangerous, if not quite
unpassable to Ships of never so little Burden, except it be to very small
Fisher-Boats. It Is true, the River Yamour, the most Easterly of all, would be
very convenient for Traffic, its course being uniform, were it not for a
prodigious number of Sea-Bull-rushes, which at its Entrance into the Sea, grow
like a Forest, of that thickness, that a Man can hardly grasp one of them with
both his Arms, whereby all Passage for Ships to go into the Sea, is quite
obstructed: All these Difficulties and Obstacles considered, who can blame the
Muscovites, if they prefer the most commodious and shortest Way before the
dangers of these Rivers, which however, are not useless, but rather very
commodious to them in their Land-Travels from Siberia, cross the Tartarian
Provinces, to the Confines of China; forasmuch as they travel with more Ease
over them when they are frozen, and are more Navigable toward their Sources,
than toward the End of their Courses? During the Differences betwixt the
Muscovites and Chinese, arisen about the Building of the Fort of Albazin by
the first, upon the River Yamour, these Merchants used to go by Water upon the
Rivers, Oby and Szelinga, as far as the City which bears the same name with the
last of these Rivers, being built there by the Muscovites, for the Convenience
of their Traveling Mercants. From this City they travel by Land through the
Country of the Tartars of Mongul, to the place of Residence of the Chan of
Becroesain, one of their Principal Chans, where also resides the Coutusta-Lama,
or Vicar of the Tartarian High Priest; here by the means of some Presents, they
obtain Guides and Carriages, with a good Convoy, who conducts them to the
Frontiers if China.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Samoyedes, Groenland, Livonia and Courland.
THE Samoyedes or Samogedes, inhabit that Tract of Ground, which lies
North-East of Siberia, on both sides of the River Oby, extending to the
Straight of Weigats in the Frozen Sea; their Habitation being under the frigid
Zone it self. This Country was first discovered to the Muscovites, by a Russian
Merchant, whose name was Oneke, who having for a considerable time traded with
the Inhabitants in rich Furrs, and gathered great Wealth, at last made a
Discovery of it to the Czar of Muscovy, who having sent thither a splendid
Embassy, they soon persuaded them to submit to His Czarish Majesty, paying a
certain number of Sable Skins for their yearly Tribute. They were formerly
comprehended under the name of those the Ancients, called Shytes or Sarmates,
it being certain, that the word Samoyedes, is a Muscovian Word, signifying as
much as self-eaters, composed out of Sam, which signifies ones self, and Geda
to eat, because they used to eat the Bodies of their dead Friends, mixed with
their Venison, in the last of which, this Country abounds, and always was, and
is to this day, their ordinary Food. Some would have them to be the same Abii,
of which Curtius speaks, that they sent Ambassadors to Alexander the Great, and
that they were called Obii from the River Oby. Though they have no Cities, yet do
they not live a Vagabond-life, like most of the Tartars, but have their settled
Habitations, which are certain Cabans or Huts, some Foot deep under the Ground,
of a circular Figure, built Vault-wise a top, having in the middle of it a
Hole, underneath which is the Fireplace, round about which they lie during the
Winter; it serves both for a Chimney, and sometimes for a Door, through which
they let in the Air, when the others are stopped up by the Snow, which falls here
often six or seven Foot high. During this Season, which lasts six Months, and
keeps them in continual Darkness; their Correspondence is maintained betwixt
them by the Trenches or Walks under Ground from one Hut to another, by which
means they visit one another, the absence of the Sun being supplied by the
melancholy light of Lamps, fed with Oil, drawn of a certain Fish, of which as
well as of all other Necessaries, they make provision in the Summer; which
Season begins here, as soon as the Sun comes to the Equinoctial Line, and
enters into the Septentrional Signs of the Zodiac, and rejoices them with a
Day as long, but not so tedious, as the Night had been before. It is then they
leave their doleful Huts, and apply themselves to their usual Employments,
which is chiefly Hunting. I am apt to believe that it is upon the Account of
these Samoyedes, that some have founded their fabulous Narrations of a certain
People that sleep six Months in the year, or that die in the beginning of
Winter, and rise up again in the Spring, like the Swallows or Frogs; as that,
what has been related of some of the Northern Countries, to wit, that there are
People there without Heads, having their Eyes in their Breasts; That they have
Feet so big, as that one of them shades the whole Body, and being thus covered
with their Feet, neither Sun nor Rain can come at them, questionless owes its
Origin to their Garments and Pattins they make use of in the Winter. For, their
upper Garments are made like Vests, or rather Cosaques, falling down to the
mid-leg, bordered below with Furr, open only at the bottom (by which they get
into them) and in the upper part, where they put out their Faces; when the Cold
is excessive, they cover their Heads with a certain Cap, like to the
Capuchines, made in the same Fashion with the Head of a Man. So in the
Wintertime, these Samoyedes, as well as the Laplanders, and Finlanders, wear a
kind of Shoes or Pattins, made of Bark of Trees, or some very thin Wood; Those
that are worn by the Samoyedes, are an Ell and a half long toward the Toe, but
those of the Laplanders and Finlanders, are as long to the Heels as to the
Toes; they use them with so much Agility upon the Snow, that down a Hill, they
will outdo in swiftness some Horses. For the rest, their Garments are made of
the Skins of the Reens, the Nerves and Veins of these Beasts serving them for
Thread to sow their Clothes; At the end of the Sleeves of their Cosaques they
have their Muffs sowed on, which they either let hang loose, or make use of to
cover their Hands, as occasion requires. Under these Cosaques they wear Shirts
made of the Skins of young Reens or Rain-Deer, which, having very short Hair,
are softer than Linen, and under these Shirts they wear their Drawers. Upon
their Heads they wear very large Caps or Bonnets, which hang down round about
their Necks; they are commonly made by the Muscovites, of Cloth of several
Colors, lined with Furr, and sold to the Samoyedes. They wear also Boots with
the Furr on the outside, which makes them appear at first sght, more like
Savage Beasts than Men. They have a way of scraping the inside of the Bark of
Beech as fine as the Shavings of Ivory, which serves them for Handkerchiefs,
for they take a Handful of it at a time, to wipe their Faces, Noses or Hands.
The length of the Winter Season making their Ground not fit for Tillage, they
have no Corn nor Cattle, so that they are contented, to live upon what Nature
affords them: their Food being Fish dried in the Wind and Sun, instead of
Bread, Honey and Venison; and the Flesh of young Whelps or Puppies, is esteemed
a dainty Fare among them. Their Stature is very low and mean, having very short
Legs, almost like the Groenlanders, of whom we shall have occasion to speak
anon; their faces large and flat without Beards, and their Eyes very little,
like the Tartars, but not so sparkling. The Women here are very ugly, so that
by their Faces and Clothes, which are exactly like to the Men's, their Sex is
not to be distinguished at first sight. Notwithstanding which, they are very
jealous of them, being extremely nice in preserving their Wives for their own
Use. For this reason they buy them at the Age of six or seven from their
Parents, without daring to look upon them before the Bargain is made, the usual
payment is a certain number of Deers, the only valuable Commodity their Country
affords, thus thinking themselves assured of their Virginity, they keep them
very close, nay more strict than in Italy, both before and after Marriage, and
there is some who affirm, that when they go abroad a Hunting, they make (...) a
certain Engine to preserve their Chastity; a convincing Instance, that Ugliness
is no preservative against Jealousy.

Their Language and Laws are equally unknown to Strangers, the latter being
altogether established by Custom, before they submitted themselves to the
Muscovite Government. He that is the best Magician, is considered among them as
the most excellent Man; if they happen to sell any of their Deer to Strangers,
they reserve to themselves the Entrails, which they keep for their own eating.
Their Arms are no other than a Bow and Arrows, which they make use of when they
go abroad a Hunting, which being their continual Exercise, they are most
excellent at Shooting; they have also a certain way of Dancing, but the most
ridiculous in the World. They were formerly all Pagans and Idolaters; for when
the Hollanders in the Year 1595. in their Voyage to the North, landed some of
their Men near the Straight of Weigats, they found near the Seaside abundance
of Idols, for which the Samoyedes had so much Affection, that they would not
allow the Dutch, though never so much entreated, to carry away one of them. But,
in this Age the Christian Religion was planted there by the help of a Russian
Bishop of Wolodimer, who having been sent thither with some Priests, brought
most of them over to the Greek Religion.

But before we take our leave of these Northern Parts belonging to the Grand
Czar of Muscovy's Dominions, America, (...)
it will perhaps not be amiss to say something concerning a certain Conjecture
some of the most Curious among the Russians have of the nearness of America to
these Northern Parts. They say, there is beyond the Oby a very large River,
called Kawoina, into which another River, named Lepa, emptying it self, they
discharge themselves into the Frozen Sea. Near the Mouth of this River is a
very spacious Island, well peopled, whose chief Employment is Hunting, but
especially after a certain Animal, called Behemot, of which we shall say
something anon; The Muscovites say, that this Creature being very difficult to
Hunt most generally upon the sides of the Frozen Sea, they oftentimes are
obliged to carry their Families along with them; so, that happening many times
to be surprised by a sudden Thaw, they are upon huge pieces of Ice, that break
from one another, carried at a great distance; They persuade themselves that it
were some of these Hunters, who being carried upon these floating pieces of Ice
to the most Northern Parts of America, which is not far from that part of Asia,
which juts out into the Tartarian Sea, settled the first Colonies there. They
allege, for the confirmation of this Opinion, that the Inhabitants of the most
Northern Parts of America, bordering on that Sea, have the same Features with
those Hunting Islanders, and that some Creatures are very frequent in the
Northern America, which are commonly to be found on the Muscovian side,
especially Beavers, all which they believe to have been transported thither in
the same manner.

As to what relates to the Behemot; Ivory Teeth of B^hemot.
it is an amphibious Animal, as big as a Crocodile, and as dangerous to Hunt.
But what makes these Islanders so Industrious, even so as to venture their
Lives, in the search after this Creature, which is usually found in the
abovementioned River Lena, and upon the Shore of the Tartarian Sea, is its
Teeth, which being ten Inches long, and two in Diameter at the Root, exceed in
every respect the Elephant's Teeth, being incomparably whiter and smoother than
the Ivory which is brought from the Indies, and in very high Esteem amongst the
Turks and Persians, who use them in making their Hafts of Scymitars and
Daggers, which they prefer before Silver or Gold; being persuaded, that it has
a most Specific Property to stanch Blood in those that carry it about them.

The Consonancy there is betwixt the Groenlanders and the Samoyedes, Groenland.
and also the Tartars, we have spoken of before, may be a sufficient inducement
to say something of their Country, before we leave the North. Groenland is
generally now a days believed to be a Continent bordering upon Tartary on the
East, and on America Westward; They are a People Savage, Stubborn, and
Indisciplinable, without any Civility, knowledge of Virtue or Shame; especially
in the most Northern Parts, they being somewhat more docile toward the
South-West.

They are all Pagans or Idolaters; Their Idols
Their Idols being for the most part made of a piece of Wood of one Foot and a
half high, covered either with Feathers, or with some Skin or another, the
hairy side outward. They prostrate themselves at Sunrising, which seems to
intimate that they adore the Sun. There were about Forty Years ago some few of
these Groenlanders brought into Denmark, in whom there was observed some
remnants of Religion, or rather Superstition, forasmuch as one of them refused
to eat of the Flesh of some Beasts, as being held unclean, are not eaten in
Europe.

Their Clothes are made of the Skins of Sea-Dogs, Clothes.
Sea-Calves, and Reens, not unlike to those of the Samoyedes, but that they
wear under their Cosaques Wastcoats, made of the Skins of Birds, such as Swans,
Geese, Wild Ducks, or Teals, turning the Feathers either inward or outward,
according to the difference of the Season. The difference of both Sexes is not
easily distinguished in their Garments, but that the Breeches of the Women do
not reach quite down to the Knees, whereas they wear theirs below them. They
live all in an equal degree, not knowing any Superiority among one another,
those being esteemed the richest, who have the most Children, most Bows and
Arrows, and kill the most Venison or Wild Fowl, the only Reward of their
Industry and Skill.

They are low of Stature, Their Stature and Manners.
but strong and well-set, their Faces broad, with little Eyes, but very lively;
their Hands and Feet short, almost like the Nagajan Tartars, but that they are
more swarthy, and their Skin much softer. Their Hair is blacker than Jet, which
they roll together, and bind it up on their Crowns. Some of them wear certain
Trinkets in their Ears. The Women as well as the Maids have their Breasts
flagging and falling down to their Bellies, the Nipples being as black as a
Coal. They suckle their Children over their shoulders, and it is very
remarkable, that those Women that were some Years ago brought into Denmark,
were observed to have no Hair in any other Part, but the Head, and to be free
from the Monthly Courses of Women. They are, for the rest, very like the
Samoyedes, except that they do not make the same account of Chastity, but in
that Point Act according to the Natural State of Freedom, both Men and Women
exercising the Venereal Act without control or shame, even in the Presence of
a great many standers-by, the Young Wenches being only obliged to ask their
Parents consent, which they rarely deny them. This was verified by two
Instances, in the Voyage of the Danes to Groenland, we have mentioned before;
one of these Women, that was to take a merry Bout with a Seaman, having by this
means, with several others, that were to be Witnesses to the consummation of
the Bargain, been trapan'd under Deck, they were carried into Norway, and from
thence into Holstein. Being arrived at Bergves in Norwegen, there was no small
concourse of People to take a view of these Savages, and among the rest a Lady
of Quality approaching nearer to the Groenland Man, he, without any further
Ceremony, attempted to Board her, making the best way he could to find out with
his Hands, what was hidden under her Petticoats.

Their Language is altogether unknown to Strangers, Language.
unless it be some few Words, which are said to have some resemblance with
Latin and Greek, which must be accidental. They speak very fast, and in the
Throat, and pronounce, not without difficulty, the Words that have a G in them;
they never pronounce the R (as do also the Tartars) but always turn it into L.
They are unacquainted with Gold or Silver; their Commerce is performed by
Trucking: They put such Commodities, as they offer to sell, together; and on
the other hand, they pick out of what is brought to them, what they like best,
so that the Buyer and Seller add and diminish, till such time that both Parties
are content with the Bargain.

The most valuable Commodity this Country affords, Their Commodities.
is the Teeth of the Fish Towack, which being twisted round, and sharp at the
end, not unlike a Horn, has been for a considerable time imposed upon the World
in lieu of that of the Unicorn of the Ancients, till Experience has
sufficiently evidenced the contrary. This, with the Fat and Oil of Whales,
Skins of Sea-Dogs and Sea-Calves, they truck for Knives, Scissars, Needles,
Looking-Glasses, Iron, and Steel. Besides which, Groenland affords Talk, Marble
of all colors; and, according to the report of some, also Silver Oar.

They have a particular way of catching the Whales. How they catch the Whales.
They make use of a very long Thong, cut out of the Whale's Skin, unto this
they fasten to one end a Hook, made out of the Tooth of the beforementioned
Fish Towack, and at the other end the Skin of a Sea-Dog, or Sea-Calf, blown up;
this being thrown at, and having wounded the Whale, by its floating upon the
surface of the Water, discovers the Tract of the wounded Whale. If they believe
the Wound not Mortal, they dart several more at her, till such time they
perceiving that the strength begins to fail her with the loss of Blood, they
come up to her with their Boats, kill her, and draw her on Shore.

The Fat of the Whales, but especially their Oil, is the greatest Dainty they
have, which they prefer before our Sugar, Spices, or Vinegar, which they have
been observed to refuse; as they also showed more satisfaction in their
ordinary Food of Sea-Dogs, Calves, Reens, Foxes, House-Dogs, and Fish, but
especially Stock Fish, than in any of our Dishes.

The swarthy color of these Inhabitants of the coldest Climate in the World,
might very well furnish us with an Opportunity to make a Digression here, in
contradiction of what is affirmed by Pliny, to wit, Lib. 2. c. 78.
That the heat of the Sun burns the Skin, as on the contrary, the Cold whitens
it, if Natural Philosophy were not at present beyond our scope; wherefore we
will pursue the Tract of our History, and give a short Description of Livonia.

The Country of Livonia or Liefland, Livonia.
borders on the East upon Muscovy, on the North it is divided from Sweden and
Finland by a Gulf of the Baltic Sea, called by the Latins, Sinus Livonicus;
On the West it has the Baltic Sea, and on the South Samogitia, Lithuania, and
Prussia. It is of a very large extent, being near 600 English Miles long, and
200 broad. It is divided into three Provinces, to wit, into Esthonie, Lettie,
and Courland. The first of these Provinces is subdivided into five Circuits,
called Hanie, Wirland, Allentaken, Jerwe, and Wiecks; its Metropolis is Revel,
as Riga of the Province of Lettie, and Goldingen is the Capital of Courland.

The City of Revel, The City of Revel.
the Capital of the Province of Esthonie, is situate upon the Baltic Sea, at
50 degr. 25 min. Latitude, and 48 degr. 30 min. Longitude. It has for its
Founder, Waldemar or Wolmar II. King of Denmark, who laid the first Foundation
of it in the Year 1230. But King Wolmar III. sold it in the Year 1347. with
some other Cities in that Country, to Goswin d' Eck, the then Master of the
Livonian Order of Knights. The Muscovites have for above these Hundred Years
past been very ambitious to unite, not only this City, but also the whole
Livonia, with the Russian Empire, which has occasioned several Wars, not only
betwixt them and the Masters of the Livonian Knights, but also with the Swedes,
after this City had put it self under the Protection of Eric, King of Sweden,
near a Hundred and Fifty Years ago. This City is very Famous for two memorable
Sieges it held out against the Muscovites, the first, in the Year 1570. the
second, in the Year 1577. both which the Muscovites were forced to raise with
great Loss. The City is fortified according to the Modern way, but its chief
strength lies in its Castle, which being most advantageously situated upon a
Rock, steepy on all sides, renders it almost unaccessible, except toward the
City, where it is defended by very good Works. It has a most excellent Haven,
fitted rather by Nature than Art, for the convenience of Trade, especially with
Muscovy. It is one of the most Ancient Towns belonging to the Hanseatick
League, and had for some Years, in Conjunction with the City of Lubeck, the
Direction of the College belonging to the Hanseatick Towns in the City of
Novogorod Veliki. It was very flourishing in its Commerce, from the Year 1477.
till the Year 1550. when having broken with the other Hanseatick Towns, the
Muscovites soon after took the City of Narva, and established there the Trading
they had before in this City; Notwithstanding which, it enjoys to this day the
Privilege of being a Mart, which has been confirmed to them by several
Treaties betwixt the Muscovites and Swedes, to wit, in the Year 1595. at
Teusma, in the Year 1607. at Wibourg, and in the Year 1617. at Stolvova; though,
at the same time, their Wings have been clipped of late Years, as to several
Privileges granted to them formerly by the Masters of the Livonian Order, and
were since looked upon as dangerous to the Prerogatives of their Sovereign. The
Ecclesiastical Government is here, like in most other Commonwealths that
profess the Protestant Religion, according to the Tenure of the Ausburg
Confession, administered by a Consistory and a Superintendent; And their Civil
Constitution comes very near to a Democratical State, the Magistrates having no
Power to Transact any thing of moment, without the Advice of the Principal Men
of several Professions, and in Matters of Extraordinary Consequence, not
without Summoning every Freeman of the City. Within half a League of it,
toward the Seaside, are to be seen the Ruins of a stately Monastery, about
200 Years ago dedicated to St. Bridget, by a very wealthy Merchant of this
City. The only thing Remarkable here, is, a Book composed of the Foundation of
this Monastery, intimating, That the Religious Men and Women (for it consisted
of both) of this Monastery had been so ingenious, even in those days, as to
have found out a way to make themselves to be understood by one another by
certain Signs, without the help of Words.

The next City of Note in the Province of Esthonie, Narva.
is Narva, situate in the Circuit of Allentaken, at 60 degrees Elevation. It
has its Name from the River Narva or Nerva, which having its rise in the Lake
Pripis, falls with a very swift Current into the Gulf of Finland, about Ten
Miles below this City. Near three Miles above it, there is a most dangerous
Cataract or Water-fall, which obliges the Ships that come down the River from
Plescou and other Places to Narva, to unlade their Merchandises near that
Place. This Town, which is not very large, but exceeding strong, by reason of
the adjacent Castle, is said to be built, as well as the City of Revel, by
Wolmar II. King of Denmark, and was in the Year 1558. besieged and taken by
John Basilovits, Great Duke of Muscovy, but recovered by the Swedes in the Year
1581. under the Conduct of Pontus de la Guard, the Swedish General, under whose
Jurisdiction it remains to this day. It has for many Years past enjoyed the
same Privileges with the other Hanseatick Towns, and was in the last Age a
Place of very good Traffic, till the Muscovian Trade was from thence, by the
English and Dutch, transferred to Archangel, and the Wars betwixt the
Muscovites and Swedes destroyed its Commerce. During the War betwixt the
English and the Dutch in Oliver Cromwell's Time, the Commerce to Archangel being
interrupted, there began to be a Prospect of reviving the Trade into Muscovy,
abundance of Ships making use of this Harbor for that purpose at that time,
so, that the Haven was repaired, and several new Additions were made to the
Town, for the Convenience of Strangers. It has two Castles belonging to it, one
on this side of the River, and the other on the opposite Shore, in a Peninsula,
made by the River Nerva. It is called Ivanovogorod, and was built there by the
Muscovites upon a Rock, so inaccessible, that it was judged Impregnable, and
was not taken by the Swedes, till in the Year 1617. when Gustavus Adolphus made
himself Master of it. At the foot of this Castle is another small Town, or
rather Suburb, called Narva Muscovite, being inhabited by Muscovites, but
subject to the Crown of Sweden, under the Jurisdiction of the Swedish Governor
of the Castle. Betwixt Revel and Narva, there are in the Woods, Bears and
Wolves of an extraordinary bigness, which, during the Winter-Season, do
abundance of Mischief to the Peasants. There is in Narva to be seen the Skin of
a Wolf of a prodigious Size, which is said to have killed six Peasants out of
twelve he met upon the Road before he was killed himself. They fasten commonly
a great Stick to their Sleds, which Noise they believe frightens the Wolves and
makes them run away.

The Capital City of the second Province in Livonia, Riga.
which is called Lettie, is the City of Riga. Its origin is somewhat doubtful,
both as to the time, and the true name of its first Founder; some having
ascribed it to Albert, the third Bishop of Livonia, in the Year 1196. Others to
one Bertold, of the Order of the White Friars, Abbot of Locken in the Country
of Shovenburgh, in the Diocese of Mindea, who is said to have built it in the
year 1189, and to have made it a Bishop's Seat. But it is beyond question, that
in the Year 1215, it was raised to the Dignity of an Archbishopric, and made
the Seat of the Metropolitan of all Livonia, Prussia and Courland. This
occasioned afterward great Jar^ngs betwixt the Livonian Knights and that
Archbishop, as also betwixt him and the Masters of the Teutonick Order in
Prussia, concerning the Sovereignty and Administration of Justice in this
place, which was at several times divided betwixt them, till the Reformation
put a stop to their further Differences, by taking from them all the Authority
they formerly had in this City. It surrendered it self by a voluntary Rendition
to the Crown of Poland, in the Year 1561, during the War the Muscovites made in
Livonia about that Time. Since which it was twice, but in vain, besieged by
Charles Duke of Sudermannia (Uncle to Sigismond, King of Poland and Sweden)
after he had got into Possession of the Kingdom of Sweden. But Gustavus
Adolphus, took it at last in the Year 1621, by Composition, after a Siege of
six Weeks, and the Swedes remain ever since in Possession of it; for, tho by
virtue of the Truce concluded betwixt the two Crowns of Poland and Sweden, in
the Year 1635, the same was not granted to the Swedes, any longer than till the
Peace, they were, according to the Tenor of the Treaty of Peace, concluded
betwixt these two Crowns, in the Monastery of Oliva near Dantzick, in the Year
1666, (wherein John Casimir, King of Poland, also resigned his Pretension to
the Crown of Sweden) put into the entire Possession of this City, and the whole
Livonia. It is situate upon the River Dune, which about ten or twelve Miles
from hence discharges it self into the Baltic Sea, and is near this City,
above a Mile broad, in a very spacious and pleasant Valley. It is well
fortified on the Land-side, to wit, with six regular Bastions, and as many half
Moons, the Counterscarp being Pallisado'd. It is very populous, because of the
extraordinary Concourse of People, that flock hither both in Winter and Summer
on the account of Commerce, which, while the Baltic Sea is Navigable, is
carried on with the English, Dutch, and Hanseatick Towns, and when the Frost
and Snow has fitted the Roads and River for Sleds, with the Muscovites. All
sorts of Provisions are extremely Cheap here, but especially Venison, by reason
that the Peasants have a Privilege hereabouts to Hunt at pleasure. The
Lutheran is the established Religion here, with exclusion of all others,
whether Protestants, Catholics or Muscovites. The High Dutch and Stavonian
Languages, are equally understood by most of the Inhabitants, but the
High Dutch being looked upon as the Principal, not only all People of any
Fashion, both in Speaking and Writing, but also the Magistrate in his public
Acts, and the Ministers in their Sermons make use of it, except it be in two
particular Churches, where Sermons are made in the Slavonian and Courland
Languages, for such of the meaner Sort, as perhaps do not so exactly understand
the High Dutch Tongue.

The next City in rank is called Derpt or Torpat. Derpt.
It is seated in the midst of all Livonia, upon the River Eimbec, between the
two Lakes of Worzero and Peipis. The remnants of its ancient Buildings, show it
to have been none of the least considerable in those Parts (before the frequent
Revolutions which happened in this Country, during the War betwixt the
Muscovites, Poles and Swedes, have rendered its condition much declining from
what it was in former Ages. It is called by the Muscovites, Jupogorod, who were
possessed of it till the Year 1230, when it was taken by the Master of the
Teutonick Order, who made it also the Seat of a Bishop. In the year 1558, John
Basilovits, Grand Duke of Muscovy, having unexpectedly advanced with an Army
near to the City, struck such a Consternation into its Inhabitants, that
without striking one Blow, they surrendered to the Grand Duke. But the Year
1571, proved most fatal to this City; For one Reinold Rose, a Gentleman of
Livonia, having laid a Design, to put the City into the hands of Magnus, Duke
of Helstein, and being discovered before it could be put in Execution, the
Citizens paid dearly for it, the Muscovites exercising all manner of Cruelties
upon them, without distinction of Age or Sex. Pursuant to the Treatise of
Peace, made in the year 1582, between the Grand Duke, John Basilovits and
Stephen Battory, King of Poland, it was surrendered to the latter, with the rest
of Livonia, that remained in Possession of it till the year 1625; when James de
la'Garde, General of the Swedish Army, took it from them, who keep it ever
since by Virtue of the Truce made betwixt these two Crowns, in the year 1635,
which was since confirmed by the Peace concluded in the Year 1666, at the
Monastery of Oliva. Gustavus Adolphus founded an University here in the Year,
1632; but it is not much frequented, unless it be by a few Finlanders, the
Livonian Nobility sending their Sons for the most part abroad to the
Universities in Germany.

To this Province also belongs the City of Parnau, Parnau.
having received its name from the River Parnau or Pornou, upon which it is
seated. It is divided into the new and old Town, and was formerly a Member of
the Hanseatick Leagues, but its Trade is much decayed of late Years, the only
thing they now deal in being Wheat; it is not very big, but has a pretty good
Castle built of Wood, after the Muscovian Fashion. The River Pornou rises out
of a great Forest, near the Castle of Weissenstein, situated upon the little
River Beca, and being in its passage augmented by the two Rivers, Fela and
Perukeja, exonerates its self into the Baltic Sea, not far below this City. It
was for a considerable time in the possession of the Poles, who had taken it
from the Muscovites, till in the year, 1562, the Swedes made themselves Masters
of it, but was however, three years after, recoverd by the Poles by Stratagem,
and ten Years after that, taken by the Muscovites, who remained in possession
of it, till by virtue of the beforementioned Treaty betwixt the Muscovites and
Poles; this, with the rest of Livonia was surrendered to the latter The Swedes
retook it from the Poles, in the Year 1617, and have kept it ever since by the
ensuing Treatises betwixt these two Crowns.

The third Province of Livonia, Courland.
is the Duchy of Courland, being divided from the former by the River Dune.
This Province was miserably ruined during the Wars betwixt the Muscovites,
Poles and Swedes; and when the Master of the Teutonick Order, and the
Archbishop of Riga were forced to submit themselves to the Protection of
Poland, with all that was remaining under their Jurisdiction, Sigismund
Augustus, King of Poland, made Courland a Dukedom, which he bestowed upon
Godard Kettler of Nesselroth, last Master of the Teutonick Order in Livonia, to
be held as a Fief from the Crown of Poland. But William, the youngest Son of
this Godard, who enjoyed the Dukedom after his Elder Brother Frederick died
without Issue, was dispossessed of it by Sigismund III. King of Poland, being
forced to live in Exile till the year 1619. when by the Mediation of several
Foreign Princes, he was reestablished in his Dukedom; whose Posterity enjoy it
to this day. Its Capital City is Goldingen, but the Residence of the Duke is at
Mittaw, Mittaw.
situate in that part of Courland which is called Semgalles, above thirty Miles
from the City of Riga. During the first War betwixt the Poles and Swodes, the
latter took the City of Mittaw, which they fortified and kept in their
Possession till the year 1629, when, by Virtue of the Truce then agreed on
betwixt these two Crowns, they were obliged to restore it to the Duke of
Courland. At the Entrance of the Gulf called by the Inhabitants, Couri-Chaf,
or Lake of Courland, is a pleasant little Town, Memel.
called Memel by the Germans, and Cleupeda by the Courlanders. It is
encompassed by the River Tange, which not far from thence falls into the Gulf.
Its Castle is extremely pleasantly situated, and well fortified, and its
Harbor very commodious. It was built in the Year 1250, and belonged to the
Friars of the Order of Livonia, who, in the year 1328, sold it to the Master of
the Order of Prussia. By Virtue of the Truce concluded betwixt the Poles and
Swedes in the year 1635, this City and that Duchy were absolutely surrendered
under the Jurisdiction of the Elector of Brandenburgh, who remains ever since
in full Possession of it.

The Country of Livonia it self was not known in these Parts till in the Year
1158. when a certain Ship of Bremen being forced by a Tempest into the Gulf of
Riga, the Merchants of that City began to establish a Commerce, and soon after,
the Christian Religion in this Country, its Inhabitants having been all Pagans
before that time, of whose Superstitions and Sacrifices we shall have occasion
to speak anon. The first that preached the Gospel among them, was Menard, a
Monk of Segeberg, afterward, in the Year 1170. made the first Bishop of
Livonia, by Alexander III. Pope of Rome. His Successor Bertold, a Monk of the
Order of White Friars, not following the footsteps of his Predecessor, was for
employing the Sword in converting these Idolatrous People, who having taken up
Arms, killed him with above 10000 Christians; so that the Christian Interest
was in the utmost danger of having been quite lost in that Country, had not the
Prudence of Albert, a Canon of Bremen, and Successor to Bertold in the
Bishopric of Livonia, in part restored what the former had lost.

For he, Livonian Knights.
the better to establish the Christian Interest in these Parts, by the
Authority received from Pope Innocent III. laid the first Foundation of the
Order of the Livonian Knights, or Friars of the short Sword, so called, because
they wore on their white Cloaks a red short Sword, with a Star of the same
color, which they have changed since into two short Swords, Salter-wise. They
were obliged almost to the same Rules with the Knights-Templars; were to fight
against the Infidels and Barbarians, and to have the third part of all that
they gained from their Enemies. But in regard this New Religious Order at first
was scarce sufficient to subsist upon its own Bottom, it was joined to the
Order of St. Mary of Jerusalem, in the Year 1238. in the Person of Herman
Balek, Grand Master of the Teutonick Order in Prussia; since which time, the
Masters of the Livonian Order had a dependence from the Grand Masters of that
Order, till being hardly pressed upon by the Muscovites, they were forced to
submit to the Protection of the Crown of Poland. It is from hence, that the
Emperors of Germany first claimed the Title over these Lords or Masters of the
Order of Livonia, and in the Year 1513. they became entirely Subjects of the
Empire, when the Archbishop of Riga, with his Suffragans, and the Master of the
Knightly Order, who had in part freed himself of the Subjection of the Grand
Master of Prussia, were received among the Princes of the Empire. But the
Muscovites, by reason of its convenient Situation, had for a considerable time
looked upon it with a wishful Eye, and in the Year 1501. entered it with a very
Powerful Army, but were vanquished in a pitched Battle, fought betwixt them and
Walter de Plattenbergh, Master of the Livonian Order, where 40000 Muscovites
were killed upon the spot, which obliged them to make a Truce with the
Livonians for Fifty Years. This being expired, the Grand Duke of Muscovy, John
Basilovits, being flushed with his late Conquests of the Kingdoms of Casan and
Astrachan, and taking Advantage of the Differences that were then betwixt the
Master of the Knightly Order, and the Archbishop of Riga, entered Livonia with a
numerous Army, and having ruined all with Fire and Sword in the Bishopric of
Derpt or Torpat and Wirland, retreated into Muscovy. This having put the whole
Country into a great Consternation, they were for seeking Aid in all Parts, and
having made their first Application to the Empire, but with little Success, the
City of Revel, which was the most exposed of all, offered to put it self under
the Protection of the King of Denmark, which having been refused, they had
recourse to Eric, King of Sweden, who likewise refused them the desired
Succors of Men and Money, unless they would put themselves under his
Protection (in which case he would maintain them in their Privileges) the City
and adjacent Nobility separated from the Master of the Order, and submitted to
the Protection of the Crown of Sweden in the Year 1560. In the mean while, the
Archbishop of Riga, and the Coadjutor of the Order of Livonia had made a League
Defensive with Sigismund Augustus, King of Poland, unto whom they had promised
300000 l. Sterling toward the defraying the Charges of the War, and for his
Security, had engaged several Bailywicks; But the King of Poland being sensible
of the extreme danger they were in, and how the City of Revel, and the Province
of Esthonie or Esthland, had been forced to submit themselves to the Crown of
Sweden, refused to execute the Treaties, unless they would follow the Example
of the rest of Livonia, and submit themselves upon the same terms to the Crown
of Poland, as they had done to Sweden. Being therefore reduced to an absolute
necessity of choosing the least Evil, the Archbishop and Master of the Order
were forced to Surrender all the Acts and Charters they had obtained from the
Emperor and Pope, into the Hands of Prince Radzivil, who, in the King of
Poland's Name, received also from them the Oath of Fidelity. The King of Poland
gave the Title of Duke, with the Country of Gourland, to the Master of the
Livonian Order, as we have said before, in the Description of Courland, in the
Year 1562. And Twenty Years after, to wit, in the Year 1582. by virtue of a
Peace concluded with the Muscovites, the Poles got into Possession of the whole
Livonia, except that part of Esthonie which had surrendered to the Swedes; who
by degrees got all the rest from the Poles, which was entirely resigned to them
in the Year 1666. by the Treaty of Peace made betwixt these two Crowns, in the
Monastery of Oliva, near Dantzick.

The Country of Livonia is very fertile, but especially in Wheat, abounding in
all sorts of Cattle, Fowl, and Venison; an Ox being commonly to be bought here
for Twenty Shillings, a Hog for a Crown, and a good Hare for a Groat; but has
within these two Years last past been so oppressed with Famine, that a great
many Thousands of the Peasants have died for Hunger.

Its Inhabitants must be considered under different Qualifications; Inhabitants
of Livonia*
The first, are the Germans and their Posterity, out of which most of the
Nobility, and the Inhabitants of the Cities are composed; The second, are the
Peasants, the remainders of the Ancient Inhabitants, who living in the Champain
Country of Lettie and Esthonie, have nothing they can call their own, but are
absolute Slaves either to the Nobility or Chief Citizens. They are called by
the Germans, Vnteutsche, that is to say, no Germans, perhaps, because they
cannot be brought to conform themselves to the manner of Living and Language of
the Germans. They are the greatest Slaves in the World, but it is alleged
against them, that, if they were not kept under such a severe Subjection, they
would be always endeavoring to recover their Liberty at any rate, of which
they have given some Proofs, when ever any Occasion presented.

The Origin of the Livonian Nobility is founded upon the Services they have in
former Ages done against the Infidels and Muscovites; Their Nobility.
they are free from all Taxes and Charges. Volmar II. King of Denmark, was the
first that gave them Manors to hold in Fealty, which were confirmed by Eric
VII. by Letters Patents, and augmented by the Masters of the Short Sword, and
the Grand Masters of Prussia. Some of these Manors, especially in the
Districts of Harrie and Wirland, are Inheritable by the Daughters and their
Issue, to the fifth degree. But they are above all beholding to that Famous
Walter de Plattenbergh, who being in the Year 1513. acknowledged a Prince of
the Empire, exempted the Nobility from all Subjection, excepting such Services
as they were obliged to do in Person, upon the account of their Manors. When
Necessity obliged them to have recourse to the Swedes, they did not submit to
that Crown, but with a Proviso, of retaining their Ancient Privileges, which,
for the most part, they keep to this day. There is once a Year a Review made of
this Nobility, which does not only, upon occasion, furnish the King of Sweden
with a considerable Body of Horse, but also is looked upon by the Sweden as
their chief Nursery of Officers, even to the Generals of Armies. The
Administration of the Government, both as to Policy and Justice, is committed
to Twelve of the Body of the Nobility, who are the Council of the Country, of
which, the Governor of the Province from the Crown of Sweden, is President.
Their Judicial Processes are very short, and decided once a Year, to wit, in
January, by this Council, who, after a Declaration and an Answer, proceed
immediately to Judgment. To perform this with the more convenience, each
Province has its own Captain, as they call him, whose Business is, to represent
to the Governor and Council the Grievances of the People, and this Employment
is never continued above three Years in the same Person. There are also certain
Triennial Judges appointed for the determining of Differences in the flat
Country; concerning the Limits betwixt Private Men, which have been rendered
dubious by the Wars; and some other Judges or Overseers of the Highways,
Bridges, and Causways; But from all these there lies an Appeal to the Council
of the Country.

As to their Religion, Their Religion.
they are Lutherans here, which must be chiefly understood from the Nobility
and Inhabitants of Cities, but, as for the Peasants; they can scarce be called
half Christians, much less, to be said of any particular Religion, being, even
to this day, so deeply entangled in their Heathenish Superstitions, that they
scarce ever go to Church, or at least, never Communicate, unless it be by
force, they being, notwithstanding that wretched and slavish Condition they
live in, quite regardless of any thing else but this Life. It Is upon this
Account, that, when they take an Oath, they conclude with these words: If I do
not swear true, I am content, that the Curse of God may light upon my Body and
Soul, upon my Children, upon all what appertains to me, to the Ninth
Generation. Some of them, especially the Peasants about Riga, if they are to
take an Oath at Law, put a Turff upon their Heads, with a white Stick in their
Hands, thereby signifying, that they consent, That, they, their Children, and
Cattle, may become as dry as the Turff and Stick, if they swear falsely. They
frequently put a Needle and Thread into the Grave with the deceased, because,
forsooth, he may perhaps have occasion to mend his Clothes in the other World.
Sorcery is much more frequent among them than Prayers, the first is propagated
by Tradition from the Parents to their Children. They never kill a Beast, but
some part of it is thrown away, nor never brew, but something must be spilt,
which they look upon as a Preservative against Witchcraft; Nay, they have a way
of rebaptizing their Children themselves (though privately) if in some Weeks
after the first Baptism they happen to fall sick, which; they say, is
occasioned by the Child's having received a Name not suitable to its
Constitution, and therefore are obliged to give it another. They love to do
their private Devotions upon Hills, or near a Tree, in which having made
several Incisions, and tied it up with some red Stuff, they there offer their
Prayers, which always tend to some benefit of this Life. The Peasants about
Revel and Narva go once a Year, viz. on the day of our Lady's Visitation, on
Pilgrimage to an old ruined Chapel betwixt these two Cities, where kneeling
before a great Stone that is in the midst of it, they offer Fruits and Flesh as
a Sacrifice for the Preservation of themselves and their Cattle, the whole
ending with Dancing, Drinking, and sometimes Fighting. All this is not so much
to be attributed to their Ignorance as Stubbornness; for there is scarce a
Village but what has a Church and Minister, and the Bishop of the Province
residing at Revel, keeps as watchful an Eye as possibly he can over the Clergy,
besides which, the Catechism, the Gospel and Epistles, with certain
Explications added to it, have been long ago translated into their Native
Tongue, for their general Benefit; but all this has proved insufficient to root
out of these stubborn Peasants the remnants of their Idolatrous Superstitions.

Their Weddings are in a great measure as odd as some other of their Customs;
Their Weddings.
For, if a Peasant Marries a Country Lass out of another Village, he gets on
Horseback, with a Stick cleft at the top; wherein is put a Brass Piece of
Money, thus equipped, and accompanied by two of his Friends with naked Swords
in their Hands, and a Bag-piper riding before him, he comes to fetch the Bride,
whom he sets behind him, and having made her embrace him with the Right Hand,
away he rides to the House where the Marriage is to be consummated; when they
come to the Door, his two Friends give each of them a stroke with their Swords
cross the Door of the House, which being opened, he gives the Brass Piece of
Money to the first he meets with there. Being entered, his two Friends stick
their Swords into a Beam directly over his Head, which they pretend to be done
to prevent Charms; for which purpose also, the Bride, as she comes along the
Road, scatters little pieces of some red Stuff or another by the way, but
especially, where any Cross-ways meet, or near any Crosses which are put upon
the Graves of little Children, which die without Baptism, whom they bury in the
Highway. They have however one Custom, which, among People so barbarous, seems
to have something extraordinary in it. For, after the Bride and Bridegroom are
set down at the Table with the Guests, they don't tarry long there, but within
half an hour, leaving the Guests to themselves, they get to Bed, after having
for the space of two hours tried one another Vigor, return to the Table,
where, with Drinking and Dancing they spend the remainder of the Day and
following Night, till, what with Weariness, and what with Drunkenness, their
Legs begin to fail them, when they all Pig together in one Nest. As for their
Garments, they are suitable to their wretched Condition, to wit, of a coarse
Cloth; the Women's Petticoats being without any Plaits like a Sack. Those, who
have been able to save a little by their Drudgery beyond the rest, wear about
their Necks a Necklace of Plates of Silver, of the bigness of a Crown Piece,
and upon the Breast one hanging down by a Chain as big as a Trencher, but not
very thick; Their Shoes are either made out of the Barks of Trees, or raw
Leather of a Cows Hide.

But, because we have had occasion to speak here of the Superstition of these
Demi-Christian Peasants in Livonia, it will not be altogether beyond our scope,
to subjoin here some Memorable Observations (not commonly known) concerning the
Religion, Sacrifices, and certain Customs of the Ancient Inhabitants of
Livonia, Prussia, Lithuania, Russia, and some other Neighboring Sarmatian
Nations, when Pagans; Forasmuch as there does not only appear a great congruity
betwixt them and some of these Idolatrous Superstitions, we have just now
related of the Livonian Peasantry, but also, by making a due comparison, a
great many Customs retained to this day by the Northern Nations, and among them
more-especially by the Russians, as to what relates to their Carnavals,
Marriages, Funerals, etc. may be observed to owe their first Offspring to
their Pagan Ancestors. These Nations, before they were converted to the
Christian Religion, had many Gods, unto whom they used to Offer their
Sacrifices. Occopirnus, was called by them the God of Heaven and Earth,
Antrimpus was the God of the Sea, Gardvates, the God and Patron of the
Seafaring Men, these three being reckoned equivalent among them to Jupiter,
Neptune and Portuninus by the Romans. Besides these, Potrympus was their God of
all Rivers and Fountains, Pilvitus the God of Riches, Perguboius the God of the
Spring. Pargnus the God of Thunder and Tempests; Poctus the God of Darkness and
Infernal Spirits. Poccollus the God of the Spirits of the Air; Putscaetus the
God of sacred Woods and Groves. Ausceutus the God of Health and Sickness;
Marcoppol the God of Noblemen: besides which, they had those they called
Backtu^s, or Erdmanlein by the Germans, That is to say, living under Ground;
and some other Spirits, which used to appear to them; in the Russian Tongue,
called Colkie, by the Greeks, Coboli, and Cobolds in the German Language.

On St. George's Day, they used to offer their Sacrifice to Pergubrius, the God
of Flowers, Plants and Fruits of the Earth, in the following manner* The Priest
holding a Cup of Beer in his right hand, adores the Idol, (...)
and calling him by his Name, sings thus in his praise: Thou drivest away the
W^nter, tho^ restorest to us the Pleasures of the Spring; it is owing to thy
Power, that our Fields and Gardens appear ^ine and green, and that the Trees
and Forests are covered with Leaves. Having finished this Song, the Pri^st
taking hold of the Cup of Beer with his Teeth, drinks it off quite, without the
help of his Hands; when he throws it backwards over his Head. The Cup being
taken up from the Ground, and replenished with the same Liquor, all that are
present drink one after another, singing the abovementioned Hymn in praise of
the Idol; and spending the remainder of the Day in Feasting and Dancing. When
the Harvest-time begin to app^oach, the Country People used to perform the same
Sacrifice, which in the Russian Language, they called Zazinck, that is to say,
the beginning of the Harvest. The Sacrifice being over, they used to choose one
of those that were present, to begin the Harvest, who cutting down immediately
a Handful of Corn, carried it to his House till next day; when first he and his
Servants, and then the rest began the Harvest; which being ended, they used
again to meet and perform the same Sacrifice as before, which they called in
the Russian Language Ozinck, which signifies the End of the Harvest.

When they were to Sacrifice to their Idol, called Putscaetus, or the God of
Groves and sacred Trees, they used to perform it under an Elder Tree, where
they brought Bread, Beer and other Eatables; offering their Prayers to the
Idol, and begging his Intercession with Marcoppol, the God of Noblemen, to
preserve them from being oppressed by their Lords; and desiring him to send
them some of the Barstucks, or Subterraneous Spirits; They were verily
persuaded, that if these Demons take to a House, they bring good Luck to the
Owners of it, for which reason they did set upon a Table in their Barns toward
Night, Bread, Cheese, Butter and Beer, if they found this eaten up against next
Morning, they promised themselves all the good Fortune in the World; but if
they found it untouched as they left it the Night before, they did presage to
themselves nothing but Misfortunes. In the same manner they were persuaded
concerning the Cobolds, as the Germans, or Colky's, as the Russians call them,
that they dwell'd in the most obstruse Corners of old Buildings, or among great
Heaps of Wood; and that they would carry their Neighbors Corn into their
Barns, for which reason they would be sure every night to leave upon the Table
the best of Victuals the House afforded. They believed, that when any of these
Demons did intend to fix their Habitation in a certain House, they used to make
the Master of the House sensible of their Intention, in the manner following:
They would carry what small Wood there was ready cut in the House together in
one Heap, and put into their Milk-Pans, filled with Milk the Dung of several
Sorts of Creatures. If the Master of the House be willing they should appear
and settle in his House, he must with his whole Family drink of the Milk thus
seasoned with Dung.

They used to keep a perpetual Fire on the top of a very high Mountain in
Samogitia, betwixt Lithuania and Livonia, committed to the Care of certain
Priests, in Honor of the Idol Pargnus, whom they believed the God of Thunder
and Tempests.

To the other Gods we have named before, they either jointly, or sometimes to
one in particular used to sacrifice a He-Goat, which was thus performed: The
Priest, after those that were to be present at the Sacrifice, were Assembled,
having laid both his Hands upon the Goat, muttered out certain Prayers to such
God or Gods, as they intended the Sacrifice to, and, having craved his or their
Assistance, all that were present lifted up the Goat, and held it so long in
the Air, till the Priest had finished a certain Hymn, which being done, the
Goat was again set upon his Legs on the ground. Then the Priest made a
Harrangue to the People, containing in Substance; That they should be very
careful in performing this Sacrifice according to the Institution of their
pious Ancestors, with all imaginable Devotion, and transmit it without blemish
to Posterity. Having ended his Sermon, he killed the Goat, and having sprinkled
the Standers-by with the Blood, the Flesh is given to the Women to boil; which
done, they feast upon it all the Night, till they are all drunk, and if any of
the Flesh happen to be left, the next Morning they bury it under Ground, for
fear it should be defiled by the Birds or other Beasts.

Some of these Pagan Nations used to keep Snakes or Serpents in a certain
Corner of the House, especially near their S^oves, which heat their Rooms; at
certain times their Priests were to come to the House, and to Conjure these
Creatures to come forth out of their Holes, and to taste of such Dainties as
were ready prepared for them upon a Table set for that Purpose; if the Snakes
are obedient to the Priest's Command, and take a Taste of all what is set
before them, the whole Family, after the Snakes have withdrawn themselves into
their Holes, eat the rest with a great deal of Joy and Content, as presaging to
themselves nothing but good Fortune, for that Year. But if these Creatures
happened to prove disobedient, not harkening to the Conjuring Priest, they
appear very sad and melancholy, as believing that some great Misfortune is
likely to befall them that Year.

They had also a certain Sort of Southsayers, whom they called Burty in the
Russian Language; these acknowledge for their Patroon, the God Potrympus, unto
whom having made their Addresses, and muttered out certain Words, they used a
certain way of pouring melted Wax into Water, and according to the several
Figures and Shapes that appeared whilst they were casting, they pretended to
resolve such Questions as were presented to them.

Their Nuptial and Funeral Rites were performed in the following manner: Their
(...)
After the young Couple had made mutual Promise of Marriage to one another, two
of the nearest Relations of the Bridegroom used to take the Bride, as it was,
by force out of her Fathers House, which being done, they address themselves to
the Parents, or such as have the Disposal of them, who then publicly give
their Consent to the Marriage. The Day appointed for the Consummation of the
Marriage being come, the Bride, with Bells hanging from the Girdle down to her
Knees, is led three times back and forward into the Kitchen, and being
afterward put into a Chair, her Feet are washed with Spring Water, wherewith
they sprinkle the Nuptial Bed, their Household Stuff, and all the Guests invited
to the Feast. After that, they used to give to the Bride a taste of Honey, and
putting a Veil over her Face, conduct her to every Door that belonged to the
House, where she was obliged to knock with her right Foot against them; In the
mean while, a Servant, who followed her with a Sack, filled with all sorts of
Corn, to wit, Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats, Pease, Beans, and the Seed of Poppies,
used to strew the Ground round about her, wherever she went, frequently
repeating to her these Words: If thou remain'st devout and constant in thy
Religion, and be'st careful of thy House, thou shall never want any of these
Things; Then the Veil is taken away, and the Bride placed at the Table with the
Guests, invited to the Feast. At night they begin to Dance, and whilst the
Bride is a Dancing, they cut off her Hair, and put upon her Head a Garland,
which the Married Women wear till they have brought forth a Son, being till
then looked upon as Maidens. At last, she is conducted into the Room, where the
Nuptial Bed is prepared, and being forced, not without some Blows, to undress
her self, she is thrown by the rest into the Bed, and let to the Mercy of the
Bridegroom. But after an Hour, or thereabouts, they refresh themselves in Bed
with a Cup of good Liquor, and a Dish of Stones of Kids or young Bears, which
they believe to contain a great fortifying Quality, and to further Conception;
for which Reason also, it is their Custom, at their Wedding Feasts never to eat
the Flesh of any Creature that is gelt.

In their Funeral Rites, Their Fun^rals.
they observed this Method: They dress the Corpse of their deceased Friends in
their best Clothes, with Shoes and Stockins, and having set it up-right in a
Chair, the next Relations making a Ring about it, drink very heartily; When the
Liquor is out, they begin to lament their Deceased Friend. Alas! say they, Why
would thou die? Did thou want either Victuals or Drink? Why would thou
die then? Alas! Had thou not a Handsome Wife? Why would thou die then? Thus
running through every Particular thing possessed by the Deceased in his
Lifetime, they ask in the same manner; and conclude, Why would thou die?
They are very careful to furnish them with Needle and Thread, when they are
laid in their Coffins, and with some Bread and a Bottle of Liquor. When the
Corpse is carried out to the Burying-place, the Relations on Horseback, surround
the Hearse or Wagon in which it is placed, and with their Swords drawn, strike
in the Air cross-ways, crying out aloud, Away you Demons to the infernal Places
of Darkness. At last, whilst the Corpse is putting into the Ground, they throw
some Money after it into the Grave. The Widow Mourns for forty Days, viz.
Mornings and Evenings, Sun rising and setting, over her Husband's Grave; but
the rest of the Relations celebrate the Memory of the Deceased at certain
appointed Days, to wit, on the Third, the Sixth, the Ninth, and Fortieth day;
when, after a certain Form of Prayers, which they mutter out before they enter
the House, they invite the Soul of the Deceased to come and take part with
them. Whilst they are at Table, there is not a Word to be spoken, neither do
they make use of Knives. They are attended by two Women, who divide the
Victuals among the Guests, but also without Knives. Each of the Guest throws
something of his Victuals, as also some of the Liquor, under the Table, which
they believe is the Food of the Soul of the Deceased. If any thing happens to
fall under the Table, it is not to be taken up, this being to be left for the
Food of such Souls as are destitute of Friends, or are otherwise unable to
Feast them after their Death. The Feast being over, the Priest is the first
that rises from the Table, and having swept all the Dust out the Doors with a
B^oom; Retire, says he, beloved Souls, you have been sufficientl^ fed with
Victuals and Drink; Retire, beloved Soul* from this House. Then it is that the
Guests begin first to Speak, and to let the Cup go briskly round, the Men
drinking to the Women in Remembrance of their dead Friend, and the Women
answering the Men with the same Freedom, till they all begin to be Mellow, when
they part with Kissing one another all round.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Crim and Precopian Tartars, and the Cosacks.
BEtwixt the two Tartarian Kingdoms of Casan and Astrachan, Crim Tartars.
subject to the Grand Czar of Muscovy, all along the River Volga, up to the Don
or Tanais, are great Deserts, which are not so much Inhabited, as frequently
visited by the Crim or Precopian Tartars, their fixed Habitations being from
the mouth of the River Tanais or Don, all along the Palus Meotides, and so in
the Taurica Chersonesus; which being divided by a great Forest, that part which
borders on the Palus Meotides, belong to the Precopian Tartars, the rest,
bordering on the Euxin Sea to the Turks. It contains about 250 English Miles in
length, and 150 in breadth, less or more in some places; but, that, what is
called the Little Tartary, on that side, comprehending also the Tartars of
Budziack, which inhabit all along the Palus Meotides, or as it is called by
them, to the Sea of Zabacche, up to the River Don or Tanais, is much larger in
compass, bordering on the North upon Muscovy, in the East upon the Circassian
Tartars, North-west upon Podolia and Luthuania, and toward the South upon
Moldavia and Wallachia. These Tartars having been for several Ages last past,
very Redoubtable, both to the Muscovites and Poles, who have been often obliged
to stop their Fury by Presents, not much differing from an Annual Tribute, and
being at this time vigourously attacked by his present Czarish Majesty, who has
gained great Advantages over them, they may very well deserve a place in this
Treatise.

The Taurica Charsonesus was anciently inhabited by the Tauri, Taurica
Chersonesus*
who gave it its Name: These were succeeded by the Greeks, who planted here
their Colonies. But about 450 Years ago, some Tartarian Hordes, inhabiting near
the Caspian Sea, having by reason of some intestine Wars, left their native
Country, and ravaged part of Asia, at last passed the River, Volga, and from
thence to the Tanais or Don and the Palus Meotides, where they possessed
themselves of the Taurica Chersonesus, except some Ports situate on the Exin
Sea, and especially the City of Caffa, which were in the Year 1266, seized by
the Genoeses, who kept them in their Possession till the Year 1474, when
Mahomet II. the Turkish Emperor took them from the Genoeses. The Places in the
possession of the Turks are Batuclawa, formerly a considerable place, but now
more like a Village than a City; it has not above 200 Houses, but has a very
good Port, and the Turks build there abundance of Ships and Galleys. The two
Castles of Ingermen and Mancus, to which were adjoining, when in the Hands of
the Genoeses, two goodly Cities, of which scarce any thing remains now but the
Ruin. The only place of Note belonging to the Turks here, is one City of Caffa,
in former Ages called Theodosia. It was, whilst the Genoeses were Masters of
it, one of the chief Trading places in the Levant, but the Turks took it from
the Genoeses, as was mentioned before, after a Siege of fourteen Years, and, as
it was believed, not without Treachery, some of the Genoeses having been
corrupted with Money. It is since that time, (as almost all other places that
groan under the Turkish Yoke) infinitely decayed from its ancient Splendour;
notwithstanding which, it contains as yet about 6000 Houses, inhabited by
Italians (the Remnants of the Genoese Families) Greeks, Armenians, Jews, Turks
and Tartars: The Christians being however the most in number, having 45
Churches here.

The Places belonging to the Precopian Tartars, as well within the Chersonesus
as upon the Palus Meotides, are; The City of Azoph or Assaw, situate at the
very Mouth of the River Don or Tanais, where it exonerates it self into the
Palus Meotides; it is a place of considerable Trade, inhabited for the most
part by Tartars, from whom it was about two years ago taken by the Muscovites.
The City of Crim, situate in a Bay, made by the Sea of Zabacche, or the Palus
Meotides; it is inhabited for the most part by Tartars. It is a strong Walled
Town, its Houses being built of Stone and Brick, and was formerly the Seat of
their Chan, from whence these Tartars received first their Name, as they were
afterward called Precopians from the City of Precop, (which is situate on the
Eastern side of the Isthmus: The Tartars call it (...) it is not very large,
consisting only of 400 or 500 Houses. It was called Precop, from the Sclavonian
Word Precap, which signifies a Ditch or Trench; because it was built just
within the Trench of the Taurica Chersonesus, which is made cross the Isthmus.
Opposite to this, on the Western side, is the City of Coslow, situate upon a
Cape of the Chersonesus, extending to the Exin Sea. It has about 2000 Houses,
and is a place of good Trade, and about five or six Days Journey from Azoph.
Further Westward at the Mouth of the River Boristhenes or Nieper, near the
Euxin Sea, lies the City of Oczacow, having a strong Castle; it formerly
belonged to the Great Dukes of Lithuania, but was taken from them by the
Precopian Tartars, who inhabit here, yet so as to be Tributaries to the Turks,
who always keep some Galleys here to keep a watchful Eye over the neigbouring
Cosacks. It is near 200 Miles distant from Precop. Baciasaray is the Town where
the Chan keeps his ordinary Residence and Court, it contains about 2000 Houses:
besides which, he has another Palace, called Almasaray, where he diverts
himself sometimes; it is only a Village containing not above 60 or 70 Houses.
The Taurica Chersonesus is in some parts full of Hills and Woods, but in others
has very fertile Plains, abounding in all sorts of Grain, Fruit, and very
excellent Wine. The Tartars that inhabit it seldom apply themselves to Tillage
or any other manner of cultivating the Ground, but leave it to the Jews or the
Christians, which are their Slaves. And as for the Tartars that live without
the Isthmus, they make not the least account of it; applying themselves
entirely to Pasturage and Robberies. All their Riches consist in their Cattle,
but especially in their Horses, and in what Booty they get abroad in their
Excursions; They sell their Prisoners of both Sexes, after the Chan has taken
his Share of them for his own Use, to the Christian and Jewish Merchants at
Caffa; in Exchange of which they take from them Turkish Horses, Arms, Stuffs,
and such other Commodities as they stand in need of. From the City of Caffa,
these Slaves are transported to Constantinople, Synope, Trebisord, and other
places in the Levant. Among all the Slaves taken by these Tartars, the Polish
Women are in greatest esteem; these are not only transported to Constantinople
and Persia, but sometimes to the Indies, to be entertained in the Seraglio's of
these Princes. Formerly the Soldans of Egypt used to drive a considerable Trade
in these Parts, the chief Strength of their Forces being consp^^^d of such as
the Tartars had made Prisoners either in Russia, Podolia, Muscovy, and
Circassia. But since the Ruin of this Warlike Empire by Selim the Turkish
Emperor, this Trade into Egypt is quite lost.

The Crim or Precopian Tartars are for the most part of a middle Size, The Crim
or Precopian Tartars described.
strong, and well set in their Limbs; they have short Necks, large and broad
Faces, with very small Eyes, but very black and lively, and have some other
Features peculiar to themselves, by which they may be easily distinguished from
other Nations. They are inured to all sorts of Hardship from their Infancy;
their Mothers being used to bathe them once a Dayat least in cold Water,
wherein a little Salt is dissolved, to make them hardy, and render their Bodies
proof against the Injuries of the Air. No sooner are they out of their Mother's
Tution, but their Fathers, by degrees, bring them to shoot with the Bow, which
they do with great Dexterity; and at the Age of twelve or fifteen, make them go
along with them in the Wars. The Common Tartars, especially those living abroad
in Tents, use no other Clothes but a Cosaque, coming down to their Heels, made
of Sheep-Skin, with a picked Cap or Bonnet of the same Stuff, under which they
wear perhaps a pair of Linen Breeches or Drawers. The Men and Women are scarce
to be distinguished in their Dress, but that the last wear often a Linen Coif,
or piece of coarse Cloth tied round their Heads. The Wives of their Chans, and
other Women of Quality always wear a Veil over their Faces when they appear in
public, and are clothed in Calicoes, Stuffs, and sometimes Silk of diverse
Colors; as their chief Men have their Clothes made of Cloth, and use Turkish
Saddles for their Horses, which are often of the Arabian Breed, and adorned
with very good Equipages, all which they have of the Armenian Merchants, or
else take from their neighboring Nations, where they make their Inroads. For
the rest they use nothing but Wooden Saddles; Their Arms are commonly a
Scymiter, a Bow and Quiv^r, furnished with twenty or more Arrows. These as well
as their Saddles, they make themselves; Their Bow-strings are made out of the
Nerves of Horses; the Quiver covered with the Skin of the same Beast: They make
also the best Whips in the World, our Whip-makers in Europe having hitherto not
been able to come near them in twisting of Whips. Besides their Arms, they
always carry about them a Knife, which serves to mend their Bridles and
Saddles, if any thing happens to be amiss; a Tinder-box to strike Fire; and a
Compass to direct them in their March through the Deserts and Wildernesses,
where there is not the least Tract of any Road.

Their Horses, Their Horses.
which they call Bachmats, are very ill-shaped, being very long and thin, with
long Manes and Tails; but what they want in Shape they make up in Swiftness and
Hardiness, being in both these Points together, to be preferred before any
other in the World: They commonly undergo the Fatigue of a long days Journey
without the least Food; they are continually kept abroad, both Winter and
Summer; and when they are upon an Expedition, these Beasts will live upon what
they can pick out from under the Snow, or upon the Moss, Bark, or small
Branches of Trees, or upon any thing else that they light on in their Way.
Their Chief Men make use of Arabian and Turkish Horses, wear under their
Cosaques Coats of Mail, and use very good Equipages: Their Chan, especially is
most Magnificent in his Horses and Equipages, keeps a very good Table, and
lives as to all other things, in great Splendour, suitable to his Quality.

When they live abroad in their Tents, Their Food.
they seldom eat Bread, instead of which they make use of Millet. Their
Ordinary Food is Horseflesh, which they boil, either alone, or with Millet,
when they rest in a Place; but when they are going upon an Expedition they have
it baked, and upon the March, often only roll it together, and put it under the
Saddle, from whence they take it upon occasion, and so eat it without any
further Preparation or Sauce, unless it be the Sweat of their Horses. The worst
of all is, that they do not choose the Youngest or the Fattest of their Horses,
but such as are either rendered unserviceable in a March, or die of themselves.
They don't drink Wine, as being Mahometans; so that their ordinary Drink is
clear Water; and in the Winter, when the Rivers and Springs are frozen up, they
make use of Snow; or sometimes of the Broth of baked Horseflesh, or a certain
Liquor made out of Millet. Their Chief Officers only, drink Water, Milk, or
perhaps Hydromel and Aqua vita, and have now and then a Dish of Wild-fowl: But
all of them abstain from Swines Flesh.

As to their Manners, they are said to be as free from Vices as any Nation in
the World. Th^i^ Manners.
For, besides their Abstinence in Eating and Drinking, they are accounted very
faithful and trusty; there being no such thing as Robbing among themselves, no
false Witnesses, no manner of Injustice or Violence; living with one another in
a perfect Union and Tranquillity: For, as to those Excursions they make into the
Territories of the Neighboring Christians, they don't look upon them as a
Crime, as being committed against those they esteem Infidels; There are
abundance of Instances to be given of the Fidelity of these Tartars, which has
been sufficiently experienced among some of their neighboring Nations, where
they are Prisoners: It is very frequent in Poland to let the Tartarian
Prisoners go upon their Parole of Honor, to endeavor the Recovery of their
Liberty by the Exchange with certain Polish Prisoners among the Tartars; which
if they cannot obtain, they are sure to return by the Day prefixed, even
sometimes to an Hour. There are Persons of Quality in Poland, who will rather
entrust the Key of their most precious Movables, with their Tartarian Slaves,
than with any other of their Servants.

Their Tongue and Religion is the same with the Turks, Religion^
but only that they have not so many Persian and Arabian Words mixed with it,
and they have their Priests, who are guided by the Alcoran, and interpret it,
after the Turkish way.

As their Religion and Language agree in most Points with the Turks, so their
Government and Administration of Justice, Their Government.
is the same used in Turkey. They have their Cadi's, who hear the Parties plead
their own Cause by way of Mouth, and give Judgment immediately. The Chan
himself frequently determines the Differences among his Subjects, which he does
as often as he appears in Public, without the least regard or respect of
Persons, whether rich or poor. Drunkenness, Adultery, Murder and Thefts, are
the most Capital Crimes here, and are sure to meet with severe Punishments;
which however, is very rare to be seen; for, though they are used to Robbing and
P^undering in time of War, they nevertheless keep themselves within their due
bounds when they a^e at home, no body being allowed to carry about him any
Arms, not so much as in the Chan's own Court. They are under the Subjection of
one Prince, whom they call Chan, which is as much as to say, King; He commands
over them without Control, as most all the other Mohammedan Princes, and is in
great Veneration with his Subjects. The Chan has a Power to nominate his
Successor, which is called Galga, and commonly is either his Son, or one of his
Brothers. The Chief among his Subjects they call Myrsas. Since Selim the
Emperor of the Turks took part of the Taurica Chersonesus from the Genoeses,
the Chans became Vassals, but not Tributaries to the Turkish Emperors, who as
a Token of his Sovereignty, sends every new Chan a Standard. Their first King
or Chan, was one Vlan, of whose Birth they relate strange Miracles. About two
hundred Years ago, this Family was set asi^e, and the Family of the Gierey's
got into the Throne in their stead, and enjoy it to this day; though there is
some still remaining of the Family of the Vlan's, who are to succeed in the
Throne, in case the Family of the Gierey's should happen to fail. Their
Strength.


This Prince or Chan is able to bring a very numerous Army into the Field;
which, when he Summons together all the Hordes under his Jurisdiction, and his
Allies, amount to the number of 300000, all Horse; for, they have no Infantry
among the Tartars, unless the Turk upon certain Occasions, send some of his
Janisaries. It is true, he keeps Garrisons in some fortified Places in the
Taurica Chersonesus, but their number is but small. The most considerable is
the Fortress of Precop, or as they call it, Or, which however, is but
indifferently Fortified, as being surrounded but with a very slender Ditch, not
above four or five Rod over, the Ramparts which are of Earth, being neither
regular nor very high. He used always to keep hereabouts a good Body to Guard
the Isthmus, composed out of that Horde, which extends it self towords the
Boristhenes or Nieper. They don't very religiously observe any Treaties with
the Christians; and, in the midst of Peace, will not forbear to commit their
usual Hostilities, by ravaging the Country, sometimes by the Chan's Orders, but
for the most part, by his Connivance. It has been upon this score, that the
Muscovites and Poles have oftentimes, when their Affairs at home were not in a
good posture, been obliged to pay considerable Sums to the Chan, which at other
times upon a more favorable Juncture, they have refused to these Infidels, who
claimed it as a Tribute.

Their manner of making War, Their way of making (...).
is rather an Irruption than a regular War When these Tartars have resolved
upon an Expedition, either against Muscovy or Poland, or sometimes against
Hungary, they most commonly make choice of the Month of January, and of the
Full Moon; when the Rivers, Lakes and Fens, are all frozen over and covered
with Snow, this Season being most convenient for them and their Horses, who can
live upon any thing; whereas it must needs prove very inconvenient to their
Enemies, by reason of the difficulty of getting Forage and Provisions, and
Encamping in so sharp a Season as they do. Every one of them carries at least
two Horses, some more, into this Winter Campaign, either to change them as
occasion requires, or else to carry the Booty they get, or what Provision they
take along with them, which however, seldom amounts to any more, than a small
quantity of Millet, and of dried or baked Horses Meat; a great many making no
other Provision for themselves, but what their Horses tired in the March, or
else made unserviceable afford them. The most redoubtable Enemies they have, if
they direct their March toward the Boristhenes or Nieper, are the Cosacks, who
being no less inured to Hardships than themselves, are always out upon Parties,
to get Intelligence, and upon the least Notice, give the Alarm in the Country,
and dispute their Passage at some Advantageous Post or another. It is for this
reason they are obliged to March with great Caution through Deserts and unknown
Roads, and, for fear of being discovered, Encamp in the very midst of the
Winter without Fire. Being come near the Place where they intend to make an
Irruption, their Generals detatch a third Part of the whole Army, which being
again divided into several Bodies, they make their Excursions at ten or twenty
Miles distance^ on both sides of the Army, which in the mean while is kept
ready in a Posture to fight the Enemy, wherever there may be occasion; The
first Detatchment being returned from Pillaging, the second is sent out, and at
their return, the third Part, till every one has had his Share in Ravaging
round about the Camp, as far as they thought it convenient for the space of
five or six days, then they retire as fast as they can, marching sometimes 60
or 80 Miles in 24 Hours, till they come to the Great Plains, where thinking
themselves secure by reason of the Advantage they have in the vast number of
their Horses, they tarry there for some time, as well to recover themselves
from the Fatigue they have undergone in the Expedition, as to share the Booty
and Prisoners they have taken. They sometimes make also an Irruption in the
Summertime, which is commonly put in Execution by the Tartars of Budziack, who
seldom go into the Campaign with above ten or twelve Thousand Men at a time.

The Tartarian Armies are divided into very strong Regiments or Troops, Their
manner of Fighting.
consisting of two, three, and sometimes four Thousand Men; they seldom Engage
with their Enemies, except they know themselves much Superior in Number; but,
when they cannot avoid fighting, they divide themselves into a great many
Bodies, and so make a running Fight, our Forces which are obliged to keep their
Rank and Order, not knowing which of them to Attack first, or with the most
Advantage. Whilst they are Retiring, they shoot their Arrows backwards, as
thick as Hail, which they do with the greatest Dexterity imaginable, being the
best Horsemen in the World, and Riding very short, with their Knees bent, like
the Poles, Arabians, Turks and Africans, they at full Speed, raise themselves
upon their Stirrops, and with their Arrows gall their Enemies Horse, and return
as frequently to Charge those that pursue them, as they find opportunity to do
it. This is however to be understood, when they out number their Enemies, for
else, if they happen to be surprised, they run away full Speed, and trust to
the Heels of their Horses. But this is very rarely done, they always keeping
strong Out-Guards at some distance from their Camp, either near a River, or on
some Eminency, from whence they at a great distance, descry the approach of the
Enemy, being as quick-sighted as any People in the World, and, so give the
Alarm to the rest. The Prisoners they take in these Expeditions, they sell to
the Merchants, which come from Constantinople, and other Places belonging to
the Turks in the Levant, to Caffa; or else they keep them for their own Use,
either to Cultivate the Ground, or to look after their Cattle, where they must
be contented with the same Food their Masters have, which is commonly Horses
Flesh half raw, which they eat lying upon the Ground, after a very beastly
manner.

But this as well as most of the rest we have related concerning the Manner of
these Tartars, (...).
is to be understood from such among them, as live in the Great Plains (and
these indeed are the greatest part) a sort of a Vagabond Life, but for such as
inhabit within the Isthmus of the Taurica Chersonesus, and have settled
Habitations in Cities and Villages, are much more civilized, making not only
use of Tables and Seats spread with Carpets; and other sorts of Furniture,
brought thither by the Armenians, and other Merchants of the Levant, but also
their Diet comes much nearer to that of other Europaeans, making use of Bread,
Mutton, Fowl, Hydromel, and Aqua Vitae in their Houses; and have their Mosques,
like the Turks. They are all bare-wall'd within, without any Painted or Graven
Image, for they ridicule the Russians, telling them, That, when their Saints
are grown old and Worm eaten, they throw them into some River or another, from
whence, says they, we perhaps take him up, and broil a piece of Horseflesh upon
it. A fine God indeed, that is not able to resist those, that are going to
destroy it. But the Floor of these Mosques are spread with Carpets, no body
being allowed to come in with his Shoes on. The Day dedicated for their
Religious Service is the Friday; (perhaps, because they will not have any thing
common with the Christians or Jews) when at Sunrising they are called
together, not by the Ringing of Bells, but by the Priest, who being seated in a
certain Place made for that purpose, on the top of the Mosque, with a laudable
Voice, exhorts them to repair thither. Being met, he takes the Alcoran, written
in Arabic Letters in his Hand, and reads the Chapter, which treats concerning
the Manner, how to worship God; after which they sing certain Songs in the
praise of Mahomet, and so depart to their respective Homes. They do not burn,
but bury their Dead, unless it be after a Defeat, when they rather choose to
burn them, than let them fall into the hands of the Christians; and for the
rest, believe the Transmigration of Souls.

We having frequently mentioned the Cosacks in the Description of several of
the Muscovian Provinces, The Cosacks.
we will conclude this Chapter with a short Account of their Origin, and what
else may be found remarkable among a barbarous multitude of People. Those that
have described the Cosacks as a particular Nation, have been grossly mistaken
in their Opinion. For, before the Time of Sigismund the I. they were no more
than Volunteers or Freebuteers, composed out of a wild and barbarous Rabble,
most of them Boors, that had left their Habitations in the Neighboring
Provinces of the Polish Russia, Wolinia and Podolia, and had settled themselves
in some Islands of the River Boristhenes, beneath Kiovia, where they lived upon
Robbing and Plunder. They were called Cosacks from their Agility (the Word
Cosa, intimating as much in the Polish Language) which chiefly consisted in
passing betwixt the innumerable small Islands, situate at the mouth of the
River Boristhenes. They used to commit their Piracies, for the most part, upon
the Black-Sea, and are since that time, not only become formidable to the
Turkish Galleys, but also to Natolia it self, where they did not only plunder
Trebisond and Sinope, but even the Suburbs of Constantinople, and brought back
their Prisoners and Booty safe to their Habitatations, in the Isles of the
Boristhenes. Their Custom is to Cruise during the Summer in the Black-Sea; but
as soon as the Winter approaches, these Freebuteers, return to the Boristhenes,
where dispersing themselves, every one to his respective Home, they before
parting, appoint the Time of their Rendezvous against next Spring, in one of
these Isles, near the mouth of the Boristhenes. The great Exploits they had
formerly done against the Turks, had gained them no small Reputation among the
Poles; therefore Stephen Batori, Prince of Transylvania, and afterward Elected
King of Poland, having considered with himself, that these Cosacks might be of
great use to the Crown of Poland, not only against the Incursions of the
Neighboring Crim or Precopian Tartars, but also might serve as a considerable
Addition to the Strength of the Polish Army, which consisting for the most part
out of Horse, would in effect, be rendered more formidable, when augmented by so
considerable a Number of Foot. It was upon this Consideration, he resolved to
put these Vagabond Soldiers into a good Order and Discipline, which he
effected, by granting to them, besides their Pay, very considerable Priledges,
and putting them under the Command of a General of their own, with a Power to
choose such Officers under him, as he esteemed most fit for Service. Having thus
reduced them into one Body, he gave them the City of Techtimoravia, with all
the Territories belonging to it, which being seated upon the Boristhenes, they
made it their Magazine, and the Residence of their Governor General: And, to
render this Body the more Serviceable against the Tartars, he joined to this
Militia of the Cosacks, (being composed altogether of Foot) two thousand Horse,
for the Maintaining of which he allotted the fourth Part of certain Revenues
belonging to the Crown, from whence they were called Quartans, and by
corruption Quartians, and were disposed upon the Frontiers, most exposed to the
Incursions of the Tartars. By this Means that Tract of Land, which from Bar,
Bracklavia and Kiovia, extends it self all along the Boristhenes, to the
Black-Sea, and is now called the Vkraine, which was before a desolate Country,
was in a little time filled with populous Cities and Towns. As this Body has
done considerable Services to the Crown of Poland, by maintaining its Frontiers
against the Irruptions of the Tartars, so after sometime time it proved very
dangerous, having several times taken up Arms against the Republic. For, being
once made sensible of their own Strength, they refused to be obedient to the
Orders of the Polish General.

Their first Rebellion was in the Year 1587, The Cosacks rebel.
under their General, John Podkowa, but being vanquished, he had his Head cut
off. In the Year 1596, Sigismund III. King of Poland, upon Complaints made by
the Turks, forbid them to cruise in the Black-Sea, which Orders they obeyed for
that time, but, soon after fell into the Polish Russia and Lithuania, where
they Ravaged the Country, under their General, Nalevaiko. In vain did the King
send his Orders for them to retire to their Habitations, they on the contrary,
resolved to maintain their Ground, against the Polish Army, which was advancing
against them, under the Command of the Polish General Zolkieuski. The Battle
was fought near the City of Bialacerkiovia, where the Cosacks had the better of
it; but Zolkieuski, as he was a Great General, having weathered the Point for
that time, soon after got them into the Trap, so that they were forced to
submit, and deliver up their General, Nalevaiko, who underwent the same Fate as
his Predecessor. In the Year 1637, the Cosacks revolted again, the Occasion was
thus: A great many Polish Lords, having Purchased Estates in the Vkraine (the
Quarter of the Cosacks) and observing, that the Boors, their Vassals, run
frequently over to them, they were of Opinion, that their Revenues could never
be well secured, as long as the Cosacks enjoyed their Privileges. Having
therefore represented them to the King, as dangerous to the Republic, by
reason of the great number of Peasants, that daily ran over to them; it was
resolved, That the Polish General, Koniespolski, should order a Fort to be
erected at a certain Point of Land, called Kudak, where the River Zwamer falls
into the Boristhenes, which for its Situation, they had chosen as a convenient
Place to bridle the Cosacks, as being not far distant from the place of their
ordinary Rendezvous. The Cosacks, who were not so simple as not to penetrate
into the Design of the Poles, resolved not to suffer the Bridle to be put over
their Heads, and having defeated Coll. Marion, who was left there with 200 Men,
to see the Fort perfected, they assembled a considerable Body, to prevent the
Polish General in his Design. But at the very juncture of time, when they
should have been most unanimous, great Divisions arising among the Cosacks,
they revolted against their General, Sawakonowiez, whom they Massacr'd, and in
his Place set up one Pauluck, of little Experience, and less Conduct in Martial
Affairs; The Polish General having in the mean while taken this Opportunity, to
put the Fort in a state of Defense, they marched out under their new General
Pauluck; but were surprised in the Plains near Korsun, before they could
Entrench themselves betwixt their Wagons, according to their Custom, so that
being destitute of Horse, they were easily Defeated by Potoski^ the Polish
Marshal de Camp. Those that saved themselves by flight, got into Borovits, but
being immediately besieged by Potoski, and the Place being not provided with
Ammunition, they were obliged to surrender their General, Pauluck, with four
more of their Principal Officers, who were afterward beheaded at Warsaw,
notwithstanding their Lives were secured to them by the Capitulation. It was
also decreed at the Diet, held at the same time at Warsaw, that not only all
their Privileges, and the City of Te^^htimoravia, granted to them by King
Stephen, should be taken from them, but also a new Body of Militia should be
erected in their stead. But the Cosacks being not discouraged at this
Resolution, resolved also on their Side, to try the utmost for the Recovery of
their Liberty; and after having protested to the Poles, that they would remain
steadfast to the Interest of that Crown, provided they were maintained in their
ancient Privileges, they fought a second time with Potoski, in the Vkraine,
but with not much better Success than before; so that finding their
Circumstances desperate, they Entrenched themselves on the other side of the
Boristhenes, upon the River Statcza, where, during the space of two Months, the
Poles attacked them at several times with great Vigor, but were as often
repulsed with all the Bravery imaginable; so that, finding there was no good to
be done with these desperate Cosacks, they were forced to come to a
Capitulation with them, and to confirm all their former Privileges, and to
promise the Re-establishment of their Militia upon the same Foot as before,
under the Command of their own General chosen by the King. But this
Capitulation was almost as soon broken as made; For, no sooner had they cajoled
the Cosacks out of their advantageous Post, but most of them were either cut to
pieces or plundered by the Poles. Their Militia was not reestablished, but
another set up in their stead, where no Cosacks were permitted to enroll
themselves. But scarce two Years were elapsed, before the Poles had sufficient
Occasion to repent themselves of this Change. For the Tartars, who before the
Reform of these Cosacks, never durst so much as approach these Frontiers, made
a great Irruption into the Vkraine, and after having ruined all with Fire and
Sword, in the Tertitories of Pereaslaw, Corfun, and Wisnowitz, returned home
with a vast Booty, and a great Number of Prisoners, according to their wonted
Custom. Ladislaus, therefore then King of Poland, having duly weighed the
Necessity there was, to keep on foot this Body, upon which he much relied,
especially at that time, when he was likely to be engaged in a heavy War
against the Turks and Tartars, effectually restored them to their former
Condition, having given them for their General, one Bogdan (or Theodore)
Chmielniski. But a great many of the Polish Nobility having conceived a mortal
Hatred against the Cosacks, missed no Opportunity of doing them what Mischief
they could; Among the rest, a certain Polish Gentleman, whose Name was
Jarinski, did not only burn some Mills belonging to the General of the Cosacks,
Chmielniski; but also, after having ravished his Wife, killed both her and her
Son. Chmielniski, being provoked to revenge so barbarous an Affront, after
having demanded Satisfaction, which was denied him, stirred up his Cosacks, who
with burning, plundering, and ravishing continually pestered the Polish
Nobility; so that they addressed themselves to King John Casimir, Brother of
the deceased King Ladislaus, desiring him to march against them in Person,
which he having refused to do, they brought together an Army of 50000 Men, but
were miserably beaten by the Cosacks; and having a second time encountered them
without the King's consent, they received another Overthow. To revenge this,
they watched their Opportunity, when Chmielniski was celebrating the Nuptials
of his Son with the Daughter of the Prince of Moldavia; the Poles then
surprised the Cosacks, plundered the City, and took the Grecian Patriarch
Prisoner. The General having sent to the King to know whether it were done by
his Orders? was answered no; but that the Nobility had done it to revenge
themselves upon the Cosacks. Chmielniski, being vehemently incensed against the
Nobility, entered into a League with the Tartars, and entering Poland with a vast
Army, the King marched against him in Person at the Head of a Hundred thousand
Men; The Battle was fought near the City of Berestesko, on the River Ster,
where both the Cosacks and Tartars were entirely routed, though they were
almost three to one stronger than the Poles. Notwithstanding which, their
General Chmielniski, who escaped after the Battle, having re-assembled the
Remainders of his broken Army, so continually harassed the neighboring
Country, that the King thought it most convenient to come to an Agreement with
them in the Year 1651. But the most of the Nobility being dissatisfied with the
King's Proceedings, did let slip no Opportunity that offered it self, to
affront the Cosacks, but especially their General Chmielniski, which obliged
them about two years after, to wit, in the Year 1653. to join with the
Muscovites, who with their assistance, took in the Year nex following the City
of Smolensko and Vilna; so, that it was chiefly owing to their Valor, that the
Muscovites got into the Possession of the Provinces of Smolensko, and Severia,
and the greatest part of the Palatinate of Kiovia, which were confirmed to them
by the Treaty of Peace, made at Oliva, in the Year 1666. About which time the
greatest part of the Cosacks, put themselves under the Protection of the
Muscovites, the rest under the Turks, whereby they opened the way to the latter
into the Vkraine, and Podolia, where two years after, they took the famous
Fortress of Caminieck from the Poles.

Out of what has been related concerning the Cosacks, Retreating Place of the
Cosacks.
it is sufficiently manifest, that they were a certain Body of Soldiers,
Established for the Guard of the Frontiers. They used to be enrolled in the
Provinces of the Polish Russia, Volinia and Podolia; and had originally but one
City belonging to them, which was the Residence of their Governor or General.
They were sirnamued Zaporogian Cosacks, to distinguish them from those living
upon the Don or Tanais; the Word Porochi, signifying in the Russian Tongue, as
much as a Stone, or Rock. At a considerable distance from the mouth of the
River Boristhenes, there are a great many Rocks, lying so close together, that
they seem to be all of a piece, which render the passage of Ships of Burden,
quite impossible, and takes away all opportunity from the Inhabitants of the
Vkraine, to Transport their Wheat, and other Commodities, which grow there in
great abundance, to Constantinople, and other places. Some of these Rocks are
scarce to be seen above the surface of the Water, others again rise above it,
some six, some eight or ten Foot, which occasion several dangerous Cataracts or
Water-falls, which are impassable to any body else but the Cosacks, in their
light Ships. There are in all, thirty of these Cataracts, some of which at low
Water, are twelve or fifteen foot high. No body can pass among them for a true
Cosack, unless he have passed all these Cataracts (which they call Porohi, and
from whence they are called Zaporouski) and consequently have made a Voyage
upon the Black-Sea, as the Knights of Maltha are obliged to serve on Board
their Galleys, before they are received into that Order: There are a great
number of Isles near these Rocks, but among the rest below the River of
Czertomelick, there is a certain Island, which is surrounded with several
thousand little ones, some of which have Sandy, others Marshy Ground, but all
of them covered with Bulrushes, which render these Little Channels, by which
they are separated, almost invisible. It Is into these narrow Passages and
Watery Labyrinths the Cosacks make their Retreat; they call them Skarbnissa
Woyskowa, which is as much to say, as the Treasury of the Army, this being the
Place whither they carry all the Booty they Purchase upon the Black-Sea, the
Passage to it being difficult and dangerous; so, that most of the Turkish
Galleys, that pretended to pursue them here, have been lost. This is also their
Place of Rendezvous.

The first thing they do, How they go upon their Expedition^
after they have met here, is to choose their General, who is to Command in the
intended Expedition, which being done, they begin to work on their Ships, which
they make themselves, being about threescore Foot long, and about ten or twelve
broad, very slightly built, every one having its Oars, some ten, others twelve,
and sometimes fifteen or sixteen. Their Sails are very wretched,
notwithstanding which, by the help of their Oars, which they most rely on, they
far exceed the Turkish Galleys in swiftness. Their Provision consists in
Biscuit, and some Barrels of boiled Millet; this is chiefly their Food; they
seldom carry any Aqua Vitae or other Strong Liquors on Board with them; and
though they are as great Drunkards as any in the North, nevertheless, when they
go upon any Expedition, either by Sea or Land, they are the Sobrest people in
the World. When they are going to cruise upon the Black Sea, they seldom exceed
five or six thousand Men, and there being commonly threescore at a time
employed in building each Ship, they will get fourscore or a hundred of them
ready to be launched in three Weeks time. Fifty or Sixty of them belong to each
Ship, which has on board five or six Falconets, each of the Men being provided
with a couple of Fusees, and Powder, and Ball proportionable; They always stay
for the last Quarter of the Moon, that at their going out they may not be
discovered by the Turkish Galleys, which are always ready in the Harbor of
Oczakow, a City situate at the Mouth of the Boristhenes, to observe their
Motion. No sooner have they got the least Int^lligence of their being abroad at
Sea, but the Alarm is taken immediately; which reaches quickly to
Constantinople, from whence Couriers are dispatched without delay, to the
Coasts of Natolia, Romelia, and Bulgaria, to bid them to be upon their Guard.
But the Cosacks are generally to nimble for these Messengers that are sent
about to give these People Advice of their coming: They know so well how to
take the Advantage of the Wind and Weather, that they commonly are in forty
Hours upon the Coast of Natolia.

When they descry a Ship or Gally, which they can do at a great distance
without being perceived by them, their Vessels not baring above two Foot and an
half above Water, they approach to it as near as they think convenient, toward
the Evening; when keeping at about three or four Miles distance, they take
exactly notice whereabouts the Ship is, and what Course it takes; About
Midnight they get to their Oars, and, with all the haste they can, make toward
the Place where they think it most likely to meet with the Ship; which being
found out, they surround, attack, and board it on all sides, so that it being
impossible for one Ship to defend it self in the Nightime against so many, it
is soon taken. What Booty they meet with, either of Silver, Cannon or Arms, or
such Merchandices as are of no great Burden, they transport into their
Vessels, but the Ship they generally sink. But as they have the Advantage over
the Ships or Galleys by Night, so, if they happen to meet them by Day, they
seldom come off without bloody Noses, they being not in a Condition to
withstand their Cannon. It is then their Swiftness stands them most in stead,
and they are secure enough from the Enemy's pursuing, when once they approach
their little Channels, and get among the Bulrushes. Whilst they were under the
Prorection of the Crown of Poland, the Turkish Grand Seignior used frequently
to make his Complaints to the King of Poland against their Piracies in the
Black Sea; but he used commonly to receive the same Satisfaction the Poles have
when they make their Complaints at Constantinople against the Incursions of the
Tartars, who dread no other Enemy in the World so much as they do the Cosacks.

But, Their Manner of Fighting by Land.
as to their manner of Fighting by Land, it is to be observed, that they are but
very indifferent Horsemen, but most excellent Soldiers on foot. They are inured
to all sorts of Fatigues and Hardship, very obedient to their Commanders, and
extremely active and dexterous in intrenching themselves, not only in the
ordinary Way, but also by making a Fence of their Baggage-Waggons as they march
along. These moving Entrenchments are absolutely necessary for them, when they
march without Horse in open Plains and these Deserts of the Tartars, against
whom they are forced to stand the Brunt wherever they meet them: There has been
several Examples, that a thousand Cosacks, all Foot; thus marching betwixt
their Chariots and Wagons in a Plain, have repulsed five or six thousand
Tartars on Horseback; their Horses as they are exceeding swift, not being very
strong, but are stopped by the least Barracado that is put in their Way. This
Way of Marching a whole Army in the midst of their Baggage and Ammunition
Wagons, would scarce be practicable in any other Country but Poland, which
lies all upon a Level, and consequently is the most proper for such a March in
the World.

The Country inhabited by the Cosacks is called the Vkraine; Country of the
Cosacks.
which is as much as to say, lying upon the Frontier; It borders upon Podolia,
and is a Part of the Palatinates of Kiovia and Braclovia; They had made
themselves entirely Masters of this, as well as a great part of the Black
Russia, but have since been forced to abandon it, for the most part. This
Country extends it self from the 51. to the 48. Degree of Latitude; beyond
which, to wit, betwixt the Danube and the Palus Meotides as far as the Black
Sea, there are vast Plains (but deserted) so fertile that the Grass grows near
a Man's height.

The Vkraine is a very fertile Country, The Ukraine.
which though scarce the third Part of it be cultivated, produces such a vast
quantity of Grains of all sorts, that, for the most part, the Inhabitants don't
know how to consume it, wanting the Convenience of Exportation, their Rivers
not being Navigable. They abound also in all sorts of Cattle, Fowl, and Fish,
Honey, Wax, and Wood, fit not only for Firing, but also for Building. The only
thing they Want is Wine and Salt. With the first of these two they are supplied
from Hungary, Transylvania, Wallachia, and Moldavia; besides that, they make
very good Beer and Aqua vitae out of their Corn, which together with their
Hydromel, they make use of instead of Wine. Their Salt they are furnished with
out of the Salt Pits near Cracovia, or out of the Country of Pokutia, upon the
Borders of Transylvania and Moldavia, where there are Salt-springs, the Water
of which being boiled produces a very White Salt, very agreeable to the Taste,
but not so good for salting of Meat as some others are. Their Houses are built
of Wood, after the Muscovia^ Fashion; and so are their Fortifications, made of
Earth and Wood, which they account to be better Cannon Proof than Brick'd
Walls, but are soon set on fire.

The Rivers of Note here, Its Rivers and (...).
are the Boristhenes or Nieper, the Bog, the Niester or Tyras, the common
Border betwixt them and Wallachia, the Dezna, the Ros, the Horin, the Stucz,
and the Ster, near which was fought the last Ba^tle betwixt the Poles and
Cosacks, in the Year 1651, which proved fatal to the last, and afterward made
them seek for Protection among the Muscovites and Turks The most considerable
Cities and Fortresses, which were once in the Possession of the Cosacks, are
Kiovia, dignified with the Title of a Palatinate, and the Residence of the
Metropolitan of the Greek Churches in those Parts, Bialacerkievia, Corsun,
Constantinow, Bar, Cirkassi, Czehrin, Kudack, Jampol, Braclovia upon the River
Bog, Winnicza, Human, Czernihow, Pereaslaw, Lubnie, Pawolocz, Chwastow, all of
them fortified within these Fifty Years; besides which there is scarce a Town
or Village, but what has something like a Fortification, or at least a Ditch,
which was intended, and serves them for a Fence against the Incursions of the
Tartars.

The Peasants of the Vkraine, Slavery of the Peasant^*
as well as of several other neighboring Provinces, are absolute Slaves; being
obliged to work both with their Horses and Hands, three or four Days in the
Week for their Lords. Besides which, they are forced to allow them a certain
Share out of all their Corn and Fruit, the Tenth of all their Muttons, Swine,
and Fruits, and to carry Wood to their Landlords Houses, and to do several
other Services. But the worst of all was, that before the last Wars, the
Noblemen used to farm out their Revenues here to the Jews, who exacted these
Services from the Country People with the greatest Rigor imaginable; and had
also monopolized the Brewing of Beer, and Distilling of Aqua vitae. This
occasioned them to join so frequently with the Cosacks, and to dispute so
desperately their Liberty against the Nobility, who in Consert with the Jews
were the Occasion of these many Revolts; and forced them at last to seek for an
end of their Misery among Foreigners.

The Cosacks are generally tall, strong, and wellset, Character of the ^os^cks.
but especially very active; they are Liberal, even to Profuseness, putting no
great value upon Riches, but are great lovers of their Liberty, which they look
upon as a thing inestimable; they are Indefatigable, hardy, and brave; but
great Drunkards, and Treacherous; Their Employment is Hunting and Fishing;
besides which, they apply themselves both to Agriculture, and the War. They
have also a particular way of making Saltpeter, great Quantities of which are
carried to Dantzick, and from thence transported, chiefly by the Dutch, into
other Parts.

The Cosacks have a certain Distemper common with the Poles, Plica Polonica*
by the Physicians, called Plica Polonica, as being peculiar to that Nation,
which in their Language, they call, Goschest: Those that are attacqu'd by this
Evil, lose all upon a sudden, the Use of their Limbs, and are tortured with
most horrible Pains all over their Body, which commonly continues for a whole
Year; after which, a Sweat coming, which continues for a whole Night; but
especially in the Head, their Hair is the next Morning all twisted together
into one knotty Lock, which has a very nauseous Smell, (from whence some
attribute the first Use of Hair-Powder, to the Poles) but in a few days after,
they are cured both of their Lameness and Pain, but the Knot and the Smell
remain for ever; for if they cut it off, the Remnants of the Humor, which
purges it self that way through the Pores of the Head, falls upon the Eyes, and
makes them blind. This Distemper is as familiar in Poland, as the Itch in some
Countries, and what is worse, is very Infectious; It is sometimes, like the
Venereal Disease, communicated by Coition; there having been Instances, that
Children have brought this Distemper with them into the World, but as they grow
up, it decreases by degrees, and never returns afterward. It is looked upon
among them as incurable, except it be by changing the Air, which must be done
by going into another Country: The Cause of this Distemper seems to proceed
from the great quantity of Arsenical Mines, which are in Poland, and
communicate their poisonous quality to the Waters, and consequently to their
Body; which seems the more probable, because abundance of their Horses are
troubled with the same Distemper, and have such a Knot either in their Manes or
foretop, of which, if there be the least part cut off, the Horse either dies,
runs mad, or becomes blind and lame; I have been very credibly informed, that
though the Poles look upon this Evil as incurable, several Foreigners traveling
in those Parts have cured it with good Success, by the same Method and
Remedies, which are made use of in the Venereal Distemper; which seems
sufficiently probable for several Reasons, not to be alleged here, where our
Scope is directed to History, and not to Physic.

The Language of the Cosacks is a Dialect of the Polish Tongue, Their Language
and Religion.
as the Polish is a Dialect of the Sclavonian. But that of the Cosacks is much
more smooth and full of Diminutives, which render it very agreeable. The
Cosacks themselves profess the Greek Religion, in the same manner as it was
established in Muscovy in the Year 942, by Vlodomir, or Wolodomir, Prince of
Russia; but the greatest part of the Nobility of the Vkraine are either Roman
Catholics, or else Lutherans or Calvinists. Within these Hundred and twenty
Years, the Greek Churches in these Parts, as well as in Muscovy, acknowledged
the Patriarch of Constantinople for their Head. But the Grand Dukes of Muscovy
having set up a Patriarch of their own choosing, the Greek Bishops in these
parts, not long after, to wit, in the Year 1595, sent two Deputies to Rome, who
in the Name of the Greek Churches of Black Russia, did represent to the Pope,
in the Presence of many Cardinals, a Confession of Faith conformable to the
Council of Trent, reserving only to themselves the Liberty of the Ceremonies
practiced in the Greek Church after its Union with the Latin, at the Council of
Florence; but they did afterward retract, and acknowledged for their
Ecclesiastical Head a Metropolitan of their own, who for some time resided at
Kiovia.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Language, Habit, Manners and Customs of the Muscovites; and of their
Marriages, Oeconomies and Interrments.
THE Muscovian Language is a Dialect of the Sclavonian, Their Language.
as well as the Polish; so that he who understands either of these two, cannot
be at any great Loss for the Muscovian. The Sclavonian being the Mother Tongue
of a great many Dialects, is in great esteem among the Russians; their Bible
and such few other Books as they have, concerning any Sciences, being not only
writ in the Sclavonian Tongue; but also those among the Muscovites, who pretend
to any Degree of Learning above the rest, always affect to make use of some
Sclavonian Words in their Writing, and Sheech, though in the Muscovian Dialect;
which indeed, among all the rest, comes the nearest to the Sclavonian, having
not the least Affinity with the Greek, except that in their Liturgy, there are
some Words borrowed from thence, which however are not used any where else.
Their Character is that alone wherein they have any Communion with the Greeks;
but they have not only much altered and transformed, but also considerably
augmented them; so that their Alphabet consists of Thirty eight Letters in
Number, which I thought superfluous to insert here, since Mr. Ludolph in his
Russian Grammar, printed in the Year 1696, at Oxford, has not only given a very
fair Delineation of them, but also treated with a great deal of Exactness, the
fundamental Parts of this Language, and very methodically represented its
Affinity with the Sclavonian; to which I refer the Curious.

As to their Habits, (...) Habit.
it is not unlike that of the Ancient Greeks, whom in this, as well as in
several other Respects, they are very ambitious to imtate. Their uppermost
Garment is a long great Robe, reaching down to their Feet, with very narrow
Sleeves, but as long as the Coat it self, which, when they dress themselves,
they turn up in several Pleats, and look upon it as a great Co^eliness* In the
Winter they let them hang down, so that they serve for a Muff; and sometimes to
cover their ill Designs; for when they intend to rob or cudgel any body, they
hide in them their Cudgels or Daggers. Persons of Quality have these Robes of
Satin, Damask, or Cloth of Gold; Citizens wear them of Violet, or dark green
Color, and sometimes of red Cloth. The meaner Sort of People, of a coarse
dark-colour'd Cloth, such as is made in the Country. In the Winter they l^^^e
them with Furrs, some with Sables, some with Ermins, others with Martens, or
some other sort, according to their several Qualities; but the Poor People are
contented with Sheep-Skin, which though very convenient for keeping off the Cold,
yet casts out a Smell that is very offensive to the Nostrils. These Robes they
wear only when they go abroad, over all the rest of their Clothes, and are as
to their Fashion the same with those kept in the Grand Duke's Wardrobe, for the
Use of his Boyars, by whom he is attended at public Ceremonies. Under this
they wear a close Coat, and under that a Wastcoat. The close Coat is called
Feres, which comes down to the Calf of their Legs, open before, with a very
broad Collar falling down upon the Shoulders, with Gold or Silver Loop-Buttons,
nay, sometimes Embroidery from the top to the bottom* and on the side. The
Sleeves like those of their Upper Garments, being as long as the Coat it self,
but very Narrow. The Wastcoats which they call Kaftan, comes down to their
Knees, the Sleeves are likewise so long that they cannot thrust out their Hands
without making Folds upon the Arm; The Collars of these Wastcoats are almost
like those of the Jesuits, but much higher, covering the hinder part of the
Head, about half a quarter of a Yard high. These Wastcoats, as well as the
Justelau-Corps, are made either of Callico, Taffata, Damask, or Satin,
according to the several Qualities and Circumstances of those that wear them.
And because the Collar of the Wastcoat, is, by reason of its Height, very
conspicuous, they either line it with Velvet, or Cloth of Gold, and sometimes
adorn it with Pearls and precious Stones. Their Breeches are pretty large, and
gathered at the Waste, so that they may be made streighter and wider as they
please. Their Shirts which they wear over their Drawers or Breeches, girded
under the Navel, are very wide, but short, scarce covering their Thighs; they
are not gathered at the Neck like ours, but strengthened behind by a triangular
Piece, which comes down from the shoulders to the Reins, and is sowed down with
Crimson Silk; those that are more curious than the rest, have little Fringes of
Silk of the same Color in the Seams, and under their Armpits. The Vanity of
the richer Sort reaches yet further; for they have their Neck and Wrist-bands,
and where it is open at the Breast, embroidered with Silk, Gold and Silver, and
sometimes with Pearls and precious Stones; and they leave open their Wastcoats
before, that the Embroidery and the Buttons of Gold, or Pearls, which fasten
the Shirt before, may be seen. The Muscovites wear no Hats, but, instead of
them, Caps or Bonnets, with a little Snip open before and behind, to the form
almost of a Pyramid, but not so much peaked, near half an Ell high. The Boyars
when they are present at any Public Ceremonies have them of black Fox-Skins or
Sables; but when they are absent from Court, or in their Houses, they wear them
of Velvet lined with these Furrs, with narrow Brims (most like the Polonian
Bonnets, which are worn by most Strangers in Muscovy) and laid over with Gold
and Silver Loops, or embroidered on the Sides with Pearl. The Poor People wear
in the Summer, White Felt or Cloth Caps, patched together out of Shreds of
Cloth, it being very dear in Muscovy, of several Colors, which in a manner
resemble a Jack Pudding's Cap, which they line with the vilest sort of Fur they
can get, in the Winter; They are not near so convenient as our Hats; for having
no Brims, they don't afford the same protection against the Sun, Wind, or foul
Weather. Their Boots, which generally they wear instead of Shoes, are short
like those worn by the Polanders, and piked toward the Toes. But the poor
Peasant is his own Shoemaker; his Shoes he makes of the Bark of a Tree wrought
very thin, and interwoven after the manner of Wicker-basket; so that it is true
beyond Contradiction, that no Country in the World has such a Number of
Shoomakers as Muscovy; As for Stockings they are never regarded, among these
poor Wretches, a piece of Sheep-Skin or Cloth wrapped about their Legs and tied
fast with a Packthread, supplies the defect of them; the rest of their
Garments, which are of the coarsest Canvass, being suitable to their Shoes and
Stockings. Persons of the first Rank shave their Heads, except when they are
under some Disgrace with the Grand Czar, when they let their Hair grow and hang
carelessly over their Shoulders, as a Token of their Affliction, in imitation of
the Ancient Greeks. Those of a lower Condition keep their Hair cut short; but
the Priests wear it very long, hanging down to the middle of their Backs. There
is no great difference betwixt the Men's Habits and the Women; There is no
strife here for the Breeches, for the Wife wears them as well as the Husband,
as they do in all other respects wear the same with the Men. Their Robes are
the same but something wider, and the Sleeves are not so closely fastened to
them, but that they either may keep in or put out their Arms at pleasure, and
let the Sleeves hang by; The richer Sort lay them all over with very thick Gold
and Silver Lace, or trim them Button and Loop Fashion. They don't use these
High Collars, which the Men esteem as a singular Ornament; besides that their
Smock Sleeves are prodigiously long, generally four or five Else, which they
pleat in little Folds upon the Arm; and the Heels of their Shoes are half a
quarter of a Yard high. The main difference is in their Head-dress. For they
wear very wide Caps or Coifs of Damask or Satin, made after a very fantastical
Way; the Hair of the Casters wherewith they are lined covering all the
Forehead, the outside being sometimes very richly embroidered. Maids that are
marriageable wear them of Cloth lined with Fox-Skin, and let their Hair hang
down their Backs in two Tresses, which they tie at the End with a piece of
Crimson Silk Ribband; but the married Women put up their Hair under their Caps
or Coifs. Children under the Age of Ten Years are not to be distinguished in
their Habits; both Boys and Girls have their Hair cut close to their Heads,
except two short Locks almost like Mustachio's, which are left to cover the
Temples; only the Girls wear Rings of Gold, Silver or Brass in their Ears. The
Muscovites keep very constant to the same Fashion; it being rarely to be seen
that any of them make use of a Foreign Dress unless it be sometimes a Person of
Quality, who taking a particular Fancy to Strangers, perhaps makes use of their
Fashion when he goes in the Country, or a Hunting. Formerly all Foreigners of
what Degree soever, used to go in Muscovian Habits, till about fifty Years ago,
the Patriarch having observed some of them to ridicule their Ceremonies when he
gave the Benediction to the People, prevailed with the Grand Czar to forbid all
Strangers living in Muscovy, to appear for the future in Muscovian Habits; but
of late Years, they Cloth themselves again after the Muscovite Fashion.

The Muscovites are of a middle Seize as to their Stature, strong proportioned,
of the same color as the other Europaeans in the Northern Parts. But they much
affect Corpulency, especially among Persons of Quality. Long Beards, and great
Mustachio's are in great request among them, which they look upon as tokens of
Virility. So that a large Belly and a great deal of Hair about the Mouth (for
upon their Heads they were little or none) are considered here as peculiar
Ornaments belonging to a Man.

The Women in Muscovy are of a midling Stature, Muscovian Women.
neither too tall nor too little, and generally well proportioned before they
are married, but after they have had several Children, inclining to Fatness, by
reason they do not keep their Bodies so straight as our Ladies in these Parts,
it being looked upon rather as a Comeliness than an Imperfection. The Features
of their Faces are not despisable, and a great many among them might pass for
very Handsome in any part of Europe, were it not for that preposterous Custom
received among all the Women of Muscovy, of what Age or degree soever, of
Painting their Faces, Necks and Hands. The worst of all is, that having not
attained to any kind of Perfection in this Art, they paint so grossly, that it
appears no otherwise than if it had been done by a Plaisterer; and
notwithstanding this; whereas in other places, Women make use of it as an
Addition to their Beauty, or a Concealment of their Deformity, a great many of
the Muscovian Ladies, may very well be said, to use it as a Veil to their
Beauty; Painting being so universally approved in this Country that the
Bridegrooms, among other Presents, send it to their Brides, as we shall see
anon, before we conclude this Chapther. Besides which, they have another
Custom, which will perhaps appear as odd as the former; which is, that they are
as careful, and take as much pains in making their Teeth black, as our Ladies
do in keeping of them white, they esteeming black Teeth an addition to their
Complexion, with the same Intention, as our Ladies make use of Patches. I am
apt to believe, that their Teeth being generally spoiled by their Mercurial
Paints, has obliged them to make a Virtue of necessity, and by an universal
Agreement, to cry that up for an Ornament, which appears to us the greatest
Deformity.

The Muscovites are a People of great Wit, Their Manners.
Cunning and Dexterity, not wanting Ingenuity in any thing they undertake, as
has been sufficiently experienced by those, who have had the Opportunity to
deal with them, either by way of Commerce or otherwise; but they are withal,
exceedingly proud, jealous and insolent; besides that, they are addicted to
Drunkenness beyond any other Nation in the World. They generally boast to be
descended from the ancient Greeks, but to confess the Truth, as Europe was
first beholding to Graecia for their Literature, and Civilization; so it may
rationally be concluded, that the want of Conversation with the more civilized
part of Europe, and the general Antipathy they have against those Arts and
Sciences, which rendered the Greeks so famous in former Ages, has made the
Muscovites to appear so different in their Manners and Customs, from most of
the other Europaean Nations. This will seem the more probable, if it be taken
into consideration, that within these 30 or 40 Years last past, since which
time, the Muscovites have had more frequent Conversation with Foreigners than
formerly; and that Encouragement has been given of late Years toward the
laying the Foundation of several useful Sciences; it must be acknowledged that
they made considerable Improvements as to several Matters which formerly were
odious, if not unsupportable to civilized Strangers. They are accounted to be
very malicious in their Inclinations to one another. It used to be a common
Practice among them, for one to convey into another's Boots (when they carry
their Money and Letters) either some Money or other valuable Things, and
afterward accuse the Party of Theft; to obviate this Evil, it was thought most
expedient, that it should be Enacted, for the Accuser to endure the Torture
first; and if while he was thus tortured, did persist in his Accusation, the
accused Person was also to endure the same. Notwithstanding this, there have
not been wanting Examples, that even Wives have accused their Husbands, and
(that falsely) of most enormous Crimes, and have endured the utmost violence of
the Torture, to the Destruction of them.

It is to the want of Education that must be ascribed, Their Quarrelsomness.
their Quarrelsomness, and Insolences, being guided merely by Instinct, and
acting in every respect according to their unbridled Appetites, unless it be
some Persons of the first Rank, who by their Conversation, having been made
sensible of these Errors, manage themselves with much more Discretion. For the
rest, who have not had the same Advantage, they do not show the least
Complaisance to one another, unless it be upon the score of Interest, when they
are very ready with their Caps.

This occasions frequent Quarrels among them, so that even in the open Streets,
you may hear them Rail at and Abuse one another, like Fish-Women, and that with
such Animosity in outward Appearance, that a Stranger would think it impossible
they could part without Fighting. They have one good Quality, which is, that
they seldom or never swear, blaspheme, or curse in their Anger; but on the
other hand, they use the most horrible and reviling Expressions, accusing one
another of Sodomy, Buggery, and all other enormous Crimes they can think of,
and that very often, without any respect of Persons, nay, even betwixt Parents
and Children. The Government being sensible of the ill consequences of these
Insolences, used to send the Strelitzes and Sergeants about to surprise some of
these Offenders, but the Evil was found so deeply and universally rooted, that
in a short time, they would have wanted hands to execute the Punishments, which
was Whipping. So, that for the Security of Persons of Quality, it was Ordered,
That if any one of them should be thus affronted, the Offender to be obliged to
pay a Fine (which they call Biscestia, and at the most amounts to 500 l.
Sterling.) according to the respective Quality of the Persons injured. And the
better to keep in Awe those that had little or nothing to lose, such, as were
incapable to pay the Fine, were to be put into their Adversary's hands, who
either might make them their Slaves, or else have them severely whipped by the
Executioner, whose place is, (to mention it here by the by) Herditary; so, that
the Sons serve their Apprenticeship in their Father's House. Notwithstanding
all these Precautions, this Fine is frequently paid, even among People of very
good Fashion, and Gentlemen, who do not forbear, upon the least Difference to
call one another Sons of Whores, Dogs, etc. which however is generally made up
over a large Cup of Aqua Vitae, for they seldom come to Fighting, or if they
do, when their Spirits are exalted by the Strength of the Liquor, it is done
with their Fists, or Switches, or a Cudgel, or perhaps by soundly kicking one
another about the Belly, for in the height of their Rage, they are sure to aim
at the Codpiece; this being the utmost extent of their Bravery in private
Quarrels. For, a Man may live a considerable time in Muscovy, and not hear as
much as mentioned a Dewel with Sword or Pistol, fought by Muscovites, as it is
practiced in other Parts of Europe, they, as it seems, not looking upon Bravery
and Courage to depend from these Weapons.'It Is true, Persons of great Quality,
to distinguish themselves from the rest, commonly fight on Horseback, but
their Weapon is a good Whip, which decides the Difference without Bloodshed.

They were formerly so fond of Ignorance, that for any one to apply himself to
the Study of any Art, Science, or foreign Language, much more to enquire into
the State of Affairs of other Countries, or Discourse of it, was looked upon as
a great Crime. But matters are extremely altered as to this Point, of late
Years, by the Encouragement given by his present Czarish Majesty to the
Nobility, to make themselves acquainted with foreign Countries and Languages,
and several useful Arts and Sciences, especially the Mathematics, in which
they were so grossly ignorant before, that they looked upon its Effects no
otherwise than Witchcraft. It is questionless owing to this gene^ous Care of
the present Czar, that Latin and Greek Schools have been erected in the City of
Musco; and that some of the Boyars among other Languages are well versed in the
first of these two, which will without question, in process of time, conduce
not a little toward the Reformation of such Abuses as have been hitherto in
vogue in Muscovy, of which we shall have occasion to speak more hereafter,
before the conclusion of this Treatise.

The most familiar Vice the Muscovites are charged with, Drunkenness.
by Foreigners is Drunkenness, though most of the other Countries in Europe,
especially the Northern parts are infected with, as well as Muscovy. It must be
confessed, that it is no where more universal, than among the Russians, when
the Clergy as well as the Laity, the Women as well as the Men, young and old,
of what Quality or Degree soever, have their share in it. Tzarkowino (for so
they term their Aqua Vitae) is the first welcome they give to their Guests, even
among People of the best Quality, whether Men or Women, which goes merrily
round, before, at, and after Meals; Wine being a Liquor too weak for their
Stomachs. The Ladies of Quality themselves, at their Poctivats, or great
Entertainments, make themselves so heartily merry with it, that they are
sensible of it the next day. It is for this reason, the Lady of the Feast,
sends the next day, one of her Gentlemen to Compliment her Guests, to enquire
after their Healths, and how their Ladyships got home, and how they rested; The
general Answer the Lady sends is; I give your Lady a thousand Thanks for her
good Cheer, indeed it made me so merry, that I scarce remember how I got home.
But to speak without Partiality, the Muscovites are not the only People in the
World, which are intoxicated by the force of strong Liquor, the very same is
practiced in Germany, where the Master or the Mistress of the Feast, as well as
the Guests do not think the Entertainment complete, if they go home without
Staggering. And as to what concerns the Muscovian Ladies, it is possible their
merry Meetings may meet with a favorable Construction from such of our Ladies,
as prefer the Charms of Distilled Waters, before Wine. Besides, that the fair
Sex in Muscovy, have a strong Plea to Allege in their own Defense: For as much
as the great Quantity of Fish they eat on their Fast-days, which make up above
half the Year, requires certain Digestives to attenuate the Viscosity of this
Diet; and, that, the merry Cup makes them, in some measure an Amends for the
solitary Life they lead at Home, under the most rigid Discipline of their
Hurbands, of which, we shall have occasion to speak more hereafter. On the
other hand, it is most certain, that the meaner Sort of People commit
intolerable excesses in this kind; for they will drink not only till they can
neither stand nor go, but oftentimes till they die upon the Spot. To spend
every Cope^ (or Penny) they have, in a Tippling-House, is a common thing here;
and thus far they may perhaps be matched as well in this Kingdom, as some
others in Europe; but nothing is more frequent in Muscovy, among the vulgar
Sort, than to come away without their Clothes, nay, it often happens, that if
they come away with their Wastcoats on, and meet one of their drunken
Companions by the way, they return, and send thus, Stockins, Wastecoat, Shirts
and Drawers, after the rest, and return home like Adamites. It is easy to be
imagined, that there is no Mischief so great, no Vice so abominable, but what
is committed by these Drunkards, who, even when sober, very seldom act
according to the dictates of Reason. Hence it is, that so many Murders are
committed in the Streets of the City of Musco, so that it is unsafe to go
alone, or unarmed in the Nightime, there being sometimes fifteen dead Bodies
to be seen together in the Court of Semskay, a place where they are exposed,
that their Friends and Kindred may take care for their Burial. If no body owns
them, they are thrown some where or another in a Ditch. From hence also proceed
these frequent Irregularities, Disorders and Excesses in Debaucheries, even to
sin against the Course of Nature, not only with Men, but also with Beasts. The
Women of the meaner Sort, though otherwise kept under a very strict Discipline,
will often find out their Husbands at the Tippling-House, and drink with them
to that Excess, till they can neither stand nor go, and are obliged to lay down
among them at the Tippling-House. Several of the Great Dukes have attempted to
put a stop to this Evil, by ordering such Publick-houses as were allowed of by
their Authority, to sell their Liquor only by certain Measures at a time; but
this proved ineffectual, the Neighbors meeting by turns at their own Houses,
where they played the same Game, they were used to, at the Tippling-Houses.

Formerly Tobacco was as extravagantly taken, Tobacco forbidden.
as the Aqua Vitae, and was the Occasion of frequent Mischiefs; forasmuch as
not only the poorer Sort, would rather lay out their Money upon Tobacco than
Bread, but also, when drunk, did set their Houses on Fire through their
Negligence. Besides (which made the Patriarch take a particular Disgust at it)
they used to appear before their Images with their stinking and infectious
Breath; all which obliged the Great Duke, absolutely ^o forbid both the Use and
Sale of Tobacco, in the Year 1634, under very rigorous Punishments; to wit: For
the Transgressors to have their Nostrils slit, or else to be severely whipped.
Nevertheless, it is of late Years more frequently used, than ever it was before
since the time of the Edict, the Search being not now so strict against the
Takers, nor the Punishment so rigorously executed. Foreigners having the
Liberty to use it, makes the Muscovites often venture upon it in their Company;
they being so eager of Tobacco, that the most ordinary Sort, which formerly
cost not above 9 or 10 Pence per Pound in England, they will buy at the rate of
fourteen or fifteen Shillings; and, if they want Money, they will truck their
Clothes for it, to the very Shirt. They take it after a most beastly manner,
instead of Pipes, they have an Engine made of a Cows-horn, in the middle of
which, there is a Hole, where they place the Vessel that holds the Tobacco. The
Vessel is commonly made of Wood, pretty wide, and indifferently deep; which,
when they have filled with Tobacco, they put Water into the Horn to temper the
Smoke. They commonly light their Pipe with a Firebrand, sucking the Smoke
through the Horn with so much Greediness, that they empty the Pipe at two or
three Sucks; when they whiff it out of the Mouth, their rises such a Cloud,
that it hides both their Faces and the Standers by. Being debarred from the
constant use of it, they fall down drunk, and insensible immediately after, for
half a quarter of an Hour, when the Tobacco having had its Operation, they lep
up in an instant, more brisk and lively than before, when their first Discourse
commonly tends to the praise of Tobacco, and especially of its noble Quality in
purging the Head.

For the rest, The Muscovite, are hardy and resolute.
the Muscovites are from their Infancy inured to all sorts of Hardship, their
Children being seldom suckled above two or three Months; and this with the
coldness of their Climate, and their sparing Diet, makes them very fit to
endure the Fatigues of War, being especially very resolute in defending of
Places; which they will maintain to the utmost extremity; I will only allege
here for an Instance, the Siege of Noteburgh, where the Garrison was reduced to
two Men, before they would hearken to a Capitulation; this happened in the Year
1579, Good Soldiers in Garrison.
when the Poles had besieged the Castle of Svikols, fortified after the Russian
Fashion, with wooden Fortifications, as they were giving the Assault, had set
it on Fire; yet the Muscovites made good the Breach, and were seen to maintain
their Ground, when their Clothes were on fire. Another example of their
Resolution may be given in the Siege of the Abbey of Paedis in Livonia, where
they were reduced to such Extremity for want of Provisions, before they would
Capitulate, that they were no longer able to stand upon their Legs, or to be
upon their Duty, and were not able to meet the Swedes at the Gate, when they
took Possession of the Place. It must be confessed, that they have seldom had
any great Advantage against the Poles or Swedes in the Field, but the most
understanding in Martial Affairs have attributed it more to the defect of their
Officers, than the Courage of the Soldiers; the first being not to be compared
to the Poles and Swedes, neither for Experience or Conduct; as it happened at
the Siege of Smolensko, where the Muscovites received that Disgrace, if not by
the Treachery, at least by the ill Conduct of their Generals. It has,
questionless, been for this Reason, That the Czars of Muscovy, have for a
considerable time past, and do to this day employ abundance of foreign Officers
in their Armies; and, it is very probable, that, since a great number of the
Cosacks have embraced the Pr^tection of the Czar of Muscovy, they may prove
more formidable in Battles than they have done hitherto They are very good at
keeping Secrets, especial^y in what relates to their own Affairs, or the
Public, in which respect they are so over-jealous, that they will scarce allow
any Stranger to cast his Eyes upon any Strong-hold, though of very small
consequence, and scarce worth taking notice of; much less, that they should be
easy in informing them in any thing, though of never so l^ttle moment, which
makes it very difficult for Strangers to be truly informed of the Constitution
of their Country, unless it be by a very long Conversation. It is upon this
score, that all Strangers at their first arrival in the City of Musco, except
such as bear a public Character, are obliged to pass their Examination in the
Chancery, in the presence of several Registers, who after having asked them as
many Questions as they think convenient, put down in Writing their Depositions.
The Muscovites are reckoned to be great Game^ters at Chess, as any are in the
World, and many among them will take now and then a Turn at Dice. They are of
late Years, become very industrious in their way of Trading, questionless, by
their frequent Commerce with the Chinese and Dutch, the last of which they
strive to imitate, not only in this, but several other Matters, the Muscovites
being more ingenious at imitating, than inventing.

The Women in Muscovy have an extraordinary Respect for their Husbands; Of (...)
they live exceedingly retired, and very seldom appear in Public. Virgins, if
they be of any Quality, live under as much if not more Restraint than the
Women; for besides that they are very seldom allowed to go abroad, when they
do, they are always covered with a Veil, to prevent their being seen; so that
many times they marry here before they have as much as looked upon one another.
Both their Women and Maids, if they be of any Quality, being not educated to
any thing of Houswifry, and making or receiving few Visits, lead a very idle
Life; having no other Employment, but perhaps a little Embroidery of Silk upon
a Handkerchief of white Taffeta, or a Purse, or some such like thing. For the
rest their Diversion is to have Ropes fastened to swing in, or else they lay a
long Plank over a Block, and mounting one at one end and another at the other,
they toss themselves up and down by a very violent Motion. They have also
public Engines to swing in, not unlik^ to those used by the Boys and Girls in
Moor-fields and Bartholomew-Fair, so contrived as that four can sit at an equal
distance, and so swing continually by the Counterpoise they give one another;
so that while some swing up pretty high in the Air, the others fall
successively near as low as the Ground, till they are tired with the Sport:
This is done in the open Streets, where certain Boys keep these Swingers for
that purpose, and have two, three, or four Pence for such a merry Bout. The
Young Men at their Festivals, for their Pass-time, play at Fisty-cuffs or
Cudgels; some exercise themselves in Wrestling, and in the Winter, with Scates
upon the Ice, as they do in Holland. Fornication is looked upon among them as a
slender Trespass; and though they don't permit Public Stews, yet they are not
very backward in doing one another a Kindness, especially when they are Flushed
with good Liquor. They don't count it Adultery, for married People to have
secret Conversations with one another in the same manner as we do in these
Parts; Adultery is not committed here, unless a Man marry another Man's Wife;
all the rest comes within the Compass of bare Fornication; with this Difference
however, that if a married Man be taken in it, he is punished with some Days
Imprisonment, or perhaps to live for some Days upon Bread and Water, or
sometimes also with a Whipping; where, by the by, it is to be observed, that
Whipping is not accounted so scandalous in Muscovy as in other Parts of Europe,
Persons of the best Quality having been sometimes so unfortunate here as not to
escape the Lash. But if the Wife chances to be convinced of a Miscarriage of
this Nature, she does not come off at so cheap a rate; for besides a good sound
Cudgelling or Whipping, which she is sure to receive very bountiful^y from her
Husband, she is shaved and put into a Monastery, unless the Husband be pleased
to pardon the Fault.

They are great Admirers of Vocal Music, Their Music.
for Instrumental Music, they have little or none, unless it be Bagpipes, and
what belongs to their Warlike Music; to the first they bring up their Children
with great Diligence and Severity in Schools erected for that purpose; Their
Notes are as different from ours as their Characters of the Alphabet, and in
all probability are borrowed either from the Greeks or Sclavonians. Their Gamut
has but small Variety, and instead of our Fa, sol, la, they sing Ga, ga, ge,
Their Cadenecs and Closes are unexpected, and, as it were, upon the surprise;
and indeed, in the main, not in any way approaching to that Perfection which is
in most other Countries of Europe. As for their Warlike Music they have
Kettle-Drums and Trumpets for their Cavalry, but the first don't sound so well
as ours do, and as for their Trumpeters, they are but very indifferent Artists,
and have not been very many Years in use in Muscovy. But their Hautboys which
the Infantry make use of in the Wars, are very passable. In their Hunting they
use Brass Bugles, which make a hideous Noise. Their Beggars all beg singing
with a very strenuous Voice. The better Sort don't much esteem Dancing, as
believing it unbecoming of their Gravity: But those that apply themselves to
it, rather dance for the Diversion of others than to please themselves. They
use strange Distortions with their Hands, and Shoulders, but especially their
Back-sid^s, and hopping upright with their Feet, scarce move from the Place.
The Muscovites exercise the Venereal Act with a great deal of Gravity and
Circumspection; for they will never have to do with a Woman, unless they first
take off the little Cross which is hanged about her Neck when she is Christened;
and they are so considerate in their Love-Passion, as first to cover the Images
of their Saints, if there be any in the Room. For the rest, their chief Penance
for Trespasses of this Nature is Bathing, which they also make use of, not only
at other times, but especially at their Marriages, after their first Coition.
All Muscovites, of what Degree or Condition soever, sleep after Dinner, so that
about Noon the Shops are shut up, and there is no more speaking with any Body
than if it were about Midnight. Both Bathng and Sleeping after Dinner is so
general a Custom in Muscovy, that Demetrius, who personated the Son of the Czar
John Basilowitz, was first suspected to be an Impostor and stranger, because he
never bathed himself, nor slept after Dinner, as we shall show hereafter.

Their Stoves, Their Bathing-places.
or Bathing-places, are close Places with Furnaces, which they heat
exceedingly, and for the better Excitation of Vapors, frequently cast cold
Water upon this Stove. There are Benches all round about at some Distance one
above another, differing in degrees of Heat, which are chosen by every one
according to his own Convenience. Upon one of these Benches they lay themselves
at full length, stark naked, and after they have sweat as long as they think it
convenient by the Help of these hot Vapors, they are well washed with warm
Water, and well rubbed with Handfuls of Herbs. After which they aften take a
Dram of Aqua vitae, and so go their ways. But what is most admirable, is, that
when they find the Heat too intense, both Men and Women will run out of the
Stoves stark naked, either straitways into cold Water, or cause it to be poured
upon them, nay, in the Winter, they will wallow in the Snow. There is scarce a
Town or considerable Village in Muscovy which has not some of them; People of
Quality have their private ones; and those of the Germans that live in Muscovy
outdo the rest, both in Neatness and Convenience; though a Man bathes in them, a
Servant Maid, only in her Smock, rubs, washes, and wipes him, and so after some
Refreshment of Wine, a Toast and Nutmeg, Citron Peel, etc. he goes to Bed: But,
besides this, there are a great Number of Public Bathing-places every where.
These are often so carelessly built, that it is easy to look out of one Room
into the other through the Distance of the Boards that part them, which they look
upon here as a Matter of no great Consequence, though either Sex has nothing
else to hide their privy Parts but a Handful of Herbs moistened in Water, which
a great many don't think it worth their while to make use of, being not very
shy to be seen by Men, when they are going out to c^ol themselves in cold
Water, both Sexes commonly going out and in at one and the same Doo^ to their
Bathing-rooms. These Baths are the universal Remedies of the Muscovites, not
only for cleansing their Bodies, but also for the Preservation of their Health,
which being thus from their Infancy inured to the greatest Extremities of Heat
and Cold, makes them to be of a very strong and healthy Constitution, and for
the generality long lived, and very seldom troubled with any Distempers; which
if they are, their Panacea is a hearty Draught of the best Aqua vitae fortified
with Garlic, and sometimes Pepper, though it be in a very high Fever, they not
knowing of any other Evacuation but what is wrought through the Pores of the
Body. Thus they live, for the most part, without Physicians, and many of them
without Diseases; yet, since the last Wars with the Poles, they have also made
a very intimate Acquaintance with the Venereal Disease, which, in so cold a
Climate as theirs, sticks very close to them; especially, since it may
rationally be believed that Physic does not appear here in its utmost
Perfection; though it be undeniable, that Physic and Physicians have, for many
Years past been highly esteemed by the Czar and the Nobility.

Their Way of Saluting is by putting off their Caps; and if they intend to pay
a more than ordinary Reverence, they decline their Head very low toward the
Ground, without moving their Feet. The Women use the same Way of Saluting, only
that they bow very slowly, letting their Hands hang down by their Sides and
never^ touch their Bonnets. When a Muscovite intends to show the greatest piece
of Civility he is capable of to a Stranger, he brings to him his Wife attired
in her best Apparel, to salute her with a Kiss. Your ordinary Citizens, or
Peasants, when they appear before their Magistrates or the Nobility, bow to the
very Ground, prostrating themselves and beating their Foreheads to the Ground;
The same Reverence is paid to the Czar, even by the greatest Men in the
Kingdom. This extraordinary Respect paid by the Commonalty to the Nobles makes
them appear so extremely haughty and jealous of their Authority, that
Strangers, though of the first Quality, rarely meet with that Civility they might
reasonably claim according to their respective Stations, unless it be from some
who are acquainted with the Customs of Foreign Countries.

They begin their Day at the rising of the Sun, and end it at the setting; so
that their Night begins as soon as the Sun is down, and ends when it rises.
Their Year they begin on the first of September, because they use no other
Epoche than from the Creation of the World, which they suppose was in Autumn.
And whereas we account from the Creation of the World to the Nativity of Christ
Three thousand, Nine hundred, and Sixty nine Years; they following the
Footsteps of the Greeks, reckon Five thousand, Five hundred, and Eight. So that
in the Year 1697, they reckon in Muscovy 7209 Years from the Creation of the
World, whilst we account but 5720. They solemnize their New Year's Day with
great Processions in all the considerable Towns of Muscovy.

Their manner of Traveling is extremely commodious, especially in the Winter,
when their Sleds glide away on the surface of the Ice or Snow in a flat
Country, with incredible Swiftness, and very little Inconveniency to the
Horses, so that they will travel 50 or 60 Miles a day. These Sleds are made of
the Bark of the Linden-tree, fitted to the length and breadth of a Man; they
line them with some thick Felt, and when a Man is laid in them along, he is
covered and wrapped up over Head and Ears in good Furs: The Carter runs, for the
most part, by the Sled, to warm himself, and sometimes sits at the Feet of the
Person that rides in the Sleds, where he is sure to comfort himself with a
Dram of the Bottle. These Sleds being very low built, if they happen to
over-turn, are not very dangerous. The Ladies Sleds, being covered on all
sides, in the Fashion of a Coach, are much higher and heavier, and therefore
more dangerous. Whilst they travel thus, the Time is past away, for the most
part, with Sleeping, the easy and insensible motion favoring the Repose of
the Traveller. When they happen to pass through Deserts and great Forests,
where they are obliged to remain all Night in the open Air, they kindle a great
Fire, and round about it range their Sleds; so, that being well closed up on
all sides, and covered all over with Furs, they sleep more commodiously, than
in a Country Cottage, where Men and Beasts being all together lodged in one
Room, greatly disturb a Man's rest. In the Summer they travel either by Water
upon the Rivers, wherewith this Country is stored every where, or else by Land,
on Horseback, by Coach or Wagon, the Roads in Muscovy, being very broad,
beautiful and easy for Traveling. By Water they make use of certain little
Boats, made all of one Piece, of the Trunk of a Tree made hollow, in which they
stand upright, and row over the Lakes and Rivers. These Boats being very light,
a Man goes a great way in them in a little time; but they have this
Inonvenience, that if not exactly counterpoiz'd, they soon turn over. They have
also certain Floating Bridges, made of pieces of Firr joined together, which
bear themselves up upon the Water. The greatest inconveniency in Traveling
here is, that in the Country there are no Inns or Houses of Entertainment for
Travelers, so that they are obliged to carry along with them what Provisions
and other Necessaries they stand in need of. Besides that, the violent Heat in
the Summer, and the prodigious quantities of Flies, are very troublesome, and
interrupt the Pleasure which a Stranger else might take in the Beauty and
Variety of their Forests, Brooks and Lakes.

Marriages is accounted honorable among them, Their Marri^ges.
and Polygamy forbidden. They may Marry twice, but to do it the third Time, is
accounted Scandalous and Immoral. They are very Superstitious in observing the
degrees of Consanguinity, and seldom Marry those that are any wise near to them
by Kindred or Alliance. Two Brothers are not permitted to Marry two Sisters,
neither are Godfathers and Godmothers to the same Person, to inter-marry.
There is no such thing as Wooing here betwixt the young Couple, Gallantry and
Courtship the Preliminaries of Love, which insensibly insinuate into the Mind,
and captivate our Hearts, are looked upon here as Chymera's, Marriage being
considered as a necessary Evil. Young Men and Maids are not suffered to see,
much less to have any Conversation with one another, so, as to talk of
Marriage, or to be able to make the least Promise by Word or Writing. It is
transacted by way of Brokeridge, so that it is no difficult Matter to put a
Counterfeit upon the Bridegroom, provided the Parents do but consent to it; in
the same manner, as Laban put the Bleer-ey'd Leah upon Jacob, instead of the
Beautiful Rebeckah, which is frequently practiced in Muscovy. Their general way
of Proceeding is thus: If any one have a Marriageable Daughter, whom he is
willing to bestow upon a certain young Man he approves of, he either by
himself, or his Broker, declares his Mind to the young Man's Parents, or for
want of them, to one of the next Kindred. If the Match be accepted of, two or
three Women, deputed by him that is to be the Bridegroom, are permitted to take
a full view of the future Bride, stark naked, to see* whether she has any
Defect; after which, their Friends on both sides treat of, and Conclude the
Marriage, the intended Couple not being allowed to see one another, till they
meet in their Bedchamber, after Marriage.

When a Marriage is concluded betwixt Persons of Quality, Marriage Cerem^ni^s
there are two Women appointed, one on the Bridegroom's, the other on the
Brides side, (they call them Suacha's) whose business is jointly to take Care
for the Nuptials. The first business of her that is appointed on the Brides
side, is to prepare the Nuptial-Bed. She, attended by a great many other
Servants, who carry all Things necessary for the Bed and Chamber, goes on the
Wedding Day to the Bridegroom's House, where the Bed is made upon forty Sheaves
of Rye, compassed about with several Barrels full of Wheat, Barley and Oats.
The same Evening the Bridegroom, accompanied by his Kindred, goes on Horseback,
with the Priest before him, to the Brides House, where being met at the Door,
and received by all her Friends, they are all invited to sit down at a Table,
with three Dishes of Meat upon it. Whilst the Bridegroom is busy in receiving
the Compliments of the Brides Friends, a young Lad gets into his Place at the
Table, from whom the Bridegroom is forced to purchase the Place by some
Presents; when he has taken his Place, the Bride is brought into the Room, most
richly Clad, but Veiled, and seated by the Bridegroom, but separated by a large
Piece of Crimson Taffeta, held up betwixt them by two young Lads. This done,
the Brides Suacha paints her, ties up her Hair in two Knots, puts the Crown on
her Head, and dresses her like a Married Woman. Whilst the other Suacha is
busied in Painting the Bridegroom, the Women sing several foolish Songs. After
that, two young Lads in very rich Apparel, bring into the Room on behalf of the
Bridegroom, a very large Cheese and some Loaves; the like being done on the
Brides part, the Priest blesses them all, and sends them to Church. As they are
ready to go to Church, there is a Silver Basin put upon the Table, filled with
little pieces of Satin and Taffeta, little pieces of Silver, Hops, Bar^ey and
Oats, all mixed together. The Brides Face being covered again, the Suacha takes
certain Handfuls out of the Basin, which she casts among the Company, who in
the mean while sing a Song, and pick up what they find upon the Ground.

When they come to Church, the young Couple standing upon a piece of Taffeta,
receive the Benediction from the Priest, which is performed by holding Images
over their Heads. The Priest takes the Bridegroom by the Right, and the Bride
by the left Hand at the same time, asking them three times consecutively,
Whether they are both sides willing and content to Marry, and to Love one
another? After they have both answered, Yes, all the Company join Hands, and
the Priest begins to sing the first Verse of the 128 Psalm, the Company singing
the next, and so continue to sing by Turns to the End of the Psalm, the Company
dancing all this while. The Psalm being ended, the Priest puts a Garland of
Rhue upon their Heads; but if a Widow, or a Widower, about the Shoulders,
saying, Increase and multiply, and Consummating the Marriage with these Words:
Whom God has joined, let no Man separate. In the mean while, those that are
present, lighting each of them a Wax-Candle, fill the Priest a Glass with Red
Wine, which he takes off, and the Married Couple having pledged him, by
drinking it off, each of them, three times; the Bridegroom throws down the
Glass, and both of them treading it to pieces under their Feet, pronounce these
Words: May they thus fall at our Feet, and be trod to pieces, who shall go
about to sow Division or Discontent between us. Then the Women there present,
cast some Flax-seed and Hempseed at the young Couple, wishing them much Joy and
Prosperity, and pulling the Bride by her Robe (as if they would pull her away
from her Husband) but she keeps very close to him, and renders their Endeavors
fruitless; Then, by the Light of several Torches or Wax-Candles, they all
return to the Bridegroom's House, where the Wedding is kept* No sooner are they
entered the House, but the Bridegroom and the Guests, sit down at a Table ready
furnished with all sorts of Meat; but the Women carry the Bride up strait-ways
to her Chamber, where having pulled off her Clothes, she is put to Bed
immediately. This done, the Bridegroom is called away from the Table, and
conducted by six or eight young Lads with Torches (which they stick into the
Barrels of Wheat or Barley) into the Chamber. As soon as the Bride perceives
the Bridegroom to approach, she goes out of Bed, only with her Nightgown on,
meets and receives him with a very submissive Reverence, with a low Inclination
of the Head; in the mean while, that the new Husband takes this Opportunity to
gaze at her, this being commonly the first time that he sees her Face. Thus
they sit down together, like Man and Wife (for it is to be considered, they are
not much addicted to Compliment) and among other Dishes, a roasted Fowl is
served up, which the Bridegroom pulls asunder, casting over his Shoulders that
Part which first comes off, whether Leg or Wing, the rest they eat; and, all
being withdrawn (unless it be one old Female Servant, that keeps Watch at the
Chamber Door) to work they go, without any further Preamble, while their
Kindred and Friends are busy in certain Charms, which they believe to be of
very great Consequence, either for fortifying the Codpiece, or at least in
defending it from Witchcraft, which they are sorely afraid of (especially
People of Quality) the Nuns here being accounted very dextrous both in tying
and unravelling the Codpiece Point* The old Female that stands Centry at the
Door, asks some time after, whether the Battle be won; and as soon as the
Bridegroom answers, that it is, she gives the Signal to the Trumpets, who make
an excellent Noi^^, which continues, till the Stoves can be got ready, where
the new Married Couple bathe themselves, but apart. Here they are washed with
Water, Hydromel and Wine, and the Bride sends the Bridegroom a fine Shirt,
embroidered at the Neck and Wrists, and a rich Habit. The two next Days are
spent in Entertainments, and all sorts of Divertisements, but especially in
Drinking, where the Ladies sometimes improve the Opportunity of their Husbands
being drunk, to carry on an Intrigues this being the only Convenient time to
make their Advantage of, inspite of all the Rigor of their jealous Husbands.

Those of less Quality are Married with less Ceremony. The Night before the
Wedding, the young Man sends to his intended Bride some Clothes, a Cabinet with
some Jewels, a Comb, and a Looking-Glass. The next Day the Priest is sent for,
who comes with a Silver Cross, and having given his Benediction to the whole
Company, the young Couple are set at the Table with a piece of Taffeta between
them; but whilst the Suacha dresses the Brides Head, a Looking-Glass is
brought, and the young Couple joining their Cheeks, look, and smile upon one
another in the Glass; in the mean while, Hops are cast upon them, and so they
are led to Church, where the Ceremonies are the same as we have mentioned
before. The Bridegroom is led home by young Lads, and the Bride by some grave
Mat^ons and the Suacha, the Priest leading the Van with his Cross; at home they
are received by a Quire of Boys and Girls, singing Epithalamiums or Nuptial
Songs, but of the coarsest sort of Bawdry; and being afterward conducted to
their Nuptial Bed, the Suacha is very careful in exhorting the Bride to be
Debonair and Buxom, and the Bridegroom not to deceive the Bride in her
Expectation; In the Interim, she stands at the Chamber Door, in expectation
when the business is over; which being done, she carries the Tokens of
Virginity, with a great deal of Joy to her Parents, and the next day or two are
spent in Feasting and other Jollities, which the Bridegroom endeavors to
recover his lost Spirits out of the Aqua Vitae Cup, and the Bride appears very
cheerful among her new Friends, this being commonly the last Day of Mirth for
the poor Woman, unless what happy Minutes she can get by Stealth, at her
Husband's drunken Hours. To speak without Partiality, Muscovy may well be
called the Purgatory of the Women, they being kept under so rigorous a
Discipline by their Husbands, that in some Places Slaves be treated with much
less Severity: For, it is not sufficient, that by their Ecclesiastical
Constitutions they are debarred from Venery two Days in a Week, viz. Mondays
and Wednesdays, besides, in Lent, and some other Fastings, which make up near
Eight Months in the Year; but Abstinency from their Wives and Aqua vitae is the
chief Penance laid upon the Muscovite Husbands by their Priests; so that the
Wife bearing the same Share with her Husband for his Trespasses, labors under
such Hardships as would seem intolerable in other Countries. If a married Woman
happens to grant a Friend in a Corner Kindness, she is sure, besides the
House-Discipline, to be sent into a Monastery, where she is to stay all her
Lifetime. The worst of it is, that this Severity often furnishes a Husband,
with a Pretense upon the least Surmise, to rid himself of his Wife, by
suborning of Witnesses, a thing frequently practiced in those Parts. If a
married Woman happen to have no Children by her Husband, he has the Liberty of
Persuading, and if that be not prevailing enough, of Cudgelling her into a
Monastery, where she must tarry all her Lifetime, for what, perhaps, was none
of her Fault, but the Husbands, who has the Liberty of m^rrying again in six
Weeks. But this is not all, if the Husband is taken with a Fit of Devotion
(whether real or pretended, it matters not) of leaving his Wife for God's sake,
as they term it, which is as much in plain English, when a Man is tired of his
Wife, and maintaining his Family, he has the Liberty, of going into a
Monastery, without his Wifes Consent, or making any Provision for his Children;
where he has a prospect of becoming, perhaps, from a Mechanic, a Priest, if
his Wife marry again; this being the only Amends the Wife has to make her self,
if that may be accounted an Amends, when they are forced to leap (according to
the old Proverb) Out of the Drying Pan into the Fire; for whenever they Marry
again, they are sure to meet with the Muscovian House-Discipline, which is the
Cudgel and the Whip. It is so general a Custom in Muscovy, for a Husband to
chastise his Wife with the Whip, that the Outcry's of a Woman upon such an
Occasion, are no more regarded, than we do a Correction given to Children. They
often used to tie them up, stark naked, by the Hair of the Head, and so to whip
them as long as they were able; Nay, there have not been wanting Examples of
Husband's whipping their Wives to Death, upon Suspicion of Adultery, without as
much as being called to an Account for it, they pretending to be exempt from
Punishment on the account of killing a Wife or Slave, if it happen upon
Correction. This barbarous Custom has of late Years, however, been much
altered, if not quite abolished, among People of Fashion, by the prudent Care
of the Parents, who now adays, to mitigate at least the Slavery of their
Daughters, oblige their Husbands in their Jointures, under considerable
Forfeitures, to find them with Clothes, suitable to their Qualities, to feed
them with good wholesome Meat, and Drink, to use them kindly without Whipping,
Striking or Kicking; but these Contracts, as all others, are sometimes kept,
sometimes broken, the General Custom being a strong Plea on the Husband's side;
the best Comfort the poor Women have, is that their Neighbors and Friends
receive the same Treatment. I know it has been alleged in behalf of the
Muscovian House-Discipline, that the Women here have very lewd Tongues, will
drink a merry Cup of strong Liquor, and upon an Occasion not refuse a Kindness
to a Friend; but grant this to be true, if the Muscovites, according to the
laudable Examples of other Nations of Europe, would give their Children of both
Sexes a more generous Education, the Husbands would show better Example and
more Complaisance to their Wives; these Means would prove, without all
question, more effectual than all their Whips and Cudgels.

As to what concerns their Economy and the Affairs of their Houses in general,
Their Economy.
it must be confessed, that it bears not the least comparison with what is
usual in these Parts; for the inferior Sort live in wooden Houses, very low,
and meanly built, their Household Stuff consisting commonly in two or three
Pots, and a few wooden or earthen Dishes. Some of the richer Sort make use of
Pewter, but what they have of it is very ill kept, as is most of their other
Furniture, the Muscovites not making the least account of Cleanliness* and as
for Plate, there is scarce any thing like it to be seen, unless it be some few
drinking Cups and Goblets. Their Rooms, at the best are hung with Mats, and
adorned with two or three Images, painted after the Muscovian Fashion. As for
their Sleeping, they strive not only to imitate, but also to outdo the ancient
Inhabitants of Capua; for those would not allow their Children any Beds; till
they were Married, alleging, that Beds were invented for the Ease of Ancient
and decripid People, not to encourage young Men in their Effoeminacy. The
Muscovites seem to be more severe, the most of them not using Beds, neither
before nor after Marriage, nor in their Old Age. A great many even of the
better Sort are contented with Matrushes, and the Poor with Chaff or Straw, and
for want of that, with their Clothes, which in the Summer they spread upon a
Table, Bench, or perhaps the Ground; and in the Winter, lie near or upon their
Stoves, which are flat on the Top; Master and Mistress, Man and Maid, all in
one Room; nay, in the Country the Poultry and the Pigs are not excluded from
the same Room in the Nightime. The common People have very little other Cheer
but coarse Meal, Pea^e, Turnips, Cabbages, Colworts, Cucumers, both f^esh and
pickled with Salt and Vinegar. They seldom want fresh Fish in a Country so
abounding with Rivers and Lakes; but their greatest Delicacy is Salt-fish,
which being ill salted, has a very strong Smell. Most of their Dishes are
seasoned with Onions and Garlic* and that to such a degree, that you may know
the Approach of any of them by the Scent, before you see them, especially in
Lent. The Spawn of F^sh, but especially of the Sturgeon, which we call Caviare,
is one of their best Banquets. I have made mention of this before in the IV.
Chapter; but because it is much esteemed by a great many in these Parts, but
especially in Italy, where they use it in Lent, I will give a short Description
of it here.

Caviare, Caviare.
or Cavajar (by the Russians called Ikary) is made of the Roes of two different
Fishes, which they catch in the River Wolga, but espcecially near the City of
Astracan, to wit, of the Sturgeon, and the Belluga. I will not pretend to
describe the first, it being too well known in these Parts; But the Belluga is
a large Fish, about twelve or fifteen Foot long, without Sca^es, not unlike a
Sturgeon, but more large and incomparably more luscious, his Belly being as
tender as Marrow, and his Flesh whiter than Veal, from whence he is called
Whitefish by the Europeans; under which Name we have mentioned it before, in
the Description of the River Wolga and the C^spian Sea. This Belluga lies in
the bottom of the River, at certain Seasons, and swallows many large Pebbles of
a great Weight, to ballast himself against the Force of the Stream of the Wolga
augmented by the melting of the Snows in the Spring: When the Wace^s are
assuaged, he disgorges himself. Near Astrac^n, they catch sometimes such a
Quantity of them, that they throw away the Flesh, (though the daintiest of all
Fish) reserving only the Spawn, of which they sometimes take an Hundred and
fifty, or Two hundred Weight out of one Fish. These Roes they salt and press,
and put up into Casks, if it is to be sent abroad, or to be kept for a
considerable time, else they keep it unpress'd, only a little corn'd with Salt.
That made of the Sturgeons Spawn is black and small grained, somewhat Waxy,
like Potargo, and is called Ikary, by the Muscovites; this is also made by the
Turks. The second Sort which is made of the Roes of the Belluga or Whitefish,
has a Grain as large as a small Pepper-corn, of a darkish Gray, the Caviare
made out of this Spawn, the Muscovites call Arminska Ikary, because they
believe it was first made by the Armenians. Both Kinds they cleanse from its
Strings, salt it, and lay it upon shelving Boards, to drein away the Oily and
most Unctuous Part; this being done, they salt, press it, and put it up into
Casks containing 700 or 800 Weight, and so send it to Musco and other Places,
from thence it is transported by the English and Dutch into Italy. That Glue
which is called Ising-glass is made out of the Belluga's Sounds.

But to return to the Russian Diet; They prepare this with Onions and Pepper
mixed with Oil and Vinegar, in the Nature of a Salad. The middling Sort of
People in Muscovy living sparingly, and the Poor meanly in their Diet; they
know no Superfluity but Drink, which they will purchase, let come of it what
will.

Their ordinary Drink is a sort of small Hydromel, Quas.
which they call Quas; This they make of Honey-combs, which they beat in warm
Water, stirring it about for some time, and after it has rested ten or twelve
Hours, it is cleansed through a Sieve, boiled and scumm'd, and so immediately
used.

Next to this is the strong Hydromel, Hydromel.
which they order sometimes with Rasberries, Cherries, Strawberries, or
Mulberries; they infuse what Fruit they have most a mind to, for two or three
Nights, in Water, or sometimes in Aqua vitae, till it has extracted the Color
and Tastes of the Fruit. Into this they put the purest Honey, to every Pound
three or four Pounds of Water, according as they would have it strong; Into
this they put a Toast dipped in the Dregs of Beer, which, as soon as the
Hydromel begins to work, they take out again. When it has done working, they
either keep it upon or without the Lees, according as they either intend to
keep it or to spend it immediately; And to give it a pleasant Flavor, they put
into it sometimes a little bag of Cinnamon and Grains of Paradise, with a few
Cloves. But their main Liquor is Aqua vitae, made out of Corn, which though very
strong here, however they sometimes fortify with Pepper. Of this they drink a
Dram before and after Dinner, and at any other time when they intend to make
themselves merry.

Persons of Quality, and rich Merchants, have of late Years built themselves
Houses of Brick and Stone; they lie upon Beds or Quilts, have Tapestry and
other Hangings, and the rest of their Household Stuff is suitable to their
Quality, yet not to that Degree of Politeness as is usual in these Parts. As
for their Diet, they don't only use all sorts of Meats and Fowls, but
especially by reason of their frequent Fasts, have great Variety of Dishes of
all sorts of Fish, Herbs, and Pulse. Among the rest they have one Dish, which
they make use of after a drunken Bout, and has a very savoury Taste. They take
cold roasted Veal, which they mince, but not very small, with some pickled
Cucumers, to this they put good store of Vinegar, Pepper, and the Liquor of
pickled Cucumers, and recommend it as a good Preservative against the Headache
arising from hard Drinking; forasmuch as they believe it dispells the Vapors
rising into the Head out of the Stomach. The Cellars of Persons of Quality are
always well furnished with Hydromel or Mead, Aqua vitae, strong Beer, Sack, and
other sorts of strong Wines; (for the Rhinish and French Wines are in no great
esteem among them, as being not strong enough.) They brew their strong Beer, as
we do, in March, and to keep it cool, (their Cellars not being vaulted) during
the Heat of the Summer they make a Bed of Ice and Snow mixed together, and then
a Layer of Barrels, upon them another Bed of Ice, and then again a Row of
Barrels, which they cover with Straw and Planks, which serves for a Vault. They
are very Splendid in their Clothes and Equipage, being attended by a great
Number of Slaves, all which however they do without any great Expense, for
as much as what Provisions they want for themselves and their Horses, is brought
from their Farms in the Country; and as for those Slaves they entertain in the
City, they allow them Board-Wages, but so scantily that they can scarce live
upon it. This is one of the chiefest Causes that so many Riots and Murders are
committed in the Streets of the City of Musco, and, that in Hay-making time the
Roads leading to this City are so unsafe to travel, there being about that time
so great a Number of Slaves abroad working in the Fields. Persons of Quality
and the richest Merchants in Musco keep for this Reason a Guard in their
Courts, who watch all Night, and are to knock every hour with a Stick upon a
Board, Their Interrments.
as many Knocks at a time as the Clock has struck Hours.

They are very Ceremonious in their Interrments. No sooner is the sick Person
departed, but all the Kindred and Friends come and stand about the Body, making
most horrid Outcries* and Lamentations. They ask him, Why he would dye?
Whether he wanted Meat and Drink? Whether he had not a Handsome Wife? and such
like Questions. The next thing to be taken care of, is to send a Present to the
Priest to pray for the Soul of the deceased Party, which he is to do Morning
and Evening, for six Weeks, upon his Grave. For though the Muscovites do not
believe Purgatory yet they believe two different Places, where the Soul retires
till the Day of Judgment; some, they say, abide in a pleasant Place, where they
enjoy the Conversation of Angels; others in a dark Valley, where they are
pestered with the Company of Devils. They are of Opinion, that by the Prayers
of Priests and Monks, the Souls may be delivered out of this Place of Misery,
and God's Wrath be appeased against the Day of Judgment. For which reason also,
those that are able give frequent Alms, during these six Weeks. Before it be
put into the Coffin, which is made out of the Trunk of a Tree, the Body is well
washed, the Shroud, or a clean Shirt put about it, and a pair of new Shoes on
the Feet, with the Arms cross the Breast.

At the Funeral Solemnity, Funeral Ceremonies.
the Priest goes first, carrying the Image of that Saint, which had been
assigned the Deceased at his Baptism for his Patron. Him follow four Virgins,
the next of Kin to the deceased, who represent the Mourners, and make most
horrid Outcries and Lamentations, all in a Tune, not unlike the wild Irish.
Then follows the Body, carried by six Men upon their Shoulders, the Kindred and
Friends following the Body without any Order, with Wax-Candles in their Hands,
whilst the Priest is singing certain Psalms, they surround the Body, and by
their Incenses, keep off the evil Spirits.

Being come to the Grave, the Coffin is uncovered, and the same Saint that was
carried before the Procession, is held over him; the Priest in the mean while
saying certain Prayers, and repeating frequently these Words: Lord, look upon
this Soul in Righteousness; and the Widow continuing (but how heartily, is
easy to be guessed, considering their Usage) her former Lamentations: Timming
Dooshink. Alas! My Dear, Why would thou leave me thus? And repeating the same
questions we have mentioned before. Then the Kindred and Friends take their
last Farewell of the Deceased, some kissing him, some the Coffin; and as soon as
the Priest has put a Testimonial between his Fingers, which is to serve him as
a Pass for the other World, the Coffin is shut up, and put into the Grave, with
the Face toward the East. The Kindred, after having paid their Devotions to
the Images, return to the House, where they drown their Sorrow in strong
Liquor. The Mourning is continued for forty Days after, during which, the
Kindred are entertained at three several times, viz. the third, the ninth, and
twentieth Day; and during this time of Mourning, the Priest reads twice a day
(as we mentioned before) the Psalms upon the Grave, having a little Booth made
up of Mats, to shelter him from the Weather. The Testimonial or Pass for his
Admittance into the other World is signed by the Patriarch or Metropolitan of
the Place, and the Confessor, who sells it according to the Ability of those
that are to buy it. This Testimonial runs thus: We, whose Names are hereunto
subscribed, the Patriarch (or Metropolitan) and Priest of the City of N. do
Certify by these Presents, That the Bearer hereof has always beha^ed himself
and lived among us as became a good Christian, professing the Greek Religion;
and tho he may have committed some Sins, he has Confessed the same, whereupon
he has received Absolution, and taken the Communion for the Remission of his
Sins. That he has honored God and his Saints; that he has not neglected his
Prayers, and has Fasted on the Hours and Days appointed by the Church; and
that he has always behaved himself toward me, who am his Confessor, in such a
manner, that I have no Reason to complain of him, nor to deny him the
Absolution of his Sins. In witness whereof, we have given him these
Testimonials, to the end, That St. Peter, upon sight of them, may not deny him
the opening of the Gate of Eternal Bliss.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Civil Government, Laws, and Justiciary Proceedings of the Muscovites.
THE State of Muscovy, or its Political Government, of which we are to treat in
this Chapter, is not only Monarchical, but also Despotical or Absolute;
forasmuch as the Czar being sole and absolute Master over all his Subjects,
disposes without Control of their Lives and Estates, in the same manner as in
most ancient Times did the Kings of Assyria, Media and Persia, who governed
their Subjects no otherwise, than a Lord does his Slaves; and as it is to this
day in Turkey, where the Grand Seignior, disposes of the Lives and Fortunes of
his Subjects at pleasure. The Czars of Muscovy possessed with so uncontrouled a
Power, as Hereditary Sovereigns of these vast Countries we have given a short
Description of in the foregoing Chapters, that there is not a Knez or Lord so
great in all these vast Dominions, but who without Reluctance confesses, that
he is his Czarish Majesty's Galop or Slave. It is therefore the Czar alone,
that gives Laws to the People; it is he that disposes of the Government of
Provinces; it is he that Levies Taxes, makes Peace and War; and to be short,
does what he pleases. For, though he consults in Matters of Importance with his
Boyars or Counselors; yet, besides, that this Counsel is of his own Choosing;
he does not always follow it, but reserves to himself the Prerogative of doing
what he judges most convenient. The Honors of Knez, Boyars, Dukes or Princes
owe all their Origin to the Czar's Favor, which they bestow upon such as they
would Reward for their Services; and the greatest of them depend upon the
Czar's mere Pleasure, and own publicly, that all they have belongs to God and
Them: Nay, formerly (within our Age) they were whipped like the vilest Slaves,
and that sometimes for a small matter, but of late years small miscarriages
have been punished with two or three days Imprisonment. This Slavish Subjection
seems to be natural to the Muscovites, forasmuch as in all these several
Revolutions that have happened there in our Age, they have frequently changed
their Masters, but never showed the least inclination of changing the Form of
their Government, which the Sovereign Power has devolved into their hands. The
wiser sort among them were perhaps sensible, that those who are good Slaves,
make the worst Freemen in the World; not only their natural Inclination, but
also their Education, having infused into them the Principles of Passive
Obedience, in so transcendent a Degree, as not to have the true Sense of that
Liberty we enjoy in these Parts. This is sufficiently evident out of their
whole Behavior, both in public and private; None among them, of what Quality
soever approaches the Czar with a Petition or otherwise, but he names himself
in the Diminutive. As for instance, if his Name be Peter, he will say, I little
Peter, do implore, etc. When they are to be admitted into his Presence, they
say; Shall I have the Honor to see the brightness of the Eyes of His Czarish
Majesty? If you ask them a Question that surpasses their Judgment, they will
answer; God and the Czar knows; and nothing is more frequent in their common
Discourse, than to own, that, all what they have is at God's and the Czar's
Disposal. The Great Duke, John Basilowits, was the first that reduced them to
this entire Submission; for, when most of these Territories, now under the
Subjection of the Grand Czar of Muscovy, were divided into a great many
Principalities, Governed by their own Laws and Princes, there is no question,
but that the Nobility had their Share in the Government here, as well as they
had in former Ages in most Countries of Europe; and what confirms me the more
in this Opinion, is, that at the Solemnity of the Czar's Coronation, among
other Things the Estates, Ecclesiastical and Temporal, are mentioned by the
Patriarch, as we shall see anon. This entire Resignation and Subjection of the
Muscovites to the Absolute Disposal of their Sovereign, has ever since been
maintained by three general Maxims; The first is, that no body is allowed, upon
pain of Death, to travel out of Muscovy, without leave of his Czarish Majesty;
The second is, that the Czar never Marries a foreign Princess, but looks out
for a Spouse among his own Subjects. The third is, the Discouragement of
Learning and Sciences, their Knowledge, even of the Priests themselves, not
reaching beyond Reading and Writing their own Language. The reason of it is
obvious; for as much as Ignorance makes people supple, and conduces much to the
easy Conservation of what by a long Custom and Education has been implanted in
them; whereas Knowledge is merely without Ambition. Lycurgus was not ignorant
of this Maxim, when he established Ignorance as one of the fundamental Laws of
his Republic; And the Emperors, Valentinian and Licinius, used to term
Learning the Plague and Poison of Sovereignty. And, that by Traveling abroad
they might not be enamored with the sweet taste of Liberty, other Nations
enjoy* and perhaps, by their Conversation, be instructed in such Matters, as
were not to be learned at home; they were not only prohibited to go abroad into
other Countries, but also Persons of a high Rank debarred from Conversing with
foreign Ministers in their own Country, without the Great Duke's express
Permission. And for fear, that by introducing a foreign Princess, some new
Customs might be introduced among the Muscovites, which in time might cause an
Alteration in the State, the Czars of Muscovy, (quite contrary to what is
practiced by other Princes in Europe) always choose their Spouses among their
own Subjects. The Czar being thus secure of his Subject's entire Obedience, he
alone creates and deposes Magistrates, and orders them to be punished at
Pleasure. He appoints the Governors and Lieutenants of Provinces, for the
Management of the ancient Demesnes, and the Administration of Justice; they
have a Diack or Secretary, and sometimes another Assessor joined with them, and
take Cognizance of all Matters, giving a final and absolute Judgment in all
Causes, and have full Power to see their Sentences put in Execution, without
any Appeal; unless the Cause be removed before Judgment given, to one of the
Pricas or Courts of Justice in Musco. They are changed from three years to
three years.

Besides these Courts, kept by the Waywode or Governor in the Provinces, there
are a great many others, who are all kept in the City of Musco, and are called
Pricas, where always one of the Boyars, or the Czar's Ministers is President,
having joined with him, sometimes one, sometimes more Assessors, and a Diack or
Secretary.

The chiefest are Pomiestnoi Pricas, where a Register is kept of all Manors
held by homage, and the Suits concerning them are adjudged, and the Duties
belonging to the Great Duke received.

In the Casanskoi, and Siberskoy Pricas; all differences of the Provinces of
Casan and Siberia, are determined, and Accounts kept of all the Furs coming
from thence to the Great Duke.

In the Rosboinoy Pricas, all Robberies upon the Highway, Murders, and other
Criminal Causes are Judged.

The Provinces of Gallitz and Wolodimer, have also their particular Pricas,
which is called Galliasko-Volodimirski Pricas; as Novorodkoi Pricas belongs to
Novogorod, and Nise-novogorod.

The Knez and Boyars have their own Pricas, as have also the Gentlemen and
Officers of the Court. The Diacks, Secretaries, Clerks, etc. have their own
Judge.

In the Monasterski Pricas, all Ecclesiastical Persons, whether Secular Priests
or Monks are judged, except it be in privileged Cases. Besides which, the
Patriarch has his particular Pricas.

There are a great many other Pricas, or Courts of Justice, as those for the
Czar's Factors, for his Revenues, for the Galops or Slaves, for the Retalers of
Wine, Aqua Vitae, and Hydromel or Mead, for his Smiths, Armourers, Cannoneers;
For the Military Officers, for the Cavalry, and many more, too many to be
described here.

Besides which, there is one general Pricas or Court of Justice, where all
Matters that do not appertain to any peculiar Pricas, are determined, this is
called Siskoi Pricas.

All the Diacks or Secretaries, Clerks, and Copiers of these Courts, are very
well Skilled in Writing and Arithmetic, the latter of which they perform by
the help of Plumb-Stones instead of Compters. They keep their Registers in
Rolls of Paper pasted together, which being 30 or 40 Yards long, are kept in
the Offices. The Boyar, who is President of each Court, and has his Secretary
and Assessors, determines finally, all such Causes as come under his
Cognizance, he being the Representative of his Imperial Majesty.

Formerly most of these Causes depended from the Equity of the Judge, Laws of
Muscovy.
there being very few Laws established then, according to which, Judgment was
to be given; They only were concerning High Treason, Adulteries, Thefts, and
Debts between private Persons. But in the Year 1647, a Book was compiled in
Folio, under the Title of Soborna Vlosienia, that is to say, Universal and
General Right, containing all the several Laws and Ordinances, according to
which, the Judges were to regulate themselves in the Courts of Judicature. In
Civil Cases, they proceed thus: If there be no sufficient Evidence on the
Plaintiff's side as to the Matter of Fact alleged against the Defendant, the
latter is asked, Whether he will by his Oath, confirm the Answer given to the
Plaintiff's Declaration, or else refer it to the Plaintiff's Oath. He, who
consents to take the Oath, is brought in the presence of one of their Saints,
where being admonished, and asked, Whether he will take this Oath upon the
Salvation of his Soul? If he persists in his Resolution, he is obliged to kiss
a little Cross, and the Saint's Image. Those that have taken an Oath, though
never so true, are looked upon as Scandalous, and are not admitted to the
Communion in three Years after. For which Reason, and to obviate Perjuries
(which are pretty common here) the Great Duke made an Edict in the Year 1634,
That all Promises or Obligations, whether for Money or Pawning, though between
Father and Son, should be put in Writing, signed by both Parties, under
Forfeiture of the Debt. Perjury is punished by a severe Whipping and
Banishment. Strangers take their Oaths according to the Custom of their several
Countries and Religions.

In Criminal Cases, the Accused cannot be Condemned, altho'never so many
Witnesses appear against him, unless he confess the Fact. To force therefore
Criminals to a Confession of the truth, they make use of the Torture, which has
its several Degrees: The first is the Strapado; when they hang the Malefactor
with his Hands tied behind, in the Air, having fastened to his Feet a great
Beam, upon which the Executioner ever and anon gets up, to further the
Dislocation of the Members, and consequently to augment the Pain. Under his
Feet is made a Fire, which with the Smoke and Heat stifles and burns him: If
they don't think this sufficient, they shave his Head, and, as he is thus
hanging, drop gradually cold Water upon the Crown of his Head, which is the
most exquisite Torment that can be invented. Whipping in Muscovy is performed
thus; A lusty Fellow, one of the Executioner's Men after having stripped them to
the middle, takes up one by one upon his Back (much after the same manner as
the Boys in England are horsed by their Fellow-Scholars at School) and having
tied their Feet together with a Cord which comes through the Legs of him that
holds them up, is held by another Servant of the Executioners, so fast that
they are not able to stir. The Executioner with a Bulls Pizzle, having fastened
to the end of it three Straps of an Elks Skin not tanned, lays it on their Back
with so much Dexterity and Strength, that at every Lash the Blood gushes out on
all sides: Heretofore these Punishments were not accounted Infamous, and were
inflicted upon Persons of the first Rank; but time has in a great measure
corrected that Error. Besides this, they have another Way of Chastisement,
which is also used in Families for the Correction of Children and Slaves. He
that is to be thus corrected, after having pulled off his Clothes to the Shirt
and Drawers, is laid down upon the Ground flat upon his Belly, one sits across
his Head and Neck, another upon his Feet, each of them furnished with a good
Switch, wherewith they soundly tickle his Back, in the same Manner as we beat
the Dust out of Clothes or Hangings. Murder is a capital Crime, unless no body
prosecute it; or it be that a Man kills his Wife or Slave under Correction. He
that has committed a Murder, after he has been kept with Bread and Water in
close Prison, has his Head cut off; But if a Wife kills her Husband, she is put
in the Ground, alive, up to the Neck, till she dies. The Punishment of Coiners
is, to have some Metal ready melted poured down their Throats. Traitors, after
they have been tormented to the highest Degree, are often banished into
Siberia, some with their Noses and Ears cropp'd, some without Eyes, some are
put under the Ice. Hanging has not been long in use in Russia; but what is most
remarkable is, that the Malefactor, most commonly at the Command of the
Hangm^n, puts his Neck through the Noose, and turns himself off, ^uch particular
Admirers are the Russians of Passive Obedience. Thefts are not capital in
Muscovy, but they are not sparing in applying to them the Torture for the
Discovery of their Accomplices. The first time, after a sound Whipping across
the Marketplace, they have one Ear cut off, and are imprisoned for two Years;
The second time they receive the same Punishment; but as an additional
Chastisement, are banished into Siberia. The Concealers and Receivers undergo
the same Punishment. Those that sell Tobacco and Aqua vitae without License,
have their Nostrils slit, or else are whipped. How they punish Adultery is
mentioned before. Those that are incapable of paying their Debts, are used with
a most barbarous Severity: For if any one happen to fail of paying at the time
prefi^ed, he is put in a Sergeant's House for some time, to see whether in the
mean time he can make Satisfaction or agree with the Creditor. If he cannot, he
is carried to Prison, and from thence brought every Day to a certain Place
appointed for that purpose, where, for a whole Hour, the Executioner beats him
with a pretty thick Wand across the Shin-bone. If he can put in Security for
his forthcoming the next day, in order to receive the same Chastisement, he is
permited to go home; if not, he is remanded to Prison, and is to undergo the
same every day till he has made Satisfaction; which if he cannot do at last, he
is to be sold as a Slave to his Creditor, with Wife and Children; but this last
the Muscovites are not much concerned at, forasmuch as they frequently fell
themselves and their whole Family upon a very slender Account. So much are they
accustomed to Slavery, that they scarce look upon it as a Punishment. Sometimes
the Executioner, for a Present, will suffer the Debtor to put a small Iron
Plate under his Boots. The same Rigor is used, without any difference, to all
of what Quality, Condition, Sex or Age soever.

A Bojar or Muscovian Lord giving his attendance at Court or at any
extraordinary Solemnity

Page 177



CHAP. X.
An account of the Coronation of the Czars of Muscovy, their Grandeur, Revenue,
Marriages, etc.
NO sooner is the Czar of Muscovy dead, but Messengers are sent every where to
summon the Chief Officers of the Court and others, who are to be present at the
Coronation, to repair to the City of Musco, where this Solemnity is perfo^med
with all the Expedition imaginable, and sometimes the very next day after the
Decease of the Predecessor. The Metropolitans, Archbishops, Knez, Boyars, and
the principal Merchants of the Kingdom, being entered the place at the day
appointed for the Coronation of the new Czar, a Scaffold is erected three Steps
high, and covered with Persian Tapestry, in the great Church within the Castle.
On this Scaffold are set three very rich Chairs, at an equal distance from one
another, to wit: One for the Great Duke, another for the Patriarch, and the
third for the Ducal Cap, embroidered with Pearls and Diamonds, with a Tassel on
the Crown of it, on which hangs a little Crown, all over beset with Diamonds of
a great Value, and the Robe, which is made of the richest Brocado, lined with
Sables.

The new Czar, The Czar's Coronation*
attended by the Patriarch and Metropolitans, being come within the Church, the
Clergy begin to sing certain Hymns, which being done, the Patriarch prays to
God, St. Nicholas, and other Saints, desiring them to be present at this Great
Solemnity. The prayer being ended, the Chief Minister of State takes the Grand
Duke by the Hand, and presents him to the Patriarch, and says: The Knez and
Boyars having acknowledged this Prince the lawful Heir to the Crown, as being
the next of Kin to the late Czar, they desire, that you may Crown him
immediately. The Patriarch then leads the Prince upon the Scaffold, where being
seated in one of the three Chairs, he blesses him with a little Cross beset
with Diamonds, by putting it to his Head, and immediately after, one of the
Metropo^^tans reads the following Prayer: O Great Lord our God, thou King of
kings, who by the Prophet Samuel, did once choose thy faithful Servant, David,
to be King over thy People of Israel, hearken to our Prayers, which we thy
unworthy Servants offer up unto thee, at this time. Look down from the highest
Heaven upon thy faithful Servant here present, who, through thy Grace, thou
have exalted to be King over thy People, and thy Son has redeemed by his
Blood. Anoint him with the Oil of Cheerfulness, protect him by thy Power, and
Crown him with a precious Diadem; grant him a long and happy Reign; put the
Royal Scepter into his Hands, that he may sway it upon the Throne of Justice.
Let all barbarous Languages acknowledge his Power, and let both his Heart and
Understanding be always directed to thy fear, and during the Course of this
mortal Life, let him never recede from thy Commandments. Let Heresy, and
Schism not come near his Person or Government; and may he always maintain and
observe what is commanded and ordained by the holy Greek Church; Judge thy
People in Justice, and show thy Mercy to the Poor, that, when they leave this
Valley of Misery, they may be received into eternal Joys. The whole Prayer he
concludes with these Words; For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory:
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be with us and remain with
us.

The Prayer ended, two Metropolitans by order from the Patriarch, take the Cap
and Robe up, which are taken from their Hands by some Boyars, who put them upon
the Grand Duke, whom the Patriarch blesses a second time by touching his
Forehead with the Cross of Diamonds; and whilst he is saying, In the Name of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and imparting the third Blessing to
the Grand Duke, the Ducal Cap is by two of the Boyars, put upon the Patriarch's
Head, who causes all the rest of the Prelates there present, to approach, and
give the Benediction to the Great Duke, but only with their Hands. Then the
Great Duke and Patriarch sit down, but raise again immediately, when the Litany
is sung, every Verse ending, with God have mercy upon us, and the new Czar's
Name. The Litany ended, both the Great Duke and Patriarch sit down again, when
one of the Metropolitans, approaching to the Alta^, sings the following Words:
O God preserve our Czar, and Grand Duke of all the Russes, whom God, out of his
great Mercy has bestowed upon us, God grant him good Health, and a long and
happy Life. All that are present, repeat the same Words, and the Boyars, and
Chief Lords approaching to the Great Duke, as a sign of their Subjection, smite
their Foreheads before him, and afterward kiss his Hand. This Ceremony being
over, the Patriarch standing alone before the Great Duke, admonishes him in the
following Words: Since through the singular Providence of God, the Estates of
the Kingdom, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, have Acknowledged and Crowned
You Great Duke over all the Russes, and have Entrusted You with a Matter of so
great Weight, as the Government of so great a Kingdom, You ought to employ all
Your Thoughts, to the Love of God, to the Obedience of His Commands, to the due
Administration of Justice, and the Protection of the True Greek Religion. Then
the Patriarch gives him once more his Bendiction, and the whole Assembly goes
from thence into the Church of St. Michael the Archangel, which is opposite to
the former; where the L^^any is Sung over again, as before; the same is done
afterward in the Church of St. Nicholas, where an End is put to the Ceremony,
and the whole Assembly is most magnificently Entertained in the great Hall of
the Great Duke's Palace.

In former times the Chiefest Dignity in the whole Empire, Principal Offi^ers
of the Court.
was that of Lord High Steward of Muscovy (called Sunderstrevoi Coiniske.) When
Zurki was called to the Crown, he was in that Office; since which time, it has
been suppressed. The next, and which is now the first in Dignity, is the
Duaretskoy, or Great Master, which is correspondent to our Lord High Steward of
the Household. The next in order is the Orusnitshei, or Master of the Horse.
These three precede all the other Boyars and Lords of the Court. Next to these
are the two Secretaries of State, the first whereof, is the Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal or Chancellor, the other is the Vice Chancellor. After them come
the Posticnizei or Lord Chamberlain, who makes the Great Duke's Bed; next to
him the Catamutzoy Klut-ziom, or Vice Chamberlain, the Cratzey or Carver. Then
follow the Stolniki or Gentlemen Sewers, the Strapsi or Gentlemen of the Privy
Chamber, and the Duoroini or Gentlemen-Ushers; besides the Pages, Secretaries
and Clerks, and a good number of Interpreters, for all Languages. Besides
these, there are six Capital Officers belonging to the Court, which they call
Courts of Chancery: The first is for foreign Affairs, under the Tuition of its
Chancellor; the second for War, the third for Crown Lands, and the Czar's
Revenues, under the Lord Treasurer: The fourth receives the Accounts of
Factors, and those that manage the Taverns* The fifth is for Appeal in Civil
Causes, and the sixth for Criminal Causes. The Czar has also two Councils, with
whom he consults concerning Matters of Moment; the first is in the nature of
the Cabinet Council, composed of the Boyars; the second is corresponding to our
Privy Council, composed out of the Ocolnits, or Lords, out of whose number the
Boyars are chosen, and all of them depending from the mere Pleasure of the
Czar; they commonly meet in the Nightime, when they are to consult about
State Affairs. All the Knez and the Boyars, who have plentiful Estates, are
obliged to give their Attendance every day at Court, and to smite their
Forehead in the Great Duke's Presence, which he looks upon as an Argument of
their Fidelity and his Security, which by their Absence might be put in danger,
considering the great Authority they have in their respective Provinces. They
are obliged to appear at Court in great Splendour, to live very Magnificiently,
both in their Houses and Retinue; so, that those who have no Employments, and
want Means to make their Appearance at Court, have leave given them to retire
into the Country, where they live, rather like Peasants than Noblemen. The
Knez, Boyars and Gentlemen, enjoy this Prerogative as well as the Monasteries,
that they are exempted from Taxes, but are obliged to maintain a certain number
of Soldiers, both Horse and Foot, proportionable to their Revenue. No body is
permitted, of what Quality soever, to appear in the Czar's presence with a
Sword on his side, nay, not as much as within the Palace.

The Court of the Czar of Muscovy never appears in greater Splendour, The (...)
than at the public Audiences of Ambassadors; when all the Knez, Boyars,
Officers of the Household, and the Chiefest of the Czar's Factors, are obliged
to appear in the greatest Magnificence in the World. Besides several Regiments
of Guards, which are drawn up on both sides of the Courts of the Palace, to the
very bottom of the Stairs, where the Ambassador is to pass. In the Hall which
leads immediately to that where the Audience is to be given, the Guards of the
Czar's Person are placed in a most splendid Equipage, their Vests of Velvet,
lined with Sables, their Caps adorned with Pearls and precious Stones, and
their Partisans covered with Gold and Silver. At the upper End of the Hall of
Audience, His Czarish Majesty is placed in a Throne of Massy Silver, with his
Scepter in his Hand, and a Crown on his Head. The Throne is most curiously
wrought, standing seven or eight Steps higher than the Floor. The Crown which
the Czar upon such an Occasion wears upon a Cap lined with Sables, is covered
all over with precious Stones, it terminates toward the Top, in the Form of a
Pyramid, with a Golden Cross at the Spire. The Scepter glisters all over with
precious Stones of great Value; his Garments being covered before with Jewels,
and embroidered all over with Pearls. On both sides of the Chair or Throne, but
something Lower stand four young Lords, remarkable for their Tallness, with
Silver Battle-Axes over their Shoulders, putting their Hands to them as if they
were going to strike. They are clad always in White, sometimes in Satt^,
sometimes in Ermin Vests, according to the difference of the Season; their
Caps, nay, even their B^ots, being covered with the same, having great Chains
of Gold across their Breasts, reaching down to their Hips. On the right side
of the Chair or Throne, upon a P^ramid of Silver stands the Imperial Apple, of
massy Gold, of a considerable Bigness, representing the World; and on the same
side, five Paces Distance from the Throne, stands the Lord Chancellor. Round
about by the Walls are Benches raised three or four steps above the Floor, and
about the b^eadth of a good Walk, where are placed the Knez and Boyars,
sometimes to the Number of two hundred, clothed all of them with Vests of
Cloth of Gold and Silver, or Velvet adorned* with Pearls and Jewels. The Gross
or the Czar's Merchants or Factors, stand at the lower End of the Hall, in very
rich R^bes, taken for that purpose out of the Czar's Wardrobe; The Sides and
Floor of the Hall of Audience, as also the Benches, where the Lords are placed,
being all covered with rich Persian Tapest^y. As soon as an Ambassador enters
the Hall of Audience, he makes a very low Reverence, the Throne of the Czar
being exactly opposite to the Door; Then advancing, and stopping in the midst
of the Hall, he makes a second, and when he is ready to speak, the third. The
Credentials being delivered to the Czar, (who immediately gives them to his
Chancellor that stands near the Throne) and the Presents sent to the Czar
being offered, and the Salutes and other Ceremonies used upon such Occasions
past, the Ambassador is reconducted to his Palace, where he is splendidly
entertained with a great number of Dishes out of the Czar's Kitchen, which in
great State are carried from the Castle to the Ambassadors House. There is one
thing very remarkable in this Court in the Public Audience of Christian
Ambassadors, that they and their Retinue are obliged to kiss the Grand Czar's
Hand; which, as it is otherwise looked upon as a thing much below the Dignity
of an Ambassador; so it is considered in the Muscovian Court as a particular
Favor, which is only granted to the Ambassadors of Christian Princes, and
never permitted to Infidels.

The Revenues of the Czar of Muscovy are proportionable to the vast Extent of
his Dominions. For besides, that he is Heir to all who die intestate and
without Heirs; He lays what Imposition he thinks convenient upon the Estates
and Persons of his Subjects, which indeed, in times of Peace are not great; but
in times of War very excessive; so that they pay sometimes the Pottina, as it
is called in Muscovy, which is the Fifth Part of every Man's Estate; as in the
Reign of Michael Federowitz, when the famous Siege of Smolensko was to be
undertaken, in the Year 1632. But most frequently at the Beginning of any great
War, the Tenth is paid by the Muscovites.

The Great Duke's proper Demesne, is always farmed out, from whence arises so
considerable a Revenue, that it maintains near a Hundred Thousand Strelitz or*
Musketeers, which are in part employed for the Guard of his Person and the City
of Musco, partly are disposed in the Frontier-places.

The Customs are very considerable in Muscovy, Five per Cent. of all
Merchandices imported or exported, being to be paid to the Czar. The
Custom-House of Archangel has some Years paid in near 200000 l. Sterling; and
since the Establishment of a free Commerce betwixt China, Persia and Muscovy,
the Customs paid on those Frontiers amount to a great Sum yearly.

The Czar is as it were the General Merchant of the Empire, employing under him
a great number of Factors, who are all accountable to him. What is imported by
the Greeks and Persians is engrossed for the Czar's Use at a certain Price;
Hides, Potash, Wax, Hemp, Flax, and other such like Commodities, which are of
the Product of Muscovy, are sent by these Factors to Archangel and other
places, where they are truck'd off for Silk, Cloth, Velvet, Cloth of Gold, and
such other Commodities as the Czar stands in need of; it being a Custom in
Muscovy for the Czar to bestow his Graces among his Subjects, in Silks,
Velvets, Sables, and such like; As his Houshold-Servants are for the most part
paid with Meal, Honey, Fish, Nut-oils, Oa^s, Beer, Mead, and other Necessaries.
His Revenue out of^the Fur and Caviare, as also the Ithyocolla and Agarick, ^
must needs be very great, forasmuch as he monopolizes these Commodities.

Bath-stoves being so common in Muscovy, that there is not a Village so small,
but has one or more of them: The Impost laid upon those that keep them for
public Use amounts to a vast Sum; But as the Taverns and other Houses where
strong Liquors are sold, infinitely out-number the Bathstoves, so the Revenue
arising from to the Czar is incredible; some of them being farmed out at 2000,
others at 6000, some at 10000 and 12000 Rubbles per Annum, reckoning a Rubble
at^the rate of 8 Shillings Sterling.

It is to be imagined, that all these several Branches, when united, must needs
make up a vast Treasure, but, if his Receippts are great, his Issues and
Expenses are proportionable thereto. For, not to insist here upon the
extraordinary Splendour and Pomp of his Court, the Presents and Expenses
bestowed upon foreign Ambassadors, and the vast Consumption of all manner of
Provisions of his Table, and the rest of his Court, where above a thousand
Persons have Meat provided for them; every day. His Military Expenses are
almost incredible. The vastness of his Territories obliges him to keep above a
hundred thousand Men in constant Pay, which in time of War are sometimes
augmented to three hundred thousand; His Wars are more expensive to him than
most other Princes of Europe, by reason of the great number of foreign Officers
as well as Soldiers, he entertains in his Armies, who are both very plentifully
and punctually paid; so, that notwithstanding the vastness of his Revenues, at
the commencement of any War, he is obliged to lay extraordinary Impositions
upon his Subjects.

The Great Duke, Coin.
having only the Power of Coining Money, the same is commonly Farmed out to
several Merchants of the Cities of Musco, Novogorod, Twere and Plescou; these
four Cities enjoying alone the Privilege of Coining, throughout all Muscovy.
Their Silver Coin (for Gold they have none, unless it be Medals) is of an Oval
figure, and very small, the biggest being worth but a Penny, they call them
Copees, or Denaing, having on one side the Arms of Muscovy, as we have
described it before, and on the other the Great Duke's Name then Reigning; and
that of the City, where it is Coined. They have two lesser Sorts, called
Poluske and Mustofske; the first is worth half, the second the fourth part of a
C^pee, both of Silver, so that this small Money being so very troublesome to
Tell; the Muscovites in their Trading make up their Accounts by Altins, Grif,
and Rubbles; the first of these they count worth Three, the second Ten, and the
third a Hundred Copees; though there* be no such Coin in Muscovy, but only is
made use of in Commerce, to avoid the Multiplication of Copees. Besides this
small Money, they make use, for the most part, of Rixdollars, and some Spanish
Reals. The first they call J^sim^i, from the word Joachim, a name of a certain
Saint, whose Image was formerly Stamped upon one side of these Rixdollars, and
who has communicated his name to a certain City in Bohemia, called
Joachimstad, where in the Year 1519, these Rixdollars were first Coined, and
are in Germany to this day, called Joachim's Dollars. The Czar rarely appears
in Public, unless it be on Festivals, or some other extraordinary Occasion,
when he shows himself in the utmost Splendour; none but his Domestics and Lords
in Office are admitted to approach within the inward Court; The Guards which
are within the Court, are kept under so exact a Discipline, that they stand at
their Duty, silent, and as it were, immovable. He dines but seldom in public,
and whether at Dinner or Supper, there is not the least Noise made by the
Sounding of Trumpets or otherwise, but a certain Officer goes to the Cellar and
Kitchen-door, where he calls to the Servant, Godusar Kushinung, that is to say,
The Grand Seignior would be Served, when immediately, the Meat is carried up.
The Grand Duke always Dines alone; but if he invites any of his Lords, they are
placed at another Table at some distance from his, and are Served with the same
Meat, that has been presented to the Grand Duke. For, it is to be observed,
that the Grand Duke has always fifty Dishes dressed for his Dinner, which the
Gentlemen, that bring them up all at once, hold so long in their Hands, till
the Carver has showed them to the Czar, who, after he has made choice of such
of them as he likes best, sends the rest to such Persons of Quality, as he has
invited to Dinner, or if he Dines alone, he sends those Dishes that have been
untouched, to some of his Boyars, to their Houses.

There is a House of Pleasure at about three Miles distance from the City of
Musco, belonging to the Great Dukes, where they go once a Year, toward the
end of May. It is called Obrasauksky, which is as much as Transfiguration, it
being dedicated to the Transfiguration in the Mount. Here the Czar, in
imitation of these Words: Master, it is good for us to be here, let us make
three Tabernacles, has very magnificent Tents set up, for him and his Retinue,
where he spends some time very retiredly, no body being admitted to disturb the
Czar with any Petitions, or other Business; Nay, round about these Tents, are
not only Rails, but Guards, placed to hinder the approach of the People, whom
the Czar does not allow to be Eyewitnesses of his Retirement.

It being an established Custom in Muscovy, His Marri^ge*
as we have said before, that the Czar never makes Alliances by way of Marriage
with foreign Princes, he always chooses one of his own Subjects, which is
generally done with a great deal of Secrecy, and never published till after the
Consummation of the Marriage; forasmuch as the Person the Czar makes Choice of
(which is done by Tying a Crown upon her Head) is exposed to the Envy and
Malice of such other Ladies, as have been refused by the Prince, so that to
avoid any dangerous consequences, but especially the Charms of these Rival
Ladies, which are much feared by the Muscovites, there is scarce any thing
known of the Czar's Marriage, till it is Proclaimed by the Sound of the Great
Bell in Musco, perhaps the finest in the World.

As the Fashion of the Czar's Clothes is like that of the Nobility, The
Czaritza*
but only richer; so the Dress of the Czaritza or Empress is little different
from other Women; the Attire of her Head is something higher, and her Smock
Sleeves are much longer, to wit, ten or twelve English Yards; besides that, her
Robe or uppermost Gown has wide Sleeves, not unlike to those of our
Batchellours of Arts: These are worn by all her Women of Honor, Chamber-Women,
Ladies, and Embroideresses. The Father or Brother of the Czaritza or Empress,
dare not call her his Daughter and Sister, nor dare any of the Kindred own
themselves so.

It is a general Custom among the Russians, The Czarovitz.
not to let their young Children be seen by any body, but their nearest
Relations, for fear Strangers should cast some ill Aspect upon them. This is
more strictly observed with the Czarovitz or Son of the Czar, none being
permitted to see him, unless it be his Tutor, and Family Servants, till he be
fifteen Years old, when he is exposed to public View; At the Birth of a
Czarovitz, the people, to demonstrate their Joy, bring great Presents to the
Court, which are, for the most part, returned, but, if the Czar likes any of
them, he pays to the full Worth for them. The Czar's Children are attended by
other Children, bred up with them, who exactly know their distance, and what
manner of Respect is to be paid to them, as well as other Persons, of what
degree soever. None of them dare speak the least Word of what passes in their
Court; as it is death for any one to Reveal what is past in the Czar's Palace.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Religion of the Muscovites, and their Church Government.
THE Muscovites do all profess one and the same Religion, which may be said to
be particular to them; forasmuch as it extends not beyond the Grand Czar's
Dominions, unless it be at Narva, where some few Muscovites live under the
Jurisdiction of Sweden, and that there is some Analogy betwixt them and those
Inhabiting the Polish Russia, that profess the Greek Religion. The Muscovites
glory, that they are the only True Christians now in the World; forasmuch as
they are baptized, whereas others have been only Sprinkled, which is the Reason
they allege for Re-baptizing all such, of what Persuasion soever, that embrace
their Religion. They profess, as they say, the true Greek Religion, which makes
them show abundance of Respect and Kindness to the Greeks, so that the Greek
Monks or Priests, which frequently come from other parts into Muscovy with
their Relics, know how to make an Advantage of their Simplicity and Ignorance.
They found their Religion on the Books of the Old and New Testament. They are
forbidden to bring the whole Bible to Church (tho they are allowed to read it
at home) by reason of several passages in the Old Testament; so that they only
carry the New Testament, and some certain chosen Psalms and Verses taken out of
the Prophets. It is about threescore years ago that they got the Bible
translated into the Russian Language, wherein they followed, as they pretend,
the footsteps of the Seventy Interperters. They have also a certain Book,
which they call the History of the Gospel, but the whole so adulterated with
Fabulous Narrations, and Impertinent Circumstances, that in another Christian
Country it would be so far from being looked upon as a Book of Devotion, that
it would appear abominable. As to the Explication of the Bible, they follow St.
Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem, who flourished toward the latter end of the Fourth
Age, under the Reign of the Emperor Theodosius, and ought not to be confounded
with Cyril of Alexandria. The rest of the Fathers, which are in greatest esteem
among the Russians, are John Damascene, Gregory Nazianzen, St. John Chysostome,
and Ephraim the Syrian; of whom they relate, that an Angel having presented to
him a Book writ in Golden Characters, which no body could disclose, he
immediately received those Instructions from thence, which he has transmitted
in his Books to Posterity. They relate out of their Annals, that the Christian
Religion was first established in these parts by the Apostle St Andrew, who
leaving Greece, came to the Borysthenes, where he embarked, and by the Sea of
Ladoga, came to Novogorod, where he Preached the Gospel. That the Christian
Religion was afterward extirpated by the Neighboring Pagans, who made
themselves Masters of Muscovy, till in the Year 989. Prince Wolodimer, or
Vlodimer, Great Duke of Russia having given them a signal Overthrow, and
reunited several of these Provinces to his Crown, grew so famous for his great
Achievements, that Basilius and Constantine Porphyrogennetae, Emperors of
Constantinople, sent their Ambassadors to Congratulate his good Success; and
that by the Conversation and Instructions of these Ambassadors, Prince
Wolodimer was induced to embrace the Christian Faith, and to receive Baptism.
John Cropalates who writ part of the Byzantine History, and lived much about
the same time, as also Cedren and Zonaras chiefly attribute the Conversion of
the Russians to the Christian Religion, to a Miracle performed by a Bishop that
was sent thither by the Patriarch of Constantinople to instruct and baptize the
people. For, these Infidels having objected to him, That, since God had
preserved Daniel's Companions in the Fiery Furnace, why might not with the
same, or more reason, the Bible be prevented by God's power, from being
consumed by Fire? The Bishop, after having told them that he was assured he
could not ask any thing from God, which he could not obtain by his prayers,
cast the Bible into a great Fire, made for that purpose, where having lain till
the Fire was all spent, it was taken out as entire and untouched as it was cast
in, whereat Wolodimer being moved, abolished all Idolatry, and in lieu thereof,
planted Christianity in all his Territories. From hence it is, that they deduce
the Origin of their Religion from the Greek Church, which however, they have
much altered since.

The Creed of Athanasius is the general Rule of their Faith, for they believe
in God the Father as Creator of the World, in God the Son, as Savior and
Redeemer of Mankind, and in the Holy Ghost, as Sanctifier of all the Faithful;
but for the rest, they are involved in a great many Superstitions, and fix the
Center of their Devotion, more in the outward and Ceremonial Part, than in the
Internal Part of Religion. They pay their Venerations to the Virgin Mary, the
Evangelists, the Apostles, and an infinite number of other Saints, not only as
Intercessors, but Co-operators of their Salvation, for they pay to their Saints
and Images all the Honors due to none but God Almighty. There is never a
Family so small in M^scovy, but what has its Tutelar Saint's Image hung up
against the Wall of the Chamber, unto whom the ignorant People pay their daily
Devotion, and all the religious Instructions they give to their Children, tends
to no more, than to stand with a great deal of Respect, and to say their
Prayers before those Images; for the rest, they place the utmost Excellency of
their good Works (which they believe meritorious) in building of Monasteries
and Churches, and giving Alms. Those who intend to change their Religion, and
embrace the Muscovian, are obliged to go for six Weeks into some Monastery or
another, where all the Instructions they receive, is, how to say their Prayers,
how to reverence their Saints and Images, and how to make the Cross.

The whole Exercise of the Muscovian Religion, may be reduced under these
several Heads, viz. Baptism, Reading of the Word of God in their Churches,
going to Mass, Praying to Saints, and making Reverences before their Images,
Processions, Pilgrimages, Fastings, Confession and Communion.

Baptism, Their Baptism.
they look upon as the most necessary Point of Religion; they acknowledge
themselves conceived and born in Sin, and that by Baptism, they are regenerated
and cleansed, according to God's Institution, from their original Impurity.
They baptize their Children as soon as they are born; and, unless they be too
weak (when they Baptize them at home, but never in the same Room where the
Mother lies) they are carried to Church by the Godfather and Godmother, where
being met at the Door by the Priest, he signs the Child with the Sign of the
Cross in the Forehead, and gives him the Benediction, saying. The Lord preserve
thy coming in, and thy going out. Then they walk up together to the Font, which
stands in the middle of the Church, cross which, the Priest fastens nine
lighted Wax-Candles, delivered to him by the Godfathers, whom he Incenses, and
Consecrates the Water with a great many Ceremonies. Then the Procession begins
about the Font; the Clerk goes before with the Image of St. John, being
followed by the Godfathers, with Wax-Candles in their Hands; thus they go about
it three times, whilst the Priest Reads out of a Book. The Procession being
over, the Godfathers give the Name of the Child to the Priest, in Writing, upon
his Demand, who puts it upon an Image, which he holds upon the Child's Breast,
and after some short Prayers, asks the Godfathers, Whether the Child believes
in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Having answered, Yes, they all turn
their Backs to the Font, as a Sign of their Aversion to the three next
following Questions, to be asked by the Priest, to' wit; Whether the Child
forsakes the Devil? Whether he forsakes his Angels? Whether he forsakes his
Works? The Godfathers answering, Yes, distnctly to every Question, and Spitting
three times upon the Ground. Then they face about again to the Font* and being
asked by the Priest, whether they promise to bring up the Child in the true
Greek Religion, they advance with the Child nearer toward the Door (for fear
the Devil, by whom they believe Children to be possessed before Baptism, should
take up his Residence in the Church) where he begins the Exorcism, putting his
Hands upon, and blowing three times cross the Child with these Words: Get out
of this Child thou unclean Spirit, and make way for the Holy Ghost. Then
returning to the Font, he cuts off a little of the Child's Hair, which he puts
into a Book, and, having asked the Godfathers, whether the Child was brought
thither to be Baptized, he takes him stark Naked into his Arms, and dips him
three times into the Water, pronouncing the Words of the Sacrament in the mean
while, viz. I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. Immediately after the Baptism, he signs it with the sign of the
Cross on the Forehead, upon the Hands, Breast and Back, with a certain Oil
consecrated for that purpose, and having put a corn of Salt in the Child's
Mouth, and a clean Shirt about him, Thou art, says he, as clean and as clear
from thy Original Sin, as thy Shirt. Then the Priest hangs about his Neck a
little Cross of Gold, Silver or ^ead, according to the Ability of the Parents,
with (...) very strict Injunction to wear it all his lifetime; which is
observed with so much strictness by the Muscovites, that they deny Christian
Burial to such (...) have it not about them, at their last Exit out of his
World. The whole is concluded by the Priest's ^igning the Child a certain
Saint, whose Image he ^^livers to the Godfather, and charges him to take
^^ectual care, that, the Child, as soon as he is come (...) Years of
Discretion, may pay all due Reverence (...) his Patron. Lastly, he takes his
leave from the ^hild and Godfathers with a Kiss, exhorting them (...) mutual
Love, but to take heed of intermarry^g.

The Water, wherein the Child is to be Baptized, is never Warmed over the Fire,
though the Cold be never so excessive, but they put it sometimes in some warm
place or other, to take off a little of the cold. If two or more Children are
to be Baptized at the same Font, the Water is emptied so often as there are
several Children to be Baptized, it being their Opinion, that the Water which
is contaminated with the Original Sin of the first Child, is not pure enough to
cleanse the second or third from their Impurities. Persons of Age who change
their Religion, and embrace the Muscovite Faith, nay, even Muscovites, who
having changed their Religion in another Country, are willing to return to
their own Communion, must be first Rebaptized, which is always done in a Brook
or River, where they are plunged over Head and Ears, be it never so Cold, nay,
they oftentimes break through the Ice to come at the Water.

In the same manner are treated those whom the Russians call Chaldeans, who
being looked upon by them as Infidels, and who during the time they commit
their Extravagancies, have withdrawn themselves from the Church, must be
reconciled to it, by Re-baptization on Twelfth-day, as that on which happened
the Vocation of the Gentiles. They are a Company of idle Vagabond Fellows, who,
in Commemoration of Sadrach, Mesack and Abednego, that were cast into the Fire
by the Command of Nebuchadn^^ar, represent the Men that heated the Oven; for
which purpose, pursuant to an Ancient Custom, they get leave from the
Patriarch, to Disguise themselves, and to run up and down the Streets with
Fireworks, from the Eighteenth Day of December, till Twelvetide: During which
time, they commit great Insolences, exacting small Gifts from the Peasants
whose Hair and Beards they set on Fire upon refusal. On Twelfth-day, when their
License is expired, they are Rebaptized (some of them having been Baptized Ten
or Twelve times) and looked upon as good Christians. Those that intend to
Embrace the Russian Faith, be they of what Religion they will, must first
renounce their former Baptism, abjure their former Religion, and declare if
Heretical, spit as often as it is named, and Curse their Fathers and Mothers.
After which they are clad in the Muscovian Habit, and are maintained by the
Great Duke according to their Qualities.

Their Festivals, Their Festivals.
when besides Sundays, every body is to attend Divine Service at Church are
regulated and certain, and are inserted in the Muscovian Almanac, according to
the Old Style: They have fifteen of them throughout the whole Year* and stand
according to their Year, which begins in September, in the following order.

First, The Nativity of the Blessed Mother of God, on the Eighth Day of
September, called by the Russians, Prasnick Rosostua Priziste B^gerodice.

The Exaltation of the Cross on the Fourteenth of the same Month, called
Vzemirna Wasdai* Senja Chresta.

The Oblation of the Blessed Mother of God, on the One and Twentieth of
November, called Vedenja Priziste Bogorodice.

The Nativity of Christ on the Five and Twentieth of December, called R^s^stua
Christova.

The Epiphany on the Sixth of January, called Cres^^enia.

Candlemass Day the second of February, called Stratenia Gospoda Boga.

The Annunciation of our Blessed Lady, on the Five and Twentieth of March,
called B^agaves^enia Priziste Bogoredice.

Palm Sunday, which they call We^bna W^s^r^shenia.

Easterday, or the Resurrection of Christ, called Welikoiden, or Wos^reshenia
Christova.

The Ascension of Christ, called Wosneshenia Christova.

Whit-Sunday, or the Sending of the Holy Ghost, called Schiestnie Swetaga
Duena. The next day after this, they Celebrate the Feast of the Trinity, and
the next following Sunday, that of All Saints.

The Manif^station of the Glory of Jesus Christ upon the Mountain; which they
call Prebrosiena Gospodo Christova, is celebrated on the 6th Day of August.

The Ascension of the Virgin; or, The Assumpption of the Mother of God, called
by them Vspenia p^iziste bogorodice, they celebrate on the 15th of the same
Month.

There is scarce a Day in the Year, but what is dedicated to one Saint, or
another; nay, sometimes three or four Saints have but one Day allotted betwixt
them: But these being of an inferior Degree, are not much regarded by the
Laity; the Ecclesiastics being only obliged to say the Offices appointed for
those Days.

Formerly the Muscovites made but an indifferent Account of their Festivals and
Sundays; for, though they would go to Mass in the Morning, the Shops were open,
and the Handycraft's-Man did follow his ordinary Employment in the Afternoons;
till about Fifty Years ago, by a special Order from the Patriarch, the Shops
were ordered to be shut, not only upon these Festivals and Sundays, but also on
their Weekly Fasting-days; to wit, on Wednesdays and Fridays: And that during
the Time of Divine Service, no Wine or Aqua-vitae should be sold; but this is
not executed with too much Rigor; at least, they seldom fail to conclude them
with Strong Liquors.

Upon these abovementioned Festivals, Their Church Service.
and Sundays, they go to Church three times a Day; first, in the Morning early,
to Mattens; at Noon; and in the Evening, to Vespers. They do not make use, in
their Service, of any Sermons, or Instructions to their Auditors; but only read
certain Passages out of the Bible, and some Homilies: Giving for a Reason, That
their Faith being founded upon the pure Word of God, it is, without any farther
Explication, sufficient to lead them into the Way of Salvation; for as much as
the diverse Interpretations of the Holy Scripture occasion Heresies and
Divisions in the Church. This they lay down as so unalterable a Maxim* that
some of their Priests, who were, perhaps, not quite so ignorant as the rest,
and undertook to preach, and exhort the People out of the Holy Scripture, have
been excommunicated, and banished into Siberia; as it happened about 60 Years
ago, to a certain Proto-Pope of Morum, and his Followers. Their whole Service
therefore consists in the Reading of certain Chapters out of the Bible, some
Psalms, and St. Athanasius's Creed: Sometimes they add an Homily out of St.
Chrys^stom, or certain Prayers, or rather Anthems; sung much after the same
manner as the Antiphona's.

The general Morning-Anthems are, Deliver me, O Lord, of thy abundant Mercy:
For thy Mercy's sake, cleanse me from my Sins; O Lord, my Savior. This is for
the Mattens, or Morning-Prayers.

At Noon-Prayers, this Anthem is used, amongst others; We trust in Christ, our
Savior; and our Hope is in him: Halleluja; Halleluja.

That for the Vespers, is; Lord, hear my Prayer, and hear me when I call; and
let my Cry come unto thee.

At the Conclusion of these, or any other of their Anthems, the People repeat
three times (making every time the Sign of the Cross) their Gospodi Pomilui;
or, Lord, have Mercy upon me.

This done, the Priest, attended by the Clerk, goes up to the Altar, where he
says the Office, according to the Liturgy of St. Basil. He pours Red Wine and
Water (in Imitation of the Blood and Water that came out of our Savior's Side)
into the Chalice, with some little Bits of Leavened Bread; and after having
consecrated them, and said several Prayers, he takes out the Bread with a
Spoon, but gives nothing of it to any body, unless it be to some sick Child,
brought thither on purpose to receive the Communion according to the
Institution of the Muscovite Church. They are all bare in the Church, even the
Great Duke himself. The People stand all the Service-time, and incessantly bow
and pay their Reverences to the Images, frequently pronouncing Gospodi Pomilui
or Lord have Mercy upon me. The most Devout prostrate themselves, knocking
their H^^ds against the Ground; especially at Whitsuntid* when they fall
prostrate upon Sycamore-Branches wherewith their Churches are strewed; being
persuaded that the Holy Ghost descends upon these Leaves. The Priests only have
the Liberty of keeping on their Caps, which are given them at their
Consecration. But if a Priest have known his Wife, if he have touched a dead
Corpse, or been at a Burial, he is not to offici^te at the Altar the same Day,
but is obliged to substitute another in his Place. The most Devout keep at a
distance, not entering the Church, but perform their Devotion at the Door, among
the Women: The fair Sex (as if they were not sufficiently disciplined at home)
having this, as an additional Mortification, enjoined them, that they must keep
at a distance at Church; especially if they have chanced to take the Husband in
a good Humor, and enjoyed lately the Pleasures of Matrimony. In which Case
also the Man is confined to the Church-door, unless he have, after having had
Knowledge of his Wife, washed and bathed himself, and put on a clean Shirt. If
the Russian Women were as constant Church-Women as our Ladies, they would be
obliged to build their Porches bigger than the Churches.

Most of these Festivals are also solemnized among the Muscovites with
Processions, among which, that upon Palm Sunday, representing the Entrance of
our Savior into Jerusalem, is performed in the Presence of the Great Duke, and
the Patriarch himself, in the City of Mosco; and throughout the whole Kingdom,
by the Wayvodes and Metropolitans of the Provinces, who represent the Great
Duke and Patriarch.

The Great Duke goes from the Castle, Process^^on Palm Sunday.
with the Patriarch, to the Church called Jerusalem, without the Castle-Gate,
in the following Order: After a Hundred, or more, Scavengers have cleared the
Way through which the Procession is to pass, there first comes a very large
Chariot, most like a Pageant, drawn by six Horses; in which is placed a Tree,
garnished with abundance of Apples, Figs and Grapes, which are fastened to the
Branches: Round about it are placed four or five Lads, with Surplisses, singing
Hosannah. Next to the Chariot come a great many Priests, in their Surplisses
and Copes; some carrying Books and Crosses, others Banners and Images upon long
Poles; some sing, others cast Incense among the People. After these, march the
Duke's Factors and Merchants; then the Secretaries, Knez and Boyares, who go
immediately before the Great Duke, most of them with Palm twigs in their Hands.
The Grand Duke himself marches on foot, richly clad, with a Crowned Bonnet upon
his Head; supported on both sides by two of the principal Bojares, or
Counselors of State; and leading by the Bridle, which is three or four Yards
long the Patriarch's Horse: This Horse, which is covered all over with a White
Fine Linen Cloth, is disguised like an Ass, with great Artificial Ears; upon
which the Patriarch rides sideling, having upon his Head a round low Crowned
Cap, with a narrow Brim, lined with E^mins, and richly beser with Pearls, over
which appears a kind of a Diadem: In his Right Hand he has a Cross of Diamonds,
wherewith he blesses the People, who receive his Benediction with very low
Submissions, bowing their Heads to the Ground, and making the Sign of the
Cross. He is surrounded by Metropolitans, and other Priests; whereof, some
carry Books, others Censers. As they pass along, there are a great Number of
Boys placed on both sides of the Way, some of which pull off their upper
Garments, which they scatter along the Way; others lay Pieces of Cloth, of
several Yard^ long, upon the Ground, for the Great Duke and (...) to pass over.
(...)
Thus they march to the above mentioned Church, where having stayed above (...)
an Hour, they return in the same Order, till they come to a certain Platform,
where the Patriarch, after having presented the Czar and some of the Bojares
with Palm-twigs, takes off the Great Duke's Cap, and having laid it upon a
Silver Plate, he presents his Diamond-Cross to him to kiss: This being done
with a most profound Reverence by the Czar, the Patriarch waves it on high, all
round about, first toward those upon the Platform, who also receive this
Benediction with the utmost Respect; and then to all the People* who at the
same Instant prostrate themselves upon the Ground, especially the Czar's Guards
that attend there* and upon this Occasion, appear the most zealous in their
Devotion. They conclude with some Hymns, which having lengthened the whole
Devotion to an Hour, the Procession marches from thence, back to the Castle* in
the same manner as they went first to the Church. The Patriarch, as an
Acknowledgment of the Honor received from His Czarrish Majesty, in leading his
Horse, presents him with a Purse, containing to the Value of an Hundred Guineas.

Eight Days after this Procession is the Feast of Easter, Their Easter.
which the Muscovites celebrate with great Ceremonies, and Rejoicings; as well
in Remembrance of the Resurrection of our Savior, as that it puts an End to
their Mortifications which they have endured in their Lent. Their Rejoicings
continue for 15 Days during which they feast* one another with all manner of
good Cheer* and to make thmselves a full Amends for their Sufferings during the
Lent, they ply the Drinking-Houses so warmly, that they are filled up every
where with Persons of all sorts, Men and Women, Ecclesiastics and Laics; and
the Streets almost not to be passed, for the Multitudes of Drunkards at Night.
They sell for these fifteen Days Eggs ready d^ed, of all sorts of Colors, but
especially of a Red, or Crimson; which they send as Pr^^^nts to one another, to
some, one; some, two; some three: And if they meet one another in this (...)
they salute one another with these Words, Christ's wos chrest, that is, Christ
is risen: Whereto the other having answered, W^stin wos Chrest; that is, He is
certainly risen; they kiss one another: He that salutes first, is obliged to
present the other with an Egg; no body, of what Condition, Sex or Quality
soever, daring to refuse either the Kiss, or the Egg. The Great Duke himself
does not only present Eggs to the principal Counselors and Lords of his Court,
but also to his Military Officers residing in the City of Musco; who all come
to kiss his Hand, and His Majesty imparts to them his Royal Benediction.

They have many such like Processions, Procession on the First of October.
upon several Occasions; and the Great Duke goes frequently on Pilgrimage, with
his whole Court. The First of October is, among other Days, celebrated with a
great deal of Ceremony. The Great Duke, attended by his Bojares, and Officers
of his Household; and the Patriarch, accompanied by some Metropolitans, and a
great Number of other Priests, with Books and Crosses in their Hands, go in
Procession to the same Church we have mentioned before, called by them, that of
the Blessed Trinity; and by the Germans, and most other Strangers, Jerusalem.
But before they come quite to the Church, there is a Theater erected on the
Right Hand as you go to it, railed in all about; before which are planted two
great Pieces of Cannon, whereof the Bore is near half an Ell Diameter. The
Grand Duke and Patriarch, without admitting any body else, being got within the
Rails, upon the Theater, the Patriarch presents to the Great Duke a certain
Image, painted upon a piece of Past-board which folds together in the Middle,
not unlike a Book, and is enriched with Silver at the four Corners; to which
the Czar makes a very low Reverence, touching it with his Forehead, whilst the
Priests without the Rails are muttering over certain Prayers, appointed for
that Solemnity. This done, the Patriarch presents to him a Golden Cross, beset
with Diamonds, of about a Foot in length; which, after the Great Duke has
kissed, the Patriarch touches his Forehead and Temples with it; and so to
Church they go, where the Service is performed, and the Solemnity ended for
that Day.

With no less Solemnity they celebrate their New-Years-Day, Their New-Years-Day.
which is the first of September; they having no other Epache but that of the
Creation of the World, as we have mentioned before. This Procession is
performed in the Castle, where a considerable number of the People are
permitted to partake of the Benediction given them by the Patriarch. He,
attended by three or four Hundred Priests, carrying Banners, Images, Crosses,
and Books, comes out of the Church, which is on the Right Hand of the Second
Court of the Castle, while the Great Duke with his Knez, Bojares, and other
Officers of his Court, comes out on the Left Hand of the same Court. The Grand
Duke with his Cap in his Hand, and the Patriarch with his Mitre on his Head,
and a Cross beset with Diamonds a Foot long in his Hand, advancing to one
another, the Patriarch presents the Cross to the Great Duke to kiss; which he
having done with a most profound Respect, the Patriarch gives his Benediction
first to the Czar, and afterward to all the rest there present, wishing them
all Prosperity in the New Year.

As to what concerns their Images, Their Images.
they suffer not any that are Carved or Graven, either in their Churches or
Houses; because, say they, these are forbidden in the Decalogue; but their
Images are painted with Oil upon Wood. The best of all is, That they will not
admit of any painted by Foreigners, though done by the greatest Masters of
Europe; but they must be painted by one of their own Religion: So that for
Color, Painting, and Proportion they are the most wretched in the whole World,
being about a Foot in Breadth, and not quite a Foot and a half in length. There
is in the City of Musco, as we have mentioned in the Second Chapter, a certain
Street appointed for the Sale of these Images; though a Muscovite will never
own to have bought his Saint: For which reason, when any one of them has chosen
an Image in the God-market, he deposits Money for the Exchange of it; if the
Saint-maker thinks it not sufficient, he shoves it back, and the other Party is
obliged to add more to it, till both Parties are contented. They will own, that
during the first Centuries, even till the Time of Constantine the Great, Images
were not used in the Church; or, if they were, no Worship was paid them. They
allege that they follow in this Point the Authority and Opinion of John
Damascene, though it is more likely they have taken them from the Greek Church.
The Walls of their Churches are every where full of them, as they are the chief
Ornaments of their Houses, every Family having its Saint with a small
Wax-Candle before it, which they light when they pay their Devotion. Over the
Porch of their Churches, in the Marketplaces, and over the Gates of their
Cities you are sure to meet with the Picture of some Saint or another, but
especially with that of the Virgin Mary, and St. Nicholas the Patron of Muscovy.

These Images the Muscovites respect, Their Ad^ration of Saints.
and look upon as things so absolutely necessary, that without them they could
not perform their Devotion. As often as they address their Prayers to them,
they set Wax Candles before that Saint to whom they intend to make their
Addresses; and after they have made most profound Inclinations with their
Heads, they frequently make the Sign of the Cross with three Fingers of their
Right Hand, touching first the Forehead, next the Breast, lastly the Right
Shoulder, and the Left after that. They conceive in this way of crossing
themselves a great deal of Mystery; for, they say, the Three Fingers signify
the Trinity; by their putting them to their Forehead, they would show that
Christ is ascended into Heaven; by crossing the Breast, that God ought to be
reverenced and loved with all our Heart. But as to making the Sign of the Cross
from the Right Shoulder to the Left, they intend to signify the Day of
Judgment; forasmuch as it is said, That God shall place the Righteous on his
Right Hand, to be called to Eternal Salvation; and the wicked on the Left, to
be thrown into the Abyss of Hell.

If they pass by any of their Images in the Street, they make a stand for a
while before them, till they have made their Reverence four or five times one
after another, which is done by crossing themselves, and pronouncing with a
loud Voice their Gospodi Pomilui, or God have mercy upon me.

They address themselves with the same Veneration to such Crosses as they meet
with in their way, Their Crosses.
where they are frequently observed to stop, and repeat the same Ejaculations.
The first, nay, the only thing Parents teach their Children, is, to make their
Reverences and Inclinations to the Images, to make the Sign of the Cross, and
to say the Gospodi Pomilui, or God have mercy upon me. The Muscovites don't
undertake any thing, nor Eating nor Drinking, or whatever else it may be,
without making first the Sign of the Cross, which may well be called the
Introduction to all the Civil Actions of the Muscovites.

The Tutelar Saints of private Houses have commonly their Stations assigned
them in a Corner behind the Table. Whenever a Muscovite comes into a House, the
first thing he does is to go straightways to the Saint of the House; if he
cannot find him, he asks, Jest le Boch, or Where is the God? After he has found
him out, he pays his Reverence to him, saying his Gospodi Pomilui, or Lord have
mercy upon me; and then turns about and salutes the Company. If they are to
take a merry turn with a Woman in the Room where the Saint is, they are sure to
cover him first* perhaps* for fear he should tell tales. They will not allow
Strangers to touch them, or for any Body to sleep in the same Room, with their
Feet toward them; nay, some are so nice, as to purify the Chamber with
Incense, if any Strangers of another Religion have lodged in it.

They will hold their Images to the Fire, believing they have a Power to
extinguish it if they please. The Swedish Soldiers, who in the Year 1610. had
taken and burnt the City of Novogorod, when they saw the Inhabitants presenting
their Images to stay the Progress of the Flames, being convinced of their
Fondness to them, and not finding any thing else in their Houses worth taking,
carried away their Images, which the Muscovites afterward redeemed at a very
good Rate. In time of Fire* they strive, before all other things, to save their
Images; but if they, or a Church happen to be burnt, they would look upon it as
a great Disgrace to say the Saint or Church is burnt; but they say, They are
ascended. When the Image is become obliterate or rotten, they either bury it
with a great deal of Ceremony, or else (which is the general way) throw it into
some River, and commit it to the Chance of the Current; at parting they cross
themselves, and cry, Prosti, Farewell. Persons of great Fortunes or Quality
adorn their Saints with Pearls or precious Stones; but these Demy-Gods are so
tenacious of what they have once got into their Clutches, that they will never
part with any of it again to the Owners, though never so ^ecessitous. There are
not wanting Examples, that, upon a pinch, some have made bold to borrow of
their Saints against their Will, what formerly was their own, who have paid for
it with the loss of both their Hands. If any one is excommunicated, his Saint,
as well as his Person, is excluded from the Church.

The Muscovian Monks and Priests, Their Miracles.
as ignorant as they are in other matters, have been cunning enough not to
despoil the Saints of the Art of doing Miracles. At Archangel there was once a
Gang of them, who, by such Impostures, had got a considerable Sum of Money
together; but falling out among themselves when they were dividing the Spoil,
the Fraud was discovered, and so had a good Whipping for their pains. It must
be owned, there are but few Instances of this nature among the Muscovites, they
being else too zealous to call in question the Omnipotency of their Saints,
whom they believe to have at least something of Divinity in them. In the Year
1643. an old Image had began to change Color, and to turn a little reddish.
This was immediately cried up not only for a Miracle, but rather for an ill
Omen, or some Bloody Presage, to that Degree, that the Great Duke and the
Patriarch being frightened thereat, as well as the People, preparations were
making for an extrordinary Fast Day, and public Prayers to be made all over
the Kingdom; but some of the Bojares having thought it convenient to call
together all the Painters about the City, they brought in their Verdict: That
they believed there was nothing ominous in the matter, forasmuch as they were
assured, that time having consumed the Paint, had only discovered the color of
the Wood, which was Red: Among others of their miraculous Saints, they have two
of a late Date; the Name of the first was, Sudatworets Philip Metropolite, he
lived in the Reign of that famous Tyrant, John Basilovits, unto whom he used
constantly to make remonstrances of his wicked Life and Cruelties, till the
Great Duke not able any longer to endure his Reprehensions, caused him to be
slain by one of his Servants; since which time he has been reckoned among their
Holy Martyrs, and been famous for the Miracles they have attributed to him,
which were formerly performed at Archangle, near which he was Buried in the
Isle of Solofka in the White Sea, but has been since from thence translated to
the City of Musco, and placed in the great Church of the Castle; where for some
time he did most surprising Miracles, by healing the Dumb, Deaf, Blind, Agues,
and Paraliticks: But of late Years, it seems, the Saint is grown Weary of his
Profession of Physic, though they affirm, that his Body remains entire to this
day, which is not easy to be disproved, since it is forbidden upon pain of
Death, to lift up the Cloth which covers the Body of the Saint.

The second, and the topping Saint of all Muscovy, for Miracles, is one
Sergius, whose Residence was in the Monastery of Troitza, about threescore
Miles distant from the City of Musco. This Saint as it seems, was in his
younger Days, a Military Person of a very graceful Aspect, but having taken a
Distaste at that Profession, and abandoned his vicious course of Life, turned
first Hermit, and afterward got into the Monastery of Troitza, which from his
Name, ever since his Burial there, has been called Zergeofski Troitza, it being
formerly Dedicated to the Trinity, where being soon after chosen Abbot, he, and
one of his Disciples, called Nikon, grew so famous for the many Miracles they
performed, that they were both Canonized after their Death, which happened in the
Year 1563. Their Heads, as they say, do not only remain entire to this day, but
also that of Sergius (if one may believe them) has not lost its Military
Operation; for, when this Monastery was Besieged by the Poles, the Head of
Sergius only forced them to raise the Siege, having caused them to turn their
Arms against themselves, during the Assault: It Is true, this Monastery was
Besieged by the Poles, under their General John Sapicha, who was forced to
abandon the Enterpize, and thus far the Monks are in the right of it, but they
were mistaken in the true circumstances of the matter; for, as much as it was
not the Head of their Saint, or their own Bravery, put the Swedish Army that
obliged the Poles, to raise the Siege: But they are not used to examine
Miracles with so much nicety here; for notwithstanding this, the Great Dukes
go thither generally twice a Year to do their Devotion, and when they come at
two Miles distance from the Monastery, alight from their Horses, walking the
rest of the way on foot. Having performed their Devotion, they spend some days
in Hunting, during which time, the Abbot entertains the Great Duke, and his
whole Retinue. The Muscovites frequently perform here their Vows of going on
Pilgrimage, and bestowing their Alms, made perhaps in their Travels or
Sickness, which with the Liberality of the Great Dukes, has increased the
Revenues of this Monastery to that Degree, that it is accounted one of the
Richest and the most Beautiful in all Muscovy, and maintains a great number of
Monks.

There is also a Church Dedicated to the Holy Mother of Casan, whither many
Pilgrimages which are made by the Muscovites, as also to Chutina, about Eight
Miles distant from Novogorod, to the Sepulcher of one of their Saints, called
Werlam, who being Born at Novogorod, was Buried near the said Monastery of
Chutina.

On the Eve of the Pentecost they perform certain a naual Devotions in Memory
of their departed Friends, with a great deal of Formality, but in a manner very
Ridiculous.

Those of their Churches which are of Stone, Their Churches.
are all round and Vaulted, because, they say, they have thus a nearer
resemblance to Heaven, which is the Throne of God. These have in the midst of
four Turrets, a Tower formed at the Top, not unlike the Knobs we put on our
Bedsteads, having upon it a Triple Cross: This is to represent our Savior, as
the head of the Church, and the Cross being the Badge of Christianity, they
think fit, the Church of Christ should be distinguished by it from others.
Within are neither Seats nor Benches, because none sit down, but all perform
their Devotions, either standing, or prostrating themselves. They don't make
use of Organs, or any other Musical Instruments in their Churches, being
persuaded, that things inanimate, cannot glorify God. They believe their
Churches profaned by the Entrance of any Stranger that is not of the same
Communion* wherefore they are not admitted, and as soon as Discovered, thrust
out. But if a Dog chances to come into the Church, they first sweep, and
afterward purify it with Incense and Holy Water; they also show a great deal
of respect for their Churchyards.

Their Bells are not hung in Steeples like ours, Their B^lls.
but placed in a certain Engine, built for that purpose in the Churchyard,
near the Church: They are for the most part very small (though Muscovy has else
the greatest^ Bell perhaps in the World) seldom exceeding 200 Weight. The Ropes
are not fastened to the Bells, but to the Clapper, and they fasten two of these
Ropes to both Arms near the Elbows, and two more to both hands of a Man, so
that one single Person may make a Chiming, in which the Muscovites take
extraordinary delight, though it sounds but very indifferently to those that are
used to better; they Toll them at the beginning of Services, and at the
Elevation of the Chalice; for, the Bread being put in immediately after the
Consecration into the Wine, they make but one Elevation; they reckon the
Chiming of Bells so essential a part of Divine Service, that they believe it to
be imperfect without it.

If there be any Religion in the World that obliges its Professors to a most
severe Mortification, Their Feasts*
it is certainly the Muscovian; for as if it were not sufficient to have
enjoined the keeping of two constant Fast-days in the Week, to wit, the
Wednesday and Friday, and the Eves before Holy Days, when they are obliged to
abstain so strictly from all kind of Flesh, that they must not make use of Eggs
and Milk, they have four Lents every Year: The longest of them is like ours of
seven Weeks; the second begins Eight Days after the Pentecost, and lasts till
St. Peter's Day; the third holds from the first of August, to the Sixteenth of
the same Month; and the fourth from the twelfth of November till Christmas
Day. During all these Lents, they eat neither Butter, nor Eggs, nor Milk, much
less Flesh, unless it be in the first Week of the long Lent, which being their
Carnaval, they have liberty for all manner of excesses, except Fish. In this
Week, their Extratravagances are almost past belief, and as if this time was
alloted them as a preparative to their Fastings, they commit such Debauches in
double distilled Brandies and melted Butter, which they pour down their
Throats, that they are all kindled in a Flame, and if they are not immediately
quenched with Milk, they die upon the Spot. Woe, to any Stranger that meets
these Drunkards at Night, without being well guarded, their Insolences being
so great, that with Fightings, Quarrels and Murders, commonly Forty or more
Persons are Murdered in a Night, during this Week; not to reckon those, who
being overcharged with Liquors, and wanting Attendance to carry them Home, fell
down upon the Snow, and so are Frozen to Death. It is a most dismal Spectacle,
to behold perhaps Ten or a Dozen of these in the Morning, carried upright in a
Sledge, Frozen to Death, some having their Faces Gnawed, others their Arms
eaten off by Dogs, others to have nothing left but the bare Bones; and yet
these are the daily Objects one meets with in the Streets of Musco, during this
time of Debauchery. All the atonement they make for these Enormities, is, That
the next Week after they live upon Honey, Herbs and Pulse, and Drink only Quus,
or small Mead, and Water; and to cleanse themselves from the Impurities
contracted in these excessive Debauches, they don't forget to visit the
Bath-stoves. The rest of the Lent, they live pretty Temporately, and some of
the most Devout will not eat Fish all that time, unless it be on Sundays: But
as they are very exact in observing these strict Rules in Lent, so it is a very
difficult task to persuade them to eat Fish on Sundays or Holy Days out of
Lent, being of Opinion, that the Rules prescribed by St. Clement, in the Tomes
of the Councels Printed at Venice, according to which, Laymen that Fast on
Saturdays and Sundays, ought to be Excommunicated, are most consonant to the
Apostolical Institution. By the same Rule that forbids them to eat Flesh, they
are also enjoined not to meddle with Women on their Fast-days, and during their
Lent; if the Russians should send abroad any Missionaries, I am apt to believe
they would make but very few Proselites in these parts. There are some who
allege, that these frequent Feasts have been Established in Moscovy, rather
upon a Political than Spiritual account, to wit, for the preservation of their
Cattle; forasmuch as the Peasants, being all Slaves here, don't take the same
care for the propagating and preserving their Cattle, as they do in other
parts, where they enjoy the Fruits of their own labor; and that the long
Winters in Muscovy renders the keeping of the Cattle both very troublesome and
chargeable, whereas they abound in the best Fish in the World, which are sold
at a very cheap rate all over Muscovy.

All those that are arrived to the Age of Discretion, Their Confession.
are obliged to go to Confesssion, before they receive the Communion. Their
Confession they make standing before one of their Images, on which having
fastened their Eyes, they make a particular recital of all their Sins,
expressing their Sorrow for every one of them in particular, and promising
Amendment* The Priest very rarely gives them the Absolution without some
Penance, which consist for the most part, in repeating frequently the Gospodi
Pomilui, or Lord have Mercy on me; in making a certain number of Reverences
before their Saints, in standing at the Church-door, in abstaining from Women
and Aqua-Vita. But if it be a sin that requires more than ordinary expiation,
the Priest is not unmindful of his own Interest; for, in this case, he enjoins
them to make use of the Holy Water, which is Consecrated on Twelfth-Day* to
cleanse Sinners of their Sins, and is disposed of for that purpose by the
Priests, not without a good Consideration.

Most of the Muscovites receive the Communion upon Easter Eve, Their Communion.
or at least upon a Fasting Day; forasmuch as if they should Communicate on a
Sunday, they must not eat Flesh that day. They prepare themselves for it, by an
extraordinary Mortification a Week before, when they eat nothing but hard
Bread, and drink nothing but Quus, worse than our small Bear, or Water. They
Communicate in both kinds, unless it be Children under seven years old, at
which Age, as soon as they are arrived, they are admitted to Communicate both,
because at that Age (as they say) they begin to sin mortally. They mix warm
Water with Wine, which (according to the Counsel of Constantinople) represents
the Water that came forth with the Blood from the side of our Savior; the
Bread, which must be Leavened and Baked by a Priest's Widow, they put in the
Wine, taking out a Morsal, together with some of the Wine in a Spoon. The
Communion Bread for sick Persons is about twice as big, and somewhat thicker
than a Crown Piece, and has in the middle the sign of the Crucifix. This
figure (after it is Consecrated) the Priest takes off with an Instrument, not
unlike a Launcet, and puts it up in a wooden Box, hanging above the Altar, to
preserve it from Rats and Mice. If a sick Person is to receive the Communion,
they take a little of it, upon which they put a few drops of Red Wine, and a
little Water in the Chalice, which they give to the sick Person with a Spoon;
if the sick Person be not capable of swallowing the Bread, they give him only a
little Wine. In the ordinary Administration of the Sacrament, they make use of
the same sort of consecrated Bread, but not bigger than half a Crown, from
which they also take the Crucifix, and break it into as many pieces, as there
are Communicants, which they cast into Red Wine, and mix it with a little warm
Water, and so Administer with a Spoon: What remains of the Bread, after
Consecration, is called Kutja, or Holy Bread, of which the Priest gives a
Morsel to each of those, who have Communicated the Week before. At the
Administering of the Sacrament, the Priest says these Words: This is the true
Body, and the true Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has been given for
thee, and for many more, for the remission of thy sins, which thou shall take
in remembrance of him, God bless thee: There have been some who from these
Words have drawn this inference, as if the Muscovites believed
Transubstantiation, against which several pregnant reasons may be alleged to
the contrary. For, if you Discourse the Muscovites concerning the Consequences
of that belief, they will not refuse to own it irrational, nay, absurd and
ridiculous, neither do they call to their aid (as the Roman Catholics do)
God's Omnipotency. Besides that they don't pay Adoration to this Mystery, which
doubtless they would do in a Religion so Zealous and Superstitious as theirs,
were they of the same Opinion, as to this point, with* the Roman Catholics.
Sick Children, though never so Young, receive the Communion, but in one kind,
till they are seven Years Old, when they Communicate like the rest, as we have
observed before. They do not refuse the Communion to Madmen, but they only
touch their Lips with the Bread dipped before in the Wine. A Woman in Childbed
is not to Communicate in the same Room, where she was brought to Bed, but must
be first washed and carried into another place. Those that have committed
Murder, are not to be Communicated but at the point of Death; if those that
lie in extremity are to be Communicated, they gave them first some Water, or
Aqua-vitae, wherein some relics have been put, then they receive the
Communion, and at the same time the Extreme Unction; which done, they are to
take nothing else, nor any Nourishment, unless there be very apparent Signs of
their amendment. There are some among the Muscovites, who at the last
extremity, cause themselves to be Shaven, and become real Monks: This once
done, they are not permitted to take any thing for a Week after; being
persuaded that they are no more Men, but become Angels: And if they happen,
after these Eight Days of Abstinence, to recover their Health, they must go
into a Monastery, because the Razor has passed upon their Heads. Formerly they
used to send the Consecrated Bread to those Places in the Country that were
destitute of Priests: They used also to give it to Travelers, to reserve it
for a Case of Necessity: But this Custom is now quite abolished in Muscovy.

The Ecclesiastical Government of Muscovy consists of a Patriarch, Their
Hierarchy.
who resides in the City of Musco, four Metropolitans, seven Archbishops, and
one Bishop; besides the Archdeacons, Proto-Popes and Priests. The four
Metropolitans are those of*

Novogorodskoi and Welikoluskoi, who resides at Novogorod.

Of Rostoufskoi and Harostauskoi, who has his Residence at Rosto^.

Of Casanskoi and Sunatskoi, at Casan.

And that of Sarskoi and Pondoskoi, who lives within the Castle at Musco.

The seven Archbishops are those of*

Wologdskoi and Weliko Premskoi, who has his Seat at Wologda.

Of Resanskoi and Moromskoi, who lives at Resan.

Of Susdalskoi and Turruskoi, who has his Residence at Susdal.

Of Twerskoi and Cassinskoi, at Twere.

Of Sibirskoi and Tobolskoi, at Toboleska.

Of Astrachanschoi and Terskoi, who resides at Astrachan.

Of Pleskouskoi and Sborskoi, who lives at Pleskou.

There is but one Bishop in all Muscovy, to wit, that of Comenskoi and
Cassieskoi, who keeps his Residence in the City of Columna.

The Patriarch has always about him an Archdeacon, who is, as it were, his
Vicar General: He has also a Proto-Deacon, residing in the Castle of Sabor.
The rest of the Ecclesiastical Order are distinguished into Proto-Popes and
Popes, or Priests. Those that attend at Church, toll the Bells, and do other
inferior Offices, are called Pangamari. The Patriarch of Muscovy has the same
(if not a greater*) Authority, as the Pope has in the Latin Church; for he, in
a manner, divides the Sovereignty with the Great Duke. He is the Supreme Head
and Judge of all Ecclesiastical Affairs: And such is his Power in all Matters
that have any Relation to their Religion, that he reforms whatever he thinks
prejudicial to this Religion, or good Manners, without giving an Account of it
to their Great Duke: Yet not so, but that his Orders must be put in Execution
by the Czar's Commands. The Patriarch of Constantinople had heretofore the
Nomination of the Patriarch of Muscovy, till in process of Time he had only the
Confirmation; and in this Age he has lost both: At present, the Patriarch of
Muscovy is chosen by the Great Duke and the other Prelates: The Latter meet in
the great Church within the Castle, called Sabor; where having nominated two or
three Prelates, the most eminent for Learning, and other good Qualilities, they
present them to the Great Duke, who, after a Conference with these Prelates,
proceeds jointly with them, to an Election. If it happen that those proposed
for the Election are equally eminent for their Learning and Piety, it is, with
the Grand Duke's Approbation, sometimes decided by Lot.

The Patriarch, Their Prelates marry not.
Metropolitans, Archbishops, and the Bishop, in Muscovy, are not to marry, but
make a Vow of Chastity as long as they continue in that Dignity: For, the
Prelates, as well as the Priests, are allowed here to quit their Orders
whenever they think it convenient, They must not wear Rings on their Fingers.
They wear neither Drawers nor Shirts of Linen Cloth, but of Flannel: Neither do
they make use of Beds.

The ordinary Habit of the Patriarch, Their Habits.
Metropolitans, Archbishops, Bishop, and even of their Monks, is very near the
same: They wear a black Cassock; and over that, an upper Garment of the same
Color, not much different from that worn by the other Muscovites: Their Hoods
are at least an Ell and an half Diameter, having in the midst a round Piece, as
big as a Trencher, which hangs on the hinder part of the Head: They wear in
their Hands a Staff, forked at the End, when they go abroad, which they call
Posock, and serves them for a Crosier.

There being in the City of Musco above 2000 Churches and Chapels, the first of
which have at least three or four, and some more, Priests belonging to them, it
is no difficult Matter to guess what a vast Number of Priests and
Ecclesiastics there must be in that City. Those that are desirous to enter
into Holy Orders, make their Addresses either to the Patriarch, or any one of
the Metropolitans; the first, the best; where having been examined concerning
their Qualifications, which consist only in Reading and Writing, and to be able
to sing in the Church, they are admitted into Orders, with an Att^station of
their being received into Priestood. At their Consecration they are invested
with the Priestly Habit, as we have just now described it: They have also the
Hair cut off from the Crown of their Heads, on which is put a little Cap, or
Calotte, which is the main Character of their Priesthood; the which they never
move, or take off, neither at Church, or any where else, unless it be when they
have their Hair cut. The chief Respect the Muscovites pay to the Priest, he is
beholden for to his Calotte; and good Reason why; for if, upon any Contest, or
Quarrel, this Calotte should be pulled off his Head, upon the Ground, the
adverse Party would incurr the Penalty of the Mulct, called Bicestie, which we
have mentioned before: To prevent which, the Muscovites, when they are going to
fight with a Priest, first reverendly take off his Calotte; which, after they
have soundly cudgelled or beaten him, they put on again with a great deal of
Respect: Which done, they are not liable to any farther Punishment, than if
they had kicked or cuffed a Layman.

The Proto-Popes and Popes, or Temple-Priests, are not only allowed, but
obliged to marry once; but cannot the second or third time, unless they quit
their Priesthood. This Point of the Marriages of Priests is one of the main
Points wherein they differ as well from the Greek Church, as the Roman: For
which they allege the Text of St. Paul, 1 Timothy 3. that a Bishop should be the
Husband of one Wife. And for the Confirmation of it, they allege the Fourth
Cannon of the Council which was held at Gangres, in Paphlagonia, not long after
that of Nice; where all those are Anathematized who refuse to take the
Communion from the Hands of a Married Priest. The Muscovites are so strict in
the Observance of this Opinion, that their Priests must be in a State of
Marriage before they are admitted into Orders: Which makes those that intend to
embrace that kind of Life marry very young, that they may the sooner have an
Opportunity of getting a Living. They are, besides this, to marry a Maid, and
no Widow, nor a Woman the least blemished in her Reputation: And in this Point
they are to be so circumspect, that if the Priest, the first Night after
Marriage, finds that the Lock has been opened before, by any other Key than his
own, he must either be divorced from her, or lay down his Calotte; out of which
two, you may be sure he chooses the first. But if the Parson's Wife stands her
Trial fairly the first Night, she has, however, this Comfort before the rest of
the Muscovian Women, that she is not likely to be kept under so severe an
House-Discipline as the rest, for as much as the Muscovian Priests hang, in a
great measure, by the Apron-string, they being, after they once become
Widowers, not suffered to administer the Sacrament, or to assist at
Noon-Service, when the Communion is received, or to give their Benedictions to
Marriages; but only at the Morning and Evening-Services. But to
counter-ballance this Advantage the Parson's Wife has before others, the Priest
is under a most strict Obligation, that whenever he has given his Wife due
Benevolence, he must not approach the Altar all the next Day; so that, what
with this, and the great Number of Fasts, she is likely to live upon very
slender Diet, unless the Parson be so goodnature as sometimes to prefer the
Duty to his Wife, before that in the Church, and substitute one to officiate in
his Room at the Altar. The Priests, however, have this Comfort left them after
the Death of their Wives, that if they do not approve of a single Life, they
are free to lay down their Cassock and Calotte, and turn Merchants, Tradesmen,
or any thing else they can, and so marry again. If they are too old to undergo
the Fatigues of the Sacerdotal Function, or of Marriage, the last Remedy is a
Monastery, where they end their (...).

There is a great Number (...) Monasteries all over Muscovy, Their M^nasteries.
both for Men and Women, both in Cities, and up and down the Country;
especially, all along the Rivers Mosca and Oeca, the most fertile Part of all
Muscovy. Besides the Anchorets, who build their Chapels upon the Highways, and
live in Woods, like Hermites, subsisting only by the Alms they receive from
Travelers; the rest follow the Rule of Great St. Basil.

They eat no Flesh, nor Fresh Fish; neither drink they any Wine, Aqua-vitae, or
Hydromel: They live only on Salt Fish, Honey, Milk, Cheese, Herbs and Pulse:
Cucumbers, both Fresh, and Pickled, are their chiefest Dainties; these they
mince very small, and eat them with a Spoon, in some of their Qua^s, or Small
Hydromels. But if they live in great Austerity in their Monasteries, whenever
they go abroad, (which they are allowed to do,) both Men* and Women are very
forward in dispensing with the Severity of their Statutes; for they seldom
refuse any thing that is offered them; and will refresh themselves with Strong
Liquor to that Degree, that it is unsafe for them to go home without good
Company. Here-tofore Superstition had got so far the Ascendant over the
Religious Muscovites, that here, as well as in some other Countries of Europe,
they used to make over all that they had, for the Benefit of the Monasteries:
So that, if a Stop had not been put to these Extravagancies, they would, in
Time, have got into the Possession of the best part of this vast Empire. But
those that now embrace the Monastic Life, are only allowed to carry a certain
Part of their Estates with them, into the Monastery; being obliged (...) leave
the rest to their Heirs. They do not live so retired in them, but that they
appear in great Numbers, both in the Cities, and all over the Country, where
they frequently follow the same Employments with the Peasants; some of them
also Trading in Malt, Hops, all sorts of Corn, and Cattle. Poverty, Old Age,
Infirmities and Domestic Contests being the chief Inducements of those that
embrace this Life, the fewest choosing it out of a Motive of Devotion, it is no
Wonder if they, most of them, according to the general Education of the
Muscovites, can scarce read or write: Not One in Ten* that can say the Lord's
Prayer: And those amongst them that are acquainted with the Creed and the Ten
Commandments, are looked upon as Men of extraordinary Learning. I cannot
forbear to relate, upon this Occasion, a certain merry Passage, which happened
some Years ago, in the Monastery of Rostone, for as much as it is not only very
diverting, but also may serve as a convincing Instance of the Simplicity and
Ignorance of the Muscovian Monks: The abovementioned Monastery stands upon a
Lake, where, for some time, a Fish had been seen of an extraordinary Magnitude,
to the great Astonishment of the Monks. This Fish, in a Sun-shiny Day, would
often be playing, and appearing half above Water; so that an Eagle, one time,
swooping at it, and being over-eager of his Prey, struck his Talons into the
Flesh of the Fish with such Violence, that he could not pull them out again.
The Fish being willing to be rid of his Enemy, plunged him in to the Bottom; so
that being transiated into a much grosser Element than he was used to live in
before, he soon lost his Life, though his Talons still stuck fast in the Flesh.
The Fish, very impatient of his Burden, made frequently toward the Shore of
the Lake; where being perceived by the Friars, with Feathers upon his Back,
they were all put under such a Consternation, that not one of them had the
Courage to approach it; some believing it to be an Apparition; others, a
Sea Monster; and some concluding it could be no less than a Water-Devil: The
last Opinion, it seems, was the most prevailing; so that, to banish the Devil
from that Shore, they fell to Ringing of Bells: And when they found this to
prove ineffectual, they went all in Procession, armed at all Points with such
Instruments and Weapons as are commonly made use of upon such Occasions; but
all in vain, the Monster, or Devil, as it seems, not being afraid of their
Weapons: So that all thereabouts, nothing was to be heard of, but the dreadful
Leviathan, which had scared the poor Monks almost out of their Senses. One Mr.
Roger Eaton, an English Merchant, then living in Russia, coming by chance that
way, had immediately a full Relation given him of the Monster; so that being
curious to see, he went to the Shore, where he found a great Number of People
standing some distance off. He soon perceiving what it was that had put them
into such a Fright, told them, that he would soon deliver them from this
Monster, provided they could get some Body that would row the Boat. But it was
no easy matter to persuade any one of them all to be so bold, as to approach
so near the Devil; till a certain Fellow, being made more courageous than the
rest by good store of Aqua-vitae, at last undertook the Task. As they were
going off from the Shore, to encounter the Monster, the Spectators, looking
upon the Attempt no less dangerous, than when St. George fought* the Dragon,
gave them over for lost, expecting every Moment to see them devoured by this
Water-Dragon: But they were agreeably surprised when they perceived the
terrible Leviathan slain by his Conqueror. In short, Mr. Eaton shot and killed
the Beast with a Screwed Gun; which, when taken up, proved to be nothing else
than a very large Pike, of about five Foot long, and of the Thickness of a Man.
It is easily to be imagined, that their Fear soon turned into Shame; yet, to
hide their Blushes, and to make some Amends to their Champion, they drunk
together so heartily, till they became all mellow; and so put a merry Epilogue
to the Play.

Mr. White, another English Merchant, living in Russia, did not meet with the
same Entertainment from the Fraternity; For, having been one time invited by
them to Dinner, they had caught another Pike, not quite so big as the former;
and as the Cook was cutting it open, he found a newborn Infant in the Belly of
it; which put the Monks into so ill an Humor, that the English Gentleman was
fain to return home without his Dinner. This Infant was suspected to have been
thrown into the Lake by one of the Nuns of a Nunnery hard by this Monastery; it
being the Custom in Muscovy, to build always a Convent and Nunnery near to one
another.

The Gentleman to whom we are beholden for these two Relations, Dr. Collins.
and who has, for a considerable time, been resident in Muscovy, having given
another Instance of the Ignorance and Superstition of their Priests, no less
pleasant than the former, it will not be amiss to insert it here. It seems the
English Resident in the City of Muscow had a very fine Monkey, famous amongst
the Russians there, for his many Tricks and Pranks which he would be playing in
the Market. This Monkey, one Day, got into one of the Muscovite Churches, hard
by the English Resident's House, and tumbled down some of their Saints. The
Priest coming soon after into the Church, and seeing his Gods thus handled,
stood amazed; but having recovered himself a little, and set their Saintships
in their respective Places, he dashed all the Windows and Doors with
Holy Water, to keep the Devil out of the Church. But Pug not understanding his
Exorcisms, took his Opportunity one Morning, when the Priest was going to
perform the Morning-Service, to be in the Church as soon as he; where he begun
the old Game of ruffling and pulling about the Saints, not sparing even St.
Nicholas himself; and that with so much Eagerness, as if he had been bred a
Quaker, grinning now and then in the Priest's Face; who, after he had recovered
himself out of his first Fright, at last approached, with his Cross before him;
and having no other Way left, he betakes himself to his Sovereign Remedy; I
mean, the Horse-Tail, dipped in Holy Water; wherewith he so besprinkled poor
Pug, (who hated it as bad as the Devil himself,) that he made the best of his
Way home to the English Resident's House. No sooner was the Morning-Service
over, but the Pope (or Priest) made most bitter Complaints against a certain
Stranger, living in the English House, for having thrown down his Saints, and
profaned the Holy Place. Whereupon, he obtained an Order to search the
Resident's Lodgings: And all his Retinue were brought forth, in the Presence of
the Priest; but none of them being the Person he looked for, It was, says he, a
little Nincheen, (or Stranger.) Whereupon, the young Children being brought
out, the Monkey, by chance, came jumping out with them: Hold, hold, said the
Priest, with a great deal of Joy, this is the little Stranger: Seize him, seize
him. Which being done accordingly, poor Pug was had before his Betters; where
not being able to answer for himself, he was condemned to the Strappado, and
paid for his unseasonable Reformation, with his Life.

But, after all this merry Digression, it is time to return to more serious
Matters: It is to be observed, that the Muscovites retain to this Day some
Remnants of the Mosaic Law; For, though they do not abhor Swine's Flesh, yet
they will not touch a Squirrel, Coney, or Hare. But, which is the oddest of
all, They hold it Pagan, or Unclean, to eat Veal; but not Lamb: For what
Reason, neither they, nor any body else, know. They account it next to a Sin,
to omit Lotionem post inatum. They look upon it as a great Sin, for a Muscovite
to lie with a Woman that is not of the same Communion: But a Venial Trespass,
for a Russian Woman to accept of a Kindness from a Stranger: They give for a
Reason, Because her Issue will be educated in the True Russian Faith; whereas a
Muscovite Man may happen to beget a Child upon a Stranger, which is not likely
to be educated in the same Religion. Heresy is punished, among the Russians,
with Fire: The Heretic is carried to the Top of a low House, from whence he
jumps into the Fire made underneath; and immediately they throw Straw upon him,
and good store of dry Splinters of Firr-Wood; these being fired, they soon
suffocate the Malefactor.

CHAP. XII.
A Brief History of the Succession of the Russian Great Dukes from their first
Origin, till the Death of that famous Tyrant, John Basilovitz.
THE first Origin of this Empire is very abscure; for, the Great Dukes of
Muscovy derive their Pedigree from August^s Caesar, yet if it be considered,
how confused the Achievements and Successions, of these Ancient Princes are
among an ignorant People, it is no difficult matter to imagine, that their
Ancient History must be full of uncertainty. Thus much is certain, that this
vast Empire was in former Ages divided into a great many Principalities, under
their own Laws and Princes, which in after Ages, and by several Degrees, have
been united under one Head, and compose that vast Body, which now adays is
known under the name of the Russians Empire.

But to return to their Chronicles, they relate that Augustus Caesar, among
others of his Kindred, whom he sent to be Governor over very remote Provinces.
One Prussus had assigned him Prussia, had his Seat on the Eastern Baltic Shore
by the River Weixel. Of him were descended by the fourth Generation, Rureck,
Sinaus and Truvor, who, at the persuasion of one Gostomistius, a rich Citizen
of Novogorod, were sent for by the Russians, who at that time lived without any
Civil Government, to rule over them in the Year 1573. As they went into Russia,
they took a long with them Olechus, their near Kinsman, and so having divided
the whole Country among themselves, each in his Province laid the first
foundation of a regular Civil Government.

Iverson the Son of Rureck (the rest dying without Issue) became Successor to
them all: He took to Wife one Otha, the Daughter of a Citizen of Plesscon, by
whom he begot Stoslaus, but being after that Slain by his Enemies, his Wife
Otha went to Constantinople, where she was Baptized and Named Helen.

His Son Stoslaus was a Warlike Prince, and very Victorious in several Battles,
till at last being Slain by his Enemies, they made a Cup of his Skull,
Engraven'd with this Sentence; Seeking after other Men's lives, he has lost his
own. He left three Sons Teropolchus, Olega and Volodimir.

Volodimir having slain his two Elder Brothers, Volodimir I.
made himself master of all Russia; he married afterward Anne, the Sister of
Basitius Porphyrogenites, and in the Year 989, introduced the Christian
Religion among the Russians, himself being before instructed in it, and
Baptized in the Year 988. Some among whom is Zonara's report, that it was done
by a Miracle, of which we have spoke before. He built the City of Volodimir,
the Capital of the Province of the same Name, upon the River Cesma, which was
for a considerable time after the Residence of the Great Dukes.

Volodimir left behind him Eleven Sons, among whom he divided the Dukedom:
Beristus and Glebus forsook the World, and for their Holy Life were Canon^sed
after their Death; their Feast is kept by the Russians in November: The rest
falling, into contentio^s among themselves, every one being ambitious of making
himself the sole and supreme Lord of all Russia, they ruined one another, till
Jaroslaus was left the only inheritor of all their Dominions.

Volodimir, Volodimir II.
the Son of this Jaroslaus, used to keep his Residence in the City of Kiovia,
upon the River Boristhenis: He was grown very famous for the many conflicts he
had with the Sons of his Uncles, whom having at last subdued, he was called
Mono Machus. He was also very Victorious against Constantine the Greek Emperor,
and having overrun all Thracia, returned home laden with Honor, and a
prodigious Booty; whilst he was preparing to renew the War with more Vigor
against the Emperor, he sent to him Neuphytus Bishop of Ephesus, and Eustathius
Abbot of Jerusalem, who having among other rich Gifts, presented him, with part
of our Savior's Cross, and saluted him by the Name of Czar, persuaded him to
enter into a League with Constantine, with whom ever after he cultivated a very
good Correspondance.

He was succeeded by his Son Vuzevolodus, after whom in order of descent,
Reigned George and Demetrius.

George Succeeded his Father Demetrius; he fought with very ill success against
Bathy the Tartarian Prince, by whom he was slain in the Battle in the Year
1237, and the Russians brought under the subjection of the Tartars, who made
their Dukes dependent from them, and as a token of their subjection, forced
them too often as the Tartarian. Ambassadors should come into Russia, to go out
and to meet them, and to stand bare headed in their own Courts, while the
Ambassadors delivered their message sitting. About the same time, the Tartars
having ravaged Poland, Plesia and Hungary, Pope Innocent IV. obtained a Peace,
or rather a Truce, from them for five Years; the Russians affirm, that this
Bathy was the Father of Tamerain.

George was succeeded by his Brother Jaroslaus, and after him Reigned his Son
Alexander.

Daniel the Son of Alexander, was the first that translated the Seat of the
Great Dukes to the City of Musco, and laid the first Foundation of the Castle;
he was also the first that took upon him the Title of Great Duke.

John, the Son of Daniel, was surnamed Kalota, which signifies a Scrip, which
he always carried about him, and out of it he used to give Alms to the Poor.

His Son Simeon died without Issue, and left the Dukedom to John his next
Brother.

Demetrius succeeded his Father John, and left two Sons, Basilias and George.

Basili, the Eldest Brother, Reigned after his Father's Death, and had a Son of
his own Name, but having conceived a jealousy against his Wife, he disinherits
the Son, declaring, George his Brother, his Successor in his Dominions.

George being thus gotten into Possession of Russia, puts his Nephew Basili in
Prison, but at his Death, (though he had two Sons of his own) resigned the
whole Dukedom to the hands of the same Basili:

Basili being thus unexpectedly put into his supposed right, was soon attacked
by Andrew and Demetrius, the two Sons of George, who could not brook the injury
received by their Father's last Will, and having surprised him, they put out
his Eyes, thinking thereby to render him incapable of entertaining any further
hopes of administering the Government, but they were mistaken in their Aim; for,
the Bojares and Nobles, notwithstanding his Blindness, kept steadfast to their
Allegiance to the Great Duke, who was therefore Sir-named Cziemnok, or the
blind Duke.

John Basilovits, who began his Reign in the Year 1450, John Basilovits.
succeeded his Father Basili, he was the first that brought the Russian Name
out of Obscurity into Renown. For, after having secured himself at home, by
putting to Death all such of his Kindred, as were likely to contend with him
for the Superiority, he applied all his thoughts to make himself formidable to
his Neighbors. Among them he bent his whole Force against the City and Dukedom
of Novogor^d Veliki, with whom he was engaged in a War for Seven Years, till at
last in the Year 1477. having vanquished them in a Battle, he forced that Great
and Rich City to a Submission, and to receive a Russian Governor. But
afterward thinking himself not absolute Master of the City, and being
unwilling to run the hazard of compelling them by force, he went thither in
Person, under pretense of some Religious concerns in behalf of the Greek
Religion; so that being admitted into the City by the Authority of the
Archbishop Theophilus, he ransact it and carried away an incredible Booty to
Musco, with most of the Inhabitants, and sent Muscovites thither in their place.

Having subdued this Potent Dukedom, as also those of Tyversky and Plescou, and
several other petty Principalities bordering upon his Dominions; he was the
first that united Russia into one considerable Body, and consequently laid the
first Foundation of its future Greatness. He entered into a War with the
Livonians, for no other cause than to enlarge his bounds, and advanced as far
as the River Narva, where he built the strong Castle of Ivanogorod, upon a
steepy Rock opposite to the City of Narva, which lies on the other side of that
River; but having received a Signal, overthrew in a Battle fought against
Guallies de Pletenbergh, the Master of the Livonian Order of Knights, he was
forced to make a Truce with them for Fifty Years. He had also some differences
with Alexander, King of Poland, who having married his Daughter, had, as he
pretended, forced her to abandon the Greek Religion, and to turn Roman
Catholic, which breaking out at last into a War, was carried on for some time
with no great advantage on either side; nevertheless the Basilovits took
Plescou in the Fray from the Luthianians. His Wife was the Daughter of the Duke
of Tiversky, of her he begat John, unto whom, after he had Married him to the
Daughter of Stephen, Prince of Moldavia, he resigned the whole Dukedom: But
John dying soon after, left only one Son, who was called Demetrius: Basilovits
by reason of the tender Age of his Grandchild, was obliged to reassume the
Administration of the Government, and soon after Married a second Wife, to wit,
Sophia, the Daughter of Thomas Polvologus, who is said to have received her
Doury out of the Pope's Treasury, under condition that she should endeavor the
Convertion of the Duke to the Romish Faith. This Princess being of a very
Haughty Temper, and not able to endure that her Husband should be a Vassal to
the Tartars, did so effectually encourage him to shake of the Tartarian Yoke,
that having first dislodged the Tartarian Ambassadors, that had their residence
in the Castle of Musco, and were the Duke's Overseers in State Affairs,
afterward by degrees dispossessed them of all they held in Russia. By the
persuasion of this Princess, he transferred the Dukedom from Demetrius, his
Grandchild, the Son of John, deceased, to Gabriel his Eldest Son by this
Princess.

Gabriel was no sooner Great Duke, Basili Ivanovits.
but he changed his Name, and assumed that of Basili Ivanowitz; he, after the
example of his Father, applied all his care to enlarge his Territories, which
he did with good success against the Lithuanians and Polanders, from whom he
recovered great part of Muscovy, especially the City of Smoleusko, on the River
Boristhenes or Nieper in the Year, 1514. He also ejected the Duke of Siberi or
Severia, and united the Province to his Crown; he afterward turned his Arms
against the Tartars of Casan, whom he defeated in a memorable Battle, and made
them his Vassals. But the Tartars having soon after killed their Governor,
surprised him with a considerable Army, and having forced him to retreat with
such Forces, as he could get together in have, under Novogorod on the River
Occas, they took and plundered the City of Musco, and forced the Castle to a
shameful Capitulation, by virtue of which the Great Dukes were to be
tributaries to the Tartars. But the Tartars having soon after broken the
Capitulation by Besieging the City of Rhesan, and the Weywode or Muscovite
Governor, having by a straitagem, got into his possession the Great Duke's
Original Letters Patents, whereby the Conditions made with the Castle of Musco
were confirmed, (as has been related before in the Description of the City of
Casan,) and having at the same time, forced the Tartars to raise the Siege of
the City and Castle of Rhesan, both the People and Great Duke, were so
encouraged by the sudenness of so lucky an accident, that the latter marched
against the Tartars, and Besieged the City of Casan, which he caused to be
attacked with all the Vigor imaginable; but these within being conscious of
their guilt, Fought like desperate Men, so that after^ much Bloodshed on both
sid^s, the Great Duke was obliged to raise the Siege, and to leave the Conquest
of this, as well as other Tartarian Kingdoms on that side to his Son John
Basilovits, whom he begat of Helan, the Daughter of Knez Glinsky, after having
Divorced himself from his first Wife.

John Basilovits being but a Child, John Basilovits.
succeeded his Father, under the Tuition of George his Uncle, in the Year 1540.
But no sooner was he arrived to the Age of Maturity, but he gave most evident
proofs of his future Greatness.

Being willing to make himself formidable to his Neighbors, by some memorable
exploit, at the beginning of his Reign, he resolved to revenge the affront his
Father had received before Casan, which City he Besieged in the Year 1552, His
Wars.
And after he had battered it very furiously for the space of two Months,
offered them very honorable conditions, which they having refused to accept,
he ordered the general Assault to be given on the Second Day of July in the
same Year; and notwithstanding the resolute Defense made by the Tartars,
carried it by Storm, and thereby became Master of the whole Kingdom of Casan.

About two Years after, he marched against the Nagajan Tartars, bordering to
the South upon those of Casan; and having in the Year 1554, on the first day of
August taken by Assault Astra Chan, the Capital of the Province, he also
reduced that Kingdom under his Subjection.

By what accident he got into the Possession of the vast Country of Siberia,
which has since proved one of the most profitable to the Czars of Muscovy; by
which they have opened themselves a way into China, as has been related before
in the Description of that Province.

In the Year 1558. he turned his victorious Arms again Livonia; where having
ravaged the Bishopric of Derpt and Virland, he made himself Master of the
Cities of Narva, and of Toopator-Derpt: So that the Livonians not being able
alone to resist his Power, and being put into Despair by the most horrid
Cruelties exercised upon them by the Muscovites, and especially against
Furstenbergh, the Master of their Order, they were forced to submit themselves,
some under the Protection of Sweden, the rest under the Crown of Poland. In the
Year 1570* he sent a very numerous Army, under the Command of Maynus Duke of
Holstein, to besiege the City of Revel, in Livonia; but the City being assisted
by the Swedes, under whose Protection they were, forced him to raise the Siege:
And when he attacked it a second time, in the Year 1577, he met with no better
Success: And in the Year 1581, the Swedish General, Pontus de la Guarde,
recovered the City of Narva from the Muscovites.

He was at first also very successful against the Poles, till Stephen Battori,
Prince of Transylvania, and elected King of Poland, not only recovered all the
Places he had taken from that Crown before, but also obliged him to make a
Peace in the Year 1582; by virtue of which, he relinquished all his Pretensions
to that part of Livonia which had put it self under the Protection of the King
of Poland. In the Year 1571, the Crim-Tartars also made a great Irruption into
Muscovy, destroying all with Fire and Sword; and at last burnt the City of
Musco.

As the first Years of his Reign were attended with Victories abroad, so at
home he ruled for some time with a great deal of Mildness; and by the outward
Show of his Piety, made his Subjects conceive all the Hopes that could be of a
prosperous Reign: For he would go frequently to Church, say the Service
himself, sing, and never fail to be present at any Ecclesiastical Ceremonies;
nay, sometimes execute the Functions of Monks and Priests himself: Which,
without Question, was it that misled Paulus Jovius into that Mistake, when he
calls him a good and devout Christian; For it will sufficiently appear, in the
Sequel of this History, that he abused both God and Men; and that his pretended
Piety was only intended to gain the Popular Applause, (which he both effected,
and stood in need of,) and to cover his most horrid Designs against such of the
Nobility as he was afraid would not submit, without Reluctance, to the Yoke he
intended to put upon their Necks. He began to give the first Proofs of his
cruel Disposition in the Year 1560; when having acquired a vast Reputation,
both at home and abroad, by the great Success of his Arms against the Tartars,
Livonians and Poles, he thought this the most convenient Time to put in
Execution his Design of making himself the sole and absolute Master of this
vast Empire. His Grandfather had laid the first Foundation of this Maxim,
(which was followed by his Son Basili, the Father of John Basilovitz,) to wit,
To suppress the ancient Nobility, by despoiling them not only of their Castles,
and Strong Holds, but also of their Estates. But this Tyrant looking upon these
Means as insufficient, resolved, by putting to death all the Great Men in the
Kingdom whom he found, in the least, contrary to his Design, to secure to
himself the Arbitrary Disposal of this great Empire.

He made the first Beginning with one Demetrius Owezinovitz, His Cruelties.
a Man of great Parts among the Russians: Being therefore willing to be rid of
him, he invited him one Evening to Supper, with a great deal of seeming
Friendship; where they drunk very merrily, so that Dem^trius began to be
overcome by the Strength of the Liquor; which the Tyrant perceiving, and
believing this to be a fit Opportunity to put his Design in Execution, he drank
to him a great Bowl-full of Strong Hydromel, which he obliged Demetrius to
pledge, to his (the Great Duke's) Health; but it being impossible for him to
drink above half of it, the Great Duke angrily told him, That since he was so
unmannerly as to refuse to drink his Health in his Presence, he might get down
into his Wine-Cellar, where he should drink it at his own Leisure. Demetrius
being very willing to obey, went, without Reluctance, down into the Cellar;
where, by the secret Orders of the Tyrant, he was suffocated.

In the same manner he caused to be either secretly slain, or suffocated,
several Persons of Eminent Quality, without any Body's daring to enquire into
their Death; till at last, the Patriarch, and the other Prelates, in
Conjunction with some of the boldest among the Nobility* having represented to
him the Enormities of his Actions, he seemed, for some small Time, to have
changed his cruel Sentiments into a more mild Disposition.

The better to confirm them in this Opinion, he got it spread abroad, that he
intended to abdicate the Empire, and to retire into a Monastery: And soon
after, having called together the Nobility, he told them, That since he had two
Sons, whom he intented to make his Successors, he would recommend them to their
Care: That he did not question but they would not only pay them due Allegiance,
but also assist them with their Counsel, and good Advice: That, for his part,
he intended to build himself a Monastery, near the City of Musco; where he
would be ready at hand to give his Directions in Matters of any Moment. Having
thus cajoll'd them into a good Opinion, he caused a very large Building to be
erected, surrounded with a strong Wall* which he endowed with considerable
Revenues, for the Maintenance of such as were to abide with him there, and to
lead, as he pretended, a Monastic Life; but, in effect, to serve as an
Encouragement to such as he intended to employ in the Execution of his cruel
Designs: For, after he had settled himself, with his Gang, in this Castle, he
used, under pretense of Preferment, to send such of his Nobles as he intended
to sacrifice to his Ambition, into some distant Province or another, as
Governors; whither, after some Time, he would command some of his Soldiers,
under such Officers as were beforehand engaged to execute his Orders, to the
Place, where the Fact was to be perpetrated under pretense of changing the
Garrison; where they remained till they found a convenient Opportunity to send,
by one Means or another, the Governor into the other World: Which done, his
Kindred were sure to meet with the same Fate at Musco; the Tyrant never wanting
Means to root out the Shrubs, after he had felled the Tree; forasmuch as the
Muscovites, who are above all other Nations given to caluminate and draw one
another into the Snare, were always ready to furnish him with sufficient
opportunity to rid himself of those under some specious pretense or another.

Thus he treated Knez Rostoroski, descended from the ancient Dukes of Roskovie,
or Rosthovie; whom he dreaded, for his Courage, and Skill in Martial Affairs.
This Principality, as well as those of Twere and Bielski, were in former Ages
allotted to the Younger Brothers of the Dukes of Russia; but were by Basili,
the Father of John Basilovits, appropriated to his own Use, leaving only to the
Heirs a very moderate Share for their Maintenance. The last of the Dukes of
Kosthovie was Peter Rostowski, whom the Tyrant had made Waywode or Governor of
Nise Novogorod. Having resolved his Ruin, he sent thither 40 Ruffians, whom he
used to employ on such like Occasions, with Orders to bring to him the Head of
the said Governor. These having found him at his Devotion, they dragged him
from thence; and having stripped him stark naked, and tied him in a Sledge,
they carried him streight-ways to the River Colga; where he that commanded the
Party, having cut off his Head, threw the Body into the River. His Kindred and
Children (Fifty in Number) were all murdered by the Tyrant's Order; and Forty
of his Slaves condemned to perpetual Imprisonment.

John Pietrovits, a Man of a very high Rank in Russia, was fain to undergo the
same Fate, with his whole Family: For, having been falsely accused in the Year
1568, as if he aimed at the Crown, the Tyrant, without admitting them to be
heard, seized upon his Estate, both Real and Personal, which was very great;
and condemned him to go as a private Soldier, in the War against the Tartars.
Having not so much left him, out of all his Estate, as an Horse to ride upon;
he was furnished with one by a certain Friar, who took pity of his Condition;so
he obeyed his Orders: And after having served several Years as a single
Volunteer, who used to have at his Heels a great Number of Servants, he at last
returned to Musco. The Tyrant not thinking it sufficient to have humbled him
thus, he called together, at a certain Time; his Council of Nobles; where
having summoned Pietrovits to appear, he, with his own Hands, as soon as they
were all met, put the Ducal Cap and Crown on his Head, with a Scepter in his
Hand, and thus, attired in a very rich Robe, set him upon a Throne, in the
Presence of all the Court; where having showed him the same Revernce as is
usually paid to the Czars of Muscovy, he spoke thus to him; All Hail to our
Great Duke and Monarch of Russia: Now thou have obtained what thou so much
desiredst; now it is, thou have encompassed thy Wish. I knew thy Aim was, to
supply my Place, in the Throne of Muscovy: See how I have, my self, created
thee Great Duke of Russia, in a most solemn manner. But know* that as it was in
my Power to set thee upon the Throne, so I am able to dethrone and despoil thee
of that Dignity, as Pleasure. He had no sooner uttered these last Words, but he
stabbed him with a Dagger, several times, through the Heart. But this was only
the Prologue to the following Tragedy; for he did not only command all his
Servants to be either strangled or drowned, but he went in Person to the Castle
of Columna, 180 Miles distant from the City of Musco, and formerly belonging to
Pietrovits; where 300 of his Vassals were massacred in the Tyrant's Presence.
But not satisfied with this, after he had, for a whole Year together, ruined
his Estate with Fire and Sword, he shut up all the Gentlemen (of whom there was
a considerable Number) that held any Lands under Pietrovits, in one House, and
so blew them up into the Air, with Gunpowder: Their Wives and Daughters, after
they had been ravished by his Guards, were cut to pieces. The Peasants, with
their Wives and Children, were driven, stark naked, into the Woods. The Wife of
Pietrovits was shut up in a Monastery; and his Children, and whole Family,
destroyed, by the Tyrant's Order.

In the same Year he caused his Chancellor, Kozarin Dubrowski, to be slain by
his Guards, with two of his Sons, as they were sitting at Dinner; and a third
Son happening not to be at home, escaped present Death for that time; but he
was afterward taken, and Quartered alive.

Boris Titow, one of his Chief Counselors of State, coming one Day to pay his
Reverence, as is usual, to the Great Duke; as he was bowing his Head, he cut
off one of his Ears, with his own Hands; and presenting it to the Owner,
Accept, says he, of this small Gift at present: Another time I will remember
you better.

These Cruelites exercised on Persons of so eminent a Rank, struck such a
Terror into the rest of the Nobility, that they were resolved to try their
utmost, whether perhaps they might not be able to divert him from these cruel
Designs. Being therefore met at a certain Day, to the Number of 300, they went
all in a Body, to represent to the Czar the Heinousness of his Cruelties;
telling him, That they were ready to sacrifice both their Lives and Estates for
his Service; and that they would always remain steadfast in their Allegiance:
But, on the other hand, they hoped he would be pleased not to afflict, in so
horrible a manner, his faithful and innocent Subjects.

The Grand Duke being not well pleased at their Errand, he ordered them, all
together, to be thrown into Prison; and some Days after, some to have their
Tongues, others their Legs and Arms cut off; and 50 of the most Eminent among
them were whipped round the Marketplace; the rest were dismissed without any
Punishment for that time, but they paid afterward the whole Score, with
Interest: For, in the Year 1570, one Morning, when the Citizens were opening
their Shops, they were not a little surprised to see 18 Gibbets erected in the
Marketplace, surrounded by the Great Duke's Guards, who had brought along with
them all manner of Instruments for the Torture* besides which, there was a
great Fire, and over it was placed a great Caldron, with boiling hot Water in
it. The Citizens, I say, being terrified at so horrible a Spectacle, and
presaging nothing but the worst to themselves, as being uncertain for what End
all these dreadful Preparations were made, some instantly shut up their Shops
again; others, more fearful than the rest, left all what they had, as it was,
and were for saving themselves by Flight, or, at least, for hiding in some more
remote Part of the City; Which Place being thus put into a general
Consternation, the Great Duke, surrounded by a great Number of his Guards,
appeared in the Marketplace, seating himself near the Caldron of boiling
Water. But perceiving that the Generality of the Citizens had; out of Fear,
either abandoned their Houses, or, at least, absconded, and dispersed
themselves into the other Quarters of the the City, he rid in Person through
the Streets, crying out to them; Let nothing disturb you: Come, and see what I
am going to do: I give you my Word, that nothing shall hurt you; you may come
forth, without the least Danger to your selves: Therefore come forth, and see
what a Spectacle I am preparing for you. The People, partly out of Fear, partly
out of Curiosity, flocked to the Marketplace, where they saw 400 Noblemen, of
the most ancient Families in Muscovy, coupled together, Two and Two, like
Hounds; and so miserably disfigured by the Violence of the Torture, that they
were almost not to be known by their nearest Kindred. To gratify in some
measure the People, he selected 180 out of their Number: Unto these, said he, I
give their Lives, for your sakes; I will pardon them all their Offenses: Let
them be presently discharged. Which being done accordingly,

The first that was brought forth to Execution, was John Michaelovits
Wiskowaty, his Chancellor; descended from one of the most ancient Families in
Muscovy: Who being charged with Keeping great Correspondence with the King of
Poland, and inviting the Turks and Tartars to invade Muscovy, when he was just
going to be put on one of the Gibbets, he spoke these following Words: I call
God Almighty, the Infallible Searcher of Hearts, to witness of what I am going
to say, to be true: I confess my self, before him, to be a miserable Sword^;
and trust in his Mercy, through the Blood of his (...) beloved Son. But as to
what concerns the Station I was lately in, by the Great Duke's Favor, I
protest to God, that I have always discharged my Trust faithfully, as I ought
to do, toward him; and therefore I appeal at this Instant to the Tribunal of
God, where, when I shall meet the Duke, I will make my Innocence appear to the
Great Judge of Heaven and Earth. I am sensible that, O Duke, such is thy
Ambition, such is thy Avarice and Thirst after innocent Blood, that nothing but
my Life can satisfy thee at present: Glut thy self therefore with innocent
Blood; but remember that thou must one Day give a most severe Account of all
these most barbarous Cruelties. Whilst he was going on in his Discourse, the
Executioner, by the Great Duke's Order, tied him up to one of the Gibbets, with
his Feet upwards, and his Head hanging down. This done, one of the Captains of
his Guards asked him what he would have farther done with this Malefactor?
Every one of you, said he, that belong to my Court, here present, shall lend an
helping Hand to send this Traitor out of the World, whom I will have cut Limb
by Limb. He had no sooner spoke the Word, but the first Captain of his Guards,
called Molutlo, dismounting his Horse, he, with a little Knife, cut off his
Right Ear; the Second, his Left; the Third, his Lips; and so every one, in
their Turn, the rest of his Limbs. The Secretary of the Grand Duke being also
to have his Share in the Execution, at last cut off his Privy Members; of which
he immediately died: Which the Duke perceiving, and believing that it had been
done on purpose to shorten the Chancellor's Misery, he ordered him to eat them
instantly; which he was forced to do.

The dead Body of the Chancellor being taken from the Gibbet, and cut into
small pieces, the next that was brought upon the Scaffold, was Michael
Tum^chow, the Lord High Treasurer of Musc^^y, for no other reason but that he
had been an intimate Friend of the Chancellors; he was very short in his
Expressions, saying only these Words: I appeal to God, from whom nothing can be
hidden (...) I never was guilty of any trespass against* my Lord and Master,
and that I have faithfully, and without any fraud, discharged my Office;
wherefore, I summon thee, O Great Duke, to appear on the last day of Judgment,
before the Tribunal of God, where thou shall be obliged to make ample
satisfaction to me. Having ended these Words, he was tied up to the Gibbet, in
the same manner as the Chancellor with his Head downwards, and very close
shaved: After he had hung thus for some time, two of the Captains of his
Guards, each with a bucket of Water; whereof one was Cold, the other filled out
of the Chaldron with Boiling Water, we mentioned before, approached to the
Gibbet, and he with the cold Water, having first washed his Head, the other
continually poured the Boiling hot Water upon it, till the Skin was quite
shriveled together, and the poor Treasurer at last died in the midst of the
most exquisite Torments. The third in order was his Cook, who underwent the
same Fate as the Chancellor, being cut to pieces Limb by Limb.

After these, follow three of the Great Duke's chief Secretaries, George
Czapkinou, John Buthakow, and Basili Stepanow; these were all together with
their Wives and Children cut in pieces, in the Great Duke's presence, by his
Guards: At last, two hundred of these Noble Men we spoke of before, were
brought before the Great Duke upon the Scaffold; who having Condemned them to
Die, without as much as naming their Crime, they were in an instant cut to
pieces by his Guards before his Face. To conclude the Tragedy, the Great Duke
ordered to be brought before him out of Prison (where he had been detained a
great while) a certain person venerable for his Old Age and Nobility, as being
extracted from a very ancient Family, whom he run through the Body with his own
Lance, and not satisfied with that, after the Old Man lay upon the Ground,
wallowing in his Blood, gave him at least Fifteen or Sixteen Wounds more, till
he died upon the Spot.

This Spectacle having thus continued for four Hours, the Tyrant before he
returned to the Castle, would needs give a Visit to the Widow of the Treasurer,
whom he had caused to be executed just before. She was Sister to the Duke
Wiazinski, and one of the handsomest Ladies in all Muscovy, whom he found shut
up in her Bedchamber, all over whelmed with Grief, and lamenting the miserable
Death of her Husband in Terms so Passionate, that it would have moved
Compassion in a heart of Stone. But the Tyrant being void of all sense of
Humanity, no sooner entered the House, but ordered her to be stripped stark Naked,
and to be set with her bare Buttocks upon a Rope, fastened titely for that
purpose betwixt two Posts, and so to be drawn upon the Rope, till the tender
Flesh of this Pretty Creature, not being able to resist long the violence of
this motion, was torn every where to the very Bones, of which she died some
days after. She had a little Daughter and Son, who had been forced to be the
mournful Spectators of their dear Mothers Misery; the first was sent into a
Nunnery, the last Condemned to a perpetual Punishment. The Chancellor's Widow
was also forced to embrace the Monastic Life, and his Son sent Prisoner to the
Castle of Biel^jezoro, which lies in one of the Northern and most unfrequented
Provinces of Muscovy. Some days after this Slaughter, about Fourscore of the
Wives and Daughters of these two Hundred Nobles, he had caused to be Butchered
before his Face, where dragged by the Hair, to the River side, where they were
all drowned. About the same time, one of his Secretaries having been presented
with a Pike by a certain Countryman, the Great Duke having got Notice of it,
caused him to be thrown into a Lake, where, as he said, he might have Fish
enough, since he was so great a lover of them.

The Lithuanians having by a stratagem surprised the Castle of Borsko, took the
Governor and his Lady Prisoners, who being afterward exchanged with some
Poles, returned to the City of Musco, where they were no sooner Arrived, but
the Great Duke ordered three Gibbots to be Erected, on which the Governor, and
two more of his chief Officers being fastened with a Rope about their Wastes,
the Tyrant and his Son shot their Arrows at them till they were killed, telling
them, ever now and than, Thus you ought to have defended your Cause.

His own Brother, though he had lived all along with the greatest
Circumspection in the World, for fear of giving any occasion of Jealousy to
the Tyrant, yet could not escape his hands. For under pretense that one of his
Bojares, called Trzeriack Wiskonati, had given information against him, he
caused him, without being heard, to be tortured in the most violent manner that
could be invented; and thus having forced him to make a Confession where his
Treasure was hid, his Head was cut off in the presence of his Lady, who all
this while lay prostrate at the Tyrant's Feet, and in vain was imploring his
Clemency: But instead of lending a favorable Ear to her just Petition, she was
stripped stark Naked, exposed to the view of the whole Court, and afterward
dragged to the River and drowned.

It used to be a common Custom with him, to make Ladies of the greatest
Qualities to stand Naked before him, and if he took any liking to them, after
he had abused them himself, to expose them to the Officers of his Guards, and
afterward cause them to be hanged at their own Doors, where the Husband was to
go out and in, perhaps for three or four Weeks, till the Tyrant was pleased to
order the dead Body to be removed. He was something more favorable to a
certain merry Crew of English, and other Women Foreigners, who had, as it
seems, laughed at some of his Prancks, which he used to play a^ certain times,
when he was in a good Humor; which he taking Notice of, they were all sent for
to the Palace; where, after they were all stripped stark Naked, in a very large
Room, he Commanded several Bushels of Pease to be thrown down before them,
which he made them pick up: When he had done, he treated them with some Wine,
and bid them to take heed for the future, how they made sport with so great an
Emperor. Perhaps, having been used to take a view of the Muscovian Ladies, he
took this opportunity to see how far the Foreign Women differed in Shape from
his own Country-Ladies.

After he had, in a manner, thus either ruined, or quite destroyed all the most
ancient Families of Muscovy, he turned his Fury against the Polish, and
Lithuanian Captives, of whom he had a great Number: Some of these were slain by
his own Hand; the rest, to the Number of some Thousands, Men, Women and
Children, were, by his Order, cut in Pieces, or thrown into the River. His
Cruelties exercised against the Inhabitants of Novogorod, Plesco^ and Twere,
are the most Barbarous in the World, being not to be paralleled in History.

Of the Barbarities committed in the City of Novogorod, we have spoken in the
Description of that City; so that it will be superfluous, to give a further
Account of them here: We will only add thus much, That, as he exceeded all the
Tyrants that ever were infamous for their Cruelties, so it was he that
perfected the Work begun by his Grandfather: to wit, by suppressing the
Ancient Nobility, to make himself absolute Master of this great Empire: Which
when he had obtained, he grew also insupportable to Sovereign Princes. How he
treated the Polish and Lithuanian Captives, we have related before; and his
Ambition being unmeasurable, he gave a proof of it to a French Ambassador; who
having put on his Hat in his Presence, he caused it to be Nailed to his Head.
Sir Jerome Bows having, not long after, been sent by Queen Elizabeth, as
Ambassador to him, he not only put on his Hat, but also cockt it before him. At
which Boldness, the Tyrant being somewhat startled, asked him, Whether he were
ignorant how he had served the French Ambassador? Unt^ which, Sir Jerome
replied, That there was a great difference betwixt them two; That, for his
part, he knew whom he Represented; that he served a Queen, who knew how to
Revenge any Affront put upon her Ministers. The Great Duke was so far from
being displeased with this bold Answer, that ever after he had a great esteem
for him; telling his Bojares, That he questioned whether, among them all, there
was one that dare do so much for him. It was in his Reign that the English
settled first their Trade in Russia, as we have mentioned in the Description of
the City of Archangel. He had three Sons; of which, the Eldest being struck by
his Father one time, with a stick, died with Grief; or, as some will have it,
by his Father's Lance: The two others were, Fedor, or Theodor, and Demetrius;
the Eldest of which succeeded him in the Empire. He Reigned Nine and Thirty
Years, and died in the Year 1584. in the Fifty sixth Year of his Age; beloved
by few, but dreaded both at home and abroad, and might have been counted one of
the greatest Princes that ever sat upon the Russian Throne, if by his most
barbarous Cruelties he had not defaced the Glory of his great Actions, and had
drawn upon his Family the Vengeance of God, which was very conspicuous in those
Revolutions which after his Death happened in the Muscovian Empire; which, as
they are the most surprising in the World, so we intend to give a most exact
account of them, as well as the succeeding Reigns, till the Arrival of his
present Czarish Majesty in England, in the Second Volum of this Treatise.

FINIS.
Books Printed for A. Roper at the Black Boy against St. Dunstan's Church, in
Fleet Street, 1697.
A True History of the Several Designs and Conspiracies, against His Majesty's
Sacred Person and Government; as they were continually carried on from 1688
till 1697, By R. K. etc.

The Doctrine of Acids, in the Cure of Diseases, farther asserted: Being an
Answer to some Objections raised against it by Dr. F. Guthill, of Dorchester in
Dorsetshire, in which are contained some things relating to the History of
Blood; as also an Attempt to prove what Life is, and that it is principally
supported by an Acid and Sulphur. To which is added, an exact Account of the
Case of Edmund-Turner, Esquire deceased, as also the Case of another Gentleman now
living, exact^y parallel to Mr. Turners. By Joh^^ Colebatch, a Member of the
College of Physicians, London.

The History of Poland, in several Letters to Persons of Quality: Giving an
Account: of the Ancient and Present State of that Kingdom, Historical,
Geographical, Physical, Political, and Ecclesiastical, viz. Its Origin and
Extent. With a Description of its Towns and Provinces; the succession, and
remarkable Actions of all its Kings, and of the Great Dukes of Lithuania. The
Election, Power, and Coronation of the King: The Senate, or House of Lords: The
Diet, and form of Government: The The Privileges of the Gentry; their
Religion, Learning, Language, Customs, Habits, Manners, Riches, Trade and
Millitary Affairs, together with the state of Physic and Natural Knowledge; as
also an Account of the Tutonick Order, and of the D. of Curland, his Family and
Territories, with Sculptures, a new Map after the best Geographers, with
several Letters relating to Physic, By B. Connor, Fellow of the Royal Society,
etc.

Books Printed for A. Bosvile, at the Dial, against St. Dunstan's Church, in
Fleet Street, 1697.
THe Memoirs of the Count de Rochefo^t, containing an Account of what past most
memorable, under the Ministry of Cardinal Richelieu, and Cardinal Mazarin, with
many particular passages of the Reign of Lewis the present French King, never
before in Print; made English from the French, the Second Edition Corrected.

The Christian Belief: Wherein is Asserted and Proved, That as their is nothing
in the Gospel contrary to Reason, yet there are some Doctrines in it above
Reason; and these being necessarily enjoined us to Believe, are properly called
Mysteries; in an Answer to a Book, entitled, Christianity not Mysterious. The
Second Edition, with a Preface, and other Additions.

A Discourse of Conscience, Published chiefly for the Benefit of the Unlearned,
though it may also be useful to others. Together with Brief Reflections upon that
which the Author of Christianity not mysterious says upon that known Text, 1*
Tim. 3* 16.

The Interpretation of Dreams digested into* ^ive Books, by that Ancient and
Excellent Philosopher, Artimedorus. The Eleventh Edition, much corrected by an
old Original Copy, with the Life of the Author, with many more Additions, with
the Judgment of some of our Modern English Writers, concerning the good use to
be made of some Dreams, and the Table very much amended.

Vol. II.
CHAP. I.
Containing a full Relation of the Revolutions in the Muscovian Empire, after
the Death of that Great Tyrant, John Basilovits, to wit: Under the Reigns of
Fedor Ivanovits, his Son, Boris Goudenou, his Son Fedor, and the Counterfeit
Demetrius.
JOhn Basilovits had by Anastasia, his first Lady, two Sons, John and Fedor or
Theodor; the first having been slain by his Father's own Hands, as we told
before. Fedor Ivanovits was after his eldest Brother's Death, the next Heir to
the Empire, and accordingly Crowned Grand Czar of Muscovy, when he was scarce
two and twenty years of Age. He was Married some years before his Father's
Death, to Irene, Sister of Boris Goudenou, a Lady of a very lofty Temper and
Carriage, by whom having no Issue, he had been several times commanded by his
Father, to send her into a Monastery (according to the Custom of Muscovy) but
his Affection and Endearments of this Lady, being more prevailing with him than
his Interest, he had by several Delays, put off the Execution of it. Being now
mounted on the Throne, and Boris advanced to the Dignity of Lord High-Steward
of Muscovy (the highest Station, next to the Prince in the Empire) he knew how
to manage the Affection of a Prince, who always had preferred his private
Pleasures and Retirement, before Public Affairs, with so much Dexterity, that
the Princess, in a great measure, owed the continuance of her Greatness to him,
as he was absolutely beholding to her for his first Advancement.

Boris Goudenou was a Man naturally qualified for the Management of Affairs of
State, and in a very few Years had attained to that degree of Perfection in
Flattery and Dissimulation, that he seemed to be the Darling both of his Prince
and the People; both being equally well satisfied in his Conduct. Thus by the
Advantages of his Quality and Dexterity, and the Weakness of the Czar Fedor,
having got the whole Management of Affairs into his own Hands, he began to bend
all his Thoughts, how to secure the Crown of Muscovy to himself and his Family;
the better to enable himself to obtain his Ends, after he had gained the
Affection of the common People, he resolved to smooth his way to the Throne, by
the Favor of the Nobility, most of whom having a Dependence from him, as the
only Person, through whose hands all Places of Honor, Trust or Profit passed,
were soon brought over by the Hopes and Advantages of Preferments to his Party.
Having thus laid the Foundation to his projected Greatness, the main Obstacle
of his growing Ambition, was Demetrius, the youngest Son of John Basilovits, by
a second Adventure, and Brother to the Czar Fedor Ivanovits, who was Educated
under his Mothers care in the Castle of Vgletz.

His Death being therefore resolved on, Prince Demetrius ^^ur ^ered.
four of the Prince's own Domestics were by vast Promises engaged to undertake
the Fact. The better to cover their Design, they set at midnight the City of
Vgletz on Fire in several places, and having thus filled all with horror and
confusion, they ran during the general Consternation to the Castle, under
pretense of saving the Prince; and being admitted into his Bedchamber, took
their Opportunity, while he was looking out of the Window, to see the
approaching Flame, and stabbed him in several places with poisoned Daggers, and
so leaving him wallowing in his own Blood, took Post for M^sco, flushed with
hopes of ample Rewards for so extraordinary piece of Service. But they were
grievously mistaken in their Account; for Boris Goudenou, considering with
himself how dangerous they might prove one time or another to his Affairs, took
a Resolution to take the first Opportunity of ridding himself of these
Evidences of his Treachery; to effect which, he hired others, who by the
Temptations of great Rewards were made the Executioners of those four Murderers
of their Prince.

To prevent the Murmurs of the People, who were all startled at the suddenness
of so bloody a Tragedy, he made use of the same Method he had done at Vgletz;
For, having caused the City of Musco to be set on fire in several Parts, he did
not question but that this general Consternation would divert the Peoples
Thoughts from enquiring into the true Circumstances of this Murder: And to
remove as far as possibly could be from himself, all Suspicion of having had
the least hand in so barbarous a Murder, he declared, that he would revenge the
Death of the Prince Demetrius, upon the Inhabitants of Vgletz. For, no sooner
was the first Consternation, occasioned by the Fire in that City, a little
over, but a Rumor being spread, that the Prince had been Murdered, the
Inhabitants forced their Way into the Castle, and transported with a furious
Zeal of revenging his Death, slew all his Servants, without any distinction.
This, which in all probability seemed to clear them from the Stain of the Fact,
was by the Contrivance of Boris, interpreted to their Destruction; alleging,
that they having slain all those from whom any Inquisition might have been made
concerning this Assassination, it would but be a sufficient Argument of their
Guilt; and that the Murder being to be laid at their door, they must be
proceeded against like Criminals. In effect, a great many of the Citizens of
Vgletz, were banished, some were tortured, hanged and drowned; And not
contented thus, after he had caused the whole Court to go into Mourning, and
recommended the Care of the Funebrial Pomp, to Knez Basili-zuski, he commanded
the Castle of Vgletz to be razed and levelled with the Ground.

Having thus signalized his pretended Passion for Demetrius, (...).
his next Care was to remove the only remaining Obstacle to his Greatness, to
wit, the Grand-Czar Fedor, whose End was hastened with Poison, after he had
reigned twelve Years. The Great Duke being sensible of his approaching Death,
did beque^th the Administration of the Government to his Lady, Irene, Sister to
Boris, to be ass^sted by the Counsel of the Patriarch in Matters of Moment.

The Widow, (...).
after his Death, ascended the Throne without any Reluctance; but, after she
had for some time labored under the weight of so vast an Empire, whether she
was grown weary of the Burden, or that she thought it more convenient to
entail the Crown upon her Family, by transserring it to her Brother, she
declared her self incapable of undergoing it any longer, and acquitting her
self of so great a Charge; and, that she, preferring the Contents of a private
Life, before the Toils of a Crown, was ready to resign all her Authority into
the Hands of the Nobility, which she did accordingly, in the Year* 1597.

Boris Goudenou, who was sufficiently acquainted with the mutinous Temper of
the Muscovites, when freed from that Servile Yoke, which otherwise keeps them
under Subjection, and that most among the Nobles being raised by, and dependent
from his Favor, would not dare to lay hold of the Government, was resolved to
improve the general Consternation and Confusion of the People to his Advantage,
being sensible that the Nobles would be emulous, who should most show his Zeal
in placing him upon the Throne. Finding therefore the Nobility ready to make
their Addresses to him, he cunningly caused a Rumor to be spread abroad by his
Emissaries, that being tired with the Toils of his Charge of Lord High Steward
of Muscovy, he was resolved to quit it, by retiring into a Monastery, to end
the remainder of his Days in quiet. The People being thus more and more
transported with the Apprehensions of their Ruin, when they perceived, that
among all the Nobility, there was not one who durst as much as to undertake the
Management of the Government, they joined with the Nobility, and the Clergy,
whose chief Interest consisted in maintaining the Public Peace, were of
opinion, that all the States of the Empire ought to make their humble
Submissions to Boris, to try whether by their joint Importunities, he might,
perhaps, be prevailed upon to take upon him the Burden of the Empire. The Nuns
quitted their Cloisters, and the Women ran with their Children in their Arms,
to back the Estates of the Empire, and to offer their most humble Prayers to
Boris, like to the tutelar Saint of Muscovy; so, that being at last overcome by
their Prayers and Lamentations, he yielded to the absolute Necessity of his
Country; and, after he had spoken much in praise of a retired Life, he
protested to them, That it was not to the Honor and Greatness of his House,
Bori Goudenou accepts of the Crown of Muscovy.
but merely to their Importunities, and the Love of his Country, that he was
going to sacrifice all the Satisfaction he found in a retired Life, and that
the only motive, which made him offer Violence to his own Inclinations, was,
that he could not see any longer so glorious an Empire, exposed to the imminent
Danger of approaching Ruin; But knowing himself too weak for so great a
Burden, he hoped that they would not deny to Aid him with their Counsels, when
Occasion should require; and that relying upon their Honor and Judgment, he
would cheerfully receive the Trust, which he would be ready to Maintain and
Defend to the last Drop of his Blood, assuring them, that if he could not equal
his Predecessors in Greatness and Glorious Actions abroad, he would endeavor
to exceed them in Temperance and the Mildness of his Government.

It must be confessed, that Boris did show no less Conduct and Wisdom in
preserving the Crown, than he had used dexterity in acquiring it. For he
entirely engaged the Army to his Service by great Rewards, he continued the
Nobility in their former Dignities, and heaped upon them new Favors and
Preferments; The common People he tied to his Interest, by easing them of their
Taxes, and the Mildness of his Government; and having thus secured the
Affections of his Subjects at home, he was no less careful of Establishing a
good Intelligence abroad with the Neighboring Princes, for which purposes, new
Treaties were set on foot, and concluded betwixt him and the Poles, Swedes, and
other Nations, bordering upon Muscovy. Thus the whole Interest of his
Government seemed, in all human Appearance, to be built upon so solid a
Foundation, that no power upon Earth was like to overturn it, as being founded
upon the general Affections of the People at home under the Management of a
Prince, who, for his Wisdom, Experience and Courage, was looked upon abroad, as
one of the most promising Princes, that ever ascended the Throne of this vast
Empire.

But mark the sudden Change of all humane Affairs, how subject to continual
Vicissitudes. What perhaps the most powerful Foreign Enemy durst scarce have
attempted at that Juncture of Time, was effected by a poor inconsiderable Monk,
who by his Devices put the whole Russian Empire into such a Confusion, that, in
spite of all the Precautions of Boris, he broke all his Measures, and brought
the Empire of Muscovy to the very brink of Ruin and Destruction.

The first counterfeit Deme^rius*

The Name of this Monk was Frisko or Grisko Otropeja; Grisco (...) De^^trius.
he was descended from a very noble but decayed Family, and by his Parents, for
his Debaucheries, sent to the Monastery of Trinouka, to correct his
Extravagancies by the Retiredness of a Monastic Life. But being not only of an
excellent Wit, but also of a very handsome Aspect and Mien, and his outward
Behavior and whole Person suitable to his great Genius; and this Confinement
not agreeing with his aspiring Thoughts, put him into a deep Melancholy. A
certain old cunning Monk of the same Monastery, who was a secret Enemy of the
then Great Duke Boris Goudenou, having taken notice of it, and judging that the
Cause of his Sadness proceeded from his present Confinement, the Narrowness of
a Monastic Life not being any wise suitable to his capacious Soul, contracted
an intimate Friendship with him, endeavoring to divert his Pensivenss by the
Instructions he gave him, first, concerning the Ancient State of the Russian
Empire, and afterward by giving him a full Relation of the present Posture of
Affairs under the Usurpation of Boris Goudenou. Being not unacquainted with the
Treacheries by which Boris had compassed his Aim, he did not forget to tell
him, how he had caused Demetrius the youngest Son of John Basilovits to be
murdered at Vgletz, how the Grand Duke Fedor, the Elder Brother of Demetrius,
was poisoned by his Contrivances; and that by the Murder of these two Princes,
as by so many steps he had ascended the Throne. He told him, that though his
Interest was laid deep at present in the Nobility, yet that there were not
wanting such among them, as, being sensible of the Treachery committed against
the two Princes, and envying his Greatness, would not Refuse to embrace the
first Opportunity that offered to expose his treacherous Designs to the View of
the World, which being once done, would soon turn the Affection of the common
People into a mortal Hatred against him. He cunningly insinuated to the young
Monk, That his Person and Aspect, being not much different from that of Prince
Demetrius, and his Genius sitted for great Undertakings, it would be no
difficult Task for him to personate the true Demetrius, (whom they would give
out to have been saved from the Assassins by the Care of his Mother) and, at
once, to punish the Treachery of Boris, and to supply the Place of Prince
Demetrius in the Throne of Muscovy. Grisko, who was naturally of an Aspiring
Temper, having received the Proposals of the Old Monk with a great deal of
Satisfaction, they began to concert Measures, which way to put their projected
Design in Execution; and wisely considering with themselves, that as soon as
the thing should take the least Vent, there would be no safety for this
New-model'd Demetrius in Muscovy, unless at the Head of a considerable Body, it
was thought most advisable for him to retire into Poland, where he might find
an Opportunity to make himself known to be the true Demetrius, and with the
Assistance of his Friends who by the Prospect of great Advantages might be
drawn into his Interest, publicly lay claim to the Crown of Muscovy. Pursuant
to this Resolution, the Old Monk, with his Pupil, traveled toward the
Palatinate of Kiovia bordering upon Muscovy, where having introduced him into
the Service of a Person of very eminent Quality and Interest in those Parts,
whose Name was Adam Wisnowiski, and given him such further Instructions, as he
thought most conducing toward the Accomplishment of their Design, he returned
into Russia, in order to prepare the Muscovites for the Reception of this
Demetrius as soon as he should be in a Capacity to appear at the Head of a
considerable Party upon their Borders. To effect this, he got it whispered
about, That Prince Demetrius, the youngest Son of John Basilovits, was still
living, that his Mother having got timely Notice of the Design of Boris against
his Life, had caused him secretly to be conveyed a way from Vgletz to a place
of Safety, and, in his stead, had provided another Child much of the same Age,
which had been murdered instead of the Prince Demetrius, who, as he gave it
out, was then in Poland, making great Preparations for the Recovery of his
Right, against the Usurpation of Boris.

Whilst the Old Monk was thus preparing the Minds of the Muscovites, and
especially of the Cosacks, Grisko Otropeja, who in the mean while, had by all
possible means endeavored to insinuate himself into the Favor of Wisnowiski
with very good Success, was only watching an Opportunity of making his intended
Discovery, which soon after offered it self, when he least expected it. For
Wisnowiski being in a violent Passion one day, not only called him a Son of a
Whore, but also seconded his Words with some Blows; which Occasion Grisko
taking hold of, with a feigned Perplexity, and Tears in his Eyes; You would
not, said he, my Lord, treat me thus, if you were as well acquainted with my
Quality as my Person; and what grieves me most, is, that I should receive this
Affront from the Man in whom I had centred all the Hopes of my future
Re-establishment. Having spoken these Words, abruptly, and with a becoming
Sadness and Modesty, he was turning away, from Wisnowiski, who being surprised
at Grisko' s Discourse, asked him* all on a sudden, And who art thou, then?
what is thy Name? what Business is it has brought thee into this Country?
Grisko Otropeja, being not unprepared with an Answer, told him, with a
well-composed Countenance. The same Confidence which swayed me to put my self
under your Protection, obliges me to reveal a Secret to you, which otherwise
ought to be kept concealed in my own Breast: Know then, that Muscovy is my
Native Country, that the Great Duke John Basilovits was my Father, and that I
am the same Demetrius, who, by the Assassins sent by Boris Go^denou, was to
have been slain at Ugletz, had not my Mother (who had got private Intelligence
of the intended Murder) preserved my Life by sending me away secretly, and
putting a certain Priest's Son, of the same Age, in my place, who was
accordingly assassinated and buried in my stead. I have ever since lain
concealed in a Monastery, till prompted by a just Ambition of Recovering my
Right, I took a Resolution to seek for Aid abroad against the Usurper of my
Throne, the Murderer of my Brother Fedor the late Great Duke, and my mortal
Enemy. He showed him also a Cross richly beset with Diamonds, which he pulled
out of his Bosom: This, said he, is the only Remnant of my former Greatness,
and the dear Pledge of my Mothers Love; and, since I have freely trusted you
with a Secret known but to very few in the World, and thereby made you Master
both of my Life and Fortune, I live in hopes that you will not refuse me your
generous Assistance in the Recovery of my Father's Throne, which I shall always
be ready to acknowledge to the utmost of my Power. Demetrius was a Person of a
great Presence of Mind, and of an Understanding much above his Years; and
being, besides this, of a very handsome Aspect; this, with the late Rumor
industriously spread abroad by the Old Monk, first put Wisnowiski under a great
Astonishment; but having soon recollected himself, he a thousand times asked
his Pardon for the Faults committed against a Person of his eminent Rank, with
a Promise that he would endeavor to expiate the same by his future Services
for his Interest.

Scarce a few Days were past before Wisnowiski got a most magnificent Equipage
prepared, in some Measure suitable to the Greatness of such a Guest, which he
offered to Demetrius, with reiterated Promises, that he would engage in his
Interest, and of all his Friends to support his Pretensions against the Usurper
Boris Goudenou.

This sudden Change in the Court of Wisnowiski, being soon spread abroad, as
well in Poland as in Muscovy, as it served for a strong Confirmation of what
had been whispered about by the Contrivances of the Old Monk, so it was not
long before it reached the Ears of Boris Goudenou. He soon took the Alarm at so
unexpected and surprising a piece of News, and thinking it most advisable to
stifle this Monster in the Birth, he immediately dispatched away a Messenger to
the Duke Wisnowiski, with Orders to inform him of the Imposture put upon him by
this pretended Demetrius, and how unbecoming his Quality it would be, to
espouse the Cause of an Impostor, against a Legal Prince; neither was he
sparing in his Promises, offering not only vast Sums of Money, but also
considerable Possessions to that Duke, if he would surrender him dead or alive
into his Hands. But this had a quite contrary Effect upon Wisnowiski, who,
being in some doubt before, concerning this Demetrius, was now, by the great
Offers made by Boris, entirely confirmed in his Opinion, that he must needs be
the true Demetrius; and therefore renewed his former Resolution of Adhering to
his Interest, maugre all the Temptations of Boris Goudenou. But having wisely
considered with themselves, that he would leave nothing unattempted on his
side, which might facilitate the Destruction of Demetrius, it was judged most
advisable not, to expose his Person any longer so near the borders of Muscovy,
as was the Duke's House, but to retire to Wisnowiski, a certain place well
fortified, and more remo^e from the Frontiers, belonging to the Duke
Wisnowiski, who, in the mean while returned to his own House, to get the better
Intelligence of what past in Muscovy. Here he was met by another Messenger from
the Great Duke, Boris Goudenou, who not only by his Master's Orders, renewed
his former Offers, but also promised more ample Rewards, if he would surrender
the Counterfeit Demetrius, either dead or alive. But this Messenger meeting
with no better Success than the former, he received secret Instructions to
endeavor the Destruction of this Impostor, at what rate soever, not to be
sparing of Dagger or Poison, great Rewards or any thing else which might
contribute to his Ruin.

This was not so secretly carried on, but that Wisnowiski had got some Scent of
the Design laid against the Life of his Friend; wherefore thinking him not
sufficiently secured against the Attempts of the Muscovites, in that place;
especially, since they had drawn together a considerable Force upon the
Frontiers, it was resolved to send him to George Mniszeck, Waywode of
Sendomiria, the Duke's particular Friend, which would both put him out of the
reach of his Enemies, and probably, strengthen his Pretensions with the
Interest of one of the most considerable Men in all Poland. Pursuant to this
Resolution, Demetrius being provided with Letters of Recommendation from
Wisnowiski, went to the Weywode of Sendomiria's House, by whom he was received
with all the Honor imaginable, due to his pretended Quality.

Demetrius being now at leisure to make serious Reflections upon the present
posture of his Affairs, had no reason to be dissatisfied with his Condition, as
being not without hopes of encompassing his End, with the assistance of such
powerful Friends; but wisely considering with himself, that their first Heat
might, by degrees, grow weak, if not quite become cool, if not sustained by
sufficient Fuel to nourish it, he employed all his Thoughts to establish, by
some means or other, his Fortune, upon a more solid Foundation, than that of
bare Friendship. He was sensible, that the Persons, among whom he now lived,
and from whom he chiefly relied in reference to his Grand Design, were all
Zealous Roman Catholics, he very well foresaw, that if he expected to be
backed by them in his Pretensions, he ought at least, to show some Inclination
to the same Faith, without which* he judged that their Friendship would be very
unstable. To obtain therefore this End, he thought it most convenient to make
his Applications to the Jesuits, whom, by reason of their great Zeal for the
Roman Catholic Cause, and the free Access and Influence they have over Persons
of the greatest Quality, he knew to be the most proper Instruments for the
managing of his Design. Demetrius therefore, having given them some assurances
of his Inclinations toward that Religion they professed; these Fathers being
overjoyed at the prospect of so great a Proselyte; under whose Protection,
they promised themselves one day to join one of the most Potent Kingdoms in the
World to the Papal Chair, were not negligent in their Duty, but readily offered
both their Counsels and real Assistance to Demetrius. After they had frequently
discoursed him concerning the Chief Articles of Faith, in Dispute betwixt the
Roman Catholics and Muscovite Church, and given (...) such further
Instructions, as they judged most convenient for their present Purpose, they
were also not wanting in their Advice toward the promoting of his main Design.

They proposed to him a Marriage with Marina, the Daughter of George Mniszeck,
Weywode of Sendomiria, who entertained him at that time in his House; she was a
Lady young and sprightly, and the Jesuits knowing her besides this, to be of a
very haughty Temper* they did not question, but that the prospect of a Crown
would be temptation too powerful for her ^^o resist; which would at once
strengthen his Interest in Poland, and remove all further Doubts, among the
Muscovites and Cosacks, of his being the true Demetrius, Son of the Great Duke,
John Basilovits. They represented to him, that Boris Goudenon, being a great
Politician, had so firmly established himself in the Throne of Muscovy, that
without the assistance of such a Person as the Weywode of Sendomiria, it would
be impossible for him to shake his Interest; that they knew the Weywode to be
one of the most ambitious Men in the World; and that therefore, if he could
condescend to enter with him into a more strict Alliance, by Marrying his
Daughter, it would be the most powerful Motive to engage him absolutely into
his Interest. They advised him therefore, to make his Addresses first to
Marina, and after he had sounded her Inclinations, to offer the same
Proposition to her Father, when they would be sure to back his Pretensions with
all the Interest they had.

Demetrius, who had already been touched by the sparkling Eyes of Marina,
received this Proposition of the Jesuits, with the utmost Satisfaction; and
being spurred on by a double Motive, to wit, that of his Love and Interest, he
sought only for a fit Opportunity to declare his Passion to his admired
Mistress, which he having soon met with one day, as he was walking with her in
the Garden, he by the most passionate and tender Expressions in the World,
endeavored to make her sensible of his Love; which she having received with a
seeming Indifferency, he made his next Applications to the Weywode her Father,
unto whom he represented his Desire of allying himself with his Family by
Marrying his Daughter, Marina, the possession of whom he preferred before the
Crown, even of Muscovy it self. The Weywode, who had been beforehand prepared
by the Jesuits, being not in the least surprised at this Proposition; after he
had thanked him for the Honor he intended to do his Family, told him, that he
thought he was a little too hasty in applying his Thoughts to Marriage, at a
time when the Eyes of the whole World were upon him, looking for the Success of
his Enterprise. That a Mistress, at this Juncture of Time, might prove a great
Obstacle to his Affairs; that, as he stood in need of the powerful Assistance
of some Princes, so it was possible one or other of them might be for
fortifying their Alliances with him by a Marriage, which, if refused, might
prove very prejudicial to his Affairs. He concluded, that as his Honor and
Welfare were more dear to him than his own Interest; so he advised him to gain
his Mistresses Heart by the Point of his Sword, and by opening his Passage to
the Throne of M^scovy, through the Heart of him that Usurped his Right.
Demetrius, who by the Father's Answer, and the Indifferency of the Daughter,
was fully persuaded, that the Success of his Love, did absolutely depend from
his Establishment in the Throne, applied himself with more than ordinary Vigor
to the accomplishing of his Design. For which Purpose, he was more conversant
than ever with the Jesuits, and having at last declared to them his Resolution
of becoming a Roman Catholic, and Establishing the same Religion in Muscovy,
as soon as he should ascend that Throne; these Fathers being overjoyed at this
Declaration, promised him their utmost Endeavors in procuring the Assistance
both of the Holy Father, Clement VIII. and Sigismund, King of Poland. Being
flushed with these hopes, he reiterated his passionate Addresses to his
Mistress and the Weywode, so, that, at last he having obtained their Consent,
in case he should recover his Throne, these following Articles were agreed on
betwixt them: That in Consideration of the Supplies and Aids to be given to
Demetrius, he should be obliged, after his, Accession to the Crown, to re-pay
the Weywode his full Charges, Marry the Lady Marina, his Daughter, and
introduce the Roman Faith in Muscovy. These Articles being Signed and Ratified,
he was by the Weywode of Sendomiria and Wisnowiski, introduced to the King of
Poland, who, at the Recital of his Circumstances, being moved with Compassion,
did not only give him a very favorable Reception, but also granted him
Permission, to levy what then he stood in need of, for his intended Expedition,
in his Dominions. This Audience turned to the no small Advantage of Demetrius.
For, it having been very industriously spread abroad, in what a favorable
Manner he had been received by King Sigismund, this did not only much
strengthen his Party in Poland, where a great many Persons of Quality espoused
his Interest, but also had such a powerful Influence upon the Muscovites, that
they began to exclaim at the Treacheries of Boris; and most of them out of
Fear, others out of hope of Rewards, only stayed for a favorable Opportunity
to declare for him, whom they now began to look upon as their Natural Prince.

Demetrius having soon got notice, how the Muscovites stood affected, and
brought over to his Party by great Presents, some of the leading Men among
them, thought it now high Time to put his long projected Design in Execution.
The Weywode of Sendomiria had all this while been employed in raising
considerable Forces in Poland, for this Expedition, and the Duke Wisnowiski,
having also publicly declared for Demetrius, a considerable Number of the
Polish Nobility, on the Frontiers of Muscovy, being encouraged by his Example,
espoused this Interest. Being strengthened by these and other Forces, which
were in several parts of the Kingdom, raised for his Service, he marched at the
Head of them into Muscovy, in the heart of the Winter, where, being joined by a
Body of Cosacks of 10000 Men, under their General Corclos, who had been engaged
with great Promises into his Service, Demetrius enters Muscovy.
by the Artifices of the old Monk, it struck such a Terror into the Inhabitants
of the neighboring Provinces, that, as soon as his Army had passed the
Boristhenes at Kiovia, they advanced without any Opposition, to the very Walls
of Eringow, which upon the first Summons surrendered to Demetrius. The City of
Puttiwoll, one of the largest and most populous in those Parts followed the
Example of Eringow; the Garrison, which consisted for the most part of Cosacks,
refused to fight against their Brethren. The other Places of less Note, trod
the Footsteps of the others, and put themselves under his Protection; so that,
as he was advancing deeper into the Country, his Army was considerably
augmented by such as flocked in to him from all the adjacent Cities, of which
none attempted to make the least Resistance, except the City of Novogorod
Sevie^^ki, which he besieged and attacked with all the Vigor imaginable. The
Czar, Boris Goudenou, in the mean while had not been careless of his Affairs,
but having ordered considerable Levies to be made before; as soon as he
received Advice of the most stupendous Progress of Demetrius, he published his
Declaration, wherein he promised Indemnity to all such of his Subjects as
would abandon the Party of this Impostour, and return to their Duty, with most
severe Comminations against all such as should persist in their treasonable
Designs against their Sovereign, in aiding and assisting the pretended
Demetrius. He sent also a solemn Ambassy to Sigismund, then King of Poland, who
having immediately demanded and obtained Audience, made most heavy Complaints;
That the Truce, which was so lately made betwixt the two Crowns for Twenty
Years, was violated by the Poles, who without the least Reason given, had
invaded the Czar's Territories, taken his Towns, and ravaged the Country: That
he hoped the King would take better Measures, and not pursue a War that was
founded upon nothing but an unjust Pretense, but recall his Troops* which were
at that time employed to maintain the Pretensions of a vile Impostor, against
one of the most potent Princes in Europe, who, if provoked, would not want
means to give himself Satisfaction for the Damages and Affronts received from
the Crown of Poland. Neither was he sparing in his Promises, by which, and the
great Presents he made to most of the Chief Ministers and other great Men of
the Court, he hoped to obtain what all his Remonstrances had not been able to
effect, but in vain; for whether it were, that they looked upon Demetrius as
the true Heir of the Crown, and upon the Affairs of Boris as in a declining
Condition, or that the Authority of the Pope and Jesuits who had espoused the
Interest of the first, had made them deaf to all these Applications, the
Ambassador was sent back with this general Answer: That the King and
Commonwealth of Poland were not concerned in what was transacted in Muscovy;
and that, if Demetrius, who was a Muscovite born, had obtained the Assistance
of some Polish Volunteers to maintain his Pretensions against the Czar Boris
Goudenou, this could not be interpreted a Violation of the Truce betwixt the
two Crowns, which on their side they would observe inviolably. Boris having
missed his Aim in Poland, dispatched a Messenger to the Camp of Demetrius, to
try once more his Fortune, and to endeavor to undeceive the Wayvode of
Sendomiria, and Wisnowiski, concerning the Fallacy put upon them by the
Counterfeit Demetrius. For this End having found out one of his Uncles in
Muscovy, whose Name was Smyrna Otropeja, and judging, not without Reason, that
if he could be confronted with Grisko Otropeja, his Nephew, his Confession
would be of the greatest Consequence toward the Detecting of this Imposture;
he sent him along with the Messenger* But whether the Wayvode looked upon that
as a Contrivance of Boris Goudenou, invented on purpose to blast the Reputation
of Demetrius, and to ward the Blow which seemed to threaten his Ruin; or that
he thought himself engaged past retreating; the Uncle, Smyrna Otropeja was
forbid, under pain of Death, to approach the Camp, and the Messenger sent back
with Scorn and Indignation.

Boris Goudenou, finding all other Means to fail, had Recourse to Arms, and
ordered his Army, which consisted of above a Hundred thousand Men, most of them
Vetera^e Soldiers, to march to the Relief of Novogorod Sevierski, which
defended it self bravely against the Poles, under the Conduct of their
Governor Bosman. Demetrius, though much inferior in Number, (being not much
above Twenty thousand, but all chosen Men) upon the Approach of the Muscovite
Army, leaving the Siege of Novogorod, posted himself as advantageously as he
could, in sight of the Muscovites, to facilitate the Passage of such Officers
in the Army of Boris Goudenou, as being corrupted before, had promised to come
over with their Soldiers to his Party. But these seeing the great Disproportion
there was betwixt the Numbers of these two Armies, either quite changed their
Resolutions, or at least thought it most advisable to delay the Execution of it
till a more favorable Juncture.

Demetrius therefore finding himself in a Post from whence he could not retreat
without fighting, was forced to put the best Countenance he could upon the
Matter, and having nothing to trust to but their own Courage, the Poles fought
so bravely, that they not only repulsed the Muscovites, who being over
confident in their Number attacked them with more Fury than Skill, but also
charged them at several times with so much bravery, that the Victory remained
doubtful for several Hours; till at last the Muscovites being continually
sustained by fresh Troops, and the Poles quite tired by the long Fatigues of
the Day, were forced to give way, more to the Number than the Bravery of their
Enemies, Demetrius routed.
who at last entirely routed them, (though not without a great Slaughter on
their side) killing 9000 of them upon the Spot, with the loss of all their
Cannon and Baggage.

If the Muscovites had been as careful in the Pursuit of Demetrius, as they
were fortunate in obtaining the Victory, and had sent their Horse (of which
they had a considerable number) immediately after, to disperse such of the
Polish Troops as were retreating in several Bodies toward Ribscum, they might
without question have put an End to the War at this one Stroke, or at least
have driven him quite out of Muscovy. But instead of pursuing their Advantage,
they besieged Krom, which defending it self with an extraordinary Bravery;
Demetrius, whilst these wasted themselves in the Siege of this Place, had full
Leisure given him to rally his scattered Troops at Ribscum, and there to expect
the Return of the Waywode and Wisnowiski, who were gone to their respective
Countries to raise fresh Supplies for this Service.

Being at last made sensible of their Mistake, they resolved to send part of
their Army to attack him under ^^scum, before he could be reinforced with such
Auxiliaries as he expected to join his Forces, and to leave the rest to carry
on the Siege of Krom. Pursuant to this Resolution, they sent Fifty thousand of
their best Men to attack Demetrius, who with about six or seven Thousand, most
Horse, the Remnants of his Army, had strongly entrenched himself under Ribscum.
Having got timely Notice of the Approach of the Enemy, he detached a Thousand
of his best Horse, to approach their Camp, and to get what Intelligence they
could concerning the Posture of the Enemy, but these having sent out a more
numerous Body of Horse to engage the Demetrians, The Army of B^ris routed.
there ensued a fierce Combat, both Parties being reinforced with fresh
Supplies from their Camps: But the Polish Horse behaved themselves so
gallantly, that after two Hours Engagement they totally routed the Muscovites,
and closely pursuing them with a great slaughter to their Camp, where their
Foot were just drawing up in order of Battle, to sustain their Horse, these
pressed all in Confusion with such Violence upon their own Infantry, that they
soon broke their Ranks, and brought the whole Army into such a Disorder, that
Demetrius, who by this time was advanced with the Remainder of his Army, soon
put them to the rout, and forced them to leave their Camp and Artillery, as a
Reward of his Victory.

The Fame of so signal a Defeat having been soon spread all over the
neighboring Provinces, all the great Cities thereabouts declared for the
Conqueror; the whole Province of Severia, one of the largest in all Muscovy,
followed the Example of the rest, and furnished his victorious Army with all
Necessaries, which by this sudden Change of Fortune, grew every day more
numerous; those who hitherto out of Fear had been backward in decla^ing
themselves, now striving to outdo one another, in giving the most evident
Demonstrations of their Zeal for the Interest of the Victorius Demetrius.

Boris, on the other Hand, though not a little startled at so sudden an Accident,
yet did not lose Courage, but having rallied his scattered Troops, and ordered
new Levies to be made, he sent his Spies and Emissaries into the Camp of
Demetrius, to try whether, by the hopes of Pardon and great Rewards, they could
bring over the Revolted Russians to their Allegiance to him, and especially to
entice the Cosacks from Demetrius to his Party, or whether by some means or
other, they could not dispatch and send him to the other World. But some of
these Emissaries being discovered, and put to the Torture, made an Ingenuous
Confession of the Truth, and were without any further Punishment, sent back to
Boris, with this Errand, that it was little becoming his present high Station,
to make use of Poison and Daggers against his Enemy, and that he did not
question, but that before long, he should be ready to call him to a severe
Account for this, as well as his other treacherous Devises; But that, if he
would give him real Demonstrations of his sincere Repentance, by surrendering
the Crown to him whose unquestionable Right it was, he would grant him, and all
his Adherents a general Amnesty, for all past Crimes and Misdemeanors.

But Boris having rejected these Offers with Scorn, and yet seeing his
Adversary increase in Strength every day, he resolved to try the utmost, and
whether by one dextrous Blow, he could not overthrow him and his Designs. He
was not ignorant that the main strength of his Army consisted in the
Auxiliaries and Supplies, he from time to time received out of Poland, and that
if he could by any means, deprive him of his foreign Aids, the rest would soon
disperse, or at least easily be reduced to obedience. He wisely considered,
that, if a considerable Diversion could be procured to the Poles at home, they
would be obliged to recall their Subjects out of the Service of Demetrius, who
deprived of their Assistance, like a Body of its best Nourishment, would soon
be reduced to a languishing Condition. But the circumstances of his Affairs,
being such as not to permit him to attempt alone this intended Diversion, a
Treaty was set on foot with the Swedish and Danish Ambassadors, then residing
in the City of Musco, to Embroil Sigismund, King of Poland, at his own doors,
by the assistance of these two Crowns. But whilst they were busied in
concerting measures to put this in Execution, and Boris applied his whole Care
in resettling his Affairs, he was on a sudden, seized with a most violent
Cho^ck, which immediately after, being followed by a great quantity of Blood,
which issued out of his Mouth, Ears and Nostr^^s, he died in an Instant; some
say for Grief, some of an Appoplexy, others of Poison by the Contrivances of
Demetrius. However it was, he expired on the 13th of April, in the Year 1605,
in the Seventh Year of his Reign. He showed so much Mildness and Moderation
during the Time of his Government, that he might well be placed among the best
of Princes, if he had not opened his way to the Throne of Muscovy, by the
Murder of his lawful and natural Prince.

The sudden Death of Boris Goudenou, The sudden Death of Boris Goudeno^^
happening at so critical a Juncture, when all his Friends had conceived great
hopes of his intended Diversion against the Poles, put them under a great
Consternation, and the greatest part of the Nobility and Army, looking upon
this unexpected Change, as ominous to his Family, showed a great Inclination in
Favor of Demetrius, whose Power began now to appear more formidable to them,
than before; But the Populacy* who had as yet fresh in remembrance the Benefits
received from Boris Goudenou, especially, during the great Famine, in the Years
1601, 1602, and 1603, declared for Fedor his Son, and having forced the Boyars
and Chief Officers of the Army to do the same, he was placed in the Throne, and
his Mother constituted Regent, during his Minority.

Fedor or Theodore, His Son Fedor succeeds him.
being thus mounted on the Throne, under the Tuition of his Mother, applied all
his Care to stop the Progress of Demetrius, and having received Intelligence,
that he intended suddenly to march to the Relief of Krom, which was still
besieged by the Muscovites, he declared Bosman, who had so valiantly defended
Novogorod in his Father's Time, General over his Army, which afterward proved
fatal to the whole Borisian Family. For Hodwen, a near Kinsman of Boris
Goudeno^, and General of his Forces during his Reign, having got timely notice
of the Resolutions taken at Court, in favor of Bosman, by the powerful
Influence he had over the principal Officers of the Army, soon prevailed with
them, to refuse to submit to the Command of Bosman, as a Soldier of fortune,
which Affront, he dissembled for a while, till he met with a favorable
Opportunity to revenge it upon the whole Family of the Great Duke, as we shall
see anon. In the mean while, Demetrius had commanded the greatest Part of his
Army under the Conduct of Zaporius, to advance toward Krom, and endeavor its
Relief, who having accordingly directed his March to the Muscovian Camp, he
received Intelligence by the means of Bosman, of the Posture of the Enemy, and
that he intended to come over to his Party, as soon as a favorable Opportunity
should present. Zaporius being resolved to improve so advantageous an Offer,
was impatient to come to Blows with the Muscovites; but these being both
superior in Number, and strongly Entrenched, and consequently not to be
attacked, without exposing the whole Army, he drew them out of their
advantageous Entrenchments by the following Stratagem: He contrived a Letter,
directed to the Governor and Chief Officers of the Garrison of Krom, wherein,
after having highly extolled their Valor and Zeal, and made them ample
Promises of Rewards, he told them, that he was advanced with a considerable
Force near the Enemies Camp, to annoy them, and to intercept their Foragers,
till the arrival of Prince Demetrius himself, who was on his March, at the Head
of the Cosacks, and other Auxiliaries, lately arrived from Poland, to oblige
the Muscovites to raise the Siege. This Letter being given to one, who
undertook to carry it into the Place, he was directed thus to the City, by the
secret Orders of Zaporius, that he must of necessity fall into the Hands of the
Enemi^s advanced Guards; which having suceeded accordingly, the poor Fellow was
carried before the Muscovite General; where having been examined, he was
forced to produce the Letter, which, as he believed, was to have been carried
into the City.

Hodwen, the General of the Muscovite Army, having perused the Letter, and
overjoyed at the Discovery of the approach of Demetrius, called immediately a
Council of War, wherein it having been judged most convenient, to attack the
Enemy before they could be joined by Demetrius, it was resolved, to leave only
a small Body to keep the Avenues leading to the Town, and with the rest to give
Battle to Zaporius.

He soon perceiving by the Countenance of the Enemy, that his Design had thus
far succeeded according to his wish, drew out his Forces in Battle-Array; but
being much inferior in number, and fearing, not without Reason, lest Bosman
with his Party, might be discouraged by the inequality of their Number, he
resolved to back his Letter with a second Stratagem. He placed all the
Servants, Su^lers, and other useless Persons belonging to the Baggage, at some
distance behind the Army, with whom having joined some Soldiers, enough to make
up a Front, he ordered them, after they had seen him Engaged for some time, to
advance in good Order, with their Colors flying, Drums beating, and Trumpets
sounding. Thus having prepared every thing according to his intended Purpose,
he marched directly toward the Muscovites, whom he attacked with the utmost
Vigor; but these being without intermission reinforced by fresh Troops, gave
so much work to the Poles, that the Fight was very obstinate and bloody, and
the latter would have been in no small danger of losing the Day, had not
Bosman, who Commanded the Body of Reserve in the Muscovian Army, as soon as he
saw the Polish Mock Army advance, in the greatest heat of the Battle, with some
of his Party, gone over to Zaporius, and declared for Prince Demetrius, crying
out aloud to the Muscovites, that they should cease to fight against their
Natural Prince. Bosman being the Darling of the common Soldiers, his Words and
Example had such a powerful Influence over them, that like one Man, they cried,
The Muscovites revolt.
they would live and die with him.

The Nobility and Chief Officers of the Army, finding themselves deserted by
the Soldiers, resolved immediately to send their Deputies to Demetrius, who at
that time resided at Puttiwoll, to acknowledge their Fault in having so long
stood out against their Prince; to implore his Pardon for what was past, and to
give him all the imaginable Assurances of their Fidelity, for the future.
Demetrius transported with Joy at so welcome a piece of News, lost no time, but
having immediately put himself at the Head of such Troops as he had with him at
Puttiwoll, marched directly first to Krom, where he caused Hodwen, the
Muscovian General to be clapped in Irons, and from thence to Avol, where the
revolted Army lay Encamped; Being arrived there, and having received fresh
Demonstrations of their entire Submission to his Commands, he offered his
Thanks to the Chief Men, but especially to Bosman and his Friends, and by his
Caresses, so gained upon the Affections of the common Soldiers, that they all
with one Voice, desired him to Lead them against the Son of the Usurper of his
Crown.

Being thus become absolutely Master of the Field and the Army, and believing
that now, he had but one step left to ascend the Throne, to wit, to make
himself Master of the City of Musco, the Capital of the whole Empire, he
ordered every thing to be got ready for the March. Whilst he was thus advancing
by slow Marches toward Musco, he sent his Letters to the Magistrates of that
City, wherein he told them, he was near at hand with a most Potent Army, ready
to attack them at his first Command; but that taking commiseration of their
Condition, he exhorted them to make choice of the fruits of Peace before the
inevitable Calamities of War. That if they preferred the last before the first,
they must be answerable for all the Miseries, which are the necessary
Consequences of an intestine War; but as he was persuaded they would consult
their own Safety, he advised them to root out the whole Progeny of that
accursed Traitor, Boris Goudenou, who had murdered his Brother, the late Great
Duke Fedor, and would have acted the same Tragedy with himself, if it had not
been prevented by the Vigilance and Care of his Royal Mother; and lastly, not
to delay any longer to show their Readiness in Asserting the undoubted Right of
their Natural Prince.

This Letter having been read in the Presence of the People and the Messenger
of Demetrius in the Marketplace, they began to assemble in great Numbers, and
after a short Consultation what Measures were best to be taken, they sent some
among them to the Palace of Knez Basilizuski, who having peremptorily demanded
of him to declare before them, whether this were the true Demetrius, Youngest
Son of Czar John Basilovits, that lay now encamped near their City, Zuski
positively asserted, that he was; and that he had been saved from the Assassins
sent by Boris Goudenou for his Destruction, by the Prudence of his Mother, who
had put another in his stead. The People absolutely relying, upon what they had
understood from a Person of so eminent a Rank, and who himself in Person had
been employed by Boris, to take care of the Funeral of Demetrius, Musco
declares for (...).
and dreading, besides this, a potent Army so near their Gates, cried out with
one Voice, Long live Demetrius, Great Duke, and Emperor of Russia! Come let us
destroy that viperous Brood of the Goudenou's.

Their Words were soon seconded with Blows; for having soon forced some of
Fedor's Guards, that were come to appease the Tumult, to retire, they went
streightways to the Castle, and sacrificing all to their Fury, that opposed
their Passage, they entered the Royal Palace, where they massacred most of the
Friends and Relations of Boris; the rest they stripped stark naked and shut them
up in a Fort within the Castle, Men, Women and Children, without distinction of
Age or Sex, where they perished in a most miserable manner, either by Cold or
Famine, none of the Kindred of Boris escaping their Fury, except the Great Duke
Fedor, the Empress Regent and her Daughter, who were preserved, not out of any
Esteem for their Dignity or Persons, but wherewith to purchase their Pardon
from Demetrius.

The Empress Dowager was a Lady of a Masculine Spirit and undaunted Courage,
who, when she reflected upon the Barbarities committed against the whole Family
of her deceased Lord, was soon convinced, that she and her Children were only
reserved for to adorn the Triumph of Dem^trius, and to serve as a Pledge of the
Fidelity of these barbarous Wretches, who being void of all Humanity, had made
such bloody Returns to the Family of him from whose Hands they had received so
many signal Benefits. She had therefore prepared a Cup filled with strong
Poison, and proposing no less to herself and her two dear Children, than the
most ignominious Death that could be invented by the enraged Conqueror, with a
most Heroic Constancy, Come, says she, Come, the dearest Pledges of your
Father's Love, Come, once my greatest Joy, but now my highest Gri^f, let us not
linger out for a few Days a miserable Life, by a more miserable Delay, till the
Tyrant have fo^nd the Way to destroy us more ignominiously; Let us by our own
Choice accelerate that fatal Separation which is prepared for us by the Hands
of our merciless Enemies. She had no sooner spoke these last Wo^ds but she took
the Cup, and, having taken a good draught of this poisonous Potion, she forced
her Children to take the rest of the fatal Liquor, The Death of Fedor and the
Empress.
and then grasping them both in her Arms, they thus expired in their mutual
Embraces; after the young Fedor had sat scarce two Months upon the Throne.

There are not a few who affirm, that the Princess only poisoned herself, but
being preserved by Demetrius's Order, to satisfy his Lust, was afterward by
his secret Order strangled with both her Children and that it was only given
out they had poisoned themselves. But the first Relation seems the most
probable, this beforementioned Tragedy having been acted on the tenth day of
June, in the Year 1605, several Days before Demetrius came into the City of
Musco.

Whilst the Populacy exercised their Barbarities upon the Remnant of the Family
of the Goudenou's, Demetrius having been advertised of what had passed in the
City by their Deputies, who told him that they were ready to receive him, he
ordered every thing to be prepared for his Reception against the 20th of June,
when he was met at two or three Miles Distance from the City, not only by the
Magistrates, but also most of the Nobility on Horseback, Demetrius pro^^^im^d
Emperou^.
and having thus made his Solemn Entrance through the Crowds and Acclamations of
the People, and been proclaimed Emperor of all Russia; he took up his
Residence the same Night in the Royal Palace.

This solemn Entrance into the City, was not long afte^ followed by his
Coronation, which was performed, with the usual Solemnities, toward the la^ter
end of the next following Month, with the loud and joyful Acclamations of the
People, Long live Demetrius, God save our Great Duke, May all his Enemies
perish!

But Demetrius, who had now assumed the Surname of Ivanovits, from his
pretended Father, the Great Duke Ivan or Jo^n Basilovits, judging, not without
Reason, that scarce any thing would contribute more at this time to strengthen
his Title, and put his Birth beyond all question, than if he were acknowledged
by the Mother of the true Demetrius, who had been murdered at Vgletz, he sent
to her a Messenger with secret Dispatches to the Monastery where she had been
shut up for seven Years last past, inviting her to the City of Musco, and the
Royal Palace. She, who saw her self thus at once freed from so long a
Confinement, and at the same time put in a Condition to revenge her self of the
Barbarities committed against her Family by the Treachery of Boris Goudenou,
accepted these Offers without the least Reluctance.

As She was approaching the City of Musco with a most magnificent Train.
Demetrius her pretended Son, met her at five or six Miles distance from the
City, and as soon as he espied the Coach wherein she was, dismounted, and came
up to salute her on foot and bare-headed. At their Meeting, after the most
tender Expressions, he showed her all the Marks of Respect due from a Son to
his Mother in a private Condition, and as he reverenced her with a more than
filial Duty, so she received him with all possible Demonstrations of a most
tender and sincere Affection, their mutual Caresses and Embraces being
accompanied with Tears. She urged him several times to come into her Coach,
which he as often refused, and would walk by, on foot and bare-headed, till the
Empress telling him that she would do the same if he did not gratify her in
her Request, with much ado, persuaded him to remount his Horse. Thus having
conducted her to the Palace, they renewed their former Tenderness, by Embracing
and all the most sincere Demonstrations of mutual Satisfaction in the Presence
of the whole Court. All these things being transacted in the Face of the World,
appeared to the People the most evident Proofs that could be given of the
reality of his Birth, as being founded upon the public Confession of the same
Person that bare him; so that the Russians seemed so generally satisfied
concerning the Reality of his Extraction, that by the common Consent of the
whole Nation, it was put beyond all question.

But Demetrius had not many Months enjoyed the Royal Dignity and the Affections
of his Subjects, before the Chief of the Nobility (who had always entertained
some Jealousies concerning the Legality of his Title and Extraction) began to
perceive his manner of Life to be far different from that of the Great Dukes,
his Predecessors; some of the most refined among them, discerning in his whole
Behavior a certain Lightness, not bearing the least proportion to the Grandeur
of his High Station; and though they knew him to be endowed with a ready Wit, and
a sufficient Stock of Courage, yet had they observed in all his Transactions,
but a very slender share of Judgment, especially in the Management of Public
Affairs relating to the Empire. The Common People, whose Judgment seldom
reaches further than the outside of things, having observed his Habit, Manners
and Gestures, to be wholly Foreign, concluded his Inclinations to be the same.
For he frequently used to appear in Polish and other Foreign Habits, he seldom
bathed, and scarce ever slept after Dinner, according to the general Custom of
the Muscovites, he would carry his Dogs along with him into the Muscovite
Churches, he would eat Calves Flesh, and not bow to St. Nicholas, all which
being abominable to the Russians, a People superstitious to a degree of
Madness, contributed not a little to the Hatred which the Populacy conceived
against his Person. But what most enflamed both the Nobility and People was,
that they saw their immense Treasures wasted in a few Months, among his
Players, Parasites, and Mimicks, who made it their whole Business to flatter
and encourage him in his Debaucheries, to which he was naturally inclined;
which made him neglect the Management of Public Affairs and commit the
Administration of Justice to Foreigners. They saw the Jesuits erect most
magnificent Churches and Dwelling-places, and the Great Duke himself, not only
to follow the Romish Persuasion, but also publicly to despise the Greek
Church, and to endeavor to introduce the Latin; by all which he drew upon
himself the Scorn of the Nobility and the Hatred of the People.

But nothing contributed so much to his Destruction, as his final Resolution of
Marrying a Roman Catholic; Demetrius, Mism^n^^^m^n^ of D^metriu^.
as we have mentioned before, had made his Address, in Poland, to Marina the
Daughter of George Mniszeck, Weywode of Sendomiria; and, among other Articles,
it was agreed betwixt them, That after his Accession to the Crown of Muscovy,
he should many the Weywode of Sendomiria's Daughter, and introduce the Roman
Catholic Religion into that Empire. No sooner had Demetrius ascended the
Throne, but as he discharged his Promise, in reference to the Romish Clergy,
unto whom he gave publicly all the Encouragement and Protection he could, much
more than was consistent with his real Interest; so he resolved both to
gratify his Passion, and to acquit himself of his Word to the Weywode, in
regard of the fair Marina.

There were not a few of his Muscovian Boyars (among whom Bosman was the Chief)
who being entirely devoted to his Interest, took the Liberty to remonstrate to
him how little suitable these Measures he took, especially in respect of his
Marriage, and the Romish Religion, were to the present State of his Affairs;
they represented to him, That the Muscovites being addicted to their own
Religion to the highest degree of Superstition, had always ente^tained a mortal
Hatred against those of the Romish Persuasion; That it had for many Years pa^^
been look^d upon as one of the fundamental Maxim^ of State, for the Great Dukes
of Russia, not to enter into any Foreign Alliance by Marriage, but to choose
their Spouses among their own Subjects; That, when the Muscovites should
perceive him to act, in Matters of the greate^t Moment, against their most
Ancient Customs, and contrary to the general Inclinations of the People, they
would soon be prevailed upon to give ear to the Suggestions of his Enemies, who
would not fail to make use of these specious Pretenses to alienate the Hearts
of the People from him, to his Destruction. But Demetrius was so far from being
convinced by these Reasons, though never so solid, that on the contrary he
persisted in his former Resolution of marrying Marina the Daughter of the
Weywode of Sendomiria.

If we curiously reflect upon the Course of Humane Affai^s in this World, we
may without much difficulty be convinced, that Honor and Riches are not always
the Reward of a sublime Genius and Industry, but f^equently the Consequences of
^ lucky Hit. Nay, it is often observed, that a fortunate Man, at a certain Nick
of Time, is elevated by an unaccountable Concatenation of lucky Accidents,
which at a^^ther Juncture prove his Destruction. Demetrius may well pass for
one of the most ^ema^kable Insta^ces of this Assertion that ^ver was heard of;
(...), as he owed his Ad^^^^ment to the Throne of Muscovy to Fortune (...) the
giddy multitude, so was he by the same means, that has raised him to the
highest Pinnacle of Glory, hurried on to his own Ruin, and precipitated into the
lowest Abyss of Misery.

Knez Basili-zuski (whom we have mentioned before to have been consulted by the
Citizens of Musco, A Conspiracy against Dem^trius.
concerning the legality of the Birth of this Demetrius) was the first that
declared his Opinion to some other Muscovite Lords, as well Ecclesiastical as
Secular, in whom he most confided; and, after having remonstrated to them the
danger whereto the State and Religion were exposed, by the Alliance which this
pretended Demetrius, intended to make with a foreign Lady of the Roman
Catholic Persuasion; he told them, what he had so merly ^eclared to the People
in reference to h^s B^^^h, had been done partly with a Design to make use of
this Demetrius, as a fit Instrument, to revenge upon the Family of Boris
Goudenou, the treacherous Cruelties committed by him against the two Sons of
the Grand Duke John Basilovits; partly to avoid the Fury of the Multitude, who,
he feared, would have involved him in the same Ruin with the Family of the
Goudenou's; but that he knew him to be an Impostor, he himself (as they all
knew) having had the management of the Funeral Obsequies of the Body of the
true Demetrius, who was certainly murdered at Vgletz. That therefore, they
should not be longer imposed upon by this Upstart Counterfeit, but take such
measures as might most effectually secure their Religion, and Government, and
the Lives of themselves and their Families from that imminent Danger which
threatened the whole Empire, with an unavoidable Ruin, if not prevented by their
Prudence and Courage.

This Declaration of Zuski had so powerful an Influence over all those that
were present, that it was unanimously agreed, that this Impostor should be sent
to the other World with the first Opportunity.

But the main thing which rendered their Design very difficult, if not quite
impracticable, was his Polish Guards, and other foreign Auxiliaries; To remove
this Obstacle, it was cunningly insinuated to Demetrius, by some that were near
his Person, that the Muscovites, could not but be extremely sensible of the
Mistrust he showed of them, in committing the Guard of his Person, rather to
the Poles, and other foreign Auxiliaries, than to his own Natural Subjects, who
had given so lately the most real Demonstrations of their Zeal and Affection
for his Person and Government; that they must needs look with an ill Eye upon
these Foreigners, as being the Cause of their being thus neglected by the Grand
Czar, for whom they were ready to Sacrifice their Lives, and all what was dear
to them, whenever he would be pleased to make use of their Service. Demetrius
thus unwarily, suffering himself to be Cajoled into an Opinion of their
Stedfastness to his Service, being deluded by this outward show of their
Affection to him, resolved wholly to rely upon the Fidelity of his Subjects,
and contrary to the Advice of all his Friends, dismissed both his foreign
Guards and Auxiliaries.

The Conspirators having thus surmounted the main Obstacle, and being
encouraged by this happy Success, began by degrees to communicate their Design
to others; and, after they had drawn a considerable Number of Accomplices into
the Conspiracy, concerted measures, how to put the intended Assassination in
execution. But many being made privy to the Design, it was not carried on so
secretly, but that Demetrius got scent of it, who having caused some of the
Accomplices to be apprehended, and Tortured, they discovered the whole Plot to
have been projected and managed by Basili-zuski.

He being soon apprehended, The Conspi^acy discovered.
and having at the first sight of the Rack, confessed the whole Truth, was
condemned to lose his Head.

Demetrius being now too late convinced of his Mistake of dismissing his
foreign Guards, called a Cabinet Council of his most intimate Friends, to
consult with them concerning the present Emergency of his Affairs, who were
unanimously of Opinion, that he should not spare any of the Heads of this
Conspiracy, but by bringing them all to condign Punishment, would strike such a
Terror into the rest, as not to dare for the future to embarque in such ill
Designs. They represented to him, how that Zuski being by his Mothers side
allied to the Great Duke of Muscovy, and a Man of a very aspiring Temper, did
without question aim at the Crown, and therefore it behoved him to secure
himself against so dangerous a Rival, now Fortune had put it into his Hands,
and he had the fairest in the World of putting an End to his Ambition, without
the least blame of Injustice. But Demetrius, as if hurried on by some fatal
Stupidity to his own Destiny, was for choosing the milder Way; and, when Zuski
was upon the Scaffold, ready to receive the fatal Blow, not only sent him his
Pardon, but soon after received him into his particular Favor, vainly
imagining to engage him thereby to espouse his Interest for the future.

For, Basili-Zuski was so far from acknowledging the Benefit received at his
Hands, that on the contrary, his Ambition being now backed by Revenge, he fully
resolved to encompass his Design, and to find out means to dispatch this
Impostor, in spite of all the Obstacles that might fall in his way. For which
Reason he invited the most Eminent Knez and Boyars, whom he knew to be of his
Party, to his House, and having again represented to them the present dangerous
Condition of the Empire under the Counterfeit Demetrius, A second Conspiracy
against Demetrius.
who had introduced Heresy, and trampled both upon the Laws and Religion of
their Ancestors. That it would be unbecoming their Courage to see themselves
thus abused by an Impostor imposed upon them by the Poles, who would, if not
soon prevented, before long make Muscovy a Province of Poland; But that, as he
was ready to sacrifice once more his Life, and what else was dearest to him for
the preservation of his native Country, so he did not question their cheerful
Concurrence and Assistance in a matter, from whence depended the Welfare both
of themselves and their Posterity. The whole Assembly, after having given their
hearty Thanks to Zuski for his Zeal in the common Cause, solemnly promised to
assist him to the utmost of their Power in his laudable Design, and to be ready
at hand, whenever he should meet with a favorable Opportunity of putting it in
Execution; There were not a few among them, who were of Opinion, that the
Tyrant ought to be dispatched immediately, and that Delays of this nature, did
often prove dangerous; but the Arguments of the wiser Sort prevailed, by whose
Advice the Execution of it was delayed, till the Celebrating of the Nuptials of
Demetrius with Marina. There were several pregnant Reasons alleged for this
Delay: Considering that they had not all their Friends ready at hand, who in
the mean while, under pretense of assisting at the Nuptial Solemnity might meet
all together in the City of Musco, without the least Suspicion; besides that,
whilst they were at Court, taken up with their Jollities, they might with the
less Difficulty put their Design in execution. There was also another Reason no
less prevailing than the rest, which was, that after the arrival of the Bride,
they were in hopes to recover the Crown Jewels, which were sent to her as a
Present into Poland.

For Demetrius, soon after his Coronation had sent a most splendid Embassy to
the King and Commonwealth of Poland, to conclude a League defensive and
offensive with that Crown, and to desire the King's Consent, to marry the Lady
Marina his Vassal, the Weywode of Sendomiria's Daughter. The King of Poland
having deferred his Resolution as to the proposed Alliance, till the meeting of
the next Diet, did without much difficulty consent to the Marriage of Demetrius
with Marina. But to give her the most real demonstrations of his Passion, and
to acquit himself in part of those Obligations he had received from her
Father's hands, who had been the main Instrument in his Advancement to the
Imperial Dignity, he now was possessed of, he sent to his Admired Marina^^ the
greatest part of the Crown Jewels of Muscovy, as the first Pledge of his
Constancy, and to make her the more sensible, what share he intended her both
in his Heart and Crown.

It is no difficult matter to guess, that Marina, who was Naturally of a very
haughty Temper, being Courted at so high a rate, was not long in Suspense,
whether she should comply with her Father's Inclinations, and the Desires of
her Lover, Marina

so that within few days after, the Nuptial Ceremonies were performed by proxy
in the City of Cracow, with all the Pomp imaginable in the presence of the
King, and a considerable number of other Persons of the first Rank. After some
time spent in Feastings, Balls, and other such like Divertisements, the Bride,
after having taken her Leave of the King, and the whole Court of Poland, set
out from Cracow toward the latter end of January, in the Year 1606, being
accompanied by the Ambassadors of Muscovy and Poland, by Duke Constantine
Wisnowiski, and her Father, besides a great many other Persons of eminent
Quality in Poland, on her Journey to the City of Musco; where being met at some
Miles distance by the whole Court, and in great Splendour, with the ringing of
Bells, and the discharge of the great Cannons of the Castle, through an
infinite number of People, and conducted to the Palace Royal; she was there
received by Demetrius, with all the highest demonstrations of Joy, that could
be given by the most passionate Lover in the World.

A few days after, (...).
they were married by the Patriarch, and the Church Ceremonies being ended,
were reconducted with all the Pomp imaginable to the Palace Royal, where the
succeeding Night was spent in Feasting, Dancing, Masquerades, and other such
like Diversions, with a Magnificence suitable to the present Occasion, and the
Grandeur of so Illustrious a Company. The same were continued for several
following days and nights, with all the Excess, Profuseness and Pomp that could
be invented, till the sixteenth day of May, the fatal Eve of the ensuing
Tragedy, which put an end to the Life of Demetrius, and the Greatness and
Enjoyment of Marina.

For as we have mentioned before, Knez Basili-Zuski, and his Accomplices,
having delayed the Execution of their Design till the Nuptials of Demetrius,
had in the mean while, by the assistance of his two Brothers, John and Bogdan,
and some other Muscovian Lords, engaged in the Conspiracy, conveyed some
thousands of Men, by degrees, and unobserved into the City of Musco, to be
ready at hand, at certain places, appointed for that Purpose, as occasion
should require. Being thus prepared, they pitched upon the sixteenth of May,
which being a Day appointed for an Extraordinary Feast in the Castle, was
consequently spent in all sorts of Jollities and Divertisments; the Guards
being even dismissed upon this extraordinary Occasion, from their Duty: So
that, every thing conspiring to facilitate the Design of the Conspirators, it
was resolved among them, that at the closing of the Feast, when the whole Court
should be buried in strong Liquor, and Sleep, should be the beginning of the
Tragedy they intended to act the next Morning. The very same Night there
happned a certain Accident, which had been likely to have once more spoiled
their whole Design.

For a certain young Fellow who was privy to the Conspiracy, drinking with some
of the Guards, and being elevated by the Force of the strong Liquor, had
unwarily let fall some Words in his Discourse concerning this intended
Conspiracy* whereupon, being seized and brought before Demetrius, he ordered
him immediately to be put to the Rack, to extort from him the whole truth of
the Design. But some of the Muscovian Lords, who were concerned in the Plot,
and in the most imminent Danger* that could be of being discovered, told the
Grand Duke, that it was easily to be seen, that the young Fellow's Brains were
intoxicated by the Strength of the Aqua vitae, and that therefore it would be a
Madness to make the least Reflection upon what he said while he was drunk.
Demetrius, hurried on by his malignant Fate to his approaching Destiny, being
also hotheaded with the great quantity of Wine he had drank that Day, followed
the deceitful Advice of his mortal Enemies, and dismissed the young Fellow for
time, with an Intention to have him further examined the next day, without
taking the least Precaution against the Attempts of his Enemies.

But the Conspirators had no sooner received Intelligence of what had passed in
the Castle, and how narrowly they had escaped being discovered, immediately
prepared themselves to execute their Design, without any further Delay. For
this purpose they had before Break of Day possessed themselves of the most
considerable Parts and Avenues of the City, Insurrection against Demetrius.
which done, they caused the great Bell (the common Signal of Alarms) to be
^oll'd, and most horrible Outcries to be made in the Marketplace and adjacent
Streets, that the Poles, who were lately come along with the Grand Duchess,
were in Arms, with an Intention to Massacre all the Inhabitants of the City.
The Citizens being soon (...) waked by those dreadful Apprehensions, with the
Assistance of the Conspirators, who had dispe^ed themselves into those parts of
the Town where the Poles were lodged* fell instantly upon the Pole^ in their
Quarters, who being all drunk and asleep in their Beds, they killed most of
them before they could be sensible of their Danger.

The Beginning of their projected Design having thus succeeded according to
Wish, Knez Basili-Zuski at the Head of this Party and a vast number of People,
having by the Massacre of the Poles secured themselves against all Opposition,
marched directly with their Scymeters in their Hands toward the Castle, where
they found every thing in a profound Silence and Security, every Soul there
being overwhelmed with Sleep, Weariness and strong Liquor, to that Degree, that
the Conspirators were advanced to the Gates of the Royal Palace before they
took the Alarm within. Demetrius, being one of the first that awakened by the
Noise and Outcries of those that were Massacring all they met within the
Castle, got to one of the Windows, and having soon understood the true Meaning
of this Tumult, he called to Bosman and some other Gentlemen of his
Bedchamber, that were near at hand, who havi^^ taken what Weapons they could
meet with, on a sudden, endeavored to stop the Fury of those who pressed
forward to enter the Great Duke's Apartment, Demetrius himself appearing among
them, armed with a Halbard, wherewith he dispatched some of the most forward of
the Conspirators; but some of them being provided with Pistols and Muskets,
they discharged so furiously upon the Great Duke and his Company, that most of
them being slain, (among whom was Bosman, who was stabbed with a Dagger,)
Demetrius was forced to retire, and being pursued from Chamber to Chamber, at
last threw himself out of the Window, down into one of the Courts, from whence,
though sorely bruised, he at last got into the Fortress of the Castle guarded by
Muscovites.

The Conspirators being enraged at their having missed their Prey, fell a
ransacking the Great Dukes Apartment, and forcing their Way with their
Scymeters through the Bodies of a few Attendants that were left, entered the Grand
Duke's Bedchamber, whither all the Polish Ladies of Quality were retired, and
at the Approach of the Muscovites, appeared half dead and immovable, like
Statues, for fear, not being able to utter one Word, unless it were a certain
ancient Lady, who somewhat more confident than the rest, by reason of her great
Age, answered the Muscovian Lords that were enquiring where the Great Duchess
was? That at the beginning of the Tumult she had found means, to get away as
she believed, to her Father's Palace. Having searched all over the Room, and
not being able to find her, they were resolved to try whether they could put
Life into the Ladies, and restore to them that Natural Motion they had lost by
this sudden Consternation, and so to work they went, every one catching hold of
her he liked best; and thus having satisfied their brutish Lust, they were
going to leave the Room, in further Pursuit after Demetrius. It is to be
observed that among all the Ladies that were there, but two escaped their
Violences; the first was the Lady Palatine of Lamoc, we mentiond before,
secured more by her Wrinkles and Gray Hair than out of any Respect to her
Person; and another Lady that sat very sick in a large Elbow-Chair, One of the
Muscovian Lords, as they were Just going out, happening to cast his Eyes that
way, observed some Motion behind that Chair, and being curious to know the
Meaning of it, advanced that Way, where having pulled up the Hangings he
discovered the poor affrighted Marina, who as she was of an extraordinary
Presence of Mind, looked upon them with so Majestic an Air, that they all
withdrew without offering any further Violence.

By this time* the Conspirators being advertised that Demetrius had saved
himself among the Muscovites that guarded the Fortress of the Castle, they
marched thither and attacked the Fort with the utmost Fury; but these within
being encouraged by the Presence of Demetrius, who notwithstanding the Violent
Bruises occasioned by his leaping out of the Widow, fought in this Extremity
like a Lion, with a Resolution rather to die with his Scymeter in his Hand than
to be exposed to the Scorn of his Enemies, they were repulsed with great
Slaughter; but their Strength increasing with their Number, they renewed the
Assault several times, but were as often repulsed, till the Garrison by their
Threats was at last prevailed upon to surrender the unfortunate Demetrius into
their Hands.

From thence they led him, Demetrius led in Triumph.
after they had put a ragged Coat about him, through the Streets of the City in
Triumph, under the Imprecations and Scorns of the Rabble, who pointed Fingers
into his very Eyes, plucked him by the Nose and Chin, asking him whether he was
now Demetrius or Grisko? All which he bore with a most admirable Constancy, not
so much as uttering one Word, and scarce changing his Countenance. But coming
near the Marketplace, and perceiving a great number of the dead Bodies of the
Poles slain by the Muscovites, wallowing in their own Blood, he could not
refrain from shedding of Tears, expressing a greater Sense of their Sufferings
than his own; telling them, that if they would but have spared his Friends, he
should not have grumbled at his own Fate, though perhaps the most severe, and not
to be paralleled in History, as being their lawful Sovereign, and Youngest Son
to their Grand Duke John Basilovits; for the Confirmation of which he would
appeal to his Mother.

The People being not a little startled at his resolute Behavior, began to
abate of their former Fierceness, and having sent Knez Basili-Zuski to the
Empress Dowager, to learn from her own Mouth the whole Truth of the Matter, he
returned soon after with this Answer; That the Empress Dowager, his pretended
Mother, had declared to him, upon the Cross, that he was no Son of hers, and
what she had done before, in acknowledging him as such, had been done, partly
to obtain her Freedom, and partly to revenge her self upon the Family of Boris
Goudenou for the Murder of her Son Demetrius.

This Answer having been soon spread among the People, a certain Muscovite
thronging through the Crowd that surrounded Demetrius, with his Pistol ready
cocked in his Hand, and coming up close to him, Thou infamous Traitor, said he,
take the Reward of thy Imposture, Demetrius killed.
and so shot him through the Heart that he fell dead the same Instant at his
Feet, those that stood nearest, wounding the dead Carcass with their Scymeters
and Pikes, and after they had stripped and mangled it so as scarce to be known,
dragged it through the Streets of the City, and committed all manner of
Barbarities upon the dead Body of the same Person, whom within a few Months
before they both dreaded and adored.

Thus was the Splendour of the Nuptials darkened by the fatal End of Demetrius,
who after he had scarce tasted the Sweets of a Diadem, and the Joys of a fair
Bride, was snatched away from both by the same Fate, that, not many Months
before, had exalted him to this sublime Station, on purpose as it seems, to
make his fall the more conspicuous.

It is a controverted Point to this day, not only among a great many of the
Russians, but especially betwixt the Poles and Swedes, whether he was an
Impostor or not. The Swedes, who were engaged on Boris Goudenou's and
Basili-Zuski's side, strenuously maintain the first, and for the Confirmation
of this their Opinion, allege, that it was put beyond all question by the
Evidence of the Empress Dowager, and Basili-Zuski himself, who managed the
Funeral Solemnities of the true Demetrius, slain at Vgletz, and asserted that
he was certainly murdered by the Assassins sent for that purpose by Boris
Goudenou; and that the owning of this Impostor to be the true Demetrius by
Zuski, proceeded from his fear of being Massacred by the People, as that of the
Empress owes its Origin to the Obligation she had to him for her Liberty and
the Satisfaction she received of being revenged of the Borisian Family. The
Poles, on the other hand, who sided with this Demetrius, assert the contrary,
affirming, that what the Swedes relate of him, is founded merely upon Hearsay*
suggested by his Enemies, on purpose to encompass their Designs of snatching
the Crown from the true Family of the Great Duke Basilovits; That the Swedes,
who were not concerned so nearly in the Matter as the Poles, and that not till
several years after the Fray was begun, ought not to be looked upon as
competent Judges of this Controversy; That it would be ridiculous to suppose,
that so many Persons of Quality in Poland, and the King himself could be thus
imposed upon; that it was not very likely, that the Weywode of Sendomiria,
would have thus engaged in his Interest, and promised him his Daughter in
Marriage, if, besides the great Resemblance he had with that Demetrius at
Vgletz, he had not had very evident Proofs of the reality of his Extraction.
That the first Declaration of the Empress Dowager, was without question real,
and that the pretended denial made afterward to Basili-Zuski, concerning this
Demetrius, was extorted from her by Fear; besides that, it was only founded
upon the Faith of Basili-Zuski, who, as it sufficiently appeared afterward;
was his Rival for the Crown of Muscovy, and succeeded him in the Empire.

But we must pursue our Tragedy, which did not end with the Death of Demetrius;
For, there being a considerable number of Poles quartered in the more remote
Parts of the City, who being involved in Drink and Sleep, had not as yet heard
the least Tidings of what had past in and about the Castle; and the Muscovites
fearing, not without Reason, that if they should take the Alarm upon so
surprising an Occasion, they would sell their Lives at a very dear rate, they
resolved to draw them into the Trap, before they could have any notice of this
Accident. For this purpose, certain Messengers were dispatched with counterfeit
Orders from Demetrius, to appear forthwith in the Castle without their Arms,
the Grand Duke being resolved, that at the Day of a general Rejoicing, nothing
of Terror should appear at his Nuptials. The Poles, not suspecting the
concealed Fraud of this deceitful Message, came forth without their Arms, thus
tamely exposing themselves to the Slaughter, which was executed upon them with
a more than barbarous Cruelty, very few escaping the hands of the bloody
Muscovites, except some Gentlemen of Quality, who having scattered some Money
among the Rabble, had thereby an Opportunity given them to gather into a small
Body, and so hewed their Way through their Enemies, till they came to the Palace
of George Mniszeck, Weywode of Sendomiria, Father-in-Law to the Great Duchess,
where was also the Duke Wisnowiski, and some other Polish Lords, who having
opened their way by their Scymiters to this Palace, which was pretty strong,
were resolved to defend it to the utmost, and at least not to sell their Lives
at a cheap rate. Neither was it long before they saw themselves surrounded on
all sides by an infinite number of their Enemies, who with great Fury attacked
them on all sides, but with little Success, for, the Poles having no other
Sanctuary left them, fought like desperate Men, and as often as they were
attacked by the Enemies, drove them back with a great Slaughter, so that at
last their Fury being quelled by the difficulty of the Enterprise, and the
Blood of their Comerades, they thought fit to leave the Poles, who thus saved
themselves by their own Bravery, by giving such Testimonies of their Courage to
the Muscovites, as made them sufficiently, sensible that if the rest of the
Poles had been alive, they would not have rid themselves at so cheap a rate of
Demetrius, and that they were more beholding to the Conduct of Zuski, than
their own Courage for the Success of this Conspiracy. To revenge themselves of
the Affront received at the beforementioned Palace, they fell upon the
Jewellers, and other foreign Merchants that were lodged up and down the City,
of whom they killed the greatest part, some few escaping into the Houses of the
Ambassadors of the several Nations, to whom they belonged, where, by the
Intercession of the Leading Men of the Conspiracy, they found a Sanctuary
against the most barbarous Fury of the enraged Multitude.

CHAP. II.
Containing the History of the Reign of Basili Zuski, and the second
Counterfeit Demetrius, till the Election of Uladislaus, Son of Sigismund, King
of Poland.
THE next following night, having put an end to the Massacre and Tumult, the
Boyars and other Lords of the Empire met two days after, to concert measures
about the Election of a new Emperor. The deference they all paid to Zuski, as
the Contriver and Chief Leader of the whole Enterprise, made them, after he had
received the Thanks of the whole Assembly, first address themselves to him, and
desire his Opinion in the present Emergency of the State.

Basili-Zuski, who beforehand had sufficient Opportunity to sound their
Inclinations, knowing that the major Part were at his Devotion, and not
questioning but that* the rest, in acknowledgment of his late Service, would
also, without much difficulty, be brought over to his Party, took this
Opportunity to tell them; That he was over-joyed to see the same Satisfaction
in their Faces, which they had testified by their Words, in reference to the
late Enterprise, contrived and executed by his directions; That, as the
Greatness of the Russian Empire was chiefly owing to the extraordinary Feats of
that renowned Emperor, John Basilovits, so the present ill posture of their
Affairs must be attributed to the Perfidiousness, Murders, and Usurpation of
Boris Goudenou: That, to deliver them from this Usurper, and to revenge upon
him the Death of the two Sons of John Basilovits, he had been prevailed upon to
acknowledge the last Great Duke for the true Demetrius, and rightful Heir of
the Crown. But this Impostor, having trampled both upon their Laws and
Religion, he had twice ventured his Life to rescue them from his unsupportable
Tyranny; and since now God Almighty had blessed their projected Design with
Success, by the assistance of their Zeal and Courage for the common Cause,
whereby the Royal Line being* extinguished, they were now in the quaity of a
Free People, unto whom was devolved the whole Right of Election, it was their
Duty not to let slip so favorable an opportunity of reestablishing their
Affairs, according to the true ancient Constitution of that Great Monarchy,
which they ought to look upon as the only solid Foundation, whereupon to build
so vast a Structure. That, as for his part, he was very ready to assist them
with his Counsel, and such Observations as he had opportunity to make during
the space of thirty or forty Years, in the most considerable Employments in the
Kingdom; being sensible that their future Felicity would depend from the Choice
they were now going to make of a Person fit to fill the Throne of this vast
Empire. That (if they would follow his Advice) a Person of mean Extraction
would by no means be qualified to answer their Expectation, and to command so
many Persons of an eminent Rank, who would not without Reluctance submit to his
Commands, or at least claim a Prerogative to control his Orders, and to have a
share in the Administration of the Government. That a young Prince would be
insufficient to undergo the Burden, at the present juncture of Time, that it
was to be feared he would be more mindful of his Pleasures, than the Troubles
and Fatigues of so great a Charge, and by neglecting his Duty, and laying the
Weight thereof upon other Men's Shoulders, make their present Condition worser,
instead of mending it. That therefore they had no other way left them at this
time, than to cast their Eyes upon a Person in the Commonwealth, fitly
qualified for the Management of so great an Empire, at the worst of Times.
That, to answer this End, they ough to choose One advanced in Years, of an
Illustrious Birth, and well versed, by many Years Experience in the Management
of public Affairs; one of approved Valor and Conduct, measuring his Interest
by that of the State, and constantly adhering to their Religion and most
ancient Customs; From such a one it is (concluded he) that we may with Reason
expect a Redress of those Mischiefs which have in the late Reigns overwhelmed
this Empire, and see it restored to its former flourishing Condition.

There were very few in the Assembly, who did not perceive that Basili-Zuski,
in the Description he had given of his Prince to fill the Throne of Muscovy had
pointed directly at himself; They knew him to be descended of one of the most
illustrious Families in the whole Empire, and by his long and many Services,
both in Peace and War, trained up in the Management of the State, so that
meeting, in his Person, with all the necessary Qualifications for so great a
Trust, after some days Debate, by the Suffrages of the Nobility, he was elected
and proclaimed Emperor of Russia, in the Month of June, Basili Zuski made
Emperor.
in the Year 1606, about a Month after the Massacre of Demetrius.

Basili-Zuski, being thus placed in the Throne, was soon after Crowned with the
usual Solemnities: The first thing he did, was to send Marina, with all her
Movables she brought along with her out of Poland (except the Crown Jewels) to
her Father's Palace, where he placed a strong Guard, under pretense of
preserving them from the Outrages of the Common People, but in effect to
observe their Motions, and to secure them as his Prisoners, till he saw how the
Treatment the Poles had met with in Musco would be relished at the Court of
Sigismund. And the better to palliate the late Massacre, he published his
Declaration, stiling Demetrius an Impostor, Heretic, and Tyrant, and that the
most imminent Danger, unto which both Church and State were reduced, under his
short but unfortunate Reign, had forced him against his Inclinations to embark
in a Design to deliver his Native Country from Death and Confusion, which, though
somewhat cruel in the Execution, yet by its absolute Necessity, Justice of the
Cause, and happy Event, was sufficiently justifiable to all the World.

This Sugar-plumb, though it was greedily swallowed by the giddy-headed
Multitude, who being always in Extremes, and fond of Novelties, showed their
Approbation by digging up the dead Carcass of Demetrius, which with most
horrible Imprecations, (in which the Muscovites excel most other Nations) they
burnt and threw the Ashes into the Air, yet did it not relish so well with the
Poles, but that, notwitstanding all his specious Pretenses, they resolved to
call him to a severe Account for the Barbarities committed upon their
Countrymen.

Neither was it long before they met with an Opportunity to revenge themselves,
and to give very sensible Proofs of their utmost Resentments against Zuski, the
Contriver and chief Actor of that Tragedy. For, though the dead Body of the late
Demetrius was exposed to public View for several days, it was so mangled and
hacked by the Fury of the Multitude, that it was impossible to be known even by
the nearest of his Friends. Which Schacopski, the Lord Chancellor of Demetrius,
and one of his most trusty Friends having got notice of, he made his Escape
with two or three more whom he knew to be absolutely in his Interest, to the
City of Puttiwoll, which had always stood vigorous for Demetrius, from the
first time he entered Muscovy with an Army. As they were traveling upon the
Road at some distance from the City of Musco, they made it their Business to
spread it about the Country, that Demetrius was not dead, that the People
during the Tumult had apprehended and massacred another in his place, he having
at the very beginning of the Disorder saved himself by Flight. They showed to
several Innkeepers, the Great Seal of Muscovy, telling them at their
Departure, that in a little time they should know what a great Guest they had
entertained that Night. They were also very profuse of their Gold, all which
serving for a Confirmation of what they had heard them say before, they took it
as an undoubted Truth; and the more they were enjoined Secre^ie, the more eager
were they in Whispering it about among their Friends, so that in a little time
it became current News in the City of Musco, where it having been encouraged
and improved by some secret Friends of Demetrius, there was scarce a Meeting
where this surprising News was not the chief Subject of their Discourse, every
one judging of the Matter according to his own Sentiment.

In the mean while, George Schacopski was, with his Friends, arrived at
Puttiwoll, from whence having immediately dispatched a Messenger into Poland,
with Letters to the Weywode of Sendomiria's Lady, wherein he gave her a full
Relation of the Conspiracy formed by Zuski and his Party against her
Son-in-Law, but that by a peculiar Providence he had saved himself in time by
Flight, and was retired to a Place of Security, from whence he would suddenly
return at the Head of a considerable Army to revenge the Death of his Friends
upon these Traitors. That her Husband also had by his Valor escaped the Fury
of the enraged Multitude, and remained in good Health in the City of Musco; and
that in a little time he hoped to give her a more ample Account of the further
Success of their Affairs.

Having sent away the Messenger with these Dispatches, he immediately demanded
Audience, in the Great Duke, Demetrius, his Master's Name, which being soon
granted, he appeared in the Assembly the next day, where having highly extolled
the Zeal of the Citizens of Puttiwoll, in having been the first that espoused
the Interest of Demetrius, in the very Infancy of his Affairs, and their
Constancy in persevering ever since steadfast in their Loyalty to their Natural
Prince; he told them how Zuski, the present Usurper, prompted by his
immensurable Ambition of putting the Crown upon his own Head, had with his
party formed a Conspiracy against the Life of the Grand Duke Demetrius; that,
to facilitate their Hellish Design, they had massacred a great number of
innocent Persons in their Beds, against all the Laws of Hospitality, and
afterward intended to have done the same to the Great Duke himself, whom they
intended to have surprised in his Palace; but having been stopped for a little
while by the Resistance made by his trusty Servants, he had by a peculiar
Providence of God Almighty, got into his Stables, where being furnished with
some of his swiftest Horses, he was with a few of his particular Friends
escaped the Fury of the People, and had directed his Course to Poland, from
whence he soon hoped to return with so considerable a Force as to be able to
reduce his rebellious Subjects to Obedience. He told them that he had
recommended to his Care the Affairs of the whole Empire in his Absence; for the
Confirmation of which, he produced the Great Seal of Muscovy; and that he had
given him a most particular Charge to satisfy his faithful Citizens of
Puttiwoll, that he was alive and in a place of Security. He further added, that
having had such constant and evident Proofs of their Loyalty, he had, in
Obedience to his Master's Commands, taken the direct Road to this City, to
discharge himself of his Commission, and to give them fresh Assurances of the
Grand Duke's Favor which they had at this time the best Opportunity in the
World to improve to their Advantage, if, as they had done heretofore, they
would by their Stedfastness show a good Example to the other neighboring
Cities, and acquire to themselves and their Posterity the Glory of an unshaken
Loyalty to their natural Prince.

The Citizens of Puttiwoll, being by these speci^^^ Pretenses soon inveigled
into a Belief of his ^^^cere Intentions, and taking Compassion on the
Misfortune of a Prince, whose Interest they had always espoused from the time
of his first comi^^ out of Poland into Muscovy, they, after having returned
their most hearty Thanks for the Honor he did them in putting so great a Value
upon their Services, declared unanimously that they were ready to sacrifice
their Lives and what else was dear to them in this World, for the Interest of
their lawful Prince, and that as a Token of their Fidelity, they were ready to
obey his (the Lord Chancellour's) Orders, till the Great Duke himself should be
pleased to honor them with his Presence.

The Chancellour's Project having thus far succeeded according to Wish, (...).
he dispatched some Messengers to the Tartars, unto whom he represented the
Cruelty and Treachery of Zuski, and by what good Fortune the Great Duke had
escaped his Hands, commanding them in his Name to repair at their Rendezvous,
which he had appointed near Puttiwoll. The Cosacks being also inveigled by the
same Artifices of Schacopski, as they had always adhered to the Interest of
Demetrius, so they were now the most forward in appearing in Arms for the
maintaining of his pretended Right; so that the Lord Chancellor, seeing
himself thus strengthened by a considerable Party of Cosacks, Tartars, and some
M^scovites, and by the Surrender of several other Places in the Neighborhood
of Puttiwoll, he obliged them to swear true Allegiance to Dem^trius, with a
solemn Promise not to lay down (...) Arms, till they had been revenged of that
bloody Usurper Basili-Zuski, and restored Demetrius to the Throne of Muscovy.

It is easy to be imagined that the new Emperor was not a little Alarmed at
so unexpected and unwelcome a piece of News; Zuski routed by the ^^^trians.
but believing it most for his purpose to quench the Fire in the Ashes, before
it should break out into a Flame, he marched with what Troops he could get
together in haste toward the Enemy. But these being in the mean while
reinforced by a considerable Body, under the Command of a certain Muscovian
Lord, whose name was Isthoma, they Charged Zuski, who was at the Head of his
Troops, with so much Fury, that they put him entirely to the rout, and
remaining thus Masters of the Field, pursued him so closely, that with much ado
he escaped to the City of Musco, where he was blocked up by the Enemy, who
fortified their Camp within a Mile of the City.

The Poles in the mean while had not been idle, but having received
Intelligence, that a considerable Party in Muscovy, had declared for Demetrius,
they were overjoyed to have found so ^avourable an Opportunity to revenge upon
the Muscovites, the Death of their Countrymen, Massacred in their Quarters,
against the Laws of Nations; for which purpose, they maintained a
Correspondency with Schacopski, whom they informed that they had found out a
certain Gentleman in Poland, not unlike in his Person to Demetrius, who
intended to appear at the Head of a considerable Army in Muscovy. In the mean
while they had got together a Body of twelve thousand Cosacks, under the
Command of one John Polutnich, who being sent by this new Demetrius to
reinforce the Army, that lay Encamped near the Gates of the City of Musco, was
by his special Commission constituted General over all his Forces.

This Polutnich was a Muscovite by Birth, and now a Soldier of Fortune; he had
been bred among the Tartars, and served his Apprenticeship in Arms among the
Cosacks, where he had made himself famous for his extraordinary Atchievments,
till at last he was taken by the Turks, and made a Gally Slave; but by good
Fortune rescued by the Venetians; from thence he took his way through Poland,
where having met with this new Demetrius, he obtained of him the Command over
his whole Army; Polutnich, therefore having, pursuant to his Commission, joined
the Forces before Musco, showed his Orders to Isthoma, who was forced to obey,
but being extremely disgusted at the Affront put upon him, to see himself thus
neglected, and another to reap the fruits of his Victory; he, with ten thousand
Men, whom he had debauched before, and brought over to his Party, went over to
Zuski, who received him no less than his Tutelar Angel, to whom he was indebted
for his present Deliverance; especially when he assured both him and the
People, that there was no such Man as Demetrius at Puttiwoll; and that the
whole was only a Contrivance of Schacopski, who by these Intrigues intended to
make himself the more Considerable.

The whole City being not a little overjoyed at these comfortable Tidings, the
People as well as the Nobility, sent their Deputies into the Camp to Polutnich.
The first desired, that they might be admitted into the Presence of Demetrius
their Prince, and that they were ready to prostrate themselves at his Feet, and
to beg pardon for their past Offenses. Those of the Nobility represented to the
General, how miserably he was imposed upon by the Artifices of Schacopski; that
the true Demetrius, whose Interest he had espoused was in the presence of a
great many Thousands slain in the City of Musco; and therefore, whoever since
had assumed his Name, and counterfeited his Person, must needs be an Impostor,
from whom he could expect neither Honor nor Profit; That therefore, he would
be much better advised to leave his Party, and to spare the Effusion of
Christian Blood, by acknowledging Zuski for the lawful Sovereign of Muscovy,
who would not fail to heap upon him such Honors and Dignities, as should be
suitable to his Merits.

Polutnich answered like a Man of Honor, that he was sorry to understand that
they took him to be like Isthoma, a Traitor both to his Master and Country;
That they did him wrong in entertaining so mean an Opinion of him; That, though
he was a Soldier of Fortune, he would never give Demetrius the least Occasion
of repenting himself of the Trust he had put in him. That the Prince was
certainly in Poland, where he had seen and spoke with him, and had from his own
hands received this Commission of being General of this Army. That if they were
so nearly touched, as they pretended, in their Consciences, with the Effusion
of Humane Blood, the best way to prevent it would be, to return to their true
Allegiance, and pay to their lawful Prince due Obedience, and as a Pledge of
their future Fidelity, and of their remorse for what was past, to deliver up
into his Hands the Usurper of his Crown. That this was the only means left them
to prevent these Evils, which they dreaded, and by which they might hope to
deserve their Pardon, and to secure themselves, their Wives and Children, and
the whole City from destruction.

The Inhabitants of Musco, being in no wise satisfied with Polutnich's Answer,
which served them for a Confirmation of what they had received from Isthoma
before, to wit; That there was no such Man as Demetrius, either in the Camp, or
any where else; and encouraged by the late Defection of Isthoma; they resolved
unanimously to stand by Zuski, and not to hearken to any further Impositions,
but to treat Polutnich as an Enemy of their Country. Pursuant to this
Resolution, most of the young Men inhabiting the City of Musco, were put in
Arms, and being joined with such regulated Troops as were brought over by
Isthoma, they made a furious sally with a hundred and twenty thousand Men; and,
attacking the Demetrian General on all sides in his Entrenchments, forced him
to retreat to Catuga, Zuski, after a few days spent in modelling his Army,
marched thither in Person, and closely besieged Schacopski, who so bravely
defended himself against the Muscovites, that he forced them to abandon the
Enterprise, and march back to Musco, with the loss of some Thousands of their
best Men.

Some time was bestowed in raising the necessary Recruits, so that Polutnich,
in the mean while, having recovered Breath, saw himself once more in a
Condition to appear with a considerable Body in the Field, which having afresh
Alarmed the Great Duke, he marched once more against them, with a very
formidable Army.

The Demetrians, though much inferior in Number, being as forward as they to come
to Blows, both Armies were drawn up in order of Battle, in a great Plain, not
many Miles from the City of Thula, and were just upon the point of Engaging one
another, when a Body of five thousand Muscovites, which were posted in the
Front of the left Wing of the Demetrian Army, instead of attacking the Enemy,
ran over to them, all in a Body, which having put Polutnich, and the whole Army
into a great Consternation, it was thought most advisable to avoid fighting,
and to retreat to Thula.

Zuski falling in their Rear, cut off a considerable number of them, closely
pursuing the rest to the Walls of the City, which was immediately after,
surrounded by the whole Army, and attacked with all the Fury imaginable; The
besieged having in their Retreat, been forced to leave behind them all their
Artillery and Ammunition, were very ill provided with such Things as were
necessary to sustain a Siege; nevertheless, trusting in their Courage, they
defended themselves so valiantly, that the Muscovites seeing themselves
repulsed with great Slaughter in several Attacks, were obliged to enclose the
City, by making strong Line of Circumvallation round about it, in hopes to
reduce it by Famine, which succeeded according to their Expectation.

For those within, by their sudden Retreat, having had neither Time or
Opportunity to put Provisions in the City, were in a little time, reduced to
the greatest Extremity for want of them. Schacopski, in the mean while, was not
a little amazed, that he received not the least News out of Poland, whither he
had dispatched his Messengers to advertise them of the danger they were in; and
the Inhabitants of Thula, who saw themselves reduced to that Extremity, as to
be forced to feed upon Cats, Dogs, Horses, and such like Things, without hopes
of Relief, began to be mutinous, and to accuse both Schacopski and Polutnich,
of having betrayed them by their fictitious Insinuations, as if their Great
Duke, Demetrius, were alive in Poland, which if he had been, he would not have
failed to give them his Assistance in this Extremity. Schacopski put the best
Countenance he could upon the Matter, telling them, that they could not expect
him to come in Person, unless backed with a Force suitable to the Strength of
his Enemies; and, that, if they would but have Patience, he did not question,
but in a few days to hear of his approach, in order to come to their Relief.
Polutnich assured them upon his Honor, that he himself had seen and spoke with
a certain Person, of about thirty Years of Age, who was in Poland, acknowledged
to be the true Demetrius, and from whose Hands he had received his Commission;
that they should not rely upon his Word alone, but that he would advise them to
send a trusty Messenger of their own (one, whom they knew to have seen the
Prince Demetrius before) into Poland, to represent to him the true State of
their Affairs, and to solicit prompt Succors; that at his Return, he would be
ready to join with them in any thing they should think most advisable for their
common Safety.

The Citizens of Thula, having given their Consent to this Proposal, and
dispatched a certain Messenger, who by favor of the Night, and the Carelessness
of the Besiegers got safely through their Camp without being discovered, they
gave fresh Assurance of their Stedfastness to Polutnich, till the return of
this Emissary. Schacopski, in the mean while, was not a little surprised, that
he could not hear the least Tidings out of Poland; but the true Cause was, that
the Gentleman, whom the Poles had engaged to personate the true Demetrius,
having understood, in what ill a posture his Affairs were in Muscovy, after
the two last Defeats, began to retract his Promise of making himself an
Instrument to satisfy the Revenge of the Poles upon the Muscovites; and
setting before his Eyes the fatal End of the late Demetrius, Quia me vestigia
terrent.
after he was in Possession of the Empire, he looked upon the Muscovian Throne,
like the Fox upon the Lion's Den, and therefore wisely resolved rather to enjoy
himself upon his plentiful Estate in Poland, than to expose himself to danger
for the imaginary Luster of a Crown.

But the Poles, being fully resolved not to acquit Zuski thus of the
Barbarities committed against their Countrymen, Another Demetrius set up by the
Poles,
were not long before they found out another to supply his Place; Muscovy, so
fertile of Impostors, soon furnishing them with One, whom they looked upon as a
fit Tool to promote their obstinate Revenge against Zuski; this was one Ivan,
or John, a Native of Pocala, a City of Russia, where he had been a
Schoolmaster for some time; and being grown weary of his Employment, took hold
of this Opportunity to meliorate his Condition, and if possible, to change his
School Scepter for that of the Muscovian Empire.

The first who publicly espoused his Interest, was one Micharetski, a Man of
very eminent Quality in Poland, who having gathered a considerable Body of
Troops, they marched at the Head of them to Puttiwoll, where, having been
received with the greatest demonstrations of Joy and Respect due to their
Sovereign, they directed their March to the City of Staradub, where, being
reinforced by some Muscovites, that upon the Rumor spread abroad of the arrival
of their Prince Demetrius, flocked in to them from all Parts; it was resolved
to march with all possible speed to the Relief of Thula.

The second counterfeit Demetrius



Whilst they were concerting Measures to put their intended Design in
execution, the Messenger from the Citizens of Thula, who, for fear of being
intercepted by the Enemies Parties, that were abroad in great Numbers, had been
obliged to travel a great way about, before he arrived at Staradub, was
introduced into the presence of this new modeled Demetrius, who, though having
some resemblance to the other Demetrius, yet was so far different from him,
whom this Messenger had seen frequently before, that he was not a little
startled at the sight of it, being scarce able to deliver his Message without
confusion. Demetrius, by the dissatisfaction he observed in his Countenance, so
on guessing at the true Cause of it, judged it not advisable to send back his
Resolution of marching to the Relief of the Town by this Messenger, who, he
feared, might by this Discovery, raise a great Prejudice in the Place against
his Person and Interest; wherefore, having ordered him to be secured under a
good Guard upon some Pretense or other, he resolved to detain him, till he in
Person, could march to raise the Siege of the Place.

This precaution, Thula surrendered to Zuski.
though in it self founded upon very weighty Reasons, yet proved the occasion of
the loss of Thula. For both the Garrison and Inhabitants of that City not
receiving the least Intelligence concerning their Messenger, whom they had
dispatched into Poland, they concluded that he must have fallen into the Hands
of the Enemies, and being reduced to the utmost Extremity for want of
Provisions, it was resolved, with Joint-consent, rather to accept of the
advantageous Conditions offered to them by Zuski, than to perish by Famine;
pursuant to which Resolution, the Place surrendered it self upon very honorable
Terms; which were however, but very ill observed by Zuski, who, contrary to his
Oath, caused several of the Chief Officers of the Garrison to be hanged, and
the Brave Polutnich, and the Cunning Schacopski, to be cast into a loathsome
Prison, where they both were miserably Famished to death.

The Cosacks that had hitherto stood firm to the Interest of Demetrius, having
had no Intelligence of his Approach, consequently looking upon his Cause as
desperate, embraced the Party of Zuski, who being overjoyed at the Conquest of
Thula and the Accession of so considerable a Force, ordered his Army in
Conjunction with these Cosacks, to form the Siege of Caluga, the strongest
Place as yet in the Possession of the Demetrians. The Army was scarce sat down
before the Place, when a Rumor being spread among the Cosacks that Demetrius
at the Head of an Army was arrived at Staradub, they began to mutiny first, and
having drawn some of the Muscovites into their Party, the whole Army, upon the
News spread industriously by the Cosacks, that Demetrius was advancing to fight
them, was possessed with so panick a Fear, that without the least Order,
Zuski's Army dispersed.
they at Midnight left their Tents, Cannon and Baggage, every one making the
best of his Way to the City of Musco where they brought the first News to Zuski
of their imaginary Defeat, and the Flight of his Army without being pursued by
any body.

The Cosacks and their Party being thus left absolute Masters of the whole
Camp, at the first Break of Day did not fail to give notice of what had
happened, to the Inhabitants of Caluga, and that Demetrius was arrived at
Staradub; but these looking upon it as a Stratagem, and a Contrivance of the
Cosacks to catch them in a Trap, at first answered them with Fire and Ball,
till upon their reiterated Assurances that the Muscovites were fled, and their
offering Hostages as Pledges of what they had related to them to be Truth, they
sent out some of the Officers of the Garrison into the Camp, who at their
Return having confirmed what they had been assured of before by the Cosacks,
they soon opened their Gates, and having shared the Booty found in the Camp
with them, they entered triumphantly into the City.

After they had bestowed a few days in rejoicing and refreshing themselves, the
Cosacks, with part of the Garrison^, to the Number of Ten thousand, marched
from thence to the Camp of Demetrius, near Staradub, where having rejoiced him
with the unexpected News of the Relief of Caluga, they were received with great
Demonstrations of his Royal Favor, and vast Promises of ample Rewards after
his Recovery of the Throne.

Thus, whilst Zuski was repenting himself of his fatal Error of having received
into his Army so considerable a Number of his Enemies Troops, Demetrius
increased in Strength every day; The Reputation of what had happened before
Caluga, and his being joined by the Cosacks, made such lively Impressions upon
the Minds of the Muscovites, that many of them were ^or siding with the most
fortunate; and the Poles and Lithuanians, bordering upon Muscovy, being enticed
by the Hopes of Reward and Booty, flocked in great Numbers to his Camp; so that
seeing himself in a Capacity to encounter his Enemies, he marched in quest of
them, and having found Misinowski the Muscovian General advantageously posted
at a strong Pass, he nevertheless attacked him so furiously that he entirely
routed them, The Zuskians routed.
killing near Ten thousand upon the Spot, besides a great number of Prisoners,
among whom was their General Matthew Misinowski himself.

This Victory gained such a Reputation to Demetrius, that the whole Province of
Severia, with some other adjacent Places, readily submitted to his Obedience,
acknowledging him for their true and undoubted Sovereign, and promising to
furnish his Army with all manner of Necessaries. But the Poles being more
especially encouraged by this Success to pursue their Revenge to the
Destruction of Zuski, sent considerable Supplies to back the Pretensions of
Demetrius. Duke Roman Rosinski sent a good Body of chosen Horse under the
Command of his Friend Walareski, Adam Wisnowiski, Charlinski, Mielski, and
several other Lords of the first Quality in Poland, soon after joined him with
such Troops as they had raised in their respective Countries; besides that, a
new Body of 8000 Cosacks, upon the first News of his Victory, had declared for
him, and taken service among his Troops.

Not long after Duke Rosinski, being also arrived in the Camp, was by the
Consent of the Polish Lords and other Principal Officers, declared General of
the whole Army.

Basili-Zuski had in the mean while applied all his Care in getting ready his
Recruits and making new Levies throughout the whole Empire, with an Intention
to bring so formidable an Army into the Field, as to be able to stop the
further Progress of his Enemy. For this end having formed an Army of above a
Hundred and fifty thousand Men, and declared his Brother Demetrius. Zuski
General, he ordered him to march directly toward the Poles, and fight them
wherever he met them. Pursuant to these Orders, the Zuskian Army marched
toward the City of Bolchow, where having fixed their Tents within sight of the
Enemy, some Days were spent in Skirmishes, whilst the Generals of both Parties
watched their Opportunity of Deciding their Quarrel by a Battle to the best
Advantage; It was not long before they found it, being equally eager of
Engaging.

For, as I said before, scarce had they lain thus encamped a few days, but they
saw the Zuskians early in the Morning drawing out to put themselves in Battle
Array, having detached a Body of their best Horse to possess themselves of some
advantageous Posts near to the Demetrian Camp; which these have soon been
advertised of by their Parties that were abroad to observe the Motion of the
Enemy, they with all speed sent also a Body of their best Horse to engage the
Muscovites, and to maintain those advanced Posts, till they could be sustained
by some of their Infantry. The Polish Horse engaged the Muscovites with so much
Bravery, that after an Engagement of an Hour they forced them to quit those
Posts, whilst the whole Army was putting in Order of Battle, having taken the
Advantage of the same Ground which the Muscovites intended to have made use of
against them.

The Muscovites being bassled in their first Enterprise, however did not lose
Courage, as trusting to their Number, and Demetrius Zuski their General, at the
Head of them, left nothing unattempted which might encourage his Soldiers to
fight bravely against the sworn Enemies of their Country; He told them, That a
great part of the Demetrian Army was composed out of Vagabonds and Rebels, whom
they had seen fly before them so often of late, and who now puffed up with
their late Success near Caluga, more to be attributed to their Treachery and a
Luck^y Chance than their bravery, had once more the Impudence to look them in
the Face, hurried on by their ill Destiny, to receive the Reward of their
Treacheries from their Hands; That the rest were Poles, the Hereditary Enemies
of their Country and Religion, unto whom must be ascribed all the Evils and
Mischiefs which had befaln their Empire for these several Years last past; That
this insolent Nation, not being contented to have once before involved their
Country in Blood and Confusion by setting up an Impostor instead of the true
Demetrius slain at Ugletz, were now upon the point of Imposing upon them a
Second, in order to dispose of the Throne of Muscovy at their Pleasure, to
enslave their Country, and to root out the true ancient Greek Religion. He
represented to them, how inglorious, nay, ignominious it would be to the whole
Russian Nation, who had extended their Conquests over most of the neighboring
Countries, to receive Laws from the Poles, who had conspired their Ruin and
Destruction. That therefore they being to expect nothing but Misery from their
mortal Enemies, they must look for their Deliverance in their own Courage, with
a Resolution not to outlive that Day, which, if lost, would put an End to all
the Glory purchased by their Ancestors, to their own Felicity, and that of all
their Posterity.

Rosinski on the other hand, the Demetrian General, was not wanting to inflame
the Courage of his Soldiers, by representing to them: That the Muscovites which
they saw before them, were the Remnants of those whom they had so often beaten
with a much less number; witness their late Engagement with Misinowski, whom,
to their eternal Glory, they had droven from his advantageous Post,
notwithstanding the inequality of their number. That therefore they should not
be startled at their Enemies, who, tho much more numerous, were, for the most
part, an undisciplined Rabble, terrible only in outward Appearance, the rest,
who so lately had experience of their invincible Courage, scarce daring to look
their Conquerours in the face. He desired them to remember the Slaughter of
that Countrymen in cold Blood, against all the Laws of Hospitality, by that
very same Rabble, whom they were now going to Engage; that their Blood crying
for Vengeance, they had now the fairest Opportunity in the World, to take the
most ample Satisfaction from those barbarous Wretches, and to punish them for
their Cruelties. He concluded That they ought to consider, that the Conquest of
whole Muscovy, depended upon the points of their Swords, and that one day's
labor would put them into Possession of a vast Empire, and all the Riches and
Treasure of their Enemies, be the Reward of the Victory.

Rosinski finding a great eagerness in his Soldiers to Engage, led them on
straight to the Enemy, whom they attacked with an unparalleled Bravery, and
forced them several times to shrink before the daring Poles; but being
continually re^^forced with fresh Supplies, they maintained the^ Ground in
spite of the Bravery of the Demetrians, so that the Success of the Battle
remained doubtful for a great part of the Day. But it is to be observed, that
the Cosacks (in the same manner as Zaporius did some years before, when he
fought Hodwen the Borisian General) had placed all their Boys, and other
Attendants belonging to the Baggage* with some Soldiers, enough to make up a
Front, at some distance behind the Line of Battle; these upon a Signal, agreed
betwixt them, advanced during the heat of the Battle, with their Colors
flying, Drums beating, and Trumpets sounding; which the Muscovites, who were
already scarce able to sustain the Fury of the Poles, having perceived, and
believing it to be a Body of Reserve, coming to attack them afresh, they began
to give Ground; which the Polish Horse being sensible of, they renewed the
Charge with so much Bravery, that in less than an Hours time, they forced the
Muscovian Cavalry to quit the Field in great disorder^. Zuski's Army entirely
routed.
The Infantry being thus exposed, both in Front and Flank, were soon put to an
entire Rout, with a great Slaughter, being bereaved of their Horse to cover
their Retreat; so, that out of this vast Army, there were not five hundred left
that quitted the Field in a Body; except five thousand, who saved themselves in
the City of Belchow, but were in a few days after forced to surrender at
discretion to Demetrius, who falling into the same Error as Zuski did before
with the Cosacks, took them into Pay, and received the same Reward from their
hands, as we shall see anon.

Demetrius being by so signal a Victory, become Master of the Field, and the
whole Camp, Cannon and Baggage of the Enemy, what wonder, if all the adjacent
Places followed the Fortune of the Conqueror, unto whom they opened their
Gates, without the least Opposition; unless it were Mo^^^sko, and two or three
more, who had Courage enough to make some show of Resistance, but at the
approach of the Victorious Army, surrendered also at Discretion.

Having thus opened his way to the Capital City of Musco, he directed his March
thither, not questioning but that the Terror of his last Victory, would have so
strong an influence over the disheartened Citizens, as to make them open their
Gates at his first arrival before the City. It is n^ difficult thing to
imagine, that the Loss of so vast an Army, on which seemed to depend the Fate
of the whole Empire, must needs put that City; upon the approach of the
Conqueror, into such a Consternation, as is not easy to be expressed. But
besides the presence of their Great Duke Basili* Zuski, who in this extremity
of his Affairs, was not wanting by all means possible to inspire Courage into
his dejected Subjects; there were two things which contributed not a little to
the Resolution of^ the Citizens, to adhere to Zuski to the last Extremity. The
first was, That Demetrius, in lieu of Marching directly to the City of Musco,
trifled a^ way his Time in the more Northern Province^ where the Poles rambling
up and down the Country, were often intercepted by the Muscovites, who in the
mean while* had leisure given them, to recover themselves out of their first
Fright, and to take such measures as were most suitable to the present
Condition of their Affairs. The second was the Perfidiousness of these five
thousand Mus^^vites, who, after their Surrender at Bolchow, had^ taken Service
under Demetrius, and, now having watched their Opportunity, left him again, and
went over to Zuski, unto whom they gave an Account of the whole Condition of
the Army, assuring him, that the Poles were not near so formidable nor
numerous, as represented to them by Fame; and that it would be no difficult
matter for the City to defend it self against them, till be^^^ reinforced with
fresh Supplies out of the more (...) mote Provinces of the Kingdom, they might
meet with a more favorable Opportunity to remove them from their Walls.

This relation, and the delays of Demetrius, having put new Courage into the
frighted Citi^^ns, it was resolved, with what Forces they could assemble in
haste, to post themselves in a very advantageous Place, on the borders of the
Province of Severia, thereby to cut off all Communication betwixt the Poles and
the Southern Provinces of Muscovy, bordering* on Lithuania, from whence they
must be supplied with Men, and all other Necessaries for the carrying on of the
War.

The Poles were not a little sta^tled at this vigorous Refolution of the
Muscovites, whom they believed to have been lost past all recovery; but having
no other way left them to secure their Retreat, and to keep open the
communication with their own Country, than their Swords, they resolved to make
an Amends for their ill Conduct, by their Bravery. Having therefore drawn back
their Army from the more Northern Parts, to the South side of the City of
Musco, they marched to the Frontiers of Severia, where having with a most
gallant Resolution either to vanquish or to die, The Muscovites defeated.
attacked those Forces in their advantageous Post, they put them to the rout,
and thus having opened their Passage, they pitched their Tents near the City of
Tusin, betwixt the two Rivers, Tusin and Moska, which in a manner surrounded
and secured their Camp.

Being now become more and more sensible of their Error, Musco blocked up by
Demetrius.
in having neglected to make themselves Masters before of so advantageous a
Post, which in all likelihood would have proved fatal to that City during the
first Consternation, they by frequent Excursions endeavored to repair their
first Fault; by which they so enclosed the Citizens within their Walls, that
scarce a Man durst appear at any distance from the Town. The Inhabitants seeing
themselves thus reduced to great Scarcity, as being very near quite shut up by
the frequent Excursions of the Poles, and seeing themselves in no Capacity at
present to drive them from their advantageous Post, it was resolved to try*
whether by certain Proposals of Peace, they might not disunite the Poles in the
Camp of Demetrius.

They had ever since the last Massacre of the Poles, detained the Polish
Ambassadors, and the Weywod^ of Sendomiria, with his Daughter, the Great
Duchess Marina, Prisoners; and as they did not question that they were very
desirous of their Liberty, so, they believed they might make use of them as fit
Instruments to encompass their Design. It was not the Reconciliation with the
Poles they aimed at, but knowing the Nature of the Poles to be unstable, they
hoped by this Artifice, to (...) time, at least till the arrival of those
Supplie^, which were raising for their Relief in the Northern Provinces, by
Knez Basili Masalski, a near K^^man to the Great Duke Basili Zuski.

To obtain this end, a Treaty of Peace was proposed to the Polish Ambassadors
and the Wey wode of Sendomiria, and that in the mean while, to remove all
Obstacles, a Cessation of Arms should be agrreed on for a certain Time. The Wey
wode of Sendomiria being very willing to lay hold of this Opportunity, to free
himself from his Captivity, sent one of his best Friends into the Camp of
Demetrius, to make these Proposals, and in case of Refusal, to endeavor to
persuade the Poles to separate themselves from Demetrius, and to cease from
committing any Hostilities, which in all likelihood might prove an obstac^e to
the Conclusion of the Peace, and consequently to his Liberty.

But the Poles in the Demetrian Camp, not measuring their Interest by that of
the Weywode, but by the Success of Demetrius, from whence they hoped to reap
the fruits of their past Labors, were so (...) from harkening to these
Propositions, that they would not as much as enter upon the least Co^merce of a
Treaty, unless it were granted as a Preliminary Article; That Demetrius should
be immediately restored to the Throne, and the Usurper Zuski, to be delivered
up into their hands.

The Muscovites finding themselves disappointed in their Expectation, had no
other Means left to secure themselves, but to repel Force with Force; For which
end, having dispatched frequent Messengers to Basili Masalski, whom we
mentioned before, to hasten to their Relief; he, pursuant to the reiterated
Orders from Court, marched with his Army which consisted of near fourscore
thousand Men, toward the City of Musco, where, having entrenched himself upon
the Banks of the River Chodiunka about a League from the City, he hoped to meet
with a favorable Opportunity to dislodge the Demetrians, or at least to annoy
them, and hinder their frequent Excursions.

But Ro^inski, who was not insensible of the Inconveniences which must needs
be occasioned by the nearness of so great an Army to his Camp, resolved to beat
up their Quarters with the first Opportunity. For which purpose he drew his
Army out of the Lines, unperceived of the Enemy by favor of the Night, The
Zu^ki^n Army ro^ted.
and having approached the Enemies Camp, over-secure in their Number and
nearness to the City, attacked them in their Entrenchments with such Fury, that
in a few hours they killed near Twenty thousand upon the Place, the rest
escaping to the City, leaving among the Prisoners their General in the Hands of
the Enemy.

The Poles, who had purchased so signal a Victory with the loss of very few of
their Men, had almost dearly paid for it at last. For, having dispersed
themselves all over the Fields without the least Order or any Guard to secure
them, and being thus engaged in the Pillage of the dead Bodies and the Enemies
Camp; the Muscovites at break of day, having been advertised of the Disorder
they were in, ^^lly'd their scattered Troops, Kally again.
and being reinforced with fresh Supplies out of the City, returned to the
Charges, and renewing the Combat, fell every where upon the victorious Poles
before they had time to put themselves in a Posture of receiving the Enemy, so
that there was nothing but Disorder, Confusion and Slaughter to be seen all
over the Field, and the Muscovites were upon the point of snatching the Victory
out of the Hands of their Conquerours, who began to prepare to save themselves
by Flight, had it not been for their Generals who coming in timely with a small
Body of Horse to their Assistance, both by their Words and Example encouraged
them either to vanquish or to die. They appeared in every place where they
found their Presence most necessary, to animate the Soldiers oppressed by the
Number of their Enemies, they told them that being surrounded on all sides,
they must put all their Hopes of Relief on the Points of their Swords; they
represented to them, how ignominious it would be, to be routed by those they
had so lately vanquished, and to suffer themselves to be robbed of the Fruits
of their Victory; so, that partly out of Shame, partly out of Despair, they
first began to make good their Ground, and then, being animated with Revenge,
they fell with such fury upon the Muscovites, The Zuskians beaten a second time.
that at last they forced them to retreat, and thus in one day gained a double
Victory over their Enemies.

The Reputation of which, being improved by Fame, not only some of the most
remote Provinces of the Muscovian Empire, sent their Deputies to make their
Submission to Demetrius, but he was also daily supplied with fresh Recruits out
of Poland, besides a Body of 4000 new-raised Horse, under the Command of
Zlarowski and Sapiha.

The Muscovites on the other Hand having scarce left a sufficient Number out of
their vast Armies to defend the City of Musco, and seeing Demetri^^ increase in
Strength daily, were forced to have (...) course to new Counsels; For which
Reason they once more addressed themselves to the Polish Ambassadors, and the
Weywode of Sendomiria, who were as yet in their Custody: Unto these they
promised Golden Mountains, if by their Interest at the Polish Court they could
prevail with Sigismund, King of Poland, to recall his Subjects out of the
Service of this Pseudo-Demetrius.

The Ambassadors and the Weywode gladly accepted their offers, but being very
desirous of their Liberty, told them that, they did not question if Matters
were truly represented to the King, he might in time be induced to draw off his
Supplies from Demetrius; But that, as his Interest at Court was backed by some
of the Chiefest Men of the Kingdom, and in great Esteem with the King himself,
so it was not to be supposed, that they should be able to prevail against their
Power, when absent, which perhaps, when present, they might do without much
Difficulty, by representing to the Court the true State of the Case, and the
Imposture of Demetrius. They represented to them, how advantageous it would be
to their Affairs, in detecting the whole Intrigue of this supposititious
Demetrius, if Marina in Person appeared at Court, and by her own Confession
confirmed the Death of her Lord, which would put the Imposture of this
Pretender beyond all question, and, without doubt, contribute more than all
other Endeavors toward the recalling of the Poles out of the Service of the
Impostor.

The Muscovites did not very well relish these Propositions, being unwilling to
part with their Prisoners upon so easy Terms; But being at last overruled by
the Speciousness of their alleged Reasons, and much more by the absolute
Necessity of their Affairs, they were at last forced to comply with the Desires
of these Polish Lords, unto whom, as well as to Marina, Marina and her Father
set at liberty.
they granted their Liberty, under Condition, that they should undertake to
oblige the King of Poland to draw back the Army of his Subjects, which lay
encamped under the Walls of the City of Musco. They were not sparing in their
Promises, so that every thing being agreed on betwixt them, they were in a few
days after, permitted to depart under a Guard of five hundred Horse, to defend
them against the Parties of Demetrius, that were continually abroad in great
Numbers.

This Treaty had not been managed with so much Secrecy, but that Demetrius, who
was not without his Spies within the City, had got Scent of it, by whose Means
also having got Notice of the Day of their Departure, and judging, not without
great Reason, how disadvantageous their Presence at the Polish Court might
prove to his Affairs; and on the other hand considering, that nothing could
contribute more at this time toward the Strengthening of his Party, than if,
by joining their Interest with his, he could bring them over to his Side, and
engage Marina to own him for her Husband; he sent out Zlarowski with fifteen
hundred Horse to intercept their Passage. Zlarowski, having been before hand
informed which way they were to pass, had not marched above two Hours before he
met with them, and having ordered five or six hundred of his Horse to face the
Muscovites who guarded the Polish Lords, he in Person, with a few of his
Officers, were advancing to address themselves to Marina and the Weywode her
Father; But the Zuskian Horse, at the first sight of the Poles, whom they saw
much stronger than themselves, looked for their Safety in the Swiftness of
their Horses, making the best of their Way toward Musco, and leaving the Poles
committed to their Charge, at the Disposal of their Countrymen, Zlarowski
making his Addresses to Marina, Are intercepted and conducted to Demetrius.
complemen^ed her in the Name of Demetrius, telling her, that he was sent to
invite them to his Camp, being ambitious not to let slip so favorable an
Opportunity of delivering them out of the Hands of their Enemies. Marina and
the Weywode were at some uncertainty what to answer (...) but seeing themselves
in no Capacity of making any Resistance, they returned Zlarowski Thanks for his
Care and Vigilance, and with a seeming Gladness went forward to the Polish
Camp, where they were presented, immediately after their Arrival, to Demetrius
Those of a more refined judgment looked upon this proceeding of Demetrius as a
gross Mistake in Point of Policy, to admit Mar^^^ and the Polish Lords, who
were quite unprepared for an Interview of this nature, into his Presence* For
Marina, as well as her Father and the Ambassadors, being surprised at first
sight, to see this Demetrius differ very much from the Great Duke, slain in the
City of Musco, betrayed their dissatisfaction sufficiently, both in their
Countenances, and the strangeness of their behavior toward him; which having
been observed as well by Demetrius himself, as some others that were present at
the Interview, he thought it most advisable to send them to another Quarter of
the Camp, with Orders not to take notice, that they had been seen by him;
hoping thus to hush up the former Passage, till they could concert new Measures
to carry on the Intrigue to their mutual Advantage.

But an Error of this Nature being not so soon corrected, the manner of this
interview could not be hid from some of the more quick-sighted; and among
others had not escaped the particular Observance of Kniasus Masalski, a Kinsman
both to the routed General of that Name, and to Zuski himself, who was ever
since the last Defeat detained a Prisoner in the Camp.

He having watched his opportunity a few days after, made his Escape, and got
into the City; where he related to Zuski and the Muscovites, the Doubts which
had at the first interview with Demetrius, appeared in Marina's Countenance and
Carriage; all which he represented, with so much Dexterity, and in terms so
lively and natural, that the Muscovites being fully persuaded of the Imposture,
unanimously resolved to adhere to Zuski to the last Extremity, and rather to
endure any thing, than to submit themselves under the Government of an
Impostor, imposed upon them by the Contrivances of their mortal Enemies the
Poles.

Zuskis seeing the People thus confirmed in his In^erest; by the prejudice they
had conceived against the Person of his Rival, bethought himself of a certain
States-Trick, by which he hoped to render the Fallacy of his Adversary so
evident to the Muscovites, as that there should be no room left for any further
Doubt, to be made upon that score. He deputed some Persons of the first Quality
and great esteem among the Muscovites to Vgletz, to disinterr the Body of the
Prince Demetrius, which had lain there fifteen years, in order to have it
conveyed to Musco, to be deposited in the Sepulcher of the Grand Dukes of
Muscovy. Scarce was the Body taken out of the Ground, but it was very
industriously spread abroad and insinuated into the Muscovites (who without the
least difficulty receive an Impression which savours of Superstition) that it
had wrought most surprising Miracles, as had been found by the experience of
some diseased Persons, who had touched it by chance. They had been very careful
in having at hand some suborned Lame and Blind, who upon the first touch of it
went away upright and clear-sighted; besides a great many other pretended
Distempers, otherwise incurable, which were removed in an instant by the
miraculous Virtue of this Body. They had also taken particular care to bring a
Body, which having not been long under Ground, was as yet uncorrupted; so, that
the Veneration of the Superstitious People being heightened, when they found it
entire after fifteen Years Burial, it was looked upon as a Crime deserving no
less than Death, to question the Truth of this Fable; for which reason also the
People made their Addresses to Zuski, desiring that it might remain
disinterr'd, till a Temple could be built, where it should be reverenced as a
Saint; which at their Importunity was granted them by the Great Duke for that
time.

But not long after wisely considering with himself, that such gross
Absurdities could not be long hidden from the Eyes of the most quick-sighted,
and fearing, lest the Cheat should be discovered, to his Confusion, and the no
small detriment of his Affairs, he caused the Body of this Saint to be
suddenly, but very solemnly interred among the Tombs of the Great Dukes; to
appease the Murmurs of the common People, it was published by Zuski's Order;
that though he did not discommend their Zeal for their Prince, whose Memory ought
ever to be sacred among them; nevertheless that, having observed his Subjects
to pay the same Veneration to a mortal Creature, which was only due to the
immortal Creator, he had taken this Resolution to deposite his Body amongst his
Ancestors, rather than to be instrumental in drawing upon himself and his
Subjects the Vengeance of God Almighty at this time of imminent Danger, when
they stood most in need of his Mercy.

But it is time to return to the Camp, where we have left Marina and her Father
to recover themselves of their first Surprise, occasioned by the Interview, we
have mentioned before. These having in the mean while had sufficient leisure to
consult with some of their intimate Friends, what was best to be done in the
present Emergency of their Affairs, whether to accept the Offers of this new
modeled Demetrius (who had not been wanting by his Emissaries to insinuate
unto them his Pretensions, as far as the Nature of so nice a Thing would admit
of) or to reject them with Scorn, and by the Interest of their Friends in the
Camp, to endeavor their Return to the Court of Sigismund, King of Poland. They
were not a little divided in their Opinions. Some of them represented to
Marina, how ignominious it would be for a Person of her Extraction and Dignity,
to throw herself away upon an unknown Vagabond, whom she herself knew to be an
Impostor, and set up by the Poles, for no other End, than to serve their own
Turn of revenging themselves upon Zuski and the Muscovites, which when they had
effected, and found themselves strong enough to maintain their Interest in
Muscovy without him, they would be sure to cast off, and throw him upon the
Dunghill, with no less difficulty than they had taken him up. That the Zuskians
would not fail to improve the whole to her disadvantage, and to allege against
her, that she had married a mean Wretch, and a suborued Property, in hopes to
satisfy her own Ambition, and to gratify the Ends of a third Party. On the
other hand, it was urged, that there being no great likelihood that the Poles
should abandon his Interest, more than they had done that of the former, as
being founded upon the same bottom, and linked together by a mutual Interest,
the most indissoluble Knot of all humane Affairs, no sufficient Reason could be
alleged, why she should not as well own this Demetrius as the former, being
both, equally doubtful, as to their Descent, in relation to the Great Duke,
John Basilovits; and, that, since she had once had the Misfortune of throwing
herself into the Arms of an Impostor, she might, with the same Reason, not
refuse the Embraces of a Second, when no less than the Crown of so vast an
Empire lay at stake. That, supposing his Birth to be inferior to that of the
other Demetrius, he was just upon the point of accomplishing his Design; and
that the Muscovites* reduced to the utmost Extremities, as soon as they were
informed of her having owned him for her Husband, would not be long before they
would receive him for their Emperor, and place him in the Throne of Muscovy.
That the Crown would soon wipe off all the Stain of his ignoble Birth, were it
never so base and sordid, and exalt him to the same degree with the most
illustrious Monarchs of the World. Besides that, if she refused him, she must
run a great risque of her Reputation, it being beyond all question, that
Demetrius and his Friends, to put the better Color upon their Pretensions,
would not fail to publish to the World; That ind^ed she had formerly been his
Wife, but that since, he had Repudiated her, by reason of her Incontinency.

Marina having well weighed all the Reasons alleged on both sides, as Ambition
was the most predominant. Passion in her Soul, and that she had once tasted of
the Sweets of a Crown, she inclined to the Advice of those, who were of
Opinion, that, since she had once sat upon the Throne of Russia, she ought not
to let slip any Means, though never so difficult, to recover it. This
Consideration being the most prevailing with the Lady, who flattered herself,
with the hopes of better Success in this, than the former Marriage, she
resolved to set aside all Scruples, to accommode herself to the present
ticklish. Juncture of time, and not to let slip this Opportunity to re-ascend
the Throne of Muscovy, which she had lost before, almost as soon as she was in
Possession of it. This Resolution having soon been communicated to Demetrius;
as the whole Business was a Design of a popular Nature, so it was thought most
advisable to be transacted in view of the whole Army; the better to blind the
World, and to put some Color upon the delay of this public Interview, it was
given out, That the Great Duchess Marina, had been indisposed for these ten
days last past, ever since her arrival in the Camp, and that being now
recovered, Demetrius was going to conduct her to his Tent.

The whole Army therefore being drawn out into the Field, Marina receiv^d by
Demetrius.
with all the great Officers in their respective Stations, Demetrius
accompanied by all the Nobility of both Nations there present, by all the
Foreign Ambassadors and Deputies or the revolted Provinces, went on Horseback
to meet her in the open Field, where being met, they both, at some Yards
distance did alight, he from his Horse, she out of her Coach; Having received
one another with open Arms, they intermingled their Kisses with Tears, and with
Expressions so tender, so passionate, and so natural, that it was impossible
even for the most quick-sighted so much as to suspect an Interview so solemn
and passionate, to be artificial; especially when they saw the Lady Marina,
after the first Caresses were past, pay to Demetrius the highest Reverence and
Marks of a most profound Esteem, as she had before given him the most
passionate Testimonies of an unfeigned Love, and the most sincere Affection;
whilst Demetrius could do nothing else than repay these Endearments with his
repeated Embraces.

After some time spent in those mutual Caresses, Demetrius made his particular
Application to the Weywode of Sendomiria, the Father of Marina, unto whom he
told, That next to the Recovery of his Dear Spouse out of the Hands of those
barbarous Wretches, nothing could be more pleasing to him at this time, than to
see himself in a Condition to make him in Person the Acknowledgments due to him
for all the Honors he had received at his Hands. He put him in mind, that, as
he had been the first who had given real Encouragement to his undertaking, by
publicly espousing his Interest in Poland, so he had ever since been the
constant Companion of all his Labors and the various Vicissitudes of Fortune,
till that unhappy Separation on the sixteenth day of May, occasioned by the
Contrivances of their most barbarous Enemies. He concluded, that the same
propitious Fate, which had so miraculously preserved him from falling into
their Hands, and now bad once more blessed him with the sight of those Persons he
loved and reverenced most in the World, in spite of all the malicious
Endeavors of their implacable Enemies, seemed already by its auspicious
Influence to have directed his Path, by which to re-ascend his Throne, to
enable him to pay his real Acknowledgments to his Friends, and to put his
Enemies to Shame and Confusion.

The Weywode, after having returned his most humble Thanks to Demetrius for
putting so high a Value upon his Services, for which he owned himself
sufficiently rewarded by having honored his Family with his Alliance, in
marrying his Daughter, and the public Acknowledgement given just now in the
Presence of so many great and brave Men, failed not to insert some remarkable
Passages common to them both since their first Attempt of entering Muscovy with
an Army; and concluded, that he had all the Reason to believe, that the same
Power which had been so instrumental in preserving them from so many Dangers,
and surmounting all these Difficulties, would crown all their past Labors in a
little time with a happy End.

To be short, the Lady played so naturally the Innocent, her Father so
ingeniously the Politician, and Demetrius himself personated so artificially
the real Grand Duke, that all three acting their Parts to the Life, drew Tears
from the Eyes of the Spectators, the most subtle and quick-sighted being
constrained, even against their Inclination, to rest satisfied in such apparent
Testimonies of a well-grounded Love and Friendship, as all the rest* however
wavering before, were now confirmed of the Reality of Demetrius to be past all
Dispute. The whole Ceremony being ended in the Field with all the Dexterity
imaginable, they marched in great Pomp, under the Acclamations of the whole
Army to Demetrius his Tent.

The Rumor of this extraordinary Interview having been soon spread all over
the neighboring Provinces, and from thence throughout the whole Empire; the
Muscovites ca^^e flocking to the Camp from all Parts; and the most remote
Provinces sent their Deputies to make their Submission to Demetrius, scarce any
standing out, except Smolensko, with its Capital City of the same Name, and a
few others* so that the Camp was abundantly supplied with all manner of
Provisions out of the circumjacent Parts. Things being in this Posture, it was
resolved to render the whole Camp more convenient, and accommodate it against
the approaching Winter; For which purpose there was not only a very magnificent
Structure (after the Muscovite Fashion) erected for the Great Duke and Great
Duchess; but there was scarce a Person of Qualty, or Officer of Note, who had
not a House prepared for his Dewlling Place, with all the Conveniences that
could be had, in a well regulated City, the whole Camp being divided into
several goodly Streets, with a Market, and other public Places; the common
Soldiers being lodged in Huts, well provided against the approaching
Winter-Season. The whole was encompassed with a very strong Line, fortified at
certain distances with Redoubts, and good store of Cannon, so that it had the
resemblance of a very large and strongly fortified City.

The Inhabitants of Musco, though not a little disheartened by the general
Defection of the Country, and the Neighborhood of the Enemy, who by the
countenance of their Camp seemed to be resolved not to quit the Enterprise at
an easy rate, yet did not lose Courage, and finding themselves deprived of all
Means to draw Supplies out of their own Country, they had recourse to the same
Policy, which Boris Goudenou intended to have made use of against the Poles, if
he had not been prevented by his sudden Death. They were sufficiently sensible,
that Charles, then King of Sweden, who had found Means to exclude his Nephew
Sigismund, then King of Poland, and lawful Heir to the Crown of Sweden, from
that Crown, would be glad of any Opportunity to stop the Progress of the Poles,
to prevent their becoming Masters of the Empire of Muscovy, which would
infallibly open them the way into the Swedish Territories. They applied
themselves therefore to the beforementioned King Charles, who, upon their
Request, sent them considerable Supplies, and first checked the course of the
Victories of the Poles, which gave such Encouragement to many other Provinces
of Muscovy, that being tired with the Insolences and Exactions of the
Demetrians, they shook off the Polish Yoke, and these being thus entangled in
new Difficulties, when they thought themselves upon the point of accomplishing
their Design, fell into Dissentions, by the mismanagement of Sigismund King of
Poland, which at last proved fatal, both to Demetrius, and the Polish Affairs
in Muscovy, which was thus unexpectedly delivered from its Enemies; when in all
Humane Appearance, they were ready to triumph over them; as it will
sufficiently appear out of the Sequel of this History.

For, when the Poles saw the Muscovites reduced to the greatest straights that
could be, by these intestine Dissensions, raised and fomented by their
Contrivance, they judged now to have met with a favorable Opportunity to make
themselves Masters of that vast Empire. For which reason, the Senate of the
Kingdom of Poland, represented to their King Sigismund, how easy it would be
for him, at this critical Juncture, to gives Laws to both Parties in that
divided Empire, if he would show himself at the Head of a considerable Army,
which was ready at hand in Poland, to march upon his first Orders, into Russia,
where they might live upon the Country, whereas they must now be maintained at
the Charge of the Republic. Besides the benefit he would reap from this
Expedition, in giving Laws to the Muscovites, and purging the Kingdom of Poland
of a great number of Vagabonds and idle Persons, the remnants of their late
civil Dissensions, it would be a glorious Work, to revenge the barbarous Murder
of so many of his Subjects, and the detaining of his Ambassadors. The Chief
thing objected was; that the Truce made some Years ago betwixt both Nations was
not expired; But this Objection was soon answered, considering that the
Muscovites had been the first, who violated it in Massacring the Poles against
all Laws of Hospitality, and detaining their Ambassadors, against the Law of
Nations; but, supposing this to be insufficient, the specious Pretense
Sigismund might make use of in appearing for Demetrius, their lawful Great Duke
in Possession of the greatest Part of the Empire, against the Usurper of his
Crown and Right, would take off the Blame of the Violation of the Truce in the
eyes of the World.

King Sigismund, being swayed by these important Considerations, alleged by
his Council, at last determined to invade Muscovy with an Army, to be commanded
by himself. In order to this Design, every thing being got ready with all
possible speed, he put himself at the Head of an A^my, consisting of
thirty-thousand Men, and in the Year 1609, King Sigismund (...) Muscovy.
in August, passing the River Borysthenes, entered the Territories of Muscovy.
It is without all dispute, that* if, pursuant to the Advice of the Senate and
his Council, he had marched directly to the City of Musco, and in conjunction
with the Demetrian Army, attacked that City, or at least blocked it up more
closely than before; the Inhabitants who were already reduced to great Straits
for want of all manner of Necessaries, would soon have been forced to abandon
Zuski, and to embrace his Party; which done* it would have been no difficult
Matter to suppress Demetrius, by drawing from his side the Cosacks and Poles
(the main, if not the only Strength of his Army) by great Rewards; and thus,
either to render himself absolute Master of the whole Empire, or at least, by
coming to a composition with Demetrius, to unite all the Muscovian Provinces,
bordering on Lithuania and Poland with his Crown. But instead of following
these wholesome Counsels, he took quite contrary measures, which rendered his
whole Design abortive, and lost his Son Vladislaus the Crown of Muscovy, as he
himself, by his own mismanagement had lost that of Sweden. It had been
insinuated to him, that if he would march to Smolensko, the Capital of the
Province of the same name, it would be surrendered into his hands at his first
appearing before it. This City, which is seated on the Banks of the
Borysthenes, and surrounded with a very good Wall of Stone and Brick, was in
those days much larger than it is now, it having been much altered from its
former Beauty and Wealth by the various Chances of War; and though it had no
outworks or Ditch, yet this Defect was supplied by a very numerous Garrison,
consisting of thirty thousand Men, besides the Inhabitants, whose number
amounted to as many, if not more, that were able to bear Arms; The Weywode or
Governor of the Place, was one Michael Sehin, an intimate Friend of Zuski, who
being sufficiently provided with Ammunition, Artillery, Provisions, and all
other Necessaries for a long Siege, was resolved to defend it to the last drop
of Blood, knowing it to be the only place of Importance in the whole Empire,
which remained steadfast in the Interest of Zuski* Sigismund being misguided by
some of his flattering Courtiers, as soon as he had passed the Borysthenes,
resolved upon an hasty March, and being cajoled into a Belief, that he was
rather going to receive than force Smolensko, leaving all his Cannon behind
him, marched with all possible speed toward that City. He was no sooner come
in sight of it, but ^he found himself miserably mistaken, both in his
Intelligence and Purpose; the Garrison making a furious* Sally upon him, and
being afterward summoned to surrender by Sapiha, the Chancellor of Lithuania,
the Weywod^ Sehin rejected his Offers with Scorn. There were not a few at that
time in the Army, who advised the King not to hazard his Army in the Siege of a
Place, which being provided with a numerous Garrison, and resolute in its
Defense, would prove a work of great difficulty to gain; but to take hold of
this favorable Juncture, which invited him to Musco, the Capital City of the
Empire, before they were reinforced with the Swedish Auxiliaries; but the
Opinion of the Lithuanian Chancellor and his Friends, was most prevailing, who
remonstrated, that a few Months would reduce so great a Multitude, however well
provided at present, to distress, when restrained from Forageing and bringing
in Provisions, or at the worst, that a vigorous Attack would in a little time,
bring them to better terms; by which the King having secured himself a safe
Retreat, might with the less danger march to the Capital City of Musco.
Pursuant to this Resolution, the King ordered all the Avenues and Passages
leading to the City, to be taken up by his Cavalry, and afterward by making a
Line of Circumvallation, to cut off all Communication betwixt the Garrison and
the Country. But having not long after received certain Intelligence, that the
Place being provided with great store of all Necessaries, this Attempt would in
all likelihood prove abortive, they altered their* Resolution, it being judged
most advisable, to change the Blockado into a formal Siege.

For which purpose, Sigismund besieges Smolensko.
the King having ordered his Cannon for Battery, and other Instruments for a
Siege to be carried thither out of Lithuania, the City was besieged in due
form. The King's attack was carried on, on the West Side of the place, his
quarters extending from the Banks of the River Borysthenes to the South. The
attack of the Cosacks was on the East Side, their Quarters reaching from the
South to the same River. The Sieur Potocki, Palatine of Braclow, had his Post
assigned him on the North-side; on the opposite shore of the Borysthenes, to
prevent any Succors from coming to the Relief of the Town that way. But the
Besiegers advanced but slowly in their Works for want of Foot; for, though the
King had late^y received a reinforcement of five thousand Cosacks, yet there
being not above ten thousand Foot in his whole Army (which according to the
Custom of the Polanders, was chiefly composed of Horse) these bearing no
proportion to so numerous a Garrison, they were continually harrassed by the
frequent Sallies of the Besieged, who often drove them from their Trenches,
before they could be seconded by their Horse. Their approaches being thus
carried on, not without great difficulty, a considerable time was spent, before
they could possess themselves of some advantageous Posts near the Walls of the
City, which being very convenient for the Besiegers to fetch in their Supplies
of fresh Water, put them to some Distress that way, yet not so, but that they
had sufficient Opportunity to furnish themselves with it in the nightime,
without being perceived by the Enemy, by reason of the nearness of the River.
Thus the Siege continued with abundance of Toil, but small Success; the King,
who now began to be sensible of his Error, being resolved upon a Punctilio of
Honor, not to leave the Place till it were reduced, cost it what it would; so
that many of the Poles, but especially of the Cosacks, paid with their Lives
for their King's Obstinacy, who might have been employed with much more
Probability of Success against the City of Musco.

For, whilst the King was thus wasting his Forces before Smolensko; the
Zuskians having received Advice of the approach of the Swedish Troops, sent to
their Assistance, began to concert measures how to remove at a further distance
the Demetrian Forces, that had lain so long at their Doors. They were not
ignorant of the Inconveniences, which the Poles labored under in the
Demetrian Camp. They had sufficient Intelligence of their Divisions and
Animosities in their Councils, occasioned by the Multitude of their Chief
Commanders, who being swayed more by their particular Interest and Ambition,
than the Good of the common Cause, lost many times an Opportunity of annoying
the Enemy. This Instability in their Councils, caused much Carelessness in the
whole Conduct of their Affairs, which frequently turned to their great
Disadvantage, as it happned in May in the same Year, when a sharp Engagement
happening betwixt the Inhabitants of the City of Musco and the Demetrians, these
had at first the better of them; but making a disorderly Retreat, without the
least necessity, and falling to plunder the Dead, gave the Enemy opportunity to
Rally, and being reinforced with fresh Troops out of the City, they so
furiously charged the Poles, that they entirely ^outed them, most of their Foot
being either killed or taken Prisoners.

The Disgrace they received not long after at Twere must chiefly be ascribed to
their divided Counsels; For the Poles, having got Intelligence that the Swedish
Auxiliaries were marching toward Musco, sent Zlarowski with three thousand
^orse to observe their Motion, and to annoy them, if possible, in their March.
Zlarowski having had the good Fortune to surprise one of their Regiments, which
was advanced at some distance before the rest* he cut them all to pieces; This
so alarmed the Muscovites, who had put all the Hopes of their Sa^ety in these
Auxiliary Troops, that they marched out with their whole Strength, and joined
them near the City of Twere. The Poles, having got Notice of their March, sent
also a considerable Reinforcement to Zlarowski, who meeting them some* few
Miles beyond Twere, Engagement betwixt the Poles and Muscovites near Twere.
a fierce Engagement ensued, both Parties disputing the Victory with great
Obstinacy; The Polish Horse attacked the two Wings of the Enemies with an
irresistible Courage, and the Russians fighting for the last Stake, behaved
themselves like Men resolved either to overcome or die; notwithstanding which,
they were forced to give Ground, both Wings being after a bloody and obstinate
Fight routed by the Poles, who killed 8000 (among whom were 1000 German Horse*)
upon the Spot. But the Foot stood all this while unmovable, and had several
times made Zlarowski, who commanded the main Body of the Polish Army, give
Ground, and though now left by their Horse, had possessed themselves of an
advantageous Post, where they could not be attacked without great Disadvantage.
The Polish Horse being extremely tired by the Fatigues of the Day, and the
whole Army much inferior in Number to that of the Enemy, it was not thought
advisable to pursue them; but on the contrary, all the ablest and most
experienced Officers were of Opinion to rest contented with what Advantage they
had gotten, and to withdraw to some more advantageous Post. But Zlarowski,
emulo^s of the Honor the rest had gotten, would by no means consent to their
Advice, and being resolved to try his Fortune, whether he could in some Measure
recover the Disgrace he had received in that day's Action, would not stir from
his Post though exposed to the Enemies Cannon. So that the rest seeing him
resolute, and obstinate against their Counsels they quartered themselves in
some of the adjacent Villages. The Enemy having by some Deserters, got notice
what Effects their divided Counsels had produced, soon rallied their Horse* and
having rejoined their Foot, by break of Day* fell with such Fury upon the
Poles, that seeing themseves thus surprised, and in no Capacity to second one
another, they fought their Way through the Enemy, the Foot retiring to Twere, the
Horse making the best of their Way to their Camp near Musco, with the loss of a
great many of their Companions, and all their Artillery and Baggage.

The Muscovites* flushed with this happy Success, marched directly to Twere,
where they stormed the Castle at three several times with more Courage than
Conduct; for the Polish Foot which got before them within the Place, repulsed
them every time with great Slaughter; so that, despairing of carrying the
Place, by reason of its numerous Garrison, they raised the Siege, and directed
their march toward the River Wolga.

At some Miles distance from Kolasinum, A^^ther Engagement^ near Kolasinum.
they were encountered by a great Body of the Demetrian Horse, who falling in
their Rear, brought the whole Arrier-guard in Confusion, till seconded by some
fresh Regiments they forced the Poles to retire. Besides this, the
Licentiousness of their Discipline in the Demetrian Camp, had occasioned
several Seditions for want of Pay; so that Demetrius, to satisfy their
Demands, was forced to lay such heavy Taxations upon the Provinces which had
submitted to his Obedience, that at last becoming intolerable, most of the
great Cities revolted, and the Country refused to pay any further
Contributions, looking upon them as the Fuel that nourished the Flame which had
almost consumed them. In some Places they grew so outrageous as to seize,
imprison and kill the Tax-gatherers. Demetrius therefore to maintain his
Authority and to protect his Officers, being obliged to send strong Parties
into several Parts of the Country, his Forces in the Camp were consequently
reduced to so small* a Number, as not to suffice to check the strong Sallies
made by those of the City, much less to hinder them from being supplied with
all manner of Necessaries out of the Country; which having been several times
attempted by the Poles, they were as often baffled by the Muscovites, always
much superior to them in Number, and becoming every day more courageous, both
by the Assistance of their Foreign Auxiliaries, and their Success against the
Poles, whose General Rosinski, in one of the Sallies, the Dispute being very
hot, was shot in his side with an Arrow, of which he never perfectly recovered.
There is no question, but that if King Sigismund could as yet have been
prevailed upon to transfer his Arms from Smolensko to Musco, that by his
Authority these Divisions in the Demetrian Camp might have been soon composed,
and the Muscovites frighted by the Accession of so considerable a Force to
their Enemies, to have been brought to better Terms; but instead of that, he
absolutely resolved not to quit the Place till he had taken it, and his Army
being extremely weakened by the long Continuance of the Siege and the frequent
Sallies of a numerous Garrison, and not receiving sufficient Recruits out of
Poland, or at least not so opportunely as the urgent State of his Affairs
required, he took a Resolution to draw his Subjects out of the Service of
Demetrius, to come to his Aid at the Siege of Smolensko, which entirely ruined
all his affairs in Muscovy.

It was in vain, that his ablest Counselors, represented to him, that this
unseasonable distracting and weakening the Demetrian Party must needs turn to
the great Advantage of Zuski, who, when the City of Musco should be delivered
of the Enemy that lay at their Gates, would thereby be confirmed in his Throne;
that the circumjacent Provinces which were kept in awe by the Demetrian Army,
would soon revolt from him, and Zuski thus strengthened by the united Forces of
the Empire, would not fail to come to the Relief of Smolensko. That therefore
he ought rather to furnish Demetrius with new Supplies, or at least keep fair
with him, and by no means to distract his Forces till he had made himself
Master of Smolensko, which when taken, he might march without the Opposition to
Musco; there being no question but that all the Polish Forces, and the Places
in their Possession, by Promises of great Rewards would without Reluctance side
with him; which would infallibly oblige the Muscovites to fall off from Zuski,
and embrace his Party. It was also called in question, whether the Poles would
be prevailed upon to quit Demetrius, from whom they expected the Rewards of all
their Toils and Labors, especially since the exhausted Treasury of the
Commonwealth of Poland was not at present in a Condition to pay their Arrears.

But the King persisting in his Resolution, sent some of his Emissaries into
the Demetrian Camp, to endeavor by all means possible to persuade the Poles to
abandon the Interest of Demetrius, and to join with the King's Forces before
Smolensko. At first the King's Agents met with little Encouragement from the
Poles, who told them that they would not by such an untimely Desertion defraud
themselves of the fruit of their Labors, but persevere in their Faith which
they had sworn to Demetrius, and sent some Deputies to excuse their not joining
with the King's Forces before Smolensko. But Sigismund having promised them
their Arrears to be paid, and brought over Rosinski their General, Zlarowski,
and some others of the Chief Commanders, to his side, a great many of the
Soldiery promised to to be obedient to the Orders of their King and Chief
Commanders, and the rest seeing their* Affairs to be in a declining Condition
began to waver.

Demetrius, not a little terrified at these* Proceedings of King Sigismund, and
fearing, not without Reason, that these few Troops which remained faithful to
him might scarce be sufficient to rescue him out of the Hands of the Poles,
whom he believed to have an Intention to sacrifice him to their Avarice and
Interest, he resolved to withdraw secretly out of the Camp, and retire to a
Place of more Security. But before he came to this Extremity, he thought
convenient to try once more, whether by fair Means he could not prevail upon
Rosinski to stand steadfast to his Interest; but this having proved fruitless
notwithstanding all the most insinuating Rhetoric he could invent, there
passed very hot Words betwixt them; Demetrius upbraiding him with Treachery and
Breach of his Word; and Rosinski calling Demetrius an Impostor, and Son of a
Whore.

Demetrius, who would not have brook'd these Words at another time, was fain to
put up this Affront with Patience, seeing himself not in a Condition to revenge
them; Demetrius withdraws himself.
and not thinking himself any longer secure in a Place where he was treated
with so much Rudeness, he took Horse immediately after, and with a few of his
intimate Friends retired secretly to Caluga. No sooner was the Flight of
Demetrius known in the Camp, but all the Muscovite Boyars and Nobles that had
espoused his Interest followed him; and Marina, declared, that having not only
wedded the good Fortune of her Husband but also his Adversities, she would
follow him wherever he went.

The Polish Ambassadors employed all their Rhetoric, to persuade her to return
into Poland, vainly persuading themselves that her Separation from Demetrius,
would be no small Advancement to King Sigismund's Affairs; but she remained
unshaken in her Resolution, neither could she be prevailed upon to submit
herself to the King's Clemency; The re^^erated Persuasions and Prayers of her
Father* and some other of her most intimate Friends having no further Influence
over her Constancy and haughty Spirit, than to comply thus far with their
Desires, as to write a Letter to King Sigismund, wherein she told him, That
though she was abandoned at this time by most of her Friends, yet that, as she
had long ago been used to the sad Vi^^^situde^ of Fortune, so she lived still
in ^opes that the same God who had so often showed his Mercy in delivering her
from most imminent Dangers, and to whom she entirely recommended herself and
her Cause, would know his time when to put a happy End to her Sorrows and
Miserie^. She added, That for the present, being deprived of all her just Right
and Title to the Muscovian Throne, she relinquished all to his Majesty's
Disposal, and being well satisfied in his Equity and Generosity, she
congratulated his arrival in Muscovy, wishing him all the Success imaginable.
Atl last she recommended herself and her Family to his Royal Protection,
promising herself no less from his Generosity than, under what Circumstances
soever, to be treated by him according to her Dignity.

In the mean while, Demetrius his Letters arrived in the Camp, Mutiny in the
Demetrian Camp.
which being read publicly, all was in an Alarm and Tumult, no body knowing
what Resolution to take; some being for going to Sigismund, others for
following Demetrius, and a third Party siding with neither, being uncertain
what side to choose. The general Complaint was against Rosinski, by whose
Perfidiousness they said Demetrius had been forced to quit the Camp, whereby
the Soldiers should be deprived of the Reward of their Blood and Labors.

Marina taking advantage from their Animosities and Irresolution, appeared
among them like another Amazon, and with the Charms of her Words and Looks,
transported them beyond all bounds. She spoke to all she met, and calling such
of the Commanders, as she knew, by their Names: Is it possible, said she, that
you can be so over-seen as to flatter your self into a Belief, that Sigismund
will trouble himself to reward the Services done to another; It is from the
Great Duke Demetrius, you ought to expect your Stipend, and the full Reward of
all your past Labors; It is out of the Immense Treasure of the Russian Empire,
and the prodigious Riches, gathered by the present Usurper, and the Plunder of
the rebellious Muscovites, you ought to be recompensed for your undaunted
Courage; All these, if you persist in your faithfulness to Demetrius, will be
at your Disposal in a little Time; for you may rest assured, that he will think
no Recompense too great for those, to whose Fidelity and Courage he shall be
Indebted for his Crown.

These Words were like Fuel, added to a raging Flame; for a great many of the
Soldiers, but especially the Cosacks, declared they would follow the Fortunes
of Demetrius, and began to pack up their Baggage, in order to their departure.
Rosinski having in vain, endeavored to dissuade them from their Resolution,
caused the Trumpets to be sounded, being resolved, with a strong Body of Polish
Horse, to stop their Passage. But these persisting, both Parties had recourse
to Arms, the Cosacks endeavoring to break through the Polish Horse, so that a
bloody Conflict ensued, the Cosacks fighting like Lions, and the Poles having
the Advantage of their Horses, the greatest part of the Cosacks, opened their
way with their Swords, and marched without any further Opposition, directly to
Demetrius, at Caluga; some few ran over to the Muscovites in the City; the
rest, with their Commander in Chief, Zarucki, were forced to Retreat into the
Camp, till a more favorable Opportunity should present. There were near two
thousand killed in this Engagement on both sides.

Marina, during this Confusion, seeing she had effected what she proposed to
herself, being disguised in Man's Apparel, and fearing lest Rosinski should be
outrageous to her, if she stayed till the Engagement was over, she, attended
only by a few trusty Cosacks, and one Maid, made her Escape, and got safe to
her Husband at Caluga.

Before her departure, she writ a Letter, which she left in trusty Hands, to be
communicated, after her departure, to the Soldiery; wherein she inveighed, in
most bitter Terms, against Rosinski, telling them, that neither her Husband,
nor she being able any longer to resist the Insolence of the perfidious
Rosinski, had been forced to seek for shelter at Caluga, that, for her part,
nothing should have induced her to leave the Camp in that Distraction, if it
had not been to save her Honor, her Fame, and her Life. That she did not
question, but that the Great God the avenger of all Wrongs, would in due time
punish the flagitious Perfidy of Rosinski and his Adherents; and reward the
fidelity of those who remained constant to their Vows and Promises to
Demetrius; from whom they might assure themselves of all they could reasonably
desire, after the recovery of his Throne by their Assistance.

The Words of this Epistle being read to the Soldiery, sounded in their Ears no
otherwise than an Alarm Bell; every one ran to his Arms, and the General
Rosinski saw his Tent surrounded, in an instant, with whole Troops of
threatening Soldiers. Is it thee, cried they, Rosinski, that have by thy
Villainies and Insolence, forced the injured Marina to follow her Husband? ^Is
it thee, that by thy Perfideousness, have betrayed us, to rob us of the due
Rewards of our Labors? Either restore us our Prince, or be sure thou shall not
escape the hands of Justice; They had no sooner spoke these Words, but they
made several shots with their Pistols at him, so that, seeing himself in the
utmost danger, he made his escape into another Quarter. The revolted Party
those immediately o^e Tiskevitz for their General, dec^^^ing publicly, that
they would follow their old Lo^d, Demetrius; and cut all in pieces that should
oppose them. But, by the Authority and Vigilance of their new General, and the
rest of their Chief Officers, they were appeased for that time. But not many
days were past, when it having been spread about the Camp (as it is believed by
some of Demetrius's Messengers) that it was not safe to tarry longer there, in
the ^ight of an Enemy, who questionless, would improve these Divisions and
Animosities, to his Advantage; and, if not prevented by their sudden Retreat,
make himself a bloody Arbitrator of their Intestine Dissensions. The
consideration of so imminent a Danger, raised the Fury of the Soldiers to the
highest pitch, who cried out aloud, that Rosinski intended to sacrifice them to
his Ambition, and that they would begone immediately, and so they fell to
packing up their Baggage.

But it having been wisely considered, that if they should march out in
separate Bodies, the Enemy might easily intercept their Passage, or at least,
be very troublesome to them in their March; wherefore, it was resolved, by
mutual Consent, to keep together till they came to Volock, where every body
should be at his disposal, to take what way he found most convenient for his
Purpose.

According to this Resolution, The Demetrian Campbroke up.
they set Fire to their Camp, which for the regularity of its Streets, variety
of Structures, and all other Conveniences, resembled rather a great City, than
a Camp; all which being s^on consumed by the Flames, they marched in good
Order, with their Cannon, Bag and Baggage, to the abovementioned Place: where
Rosinski and Zlarowski, with some thousand Horse, and the remnants of the
Cosacks, having declared for King Sigismund; Sapiha, with all his Men, and such
others as were resolved to follow the Fortune of Demetrius, directed their
March to Caluga, where they were received with all the demonstrations of Joy,
their Fidelity deserved.

The Muscovites in the City had sufficient Information of the Dissentions that
reigned in the Camp, which they fomented under hand, keeping themselves close
within their Walls all this while; for fear, if they should attack them, they
might become sensible of their Error, and by the common danger that threatened
them, be reunited for their mutual Security; which succeeded so well, that
they saw the same puissant Army, which had given Laws to the whole Empire, for
the space of two Years, and reduced the Capital City it self, to the last
Extremity, to moulder away to nothing, by the intestine Dissensions of their
Generals, and the carelessness of their Martial Discipline; but more especially
by the mismanagement of Sigismund King of Poland; who by the unseasonable
Distractions, occasioned by his recalling the Poles out of the Demetrian Camp,
was the chief Instrument of the Deliverance of the Muscovites, to his great
Detriment; for, the Enemy, who before was scarce able to maintain himself
within the Walls of Musco, being now freed from that Thorn that stuck so deep
in his Flesh, soon gathered new Strength; for that the King, who might, if he
had given due Encouragement to have Demetrius, prosecuted the War at the
Expense and Danger of others, or at least, have shared both with them, by his
obstinate Perseverance in the Siege of Smolensko, drew the whole Burden of the
War upon his own Shoulders, and thus robbed himself of the Glory and Advantage
of making himself the Arbitrator betwixt both the contending Parties. This
memorable Siege was raised in the beginning of March, in the Year 1610.

The Citizens of Musco seeing themselves thus delivered from their troublesome
Neighbors, began now to assume new Courage and Vigor, and having driven the
Poles out of Peresla and Alexandria* most of the Provinces which were revolted
to Demetrius, now again declared for Zuski, offering considerable Supplies, and
promising their utmost Assistance in chasing the Poles out of Muscovy.

Zuski, having conceived new Hopes of S^ccess from the Zeal of his Subjects,
marched to the Ri^er Wolga, where he recovered all the Places as yet in the
Possession of the Demetrians, and forced Sapiha (who, as we mentioned before,
remained steadfast in the Interest of Demetrius) to raise the Siege of the
strong Convent of Troitza.

Rosinski, after his Separation from Sapiha and the rest of the Demetrian
Forces, had possessed himself of Volock and the strong Convent of Ossipow, both
which he had provided with a good Garrison, having sent the rest of his Troops
under the Command of Zlarowski to the King of Poland before Smolensko. He
himself, was by reason of an Indisposition occasioned by a hurt he received
before Musco, detained at Volock; His Distemper increasing every day, by reason
of the Distraction of his Mind, created by his late ill Successes, he was at
last overcome, more by the Violence of his Grief, than of his Malady, which
deprived him of his Life in a strange Country, Rosinski dies.
at that very time when the Zuskians were approaching the Place in order to
besiege it.

Volviowitz, the Zuskian General, having soon received Intelligence of the
Death of Rosinski, hastened his March, and having immediately caused the Town to
be attacked with Vigor, the Garrison all in a Distraction by the Death of
their General, surrendered it in a few Days, without making any considerable
Resistance.

From thence he turned his Arms to Ossipo^, which he also took, but not without
great Difficulty, and the Loss of a great many of his Men. For, this Place
being garrisoned by a thousand French and Germans, they beat off the Muscovites
in several bloody Assaults, and obliged them to turn the Siege into a Blockade,
which having reduced the Garrison to the last Extremity for want of all manner
of Necessaries, they took a Resolution rather to force their way with their
Swords in their Hands through the Enemies than tamely to surrender upon
dishonorable Conditions. They chose Midnight as the fittest time for the
Exploit, when, having refreshed themselves with what Provisions there was left,
and having taken their farewell of one another by Embraces, and drinking each a
Cup of Aqua vitae, they made a Sally out of the Gate which leads to Smolensko,
and like Men resolved to die, attacked the Muscovites in their Posts, with an
unparalled Bravery, of whom a great many were killed before they could be
relieved by fresh Troops; when their Number increasing continually, they killed
most of the Garrison (but not without great Slaughter on their side) two
hundred only escaping to King Sigismund's Camp; And the rest sold their lives
so dearly, that some thousands of the Muscovites were slain upon the Place.

In the mean while the King of Poland had made several fruitless Attacks upon
the City of Smolensko, the Garrison of which Place defended it self with a most
gallant Resolution. The Attempt which was made at the Gate of S. Michael by one
Nowodorski a Polander and Captain of the King's Guards, deserves among the rest
a particular Remembrance here. For he, having fastened a Petard to the
abovementioned Gate, laid open a Passage into the Town, and with a few young
Polish Noblemen entered the City with their Scymetars drawn, cutting down all
before them; There is no question but that if they had been vigorously seconded
by the rest, the Place must have infallibly fallen into the Hands of King
Sigismund; But most of them not daring to follow, he and his small Company were
overpowered by the great Number of the Muscovites, who flocked to the Defense
of the Gate; yet they made good their Retreat, with the Loss of two only of
their Companions, leaving behind them most evident Proofs of their Valor among
the Muscovites; They being now forewarned, took care to block up their Gates
with Earth, and making deep Trenches before them to prevent their being
surprised upon the same Account for the future.

Zuski, being flushed with the variety of these Successes, and having got
together an Army of above fifty thousand Men, all chosen Troops, a great many
of them being Germans, Swedes, and French, was resolved to push on his Fortune,
and, if possible, to clear Muscovy, both of its foreign and domestic Enemies.
If he had bent his whole Force against Demetrius who at that^time lay with the
Remnants of his Army near Caluga, there is no question but that he might have
destroyed him and his Party past all Recovery; but despising his small Number,
he committed the Care of them to his Tartarian Troops, whilst he with the main
Army marched to the Relief of Smolensko.

King Sigismund having received timely Intelligence of their Design was not
unprepared for their Reception, and having sent Stanislaus Zolkievitski with
ten thousand Men, to take Possession of some advantageous Posts near Clusin, he
resolved there to expect the Enemy. Not many days were past before the
Muscovites were advanced within sight of the Poles, when pursuant to a
Resolution taken in a Council of War, the whole Army was drawn out in order of
Battle to attack in their Advantage.

The left Wing of the Zuskian Army was composed of Muscovites; the Right, of
Swedes, French, and a good Number of Tartarian Horse, the main Body consisting
most of Germans, and some other mercenary Soldiers. The Poles were much
inferior in Number to the Muscovites, but trusting upon their Courage and the
Advantage of the Ground they received the Enemy with great Bravery, who
confiding in their Number attacked them with incredible Fury. The Fight was
very bloody, and remained doubtful for some Part of the day; for though the Poles
soon routed the Left Wing commanded by the Brother of Zuski, yet the Swedes and
the Tartars in the Right fought it out very gallantly and the Germans in the
main Body being placed upon a Ground full of Shrubs and other Rubbage, where
the Polish Horse could not advance without great Difficulty, repulsed them
several times with great Slaughter; till at last the Right Wing of the
Muscovite Army being brought first into Confusion, and afterward totally
routed; the German Foot seeing themselves deprived of the Assistance of their
Horse, Zuski routed.
and on all sides surrounded by the Poles, gave the Signal for Parley, which
being readily granted by King Sigismund, and the Hostages interchanged, it was
agreed* that such as should be willing to enter into Pay in the Polish Army
should be entertained by the King according to their respective Stations, the
rest to remain Prisoners of War.

Scarce had the Treaty been signed, and was just upon the Point of being
executed, when De la Guard, who commanded the Swedish Auxiliaries in Hopes that
the German Foot had maintained their Ground, having rallied the Wings that were
broken before, returned to the place of Battle, but being informed of what had
passed, he entreated the Germans to return in Conjunction with the Horse to the
Charge. But these were deaf to all his Admonitions and Persuasions, declaring
that they would not be guilty of the Breach of the Treaty so lately made with
the Poles, who thereupon afresh attacked the Muscovite Horse, entirely routed
them a second time and after a Pursuit of some Hours, made themselves Masters
of their Camp, Artillery and Baggage.

Most of the German Foot having taken Service under King Sigismund, The
Zuskians routed a second time.
he to terrify the Garrison of Smolensko, ordered a most solemn Triumph to be
made in the Camp, where a great Number of Captives, Colors and other Warlike
Ensigns of his late obtained Victory, were exposed to the View of the
Muscovites within the City unto whom having at the same time caused to
represent the irrecoverable Loss of Zuski and his Party, after so signal an
overthrow, he assured them, that if they did not make use of this last Offer
the King intended to make them of deserving his Mercy; they must infallibly
expect to be involved in his Ruin. Most of the Inhabitants showed a great
Inclination to a surrender upon such honorable terms as were offered by King
Sigismund; But Sehin their Weywode being a Man of an undaunted Courage, would
not hearken to any Propositions though never so advantageous; and having
represented to them that their Condition was such as to be able to stop the
Carreer of the Victorious Poles, and to their eternal Glory, to deserve the
Honor of having upheld the declining Fate of their Country against its mortal
Enemies, they unanimously resolved to defend themselves to the last Extremity.

In the mean time, the Muscovites began to feel the direful Effects of the loss
of this Battle; For, Sapiha (now the Demetrian General) had routed the
Muscovian Tartars, near Twitza, and cut to pieces another considerable Body of
their Troops at Borowsko; King Sigismund, having got notice, that Volviowitz
the Zuskian General was, after the last Defeat* retired with a Body of ten
thousand Men under Czarow, sent thither part of his Army, the very sight of
which, so terrified the Muscovites, that without striking one Blow, they
surrendered to the Conquerour's discretion; the Demetrian Army began to approach
a second time their Capital City, and the Poles had detatch'd a considerable
Body from the Siege of Smolensko, whom they expected to see every day at their
Gates. The worst of all was, that in the last Battle, they had lost the Flower
of their Army, and most of their Foreign Auxiliaries, in whom they most
confided, the Germans having taken Service among the Poles; so that, having not
the least prospect of repairing their ruined Troops, nor any other Means left
to defend themselves against the Power of two Armies, that were on their march
to besiege them more closly than ever, they were at the greatest Plunge, how to
extricate themselves out of these impending Miseries.

After various Debates among the Nobles, who most took to Heart the present
miserable State of their Country, they had recourse to the same States Policy,
which had proved successful to their Affairs before, to wit, to try whether by
raising new Divisions among the Poles and Demetrians, they might not find once
more an Opportunity to save themselves from this imminent Danger, which, if not
soon prevented, threatened their infallible Destruction. To encompass this
Design, it was proposed to seize upon the Great Duke Basili Zuski and to give
it out that they were resolved to put Vladislaus, the Son of Sigismund King of
Poland, upon the Throne of Muscovy; that thereby they should infallibly ruin
the Interest of Demetrius, and consequently rid themselves of a vile Impostor,
whose very Name was become odious to them, and at the same time, restore
immediately Peace to their harrassed Country. It was represented, that, though
they ought to look upon the Poles, as their most dreadful and mortal Enemies,
that nevertheless, their only Business being now to get time, and to breath a
little; the Poles, inveigled by their fair Promises, would soon become secure,
and furnish them with an opportunity, either quite to elude the Election of
Vladislaus, or, if that was not thought advisable, they might find sufficient
Means, at one time or other, to rid their hands of him, under pretense of his
Childhood, which, if well timed, they might make use of so favorable a
Juncture, to endeavor to return their Government into its ancient Channel,
from whence it had been diverted by the Artifices of their Enemies, and had
been the occasion of all the Miseries they had endured of late. This Design,
laid upon deep Reasons of State, succeeded at last according to their
Expectation, by the mismanagement of the Poles* who were, by the good Conduct
of the Muscovites, not long after, obliged to leave that Empire, and restore to
it that Repose, which with vast Expenses, and the effusion of a great deal of
Blood, they had robbed it of, for near twenty years before. The Muscovian
Boyars, and Nobles, having thus concerted measures among themselves, according
to which, the Ruin of Zuski was resolved on, as the only means to encompass the
intended Deliverance of their native Country, it was by their Instigation
whispered about among the Populace, how that Basili Zuski, the present Great
Duke, ought to be considered, as the Chief Author of all their Misfortunes, who
by his Sorceries and Tyranny, had drawn down upon the People of Muscovy, the
vengeance of God Almighty; and that by his Miscarriages, they were again
plunged into these Miseries, wherewith they saw themselves environed past all
Redemption, unless they took new measures for their common Safety.

Zuski had, since his accession to the Crown, rendered his Government very
obnoxious to the Censures of the Nobles; For, having mounted the Throne, by
Blood and fraudulent Means, he began to be jealous of his most trusty Friends,
and, to gratify his Fears, exercised his Cruelties upon several Persons of an
eminent Rank, whom he caused to be put to Death upon no other Pretense, than
his having secret Intelligence of their Unfaithfulness. As his Reign was one
continued Series of Troubles, so when he was at a Plunge, he used to have
recourse to Sorcerers and Witchcraft, and being infatuated by their
Persuasions, he committed such Barbarities as are scarce to be named without
horror. It was upon this account, he caused the Wombs of big-bellied Women, to
be ripped open, to make use of the immature Fruit, to accomplish his
Enchantments, which, he was vainly persuaded, would be more efficacious against
the Poles, than his Sword. Some of his Wizzards having foretold him, that one,
whose name was Michael, should succeed him in the Throne, he caused three of
his most faithful Friends and Servants to be made away, for no other reason,
but because they bore that name, which for all his barbarous Precautions, was
verified in the Person of Mich. Federowitz, the present Czar's Grandfather.
There were in the great Church within the Castle, amongst other Things of great
Value, thirteen Statues, representing our Savior and the twelve Apostles, all
of massy Gold, each of them of the bigness of a Man, valued at near three
hundred thousand Pounds Sterling. Zuski being at last reduced to great
Straights for want of Money, and having, in vain, tried all the Skill of his
Sorcerers, who were not able to supply his present Occasions, he had recourse
to the twelve Apostles, whom he displaced from their Station in the Church, and
having caused them to be melted down, made use of the Metal for the Payment of
his Soldiers. He had so much Grace as to spare the Statue of our Savior, which
the Poles, not long after, converted to the same use.

All these Enormities, being now by the Nobles, who had conspired his Ruin,
improved to his disadvantage, the Populace (whose Darling he was before)
prompted more by their Zeal for their golden Statues, than the Love and Welfare
of their Country, Zuski deposed.
soon shook hands with the Nobility; and seeing Demetrius to meditate a second
time the Siege of their Capital City, they, with the same unanimous Consent,
wherewith they had raised him before to the Throne, pulled him down again, and
thrust him, with his two Brothers, into a Cloister.

This done, they sent their Deputies to Zolkievitzski, the Polish General, who
commanded that Body, which was approaching to the City of Musco, unto whom they
promised to choose Vladislaus, the Prince of Poland, for their Great Duke,
provided he would defend them against Demetrius.

Zolkievitzki, The Poles admitted in to the City of Musco.
gladly accepting of their Propositions, detatch'd immediately a good Body of
his best Troops, who being readily admitted into the City, he followed in few
days after with the whole Army, pitching his Tents on the East side of the
City; as Demetrius was encamped on the Western part. Some time being spent in
Consultations, betwixt the Muscovites and Poles, the first opened their Gates
to the last, so that Zolkievitzki, marching with his whole Army through the
City, fixed his Camp near to that of Demetrius, who, though not a little
surprised at this sudden and near approach of the Poles, yet was forced to put
the best Countenance he could upon the Matter, and to smother his present
Resentment.

There being thus a communication, and seeming friendly Correspondence
maintained betwixt both Camps, Zulkievitzki found it no very difficult Task to
debauch that Body of Polish Horse, Commanded by Spiaha, which hitherto had
remained steadfast in the Interest of Demetrius; These having received the
public Faith of the Commonwealth of Poland for the Payment of all their
Arrears, unanimously revolted, and declared for King Sigismund.

Zarucki, the General of the Cosacks, and Kasinowski, Prince of the Tartars,
that served in the Demetrian Camp, both intimate Friends of Demetrius, seeing
themselves thus deprived of the assistance of the Polish Horse, the main
strength of their Army, and that the City of Musco was defended by a great Body
of Poles, both within and without its Walls, began now to despair of the
Fortune of Demetrius; and thinking it not advisable to involve themselves in
his Ruin, they resolved to embrace the Party of the Conquering Pole, expecting
to reap from the Success of Sigismund, the Fruits of their past Labors.

Whilst these were preparing to wait upon the King before Smolensko, Demetrius
retreats from before Musco.
Demetrius forsaken not only by the Poles, but also by them he most confided
in, and seeing himself and his Affairs exposed to Despair, sought once more for
Refuge at Cal^ga, which, having served him as a Shelter before, now received
him again with open Arms.

The Muscovites, being thus freed from Demetrius, would fain have recalled
their former Promise of Electing Vladislaus their Great Duke, alleging that
they could not proceed to his Election till he were present in Person, to
confirm to them by Oath, the maintenance of their Religion and Ancient Customs.
But Zolkievitzki, having declared in the Name of King Sigismund, that he would
not quit the City with his Army till he saw Prince Vladislaus seated upon the
Throne, and that therefore he exhorted them to fulfill their solemn Promise
without any further Tergeversations, unless they would expose their Capital
City to inevitable Destruction; and that he was ready to swear to such Articles
in the Great Duke's Name, as should be agreed betwixt them; they judged it most
advisable not to exasperate the Poles, who at present had two potent Armies
one in the very Bowels of the City of Musco, the other in the Empire before
Smolensko.

These Considerations at last prevailing over the Aversion they had against the
Poles, and being persuaded that the Childhood of Vladislaus could not but
furnish them, in a little time, with an Opportunity of ridding their Hands of
him, as they had done of both the Demetrius's, they proceeded with all the
usual Solemnities to the Election.

The chief Conditions were; That a general Amnesty and Act of Oblivion should
be passed; and all their Ancient Customs and Privileges confirmed and
established.

That the new Great Duke Vladislaus should, with all convenient Speed, come in
Person into Russia.

That he should conserve their Religion inviolable, and for the better
Settlement of the same and the whole Kingdom, abjure the Roman Catholic Faith,
and embrace the Greek Religion.

Zolkievitzki and some of the great Officers of the Polish Army having
confirmed these Articles by Oath in the Name of the new Great Duke, he was,
though absent, proclaimed with the usual Ceremonies and Fealty sworn to him by
all the Boyars, Uladislaus proclaimed Great Duke.
Nobles, and Chief Officers there present, as Great Duke and Emperor of
Russia, with great Demonstrations of Joy, and the Acclamations of the People.

As a further Pledge of their Fidelity, and to remove all the Shadow of
Dissimulation from themselves, they sacrificed Zuski and his two Brothers to
the present Exigency of the State, who were surrendered into the Hands of
Zolkievitzki, and by his direction sent to Sigismund King of Poland* where the
unfortunate Zuski, Zuski surrendered to the Poles.
with one of his Brothers, after having been forced to adorn the Triumph of
King Sigismund and Zolkievitzki, ended his Days in Prison, as will appear out
of the following Chapter.

CHAP. III.
Containing a full Relation of the Rev^lutions which happened in Muscovy, from
the time of the Election of Uladislaus, Son of Sigismund King of Poland, till
the Beginning of the Reign of Michael Federowitz, the present Czar's
Grandfather.
ZOlkievitzki, the Polish General, having in the Name of the new Great Duke
Vladislaus taken Possession of the Castle of Musco, and the Royal Palace, with
a Guard of a Thousand Poles, it was unanimously resolved to send a splendid
Ambassy to King Sigismund before Smolensko, to make a Tender of the Crown of
Muscovy to his Son Vladislaus, and to desire his Confirmation of the Articles
agreed on betwixt the Russians and the Polish General.

The Ambassy being composed of some of the Chief Boyars of the Empire, attended
with a most magnificent and numerous Train; they were received with more than
ordinary Honor by King Sigismund, who sent out the whole Body of Horse from
before Smolensko, with all the great Officers of the Army, and his Courtiers,
to receive them at some Distance from the Camp.

Being introduced into the King's Presence, they addressed themselves in a
Speech full of Flattery and Dissimulation, The Muscovites tender the Crown to
Uladislaus.
under which they hid their secret Aversion to the Poles. They told him how
overjoyed they were to see that Day which they hoped would restore Tranquillity
to their harrassed Country, by the Choice they had lately made of his Son
Vladislaus for their Great Duke, humbly beseeching the King, that in regard of
the near Interest he now had in their Preservation, he would vouchsafe to take
them and their afflicted Country into his Royal Protection, as the only Means
to revive the former flourishing State of the Russian Empire, which had been
reduced to the very Brink of Ruin by their intestine Divisions. That their late
Election having been unanimous and founded upon Hopes of their future Felicity,
they begged of his Majesty not to deny them their earnest Request, but to send
as soon as possibly might be, their Prince into Russia, in order to let them
enjoy the Comfort of his Presence and Protection, and to complete their
Election by Crowning him Great Duke and Emperor, with the usual Ceremonies, in
the Royal City of Musco. They related to him the Conditions upon which he was
to be received, as we have related them in the foregoing Chapter; They enlarged
themselves much in praise of the Greek Religion, and how necessary it would be
for the Prince to accommodate himself to the Rites of the Muscovian Church,
which they said, ought to be looked upon as the Foundation-Stone of that
Monarchy, from whence depended the common Safety, both of Prince and People;
all which they recommended to his Royal Wisdom.

King Sigismund, who was not ignorant that these subtle Insinuations proceeded
more from the present Necessity of their Affairs, than any good Will either to
himself or the Polish Nation, was not wanting to give them an Answer suitable
to the present Occasion. And having received their Message with a very serene
Countenance and seeming Gladness, he answered them in general Terms; That he
could not but receive the Honor conferred upon his Son by the Offer of the
Crown of so great an Empire with a great deal of Gladness, but that as the
chiefest Satisfaction he took in their Election, was their unanimous Consent,
so he assured them, that he should look upon it as an indispensible obligation,
to assist at all times hereafter their Country with his Aids and Counsels, by
which means he hoped a mutual good Correspondency might be established betwixt
th^se two potent neighboring Crowns of Muscovy and Poland, to their mutual
Advantage. And as to what related to the Particulars of the Treaty, they being
of such a Nature as to deserve a particular Consideration, he would, after
having well weighed the Matter, send his full Instructions to his General
Zolkievitzki, Resident in the City of Musco,, with whom the whole Matter might
be completed at their own Homes, to the Satisfaction, as he hoped, of both
Parties.

The Ambassadors being in all outward Appearance very well satisfied with this
Answer, there passed abundance of Caresses betwixt them and the Polish Lords,
by whom they were sumptuously feasted at sundry times, with such mutual
Professions of Friendship, as if they had been but one People; The same
Kindness was shown betwixt the Muscovites* and Poles in the City of Musco,
whereby the Inhabitants being inveigled into a profound Security, the Poles
found Means by degrees to creep into the Castle, to the Number of six or seven
thousand, which afterward proved fatal to that City.

The Ambassadors having not long after demanded their Audience of Leave from
Sigismund in order to their Departure; the King in return to their Demand,
asked from them the Surrender of Smolensko in the Name of Prince Vladislaus,
elected and proclaimed Great Duke of Russia; unto which they having answered,
That they had nothing of it in their Instructions, and that they were of
Opinion the Russians would be unwilling to surrender a Place of such Importance
till the Great Duke were come in Person to the Capital City, and Crowned and
sworn to the Performance of the beforementioned Articles, they were not
permitted to depart till further Orders. For, King Sigismund having fully
weighed the whole State of the Matter, and especially their Refusal of the
Surrender of Smolensko, began to be more and more convinced of their fraudulent
Dealings; and knowing that it was not their free Choice, but the absolute
Necessity of their Affairs that had raised his Son to the Throne, he had all
the Reason to fear, that when he had withdrawn his Forces out of Muscovy, they
would make their Advantage by the Unexperience of his Son, and justle him out
of the Throne. But if he should forbear to send him till he came to his riper
Years, they would from thence, without question, take Occasion to recall their
Choice, and elect another in his stead. And, considering that he had reduced
them to such Straights, as had made them take those Measures so little suitable
to their Incinations, but merely invented to disintangle themselves out of
their present Distresses, he looked upon it not only as inglorious by accepting
their Conditions to receive instead of imposing Laws upon them, but also quite
inconsistent with his own Interest and the Safety of his Son.

All his Thoughts therefore, were bent upon the Siege of Smolensko, which when
taken, he supposed he might appear among them as a Conqueror, and prescribe
such Laws to the dece^tful Muscovites, as should be most consistent both with
his Honor and Safety. This was the Resolution of Sigismund.

But his ablest Counselors were of a quite different Opinion; For, though they
were no less satisfied in the deceitful Intentions of the Muscovites, than the
King himself; yet did they not judge it advisable, to drive Matters to
extremities, and to commit that to the hazard of the Sword, which might be
obtained without Opposition. They represented to the King, that the Conquest of
so vast an Empire, could not be obtained without the effusion of much Blood,
and the Expense of vast Treasures; whereas, if what had been sworn to by
Zolkievitzki, by the King's Orders, were confirmed, he might in one day, make
himself Master of all Muscovy. They advised him therefore, not to give the
opportunity to an unstable People to take new measures, who perhaps, when
driven to Despair, might side with Demetrius; which would take away all his
Pretenses of invading that Empire, since he had undertaken his Expedition under
the pretext of assisting him in the Recovery of his Right; But to send Prince
Vladislaus, assisted by a good Body of Troops, and some able Counselors, to
the City of Musco, where he being received and Crowned Great Duke Russia, might
with their Assistance easily elude the Practices of the Muscovites. That by
this means, Smolensko would fall on course into his Hands, and his Army,
besides this, might be paid all their Arrears out of the Great Duke's Treasure,
as belonging to Vladislaus their Prince, who else, as the Case now stood; would
be an intolerable Burden for the Commonwealth of Poland. And as to what
related to the Articles, they might without much Difficulty, be either quite
evaded, or at least delayed, till the Prince, strengthened with fresh Supplies
out of Poland, should find himself in a Capacity to Rule this false and
stubborn People by such Laws, as he should judge most convenient, and suitable
to his own Interest. But these wholesome Counsels had no great Influence over
the King, who being prepossessed with a vain Punctilio of Honor, not to rise
from before Smolensko before it was taken, and with the pernicious Insinuation
of his Flatterers, who persuaded him, that the Place was reduced to that
extremity, as not to be able to hold out long against him, he resolved to leave
nothing unattempted which might contribute to the Rendition, or forcing of that
important City.

For which Reason, he caused a new Battery to be raised, from whence, and some
others the Poles, fired so furiously upon the Town, that after some time, they
laid flat a great Part of the Wall, and ruined two Bastions. Smolensko. stormed.
Upon which it was resolved to assault the Place, which was executed with a
great deal of Bravery; But those within, by reason of the Numerousness of the
Garrison, having had sufficient time to raise strong Retrenchments, fortified
with Pallisado's, and a good Ditch behind the Breach, the Poles were not able
to lodge themselves in the Breach, notwithstanding their reiterated Attacks,
made with the greatest Bravery imaginable, were repulsed with great Slaughter.

After this ill Success of the Poles, the Muscovites, who hitherto had but
murmured and whispered their Complaints, began to explain publicly against the
Breach of the Articles, the detaining their Ambassadors against the Laws of
Nations, and the Outrages and Insolences of the Poles, who being got into the
entire Possession of the Castle and Principal Ports of the City of Musco,
committed Violences upon the Citizens, their Wives and Saints, at the last of
which they shot with their Pistols; which being a thing intolerable to People
infatuated with Superstition and Zeal for their Images, would certainly have
produced violent Commotions among them, at that time, if they had not been
over-awed by the great Number of Poles, within the bowels of their own City,
and which was the most prevailing, that they saw Demetrius increase again in
strength at Caluga.

For Zarucki, the General of the Cosacks, and Kazinowski, Prince of the
Tartars, who, as we said before, had left him, at his second Retreat from
before the City of Musco, finding their Reception to bear no proportion with
the Reward they proposed to themselves from King Sigismund, and seeing
themselves despised by the Nobility of Poland, were since returned to the
Service of Demetrius, who countenanced by their Return, began to look up again,
and having drawn new Supplies out of the adjacent Places, began to appear
formidable at Caluga, and would in all likelihood have once more appeared in
the Field, if he had not been preven^ed by his sudden and untimely Death, which
happened thus:

Kazinowski, the Tartarian Prince, who was lately returned to his Service, had
given him great Occasion of suspecting his Fidelity; wherefore D^metrius, to
prevent the Design, which he believed to be formed against his Life by the said
Tartarian Prince, caused him to be thrown into the River Occa, and drowned
there. The Tartars, but especially his Guards, enraged at the Death of their
Prince, resolved to revenge it upon Demetrius, with the first Opportunity,
which was not long before they met with it, according to their intended Design.
For it is to be observed, that D^trius, ever since his last Retreat from before
Musco, was grown excessive Melancholy, which he was used to divert frequently
with Drinking, endeavoring to drown his Cares in Liquor. Having been one day a
Hunting, he retired toward night with some of his most intimate Friends to the
Enjoyment of his Customary Comfort, the Bottle, without any Guards about him.
The Tartars, who had formed the Design against his Life, having got notice of
it, secretly got near to his Quarters, and finding him and his Friends involved
in Liquor, and a most profound Security, D^m^tri^^ slain.
broke in upon him, and slew him and some of his Friends, who endeavored to
stop their Entrance, upon the place.

This was the End of this Second Demetrius, who, from a mean and sordid
Fortune, was raised to so eminent a Station as to have bid fair for the Russian
Empire, till he met with his deserved Death among his own Servants and Friends.
He is agreed by all Hands to have been an Impostor, some affirming his first
Origin to have been a Schoolmaster, others supposing him to have been a Jew,
because in his Closet were found several Hebrew and Talmudical Books, which are
Materials not belonging to the Profession of the Russian Schoolmasters, whose
Learning rarely exceeds Reading and Writing.

But whoever he was, it is certain that he was an Impostor, and slain by the
Tartars, who did not long escape Vengeance; For, Marina had no sooner received
this dismal News, which at one Stroke robbed her of all her great Expectations,
but, being seized with the most violent Apprehensions in the World, and
transported with Grief and Rage, without any Respect to her Quality and Sex,
to^e her Hair and Face, and thus running into the Streets, cried out, like a
distracted Creature, Either restore me my Husband Demetrius, or else take pity
of me, and let the same Swords that so barbarously murdered him send me also
to the Grave. After the first Transports were a little over, she ran in great
Fury, with a Dagger in her Hand, to the Quarters of the Cosacks, and calling to
those she knew by their Names; Dear Friends, said she, either revenge the
Murder of my dear Lord, or at least do not refuse to do an Act of Charity
toward me; take here, cried she, this Dagger, and with it deliver me from that
Life, which, since the fatal End of my Husband, cannot but be loathsome and
burthensom to me. The Cosacks, not able to resist the Tears and Prayers of this
charming Lady, fell with great Fury upon the Tartars, whom they massacred
wherever they met them in the Streets, and very few would have escaped their
Fury, had they not at last been appeased by the Persuasions of their Leader
Zarucki.

After the Cosacks had sacrificed several Hundreds of the Tartars to the Manes
of Demetrius and the just Resentment of Marina, A third Demetrius.
those of Caluga chose and proclaimed the Son of Demetrius and Marina, Emperor
of Russia; and though it is most generally believed that Marina was barren, and
this pretended Son a supposititious Child, yet Zarucki the General of the
Cosacks being willing to carry on the Imposture in Opposition to the Polish
Interest, addressed himself to the Russians, offering them his Aid with all his
Forces, if they would engage to aknowledge, after the Example of Caluga, this
Son of Demetrius, Great Duke and Emperor of Russia, so soon as they should
have chased the Roles out of Muscovy.

Zolkievitski in the mean time perceiving himself slighted by King Sigismund,
whom he found to have taken quite contrary Measures to what had been agreed on
betwixt him and the Muscovites by the King's Order, he left the Army under
Pretense of going to fetch Prince Vladislaus to Musco, and taking his Way by
Smolensko, to show his Discontent, he only saluted the King, and, without any
further stay, retired into Poland.

The Affairs of Russia having thus for a while hung in Suspense, whilst the
People were kept under by the apprehension of a double Danger, to wit, from the
Poles within the Gates of their Capital City, and the Demetrian Forces at
Caluga, they began now to change Face, and to appear with another Countenance.

For the Muscovites, after the departure of the Polish General, finding King
Sigismund resolute in not sending his Son Vladislaus into the Empire, and in
the Continuation of the Siege of Smolensko, and seeing that both the Captive
Zuski's and their Ambassadors were sent away Prisoners into Poland, and that
the King took upon him the supreme and absolute Administration of Affairs,
putting such Officers into all Places of Trust, as he thought most convenient
for his Purpose, they began to conceive great Jealousies; and being now by the
Death of Demetrius delivered from their Fear on that side, prepared for an open
Revolt, in order to prevent their Empire from becoming a Province of Poland,
which they looked upon to be the main Design of King Sigismund.

Whilst he therefore wasted himself at the Siege of Smolensko, which he thought
ignominious to abandon before it was reduced, and thereby let slip the most
favorable Opportunity in the World, of Establishing his Affairs in that
Empire, the Muscovites had, by his Delays, sufficient Leisure given them to
reunite themselves and make Provisions for their future Security.

The first that appeared in Arms, toward the beginning of the Spring in the
Year 1611, was one Lepanovits, a Man of a great and ancient Family in Muscovy;
he having a great Interest in the Country, had made secret Levies, and
appearing with a Body near Peresla, invited and gained most of the Boyars and
Nobility of the neighboring Provinces into his Party; He also sent his
Messengers into the more remote Parts, to represent to his Countrymen the
Breach of Faith of the Poles; how they had possessed themselves of their
Capital City, broke the Articles agreed on betwixt both Nations, by continuing
the Siege of Smolensko, and not sending their Prince Vladislaus into Muscovy;
how that they, not only kept the Zuski's, but also their Ambassadors Prisoners
against the Laws of Nations, and, in all other Respects, treated them not like
a free People, but as Slaves depending from the Mercy of their Conquerours. He
exhorted them to shake off this Foreign Yoke, and by giving timely Assistance
to secure themselves and their Posterity against the Insolences of their
mortal Enemies the Poles.

This had the desired Effect; for the Country flocked in from all Parts, so
that another great Army was raised near Nisi Novogorod, under the Command of
Prosowecki a Lord of a very eminent Rank in Muscovy; and Zarucki joined his
Forces with them, under Condition, that so soon as they should have cleared
their Country from the Poles, they should proclaim the Young Demetrius, their
Great Duke and Emperor, which they were very free to promise, though they had
not the least Intention to perform it, as Zarucki found afterward to his Cost.

The Poles were not unadvertised of the Designs of the Muscovites, but the
King's Forces before Smolensko being scarce sufficient to carry on the Siege
against a strong Garrison, he could not spare any to disperse these Levies, and
the Poles within the City of Musco had enough to do to maintain their Posts,
and keep that vast Multitude of People in subjection; so that these Levies,
from a small Beginning being improved into a great Bulk, the Polish Forces
which were quartered up and down in the Country, to keep it in Obedience, were
so far from being able to attack them, that they were scarce sufficient to keep
on the Defensive.

The Inhabitants of the City, being now encouraged by these Muscovian Lords
appearing in Arms, thought it now time to throw off the Mask, and to give the
Poles very sensible Proofs of their Aversion toward them. A Design therefore
was laid among them, upon a Signal given to assemble and massacre all the Poles
within the City.

The City of Musco was at that time much bigger than it ever was before or
since, by Reason of the vast Confluence of Strangers, who during these
intestine Commotions were retired thither out of all the neighboring Provinces
for Sanctuary, so that it was computed to comprehend in its Circuit above a
Hundred and fifty Thousand Houses. All this vast Multitude of Inhabitants being
enraged to the highest Pitch against the Poles, were ready to lend a helping
Hand to accomplish the Design of the Conspirators, they only wanting a Head to
lead them on to put it in Execution.

A thing of this Nature could not be carried on so privately, but that
Gaziowski, who then commanded the Poles in Chief, had timely Notice of their
projected Design, but thinking it not advisable to be the first Aggressor, he
dissembled his Notice, and contented himself with fortifying the two Quarters
of the City called Catangorod or the Mid-City, and Czargorod or the City-Royal,
which being surrounded with good Stone-Walls, and containing the Castle, with
the Royal Palace, all the Magazines, and great Houses of the Nobility and
Merchants, he proposed to himself as a safe Retreat upon all Occasions.

The Polish General Gaziouski had scarce finished his Works, before the
Russians finding by the Precautions used by the Poles, that their Design had
taken vent, resolved to put it in Execution, trusting more in their Number than
their Conduct, and having on the third day after Palm Sunday drawn together an
incredible Number of People by the Ringing of the Bells, they attacked the
Poles, with a Fury past all Belief, as Men resolved either to accomplish their
Design, or to die in the Attempt.

The Poles, The Poles attacked in the City of Musco.
on the other Hand, being surrounded and attacked on all sides, animated by
Despair, and having the Advantage of a well regulated Discipline against a
confused Multitude, repulsed their Enemies with great Vigor, who, tho* most
obstinate and furious in their reiterated Assaults, were nevertheless at last
forced to give way to the Bravery of the Poles, who made them retreat with the
Loss of near Ten thousand Men on their side. No sooner had the Poles removed
them from their Works, but they sallied out with some thousand Men, and having
prosecuted their Victo^y, and slain a great Number of them at a great distance
from their Quarters, they see all the circumjacent Parts of the City on fire,
which destroyed not only a prodigious Number of Houses, but also of Women,
Children and other helpless Persons. The next day the Polish General, having
received Intelligence that most of the Inhabitants of Musco were retired to the
Suburbs called Strelitza Slavoda, which lies South of Cataygorod or the
Mid-City, on the opposite Shore of the River Moska, where they were disputing
the Passage to Strusius, who, with a good Body, was come from Malsaisko, upon
the first News of the Tumult, to the Relief of his Countrymen, he made a strong
Sally, and having caused the said Suburbs to be set on fire in several parts,
The City of Musco burnt by the Poles*
he burnt it quite to the Ground, thereby facilitating the Passage of the Poles
who came to his Assistance and securing to himself a free Communication, which
stood him in great stead afterward upon several Occasions.

It is computed that a Hundred and twenty Thousand Houses were laid in Ashes by
that raging Element, and that by the Fire and Sword there fell near Two hundred
Thousand of the Inhabitants of all Sorts, besides an incredible Quantity of
Stores and Merchandices.

The Remainders of the Inhabitants seeing their City thus laid in Ashes, and
themselves sufficiently tamed by the Sword, implored the Mercy of the
conquering Poles, rejecting (as it is usual in such Cases) the Fault upon a few
of their Ringleaders, who had paid for it with their Lives. The Poles knowing
themselves not in a Capacity to do any further Mischief, and being glad to have
reduced them to ask Quarter, granted it without Difficulty. But as it was owing
to the utmost necessity of their Affairs, so this Truce so earnestly sued for
by the Mus^ovites, lasted not long. For the Inhabitants of Musco having invited
Lepanovits, Prosowecki, Zarucki, and the rest of the Leaders of the Army, we
mentioned before, to come to their Assistance, they advanced with a Hundred
thousand Men toward the City, upon whose Approach having joined with their
Forces, they forced the Poles into their Works where they were so closely
besieged, that they had but one Passage left open for their Communication with
the Country, which was that part on the other side of the River Moska, where
not long before had stood the Suburbs called Strelitza Slavoda, and which they
kept open a long time for the Convenience of their Provisions and other
Supplies, and made frequent Sallies with great Success on their side, till at
last by the ill Conduct of King Sigismund, they were forced to abandon that
Post, and soon after, the whole City, to the irreparable detriment of the said
King.

For whilst the brave Poles were hardly pressed upon by their Enemies, he lay
immovable at the Siege of Smolensko, where his Affairs began to look with a
very ill Face. For the Soldiers, tired with the long Continuance of the Siege,
grew very uneasy for want of Pay, and their Clamours were now risen to that
height, that the King began to dread every day a Mutiny, having not wherewithal
to satisfy their just Demands, nor any other Means now left to raise Money,
unless by calling together a Diet, which at last was resolved on, and a
Convention of the Estates appointed against the September next following; This
Remedy, though somewhat slow, to satisfy the greedy Appetite of the Soldiers,
yet were they (in Hopes o^ a happy Success of that Assembly) thereby appeased
for that time.

The King, in the mean time, considering with himself, that the Measures he had
taken in Muscovy, contrary to the Advice of the Senate and his Council, having
proved abortive, would not be very agreeable to the Convention, he resolved to
make another Attempt for the Gaining of Smolensko, not questioning but, that,
if he could appear at the next Diet as a Conqueror, it would in a great
measure take off the Blemish of his former Conduct in the Muscovian War. A
general Assault being therefore resolved on to be made on the 13th. day of
June; the Soldiers encouraged by the Hopes of the Booty of so vast and rich a
City, showed a great Eagerness to attack the Place.

The Assault was made on the East side, by the Palatine of Braclow, and on the
West, where then was the King's Quarters, Smolensko stormed*
by General Wire, who commanded the Germans. The Soldiers had found means
before break of day to raise Ladders in several places upon the Walls,
unperceived by the Enemy; so that, at the Signal given, the Germans first
mounted and got up to the Top of the Walls, as did also, not long after, the
Poles, under the Command of the Palatine, without much Opposition from the
Enemy, who being thus attacked upon a sudden, when they least expected it,
those Forces that were left for the Guard of the Walls were not sufficient to
stop the furious Assault of the Poles. But the Descent from the Wall into the
City being very steep, and the whole Garrison having by this time taken the
Alarm, came flocking in great Numbers to the defense of their Walls, the Combat
grew very hot, the Poles pushing forward with great Bravery to maintain the
Advantage they had got, and the Garrison armed with Despair fighting like Men
either resolved to vanquish or die; so that the Dispute remained very doubtful,
and perhaps would have ended to the Disadvantage of the Poles, if the same
Novodorski, whom we mentioned before to have so bravely attacked the Gate of S.
Michael, had not come to their Assistance.

For, he having, whilst they were engaged upon the Walls, found means to apply
a Petard at a certain small Gate on the side of the Boristhenes, he opened a
sufficient Passage for him and the King's Guards which were under his Command:
In the Head of whom he, being seconded by the Marshal of Lithuania,
Dorostanski, with some Volunteers, assaulted and entered the Place, and having
slain a few who opposed their Entrance, they marched without any further
Opposition directly to the Marketplace, where having fixed their Banners, they
soon made themselves Masters of the whole City. For the Garrison who were
engaged with those upon the Walls, seeing the Enemy in the Heart of their City,
and inf^tuated with Fear occasioned by the Suddenness of the Adventure, threw
down their Arms, quitted their Stations, and left a free Passage for the
Besiegers to enter in on all sides upon them. Smolensko taken by Storm.
In a Moment there was nothing but Horror and Confusion to be seen throughout
the City. For the Poles, enraged at the long Resistance of the Besieged, put
all they met to the Sword, Men, Women and Children, without distinction of Age
or Sex, so that the Streets were every where filled with Blood and Slaughter.

A great Number of the Citizens run with their Wives and Children, who made
most horrible outcries, to the great Church, where being assaulted by the Poles
they defended themselves valiantly for some time, but being at last overcome,
they set fire to some Barrels of Powder that had been laid up there, and thus
blew themselves, with such of the Poles as were entered, into the Air, choosing
rather to perish by this furious Element, than the Hands of their bloody and
merciless Enemies*

Sehin the Weywode or Governor was retired with about twenty of the principal
Officers into a little Tower upon the Wall, where being surrounded and attacked
on all sides by the Poles, they defended themselves like Lions, declaring that
they would not surrender unless to one of the General Officers of the Army. The
Governor had used some of the Polish Prisoners very cruelly, so that dreading
the Vengeance of the Poles, if he should fall into their Hands, he was resolved
rather to die, than surrender to their Mercy. It happned very luckily, that
Potocki a General Officer among the Poles, advanced near that Way, who having
enquired into the Cause of this Resistance made by a few Men, Word was brought
him, that it was the Governo^^ of the Place, who refused to surrender (...) to
one of the principal Officers; upon which he came to the Place where Sehin with
his Comrades yielded themselves immediately Prisoners of War.

Thus was this great City, after having endured a Siege of near two Years,
taken in a few Hours, in June, in the Year 1611. The Honor of which ought
chiefly to be ascribed to the Bravery and Conduct of Bartholomew Novodorski,
Knight of Maltha, and Captain of the King's Guards; who by his timely opening a
Passage with his Petard was the main Instrument of the Gaining of the Place;
without which that Attempt of Sealing the Walls would in all likelihood have
proved unsuccessful, or at least would not have been effected without the
Slaughter of a great many of the Besiegers; whereas it was now purchased with
the Loss of a few among the Poles. The Place being thus secured, strict Orders
were sent throughout all the Quarters of the City, to give Quarter, and that
the King had given the Pillage of the City to the Soldiers, as the Reward of
their past Fatigues and Dangers. But the Soldiers, especially the Germans and
Poles, not agreeing about the distribution of it, were upon the point of coming
to Blows, when the King ordered all the Booty to be brought, into one place in
order to make an equal Dividend among them. But whilst they were busy in
executing the King's Command, a Fire happening, by what Accident is unknown,
consuming in a little time all the vast Wealth of that rich City, and burnt a
great part of it.

Notwithstanding a Siege sustained of near two Years, there was found in the
Magazines Provisions and Ammunition for three Years longer; so that if they
could have had fresh Supplies of Men, the Place might have been defended much
longer, the Garrison and Inhabitants which at the beginning of the Siege
consisted of near fourscore, thousand Men, able to bear Arms, being reduced to
eight or nine thousand, who nevertheless might probably have made good the
Place against the assailants upon the Wall, if they had not been more conquered
by their own Fears occasioned by the sudden Entrance of Novodorski, than by the
Power of their Enemies.

The Muscovites being under a great Consternation after the taking of
Smolensko, who expecting no less than to see the whole Polish Army in a little
time at the Gates of the City of Musco, redoubled their Fury, attacking the
Polish Garrison in the Castle with their utmost Vigor, but these being
encouraged by the Success of their King, disputed every Inch of Ground with the
Enemy, who, notwithstanding their vast Number, were not able to drive them from
that Post by which they kept a Communication with the Country.

Sigismund, on the other Hand, was advised by his most able Counselors, not
to lose the Fruits of his Victory, but to improve it to the utmost, by carrying
the Terror of his victorious Arms to the Gates of the Capital City, where
having a considerable Party, even among the Russians themselves, the Reputation
of his late Success could not fail to produce strange Effects among the
Muscovites to his Advantage; That if he would but march to the Relief of his
Subjects, who there disputed his Interest with all the Bravery imaginable, it
was very p^obable he might keep in Possession of that great City, which if once
in his Power, the rest of the P^ovinces of that Empire would be soon compelled
to receive his Dictates, especially if they saw Vladislaus their Great Duke
appear in Muscovy.

But King Sigismund, as if overswayed by some secret Fatality, was so far from
harkening to their Counsels founded upon most solid Reasons of State, that he
took quite contrary Measures, and in lieu of p^osecuting his Victory, resolved
to turn his Back to his new Acquisitions, and to exchange the fair Hopes of
Gaining a vast Empi^e, with the vain Acclamations of his People in Poland, and
the empty Noise of Triumph, which ^^st him no less than the Loss of the
M^sc^^i^n C^^^n, as ^is ill Conduct had lost him some Years before his
Hereditary Kingdom of Sweden.

Having therefore feasted the whole Army for three days (to make in some
measure an At^onement for the Loss of their Booty) and left a Body of T^oops,
under the Command of Charles Chodkievitski, for the Guard of Smolensko, he
himself returned into Poland to receive the Flatteries of his Subjects.

At the next Meeting of the Diet of that Kingdom, he was received with all the
Pomp and Ceremonies due to a Conqueror: The Estates were not sparing in their
Addresses and Congratulations, many Speeches were made in the Assembly in
Praise of the King who had added so great a Province to the Commonwealth, made
himself Master of the Imperial City of the Muscovian Empire, and got their
Great Duke Zuski in his Custody.

Sigismund himself was so intoxicated with these imaginary Honors, that he
caused Zolkievitzki, who first took Possession of the City of Musco, to make
his solemn Entry in Triumph, being attended by a most numerous and magnificent
Cavalcade, and followed by the Great Duke Basili Zuski, Basili Zuski l^d in
Triumph.
who with his two Brothers, was seated in an open Chariot, and thus like
Captives led to the Senate House, where being admited, Zolkievitzki presented
these Captive Princes to the King and Assembly, and having in a very lofty
Harangue extolled the Fortune of the Commonwealth of Poland, in having got
these Illustrious Persons into their Possession, by whose Misfortune they had
opened themselves the Way into the Russian Empire, and to the Throne it self by
the Election of Prince Vladislans Great Duke of Muscovy. He did not want Vanity
to compare the Captivity of t^ese Princes to the greatest Exploits of the most
renowned Heroes of A^tiquity; though it was sufficiently known that they were
fain into his Hands, more by the Treachery of the Muscovites than the Bravery
of the Poles, who, whilst they trif^ed away their time in Complementing and
Flattering th^m^e^ves, let slip the best and most favorable Opportunity in the
World, to make themselves real Masters of that Empire which they had swallowed
up in their imaginary Panegyricks. Zuski and his two Brothers were by the
King's Order sent Prisoners to Goston Castle, where they were treated according
to their Quality.

But Basili Zuski did not long survive the Loss of his Empire and Liberty, the
Weight of his Sorrows having, as it is believed, deprived him of his Life soon
after; He was some time after followed by one of his Brothers, who also died
for Grief; They were both privately buried betwixt Warsaw and Thorn, where
their Ashes ^ested till the End of the War betwixt these two Crowns, when they
were translated into Muscovy, and interred among their A^cestors.

This Basili Zuski, H^ dies in Poland.
Great Duke of Muscovy, ended his Life in Captivity, in a Foreign Country,
after a short and troublesome Reign. He was a Person of a more than ordinary
Capacity and Merit, which had raised him to the highest Station in the Empire,
before he mounted the Throne; which as he obtained by Fraud and Blood, so he
endeavored to settle it by the same Arts, by which he had gained it. And
knowing the, Muscovites to be a People the most unstable in the World, and soon
hurried from one Extreme to another, he had at last, (when he found his Affairs
in a declining Condition) Recourse to Witchcraft and other violent Means, which
served him for no other End than to hasten his Ruin, and to remove him from the
Throne to a Prison where he ended his Days. A remarkable Instance of the
perpetual Vicissitudes of Human Greatness, and the Instability of Popular
Favor.

But it is time to return to the City of Musco, and to see what different
Effects this Retreat of Sigismund out of Muscovy produced among the Russians
and the Polish Garrison.

The Muscovites being, by the Departure of the King, delivered from what they
dreaded most, to wit, his Marching to the Relief of the Polish Garrison in
Musco, reassumed new Vigor, and, by their repeated Attacks, pressed so hard
upon the Poles, that they shut them up close within their Fortifications; and
these, seeing themselves thus neglected by their Prince, and exposed to Danger
without any prospect of Relief, began to contrive Means for their own Safety, a
great many among them, under pretense of want of Pay, openly demanding their
Dismission.

Gaziowski their General did endeavor by all means possible to keep them in
Obedience, flattering them with Hopes of a speedy Relief, and perce^ving that
his Words had not the desired Effect, he contrived Counterfeit Letters to be
brought to him as coming from the King, out of Poland, filled with Promises of
a most powerful Relief in a very short time. To take away all the Pretense from
the Soldiers of demanding their Dismission for want of Pay, he caused a Statue
of our Savior's of massy Gold, valued at near fifty thousand Pounds, which
stood with the Twelve Apostles in the Great Church of the Castle (the latter
being melted down by the Order of Basili Zuski, as was mentioned before) to be
divided among the Soldiery, who quickly sacrificed, the same Statue to their
Avarice, which they had adored but a few days before. The General having by
this and some other Dividends taken out of the Treasury of the Great Dukes of
Muscovy, (which was in his Possession) appeased and encouraged his disheartened
Soldiers, he kept them in continual Exercise by frequent Sallies, from whence
they seldom returned without Advantage, they were much flushed with this
Success against the Muscovites.

There was a Magazine of Salt without the Fortifications of the Poles, which
had been spared by the Flames, when the Poles set the City on fire. The
Besiegers and the Besieged standing equally in need of this Commodity, as
having, no other to supply their present Occasions, this gave them constant
Employment on both sides.

This Magazine was at so near a distance from the Poles, that it would have
been no difficult Matter for them to enclose it within their Lines, but their
General knowing that their own and the Enemies Wants would engage them in
continual Skirmishes, did not think convenient to take away this Opportunity of
keeping his Men in Action.

He made it also his Business to sow the Seeds of Discord among the Muscovites
and Cosacks that served in the Russian Army, from whence he hoped to reap no
small Benefit, if he could bring over the Cosacks to his Party, and at the same
time contrive the Destruction of Lepanowitz the Russian General. For which
purpose he caused several counterfeit Letters to be dispersed in the Provinces
written in Lepanowitz's Name, wherein he commanded the Muscovites to fall upon
the perfidious Cosacks in their Quarters, having received certain Intelligence,
that they intended to side with the Young Demetrius at Caluga. The General's
Name of the Dunensian Cosacks that served at that time in the Muscovite Army,
was Sidorus, who formerly had been in the Interest of this Young Demetrius his
Father. Gaziowski was very careful to cause one of these Letters to fall into
his Hands, who not in the least suspecting any Fraud in the Matter, without any
further Consultation communicated it to the other principal Officers of the
Cosacks, representing to them their common Danger, in Terms so lively and
natural, as sufficiently testified his Apprehension of their imaginary Peril;
Being all terrified with the imminent Danger of their approaching Ruin and
Destruction, they unanimously resolved to anticipate their Fate and return it
upon their Enemies; for which Reason having communicated their Design to the
Soldiers, they ran all to their Arms, fa^^ing upon the Muscovites next to their
Quarters.

Lepanowitz, surpised at the Suddenness of the Matter, and being not in the
least forewarned of the Trap laid against his Life, hastened thither with a few
of his Friends to appease the Tumult by his Authority, or else to give the
necessary Orders for stopping tho Violences of the Cosacks, who no sooner saw
him appear, but looking upon him as the chief Author of their imaginary
Massacre, and being underhand edged on to his Destruction by certain
Emissaries sent among them for that purpose by the Polish General, they soon
overpowered and slew him upon the place.

By this time the rest of the Muscovian Generals, having got what Forces they
could together, marched at the Head of them to the Quarters of the Cosacks, who
were also on their side preparing for a resolute Defense, and, if all Means
failed, to open their Passage to the Castle, in order to join with the Poles;
so that the projected Design of Gaziowski, was upon the very point of having
had its desired Effect, if Trubecowitz. (who upon the News of the Fall of
Lepanowitz, was declared General over the Muscovites) seeing them so resolute
in their Defense, had not desired a Parley with some of their principal
Officers, which having been granted, and he being informed of the false
Apprehensions of their imminent Danger, which had occasioned this Mutiny gave
them such convincing Demonstrations of the Falsity of their imaginary Peril,
and the most sincere Assurances of his Protection and Acknowledgment of their
Services, that the Tumult was appealed without any further Bloodshed.

Neither was it long before the Artifices of Gaziowski were discovered and
quite eluded by the Care of the new Muscovite General, who having caused some
of the Polish Emissaries (who were sent into the Camp to debauch the Cosacks)
to be seized and tortured, they confessed the whole Matter, and were put to
death with the most exquisite Torments in View of their Countrymen within the
Castle, to deterr them from the attempting any thing like it for the Future.

There having by this means an entire Reconciliation and good Correspondence
been re-establ^shed betwixt the Muscovites and Gosacks, they with their joint
Forces vigorously p^osecuted the Siege, and pressed so hard upon the Poles on
all sides, that they drove them out of all their Outworks, and at last
possessed themselves also of those Fortifications which they had on the other
side of the River M^sca, for the maintaining a Communication and Correspondency
with the Count^y, whereby being put out of all Hopes of Relief, and of
receiving the Necessary Supplies of Provisions, ^^ey were reduced to great
Wants. Having been forced to endure great Hardships for want of all manner of
Necessaries for the Space of several Weeks, and every thing seeming to tend to
a general Insurrection among the Polish Soldiers, they were on the fifteenth
day of August unexpectedly delivered by a lucky Accident, or rather a Miracle.

It is to be observed that the Poles before they were so closely pent up by the
Muscovites, and when they were as yet Ma^ters of the Pass opposite to the
Mid-City on the other side of the River Mosca, had sent several strong Parties
abroad, partly, the better to husband that small Store of Provisions which were
remaining in the Castle, partly to get what Booty they could in the Country, to
supply their Wa^ts within. Being especially reduced to great Straights for want
of Forage, they had sent all their Boys and Ser^^nts out a foraging, which the
Muscovites having got notice of, they took this Opportunity to attack in the
mean while this Post with the utmost Vigor, which, after a brave Resistance,
they made themselves Masters of, and having caused a Line to be made, with the
necessary Redoubts on all the Avenues, guarded by a considerable Body of their
best Troops, they thought to have now cut off all Hopes of Relief or receiving
Supplies from the Besieged; as in effect they had, if their own Fears had not
once more opened that Passage to the Enemy.

For scarce were these Lines perfected, when the several Parties sent abroad by
the Poles, which all together amounted to some Thousands, being at a certain
place, according to Agreement joined in one Body and met by the Forage^s who
were marching to the City of Musco, in order to their return into the Castle;
but approaching the River Mosca, found all the Avenues leading to it, secured
by the Enemy's Lines. They were at first at a stand* not knowing what to
resolve upon in this present Exigency of their Affairs, most of the Soldiers
that were among them tired before with the Fatigues and Hardships they had
endured, being for retiring and shifting for themselves; But the Boys and other
Servants that had been foraging, declaring that they would not abandon their
Masters without attempting their Relief; the rest being at last overcome with
Shame, resolved also to open their Passage with their Swords, and force their
Way into the Castle. Pursuant to this Resolution they put their little Army in
Battle-Array, and extending their Front (where they had placed all the
Soldiers) as much as possibly they could, they advanced with Colors flying,
Drums beating, and Trumpets sounding, in good Order, toward the Enemy's Lines.
Scarce were they come within sight of the Muscovites, but these imagining no
less than that the whole Polish Army was advancing to the Relief of their
Countrymen, and being seized by a Panick Fear, without any further delay
quitted their Lines, and retired on the other side of the River Mosca, leaving
a free Passage to the Poles, who entered Cataygorod, or the Mid-City (which
comprehends the Castle within its Walls) without the least Opposition, where
they were received with all the Demonstra^ions of Joy and Praises due to their
Courage.

Gaziowski the Polish Gene^al having, out of what had happened, and the Confusion
he observed among the Muscovites in the City, soon guessed at the true Reason
of their sudden Retreat, and willing to improve so favorable an Opportunity,
caused a strong Sally to be made upon the Muscovites, who being scared with
the. Apprehensions of the Approach of the whole Force of Poland, durst not look
the Enemy in the Face; so that the Poles recovered in a few Hours from the
Muscovites, what had cost them many Months before they could gain it; and
during this Consternation it would have been no difficult Matter to have chased
them quite out of the City, if he that comman^^d the Sally would have pushed on
his Advantage with the same Vigor to the last, as he did in the Beginning. But
this Commander being at Variance with Gaziowski the Polish General, but
intimate Friend of Chodkienitski Lieutenant General of the Lith^^nian Army, who
was designed for the Relief of the Castle of Musco, he was afraid, that if he
should prosecute the Victory to the utmost, he should rob his Friend, to whom
he was obliged for his Advancement, of the Honor of having delivered the City
of Musco into the Hands of King Sigismund; so that being contented with having
enlarged the Polish Quarters, and chased the Muscovites out of their Posts, he
returned without pursui^^ the Enemy, having let slip a fair Opportunity of
securing this Imperial City, and consequently the whole Empire for King
Sigismund, both which were not long after lost by the King's ill Conduct, and
the Jealousies which reigned among his Generals, as we shall have Occasion to
relate anon. For, though the Poles flushed with this Success, reassumed new
Courage for a little time, yet finding the Enemy, after his first Consternation
was* over, to attack them afresh with more Vigor than ever, and by degrees to
drive them out of their most advanced Posts, and that they had but little Hopes
of any solid Supply out of Poland, which might be sufficient to divert the
whole Force of Muscovy, they in a mutinous Manner demanded their Pay, declaring
that they would no longer expose themselves to such Hazards, without the least
^opes of Relief or Reward. Gaziowski endeavoring by all means possible to
appease the Tumult, (which was fomented by the Divisions among the Chief
Officers) it was agreed that Letters should be once more dispatched into Poland
by a trusty Messenger, after whose Return they should be at Liberty ^o dispose
of themselves as they found it most convenient to the present Circumstances of
their Affairs.

Accordingly a Letter was sent to King Sigismund, written in the Name of the
Polish Garrison of the Castle of Musco; wherein having represented to the King,
how faithfully they had served him in their Station, how they had held out for
a considerable time against the whole Force of Muscovy, struggled with Famine
and all other Inconveniences, which must be the necessary Consequences of so
long a Siege, they found themselves and their Services neglected, by not
receiving any Supplies of Men or Money, that their Condition was such as not to
be able to defend themselves much longer against so numerous an Army; if not
powerfully assisted by the King; That therefore they were obliged to consult
their own Safety; and to declare, that if by the sixth of January next ensuing,
their Prince Vladislaus were not sent to their Assistance with a considerable
Body of Troops, and all other things requisite to enable him to maintain his
just Claim (by Virtue of the last Election) to the Muscovian Crown, they were
unanimously resolved to quit the Castle, to march back into Poland, and to
require their Arrears.

King Sigismund being not a little startled at the peremptory Demands of the
Soldiery in Musco, was uncertain what Measures to take, to maintain his
Interest in the Russian Empire; but remaining steadfast in his Resolution not to
send his Son Vladislaus, he ordered Charles Chodkievitski, Lieutenant General
of the Lithuanian Army, to march with some Thousands of his best Troops toward
the City of Musco, and to maintain the Castle against the Muscovites, till he
having settled his Aff^^^s at Home, should be at leisure to march the next
Spring to their Assistance with a Royal Army.

Potocki, Palatine of Braclovia, was at that time Commander in Chief over those
Forces that were left for the Guard of ^he Province and City of Smolensko, who
had signalized himself upon several Occasions at the Siege of that Place, and
being an intimate Friend of Gaziowski the Polish General within the Castle of
Musco, looked with a very ill Eye upon this Advancement of Chodkievitski, which
he thought to have been due to himself, or at least to his Friend Gaziowski;
and therefore resolved to thwart all his Designs. For which purpose it was
insinuated into the Chief Officers, That Chodkievitski was sent with an Army
out of Poland to prosecute the Muscovian War, and to take Possession of the
Imperial City, to the gaining of which he had contributed little or nothing, to
defraud them of the Honor and Rewards of their past Labors; The common
Soldiers being also terrified with his Severity in Martial Discipline, by the
Artifices of Potocki's Emissaries, were prepossessed with such an Aversion
against his Person, that at his Arrival they refused to obey his Commands,
neither ^ould they be prevailed upon to make any more Sallies, which the
Muscovites improving to their Advantage, straightned them more and more without
any considerable Opposition.

The time was thus trifled away in Contests within the Castle till the sixth of
January, the Day prefixed for the Departure of the Garrison, in their Letter to
King Sigismund, if Prince Vladislaus did not come to their Relief; when they
unanimously declared, That they would march directly into Poland to get
Satisfaction for their Arrears.

Chodkievitski, with all the Head Officers of his Party, did omit nothing which
they believed might keep them in Obedience; they endeav^ured by Entreaties,
Promises and Threats, to induce them to alter, or at least to deferr their
Resolution, but in vain; For having chosen one Joseph Cieclinski their General,
they marched, to the Number of betwixt seven and eight thousand Men, most
Horse, out of the Castle, and having opened their Passage with their Swords
through their Enemies, directed their March to the Lesser Poland, where having
distributed their Troops into several Palatinates, they made Leopolis their
Head Quarters, and seized not only upon the King's Domains, but also upon the
Ecclesiastical Revenues for the Satisfaction of their Arrears. There was
however a Body of four thousand Men, to wit, that commanded by Sapiha, left for
the Guard of the Castle of Musco, who were at last prevailed upon to stay for
some time longer, by the p^ospect of great Advantages, having all the
Crown-Jewels of Muscovy, consisting of two Crowns of Gold beset with Gems, two
Sceptres with Diamonds, two Ducal Bonnets, the Golden Apple, and other precious
Stones of great Value, put into their Hands as a Pledge for their Pay.

Potocki having thus far succeeded in his Design, and finding things reduced to
Extremity by his Contrivances, he thought it now fit time to step in for the
Prese^vation of the Place; for which purpose he sent a considerable Force from
Smolensko, under the Command of Konickpotski a Creature of his own, and not
long after, his near Kinsman Nicholas Strusius, with part of the Garrison of
Smolensko, to the Assistance of those within the Castle of Musco. They entered
without the least Opposition, through that Pass which the Poles had as yet
maintained on the other side of the River Mosca; and those within being
reinforced and encouraged by so considerable a Number of f^esh T^oops, might
without all (...) not only have maintained but also have enlarged their
Quarters, if the Jealousy and Envy that reigned among the Officers had not
rendered all the Designs of Chodkicvitski fruitless; so that, notwithstanding
the considerable Accession of these Troops, the Muscovites found Means ^o pen
them up closer every day, and at last to cut of their Communication with the
Country, by perfecting their Lines on the other side of the River M^sca.

The Sapihan Horse, consisting of four thousand Men, seeing themselves in
danger of being enclosed without any Hopes of Relief, and unwilling to lose the
Treasure they had got so lately in their possession, declared unanimously, that
they were resolved not to endure any longer the Dangers and Fatigues of a close
Siege, without the least Prospect of Success on their side; and that they would
follow the Example of ^he rest, who were some months before marched into
Poland. Accordingly having chosen one John Zalinski their Commander in Chief,
they marched out with all the Crown-Jewels in their Possession, and having with
great Bravery fo^ced the Enemy's Lines, marched directly into Lithuania,
setting up their Head Quarters at Bresla, and treading the Footsteps of their
Brethren in the Lesser Poland, took up their Quarters in the neighboring
Palatinates, where they lived at discretion upon the King's Domains and the
Ecclesiastical Revenues, till their Arrears were paid.

King Sigismund was by this time become sensible of his fatal Error in not
sending his Son Vladislaus into Muscovy; especially when the Polish Nobility
exasperated by the Insolences of the confederate Forces in the Lesser Poland
and Lithuania, began to break out into open Complaints, charging the King with
the Causes of all these Disorde^s, which might have been prevented if he had
not preferred the Insinuations of his flattering Courtiers before the wholesome
Advice of his Senate and his most experienced Officers. To repa^r therefore, if
possible, his former Mi^^ake, he resolved to bring Vladislaus thither in Person
at the ^^ad of a good Army, and having assembled what Forces he had in
Readiness, marched directly to Vilna the Capital City of Lithuania, Si^^^mund
m^rches to the Relief of Musco.
expecting to be joined there by the Confederate Forces, by reason of their
great Zeal for the Interest of their Prince Vladislaus. But these having once
tasted the Sweets of their p^entiful Quarters, and having yet in fresh
Remembrance their late Fatigues sustained in the Castle of Musco, were not for
changing their present plentiful Condition for the To^^ and Chances of War; so
that, when the King o^der'd them to prepare for the March, they unanimously
declared that they would not stir unless they received full Satisfaction for
their Arrears.

The King, though disappointed in the Assistance of those Troops, in which he
confided most, having received a Reinforcement of two thousand German Foot,
directed his March toward Smolensko, where by the Accession of those Forces
that Quartered thereabouts, he hoped to be in a Condition to attempt the Relief
of his Subjects within the Castle of the City of Musco. But the same Evil
Genius which had alienated the Confederate Forces from his Service did follow
him to Smolensko. For the Horse in those Parts, after the Example of their
Brethren in Lithuania and Poland, declared that they would not stir out of
their Quarters till their Arrears were paid them. King Sigismund wanting Money
to satisfy their Demands, and Strength to reduce them to Obedience, was fain
to have Recourse to Entreaties and Promises not only of their Arrears, but also
of vast Rewards; but these verbal Temptations not making the least Impression
upon the Soldiers, the King declared that if they all refused to follow him,
he would in Person at the Head of his Guards only march to the Relief of his
Subjects in Muscovy.

Some of the Horse, overcome with Shame and the Persuasions of their Officers,
who upbraided them with Cowardice and want of Loyalty, being at last prevailed
upon, not to leave the King at this critical Juncture, Sigismund resolved to
prosecute his March to Viasna, midway betwixt Smolensko and the City of Musco.

I had almost forgot to have mentioned here an Accident that happened to the King
at the time of his marching out of one of the Gates of Smolensko, which is
called the Kings Gate, the same was interpreted as an inauspicious Omen to
Sigismund. For it happened, that just at the same Instant as he was to go through
the abovementioned Gate, the Portcullice fell down and stopped his Passage; so
that he was forced to ^urn back and take another Way to Viasna, where he
halted, expecting to be joined by some other Forces, that were quartered in the
neighboring Provinces.

Whilst the King, who was always dilatory in his Affairs, was advancing with
slow Marches toward the City of Musco, the Russians had pressed on the Siege
of the Castle with more Vigor than before, and having perfected their Lines on
all sides, and fortified them with Redoubts at convenient distances, and
reduced the Poles within to great Straights, who, for want of a sufficient
Number of Foot, were no longer able to maintain their Works, much lest to
hinder the App^oaches of the Enemy. However, they supplied the Defect of their
Foot by the Service of their Horse, who during the whole Summer,
notwithstanding all the Passages were fortified and guarded by the Muscovites,
at several times broke through their Lines and brought in Provisions for the
Garrison. But these Supplies being brought in so small Quantities as not to
bear any proportion with the Necessities of the Soldiers, who were at last
reduced to extreme Want, Chodkievitski resolved to make his last Effort, and to
try whether he could not by the same Way of the River, which he had made use of
before, bring in a Supply of five hundred Wagons, laden with all manner of
Provisions into the Castle.

For which purpose having ordered a Sally to be made with the greatest part of
the Horse, and all the Foot within the Castle, they by break of day forced the
Guards of the Muscovites on the other side of the River Mosca, to facilitate
the Passage of their Convoy, which they met at some di^tance from the Town. But
they advancing very ^lowly by reason of the great Number of Wagons, the
Muscovite^ had sufficient Leisure given them to draw the greatest part of their
Forces out on that side, so that at their Return they were warmly received by
the whole Power of the Muscovites, who knowing the Fate of the Siege to depend
from the Success of this days Action, fought with great Obstinancy. The Polish
Horse, induced by the same Motives fought like Men resolved to conquer or to
die, and, notwithstanding the great Inequality of their Number, had brought the
Muscovian Horse into Confusion, and would in all likelihood have carried the
Day, if they had been duly seconded by their Foot commanded by Strusius. But he
being a near Kinsman and Creature of Potocki, Poles beaten by the Muscovites.
who, as we mentioned before, looked with an ill Eye upon the Advancement of
Chodkievitski, under pretense of guarding the Convoy of Provisions, advanced so
slowly to the Rescue of the Horse, that being surrounded on all sides, they had
enough to do to fight their Way through into the Castle, without being able to
execute their Design, and were soon after followed by the Foot, who were forced
to leave all the Provisions intended for their Relief to the disposal of the
Enemy.

Thus the Hopes which King Sigismund had conceived of the conquering of the
Russian Empire vanished with his Overthrow, which at once lost him all the
Fruits of his former Victories, acquired with the Effusion of so much Blood,
and the Expense of a vast Treasure.

For the Muscovites having received certain Intellig^nce that King Sigismund
was preparing to advance to their Rescue, doubled their Guard in all their
Avenues leading to the Castle, and so straightly enclosed the Garrison within
the Limits of their Walls, that they took from them all Hopes of receiving any
further Supplies of Provisions. The Poles on the other Hand knowing the
Importance of the Place which was committed to their Custody, from whence
depended in a great Measure the Fate of the Muscovian Empire; and living in
daily Expectation of the Approach of their King, endured all the Extremities of
Famine with an unparalleled Resolution. For after having consumed every thing
that was eatable, not only Horses, Cats, Dogs, Rats, Mice, and other living
Creatures, but also the Leather and Coverts of their Trunks and Saddles; they
proceeded to Human Flesh, feeding upon the Carcasses of their Comrades. But
this having in a little time caused a most violent Contagion among them, and
receiving no certain Intelligence of the further Approach of the Polish Army,
The Poles surrender he Castle of M^sco.
their Obstinacy was forced to yield to the Extremity to which they were
reduced by the Watchfulness of the Muscovites, and the slow Advances of their
Countrymen, so that they surrendered themselves at Discretion, after having
given a thousand evident Proofs of their Courage and Loyalty during this long
and remarkable Siege.

King Sigismund had been all this while trifling away his time at Viasna, where
having received this fatal News of the Surrender of the Castle of Musco, he and
the whole Army were put into such a Consternation as is not easy to be
expressed. Being at the greatest Incertitude that possibly could be, what to
resolve upon at this critical Juncture, he called together all his ablest
Counselors and most experienced Officers, to consult what was best to be
done. There were not a few who advised him to lay aside all further Thoughts of
the Muscovian Crown, and, in a far advanced Season, not to expose his Person
and the whole Army to eminent Danger among a Treacherous People. But the major
Part were of Opinion, that the Pretenses to the Russian Empire ought not to be
quited at so easy a Rate; that if he, without any further Delay, advanced into
the Heart of the Country, it was not improbable that the Muscovites overawed
by his Presence at the Head of a good Army, whilst their Affairs were yet in an
unsettled Condition, might be induced rather to adhere to their former Election
of Prince Vladislaus, than to expose themselves afresh to the Hazards of a
ruinous War. And that in case they should be disappointed in their Expectation,
it would be more glorious for them to procure an honorable Peace with their
Swords in Hand, than shamefully to turn their Backs to their Enemies, whereby
they would be encouraged to carry the War into the Polish T^rritories.

The King having given his Approbation to the latter, it was resolved to march
immediately toward Federoviscum, where having set up their Head Quarters, the
King detached a considerable Body of Horse, to advance to the very Walls of the
City of Musco. They were no sooner come within sight of that City, but they
were received with good store of Shot from the Walls, which being seconded by a
furious Sally, the Polish Horse were forced to retire with the Loss of some of
their Companions. The King judging by the Entertainment given to his Troops
before the Imperial City that the Muscovites had laid aside all Thoughts of
receiving his Son Vladislaus for their Great Duke, and finding himself not in a
Capacity at present to force them to a Compliance, was uncertain what Measures
to take. The worst of all was, that the Muscovites in the circumjacent
Provinces, upon the first News of the Surrender of the Castle of Musco, and the
Approach of the Polish Army, had carried all their Provisions into their strong
Holds; so that King Sigismund's Army which consisted most of Cavalry, was in
great Distress for want of Forage in a Country where the Winter-Season affords
nothing in the Field for the Sustenance of Horses, and makes encamping almost
intolerable to the Soldiers.

The evil Posture of their Affairs gave occasion to frequent Consultations in
the Polish Camp, where it was at last resolved to attempt to make themselves
Masters of some Place of Strength, whereby they might at once supply their
present Necessity, and secure themselves a secure Retreat in the ^ear^ of the
Country, till they might find an Opportunity to take new Measures against next
Spring. Volock was the Place pitched upon as the fittest for their present
Purpose, which the Poles, enraged at their ill Success, attacked with
incredible Fury, but their ill Fortune seemed to follow them wherever they
came; for the Muscovites having in fresh Remembrance the Ravages committed by
the Poles, and especially the Burning of the City of Musco, looked upon them no
otherwise than the mortal Enemies of their Country, and therefore defended
themselves with such a Resolution as sufficiently showed that they would rather
bury themselves in the Ruins of the Place than suffer them again to get footing
in the Heart of the Empire; so that after having been repulsed several times
with considerable Loss, The Poles retire out of Muscovy.
they had no other Way left them for their Safety, than to hasten their March
toward Smolensko, and from thence into Poland, with the Loss of many of their
Soldiers and most of their Horses.

And thus, after so much Bloodshed, so many Sieges and Battles, and the
Expense of vast Treasures, ended the Expedition of Sigismund King of Poland,
who by his ill Conduct lost the Crown of Muscovy designed for his Son
Vladislaus, rendered the Endeavors of the two unfortunate Demetrius's
unsuccessful, and involved the Russian Empire in unspeakable Miseries, which
now by his Retreat began to conceive new Hopes of its future Establishment.

For, no sooner had they rid their Hands of the Poles, but they applied all
their care toward the rooting out the Remnants of the Imposture of the
Demetrius's for which purpose they sent a considerable Body toward Caluga, to
attack those Forces that stood still out for the Interest of Marina and the
Young Demetrius, her pretended Son, under the Command of Zarucki the General of
the Cosacks; but these defended themselves with so much Bravery; that the
Muscovites finding them so resolute in their Defense, and fearing lest they
should be prevailed upon to side with the Poles against them, tampered
underhand with some of their Chief Officers, who being blinded by the
Muscovite Gold, brought over the greatest part of the Cosacks to the Muscovite
Party, and as a Pledge of their future Fidelity, delivered their Leader, the
brave Zarucki, and Marina and her supposititious Son into their Hands.

The Unfortunate Zarucki, after an Imprisonment of some Months, was impaled;
but as to Marina and the Young pretended Demetrius, the Muscovites were divided
in their Opinions; there being not a few who in regard of the eminent Station
she had born in the Muscovian Empire, and her high Extraction, endeavored to
save her from the Cruelties of those who laid all the Outrages committed since
the Beginning of the War by the Poles at her Door, as being in a great Measure
the chief Cause of their Invading the Russian Empire, and consequently of all
the Miseries they had endured for these ten or twelve Years last past. They
judged it therefore most conducible to the Settlement of their State, by her
Death to strike at the Root of the Pretensions of the Demetrius's, and to take
away all Color of future Claim upon that Score: Pursuant to which Resolution,
she and her pretended Son Demetrius were condemned to be thrust under the Ice.

Marina received the fatal News with a Constancy above the ordinary Courage of
her Sex, and having desired only a few Hours to prepare herself for her last
Exit out of this World, Marina and the Young Demetrius drowned.
she appeared with a very grave and composed Countenance, and a Presence so
Majestic, and out-braving her present ill Destiny, that she drew Tears even
from the Eyes of her mortal Enemies. She declared, that, as for her own part,
she had of late been so much accustomed to the perpetual Vicissitudes of
Fortune, as not to be terrified at her approaching Death, by which she hoped to
exchange her Miseries for everlasting Joys; That her only Concern was for the
young Babe, whose tender Age, as it was incapable of committing any Crimes, so
her greatest Grief was to see its Innocence thus involved in her Ruin by the
Insatiable Revenge of her Enemies. Being not allowed to say any more, after a
few Minutes bestowed in pious Ejaculations, she was with her Babe in her Arms
thrust into the Watery Element, where she and all her Hopes were smothered
under the Ice.

She was a Lady of an immense Ambition, and of a Greatness of Mind uncommon to
her Sex; as her aspiring Thoughts gave place to all other Considerations, so
the Desire of Empire was the predominant Passion of her Soul, which had made
her embark in these Designs which at last proved her Destruction. The Greatness
of her Courage and Constancy was such, as that she refused even to the last to
be treated at a less Rate than an Empress; And in the very lowest Ebb of
Fortune, such was her Ambition as to refuse the Letters of certain Friends,
because they had not styled her Empress of Muscovy in their Superscriptions.

The Muscovites having thus disintangled themselves out of these Troubles which
had overwhelmed their Empire, began now to take breath, and in order to
establish their present Quiet upon a lasting Foundation, began to consult the
Settlement of the Government, by such an Election as might restore them to
their former flourishing Condition. There were some among the ancient Nobility,
who sufficiently declared their Inclinations, that by their late Services in
having been instrumental in chasing the Poles out of Muscovy, they thought
themselves entitled to the Royal Dignity, which was like to have proved the
Source of new Calamities, if the popular Faction headed by Prosowecki and Boris
Sicin had not declared peremptorily, that the only Means to resettle their
turbulent State, was to revert the Government into its ancient Channel, by
choosing one of the Royal Family of John Basilovits.

But whilst the Muscovites were concerting Measures for the Establishment of
their State, thinking to have secured themselves against any further
Impostures, by the Death of Marina and the pretended Young Demetrius, they were
surprised with the unwelcom News, that the Old Demetrius was revived again, and
had appeared in the North-western Provinces of the Empire.

This Impostor was of a mean Extraction, A fourth counterfeit Demetrius.
a Scrivener by his Profession, but of a bo^d and daring Spirit, and a ready
Tongue and subtle Wit; He assumed the Name of Demetrius the Son of John
Basilovits, giving it out that besides his miraculous Preservation at Vgletz
and in the City of Musco, he had escaped the Hands of the Tartars at Caluga,
who in the Fray had murdered another in his stead.

The Rumor spread abroad concerning this new Demetrius, soon drew to his Party
such of the Muscovites as had lately adhered to Marina, and for fear of
Punishment were glad to embrace any Opportunity to fish in troubled Waters. To
these there flocked abundance of Vagabonds and idle Persons, the Remnants of
the late intestine Broils, and such as having been by the War indisposed to any
thing of Labor, hoped to live upon Rapine and the Plunder of the Country.

Finding himself thus on a sudden at the Head of a considerable Party, he
published his Manifesto, wherein he exho^ted all his faithful Subjects to
acknowledge him for their lawful Sovereign, as being the only surviving Issue
of John Basilovits, their Great Duke, who having three several times escaped
the Hands of his bloody Enemies did once more appear to assert his Legal Title
to the Muscovian Throne.

Perceiving the giddy Multitude ready to swallow the Bait, he directed his
March to Novogorod Veliki, where being received under the Acclamations of the
People, Several Places declared for him.
he after some short Stay, marched from thence to Jama, and so further to
Ivanogorod, where the Inhabitants, after the Example of those of Novogorod,
readily opened their Gates, and received him as Great Duke of Muscovy. Being
encouraged by this Success, to put the better Countenance upon his Imposture,
he resolved to strengthen his Interest, if possible by some Foreign Alliances.
He judged, not without reason, that the Poles, who had been so lately baffled
in their Design against Muscovy at the Expense of a vast Treasure, and the Loss
of so many of their Countrymen, would not easily be prevailed upon to try so
soon again their Fortune in a Country where they had drawn upon themselves the
general hatred of the People; wherefore he thought it more conducing to the
present Circumstances of his Affairs, to implore the Assistance of the Swedes,
who by Reason of the nearness of their Frontiers to those Provinces where he
had established his Interest, were the most likely to prove most advantageous
to his Pretensions.

In order to which, Sends an Ambassador into Sweden.
he sent an Ambassador to Charles King of Sweden, unto whom having represented
the Treachery of his unfaithful Subjects against their Lawful Sovereign, he
craved his Aid for the Recovery of his Throne. King Charles showed sufficient
Inclination to hearken to his Propositions, but considering with himself how it
could be possible that the same Demetrius, after having been slain three
several times, should appear again and ask his Assistance unless he were
immortal, he dispatched the Ambassador of this New Demetrius with this Answer,
That he would send an Ambassador of his own to Ivanogorod, in order to settle
every thing, relating to the proposed Alliance, with him in Person. King
Charles had at that time in his Co^^t, a certain Gentleman whose Name was
Petrejus, who had formerly seen the first Demetrius; both in Poland and in the
City of Musco. Knowing him to be a Person of undoubted Integrity, and being
resolved not to be imposed upon by the cunning Muscovite, he sent him as his
Ambassador to this Demetrius, then resident at Ivanogorod, with Orders, if he
found him to be the same Person that was acknowledged and crowned as the true
Demetrius in the City of Musco, to conclude an Alliance with him, and to
promise him all possible Assistance for the Recovery of his Crown and the
reducing his Subjects to their due Obedience. Petreius, being arrived at
Ivanogorod, demanded, according to his Instructions, immediately Audience from
the supposed Great Duke, which he could not obtain at that time by reason of a
Pretended Indisposition of this new modeled Emperor of Russia, who having got
Notice that Petreius had personally known the first Demetrius, did not judge it
advisable to admit him into his Presence. Petreius having again demanded
Audience, was answered, That the Great Duke's Indisposition would not give him
leave to receive him in Person, according to his Quality, but that if he would
be pleased to treat with his Council in the mean while, concerning such Matters
as were within the Compass of his Instructions, he did not question but that in
a few Days he might be so far reestablished in his Health, as to ratify the
Treaty in Person, and to show him all the Honors due to his Character.
Petreius, who began to mistrust the Matter, answered, That the King of Sweden,
his Master, being desirous to enter into a strict Alliance with his Czarish
Majesty, had given him some particular Instructions, which he was commanded to
communicate to no body but to him in Person; And having made reiterated
Instances for his Admittance into the Great Duke's Presence, which was as often
denied him, under some pretense or other, he had all the Reason to gather from
thence and some other Observations he made, that this Denial proceeded from the
Conscience of his own Guilt, and that all his Pretenses were fictitious;
Wherefore having once more demanded Audience, which was again denied, ^he
declared, That since it was his Misfortune to come at a time when it was not
consistent with his Czarish Majesty's Health to be admitted in his Presence,
and that being limited as to the time of his Return, and not permitted to
disclose his Master's Secrets to any of his Ministers, he was obliged to return
into Sweden; But that, if the Great Duke would send once more his Ambassadors
to the King his Master, he did not question but that Matters might be adjusted
betwixt them to their mutual Satisfaction. Thus Petreius cunningly dissembling
his real Thoughts conce^ning ^hese frequent Delays and Denials put upon him by
the Russians, left Ivanogorod, and at his Return gave King Charles a full
Account of the Success of his Negotiation.

The new modeled Demetrius finding himself thus disappointed in his Hopes of
the Swedish Aids, yet did not lose Courage; but having by this time brought
over a consid^rable Body of the Cosacks to his Party, resolved to appear now in
the Field at the Head of his Army directing his March to the City of Plesko,
situate upon a Lake of the same Name, and one of the most considerable in those
Parts.

The Muscovites, who looked at first upon this Imposture, as so gross and so
ill contrived as scarce worth their taking Notice of, when they saw several
Places of Note thereabouts to take the Bait, and the Impostor ready to take the
Field with a considerable Number of Troops, thought it now high time to run to
the quenching of the Fire before the Flame should spread it self over the
neighboring Provinces. Having received Intelligence that the Impostor was
marching toward Plesko, they ordered their Army to march also to the Relief of
that Place; which being by the Counterfeit Demetrius summoned to a Surrender,
was just upon the point of complying with his Demands, when the Muscovite Army
advancing, he took the Alarm, and finding himself not in a Capacity to fight an
Army much superior to him both in Number and Goodness of the Soldiers, he
resolved upon a hasty Retreat, which was done with so much Precipitation, Is
routed.
that he was forced to leave all his Cannon and Baggage behind him, which fell
into the Hands of the Enemies, who also pursued and dispersed his Troops,
himself scarce escaping to Ivanogorod.

The Muscovites, believing there was nothing more to be done for them in those
Parts, marched back with their Army to the Capital City; but it was not long
after they had withdrawn themselves out of the Neighborhood of Plesko, Is
invited to Plesko.
when the Inhabitants of that City sent their Deputies to Ivanogorod offering
themselves and their Town to the Service and Protection of this Impostor.

He, who but a few days before had looked upon his Affairs as desperate and
past redress, being over-joyed at so unexpected a Success, reassumed new
Courage, and being resolved to improve so favorable an Opportunity to his
Advantage, went immediately with what Troops he had left after his late Retreat
to Plesko, where he was received with all the Demonstrations of Joy, and Honor
due to their Lawful Sovereign.

If he had been as careful to maintain the good Opinion of the Citizens of
Plesko, as he had been vigilant in procuring it, the Accession of so
considerable a Place might have proved of great Consequence to his Affairs;
but, instead of improving it to his Advantage, he gave himself over to all
manner of Debauchery and Licentiousness, and his Officers, following the
Footsteps of their Leader, committed all manner of Insolences upon the People,
by debauching and violating their Wives and Daughters; so that at last the
Citizens of Plesko, being convinced of their Mistake, and not any longer able
to endure their Villainies, took a Resolu^ion to rid their Hands of these new
Guests.

For which purpose being met at a certain Day appointed for that purpose early
in the Morning well armed, they attacked and beat his Guards, and forced him to
fly the City. The Cosacks seeing him thus forsaken by the Muscovites, resolved
not to stay long behind, but to leave him with the first Opportunity. But some
of the Officers considering with themselves, that if they could seize upon his
Person, they might, by so acceptable a Present the sooner make their own Peace,
and obtain Pardon for their Rebellion, resolved to seize him and to deliver him
up to the Muscovites. They were just upon the point of putting their Design in
Execution, when he mistrusting the Matter, clapped Spurs to his Horse, and
would without Question have saved himself by the Swiftness of his Horse, if he
had not been overtaken by an Arrow out of a Cosacks Bow, Is taken and executed.
which having wounded him in the Shoulder, he was taken, and being bound Hand
and Foot, sent to the City of Musco, where he was hanged in a Chain before one
of the Gates of that City.

The Muscovites in the mean while having consulted their own Safety after some
Contests among the Nobles, at last, by the universal Suffrage of the People,
chose Michael Federovits, the fatal Youth so much feared by Zuski, their Great
Duke, who happily maintained himself in the Throne, and restored Tranquillity to
the shattered Empire of Muscovy, as will appear out of the following Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
Containing the History of the Reigns of Michael Federovits, of Alexi
Michaelovits, his Son, and Fedor Alexiovits the Eldest Brother of the present
Grand Czar of Muscovy.
MIchael Federovite was the Son of Fedor Nikitis, who being descended from the
Race of the Great Duke John Basilovits, by one of his Daughtters, had during
the last Troubles in Muscovy lived a very retired life; And at last having
forsaken his Wife for God's sak^, as they call it in Muscovy, embraced a
Religious Life, and soon after was made Patriarch, when he changed the Name of
Fedor into Philaretes. His Son was scarce seventeen years of Age when he was
crowned Great Duke of Russia, in the Year 1613, with one of the Diadems which
they found among the Rapines of the Poles, notwithstanding which he governed
the Russian Empire with a great deal of Prudence, taking the Advice of his
ablest Counselors, but especially of his Father in all Matters of any Moment.

The first thing he did, after his Coronation, was to recompense the Services
of Prosowecki, Boris Sicin, and the General of the Dunensian Cosacks, who had
not only signalized themselves by their Zeal in driving the Poles out of
Muscovy, Truce begun* be^wixt the new Great Duke and the Poles.
but also had been very instrumental in his Election. Those he constituted
Generals of his Armies, and by their Valor obliged the Poles to emancipate
them from the Oath which the Muscovites had sworn to Vladislaus their Prince,
who was forced to make a Truce with this new Great Duke for fourteen Years, yet
under these Conditions, That the Poles should keep in the mean time in their
Possession the Dukedoms of Severia, Ze^ikow, and Smolensko, which they had
taken during the late Troubles in Muscovy. He also renewed the Ancient
Alliances with the other neighboring Princes; and as he was of a very good
Nature, so by the Mildness of his Government he abolished the Memory of his
Predecessors Cruelties, that, it is granted, the Muscovites never enjoyed a
more peaceable and happy Government for many Ages before. His Father, for whom
he had always expressed so much Respect, as not only to admit him to all
Public Audiences and Ceremonies, where he gave him Precedence, died in the
Year 1633. Which had almost proved fatal to his Affairs, by the unfortunate
Siege of Smolensko, if by a seasonable Peace he had not prevented the ill
Consequences of so signal a Disgrace.

For the Truce with the Poles being expired some Years before, and Michael
Eederovits, being resolved to remove these troublesome Neighbors at some
further Distance from his Frontiers, and to draw out the Thorn which stuck so
close in his Flesh, meditated the Siege of Smolensko. For which purpose he had
brought together an Army of above an^ Hundred thousand Men, among whom were
several Thousand Germans, and several Muscovian Regiments exercised according
to the German Discipline, and commanded by foreign Officers; (...)
and a great Train of Artillery consisting of three hundred Pieces of Cannon,
and all other things requisite to carry on the Siege with the utmost Vigor,
under the Command of one Herman Shein a Polander, who by his changing Religion
had gained him the Affection and Favor of the New Patriarch. The Reduction of
the Place seemed to be so much the easier, in that the City is encompassed with
Hills and only one single Wall built after the old Fashion without any
Outworks or Ditch, and that the Polish Garrison was not very numerous. The new
Great Duke besieges Smo^ensko.
For which Reason the Great Duke having ordered to attack it with all
imaginable Vigor, the Place was closely besieged in the Year 1633.

The Germans soon made a large Breach in the Wall on their side, and were
resolved to give the Assault, which was opposed by the General, saying, That it
would be a Reproach to the whole Muscovite Army, that a Handful of Germans
should carry away the Honor of the Siege; but these being encouraged by the
rest of the Foreign Officers of several Nations, mounted the Breach, and were
in a manner Masters of it, when they received positive Orders from the General
to retreat, and that in case of Refusal he would turn his Cannon upon them: So
that not daring to make any further Attempt, the whole Army continued the Siege
without doing any thing worth taking Notice of.

Vladistaus, the New King of Poland, had in the mean while Leisure given him to
get together a Body of Troops, and being encouraged by the Divisions among the
Officers in the Muscovite Camp, or invited on purpose (as some will have it) by
the Muscovian General Herman Shein, marched to the Relief of the Place. The
City of Smolensko is surrounded with Hills and vast Woods, which gave
sufficient Opportunity to the Poles to possess themselves of those few Avenues
that led to the Muscovian Camp, Disgrace received before Smolensko.
and by which they received their Provisions, so as that in a little time the
Muscovites were reduced to such Straights for want of all manner of
Necessaries, that the General to prevent their being starved, was forced to
capitulate with the Poles, to surrender the whole Army and Artillery at
Discretion, which was to be ransomed by the Great Duke.

The Loss of so great an Army, put the whole Empire under a great
Consternation, and things began to look with a very ill Face, especially when
the People began to murmur openly, and some of the great ones were suspected to
have a Finger in the Treason. King Vladislaus sent an Ambassador to the Great
Duke immediately after this Defeat of the Muscovites, who by his Insolent
Behavior sufficiently expressed the Sense the Poles had of the present turbulent
State of the Russian Empire. He caused the Muscovite Pristafs to alight and to
uncover themselves first, (which they refuse to all other Nations) declaring
publicly, that he was not come there to do the Muscovites any Honor, but to
receive it from them. He refused the Great Duke's Horses at his Entrance and
made use of his own. At his Audience he would needs make his Proposition
Sitting, and perceiving that when he pronounced the Name and Titles of his
King, Insolence of a Polish Ambassador.
the Boyars did not uncover themselves, he stopped till such time as he saw the
Great Duke command them so to do. King Vladislaus had not so much as sent the
usual presents to the Great Duke (without which otherwise Ambassadors are never
admitted to public Audience) the Ambassador only presented him, as from
himself, with a very rich Coach, which the Great Duke having accepted of, he
sent him before his Departure a rich Present of Sables, which the Ambassador
refused with Scorn. The Great Duke thereupon sent back his Coach, which he was
so angry at, that he kicked the Pristaff, (who brought the Message) from the
Top of a very high pair of Stairs to the Bottom.

The Great Duke being highly incensed thereat, yet was fain to dissemble his
Resentment, in the present ill Posture of his Affairs, he only sent word to the
Ambassador, that he knew not whether this Behavior of his was according to his
Master's Order, or whether it proceeded from his own violent Inclinations; That
if he had acted according to the King's Commands, he must have Patience till a
more favorable Juncture should present to give himself Satisfaction for the
Affronts put upon him; That though by his late Disgrace before Smolensko he was
at present not in a Capacity to show his Resentment as he ought to do, the
Event of the War was nevertheless in the Hands of God Almighty, who might crown
his Arms with better Success another time; But that if what he had done was
without the King's Order, (as he believed) and upon his own Account, Complaint
should be made of it to the King his Master, from whose Justice he promised
himself ample Satisfaction for the Rudeness and Insolences committed by his
Minister. Michael Federovits, seeing his Affairs in so ill a Posture, Peace
betwixt the Muscovites and Poles,
thought it most advisable to comply with the present Exigency of the State,
and to clap up a Peace with the Poles in the next following Year, by Virtue of
which the Muscovites renounced all their Pretensions to the two large Dukedoms
of Smolensko and Zernikow. In the same Year he caused Herman Shein, his General
at the Siege of Smolensko, to be executed, with his Son, and all his Kindred to
be banished into Siberia, by whose Death the Clamours of the People having been
appeased, he reigned afterward in great Tranquillity, and to the great
Satisfaction of his Subjects, till the Year 1645, when Count Wolmer, natural
Son to the late King of Denmark, came to this Court, to solicit his Daughter
in Marriage, which being opposed by the Russian Clergy, who objected, that he
was an Heretic; the Count proffered that his Chaplains should maintain the
Truth of the Lutheran Faith against them, which the Muscovite Priests refusing,
the Grand Czar broke out into a Passion, saying to them, Why do you impose upon
us a Faith you dare not bring to Trial? A few days after, going very well to
Bed, he was seized at Midnight with a most violent Vomiting, Michael Federovits
dies.
which put an End to his Life the next Morning being the 12th. day of July, in
the 49th. Year of his Age, and the 33d. of his Reign, the Great Duchess his
Wife dying within eight days after him, being generally regretted by the
Muscovites, who under his Reign enjoyed the Fruits of a peaceable and mild
Government.

Some years before his Death, A new (...) starts up.
there started up another Impostor, who had Impudence enough to (...) the Name
and Qua^ity of Basili Ivanovits (...) the Great Duke Basili Zuski, though it
(...) known that the whole Race of the (...) was extinct some Years before. For
of the three Brothers that were carried Prisoners into (...) died the^e without
leaving any Male (...) and the third, who was releas^d and returned into
Muscovy, died a few Years before the Discovery of this Impostor, without
Children. There was another Lord of the same Family, who had one Son, named
Michael Basilovits Zuski Scapin, who died Young, in the Year 1616, without
Issue.

The Name of this Impostor was Timoska (the Di^inutive of Timothy) Ankudina,
born in the Suburbs of Vologda in the Province of the same Name. He was the Son
of a Linen Draper who dealt in coa^se Clothes, whose Name was Demki Ankudina,
and his Mother was called Salmaniska.

The Father having observed something more than Ordinary in him, had been very
careful of giving him the highest degree of Muscovite Education, which consists
in Reading, Writing, and Singing, so that he was looked upon in those Parts as
a Person of an uncommon Capacity. The Excellency of his Voice and his Skill in
Singing, had particularly recommended him to the Archbishop of the Place, who
took him into his Service, wherein he behaved himself so well, that he bestowed
one of his Grand-daughters upon him in Marriage.

After the Archbishop's Death, having squandred away his Wifes Fortune, he
settled himself in the City of Musco, where by the recommendation of a Friend
he had at Court, he was made one of the Receivers in the Office, that is kept
there for the Licensing of Taverns and Tippling-Houses. But giving himself over
to all manner of Extravagancies and Debaucheries he could not make up his
Accounts, which fell short the first year by a considerable Sum. To repair this
Breach, he had recourse to an intimate Friend of his, one of his
fellow-Receivers in the same Office, called, Basili Gregorovits Spilki, him he
told, that one of the chiefest Merchants of Vologda, a near Relation of his
Wifes, was come to Town, and had invited him to Dinner; that he being willing
to show his Friend the highest Act of Muscovian Civility, intended to let him
see his Wife; and that he might be able to present her in a Condition suitable
to his present Statio^, he entreated him to lend him his Wifes Pearls and other
Jewels, which were of a considerable Value. His Friend having without the least
difficulty granted his Request, lent him the Jewels, without the least
Precaution, or taking any thing under his Hand for the Receipt of them; so
that, when he demanded his Jewels, Timoska averred that he had not lent him
any. Spilki clapped him up in Prison, but having no Evidence against him, he was
acquitted.

But instead of making up his Accounts with the Money he received for the
Jewels, which he sold, he squandred it away upon his Extravagancies; whereupon
great differences arising betwixt him and his Wife, who had a very lewd Tongue,
and would frequently upbraid him with his treacherous Dealings, both to his
Prince and Friend, and fearing that he might be called to an Account for his
Perfidiousness, and that his Wife might be the main Instrument of his
Discovery, he took a Resolution to dispatch her with the first Opportunity.

For which purpose, having sent his Son Tereska to a Friend of his in the
Country, he shut his Wife up in a Stove, Burnt his Wife.
and set the House on fire, which consumed her and some of the neighboring
Houses.

Having done this he went into Poland, Re^ires into Poland.
but so secretly, that it was the general Opinion in the City of Musco, that he
had been consumed with his Family. He continued two Years under a borrowed Name
in the City of Warsaw, at the Court of Vladislaus King of Poland, when hearing
that a Muscovite Ambassador was on his Way to that Court, and not thinking
himself secure, he retired to Chmielniski the General of the Cosacks, unto whom
having represented, that he was a near Kinsman of the Great Duke Basili Zuski,
and was prosecuted upon that Score by the present Czar, Michael Federovits, he
begged his Protection, and was received with all the Respect due to his
pretended Quality. As he had a ready Wit, so he carried on the Imposture under
such specious Pretenses, that he began to be very considerable among the
Cosacks, who flattered themselves with his future Protection, at a time when
they were very uneasy under the Polish Government.

The Muscovites had by this time got some Scent of the Matter, wherefore the
Great Duke sent one of his Gentlemen Ushers, named Jacob Koston, to the Cosack
General, with an offer of his Protection against the Poles, and to demand the
Impostor.

Timoska having got Notice of the Arrival of the Muscovian Poslanick, and
guessing at his Errand, thought himself no longer safe among the Cosacks, who
he feared would secure him for their own Advantage, and so went to
Constantinople, Goes to Turkey, and tur^s Mohammedan.
where having abjured the Christian Religion he embraced Mahometanism and was
circumcised. He proposed to the Turks the Introducing of Mahometanism in
Russia, if by their Assistance he might be placed in the Throne of his Father
the Great Duke Basili Zuski; but these giving no great heed to his
Propositions, he did not stay long there, but took the first Opportunity to be
transported by a Venetian Vessel into Italy. Comes to Rome and turns Roman
Catholic.
From Venice he went to Rome, where he professed the Roman Catholic Religion,
and by the same Artifices that he had made use of at Constantinople, to wit, by
promising to establish that Re^gion in Muscovy, endeavored to bring over the
Holy Father into his Interest. The Court of Rome being by this time better
acquainted with the State of Muscovy than they were some Years before, when
they were so miserably imposed upon by Demetrius, and knowing that Empire so
sett^le of Impostors, would not act with so much precipitation in an Affair of
such Moment, but resolved to amuse him with fair Promises, till they might be
fully satisfied as to the Legality of his Pretensions.

But Timoska, either judging these Resolutions too slow, Goes to Vienna, and
from thenc' into Transylvania.
or at least not suitable to his Purpose, went thence to Vienna, and from
thence to Prince Ragotzi in Transylvania. This Prince furnished him with
Letters of Recommendation to Christina Que^n of Sweden.

This Princess finding him a Person of great Dexterity, and a considerable
Share of Knowledge (for he had in his Travels attained the Latin, German,
Italian, and Turkish Languages) and giving credit to what he had related
concerning his Quality, Is well received by Christian Queen of Sweden.
refused to appear in Arms for his Interest, but allowed him a very honorable
Subsistence; so that he was looked upon by every Body and treated as the true
Son of Basili Zuski Great Duke of Muscovy.

But the Czar Regent having soon been acquainted by the Muscovian Merchants
residing at Stockholm, how this Impostor was received by the Queen sent the
same Poslanick, who had seen him before with Chmielniski the General of the
Cosacks, to detect the Fraud, and at the same time to desire her to deliver
this Villain into his Hands.

But Timoska had no sooner got Notice of the Arrival of this Gentleman, but
knowing his coming to presage no good to his Affairs, got away, without taking
his Leave, from his Man Kostka (Constantine) the constant Companion of his
Adventures, who was carried in Chains into Muscovy. Timoska was by Order from
the Queen of Sweden secured at Reval in Livonia, who intended to have also sent
him to the great Duke; but having found Means to get out of the Prison (by the
Connivance of the Governor of the Place as it was believed) he made his Escape
into Holland, from whence he went to Brussels where he tarried for some time in
that Court.

From thence he went to the University of Wittenberg, Turns Lutheran.
and soon after to Leipzick, where he made Profession of the Lutheran Religion,
and writ himself his Confession of Faith in the Latin Tongue.

After some Stay there he went to Newstadt in the Country of Holstein, where
having been discovered by a Messenger of the Great Duke's, called Peter
Micklaf, Seized in Holstein.
he was taken by Order from the Duke of Holstein, who caused him to be conveyed
from thence to Gottorp, his usual place of Residence, and to be secured under a
strong Guard, till the Great Duke should send express Orders for the bringing
his Person into Muscovy. Czar Alexis Michaelovits, Son and Successor to Michael
Federovits, having received Notice of the Seizure of this Impostor, not only
sent his Letters to the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, where he desired to have him
delivered into the Hands of such as he had appointed for that purpose, but also
(to bring to light the Villainies of Timoska, beyond all Contradiction) sent
among his Deputies the same Spilki, whom formerly he had cheated of his Wife's
Jewels, and who had been his Fellow-Officer in the same Employment.

Spilki was no sooner arrived at the Court of the Duke of Holstein, but he
desired to be confronted with him in the Presence of some Officers of the
Court, not questioning but that his Presence would soon bring him to an
ingenuous Confession of the whole Truth.

But they were not a little surprised when they saw Timoska without the least
Alteration in his Countenance or Behavior, treat Spilki as if he had never
known him before, and speak to him in the Polish Language, which Spilki did not
very well understand, and being asked several Questions by him in relation to
his past Life, especially as to his Name, whether it were not Timoska Ankudina,
whether he had not defrauded the Great Duke's Treasury, whether he had not
cheated him of his Wife's Jewels, burnt his House, and committed other enormous
Crimes? Timoska answered carelessly, That it was possible that one Timoska
Ankudina might have converted the Great Duke's Money to his own use, and
committed many other Villainies, but that this was no Concern of his; That his
Name was Johannes Sinensis, (which in the Polish Language signifying as much as
Zuski, he cunningly evaded thereby what he had form^rly declared of his being
the Son of the Great Duke Basili Zuski) and that as to what he spoke of his
Wife's Jewels could not have the least Relation to him, his Extraction having
put him above the Rank of a poor Mechanic or Seller of Pins, alluding to the
Word Spilki, which in the Russian Tongue signifies as much as Pinmaker.

He had some time before upon the Persuasion of a certain Russian Gentleman
writ a Letter with his own Hand to the Patriarch of Muscovy, in which he had
writ, That he was a Muscovite born, and received the Name of Timoska at his
Baptism. That he had once (when he was at the Ottoman Court) been tempted to
enter the Russian Empire with an Army of two hundred thousand Tartars, but that
he had been diverted from this pernicious Design by the Guardian-Angel of
Muscovy. That thereupon being resolved to lay aside all Designs against his
Native Country, he had quitted Turk^ with an Intention to return into Muscovy;
That it would else have been no difficult Matter for him to have made his
Escape out of Prison if he had not stayed for the Great Duke's Command.

This Letter being looked upon as a material Point to overcome his Obstinacy,
was produced and read in his Presence, but this had no more Influence over him
than the Presence of Spilki, whom he called a Cheat who had conterfeited the
Letter to his Destruction. To confirm which, he writ another Letter so
different both in the Style and Character from the former, that the most
quick-sighted could not find the least Resemblance betwixt them.

His Highness the Duke of Holstein seeing all their Endeavors of making a true
Discovery of the Imposture to prove unsucessful, ordered some of his Privy
Council to examine him, and to try whether, out of his former Depositions they
might not be able to convince him concerning the true State of his Affairs.
They asked him, For what Reason he was prosecuted by the Great Duke; what could
be the Reason of his having conceived so particular a Prejudice against his
Person? What House and Family he was descended of? And whether he were of any
Kin to the Great Duke? He answered, That he was no Kinsman of the Great Duke,
forasmuch as his Father was a Prince born; whereas the Great Duke's Father was
but a Gentleman; That he was a Muscovite by Extraction, but born and brought up
in Poland; That he was Hereditary Lord of Hukagina Severska* in the Province of
Novogarka Severskio, upon the Frontiers of Muscovy. That his Name was Johannes
Sinensis, which in the Polish Language signifies as much as Zuski; That his
Fathers Name was Basili Domitian Suiski, who had received his Name from the
City of Su^a in Muscovy. That he was persecuted by the Great Duke upon no other
Account, that he knew of, than that of his high Extraction.

But these Depositions varying much from what he had publicly professed
before, that he was Son to the Great Duke Bassli Zuski, and that he was born in
Poland, with a gr^^^ many other inconsistencies, which sufficiently testified
the distractions of his Conscience; he was by the Duke of Holstein's Order
delivered into the Hands of the Deputies of the Great Duke.

Timoska, finding that these Evasions would stand him no longer in ^tead, fell
into Despair, and took a Resolution to kill himself* For which purpose, being
upon his Way from, Newstadt to Travemund, in order to be put on Board the
Vessel that was to carry him to Archang^l in Muscovy, he threw himself down
headlong from the Wagon, striving to shuffle himself under the Wheels, in
Hopes they would pass over his Body; But the Ground happening to be sandy and
soft, his Fall did him no harm; and the Wagon being stopped immedia^ely before
the Wheels touched any part of his Body, they put him again into his Place,
where they fa^tned and watched him so narrowly, that he could not find the
least Opportunity of putting his Design in execution. Notwithstanding which he
appeared very cheerful during the whole Voyage, thinking thereby (as it was
supposed) to make his Keepers the more careless, till he might find Means to be
his own Executioner, and so avoid the Torments which he knew were prepared for
him in Muscovy.

For no sooner was he arrived at Archangel, but he fell in so deep a
Melancholy, that he appeared quite disconsolate, and would scarce utter one
Word.

From thence he was carried to Novogorod Veliki, and so to the City of Musco,
(...) brought ^o Musco.
where he was immediately condemned to the most exquisite Tortures. This was
put in Execution in the Presence of several Boyars and other Persons of the
first Rank; (...) tortured.
but they could not prevail over his Obstinacy, he refusing to give the least
Answer to the Questions proposed to him. He only told them, That if they would
send for Knez Nikita Ivanovits Romanow, he was the only Man whom he thought
worthy to receive his Confession, as knowing him to be a Person of great Honor
and Cou^age. While two of the Boyars there present were gone to find out
Nikita, he desired somewhat to drink; whereupon some Q^tas or small Mead was
presented to him, which he refusing, they gave him some Hydromel in a Silver
Cup, according to his Request, which in a scothful manner he only put to his
Lips without tasting the Liquor.

By this time Knez Nikita and the other two Boyars being come in, he gave them
a very civil Salute, but (...) persisted in his former Depositions, that he was
the real Son of Basili Zuski, Great Duke of M^scovy, though it were sufficiently
proved against him, that he was the Son of Demki Ankudina a Linen Draper in
the Suburbs of Vologda; and that the Great Duke Basili Zuski had no Children,
but only two Brothers who both died without any Male-Issue, one in Poland, the
other in Muscovy some Years before.

Whilst he endured the Tortures with an uncommon Resolution, his Mother and Son
were sent for, in hopes that their Presence might (...) prevailing over his
Obstinacy, than the Violence of his Tortures; They both th^ew themselves at his
Feet, and with Tears and all the tender Expressions they were capable of,
conjured him to undeceive himself and the World, and to acknowledge his Crime.
The Change of his Countenance sufficiently testified the various Agitations of
his Conscience, notwithstanding which, he persisted in affirming, that they
were unknown to him, and took him for another than really he was; expressing in
the midst of his most violent Tortures a most admirable Constancy, or rather
the most resolute Obstinacy in the World; whether it was that he took a
particular Pride to confirm in Strangers the high Opinion they had once
conceived of his pretended Extraction; or that he was assured, that by his
Confession he could not prevent his Death or obviate his Miseries, is uncertain.

Last of all, that nothing might be omitted which could in any wise contribute
to overcome his Obstinacy, and induce him to an ingenuous Confession, one John
Plessou, who had been his intimate Friend, and with whom he had left his Son
before he retired into Poland, with several others of his Fellow-Officers at
the Tavern-Office, were brought before him; who each in their turn,
endeavoring to convince him of his Error, and representing to him the Danger
wherein he put his Soul, in the Condition he was in, exhorting him to pull off
the Mask which he had made use of for some Years past to cheat the World, and
to create new Disturbances and infinite Miseries to his Native Country; That
the whole Mystery of his Impostures being revealed to the World by so many
undeniable Witnesses there present, he should not rely any longer upon these
vain Elusions, but consult the eternal Welfare of his Soul, and not draw any
further the weight of God's Vengeance upon himself. He seemed to be moved at
their Discourse, but continued so obstinate in his former Resolution that he
would not speak one Word afterward.

The next day he was again put to the Torture, which he endured with the same
Resolution, not vouchsafing to speak one Word. Being searched and found
circumcised, he was immediately carried to the Great Marketplace before the
Castle, where Sentence was pronounced against him and put in Execution. First
they cut off, with an Ax, his Right Arm below the Elbow, Is execu^ed.
then his left Leg below the Knee; next, the Left Arm and Right Leg in the same
manner; all which he endured with an unparalleled Constancy, and without as
much as a Groan. Last of all, the Head being severed from his Body, and the
Members being set upon Stakes in the Marketplace, and the Trunck left upon the
Ground, the last was in the Night devoured by the Dogs, and the next morning
the Executioner's Servants dragged the Members to the place where all the
City-Dirt is thrown.

It is to be observed, that some time before a Polish Ambassador was arrived in
the City of Musco^ And the Muscovites, who still bore a Grudge to the Poles* on
the Account of the Miseries they had endured in their last Civil Dissentions,
occasioned by the Contrivances of the several Impostors encouraged by the
Poles, had so well timed it as to give Audience to the Ambassador the same day,
that Timoska was put to death, and to lead him in State through the
Marketplace, just at the very Hour of his Execution, where (under some
pretense or other contrived for that purpose) they make a Halt, that he might
be an Eyewitness, and be able to give an Account in Poland of the tragical
Exit of that Imposter, whom they had looked upon there as Son to the Great Duke
Basili Zuski. Kostka^ the Servant of Timoska, whom we mentioned before to have
been carried laden with Irons out of Sweden into Muscovy, having made an
ingenuous Confession of the whole Matter, was pardoned as to his Life, and his
Punishment changed into that of losing three Fingers of his Right Hand. But the
Religion of the Muscovites obliging them to make the Sign of the Cross, with
their Right Hand, th^s Punishment was again, by the Intercession of the
Patriarch, moderated, so that the same was executed upon his Left Hand, after
which he was banished into Siberia.

We said before, that the Great Duke Michael F^derovits died in the Year 1645.
The next day being the 13th of July, the Knez and Boyars the^ present, Alex is
Micha^lovits crowned.
resolved unanimously to hasten the Coronation of Alexis Michaelovits; his Son,
who was then not full sixteen Years of Age* He was born in the Year 1630, on
the 17th of March, and had been by his Father committed to the Car^ of Knez
Boris Ivanov^s Morosou, a Person of very high Extraction and extraordinary
Ability* It is beyond our Scope, to relate here the Rise of the Family of the
Romanow's from whence the Family of the present Czar derives its Origin, one of
the most Ancient in Muscovy, (who first assumed the Name of Czar) from whence
descended Basil the Father of that Famous Tyrant John Basilovits* who reduced
most of the neighboring Princes under the Obedience of the Russian Empire. But
the Muscovites relate a Story of the Father of this Boris Ivancvits Morosou,
which may not be beyond our purpose to be inserted here. It seems he was a
Favorite of the Tyrant John Basilovits, and being a Widower presumed so much
upon his Interest with the Great Duke, that he begged a certain handsome Lady,
which had been the Tyrant's Mistress, for a Wife; The Great Duke granted his
Request without the least Difficulty; but whether it was that he repented
himself of what was done, or merely to gratify his cruel Temper, he having got
notice that the said Morosou and his new married Lady were at their amorous
Sports one Afternoon in a withdrawing Room behind the Bath-stove, he got
secretly two wild Bears, conveyed into the Room, who immediately fell upon them
and devoured them both. This Morosou left two Sons, Boris and C^leab, who being
very young, were educated by the said Tyrant; the eldest of which having
improved the Advantages of his high Birth and Education above the ordinary
Degree, during the intestine Commotions in the Russian Empire, was, as I said
before, constituted by Czar Michael Federovits Governor over his Son Alexis
Michaelovits, whom he used frequently to charge to follow his Advice in all
Affairs of Moment. Knez Boris Ivanovits Morosou, fearing that his Enemies might
take Advantage of the Princes tender Years, had the Coronation Ceremony
performed a few days after his Father's Death (who was according to the Russian
Fashion deposited in the Church of S. Michael, wherein are the Sepulchers of
the Great Dukes, the next Night after his Decease) which was not performed with
all the usual Pomp, they wanting time to send for all those who are obliged to
be present at this Solemnity. After the Coronation was over, Morosou changed
the Quality of Governor into that of Protector, exercising, during the Princes
Minority, the same Power in the disposing of his Affairs, as he had done over
his Person during his Father's Life.

Knowing the young Great Duke to entertain (...) most profound Reverence for
the Duchess Dowager his Mother, he bestowed great Employments upon all her
Kindred, whom he preferred to the best Governments in the Empire, but: at (...)
stance from Court, as made them incapable of opposing his Interest. The same
Method he made use of in regard of the Ancient Nobility, and such as had had
the chief Administration of Affairs in the late Great Duke*s Reign, whom he
sent away, from the Princes Pe^s^^ to far distant Countries ^ Thus he did with
the (...) Rippine and Corakin, the first of whom he constituted Governor of
Nisi Novogorod, the last of Ca^an.

Having thus removed from the Princes Person all such as he thought might any
way oppose his Greatness, and filled all Places of Profit, and Trust at Court
with his own Kindred or Creatures, such as he knew wholly to depend on his
Fortune; He used frequently to get the Young Prince out of the Capital City,
under pre^ence of Hunting or some other Divertisements, so to beget in him an
Aversion to Business, whereby the whole Management of Affairs might fall to
this share. But in order to an entire Establishment of his Fortune, he thought
nothing more conducing to make, sure of the young Princes Favor; than if he
could, get him to choose a Wife out of such a Family, as being absolutely in his
Interest, and where he himself might engage in an Alliance by Marriage, would
enage both the Prince and Great Duchess, in his future Preservation.

The Person he pitched upon* as most suitable to his Purpose, was one (...)
Danilovits Mioslauski, of obscure Gen^^^ty, raised by the Death of Grammatine
the Chan^^llor of the Ambassadors Office, his Uncle by the Mothers side, whose
Servant he had been formerly. This Man was looked upon with a very favorable
Eye by Morosou, by reason of his constant Attendance on him; and his two
beautiful Daughters, one of which he designed for the Great Duke, the other for
himself.

Whilst this Favorite was thus employing all his Cunning to establish his
Fortune in the near. Alliance with his Sovereign, he was upon the Point of
having been frustrated in his Hopes, if by his Dexterity, he had not ext^icated
himself out of that Difficulty, which was likely to have rendered his Design
abortive. For a certain young Lady, who was exceedingly beautiful, having been
brought before the young Great Duke without^ his Knowledge, the Czar was (...)
an instant with so violent a Passion for her, that he presented her with a
Handkerchief and Ring, the usual Present the Czars of Muscovy make to such
Ladies as they choose for their Spouses. She was to appear again in Royal Dress
in a few days after, when according to Custom, the young Great Duke was to tie
the Crown upon her Head. But Morosou having been by this time sufficiently
informed of what had passed, (though managed with great Secrecy) ^ had laid the
Plot with the Attire-Women, that they should tie up her Hair so hard as to put*
her in a Swoon, which succeed^d according to Expectation; For, whilst she was
in the Great Duke's Presence, and they were busied in tying the Orown about her
Head, she fell into a Swoon, which was presently by those that were present and
most of them Creatures of Boris Morosou, construed an Apoplectick Fit; So that
the poor old Gentleman, her Father, who believed himself just upon the Point of
being exalted to one of the most eminent Stations in the Empire, by the
Alliance with his Sovereign, saw himself not only unexpectedly deceived in his
Hopes, but being besides accused of (...) Treason, in pretending to put his
Daughter, laboring under such a Distemper, into the Arms of the Great Duke,
was forced to undergo the Strapado, and was banished into Siberia, where he no
sooner arrived, but he died with Grief, leaving his Family in Disgrace. The
Maid remained a Virgin ever after till her Death, and was never known to have
had any fit since; and the Emperor, being conscious of the Wrong done to her
and her Father, allowed (...) a large yearly Pension, which made her to be
courted by many of the Nobility* whom she all refused, and kept the
Handkerchief and Ring, as Pledges of the Injury done to her Family.

But to return to Morosou, who having weathered this Point, and relying upon
the Fidelity of Ilia Danilovits Miloslauski, he took the first favorable
Opportunity to speak to the Great Duke concerning him, and thence to extol the
Beauty and Deserts of the two Gentlewomen his Daughters. These Commendations
having raised in the Great Duke a desire to see them, he sent to them under
pretense of a Visit to be made to the Princesses his Sisters* where, having
taken a full View of ^^em both, he became instantly so enamoured with the
Beauty of the Eldest, whose Name was Mary, that he dispatched one immediately
to her Father to bring him the welcome News that the Czar intended to honor him
with his Alliance, and to marry his eldest Daughter.

It is easily imagined, that as M^iloslauski was not altogether unprepared for
it, so he received the Message* with the most profound Respect, and without
being in the least discomposed, returning his most humble Thanks to his Czarish
Majesty for the Honor he intended to do his Family* Some days after the Great
Duke sen^ Presents of a very great Value to his Bride, and having been informed
concerning the Circumstances of Miloslauski, which being such, as that he and
his Family could not appear at the Wedding without a present Supply, he ordered
them a considerable Sum of Money to put them in an Equipage suitable to their
Present Condition. The Marriage Ceremony was performed in the beginning of the
Year 1647, The Young Great Duke (...).
but very privately for fear of Witchcraft, a thing much ^^eaded among Persons
of Quality in Muscovy, especially at (...) Weddings. The Czarissa was a very
beautiful Lady, besides which, her Modest and Religious Behavior, and many
Charitable Actions, made her afterward the Darling of the People.

The next thing Boris Morosou had to do, was to petition, for Ann the youngest
Daughter of Miloslan^ki, and Sister to the Empress, which having been soon
granted, he married her in eight days after; so, that his former Interest being
now strengthened by this new Alliance, his Fortnue was established beyond the
reach of his Enemies. But, his Content at home was not altogether answerable to
his great Fortune at Court; For, he being a Person pretty well advanced in
Years, and she a brown Buxsome Lass, found herself deceived in a great measure
in her Expectation; so that instead of Children, Jealousies were got, which
produced the ordinary Effects, to wit, first Contentions, and afterward (after
the Muscovian way) the House-Discipline; and some Persons, among whom was also
an Englishman, being suspected to have too free an Access to Boris Morosou's
House, were by his Instigation banished into Siberia.

But whatever his Fortune might be at home, he was not careless in his Affairs
at Court, where in Conjunction with Ilia Damilovits-Miloslauski; the Great
Duke's Father-in-Law, they managed* every thing to their own Advantage: For,
they not only removed most of the Nobility from Court, but, by degrees* cast
off all such old Officers of the Household as were yet remaining, in whose
stead, they brought in their own Kindred and Creatures, who let s^ip no
Opportunity to enrich themselves at the Expense of the Public.

Among others, they had made one Leponti-Steppanovits-Plessou, Chief Justice of
the Semskoy Duor or Semskoy Pricas, a Court instituted for the Judgment of all
Civil Causes between the Citizens of Musco, where are also paid the Duties
arising from Places and* Houses that are sold; as also the Taxes levied for the
Reparation of Bridges, Gates* Fortresses, and other public Buildings. This Man
being entrusted with a Commission of so large an Extent, did abuse his Trust,
to the great oppression of the People. For there was no Extortion so great,
which he was not ready to undertake. He would receive Presents from both
Parties, and afterward leave them in the lurch. But not content with this* his
common Practice was, to suborn false Witnesses, whose employment was to bring
in Charges against such of the Citizens of Musco, as he knew to be rich enough
to redeem themselves out of his Persecutions; For, whenever they fell into his
hands, he did not fail by imprisoning, and other violent and oppressive
Methods, to oblige them to purchase their Liberty and his Favor with the ruin
of their Fortunes.

He had a Brother-in-Law, whose name was Peter* Tichonovits Trochanistou, one
of those, whom in Muscovy they call Ocolnits, who are one degree under the
Boyars, who are chosen out of their Number. Him they had made President of the
Puskarskoy Pricas, and consequently had the oversight over all the Great Duke's
Founders, Furbishers, Cannoneers, Armourers, Smiths and Carpenters, who wrought
to the Arsenal. These Mechanics were usually paid once a Month, according to
the Custom of M^^covy, where Payments are made with greater Exactness, than in
any other Part of Europe; instead of which he used to keep them in Arrears for
many Months together, and in the mean while, to make use of their Money, to his
own Advantage; and when he had thus droven them to extremity, to foice them to
compound for half, or what they could get, and to give Acquittance for the
whole Sum.

Miloslauski and Morosou, played the same Game in their several Stations, not
only by selling at an excessive Rate all the Employments in the Kingdom, but
also by procuring Monopolies, which ruined the Trade of the whole Empire. Among
others they had got a Patent for one of their own Gang, prohibiting the further
use of the common Else, hitherto used in Muscovy, but instead of that to make
use of certain Iron ones with the Great Duke's Mark upon them; on purpose to
oblige the People to buy the latter at the Price of a Crown per Piece; whereas
they used to buy the others at 8 or 10 d. a Piece, whereby a necessity being
laid upon the whole Kingdom of having them from the Patentees at their own
Price, they gathered a vast Sum of Money without giving any Account of it to
the Great Duke's Treasury.

They had also found out another Invention to raise the Price of Salt from
twenty to thirty Pence per Measure, containing about forty Pound Weight. This
proved a heavy Burden to the People, and of no Advantage to the Great Duke;
For the dearness of the Salt had hindered the Sale of it, so that ^bundance of
Fish being lost for want of Salting, the Great Duke's Revenue suffered by it
upon a double Account.

The Inhabitants of Musco had enjoyed the Fruits of a very quiet and mild
Government, under the Reign of his late Czarish Majesty, who being a Prince of
incomparable Clemency, endeavored through the whole course of his Reign, to make
the Government easy to his Subjects, who had so long groaned under the
Calamities of their civil Di^tensions; so that finding themselves thus
oppressed beyond all measure, they could not brook this sudden Change, without
showing publicly their Resentments. The Muscovites seldom or never make their
Cab^s over the Bottle, they do not look upon strong* Liquor to be a suitable
Companion for those who intend to treat of States Affairs; they make use of
their Hydromel and Aqua vitae according to it is primitive and genuine
Institution, to exhilerate the Mind and drive away Cares. As they are the
greatest Zealots in the World* so they begin commonly their States Reformations
a Jove, after they have been at Divine Service. Here it was the Chief Citizens
used to meet, and to utter their Complaints against the Oppressions, which they
groaned under by the Mismanagement of the Ministers of State, and resolved at
last to Petition the Great Duke for a Redress of their Grievances.

But the main difficulty was, who among them all durst be so venturesome as to
deliver the Petiti^^; so that no body being willing to undertake that Task, a
certain day was appointed to give it to the Great Duke himself with joint
Consent* as he should come out of the Castle to go to his Devotion. They were
as yet not so bold as to dare to attempt any thing against Morosou, by reason
of his near Alliance to the Great Duchess, though they knew him to be the main
Istrument of these Calamities they suffered, but their Petition was, for the
present, chiefly levelled against Lepont Stepanovits Plessou, who by his most
barbarous Exactions being become insupportable to them, they desired, that he
might be removed from his Office, and his Place be supplied by some Person of
known Integrity, of whom the People might expect more Justice. They had watched
several Opportunities to deliver it to the Prince himself as he was going to
his Devotions or Divertisements, but in vain; for the Boyars, who attended his
Person had always took it from them, telling them that they would make a Report
of it to the Great Duke; but this being done according to the Instructions
received from Morosou, the Petition was not as much as answered, much less
their Grievances redressed.

This happening so often, that they found themselves absolutely mistaken in their
whole Expectation, it was resolved, that they should meet together, and inspite
of all the Opposition from the Boyars make their Complaints to the Great Duke
by way of Mouth. The sixth of July, in the Year 1648* was pitched upon as a day
fit for the execution of their Design, when they knew the Great Duke was to be
present at a Procession to be made to a Monastery in the City, called
Stertenski.

The People were got early together in the Morning, in the great Marketplace
before the Castle, to see him and his Cavalcade pass by as they were wont to do
upon such like Occasions; But, whether it was that they did not think
themselves strong enough, other that their Leaders were not present, they did
not make the least Signs of dissatisfaction at his going to the Monastery* But,
at his return, they broke through those that attended the Great Duke, came up
to him, stayed him, and taking hold of his Horses Bridle, entreated him to take
their present Case into his Consideration, to hearken to the just Complaints of
his Subjects, concerning the Injustices and Violences committed by Plessou,
desiring that a Person of known Integrity might be put in his Place, who should
better discharge so great a Trust.

The Great Duke was not a little startled at this unexpected procedure of the
populace, but dissembling both his Surprise and Resentment, he spoke to them
with a very cheerful Countenance, telling them, that he was much troubled to
understand the Grievances of his good Subjects, occasioned by the Mismanagement
of Plessou, that he would forthwith examine the whole Matter, and take care
that they should receive due Satisfaction in relation to all their just
Complaints.

The Generality of the people appeared to be well satisfied with the Great
Dukes Promise, which they testified by their joyful Acclamations; but some
thronging still about the Great Duke's Horse, the Boyars who attended at this
Solemnity, being for the most part Friends of Plessou, gave abusive Language to
those who were near to the Czar, thrusting some away, and striking others with
their Whips, which so incensed the Populace, that the Stones began to fly about
the Courtiers Ears as thick as Hail, who were forced together with the Great
Duke, Mutiny in Mus^^.
to retire with all speed to the Castle, whither they were so closely and
vigorously pursued by the People, that maugr^ all the resistance of the Guards,
they had enough to do to reach the Great Dukes Lodgings before they were at the
Heels of them. The Strelits (or the Czar's Guards of Musketeers) used all
their endeavors to stop the Current of the Populace that were thronging into
the Castle Gates, but their resistance proving fruitless, by reason of the
infinite number of the People, it rather enflamed than abated their Fury, who
cried out with one Voice* that if Plessow were not immediately delivered into
their Hands, they would force the Princes Lodgings, and lay it level with the
ground.

The Clamours and Threats of the People had put those within into a great
Consternation, and not knowing what course best to take, Morossou was ordered
to appear in the great Balcony, and to endeavor by his Authority, to appease
the Tumult, desiring them in the Great Dukes Name, to repair to their
respective Homes. He had scarce leisure given him to speak a few words, when
some of the most forward among them tells him, That they were glad to see him
there, knowing him to be of the same Stamp with Plessou, and that he should
expect no better treatment than the other, which he should soon experience to
his cost. They had no sooner said these words, but they led the Populace to his
Palace, which being within the Precinct of the Castle, they forced, ransacked,
and pulled down in an instant, after they had thrown some of his Servants out
of the Windows, because they had made some Opposition.

The Muscovites generally show a great deal of Veneration to the Images of
their Saints, whom they will save from among the midst of the Flames at the
perils of their Lives; but such wa^ their Animosity against Morosou, that they
spared not the least thing they found within the compass of his Palace,
destroying all his Furniture of a great value, and not sparing the Images of
the Saints; they broke to pieces his Coach of State, the richest that was ever
seen in Muscovy, beat out the bottoms of the Strong Water Barrels, threw his
Ladies Jewels and Pearls into the Street, trod on them with their Feet, and
told her, that it was in respect to the Great Duchess her Sister, and the
Great Duke, for whom they had still a great Veneration, that they did not make
her pay with her Life for the Villainies of her Husband.

But this was only the Prologue to the ensuing Tragedy. For from thence they
went straightway to the House of Plessou, which they ransacked and demolished
in a moment: The same Game they played with the Palace of Nazri Ivanovits
Tziston, Lord Chancellor of Muscovy, whom they Sacrificed to their fury,
because he had Farmed the new Imposition upon Salt. It was his misfortune to be
just then sick in Bed, by reason of an accident that had happened within some
days before, when meeting in the streets with a mad Ox, he was thrown by his
Horse with so much violence, that it had put him in danger of his Life; but
hearing how the Populace was in Arms, and in what manner they had ransacked the
Palace of Morosou and Plessou, and judging, not without reason, that they would
also give him a Visit in his turn, he hid himself under a great heap of Birch,
which at a certain time, the Muscovites make Provision of against the Winter,
to serve their Stores; and to take away all suspicion, he had caused a good
number of Flitches of Bacon to be laid across of them. He had scarce had
leisure enough to prepare this retiring place, before the Clamours of the
approaching Rabble gave him sufficient warning what he had to expect from them:
To be short, they forced open the Doors, took away all his rich Movables, and
knowing him to be in no condition of stirring abroad, searched for him in all
the most abstruse corners of the House, even to the Cella^s and Stables; but
not being able to find him out, he had certainly escaped their Hands for that
time, if he had not been betrayed by one of his Servants, who being enticed by
a good Sum of Money which was immediately given him, showed them the place
where his Master lay concealed. The enraged Multitude, without any further
delay, draggs him out by the Heels into the streets, where they immediately
cudgelled him to death. This done, they threw his Body upon the Dunghill,
Pillaged his House, and laid it level with the ground.

The same they did to the House of Peter Tichtonovits Trochanistou, whom we
have mentioned before to have been constituted Overseer over the Great Duke's
Arsenal, and to all others whom they knew to have any Relation or Dependence on
Morosou; which afforded them such a Booty, that they measured the Pearls in
their Caps; and as for rich Furs and all Sorts of the best Silk Stuffs, they
had such a Quantity of them as to throw them about in the Streets for any body
to take them up at their pleasure.

Whilst the Populace spent the whole day in ransacking and pulling down of the
Houses, those in the Castle had leisure given them to barricado and prepare
themselves against their Return, which they expected the next Morning, they
continuing in such a Posture all the Night as sufficiently showed they only
expected Daylight to renew the old Game.

The Great Duke in the mean while, having found his Muscovite Guards
insufficient the day before to make head against the Insolences of the People,
had sent for the German Officers with their Regiments that were quartered near
the City, to meet at their several Rendezvouses, and to march without delay to
the Relief of the Castle. Pursuant to these Orders they marched the next
Morning with Drums beating, and Colors flying, and Arms ready, through the Heart
of the City to the Castle; whereat the Muscovites, being not a little
terrified, durst not attempt to stop their Passage, but instead of Opposing
them, gave them Way, telling them as they passed by, that they knew them to be
Men of Honor and Courage, who had no dependence on those Villains who by their
Mismanagement abused the People, and that they had no Quarrel against them.
Having therefore without the least Opposition taken up their several Posts
assigned them for their Guards, the Great Duke laid hold of this Opportunity,
to endeavor the Appeasing of the Tumult by the Authority of Knez Nikita
Ivanovits Romanow, whom he knew to be much respected by the People.

He appeared before them with Cap in Hand, and told them in the Name of the
Great Duke his Master, that he hoped they would be satisfied with the Promise
and Assurance given by his Czarish Majesty's own Mouth, that he himself would
take Cognizance of the Matter, and remedy the Grievances of which they
complained. That his Majesty had sent him on purpose to give them fresh
Assurances, that he was not unmindful of his Word, but would give them all the
Satisfaction in this Point they could reasonably desire, and to advise them to
break up the Assembly and for every one to repair to his own Home, that he
might the better perform what he had promised them the day before.

This Message being received with the joyful Acclamations of the People,
sufficiently testifying their Approbation, answer was made that they had no
reason to be dissatisfied with the Great Duke, but with those who made use of
his Name and Authority to execute their execrable Villainies upon the People;
And that therefore they could not rest satisfied, nor would they stir from the
Place, till Boris Ivanovits Morosou, Leponti Stephanovits Plessou, and Peter
Tichtonovits Trochanistou were delivered up to them* that they might revenge
upon their Heads all those Mischiefs they had done the Kingdom.

Romanow showed them his Acknowledgment for the favorable Audience they had
afforded him, telling them, that he would immediately go and acquaint the Great
Duke with the Zeal and Affection they had expressed for his Person, and that he
did not question but that the Great Duke would grant their Request, and order
the Execution of those three Lords, who had drawn upon themselves the Hatred of
his good Subjects, by their Mismanagement; but that he was ready to swear to
them by the Cross, that Morosou and Trochanistou had made their Escape at the
first beginning of the Tumult, and for the third, he dares engage his Word, he
should be brought to Execution immediately.

Romanow being returned to the Great Duke, it was, after a short Debate,
resolved to sacrifice Plessou and Trochanistou to the Fury of the People, who
with a great deal of Impatience waited at the Castle Gatefor the Great Duke's
Answer, but to endeavor by all means possible the Preservation of Morosou; but
that, to appease the Rage of the People, Word should be sent them immediately,
that Plessou was coming out forthwith to be sacrificed, and that the other two
should receive the same Punishment, so soon as they were found, which was done
accordingly; and the People being desired to send for the Executioner to do his
Office, they had him ready at Hand with all his Servants attending at the
Castle Gate; whence, in less than a quarter of an Hours time they saw him
leading the miserable Plessou into the Marketplace before the Castle, Plessou
massacred.
in order to cut off his Head. But the People were so exasperated against him,
that they fell upon him immediately with Cudgels so outrageously that they
dispatched him in a Moment. His Body was dragged by the Feet through the Streets,
accompanied with Millions of Curses of the Populace; till at last a Monk who
had a particular Spleen against the deceased, cut off his Head, and carried it
away in Triumph.

The Execution of Plessou and the reiterated Promises of the Great Duke, that
the rest, when found, should come to the same end, begot some calm in the
Peoples Minds, who had sent their Messengers upon all the Roads leading to the
City, in search after Morosou and Trochanistou; the first finding his Escape
almost impossible, by reason of the Peoples searching so closely after him, had
found means to lay concealed at a particular Friend's House, Trochanistou
Ex^cuted.
at a little distance from the City, from whence he returned by secret ways,
the next night into the Castle.

But Trochanistou had not the same good Fortune to escape the Hands of his
Enemies, but being overtaken upon the Road by some of the Great Duke's
Messengers (who for fear of being thought to have consented to his Escape, had
been forced to employ all his Care in finding him out) he was brought the next
day, being the 8th of July, to the same place where he used to sit as Judge
over the Cannoniers, Armourers, and others belonging to the Great Duke's
Arsenal; where, by order from the Great Duke, he had his Head cut off.

By this time the People being informed how Morosou had been seen in the
Country, and ignorant of his return into the Castle, they seemed to be
satisfied with the Execution of Trochanistou for this time, forbearing to press
any further upon the Great Duke to give them what was not in his power to do;
so that toward Noon they began to disperse, and prepare to go to their
respective Homes.

The same afternoon several Houses (whether by accident or by the malice of the
Rabble, A Confl^ration in Houses.
who had not quite cleared the streets and committed great Insolences, is
uncertain) were set on fire, which made such a Havoc in a few hours, that it
consumed the whole Quarter of Czargorod, or City Royal, reducing to Ashes all
the Houses within the compass of the White Wall (which surrounds that Quarter)
down to the River Neglina: Toward Night it got over that River into the Great
Duke's Taverns, into his Storehouses for Strong Waters and other Provisions,
where it consumed above sixty thousand Flitches of Bacon, and an incredible
quantity of Aqua-Vitae; which being the most proper Fuel in the World to
nourish the Flame, it grew so violent, that the Castle was in most imminent
danger to have been reduced to Ashes by this raging Element; no body
endeavoring to stop its fury, because those who had the Charge of quenching
the Fire being got Drunk, and inebriated with the Exhalations of the Strong
Waters, were incapable of performing that Service; many of them lying in the
streets choked with the Smoke and Vapors, which so terified the Muscovites,
that none among them durst approach the Flames.

About Midnight some Foreigners looking with no small astonishment on the
Fire, which just then had seized upon one of the Storehouses, where were kept
a great quantity of Bacon for the Great Duke's Provision, they perceived, at
some distance, a Monk with a Sack upon his back coming toward them, as if he
carried a very great Burden, and coming near to them, they asked him what made
him thus blow and be all in a sweat? He to told them, that he had made all the
haste he could, to come to quench the Flames' that if they would but lend him a
helping Hand, to throw the Body (which he showed them) of the cursed Plessou
into the Fire, they should soon see the Flame lose its force. The Strangers
having refused to comply with his desire, which they looked upon as ridiculous,
he heaped upon them a thousand Curses, till some Muscovites upon his
persuasions, were prevailed upon to do him the good Office, and to help him to
cast the the dead Carcass into the Fire, which in an instant began to abate,
and in two hours after, was quite extinguished; more by the assistance of those
who being encouraged by the M^nk, and came from all Parts to the quenching of
the Flames, than by the Charms of the Superstitious Friar.

Those in the Castle-having thus weathered the Storm that threatened them, the
following days were taken up in Consultations how to continue this Calm among
the People, and by which means to preserve Morosou from falling into their
Hands: For which reason, the Patriarch having sent for those among the Priests
and Monks, whom he knew to be of most Authority among the Populace of the City
of Musco; they were enjoined to do their utmost in endeavoring the Settlement
of the unquiet Spirits, by their Spiritual Exhortations, and to represent to
them in the most passionate manner that could be, the Respect and Obedience due
to their Sovereign. The Great Duke having also taken off the New Imposition
upon Salt, and Promised to suppress all Monopolies lately set up by his
Ministers, supplied the Places of the Executed Trochanistou and Plessou, the
first by the Boyar Knez Jurgi Alexiovits Dolgaruskoi, the second with the
Ocolnits Za Bogdan Matth^ovits Chitrou, both Persons of great Ability, and
approved Probity. He Treated the Strelits with Strong Waters and Hydromel, and
caused Ilia Danilovits, his Father-in-law, to invite the Chief Citizens of the
several Professions in the City of Musco, who were very splendidly and kindly
Entertained at his Palace for several days together.

Having thus prepared his way, he took the opportunity of a Procession, when
being accompanied with the same Nikita Ivanovits Romanow, who had been so
successful before in appeasing the Tumult, and now rid by his left side, he
spoke to the People, and told them, That he had been extremely troubled to
understand the Violences and Injuries committed by Trochanistou and Plessou,
upon his good Subjects, whose welfare was very dear to him; that those
Extortions executed under his Name and Authority, had been quite contrary to
his Inclinations and Commands: And that therefore having let them suffer
condign Punishment for their Villainies, he had put in their Places Persons of
known Integrity and Ability, whom he believed would be acceptable to the
People, as knowing them to be Persons, that would execute Justice without
Corruption or Partiality. That he had already abolished the New Imposition upon
Salt, and would take care, that all Monopolies newly introduced by his
Ministers, should be suppressed; That he for the future, would himself keep a
watchful Eye over their Actions, and not suffer their Privileges to be
diminished, but rather, it occasion were, would see them augm^nted.

The Populace being overjoyed at this inveigling Speech of the Great Duke,
showed the most p^ofound respect they were capable of, by smiting their
Foreheads on the ground, and giving him (...) the imaginable Thanks and
Promises of their future Fidelity; so that the Czar thinking this a fit
opportunity to declare his Sentiments concerning Morosou, he reassumed the
Discourse, telling them, That he was not forgetful of what he had promised them
sometime before concerning Boris Ivanovits Morosou, and that he was obliged to
confess, that he had transacted many things, which he would not in any wise
justify; but that on the other Hand, he had so much confidence in his good
People, as to hope they would excuse him,. if at this time he could not
immediately resolve to condemn him to Death. That this being his first Request,
he lived in hopes they would not deny it him, which was, that for once they
would pardon the past Miscarriages of Morosou, on whom he desired them to look
as one who had been the Guardian of their Prince, and had Married the Great
Dutchess's Sister, who upon this double account must needs be very dear to him,
and consequently that it would be the hardest thing in the World, for him to
consent to his Death. That he himself would be answerable for his future Good
Behavior, not questioning but that he would behave himself so as that they
should not have the least reason to complain of him; and, that if they would
declare him incapable by their unanimous Vote, of being admitted into his
Council for the future, he should be dismissed.

The Great Duke being then not twenty Years of Age, and of a very tender
Constitution, could not forbear to accompany his last words with some Tears,
which so moved the People, that they cried out with one Voice, Long live our
Great Duke, God grant him a long and happy Reign, God^s and the Great Duke's
Will be done. The Czar having given them his Thanks, and extolled their Zeal
and Affection for his Person, returned to the Castle well satisfied in having
been so successful, to reconcile his Brother-in-law to the Citizens of his
Imperial City of Musco.

Some days after, the Great Duke according to Custom, went a Pilgrimage to the
Monastry of Troitza, about Threescore Miles from Musco, when Morosou took this
opportunity of appearing again the first time in Public. As he went through
the City he was uncovered, Saluting the People on both sides of the way with
great Submission. He countenanced the Old Nobility for some time, and ever
after laid hold on all occasions to gratify the People, and assist those who
Addressed themselves to him in any Business they had at Court; so that in a
little time there appeared a great change in the Affairs of the Government of
Muscovy; and Morosou became the Favorite of the People, and the Patron to all
Strangers, maintaining his Greatness till his Old Age, when he died much
lamented by the People, but not the Nobility; and as much beloved by his Prince
as he had been always successful in his Counsels.

But to return where we left off, notwithstanding this Remarkable Alteration in
the Government, there happened not long after another Revolt, which, if it had
not been timely prevented by the vigilance of those at the Helm, might have
proved of dangerous Consequence to the Empire, which was occasioned thus:

Some differences were arisen betwixt the two Crowns of Muscovy and Sweden, by
reason that the Subjects of both Kingdom, leaving their Habitations in their
Respective Native Countries, used to seek for shelter in the others Dominions,
to avoid the Payment of their Debts. These differences improved by some Reasons
of State were risen to that height, that both States seemed to be threatened
with an inevitable War, unless prevented by a speedy Composition: In order to
which the Great Duke Alexis Michaelovits sent in the Year 1649. (the next
following after the Insurrection in the City of Musco) a Solemn Ambassy to
Christina Queen of Sweden, the Chief whereof was a certain Ocolnitza called
Bonis Ivanovits Puskia. And in regard that it was 32 Years since the Accounts
had been cleared betwixt the two Nations, it was Agreed by certain Articles
made at that time, That for the first Thirty Years there should be a
Liquidation of all Accounts; but that in regard there were more Swedes now in
Muscovy than there were Muscovites in Sweden, by which the first remained
considerably Indebted to the last; the Great Duke should pay to the Crown of
Sweden 190000 Rubles, which amounts to Ninety odd Thousand Pounds Sterling of
English Money; whereof 300000 Crowns were to be paid in ready Cash, and the
rest in Rye; and the whole Payment to be at the beginning of the next following
Year, which was but a few Months after the Conclusion of the Treatise.

Pursuant to this Agreement, the Queen of Sweden had sent one John Rhodes in
Quality of her Commissioner into Muscovy, who received the abovenamed 300000
Crowns in Ducats, and as to what related to the Rye, he was ordered to receive
it from one Fedor Amilianou, a Muscovian Merchant in the City of Pleskou.

This Merchant having been Empowered by the Great Duke to buy up thereabouts so
much Rye for his Use as would answer the remaining part of the Debt, which
amounted to 90000 Crowns, made use of this opportunity to enrich himself at the
cost of his poor fellow Subjects. For having, under the Cover of the Great
Duke's Authority, caused all the Rye thereabouts to be seized, and not
permitting any body either to buy or to sell any without his leave, he
Engrossed the whole Commodity for his own use, selling it at his own Rate,
which was so excessive, that a great many poor people were droven to the
greatest extremity for want of it. The Inhabitants of Pleskoa, as they w^^e
most ^ea^^y concerned in this Abuse, so they were the first that openly
murmured against this Oppression, cha^ging not ^^^y the S^edes with A^^^^^^,
but (...) exclaiming against Puskin the Muscovian Ambassador in Sweden, whom
they charged with Prevarication in his Employment, and Perfideousness to his
Prince. They did not spare Morosou, who they said, preferred the Interest of
Strangers before the Welfare of the Natives.

They were not wanting to draw the City of Novogorod Veliki, and other adjacent
Parts into their Party, and being persuaded that this Negotiation had been
carried on without the Knowledge, and contrary to the Intention of the Great
Duke, every thing seemed to tend to a general Insurrection in those parts, if
the Weywode or Governor of Novogorod by his prudent Conduct, had not kept
those under his Jurisdiction in Obedience; yet could not hinder their taking a
Resolution to stop the Money as it should come their way, in order to be
carried into Sweden.

Those of Pleskou absolutely refused, that such a quantity of Rye, the
transportation of which, in all likelihood must starve them, should be exported
into Sweden. And the better to be satisfied whether the said Treaty was set on
foot and executed by the Great Duke's Order, they sent three Deputies of their
own to Court, to wit, a Merchant of that City, a Cosack and a Strelits, to
inform themselves concerning the truth of the matter, and to desire Redress of
their Grievances: But they were no sooner arrived at Novogorod, but the Weywode
of that City caused them to be clapped in Irons, and thus Fettered, sent them to
Court, where at the same time arrived the Weywode of Pleskou, and the Merchant
Amilianou, who had been forced to quit the City for fear of the Populace.

For, the first having endeavored to prevent those Disorders which were daily
committed by the Mob, they forced him with his Guards out of the Town, and
Amilianou, not thinking himself safe without the Governor's assistance,
accompanied him to the City of M^sco to make his Complaints to the Great Duke.

Nor was he mistaken in his Judgment; for no sooner had he left the City,
Another (...) at Pl^sko^.
but the Citizens of Pleskou, without expecting the Return of their Deputies,
or before they had the least Notice of the Treatment, they had received at
Novogorod, ransacked Amilianus's House, and tortured his Wife in a most cruel
and barbarous manner, to make her confess where her Husband had hid his Money.
The same Game they played with several Swedish Merchants living among them, whom
they robbed, plundered, and abused in their Persons. This done, they published
their Manifesto against Monopolies and Patentees, inviting the Neighboring
Cities to join with them in the Defense of their Privileges*

The Court having soon received Intelligence of these Insolences, they were
not a little surprised especially when they got notice that this mutinous
Spirit began to spread it self in some of the other Cities in the Northern
Provinces bordering upon Sweden, and thinking it therefore most advisable to
try whether by gentle Means they could suppress and prevent any further
Tumults, it was resolved to send back the Weywode of Pleskou, and with him a
Boyar, who in the Great Duke's Name should endeavor to quiet those restless
Spirits.

Those of Plesko were for a considerable time debating whether they should open
their Gates to them or not, but the first being at last resolved upon, they
gave them Admittance, but it was to put the Weywode in Prison, and to affront
the Boyar, who having spoken to them in the Great Duke's Name, with more
Authority than they thought becoming him in his present Station, they fell upon
him with Cudgels and beat him so severely, that he was fain to seek for Refuge
in a Monastery, where he laid for some time half dead, every one despairing of
his Recovery.

The Great Duke having received Info^mation in what manner his Ministers had
been treated by the Pleskovites, who had shut their Gat^s and put themselve in
a po^^ure of defense; and fearing, ^ot without reason, that some of the
neighboring Cities, encouraged by their Example, might tread their Footsteps,
if by a severe Chastisement they were not deterred from such like Undertakings
against his Authority for the future, it was resolved to prosecute the
rebellious Pleskovites with the utmost Rigor. In order to which, the Great
Duke commanded Ivan Nikitovits Gavenski to assemble the Nobility and standing
Militia of the neighboring Provinces, and to join with them several Regiments
of the foreign Forces commanded by the Colonels Kormichel, Hamilton and
others, to besiege the City of Pleskou, and not to stir from thence till they
had reduced it to Obedience. Plesko b^sieged.
The Inhabitants at first seemed not at all startled at this Resolution, and
were so far from making their Submission to their Prince, that they resolved
unanimously to stand it out to the last, and accordingly put themselves and
their City in a posture of Defense. They showed at the first approach of the
Czar's Army, no less Bravery than they had showed Resolution in their Counsels;
For they made several furious Sallies upon the Besiegers with such Success that
they found themselves obliged to make use of their heavy Cannon, which having
made a large Breach in their Works, their Hearts and Strength began to fail
them, Is reduced.
so that they were forced to surrender at Discretion.

The Czar being resolved by an exemplary Punishment to deter the rest of his
Subjects from committing such Outrages, caused the Ringleaders of this Sedition
to be tortured and put to death, some at Pleskou, some in the adjacent Cities,
some in their City of Musco, and a great many of the Pleskovites were banished
into Siberia, where these State-Reformators were employed in Sable-Hunting. All
things being thus qu^eted by the Vigilance of the Great Duke, he pursued the
Execution of the Treaty made with the Crown of Sweden; And the Rye in those
Northern Parts having been by the Fury of the Populace for the most part either
destroyed or consumed, so that it was impossible to bring together a sufficient
Quantity within the time limited by the Treaty, he paid the Swedish
Commissioner Money instead of Rye, and caused him under a sufficient Guard of
Strelits (to protect him against the Insolences of the Rabble) to be conducted
to the Frontiers of the Kingdom of Sweden.

These Disorders having been* thus appeased by the Prudence of his Czarish
Majesty, yet caused no small Change in the Government of Muscovy. For the Great
Duke, having been made sensible of the Miscarriages of those who being the
Creatures of Morosou and Miloslauski, had abused their Authority to the
detriment of the People, removed them out of all Places of Trust. And as to
Miloslauski and Morosou, though by reason of their near Alliance to the Great
Duke, they retained much Credit at Court; and Morosou especially, discharged
his Trust ever after with a great d^al of Prudence and Fidelity; yet the Czar
did distribute his Favors with a more equal Hand among the other Knez and
Boyars, who had a great share in all public Affairs, and executed their
Charges every one according to his Birth and Employment.

For which Reason he caused Knez Boris Alexandrovits Rappenin, and Knez Fedor
Simonovits Curakin, (whom we mentioned before to have been sent by Morosou to
the Governments of Nisi-Novogorod and Casan) to be called to Court where in
Conjunction with Knez Juan Andreovits Galitzin, Boris Nikita Ivanovits Romanow,
the Czar's Great Uncle, they were consulted with in all Affairs of Moment, and
remained in great Authority with this Prince, who had always a watchful Eye
over his Ministers, lest they should under the Cloak of his Authority impose
upon his Subjects.

For which Reason he would frequently in the Night Season go about and Visit
his Chancellours and other Judges Desks to see what Decrrees were passed, and
what Petitions were laid by unanswered. He employed his Spies in every Corner,
so that there was scarce any Feast, great Meeting, Burial, or Wedding of Note,
but he knew all what was transacted there. He entertained a good Number of
Gentlemen of small Fortunes, who absolutely depending on his Favor, were sent
as Spies with the Ambassadors, and into the Armies, to attend and watch their
Motions* and to give a true Acount of all their Transactions.

If he found any of his Officers deficient in their Trust, he was sure not to
escape Punishment; as it happened to Peter Solticove a Muscovian Lord, and
Governor of Russia minor. This Solticove used to keep the Arrears of the
Soldiery in his Hands to improve it to his Advantage by Merchandising and
otherwise. A certain Russian Captain, a Native of that Province, having been
kept without Pay three whole Years, and in vain addressed himself to the
Governor, took the Opportunity of the Czar's going into the Country to take
his Pleasure (at what time no body is permitted to interrupt* his
Divertisements) and thronging too near the Czar's Coach with a Petition in his
Hands he suspecting him to be an Assassin, with his Staff (which was piked at
the End not unlike a Dart) intending to make him withdraw at a farther
Distance, struck the Fellow to the Heart, so that he died immediately.

Those that attended the Czar's Person being surprised at the Accident, and
judging no otherwise than that he intended to have made an Attempt ogainst the
Great Duke's Life, rid up to the Coach and searching what Arms he had about
him, found nothing but a wooden Spoon, and the Petition for his Arrears. The
Czar showed a great Concern for this Mishap, and sending immediately to
Solticove the Governor of that Province, he checked him severely, telling him
that he was guity of the Blood of this innocent Person, and that he deserved to
receive the same Treatment; That however he would spare his Life for this time,
but that he discharged him from his Commission, ordering him not to appear for
the future at Court, and appointing Nashockin then his premier Minister to
succeed him in that Office, and to search into the past Misdemeanors thereof,
in order to redress the Grievances of his Subjects.

For, it is to be observed, that after the Death of Mororosou Ilia Danielovits
Miloslauski, the Great Duke's Father in Law Nashockin succeeded him in the
Place of Chief Minister of State and all his other Employments. Miloslauski was
a Man of a very strong Body and goodly Aspect, bold, and of great Judgment,
rather feared than beloved by the Czar; but his Interest was upheld by his
Daughter. It is related of him, that he had so prodigeous a Memory, as to have
perfectly well known all the the Commission Officers of an Army of a Hundred
Thousand Men, (of which he was Generalissimo) where they Quartered, and what
their Qualifications were. He was also Lord High Treasurer of Muscovy, and had
several other Offices bestowed upon him, all which he managed with great
dexterity. Though he was pretty well advanced in Years, he was a great Admirer of
the fair Sex, and for his Satisfaction entertained a good Number of very
handsome Polish and Tartarian Female-Slaves. His eager pursuit after amorous
Pleasures had almost lost him the Czar's Favor; as an Apoplexy disabled him at
last in Body and Mind, so as to know no Body without being told.

He was succeeded in his high Employments, by the just now mentioned Nashockin,
who was also made Chancellor of the Ambassadors Office, and Governor of Russia
Minor. He was a Person of more than ordinary Integrity, not to be corrupted by
Presents or other Illegal means; very sober and indefatigable in Business. The
first proofs of his great Capacity he gave at the Conclusion of the Peace
betwixt the Muscovites and Poles, to the no small advantage of the first, which
was absolutely transacted by his Vigilance and Conduct; as was also the League
betwixt the Great Duke and Swedeland. It was he that settled the Silk Trade
upon a good Foundation through Russia, and showed them the way, how the Indian
Trade might be drawn that way. He Reformed and new Modeled the Russia^ Laws
all over the Empire, so that Suits should be less dilatory, and Criminals to be
Examined and Judged by the Governors of the Provinces with their Assistants;
whereas most of the Criminals were before that time brought to Musco, with no
less Trouble to the Prisoners than Charge to the Czar. He was a great Admirer
of Monarchy, and a Patron of the English; as on the other hand, Bogdan Matfeilt
always was a secret Enemy both to Nashockin and the English, but a great Friend
of the Dutch, who used to purchase his Favor by great Presents.

This Bogdan was bred up with the Czar from a Child, and was much of the same
Age. He was Lord High Sreward of the Household, having in his disposal all
Domestic Affairs. He used to be called the Whispering Favorite, because the
Czar asked his Advice oftener in his Closet than at the Councel-Board. It was by
his Connivance that the Jews got secretly footing in that Court and the City of
Musco; whereas before that time they were abominable to the Muscovites, because
they supplied him with handsome young Slaves out of Poland, which he entertaine^
for his Pleasure, some in the Country, and some in his Palace in Musco. His
Lady being Jealous of these Slaves, showed her Re^entment at several times in
so outrageous a manner, that her Death being resolved on, she was one Night
Poisoned in a Plate of Sweetmeats; or as others will have it, in a Glass of
Wine.

As for the Czar Alexis Michaelovits himself, he was a Person of a Majestic
Deportment; The Character of Alexis Michaelovits*
Tall, incling to Fat, of a Sanguine Complexion, and Light Brown Hair,
Beautiful and Charitable, but severe in his Anger; of a very strong Memory,
strict in his Devotion, and a great Favourer of his Religion, in the Observance
of which, he was the strictest Man in the World. For he never missed Divine
Service; and if indisposed, used to have it performed in his Bedchamber. On
Fast-days he would frequent Midnight Prayers, standing four or five hours
together prostrating himself to the Ground. During the great Fasts, he would
eat but three Meals a Week, being contented for the rest, with a piece of Brown
Bread and Salt, a pickled Mushroon or Cucumber, and a Cup of Quas, or small
Mead. In short, it has been observed of him, that no Monk was ever more
observant of the Canonical hours, than he of Fasts; it having been computed,
that he fasted above Eight Months in the Year. He would also frequently appear
at the Processions bare-headed and on foot, and was always a declared Patron of
the Muscovite Church; notwithstanding which, he would sometimes make bold with
the Church Revenue upon Loan, in time of War, which he was not very careful to
repay, knowing that the Church Treasury, which is supplied out of the best part
of the Empire, may now and then dispense with a Loss for the benefit of the
Public. He also made an Ordinance to restrain the profuse Bounty of dying Men
to the Clergy; neither would he ever suffer a Monastery to be Founded without
his License.

Every Good Friday he used to visit in the Night all the Prisons in the City of
Musco, to take Personal Cognizance of all the Prisoners; among whom he would
buy out some that were in Debt, and release others that were Criminals; and
bestow sometimes great Sums for the use of such as he knew to be really
necessitated. He would cause the Empress to do the same, and to redeem yearly a
certain number of Women out of Prison. He ordered also at about seven or eight
Miles distance from the Imperial City, Workhouses to be built for Hemp and
Flax, in that good Order, Beauty and Capacity, that they were sufficient to
Employ all the poor in the Kingdom with Work; having settled for that use a
good many Miles of waste Lands, by which he improved the Manufactury of the
Country, and fed his Laborers at a very cheap rate. He Assigned that part of
the Building where the Women were Employed, for the Use and Profit of the
Empress. He was of so mild a Temper, that he seldom condemned any to Death, but
most commonly to the Strapado and Banishment into Siberia. Being one time urged
by some of his Foreign Officers, to make it Death for any Man to Desert his
Colors; he answered them, That he thought that would be too hard upon the poor
Soldiers, since it was certain that God had not given every Man an equal share
of Courage.

Notwithstanding these his Mild and Charitable Inclinations, he was of a
Warlike Spirit, having been Engaged in Wars against the Poles, Swedes,
Crim-Tartars, and Turks. For being sufficiently sensible of the Advantage the
Poles had got during the late Intestine Commotions in Muscovy, by making
themselves Masters of the Provinces of Severia and S^ol^^sko, in the Possession
of which, they were confirmed by Virtue of the Truce made by his Father M^chael
Federovi^s* after his Disgrace received at the Seige of Smolensko: And the Term
of the said Truce being now expired when the Poles were Engaged in a Mortal
Quarrel with the Cosacks, he looked upon this Juncture, as the most fabourable
that could be, by the Recovery of these Provinces, to secure his Frontiers
against so Potent a Neighbor.

For which purpose having settled a Correspondence with Chmielniski, the then
General of the Cosacks, and offered them his Protection; these were a^ first
very successful against the Poles, of whom they killed Ten Thousand upon the
spot, and took from them the City of Kiovia. And the Poles having drawn out a
second time their whole Force against them, were again miserably beaten by the
Cosacks; till at last, having committed great Depredations in Poland, King John
Casimir was obliged to March in Person against them, who having totally routed
them, they Embraced the Protection of the Great Duke. H^s W^r with the Poles.
He finding himself thus strengthened by the accession of so considerable a
Force, did apply all his Care for the recovery of Smolensko; for which purpose
having brought together a great Army, The Taking of Smolensko.
and a vast Train of Artislery, he besieged the City of Smolensko in the Year
1653. and notwithstanding the Resolute Defense of the Polish Garrison, made
himself Master of it in the Year next following.

The taking of which Place was chiefly attributed to the Cosacks, who upon all
occasions gave the utmost proofs of their Bravery, and Hatred against the Poles
during this Memorable Seige.

Having thus opened his way into Poland, he carried the Terror of his
Victorious Arms into the Great Duchy of Lithuania, he Ravaged the whole
Country, took many Cities; and in the Year 1655. also the Capital City, Takes
Vilna.
called Vilna; where, as well as in other places, the Muscovites committed most
horrid Barbarities, in Retaliation, as they said, of those Calamities they had
suffered by the Polish Invasion, during their Intestine Commotions.

In the same Year Charles Gustavus King of Sweden, entered Poland with an Army
of Chosen Men, and having soon Conquered the Great and Lesser Poland, and
Mosovia, with the City of Cracovia, Marched from thence into Prussia, where he
was received by most of the Cities, except Dantzick, who stood firm to the
Interest of King Casimir. Seeing his Affairs reduced to that Extremity, he fled
himself into Silesia for Refuge and Aid from the Emperor; so that not only the
whole standing Militia of Poland, but also that part of Lithuania, which was
not as yet Conquered by the Muscovites, submitted themselves to the Swedish
Protection.

Czar Alexis Michaelovits, not thinking it Advisable to Encounter the Swedes,
flushed with their late Success, and strengthened by the whole Force of Poland,
judged it more for his Interest, to make use of this Opportunity, whilst the
Swedes were Engaged with the Poles, His War with Sweden.
to transfer his Arms into Livonia, where he hoped to make a considerable
Progress in the absence of their King, Charles Gustavus, before he should be
able to come to their Relief.

Pursuant to this Resolution, Enters Liv^nia.
he entered Livonia with a very Puissant Army, and Besieged Torpat, which after
some Resistance, he took by Composition.

Having soon after made himself Master of Kokenhousen, Is forced to Raise the
Siege of Riga.
and some other places of Note, he laid Siege to the City of Riga, the Capital
of the Province of Lettie in Livonia, Situate upon the River Dune, which
exonerates it self into the Baltic Sea; but the Swedish Garrison defended the
Place with so much Galantry, that the Muscovites, notwithstanding their
reiterated Attacks, were forced to Raise the Siege with very great Loss.

In the mean time the Poles having recollected themselves, after their first
Consternation, had Defeated and Dispersed the Swedes that were Quartered up and
down the Country; had Retaken Warsovia, and the Revolted Lithuanians, had
Surprised and Killed all the Swedes that were in Winter Quarters with them.

And though Charles Gustavus the Swedish King (having been joined before by the
Elector of Brandenburgh's Forces) did Vanquish the Poles in a Memorable Battle,
which lasted Three Days near Warsovia; yet being soon after obliged to March
out of Poland against the Danes, the Poles Retook Cracovia and Thorn from the
Swedes, and Recovered Courland out of their Hands.

At last both Crowns being Tired with the War, a Treaty of Peace was set on
foot in the Year 1666. in the Monastry of Oliva near the City of Dantzick, in
the Royal Prussia; so that Czar Alexis Michaelovits fearing not without Reason,
that after the Peace was Concluded betwixt both those Potent Kingdoms, they
might turn their United Forces against him, proposed to be included in the said
Treaty; by Virtue of which, Peacemale at Oliva.
both the Muscovites and Poles Resigned their Pretensions upon Livonia to the
Swedes; but the first were Confirmed in the Possession of Smolensko, Severia
and Kiovia, which was given them by the Poles as an Equivalent of what they
lost in Livonia. In lieu of which, the Swedes restored to the Poles all the
places they were possessed of in the Royal Prussia, and the later Resigned the
whole Sovereignty over the Ducal Prussia to the Elector of Brandenburgh. This
Peace proved very Advantageous to the Muscovites, who by the Recovery of these
Frontier Provinces, secured themselves against the further Attempts of a most
Potent Neighbor.

The War he was engaged in against the Turks and Crim Tartars, His War (...)
^he Turk.
was occasioned because some of the Zaporogian Cosacks had submited themselves
under his Protection (as we mentioned before) whereas some of them had sought
for Protection under the Grand Seignior, which occasioned a War betwixt these
two potent Neighbors, in which the Muscovites got but little Advantage; For
the Crim Tartars made an Irruption into Muscovy, and carried away above 400000
Souls into perpetual Captivity.

There had some years before also been swept away by the Plague betwixt seven
and eight Hundred thousand People, and a great Number of Men had been lost in
the War with the Poles and Swedes; So that betwixt the Sword and Plague, it was
computed that Muscovy had in Ten years time lost near a Million and a half of
People, which so impoverished and depopulated the Country, that abundance of
the best Land lay untilled for want of Hands, and that in some of the Southern
Parts, where the Crim Tartars had made their Inroads, there was scarce any
thing to be seen but Women and Children; Since which time however the Russian
Empire has in a great measure recovered its pristine Prosperity.

In the Year 1669, A new Rebellion.
Muscovy was involved in another Rebellion raised by one Stephen Ratzin.

He was a Dunensian Cosack by Birth, and having observed a certain Disposition
in the Nagaian Tartars, inhabiting the Kingdom of Casan and Astrachan, by
Reason of the heavy Oppressions they groaned under, by the Mismanagement and
Avarice of the Muscovite Governors in those Parts, to shake off the Russian
Yoke, he gathered a considerable Party, and being assisted by a good Number of
his Fellow Cosacks inhabiting betwixt the Dun and the Wolga, he marched at the
Head of them to besiege the City of Astrachan, which, after some small
Resistance, was surrendered into his Hands. From thence he marched toward
Casan, threatening not only that City, but also the Southern Muscovy with a most
dreadful Invasion, his Army increasing prodigiously by the vast Number of
Tartars that f^ock'd in to his Assistance.

But instead of improving this Opportunity to his Advantage, he gave himself to
Idleness and all manner of Debauchery, whereby the Muscovites having got
Leisure to draw together their Forces to stop the Current of his Victories,
They were so expeditious as to arrive near Casan, before Ratzin could lay Siege
to the Place, and having thus cut off all Communication with the Country
thereabouts, from whence Astrachan and the adjacent Parts are supplied with
Corn, the rebellious Army was soon reduced to great Straights for want of
P^ovisions; so that the Tartars, being apprehensive of their approaching
Danger, left their Leader for the most part.

Notwithstanding which, the Cosacks stood it out bravely, resolving to maintain
their Ground against the Muscovites. For which purpose they having entrenched
themselves under the Walls of Astrachan, The Muscovites seeing the desperate
Resolution of the Cosacks, thought it most advisable to reduce them, if
possible, to Obedience, rather by fair Means, (and a promise of Pardon for what
was past than by force of Arms. This had the desired Effect: For Ratzin,
finding his Cosacks wavering, upon the Persuasions of some of his Friends in
the Czar's Court (who gave him great Hopes of his Pardon) surrendered himself to
the Mercy of Czar Alexis Michaelovits in the next following Year.

His Party being thus deprived of their Head, readily embraced the Czar's
Offers; but Ratzin himself, not long after, found himself extremely mistaken in
his Hopes; for he was carried to the great Marketplace before the Castle,
Ratzin beheaded.
where he had first his Arms and Legs, and afterward his Head cut off in the
Presence of an infinite Number of People, who flocked thither to be Spectators
of the tragical Exit of him, whom not many Month before they had looked upon as
their most dreadful Enemy.

About the same time Maria the Empress Regent departed this Life, and Czar
Alexis Michaelovits was married soon after to another young Lady, the Niece of
Oatomon Sergoivits, who having by this near Alliance with the Emperor obtained
the whole Ministry of the Government, acquired himself with great Applause and
to the General Satisfaction of the People in this eminent Station, till the
year 1675. When Czar Alexis Mi^haelovits died, Czar Alexis Michaelovits dies.
to the great Regret of his Subjects, who by Reason of his great Clemency,
singular Devotion, and incomparable Conduct during the last Years of his Reign,
lamented his Loss, by all the Expressions of Grief due to the Memory of so
great a Prince.

He left behind him, by the first Adventure, two Sons and a Daughter, to wit,
Fedor, John, or Ivan, and Sophia; by the second, one Son, called Peter, the
same who now sways the Scepter of the Miscovian Empire.

He was succeeded by Fedor Alexiovits his Eldest Son, being not quite Seventeen
years of Age, and of a very Sickly Constitut on, who ^eigned seven Years under
the Protectorate of Sophia his Sister, till the year 1682, Fedor Alex^ovits
dies.
when by his Death the Muscovite Empire was divided into two potent Factions,
which might have proved of very dangerous Consequence, if the extraordinary
Conduct of his present Czarish Majesty had not in a great Measure diverted the
fatal Blow which seemed to threaten its Ruin.

CHAP. V.
Containing an historical Account of the most remarkable Transactions, from the
Begi^ning of the Reign of the present Czar Peter, till this time; with some
political Reflections on the present State of Muscovy, in Relation to its
Traffic, and Strength, in reference to its Neighbors.
AFTER the Death of Fedor Alexiovits, John the second Son of Alexis
Michaelovits being, by Reason of his natural Infirmities, incapable of
undertaking the Administration of the Government, was soon prevailed upon to
resign all his Claim to the Russian Crown, Two Factions after his Death.
to his younger Brother Peter, who, though very young, being looked upon by most
of the Boyars as the only Person who gave them all the imaginable Hopes of his
future Ability to supply the Place of his Father Alexis Michaelovits, Czar
Peter crowned.
was crowned Czar of Muscovy, instead of the deceased Fedor, his Brother.

But the Princess Sophia, seeing her self thus excluded from the Management of
the Government* of which she had enjoyed the full Advantage during the Minority
of her Brother Fedor, she with Knez Gailizin and some others of her Creatures
took a Resolution not to part with so fine a Morsel at so easy a Rate, but to
endeavor, by putting John in the Throne, to maintain their own Greatness, in
Opposition to the New Czar Peter Alexiovits.

It is to be observed, that the deceased Empress Maria, Mother to John, who had
by his own Consent debarred himself from the Royal Dignity, was infinitely
beloved by the Common People, by reason of her extraordinary Modesty, Charity,
and other most eminent Virtues; The Princess being not ignorant of this
Advantage on her side, sent abroad her Emissaries, who insinuated into the
People the Injustice done to John the eldest surviving Son of the Empress
Maria, the Darling of the People, by an adverse Party, who contrary to the
ancient established Custom of Muscovy, had excluded that Prince from his Right
in favor of his younger Brother.

These cunning Informations had such powerful Influence over the Common people,
but especially over the Guards that constantly attend the Czar^s Person, that
one Morning being headed by some of the Princesses Creatures, they rose in open
Rebellion, declaring, they would not lay down their Arms, till they saw John
the Elder Brother of Peter, placed on the Muscovian Throne.

The Boyars in the Interest of the present Czar Peter, Ins^rrection i^ the City
of M^s^o.
endeavoring by their Persuasions to appease the Mutiny, did feel the dreadful
Effects of their Fury; for some had their Palaces ransacked and pulled down to
the ground, others were cut to pleces immediately, others thrown out of the
Windows; so that nothing less than a total Destruction seemed to threaten the
City of Musco, unless prevented by some Expedient, which might stay the Fury of
the enraged Populace. For which reason, the Heads of both Factions (who by this
time began equally to dread the Insolency of the Rabble) after various Debates,
came to this following Resolution: That, to balance* the* Interest of both
contending Parties, Czar Peter should be confirmed in the Throne of Muscovy,
but that his elder Brother John should be his Associate, both in the Royal
Dignity and Administration of the Government.

The Princess Sophia, having thus once more by the powerful Influence she had
over the weakness of her Brother John, and by reason of the tender Age of the
present Czar Peter che being not above twelve years of Age, when he was Crowned
Czar of Muscovy) got the Reins of the Government into her own hands, managed
all Matters under the Conduct of the Premier Minister, Knez Gallizin (her
Creature) with a great deal of dexterity for some time, till at last by the
removal of this her faithful Councellor, being deprived of his Assistance, and
the Death of her own Brother, Czar John (who died about four years ago without
Issue) she was totally excluded from the further Management of public Affairs,
and thrust into a Monastery, where she is detained to this day.

The present Czar Peter was born on the 29th of May, in the Year 1670, by a
second Adventure, and after the Death of Czar Fedor his eldest Brother, Crowned
Czar of Muscovy, when he was not full twelve Years of Age. After the removal of
Knez Gallizin from the Ministry, A Conspiracy against the present Czar.
and the death of his Brother, the whole Administration of the Government being
devolved to him, he managed it with so much Conduct and Success, as has rendered
his Actions famous throughout all Europe; which those of the contrary Faction
looking upon with an envious Eye, a Design was laid some few years ago, against
his Life, which in all likelihood would have proved fatal to this great Prince,
if by the Imprudence of him, who was to have been the Chief Actor in this
Tragedy, the whole Design had not been discovered before the Conspirators could
meet with an opportunity to put it in execution.

This was a German by Birth, whose name was Sickler, who having a considerable
Command in the Czar's Army, and being extremely beloved by him, had a free
Access to his Person. This Man being enticed by the hopes of extraordinary
Rewards (even of the Crown of Muscovy) undertook to dispatch the Czar the first
favorable Opportunity that should present, and had certainly executed his
Design, if the Contests that arose among the Conspirators concerning the
Succession in the Throne, had not delayed the Execution of it.

Sickler in the mean while, who was a good Bottle-Companion, having uttered
some Words to a Friend of his at several times, relating to their intended
Project, he conceived so much a horror at it, that he was resolved to discover,
what he had heard Sickler say concerning the Conspiracy; But knowing him to be
in great favor with the Czar, he was not without reason afraid, that his
Depositions might be interpreted by the adverse Faction, as proceeding from
Envy or Malice, and consequently, instead of serving his Prince, turn to his
own destruction, he resolved to proceed with as much caution as possibly he
could in a Matter of so much Moment.

For which purpose having one day met a certain Gentleman, an intimate Friend
of his and of Sickler; and not questioning, but that he had made use of the
same Expressions to him, in relation to the Conspiracy, as he had heard him say
at several times in his presence; he began to enter upon a Discourse of their
common Friend Sickler, and in a careless Manner to repeat several Passages,
which he had received from Sickler's own Mouth. His Friend being not a little
surprised at the Imprudence of his Friend, told him, that indeed he had heard
him say several times many things of that Na^^^e; but looking upon them as the
Effects of strong Liquor, he never made any further account of them. But the
other replying, that the Concealment of Matters of such a nature might one time
or another prove their Destruction; and that therefore, he was fully resolved
not to hide it any longer, they went by joint-consent to make their Discovery
to the Czar in Person.

He was just then at a Wedding in the Suburbs, Plot discov^red against the Czar.
where the Germans, and other Christian Foreigners have their Habitations, when
being informed of the most imminent danger that threatened his Life, he went
immediately, accompanied by his Guards, and some of his most trusty Boyars to
the House of Sickler, and looking upon him wi^h a stern Countenance, after
having asked him some general Questions, and among others; What Punishment
ought to be inflicted upon a Person who should not only betray, but murder his
Friend in cold Blood; and the sudden Change of his Countenance and his confused
Answer, sufficiently betraying the Guilt of his Conscience, he caused him to be
seized, and being confronted with his two Friends, who had made the Discovery,
he confessed the whole Design, and received the due reward of his Treachery,
being broken alive upon the Wheel.

As to the present Czar's Person, he is of a Noble Aspect, his Face being of an
Oval Figure, with very large Eyes, and well Featured; his Hair of a light brown
Color, D^scrip^ion of the present Czar.
his Complexion inclining to brown but very clear; he is slender but very
strong and well-set, being above six Foot high, and though in his whole demeanor
there appears a great deal of Majesty; yet is his Conversation full of an
engaging Familiarity, without the least appearance of Pride even to the meanest
of his Subjects; but his chief delight is in the Conversation of Strangers,
with whom he will at certain Times converse no otherwise than if they were his
Equals, and be very frolicksome in their Company.

Thus he did some Years ago in the River of Archangel with some English
Merchants, and a Captain of a Ship belonging to the Russian Company. This Ship,
called the Perry and Lane, carrying 30 Guns, arrived in the Year 1694, in the
beginning of July in the River of Archangel, at the same time, that the
present Czar was come thither to take a view of a new Man of War, which he had
caused to be bought for his Service in Holland.

The Emperor having some days after, invited himself on Board the said
Captain, he came accordingly at 3 a Clock in the Afternoon, with 40 or 50 of
his Attendance, where he passed away his Time so pleasantly, that he did not
depart till next Morning after Sun rise.

The next day he invited the Captain, all the English Merchants, and Masters of
Ships, to dine with him at a House in an adjacent Island, where being seated at
the same Table with the Emperor, he, after Dinner was over, caused them all to
be weted with an Engine brought lately from Holland; Which done, he made them
all, without the least distinction of Age or Quality, to plunge themselves over
Head and Ears into the River, he in his Person leading the Way, and showing by
his own Example, what they had to do.

Having dismissed them for that time, they were invited again a few days after
to the same Island, where they all played at Nine-Pins and Bowls till Night,
when expecting the Czar's Orders to depart, he told them that they must stay
with him till the Wind turned fair; so that they were forced to stay two days
and nights, during which time they spent the days in Merriment, and a few hours
in the Nights upon the hard Boards; when the Wind veering about, they got leave
to depart, and set Sail for England.

As he takes great delight in the Company of Strangers, so he makes use most
commonly of foreign Habits, even in his own Country; which the present
Patriarch of Muscovy looking upon as not agreeable to their own Customs, took
the opportunity, when he met the present Czar one day at his Mothers Palace,
then lying upon her Deathbed, to tell him in her Presence, That the Czars his
Predecessors used always to endeavor to maintain the good Will of their
Subjects, by accommodating themselves to their most ancient Customs, and to
appear in the same Habit with their Subjects; To which the Czar made answer:
Father, are you not the Head of the Muscovian Church; to which he having
replied, yes Sir, by your Favor? the Czar said, and why then turn you the Head
and Advocate of the Tailors? I intend to give my Subjects more substantial
Proofs of the care I take for their Welfare, than what depends from the
imaginary Differences of Dresses or Clothes.

But a Priest of his Attendance did not come at so cheap a Rate in the Hague;
For the Czar, having been informed, that all the Day of the proclaiming of the
Peace he got excessively drunk, laid this Penance upon him, to wit, to be
employed in twisting of Ropes for many days together, which having cut the poor
Fellows Hand to the Bones, gave the Priest an experimental Proof of the
Cruelties they sometimes with so much freedom exercise upon the Laity.

The present Czar's Journey into those Parts at a time when he is engaged in a
heavy War against the Crim Tartars, The Czars Journey.
and his Presence seems to be absolutely necessary to suppress the Designs of a
potent adverse Faction, has been the Wonder of all Europe; But it is to be
observed, that by the seasonable Discovery of the last Conspiracy by the
thrusting the Princess Sophia into a Monastery, and the removal of the Knez
Gallizin from the Ministry into Siberia, the Faction, that hitherto opposed his
Interest, has been sufficiently discouraged from making further Attempts
against a Prince, who by his singular Clemency and the great Success of his
Arms against the Tartars, is now become the Darling of the common People.

Besides which, he took all the Precaution imaginable before his Departure, to
disappoint the Designs of his Enemies, if perhaps in his Absence they should
have a mind to try their Fortune.

For which Reason he not only committed the whole Management of the Government
to such as he knew absolutely devoted to his Interest, but also sent a great
Number of Persons of the first Quality (the Sons of the most Ancient Nobilty)
to travel into far distant Countries, to instruct themselves in the
Mathematics, the Art of Navigation and other useful Sciences, for a certain
Term of Years; where they might both improve their own Knowledge to the
Advantage of their Native Country, and at the same time serve him as Pledges of
their Parents* Fidelity during his Stay in foreign Countries.

The Motive which could induce so great a Prince to leave for some time his
Native Country, cannot be attributed to any other Cause than his most ardent
Desire of improving his own Knowledge and of his Subjects, quite contrary to
what has been practiced by his Predecessors, who looked upon the Ignorance of
their Subjects as the main Foundation-Stone of their Absolute Power; from
whence the most clear-sighted* promise themselves great Advantages after his
Return into Muscovy.

Thus much is unquestionable, that his Desire of improving himself in the Art
of Navigation and all Sea-Affairs, is such as to surpass the industry of most
private Men, who apply themselves to it out of a bare Prospect of Lucre.

I have heard it related by very credible Persons, that he would not only go
frequently to Sordam (a large Village on the opposite Shore of the City of
Amsterdam, on the same River) most inhabited by Shipwrights employed there in
the building of Ships, in Disguise, on purpose to instruct himself in every
thing belonging to that Trade; But he used often to go disguised in a Sea-man's
Habit into the Yard of the East India House, where he would be employed in
fetching and carrying such Materials as are requisite for the building of
Ships, which he would see put in their proper Places, and oftentimes would
employ himself in working in concert with the Shipwrights.

It is by this incredible Desire of accomplishing himself in this, as well as
all other useful Arts and Sciences, that he has so improved his Judgment, as to
be able to examine and inform himself concerning all Matters relating to
Military Affairs, whether by Sea or Land; both which he endeavors to improve,
far beyond whatever was attempted by any of his Predecessors, which is
sufficiently apparent by the intended communication betwixt the two Rivers,
Wolga and Tanais, and the discovery of Nova Zembla not to be an Island, as it
has been hitherto believed; and the Mare Glaciale of the Frozen Sea, to be
nothing else but a Sinus or Bay, which was performed by His Czarish Majesty's
express Orders, within these few Years.

And as the prosperous success of his Arms against the Crim-Tartars seems to be
a convincing instance, that his generous endeavors have not proved fruitless,
so the design of extending his Conquest to the Black Sea, gives the Muscovites
all the hopes imaginable; of seeeing their Empire in a few Years, a more
flourishing condition than ever it has been in under the Reigns of their former
Monarchs; of which the great Achievements of this brave Prince, which are the
Subject of the following relations, seems to be the happy presages.

But before we go any further, it will not be beyond our purpose to insert here
the true character of Kn^z GalliZin, together with two remarkable Accidents,
which seemed to be the forerunners of his ensuing downfall: which caused no
small change in the Affairs of the Muscovite Government.

Knez GalliZin descended from the Race of the Jagellons, Character of Knez
GalliZin
was at that time one of the most considerable Princes of the Muscovian Empire,
whether in regard of his illustrious Extraction, or the high Station he was
settled in, of being Chief Minister of State, by the favors of the eldest Czar
John, and his Sister Sophia, who is Creature he was. He was undoubtedly one of
the best Head pieces in the Kingdom, and the most Knowing, and most
Accomplished of all the Muscovian Boyars, always addicted to the French
Interest, and such an admirer of the present French King Lewis XIV. that he
caused his Son to wear his Picture constantly upon his Breast. It was chiefly
owing to his advice and dexterity, that the Princess Sophia had seized upon the
Administration of the Government during the Minority of the two Czars, her
Brothers, in which she continued for several Years; by the extraordinary
Conduct of this her faithful Minister, till the Boyars and Chief of the
Nobility, who were altogether in the Interest of the Youngest Czar Peter the
present Emperor, being resolved not to suffer themselves any longer to be
Imposed upon by this Favorite, found means to remove him from his Ministry, of
which the two following relations appeared to be the Fatal Presages.

The first was undertaken by a private person, who having watched his
opportunity one morning as GalliZin was going in his Sledge to the Czar's
Palace, threw himself upon him, and seized him by the Beard to stab him. But
whilst he was drawing his dagger which (according to the Muscovian fashion)
stuck in his Girdle, the Princes Servants running up to the Sledge, had the
good fortune to stop his hand, just as he was about sticking the Dagger in
their Master's Heart.

The Assassin was so far from being dejected, that on the contrary his rage
seemed to be increased, which sufficinetly appeared by his furious looks, and
his utmost, though vain efforts, of putting his design in Execution; But finding
himself overpowered, and all his endeavors in vain, he spoke to GallaZin with
unparrallell'd resolution, in the following manner: Infamous Tyrant, It is not
the fear of death, but the regret I feel of being disappointed in my design,
that you see me thus changed in my Countenance; But know, that though I have been
so unfortunate as to fail in this attempt, to deliver my Native Country from
the most horrid Monster that ever was bred upon the face of the Earth; though
this hand has been unsuccessful in making thee a Sacrifice to the just
resentments of thy fellow Subjects; Know, I say, that this feat is reserved for
some happier hand than mine, and that among three hundred Citizens, who, out of
pity to the people, that daily groan under the burden of thy most intolerable
oppressions, have conspired thy final destruction; there will be some, that
will take surer measures than I have done.

He was going on in his discourse, if he had not been dragged away immediately
to Prison, where after having been put to the Rack, he was executed privately,
for fear of incensing the people.

This Outrage was soon after followed by another; less dangerous in its
Contrivance, but sufficiently convincing to GalliZin of the Sentiments the
people had of his Ministry.

He was then just upon his departure for the Army, which he was to Command, as
General, against the Crim Tartars, when one night a covered Coffin was found at
his Palace Gate, with a Note in it, containing these Words: GalliZin, Unless
the Campaign which thou art now going to open, prove more successful than the
former, we are resolved to make sure work with thee.

The worst of all was, that these menaces proved true in the Event; for, after
his return from the Army, he was so closely pressed upon by the rest of the
Boyars, that not being able to justify himself against the manifold
miscarriages laid to his charge, he was dismissed from all his Employments at
Court, GalliZin banished.
his Estate Confiscated, and he banished into Siberia, where he was forced to
lead a miserable, or rather shameful life.

Much about the same time Prince Archilla, King of Iveria and Mengrelia, who
had for some Years last past lived with his Princess in the Court of the two
Czars, was preparing for his return into his Kingdoms. This Prince being
originally a Georgian by Birth, had been prevailed upon to embrace Mahometism,
for the peaceable enjoyment of the two Kingdoms of Iveria and Mengrelia, which
border upon Persia.

The Chan of Persia, Prince Archilla.
who is Vassal he was, and to purchase whose favor he had changed his Religion,
was very favorable to him at first; and though he not long after returned to the
Christian Religion, which he professed before, did not use him with the same
severity as he did the rest of the Petty Princes, that were his Vassals. But
this seeming kindness of his, proceeded, (as it appeared afterward) not so
much from any inclinations he had for his person, as the Beauty of his
Princess. For having received great recommendations of the excellency of her
Person, as he was insatiable in his Lust to Women, so, though he never had seen
her, he was resolved to purchase the enjoyment of so much Beauty at any rate;
so that he made this unfortunate Prince sufficiently sensible that he had no
longer any regard for his person; being now become no less troublesome to him,
than he had appeared kind before.

His first endeavors were carried on by fair means, by vast promises, and
hopes of great Rewards, but these proving insufficient to obtain his desire, he
proceeded from mildness to Threats, but finding these also not to have the
desired effect, he had recourse to open Violence; ordering his forces to
advance into the Territories of Archilla, to seize him and his Princess, and
carry them prisoners to his Court.

Archilla, dreading the indignation of the Chan, who is Forces he was not strong
enough to oppose, was obliged to seek for safety in his flight, and retired
with the Princess to the utmost confines of this Kingdom of Iveria, which being
the most distant from Persia, border upon the Turkish Territories, on that side
toward the Black Sea; in, hopes to shelter themselves there against the forces
of their enemies. But the Chan of Persia resolved not to quit his pretension at
that rate, found means to engage the Turkish Grand Seignior in his Quarrel, who
having sent some forces to seize the Prince, they surprised and carried him to
a Castle under the jurisdiction of the Turks, on the borders of Iveria, where
he was detained Prisoner till further orders.

They had shown so much favor to the Princess, whom they were unwilling to use
with violence that they had not detained her person; But she being exasperated
to the highest degree, by the outrages committed upon her husband, retired
secretly into Iveria, where without any further delay, having assembled some
Gentlemen, the bravest and most trusty among her Subjects, she, like another
Amazon, marched at the head of them to the Relief of her husband.

The Garrison had got some intelligence of her approach some hours before her
arrival near the place, wherefore having prepared themselves for a resolute
defense, the Iverians met with a stout resistance. But being encouraged by the
presence and example of their Princess, who was resolved either to deliver her
Husband, or to fall in the attempt; they at last forced the Castle where their
Prince was kept Prisoner, in spite of all the resistance the Soldiers could
make, carried him off, and set him at Liberty.

So soon as they had time to reflect upon their present condition, they were
sufficiently sensible that an act so extraordinary, and so bold, must needs
draw upon them the indignation of both these Great Princes, their Neighbors,
and that consequently they could not tarry long with safety in their Kingdoms,
encompassed as it was, on all sides, by their enemies* Therefore they were
forced to abandon their Subjects to the mercy of these two Potent Neighbors,
and with some of their most trusty friends to seek for shelter in Muscovy.

They were received with all the demonstrations of friendship by the two Czars,
Prince Archilla arrives in Muscovy.
who assigned them a Palace in the City of Musco, and during the space of
three. Years allowed them a Pension suitable to their Quality, till their
Subjects having composed matters with the Grand Seignior, and become weary of
the Persian yoke, solicited their return into the Kingdoms of Iveria and
Mangrelia, promising to Sacrifice all what was dear to them for their Interest,
against the Persians their common enemies.

The same Year the Youngest of the two Czars, The present Czar marries.
(the same who lately honored this Kingdom with his presence) married the
Daughter of an Officer of the Army. He was then but Eighteen Years of Age, and
a few days after the marriage was published by the sound of the great Bell in
Musco (perhaps the finest in the World) he was seized with the falling Sickness.

Those who did not know this distemper to be Hereditary to his Family, but were
sufficiently ac^uainted with those frequent misfortunes that happen in Muscovy,
to persons of a high Rank at the time of their marriages; occasioned by the
Envy of the contending Rivals of the Female Sex, looked upon it as an effect of
the Jealousy of such families as being by this marriage excluded from the
hopes of that Alliance they had aspired to, had let their vengeance fall upon
their young Prince. But this accident not being attended with any further ill
Consequences, these Rumors were soon dispersed, and the rejoycings continued to
the Great Satisfaction of the Muscovites, who had placed the chief hopes of
their future prosperity in the Activity and Courage of a Prince, who soon after
gave them such evident proofs of his great ability in the art of Government,
that they were satisfied their hopes would not fall short of their expectation,
especially when the CzaritZa within a twelve Month after, brought forth as
Young Prince, who being now about Eight Years of Age, gives all the imaginable
hopes, of being one day the inheritor of his Father's Virtues and Dominions.

For after the Removal of GalliZin, having taken the Reins of the Government
into his own hands, and consequently suppres'd that Faction which hitherto had
in a measure opposed his Greatness, he began to lay the foundation toward the
accomplishment of these designs, which within these few Years last past have
been the Admiration of all Europe, and caused Terror to his Enemies.

The unfortunate War in which the Turks were engaged against the Emperor,
Poles and Venetians having sufficiently disenabled them to send any
considerable Succors to the Crim Tartars, The War against the Crim Tartars.
the hereditary Enemies of Muscovy, which has so often felt the direful effects
of their barbarous Cruelties, the present juncture of time was looked upon as
the most favorable to reduce these troublesome Neighbors under the Obedience
of the Russian Empire. For which purpose a considerable Army having been
brought into the field, the Siege of Asaph was resolved on, which, City being
seated at the mouth of the River Don or Tanais, where it discharges itself into
the Palus Meotides, or the Sea of Zabacche, is the Inlet into the lesser
Tartary, and conquently facilitates the Conquest of the Crim Tartars,
inhabiting the Taurica Chersonesus. The Muscovites attacked the City very
vigourously, but being destitute of Shipping, and not sufficiently provided
with good Canoneers, they could not hinder the Turks from bringing in at
several times fresh supplies of Men, Ammunition and other necessaries, whereby
they were obliged at the approach of the Winter Season to raise the Siege for
that time.

But the Czar was so far from being discouraged by this retreat, that he
resolved to repair this disgrace, and to make himself master of the place, let
it cost what it will. For which purpose having ordered a considerable number of
Ships to be built, and manned, to prevent their Communication with the Sea, and
obtained a good number of Engineers, Bombardeers, and Canoneers from the
Emperor, Venetians, Elector of Brandenburgh, and some other Christian Princes;
he resolved to take the field in person in the ensuing year, so soon as the
Rivers should become Navigable, and to open the Campaign with the Siege of
Asoph.

Pursuant to this resolution having ordered a vast Train of Artillery, Besiege.
Asoph.
consisting of 400 Pieces of Cannon, and 150 Mortars, to be got ready, he
Marched with a very numerous Army, commanded under him by his Favorite, the
General and Admiral Le Fort, (the Chief of the Ambassy, now in Holland) by Mr.
Gourdon, a Scotchman, and Afranou Nichelouits, a Muscovite, and laid close
Seige to the said City, whilst his Fleet guarded the Port, and prevented any
Supplies from coming to their Relief that way; and the Cosack Generals MaZepa,
and Paley, advanced in two distinct Bodies toward the Boristhenes, to give a
powerful diversion to the Crim Tartars on that side.

The Tartars within defended themselves for some time with bravery enough,
notwithstanding the great havoc made by the Muscovite Bombs, under the
direction of the Foreign Bombardiers, but finding themselves disappointed in
their hopes of Relief by Sea (the Muscovites having defeated those that came to
their Assistance) they beat a parley, Takes Asoph by composition.
and Surrendered themselves, upon certain Articles, to the Czar.

After the taking of Asoph, he advanced to Karikeumen, which, by the force of
his Bombs, he soon obliged to Surrender at discretion. All the Castles and
Places thereabouts, underwent the same fate, most of which he caused to be
demolished, unless it was Taran, where he left a very good Garrison.

The same Summer the Cosacks had made themselves Masters of several Strong
Forts on the Boristhenes, which may in time much facilite the taking of Precop,
Situate at the very entrance of the Taurica Chersonesus. The Czar after the
Conquest of a place so considerable for its Situation, was received at his
return by his Subjects inhabiting the City of Musco, Enters Mosco in Triumph.
with all the demostrations of joy, and other Honors due to a Conqueror: For
at his Entrance there were Triumphal Arches erected, representing the Conquests
of Asoph, and other places taken by him the Summer before: And as he went
through the City to the Castle, he was preceeded by the General Le Fort in a
Litter, and by General Gourdon on Horse back.

But what was most pleasing to the People, was, the Leading it. Triumph of a
certain noted Deserter, who is name was Jacob. He being taken at the Surrender
of Asoph, was brought into Muscovy, and to complete the Show, was placed upon a
high Wagon, Seated under a Gibbet; upon which he was hanged the next day after
this Solemn Entry.

His next care was to send an Envoy to the-Court of Vienna, not only to give an
exact account of the Success of his Arms against the Infidels, but more
particularly to enter into a more strict Alliance, with the rest of the
Confederates, against the Turks: And having received certain intelligence, that
the French Ambassador in Poland, was laboring for the advancing of the Prince
of Conti to the Polish Crown, he gave the Polish Nobility to understand by his
Minister Resident in Poland, that in case they should advance the Prince of
Conti, or any other Frenchman to the Throne, they must expect to be treated as
Enemies, he looking upon the French Nation, joined in Alliance with the Turks,
to stand in opposition to the General Interest of Christendom.

In the mean while the Negotiation at Vienna, Concludes an Alliance with the
Confederates against the Turks.
concerning the Alliance against the Infidels went on with good Success the
main Scruple to be removed, being about the time of the Continuance of this
Alliance, and which the Muscovites desired to be for Seven Years, whereas the
Emperor and the Venetians insisted to have it continued for no longer than
three Years. But the Czar having sent new Instructions to his Envoy, with full
power to conclude the said Negotiation according to the Proposals made by the
rest of the Confederates, all things were at last agreed on to the Satisfaction
of all the parties concerned in the Alliance, and the Treaty was Signed and
Ratified at Vienna, in the Presence of the Venetian Resident, containing
besides several others, these three following Articles.

That the Alliance shall last three Years, at least, reserving to the Parties
concerned, the power to renew it, after that time is expired, if they think fit.

That none of the Parties shall make Peace, without the Knowledge and Consent
of the other.

And Lastly; that in Case the Enemy shall make any Proposals of Peace to any
one of the Confederates, the same shall be imparted to all the rest.

After the Conclusion of this Alliance the Emperor appointed a Minister to
Reside with the Czar, and to attend him in the Field, to be an eye witness of
what passed in the Muscovite Army, and to give the Emperor from time to time
an account of their Progress against the Tartars.

The noise of this Alliance, and the great preparations made by the Czar
against the next ensuing Campaign, struck such a terror to the Tartar Chan,
that he dispatched frequent Messengers to Constantinople, to Solicit Prompt
and Powerful Succors against the Muscovites, who were preparing to invade the
Crim Tartary, and by the Conquest of the City of Precop, to make themselves
Masters of the Taurica Chersenesus.

These Remonstrances had such an influence over the Ottoman Port, that they
promised them considerable Assistance, and it was given out, that the Grand
Seignior intended to go in person against the Muscovites; and though the last
proved to be only a Contrivance to amuse the Enemy, yet the Turks being in the
next Campaign deprived of the Succors they generally used to receive from
these Tartars, did in a great Measure attribute their last defeat to the want
of these Auxiliaries, who, by their number, used to stand them in no small
stead against the Impeiral Cavalry.

But whilst all Europe waited in expectation to hear of the advance of his
Czarish Majesty at the head of a very formidable Army, toward the Crim
Tartars, they were agreeably Surprised with the news of a great and Splendid
Muscovian Ambassady arrived in Prussia, where the Czar was in person, but
incognito. This news, which at first carried along with it but little
probability, was put beyond question after they had been received with so much
Solemnity by his Electoral Highness of Brandenburgh at Konigsbergh, the Capital
of the Ducal Prussia.

The Chief of the Ambassy was Francis Jacolovits Le Fort, whom we have
mentioned before, with whom were joined as Colleagues Mexievits Holowin, Damnos
Diat Precophei, The Muscovite Ambassadors Entrance in Konigsburgh.
and Bodanovits Wornits Zien. Being arrived early in the morning at Laut, about
a mile distant from Konigsbergh, with a Train of betwixt three and four Hundred
Persons, the Sieur Danckelman. Prime Minister of State, and Mr. Besser, Master
of the Ceremonies, with a great number of Courtiers, and the Nobility of the
Country, were sent by his Electoral Highness, to Complement them in his Name,
and Conduct them into the City, where in the afternoon they made their Public
Entrance in the following manner. Forty of his Electoral Highnesses best led
Horses, with very rich Sadles, and other Accoutrements, led the way. These were
followed by a Single Officer richly clad, attended by the Kettle Drums of the
Guard of the Body, three Troops of whom followed immeditely after, all clad in
Red.

Next to these came Thirty Coaches, drawn with Six Horses each, in which were
the Principal Nobility of the Ducal Prussia. Then two of his Electoral
Highnesses Coaches, and one belonging to the Margrave Albert. After these were
to be seen the Court Pages, clad all in Red* laced all over very richly with
Gold Lace, riding two and two with a Page of the Ambassadors betwixt them.

These were followed by Forty more Coaches, with Six Horses each, wherein were
the Chief Ministers and Officers of the Electors Household; after whom came the
first Kettle Drum and Trumpet belonging to his Electoral Highness, followed by
the Ambassadors Foot Guards, clad in Green, with Silver Battle Axes upon their
shoulders; and after these the Ambassadors Horse Guards, in the same Livery,
but without Battle Axes.

Then came the Coach wherein were the Four Ambassadors; and lastly, the whole
Train was closed with Twelve Coaches filled with Muscovite and Brandenburgh
Gentlemen.

The Streets through which their Excellencies passed to the Kniphoff, (where most
Magnificent Lodgings were prepared for them) were lined with the Burghers, who
were drawn up in a double file: They were received at their Lodgings by the
Garrison of the City, and saluted with a treble discharge of all the Cannon
round the Fortifications, and being thus conducted to their Apartments, the
Sieurs Danckelman and Besser took their leave of them, being waited on by the
Ambassadors to the Stairs of the House.

Some days after, Have their Audience.
being the 25. of May, they had their Public Audience of his Electoral
Highness, being again conducted by the abovementioned Sieur Danckelman, and
Besser the Master of the Ceremonies, being followed by a Train of Thirty odd
Coaches. Before the Ambassadors Coach went Thirty Persons, carrying the Czars
Presents to the Elector, consisting in Tables, Ermins, and other Rich furs,
beside a good quantity of Indian, and Persian Silks, Stuffs, and Tissues of
Gold, and Silver; valued in all at 20000 l. Sterling. The Ambassadors
themselves were most richly dressed, their Habits being of Cloth of Gold and
Silver, covered with rich Embroidery, and abundance of Pearls and precious
Stones. They passed through the Electors Guards, which was placed on both sides
up to the Great Hall of the Castle, where the Elector, attended by the
Nobility, and all the Officers of his Household, was Seated under a Canopy of
State.

The Ambassadors having made the usual reverences, every one in his turn,
complemented his Electoral Highness, and after having delivered the Presents,
they presented a Letter containing in Substance; That his Czarish Majesty had
sent these (abovenamed) Persons as his Ambassadors, to his Electoral Highness
to give him all the possible assurance of his desire to improve the Affection
and good Correspondence, which always had been between them, and their
Illustrious Ancestors That this Ambassy, being intended, to proceed from hence
to several other Courts in Christendom, in order to concert Measures, and
promote the common Interest of the Confederacy, against the Infidels; his
Czarish Majesty did not in the least question, but that the Elector would
assist them in so glorious a Work, and forward them in their Journey. The
Letter concluded with the thanks from the Great Duke to his Electoral Highness,
for the Engineers and Bombardiers, which he had sent sometime before, and which
by their extraordinary Skill had been very instrumental in the Siege of Asoph,
and other places, taken by the Muscovites in the Crim Tartary.

The Elector answered; That he acknowledged himself much obliged to the Czar,
for his assurances of the continuance of his Friendship, and especially for the
Splendid Ambassy he had sent to him.

But the Sieur Danckelman returned them an answer more at large, and in the
Electors Name answered their Complements, in terms so obliging, that the
Ambassadors were extremely satisfied with his Generous and Genteel behavior.

Being afterward reconducted to their Lodgings in the same manner, they were
Treated with a most Splendid Dinner by his Electoral Highness, and were the
same Evening, Entertained with variety of extraordinary Fireworks, which
lasted, to their no small Satisfaction, till midnight.

Whilst the Czar of Moscovy, The Czar obtains a great victory against the
Tartars.
with his Ambassadors, was on his Journey toward Holland, his Army obtained a
Signal Victory against the Crim-Tartars, on the 30th of July.

For the Muscovites having drawn together their Forces to the number of 70000
Men, most Horse; the Turks and Tartars, who had received advice of their March
thinking themselves Superior in number and strength to the Muscovites, resolved
to Attack them before they were joined by the Cosacks.

In order to which, they advanced under the Command of Sultan Galga, and
attacked them with their utmost Vigor, but were received by the Muscovian
Cavalry with so much Resolution, that they were repulsed and droven back in
great disorder; but trusting in their number they rallied again, and charged
the Muscovites with great Fury, till being, after some Hours engagement quite
broken, they were forced to quit the Field, being pursued by the Enemy to the
River Kalganski, where a great slaughter ensued: For being constrained, by the
close pursuit of the Muscovites, to cross that River with great Precipitation,
a great part of their Army not being able to follow the rest, with so much
haste as their present danger required, were either cut to pieces, or drowned
in the River, or taken Prisoners.

This Victory was the more advantageous to the Muscovites, because most of the
Tartars having been slain in the flight, the loss was not considerable on the
Muscovite side, for which reason great Rejoycings were made in the City of
Musco, and all over the Empire.

In the mean while the Embassy was arrived in Holland, where they received the
first News of this Victory, and made their public Entry at the Hague on the
17th of September, in great Splendour.

Before their Excellencies Coaches went a Train of 50 others with 6 Horses
each, The Moscovite Ambassadors make their Entrance at the Hague.
wherein were the Gentlemen of the Ambassador's Retinue, and other Persons of
Quality.

Then came the two Coaches of State, in which rode the Ambassadors, who were
followed by three Coaches of their own, which closed the Cavalcade.

After they had passed through the Guards that were placed on both sides of the
Court, Their Audience.
they were received by two Deputies of the States, in the Out-Room of Audience.
Being conducted into the Room of Audience, they were saluted by the whole Body
of the States* unto whom they delivered the Czars Letters, directed to their
High and Mightinesses, containing assurances of his Affection, and his desire
of Cultivating a good Correspondence with the State, desiring their High and
Mightinesses to Treat with the (abovenamed) Ambassadors, concerning such
matters, as they should propose to them in his Czarish Majesty's Name, to
promote the Interest of Christendom against the Infidels.

Then each of the Ambassadors having, in his (...), made a Complemental Speech
to the States, and delivered the Czar's Present, which consisted in a great
quantity of Sable-skins, of a considerable Value, the Deputies answered them in
a very Eloquent Speech, in the Name of the States.

The Ambassadors were entreated to sit down, in Elbow-Chairs set for that
purpose, which they having refused, and the whole Assembly judging, not without
reason, that this refusal proceeded from the respect they bore to their
Sovereign, there present, did also continue in the same posture till the
Audience was over, when the Ambassadors were re-conducted, in the same Order as
they came, to their Lodgings.

For the better understanding the present condition of the Russian Empire, it
will be absolutely requisite, before we conclude this Treatise, to add
something concerning its Traffic, and present Strength, in relation to its
Neighbors; in both which, it must be confessed, the Muscovites have improved
themselves since the settlement of their Government, after their Intestine
Commotions, to the admiration of all those, who have taken the Pains to make a
due comparison betwixt their former condition, and the present State of their
Empire.

Not to enlarge my self hereupon, Trade of Muscovy.
the Trade of Muscovy depending on the product of the Country, such as
Potashes, Wax, Honey, Tar, Pitch, Hemp, Flax, Cavier, and Sturgeon, besides a
great many other Commodities which are exported from thence into Foreign
Countries. It is almost incredible, what advantages the Muscovites reap from
the Persian, Indian, and Chinese Trade, lately established throughout the whole
Empire. The staple of the Persian, and Indian Trade is chiefly at Astrachan,
which lying within the Mouth of the River Volga, must be considered as the
Frontierplace of the two most considerable parts of the World, to wit, of
Europe, and Asia.

The Armenians possess one of the Suburbs of this City by themselves, and drive
a vast Trade from thence into Persia; but they who without question contribute
most to the flourishing condition of this City, and carry on the Indian Trade
through Muscovy, are the Banjans, a certain sort of Indians, much addicted to
Trading, and dispersed all over the great Mogul's Territories, but especially
inhabiting the Province of Guzuratte (by the Portugueses called Cambaya) who
holding a Correspondence all over the Caspian Sea, there are few sorts of
Merchandises which do not pass through their Hands.

For it is to be observed, that the Province of Guzuratte is Inhabited besides
English, Dutch, and Persians, by three several sorts of People by the
Ind^stans, the ancient Natives of the Country, an idle and sluggish Generation;
by the Moguls, who came out of Grand Tartary, and are all Mahometans, much
addicted to Arms, and the Banjans, who altogether apply themselves to
Manufactury and Traffic. It is true, there is no Province in India, where
there are not some of these Banjans, but in the Province of Guzuratte they are
more numerous than in other places, and are distinguished, especially from
those that profess Mahometism, by their Habit.

For though they do not ware their Hair very long, yet do they not shave their
Heads. The Banjans described.
Their Women don't cover their Faces, as those of the Mahometans do; they ware
Pendants, and Pearls in their Ears, and Necklaces about their Necks. Black
Teeth are amongst them as well as in Muscovy in great request, from whence it
comes that they nick Name the Europeans, who have white Teeth, Bondra, that is,
Apes. They ware no Breeches as the other Indians, but only a piece of thin Silk
stuff, which is wrapped about them, reaching down to their Hams, over which they
ware their Smocks, and on them their upper Garment, which they tie with a
Girdle at the Waste: Some of them wear under these a kind of narrow Wastcoats,
the Sleeves whereof reach no further than the Elbow, being naked from the
Breasts down to the Navel. They wear Shoes either of Wood, Velvet, Brocade, or
gilt Leather, fastened with Straps to their Feet, which they put off when they
go into any Room, where the Floor commonly is covered with Tapestry.

They are incomparably more Ingenious, Subtle, and more Civil, than any of the
other Indians. No People in the World are more given to Writing and casting
Accounts than they, and their Conversation is very delightful. There is no
Trade in the Great Turk's Country, which is not chiefly managed by them, nor
any Commodity throughout all the Indies, which they do not sell, unless it be
Flesh and Fish, or any other Thing that had Life, which they are bound to
preserve by the Rules of their Religion, as we shall relate anon.

They Marry their Children at 7, 8, 9, or 10 Years of Age, and it seldom
appears that they stay till 12, especially if they be Daughters; for if they
should exceed that time, it would be looked upon as Scandalous.

The Banyan Widows are not permitted to Marry a second time, even though the
Bridegroom should Die before the Consummation of the Marriage; but all the
Ornaments are to be taken from her, and her Hair to be cut of immediately after
the Husband's Death. Nevertheless they are not obliged to burn themselves with
the Dead Bodies of their Husbands, neither are they hindered to do it if they
have an inclination thereto. Those Widows in India, who cannot dispense with a
single Life, get in among the Dancers of that Sex, where they have sufficient
opportunity to exercise the Flesh, and to allay the heat which must needs be
occasioned in Vigorous Bodies lying in so hot a Climate.

This Barbarous Custom for the Widows to burn themselves with their deceased
Husbands, was first introduced into those parts upon a Political account For
Polygamy causing abundance of Heart burning and Jealousy among the Women that
were Rivals in their Husbands Affections, it often happened, that such as
thought themselves neglected, used frequently to procure their Husbands Deaths.
Wherefore to make them to be more careful of their Husbands Lives, it was
ordered, that such as were desirous to be accounted honest Women, should be
engaged to keep their Husbands company in their Journey to the other World, and
be burnt together with their Bodies. So that though this obligation of dying with
their Husbands was only imposed upon such Women as stood upon the reputation of
their Honesty, without any punishment to be inflicted on such as refused to
conform themselves to so dreadful a Custom, unless they were not admitted into
the Company of Persons of Quality, as being looked upon as Infamous; yet has
this principle of Honor been so prevailing upon a vast number of the Indian
Women, that there are innumerable examples, of such as have sacrificed their
Lives upon the Pile which burnt the dead Carcasses of their Husbands.

But as among all the Sects of the Indians, there have been Women, who, with
the same cheerfulness have thrown away their Lives to the memory of their
Husbands, as those of the Sect of Samarath, whose Persuasion is, that if a
Woman has so great an Affection for her Husband; as to burn her self with him
after his Death, she shall live with him in the other World seven times as
long, and shall enjoy him with seven times as much satisfaction as she has done
in this; it is most probable, that they are induced to this resolution, not
altogether by the motive of a Punctillo of Honor, but look on this kind of
Death as a Passage, through which they are to enter into a beatitude of these
Pleasures, whereof they had but a small share in this World.

But to return to our Banyans, who having a considerable share in the Indian
Trade in Muscovy, very well deserve our particular description here.

The Banyans, Religion of the Banyans.
therefore, are Pagans, using neither Baptism nor Circumcision; yet they
believe that there is but one God, Creator and Preserver of the Universe.
Neither does this persuasion hinder it, that they acknowledge one Braman, who
they say, is God's Vicegerent, (as they call the great God of all the other
Gods Etvara) and out of who is Brains, they say, their Bramans, or Priests
derive their first Being. They are highly respected among the Banyans, Their
Bramens.
as well as the other Pagans in India, not only upon the account of their
austerity of Life, and their extraordinary Abstinence, they fasting sometimes
several Days together, scarce eating any thing at all, but also in regard the
Education of the Youth is committed to their care, and that they expound the
mysteries of their Religion to the ignorant People; so that making what
impression they think most convenient for their purpose, on the minds of the
superstitious Indians, their Words are considered as Oracles; from whence it
comes, that the Banyans seldom engage in any business of consequence, unless
with the Advice and Approbation of the Braman.

They are distinguished from the other Banyans, only by what they wear upon
their Heads, which is a certain Head-dress made of Linen Cloth, wrapped several
times round the Head, to cover their Sacred Hair, which is never cut. Besides
which, they wear three pieces of small Packthread next their Skin, which comes
cross over the Breast from the Shoulder to the Wast, which Packthreads they
never pull of, though it were to save their Lives.

Among the Malataps, they are looked upon as so Holy, that no Marriage is
contracted there, but the first Fruits of the Bride must be Consecrated to the
Braman, to whom she is brought to be deflour'd, and being thus purified in her
lower parts, the Bridegroom may enter without danger. For the cunning Priests
have cajoled the poor simple People into a belief, that the Marriage could
never be sufficiently Blessed, unless the Braman has initiated the Bride with a
Sanctifying touch. From whence it comes, that many times he must be very
earnestly entreated, before he will undertake the Task; and if the Persons be
of any Quality or good Substance, he will scarce be engaged to take of the
drudgery from the Bridegroom's Hands, unless he be hire^ to the Work, and have
a good reward for his Pains.

Thus the crafty Priest, by imposing upon the simplicity of his Flock, improves
his natural Tallent to his utmost Advantage, satisfies at one stroke both his
Appetite and Purse, and fells his Benevolence at an excessive price, which a
Layman would be glad to bestow generously, for nothing. But this is not all,
for if the Priest once gets sure footing in a good place, he is sure not to
part with it at an easy rate, but remains a standing Friend to the Family; for
the Married Men retain so much kindness ever after for their Copartners, that,
if they go any Journey, or upon any occasion are detained from Home, they
recommend their whole Family (but especially their Wives) to the care of the
Braman, while they are absent, to supply their places with them, till they
return, which you may be sure the Priest will perform to the utmost of his
Power, unless the good Woman happen to be very old or ugly, or he be disabled
to do his Office by his long fasting, in which case it is the Woman's business
to cherish the Father's languishing Spirits, with powerful Restoratives, at
which the Indian Women are the most expert in the whole World, as they are very
skilful to send their Husbands upon certain occasions, to the enjoyments of the
other World.

But to return to the more serious part of their Religion; they hold the
immortallity of the Soul, but believe, withal, that at its departure out of the
first Body, it transmigrates into that of some other Creature. Thus they
affirm, that by example, the Soul of a good natured and meek Person, is
translated into the Body of a Pidgeon or Chicken; that of a Cruel and Rapacious
Fellow into a Crocodile, a Lion, or a Tiger; that of a Cunning and Crafty Man,
into that of a Fox, That of a Glutton into the body of Swine; that of a
Treacherous and Malicious Person into a Serpent, before they are admitted to
the enjoyment of Spiritual Beatitude. For which reason it is the Banyans
abstain as we mentioned before, from killing any living Creatures, even to the
Insects, be they never so troublesome or dangerous. Nay they Act with so much
Circumspection in regard of all Living Creatures, of what kind soever, that
they forbear keeping any fire, and lighting of Candles, in the Night time, out
of fear, that the Flies or Moths should chance to burn themselves therein; they
scarce can be induced to make any Pits in the ground, for fear of drowning the
Slegs and other Insects.

If the Mahometans among them do sell any Birds, they will be sure to redeem
them, if possibly they can, and feed them well, because, say they, we don't
know, how soon our selves may stand in need of the same kindness; and they will
Erect Hospitals for Beasts that are Hurt or Wounded.

They have a more then ordinary respect for Cows, so that if they know of any
one that is to be killed for the Market, they will not only purchase and redeem
it at a high rate from the slaughter; but there is scarce a family, but what
breeds up one, almost as tenderly as their own Children; For they will comb and
feed it, and lodge it as cleanly, and as carefully as if it were one of their
best Friends or Relations.

They never eat but in private, and before they touch the Victuals, they throw
some small quantity of it separately into the Fire, the Water, the Air, and
upon the Earth. They have abundance of other pretended niceties, too many to be
inserted here; but it ought not to be passed by in silence, that though they
acknowledge one Supreme God, they nevertheless worship the Devil, alleging for
a reason, that God having created him to govern the World, They worship the
Devil.
and to do hurt to Mankind, he ought to be appeased by Prayers and Sacrifices.

From whence it is, that his Statues of Gold, Silver, Ivory, Ebony, Marble,
Wood or Stone are every where to be seen in their Mosques, the figure of which
appears most dreadful to the eyes of the Beholders. For his Head, out of which
come forth four Horns is adorned with a triple Crown in the shape of a Taira.
His Face resembles that of a large Boar, with two great Teeth coming out of his
Mouth; and a great ugly. Beard on his Chin. He bends his Breast to his Belly,
where the Hands hang down negligently. Betwixt his Thighs there appears another
Head with two Horns upon it, as ugly as the first, thrusting out of the Mouth,
a Tongue of extraordinary bigness. Instead of Teeth it has Saws, and a Cows
Tail behind. This Figure stands always upon a Stone Table, this being the Altar
where the offerings are to to be made. They have no other light in their
Mosque, than what they are furnished withal by the Lamps which are kept
burning perpetually near the Idol: And after the Priest has finished his
Devotious, he purifies his Head, by putting it into these Flames, as the other
Banyans purify themselves before the Sacrifice, by washing in a Trough, which
always stands on the right side of the Altar.

But it being beyond our present Scope, to digress further into the cloudy and
Superstitious Rites of these Banyans, let us return to their traffic, which
seems to be more suitable to our present intention. These Banyans therefore
being the most in number throughout the Cities of Surat, Blevitshia, Gandeer,
Goga, Cambaya, Dium, Pateppatene, Mangalor, Gondore, Massary, Gandivi, Balsara,
and in the Metropolis of the Province Hamed Ewad, or Amadabath; they manage the
whole Trade of India, not only in Silks, Cottons, but also all sorts of
Proveado's of Gold and Silver, Sattins, Velvets, Taffata's, Sattins for Linings
and Carpets, quilted Coverlets of Silk or Cotton, Tents, which are used instead
of Coaches, Cabinets of Lacque, Chest boards of Tortoise Shell, Seals, Beads,
Chains, Buttons and Rings of Ivory, Amber, Rock Crystal or Agat.

The other Commodities which by the Banyans are transported into Mnscovy and
Persia are, Sugar candy'd or in powder, Cummin, Opium, Ginger, dry and
preserved Myrobolans or Indian Plums, Sal Armonias Musk, Amber Greece, Lacque,
Saltpeter, Indico, Borax, Assafaetida, and Diamonds, besides several sorts of
other precious Stones.

The Lacque is a Gumm taken out of a certain Tree, Lacque, how made.
not much unlike a Plum Tree, there is abundance of it all over the Province of
Guzurette; its native color is Red, Brown; But the Indianst beat i^ to powder,
and after they have given it what color they please, make it into Sticks, for
to Seal Letters, or beatfiie their Cabinets, and other Household Stuff.

Saltpeter is made in those parts, Saltpeter, how made.
out of the blackest and Saltest ground in the following manner; having made
certain Trenches, they fill them with this Nitrous Earth, and let into them out
of the Adjacent small Rivulets, so much water as they think sufficient, for its
soaking, which that it may be the more effectually done, they tread it with
their feet, till it be well mixed. When they believe the Water to have drawn
out all the Nitrous Substance, which was in the Earth, they take, after it be
well settled, the clearest part of it, which they dispose in* another Trench,
where after some time it grows thick, and then they boil it like Salt
continually scumming it. Lastly they put it into a great Earthen pots, where
the grossest dregs falling to the bottom, they take of the Saline Substance,
which is set a drying in the Sun, till it grows hard, and is reduced into that
form, as we see it in Europe.

The best Indigo in the World comes from about Amadabath, Indigo, how prepared.
the Capital of the Province of Guzurat^e, from a Village called Chirphees. The
Herb out of which that is made, is not unlike that of Yellow Parsnip, but
shorter and of a more bitter taste; It sprouts forth to branches like a Reed,
growing some Years, when the season proves kind, Six or Seven foot high, with a
flower like that that of a Thistle, and the seed altogether like Fenugreek. It
is seldom sown till in June, and is ready to be cut toward toward the latter
end of November, or the beginning of December. They Sow it but once in three
Years, but the first year produces the best, when the leaves are cut off within
a foot of the ground. The Stalks are thrown away as useless, and the leaves
laid a drying in the Sun* which done they are put a put a soaking for four or
five days in a Stone Trough, the Water with the leaves is often stirred, till
such time that the Water has sufficiently extracted the whole tincture of the
Herb. Then the Water is smoothly drawn off into another Stone Trough, in order
to let it settle for one night. The next day, all the Water is again drawn off
to the settlement, and what, is thus left in the bottom of the Troughs, is
strained through a course Cloth, and so set a drying in the Sun.

And this is true Indigo, which however the Banyans frequently adulterate; by
mixing with it a certain Earth of the same Color. And because the excellency
of this Commodity is judged by its lightness, they have cunning enough to add
to it some oil, to make it swim upon the Water. The second year, the Stalk
which was left in the ground the year before, shoots forth other leaves, but
they are not comparable to those of the first, though they much exceed the Wild
Indigo. Wherefore they reserve the greatest part of the second Years product
for Seed. That of the third Year, is as much infersour in goodness to that of
the second, as that is in comparison of that of the first, and being therefore
in no esteem among foreign Merchants, is onmade use of in the Country, in
dying of their Clothes. After it has been in the ground three Years, they let
the Land lie fallow for one Year, before they set it again

The Banyans in General, are the most crafty Traders in the World, which makes
the Muscovites (as do also the English and Dutch in India) employ those
residing at Astrachan and in other parts of the Empire, employ them for their
Factors and Hawkers, as being the most likely to discover the cheats of their
brethren in India. Both the Banyans and Armenians residing at Astrachan are
very industrious in keeping a constant correspondence with the Indians and
Persians in their respective Countries, but especially in all the Seaports of
the Caspian Sea, which by reason of the vast number of Rivers that exonerate
themselves into it, rendereth the Commerce with Persia, and consequently with
the Infidels very commodious to the Muscovites.

Among others the great City Gangea, one of the fairest and best in Persia, by
reason of its advantageous Situation for trade upon the confluence of several
Rivers, and the great Crowd of strangers that resort thither on the account of
Traffic is frequently visited by the Muscovian Factors, the Banyans and
Armenians.

But Shamachie is the place, The City of Shamachi
which chiefly furnishes the Muscovites, by reason of its nearness to the
Caspian Sea, with such Indian and Persian Commodities, as they stand in need
of. This City was indeed formerly much bigger than it was now, the greatest
part of it having been about twenty Years ago ruined by an Eathquake, yet
notwithstanding this misfortune it is still very considerable, there being not
in all the Persian Empire a City, where there is so general a resort of
strangers of all Nations, to wit, of Armenians, Banyans, Georgians, Greeks,
Turks, Circasians and Muscovites; the latter of which have their particular
Caravansera or public Storehouse, where they truck their Tin, Russia Leather,
Copper, Furrs, and other Merchandises, for the precious Commodities of India
and Persia, and which afterward are conveyed into to Russia either by Land by
the Way of Derbent, through the Dagesthan and Circasian Tartars, over the great
Deserts of Astrachan to the river Wolga; or else are Ship't in the Road of
Nizora (the most safe and most convenient for Shipping in all the Caspian Sea)
and from thence are carried up the Wolga, to the River Oc^a, and so by the
Inopea to the Capital City of the Empire.

The project which by the Command of the present Czar of Muscovy has been set
on foot, of (...) a Communication betwixt the great Rivers the Wolga and the
Don, would when perfected, be of incredible advantage to the Muscovites, in
trans^^^ing, not only their own, but all the Sarick Indian, Persian, and
Chinese Commodities into the other parts of Europe; especially if his present
Czarish Majesty, should be so Successful against the Crim Tartars, as to make
himself Master of the Taurica Chersonesus, and consequently of the City and
Port of Caffa, (formerly so famous, when in the hands of the Gene^ses,) and the
Port of Erzotra, Situate on the black Sea.

I have hitherto withal the enquiry I could make* not been able to be fully
instructed in what place it is, that this Communication betwixt these two
Rivers is to be perfected; But thus much is most probale, that it must either
be effected by cutting a Canal on this side of the first Branch of the River
Wolga, Communication betwixt the Rivers, Don and Wolga.
near the City of Zariza, where the Don advances within Seven Leagues of the
Wolga, for else by rendering the small River of Kamous Navigable, which rising
out of the Don, falls below the said City of Zaria, behind the Islle of
Zerpinsk into the River Wolga.

As to what relates to the Chinese Trade in Muscovy, The Chinese Trade.
how the way thither was first discovered and improved by the Sable Hunters of
Siberia, and how by the Rivers of Obi, Genessay, Lena and Yomour; and by the
convenience of their sleds drawn by Rain-Deer, during the Winter Season, they
carry on that Trade, has been circumstantially related in the first part, in
that Chapter where we treated of Siberia,

We have therefore only thus much to add here; that as by the help of the
Banyans and Armenians, (...) Muscovites maintain a constant correspondence with
the Indians and Persians, so, with the assistance of those they call, Kitachi,
they keep up their Communication with China. These Kitachi go commonly under
the Name of Chinese in Muscovy, by reason, that the Muscovites call all the
Inhabitants betwixt the River Oby, the Wolga and China (which (...) properly
the Great Tartary) by the Name of Ka^^^. But in regard the Muscovites, (as we
mentioned in the first Volumns, have made such considerable discoveries on that
side of late Years, as to have built several Cities, for the security of their
Colonies on that Side, they have also by degrees drawn abundance of these
wandering People to these (...), where after once they became fixed, and began
to have a true Sense of the Benefits, and Advantage of a Settled Life, they
have settled themselves in the other parts of Muscovy, and prove very
beneficial to the Russians, to carry on the Chinese Trade, by their
Correspondence with the several Tartarian Nations, Inhabiting that spacious
Country betwixt Siberia and Chinese Wall.

As the accession of these foreign Nations, has been of great advantage to the
increase of Trade, and the Wealth of the Russian Empire, so it has contributed
not a little to the peopling of the Country, which by reason of their intestine
Commotions in our age, and frequent Inroads made by the Crim Tartars, was laid,
in a great many parts, in a manner desolate. This is most conspicuous in the
fertile Plains on both sides of the River Steca, down to the Wolga, almost as
far as Cesau, which not many Years ago were in a manner dispeopled, but now are
stocked with an infinite number of Towns and Villages, and the City of Musco it
self has in a few Years so well recovered its passed disasters, that it is
incomparable more Beautiful than ever it was before, and is reckoned to contain
at present no less than betwixt Six and Seven Hundred Thousand Inhabitants of
several Nations.

As the prodigious increase of the Capital City, must chiefly be attributed to
the great conco^^^^ of the various Trading Nations we have mentionen, so the
peopling of the Country is to be ascribed to the prudence of the Czar Alexis
Michaelouits the present Czar's Father, who finding his Territories exhausted
of men, in his War with the Poles, carried away a number of Captives out of
^^^^thuania, and the other Polish Provinces bordering on Muscovy, as were
sufficient to plant several Colonies all along the Rivers Gecca and Wolga, who
having been encouraged by several privileges granted to them, have repeopled
that Country in such manner as it appears at present,

But, Strength of the Muscovites in respect of their Neighbors.
since we have sufficiently spoke concerning the Strength of the Muscovites, by
the increase (...) their Wealth and Trade, we must also, before (...) conclude,
say something of their present Condition in reference to their Neighbors: The
Persians, Poles, Swedes, the Crim Tartars and Turks.

As to what relates to the Muscovites in respect of the Persians, The Persians.
there is no great probability that these two Neighbors should have any
occasion to try their mutual strength, since they are so separated from one
another, by the Caspian Sea, the Dagesthan and Carcassian Tartars, and the vast
deserts betwixt these, and Astrachan; and that the common benefit they receive
by their Trade in the Caspian Sea, engages them equally to keep a good
understanding betwixt them, especially since, upon occasion they may be very
serviceable to one another against the Turks.

The Tartars, bordering the North East upon Siberia, The Tartars.
and some other Provinces under the Czar of Muscovy's jurisdiction, though they
formerly (especially the Calmuc Tartars) used to be verry troublesome to some
of the Tartarian Provinces, depending upon the Russian Empire; nevertheless
since the Muscovites have guarded the Frontiers on that side, with good
Fortifications and Garrisons, and have made these Vagabonds sensible of the
advantage of their Fire Arms, they are not so forward in ma^ing, their
irruptions. Their only way they make (...) of now is, to appear sometimes in
great Numbers, on the Frontiers, and to send their Deputies into Muscovy; by
which means they get considerable Presents, from the Czar, who thinks it more
Prudence to purchase the Friendship of a Vagabond ^^ople, who have nothing to
loose, than to put himself to the expense of sending an Army against (...) lieu
of which they assist the Czar in his Wars, with a considerable Number of Horse,
and are very serviceable to the Muscovite in furthering their Passage and
Traffic into China.

But the Turks and Crim Tartars, The Turks and Crim Tartars.
used to be the most Mischievous Neighbors to Muscovy. It Is true the Turks do
not immediately border upon Muscovy, (...) the Country Inhabited by the
Budziack and (...) Tartars, who though at a great distance to the South from the
City of Musco, as they are the Grand Seigniors Vassals, so he makes use of them
like his hunting Dogs, to overcome the Southern part of Muscovy, to the very
Gates of its Capital City.

Czar Michael Frederovits endeavored to prevent their Incursions, by causing
the Woods to be cut down in some places, and by reason of a Line strengthened
with a Moat, of about Five Hundred Miles in Length; but they did not rest, till
they had pulled down the first, and filled up the last, and by their frequent
Incursions had almost rendered that part of Muscovy quite desolate. For which
reason the Muscovites were always obliged to keep a considerable Body of Horse
on the Frontiers, and sometimes to give them a diversion by the help of the
Donepsian Cosacks, and the Nogajan Tartars.

But the case is much altered as to this particular of late Years; For since
the Muscovites, by virtue of a Peace concluded with the Poles at Oliva, are
become Masters of Kiovia; this serves them in a great measure, at once to
Bridle the insolency of these Robbers, and for a Bulwark against the Turks;
^^pecially if they prevent the last from getting first footing in Vkraina. But
the taking of Asoph, (...) the further progress of the present Czar (...) the
Crim Tartars, gives a fair prospect to the Muscovites, not only of securing
themselves for the ^^ture against their attempts, but also of reduc^^^ them
under their obedience, and by taking the (...) of Precop to enter the limits of
their Empire (...) the Borders of the Black Sea.

The Poles are certainly the most redoubtable ^nemies the Muscovites have, The
Poles.
their Situation (...) such, as to encourage them to Act against the
Muscovites, when ever they meet with a favorable opportunity; Of which they
have given Sufficie^^ Proofs, during their intestine Commotions (...), when
they were just upon the point of having made it a Province of the Crown of
(...) if by their own divisions they had not given (...) Muscovites leisure to
recover themselves. But (...) they seem to have sufficiently secured their
^^^^tiers against the Insult of the Poles, by then (...) Masters of Surleasko,
Severia and Ki^^i^; and (...) the Poles are reckoned much the better Sold^^^^
the Field, by reason of their great number of (...) yet the accession of the
Zaparogian Cosacks (...) a little Strengthened the Muscovian Forces, and (...)
in some measure be looked as a sufficient Balance to the Advantage of the
Polish Horse, (...) since the Muscovites, now are capable to out^^ the Poles;
if not in goodness, at least in the number o^ their Horse.

The Muscovites had formerly great Contests (...) the Swedes, The Swedes.
about Livonia, which occasioned several Bloody Wars, but since the causes of
these differences are removed by the Peace of Oliva, when the first resigned
all their pretensions to this Country, the Muscovites need not fear any thing
from that Side, where it Bordered on Sweden; since more Conquests in far
distant Country, would prove more hurtful than profitable to Sweden. And the
Muscovites* have no great encouragement to At^^ck the Swedes on that Side,
where they have for (...) most part succeeded so ill in their Attempts; ^^sides
that it is to be feared, that if the Poles, ^^ho's interest it is, not to let
Livonia fall into ^^eirs hands) should join with the Swedes against (...), they
would put them very hard to it; and (...) the Muscovite Army's appear now very
nume^^us in the Field, yet would they scarce be able ^^^graple with two such
Potent Enemies, who is (...) by the Conjunction and Advantage of the (...)
Horse, with the well Dissiplin'd Infantry of (...) Swedes, would perhaps prove
invincible to them. (...) But to come to a Conclusion; Whether we con^^der the
vast extent, fertility, and variety of pro^^cts of the Russian Empire* whether
its strength (...) regard of its vast Revenues, its Advantageous ^^^tuation in
respect of of its Neighbors (being ^^^ounded on the North and East, with a
vast Sea, (...) a great Wilderness) or in regard of its great ^^mber of Forces
it is able to maintain; or (...) in respect of the vast increase of its
Trafick, (...) Persian, Indian, Chinese Trade (especially if ^proved by the
Advantages his present Czarish ^^jesty has had over the Crim Tartars) it will
sufficiently appear out of what has been said in this (...), that as the
Present Flourishing Condition (...) the Russian Empire renders it one of the
most ^^^siderable in Europe, so, were it not, that the (...) of their
Government seems to be a ^onstant check to their growing greatness, in
reference to their Traffic, it is more than probable, (...) under the
Auspicious Reign of so hopeful a (...) as now Sway's the Scepter; it might
con^^^ for the Superiority with the Greatest and ^owerful Kingdoms of the
Universe.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Abel Roper, at the Black Boy, in Fleet Street.
THE History of Poland, in several Letters to Persons of Quality: Giving an
Account of the Ancient and Present State of that Kingdom, Historical,
Geographical, Physical, Political, and Ecclesiastical. viz. Its Origin and
Extent. With a Description of its Towns and Provinces; the succession, and
remarkable Actions of all its Kings, and of the Great Dukes of Lithuania. The
Election, Power, and Coronation of the King, The Senate, or House of Lords: The
Diet, and Form of Government: The privileges of the Gentry; their Religion,
Learning, Language, Customs, Habits, Manners, Riches Trade and Military
Affairs, together with the state of Physic and Natural Knowledge; as also an
Account of the Teutonick Order, of the Duke of Courland, etc. By B. Connor,
Fellow of the Royal Society. Published by the Care and Asistance of Mr. Savage.

The 2d. Edition (with an Addition of Remarks on Marriage, by Mr. Brown) of the
Marriage-Ceremonies: or the Ceremonies used in Marriages in all parts of the
World. By Seignior Gaya. Translated from the Italian.

Printed for A. Roper, and A. Boswel.

The Grounds and Foundation of Natural Religion discovered, in the Principal
Branches of it, in opposition to the prevailing Notions of the Modern Scepticks
and Latitudinarians; with an Introduction concerning the necessity of revealed
Religion. By Tho. Becconsal, B. D. of Brasenose College in Oxford,


