Cruel and Barbarous News From GHEAPSIDE in LONDON: Being a True and Faithful
RELATION Of an horid Fact, acted by an unhuman Mistress upon the body of her
Apprentice, who for want of the fear of God, hired two men to strip him naked
and bind him to a Spit, intending to Roast him alive, but by the providence of
Almighty God was prevented, for having stoped his mouth with a clout, turning
him about until he was very much scorched, with striving for life the clout
draped out, and then crying out murder the Neighbors by violence broak open the
door, and delivered the poor wrech from the unmercyful Flames, from which the
Lord deliver us.

Printed for W. P. 1676.

Cruel and Barbarous News From GHEAPSIDE, in LONDON:
HOW many wicked, cruel and unhuman Acts of Murder do we almost daily hear of,
so that we may justly cry out with the Prophet, The people have sold
themselves to do wickedness, and for want of the fear of God, they still run on
in their wicked courses until they destroy both body and soul to all eternity,
not once thinking that they must one day give an account for all their wicked
works which they do here commit; But woe unto them that do harbor such thoughts
in their breast, much more to commit such unheard of cruelties: Alas poor souls
they think not what answer they must make before the great Tribunal seat of
God; then they would wish they had never been born, or the mountains to fall
upon them, or the Hills to cover them from the presence of the most high God.

But now to leave this digresion and come to the Relation of this unhuman fact.
I think that if it be considered in all the circumstances, there has not been
heard of, in our age, a Fact more barbarous then what this Relation gives you,
of a Scale-makers wife living near unto Cheapside. She was of light carriage,
and used to frequent Taverns and Playhouses, as many people do report; for she
allwais took Coach when she went out, but as she came back again she alighted
in Cheapside, and came home a foot, because she used to frequent a house
thereabout, or not far from the place where she was set down.

Her husband being as I told you before a Scale-maker and a Common-Council-man
of the City was many times from home about his occasions, and did little think
that his Wife did follow such lewd courses and bad company; but one day coming
home before he was expected, asked the Apprentice where his Mistress was, to
which he answered he knew not, and within a short time after she came home and
all was quiet.

About two or three days after her husband being from home, she sent the
Apprentice into Cheapside to call a Coach, which he did according to her
command, and the Coach man came to the door with him, and she being ready
equiped for her (not long journey) away she went.

This Apprentice, that afternoon had been a broad in the City about his Masters
business, and as he was coming home, saw his Mistress alight out of the Coach,
and went into this suspected house which I before told you of, and when he came
home was about his Employment, and soon after his Master came home and asked
him where his Mistress was, and he told him that she was at one Mr. Drapyers, O
said his Master does she lay up her time in a Baudy House, S^rah go and call
her, and so he did, and when she came home her Husband asked what her business
was at that house, and told her that it was counted a Baudy House, (she could
have told him that) but she said she had been there to see a Sick body, and so
pasified her Husband.

The next Morning when her Husband was gone out, she asked the Apprentice how
his Master knew where she was, and he told her that he saw you go thither;
Sirrah said she I will make you an example to all teltails, and from that time,
and ever after, told him that he should beweare how he told any more tails, and
he poor wrech little thinking what Barbarous thoughts she harbored in her
Breast. Upon a-time when she knew her Husband was from home, sent for two Men
which she had more love for, then she had for her Husband; called in the Boy
and told him that he should die the cruelest death that ever could be thought
on, or devised, and imediately the two men that were there, laid hold on him,
and striped him naked unto the skin, and bound him to a Spit, and having
kindled a Fire and stopped his Mouth with a Clout, laid down this poor
harmless Creature to the Fire, and turned him round until he was sorely
scorched, but with long striving for life he got the Clout out of his Mouth,
and cried out Murder, and with many doleful screeks and cries that the
neighbors made all possible speed to deliver this poor, innocent and harmless
wretch from this amaising and horrid death, which through Gods infinite
blessing they attained.

Whilst they were comforting this poor creature, and hearing him give this
present Relation, his Mistress and the two men her wicked assistants made their
escape.

This sad news being noised abroad in the City, the Apprentices presently made
a rising, intending to have pulled down the house, but the Right Worshipful the
Lord Major, and his Officers and Constables of the City, and their assistants,
desired them to forbear, promising them that if either the Woman, or the two
cruel men her companions, could possibly be apprehended, they should be
proceeded against according to Law.

Finis.

