Good News from IRELAND, Being a True and Faithful Account of a Late Signal
Victory Gained by our English Forces near DUBLIN.

Together with a Report of the taking of that strong City Drogheda, and the
speedy Advancing of our Army from thence toward Dublin.

As also an Account of the taking of several Vessels, and abundance of Horses
from the Enemy, of which the very Horse King James Rid on in the Fight was one,
which is now brought to High-lake; with several other things of great moment.

In a Letter directed from an Officer in the Fight, to Mr. John Cook at the
Sheers in Little Lumbard street, where the true Copy is to be seen.

Printed according to Order.

SIR,
THough occasion has not hitherto permitted me to write to you all this time,
yet I hope this will not be unwelcome to such a well-wisher of their Majesty's
and Countries Interest as your self. We just now Arrived here safe from Dublin
Bay, whither our Commander Captain John Jennings was ordered out last Week,
taking Their Majesty's Ship the Dover, Captain Whitaker Commander along for our
Assistance: we Arrived at Dublin Bay about 11 at Night on Friday last, and came
to an Anchor, sent our Boats to and again over the Bay all that Night and to
Morrow after, and did take several little Vessels with Prisoners, and
Protestants, by whom we were too late informed that four Vessels went richly
loaded for France some five or six hours before we Arrived; but our comfort is
that the Ruby and James Galley being sent before us to Cruise over against
Waterford and Saltess, can hardly be supposed to miss of them. Our taking of so
many of their Barks and Vessels did so vex the Irish that they planted
abundance of Great Guns upon one side of the Bay, and played very smartly upon
us all Saturday Morning, which our Men were so unconcerned at, that while their
Great Shot came very thick about us on all sides, yet all we returned them for
some time were some few Hollows of derision after every Volley of the Irish
Guns. But at length our Commander orders to weigh Anchor, and coming some
nearer to them, returned them so hot Broad-sides that though all the place was
full of Men, and convenience to keep our Shot from doing them much hurt, yet of
a truth it was pleasant to see with what pannick fear and confusion they run
every one almost a different way, in all the World like a company of Mice
pursued by Rats, industriously making trial of every appearance of a hiding
place. The Horses run as confusedly and disorderly as the Men, and being madded
with noise and disorder, trod down numbers of them, for though there were a
great number of Horsemen (for they feared our coming ashore) yet in a little
time not a Man was to be seen on Horseback save the late King James
endeavoring to put courage in that Spiritless Crew; but all he could do was
with great difficulty to get their Guns carried off, and was forced to quit his
Horse; upon which our Commander ordered the Boats ashore, and going himself in
Person, took a little Vessel in the eye of several Troops of Dragoons that had
come fresh from Dublin, with whom, as we understood after, the late King James
returned; but so soon as our Commander ordered the two Boats Crews ashore, it
was pleasant to see how such as were on Horseback did Scamper, and such as were
on Foot did climb upon the Rocks like so many Goats. In fine, it not being safe
for so small a Number as our Boats Crews to advance far, our Commander was
contented to bring some of their Horses on Board of our Ship by the little
Vessel he had taken in their eye, for a token of their Cowardice, and the
English Courage, amongst which was the late King James's own Horse, which he
had quit, it seems, to order and encourage the Dragoons that were on foot. We
brought four of the Horses, and specially that which was the late King James's
to High-lake, and set them on Shore. In all the Action, though they lost
several, as we could visibly see, and Prisoners after taken confirmed, yet we
lost not one Man, though yet there wanted not work for your Instruments, which
answered my expectation pretty well. There lay a Privateer within the Bar,
which we are informed does carry Weekly Pacquets to and from some place of
England, which we could not come at, our Boats being of too small Force to
attack him, and our Ships of too great Burden to go over the Bar; beside, that
we was not allowed so much time by our Orders as to Man and Fit one or two of
the Barks we took to attack him, else our Commander had certainly brought him
along. The Protestants and Prisoners tell us, That all things are so scarce at
Dublin, that the French are like to eat up the Irish, and they irritated to see
the French preferred and countenanced, severals specially of the Irish are
daily killed upon the Score. They expected we were to lie in the Bay to hinder
them from any commerce by Sea with France or other parts of Ireland, which
terrified, and as the Protestants assure us, would weaken them exceedingly, and
make them quit Dublin. It Is commonly judged by Papists as well as Protestants
at Dublin, that King James has a mind to submit to our King; First, Because he
is nothing so much cast down, sometime since he heard of King William's Design
of coming to Ireland; and of his little concern how things go with his Army.
Others judge that he makes his account to quit Ireland at last, because he is
so earnest in sending off for France all the Best things he can, and those also
that are nearest to him, in these four Ships I spoke of; they tell us of a vast
deal of Plate, Gold, and Silver Money, beside other fine Things; so that hardly
any Money but their new Coin is to be seen among them. We brought off a great
deal of their Coin at this and other Occasions, whereof I would have sent you a
Token, if wo^^h the pains. Our Army, as the Prisoners tell us, have taken
Droghedah, and make haste toward Dublin. All the Prisoners profess themselves
willing and glad to be Taken from the Misery that they feared to come upon
them. By which you may judge what may be expected if our King were once over.
So soon as he goes over, our Ship, with the Monk and St. Albans are ordered to
attend the great Fleet, whence I may have Occasion to send to you for some
Instruments, and my Friends Mr. Hulse and Mr. Thowlt, for some Medicines; for
our Captain has spoken to me to provide for a bigger Ship. I shall only desire
you to Present my most hearty Respects to my very good Friends Mr. Hargrave,
and Mr. Couley, Mr. Hulse, and Mr. Thowlt; and to please, if you can hear of
us, to write me how they be, and your self; as also how things Rule, especially
in Scotland. Our Cruisers have been so vigilant, that it is great News to hear
of a French Ship any where in this Channel. I could write you many more
considerable things, but that I forbear to trouble you too much at one time,
being,

SIR, Your Affectionate Friend and humble Servant, James Crysly.


Books Newly Published.
The Bloody Duke; or the Adventures for a Crown: A Tragi-Comedy as it was Acted
at the Court at Alba Regalis by several Persons of Great Quality.

The Abdicated Prince; or the Adventures of Four years: A Tragi-Comedy. The
Second Edition.

The Late Revolution; or the Happy Change: A Tragi-Comedy, as it was Acted
throughou^ the English Dominions in the year 1688. Written by a Person of
Quality.

These three new Plays contain a full Account of the private Intrigues of the
Two last Reigns, and of all the most Remarkable Transactions that have happened
since.

A Narrative of the Dissenters New Plot, that has made such a great noise in
the World by being misunderstood; with the Chief Conspirators Names, and
Principal Consults: Written by one who was deeply concerned therein. To which
is added, an Account of the design of it by the same Author.

London, Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey. 1690.


