Imprimatur.

Ex aedibus Lambeth. October. 3. 1664. Tho. Cook, Rssimi in Christo Patris ac
Dni, D. Gilb. Cant. Archiep. Sacel. Dom.

A SERMON Preached to the HONORABLE SOCIETY OF LINCOLNES-INNE,

BY R. CuDWORTH, D. D. Master of CHRIST'S College in CAMBRIDGE.

S. Gregory Nyssen. (...).

LONDON, Printed by J. Flesher for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred
MAJESTY. M DC LXIV.

1 Corinthians. 15. 57. But thanks be to God which gives us the Victory through
our Lord Jesus Christ.
CHRIST's Resurrection, which the Apostle treats of in the former part of
this Chapter, is one of the main and principal Articles of our Christian Faith:
for though Christ by his Death upon the Cross made a Propitiatory Sacrifice for
the World, yet it was his Resurrection only which did manifest his Death to be
effectual and available for that end, and did evidence its acceptance with
God. For if the Grave had detained Christ, and held him Prisoner, this would
have been an argument that the Debt, for which he was committed to that dark
Dungeon, was not yet paid, nor Satisfaction made; for if Christ be not raised,
(says the Apostle) Verse 17.
your Faith is vain, you are yet in your sins. But now Death and the Grave
having delivered up Christ out of their custody, his Resurrection is an
undoubted argument that they had no more to lay to his charge, as he was a
Surety and Undertaker for mankind, but that the Debt which was owing to the
Law and Divine Justice was in the Court of Heaven fully acquitted and
discharged. For Christ was delivered Romans 4.
for our Sins, and rose again for our Justification.

And though Christ's other Miracles ought to have conciliated Belief to his
Doctrine from the Jews; yet his Resurrection from the dead (foretold by himself
and really accomplished) added to all the rest, was a most undoubted and
unquestionable Confirmation of his Prophetical Ministry. For if it were
supposed, (as the Jews of old and the Talmudists of latter times maliciously
calumniated our Savior Christ) that a mere Wizzard or Magician should have
appeared, and not only have done many Miracles by Beelzebub and the Powers of
Darkness, but also have foretold that after he had been put to death he should
rise again, and have given this as a farther sign to confirm his Prophecy, as
our Savior did, Matthew. 12. 39. it could never be conceived that Divine
Providence should suffer such an Impostour miraculously to rise again, in so
remarkable a manner, and so often to appear before the eyes of so many
Spectators, and at last visibly to ascend up to Heaven. Because this would have
been Tentatio invincibilis to mankind, it being not imaginable what greater
assurance Heaven itself could give to confirm and seal a Prophet, and to
persuade the World that what he did was by the Finger of God, and not by
Magical imposture, then this is. And therefore it is observable, that though a
good while after our Savior's time, when the Jews had now forfeited that
peculiar Providence that watched over them, a certain counterfeit Messiah, one
David El-Roy, was permitted to do several strange and miraculous things by
Magic and Witchcraft, if the Jewish Relations be true; yet when he gave this
for a Sign to the Persian King to prove himself the Messiah, that after he was
beheaded by him he should rise again; he plainly discovered his Imposture, to
the great disappointment of the deluded Jews, who (as Maimonides writes) in
vain expected In Iggereth Teman.
his Resurrection a good while after.

Moreover, If Christ had not risen again after death, the world would not have
had sufficient ground to trust and believe in him as a Savior. S. Austin
reckoned it as great a Miracle as any that Christ ever did upon earth, that the
World should be brought off to believe in a crucified Savior. For to worship
(...) as the Jews by way of Disgrace call our Savior, or (...) in Lucian's
language, one that was hanged, for a God, and to believe in him, could not but
seem a monstrous and prodigious thing both to Jews and Gentiles; and certainly
it would never have been brought to pass, had there not been unquestionable
assurance given of Christ's Resurrection from the dead. For who would be so
sottish as to believe in a dead Savior, and to expect help and assistance from
him that had not been able to help himself, and therefore had given no proof
that he was able to help others; nay from him that to all humane appearance had
now no being at all? Upon which account the Psalmist upbraids the sottish
Heathen, That they ate the Sacrifices of the dead. Wherefore it is Psalm. 106.
observable in the Gospel, that when Christ was now dead and buried in his
Sepulcher, the Hope and Expectation of his Disciples, who had formerly believed
in him, lay as it were intombed in the same Sepulcher with him. And then the
two Disciples that went to Emmaus could only say, We trusted this had been he
Luke 24.
which should have redeemed Israel. But afterward, when they were able upon
good grounds to affirm that (...), The Lord was risen indeed, then their Faith
revived anew, and mounted up higher then ever, and grew triumphant in them.

Again, there was another excellent Design in Christ's Resurrection from the
dead, which the Apostle pursues largely also in this Chapter; viz. To give the
world assurance of a Life after death, and a blessed Immortality to be enjoyed
by all true Believers and Followers of Christ. Christ by his Resurrection has
abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light, as the Apostle
speaks 2 Timothy 1. 10. or, as the Church sings in that divine Anthem, After he
had overcome the sharpness of Death, he opened the kingdom of Heaven to all
Believers. The reasons of Philosophy that prove the Soul's Immortality, though
firm and Demonstrative in themselves, yet they are so thin and subtle to
vulgar apprehensions, that they glide away through them, and leave no such
palpable impressions on them, as can be able sufficiently to bear up against
that heavy weight of gross infidelity that continually sinks down the minds of
men to a distrust of such high things as be above the reach of Sense. Neither
are these considerations any longer of force then men can actually attend to
the strength and coherence of the Demonstration; and when that actual attention
(which is operose and difficult) is taken off, then the Truth itself like a
Spectre or Apparition suddenly vanishes away, and men question with themselves
afterward whether there were any such thing or no. Such thin and evanid things
are Philosophical Speculations about the high Mysteries of Faith and Religion.
But Christ his raising of the selfsame Body which was laid in the Sepulcher,
and afterward appearing in it often to his Disciples, gave such evident
assurance of the Soul's Immortality and Life after death, as must needs strike
more strongly upon Vulgar minds, and make more palpable impressions on them,
and be always of more present and ready use then any Philosophical Reasons and
Demonstrations.

And the Scripture is herein very harmonious and agreeable to itself both in
the Old and New Testament: for as in the one it makes the original of Death's
entrance into the world to be the Sin and Disobedience of the First Adam, who
was (...), of the earth, earthy; so in the other it attributes the recovery of
Life and Immortality to the meritorious Obedience of the Second Adam, that was
(...), (...), the Lord from heaven, heavenly, who by his Death vanquished and
destroyed Death. For as Sampson, (who was a Type of our Savior) when he was
besieged by the Philistines in the City Gaza, (Judges 16.) rose up at midnight,
and pulled up the Gates of the City and the Posts, and laying them upon his
shoulders carried them up to the top of the Hill; in like manner Christ our
Lord, when he was environed and encompassed by Death, after he had been awhile
detained under the custody thereof, he ascended victoriously out of the Power
of the Grave, and carried the Gates of Hell and Death upon his Shoulders along
with him triumphantly into Heaven; he slighted and dismantled that mighty
Garrison whose Walls were stronger then Brass and Gates harder then Adamant,
that it should no longer be a Prison with doors and bars to shut up those that
believe in him, but an open and free passage and a broad Highway to Life and
Immortality. He is the Resurrection and the Life, (John 11. 25.) and he that
believes in him, though he were dead, yet shall he live. For he that lives
and was dead and is alive for evermore, even he has the Keys of Hell and of
Death. Revelat. 1. 18.

But that which I chiefly aim at at this time, concerning Jesus his
Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven, is this, That by and after it he was
made Lord and Christ, King and Savior, and Sovereign of his Church. Not but
that Christ's Humanity was always hypostatically united to the Divinity, but
because the Oeconomical Kingdom of Christ as Mediator, according to the
Scripture-calculation, seems not to commence till after his state of
Humiliation was over, and so begins its Epoch from Christ's Resurrection, or
his Exaltation to sit at God's right hand in heaven. Acts 2. 36. Let all the
house of Israel know assuredly, that God has made that same. Jesus whom ye
have crucified, both Lord and Christ. Acts 5. 31. Jesus whom ye slew and hanged
on a Tree, him has God exalted on his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior,
etc. Philip. 2. 9. Who humbled himself and became obedient to the death of the
Cross; Wherefore has God highly exalted him, and given him a Name above every
name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, etc. and that every
tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the
Father. And that Article of our Creed concerning Christ's sitting at God's
right hand in Heaven signifies thus much unto us, That Christ after his
Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven has all Power given him both in Heaven
and in Earth, all things being made subject to him, excepting him only 1 Cor.
15. 27.
that has put all things under him. He being, for the Comfort of his Church
and Members here upon Earth, according to his Humanity made God's Vicegerent,
and seated in his Father's Throne, and having a Mediatorious Kingdom bestowed
upon him that shall continue till he has put down all Authority and Power, and
Verse 24.
has subdued all his Enemies under his feet, and then has delivered up this
Oeconomical Kingdom to God the Father, that God may be all Verse 28.
in all.

And this is an unspeakable Consolation that Christian Religion affords to us,
and a most gracious Condescension of the All-wise God; That forasmuch as we
that dwell in these houses of Clay are so far removed from the pure and
abstracted Deity, and so infinitely disproportioned unto it, that there should
be such a contrivance as this set on foot, That we should have one of our own
Flesh and Blood, that was in all things tempted like unto us, and had
experience of all our difficulties and calamities, who demonstrated his
infinite love to us in laying down his Life for us, and therefore we cannot
doubt but has a most tender Sympathy and fellow-feeling with us in all our
infirmities; I say, that we should have such a one exalted to God's right hand,
and invested with all Authority and Power both in Heaven and in Earth, that he
might administer all things for the good of his Church and Members, and supply
them in all their wants and necessities. Which consideration must needs be
far more comfortable, chearing and reviving to every true Christian, then it
was to the Sons of Jacob, when they went down to Egypt to buy Corn and
provision for their necessities, to think that Joseph their Brother was made
Ruler over all the Land.

And yet notwithstanding this is wholly eluded and evacuated by those
high-flown Spiritualists of these latter times, that slight and reject the
Letter of the New Testament as a mean and carnal thing, and will acknowledge no
other Death and Resurrection of Christ, no other Ascension and Sitting at God's
right hand, nay no other Day of Judgment nor Resurrection of the Body, but
what is Mystical and Allegorical: Whereby they do not only impudently slurre
the Gospel according to the History and the Letter, in making it no better then
a Romantical Legend or a mere Aesopick Fable that contains a good (...) or
Moral under it; but also plainly defeat the Counsel of God against themselves
and mankind, by antiquating Christianity, and bringing in instead thereof old
Paganism again disguised under a few canting Phrases of Scripture Language. For
though Moses had a Veil over his face, though there were many obscure Umbrages
and Allegories in the Law, (the Children of Israel being then not able to bear
the brightness of that Evangelical Truth that shined under them) yet now under
the Gospel we do all with open face behold as in a Glass the glory of the Lord
nakedly represented to 2 Cor. 3.
us, being changed into the same image from glory to glory.

But to let pass these, and still to improve our former Meditation further; Let
us in the next place consider, that Christ, who received all this Power after
his Resurrection and Ascension, did not receive it in vain and to no purpose,
either taking no notice of our humane transactions here below, as having
removed his Pavilion too far into those Regions of Light and Glory from us;
or else remaining notwithstanding an idle Spectator, and no way concerning or
interesting himself in the Issues of our humane affairs. Which will be so much
the more improbable, if we consider what the Scripture and experience tell us,
that the Devil and Apostate spirits are perpetually active and busy in
promoting the Concernments of the Kingdom of Darkness. And therefore doubtless
He whom God has made the Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls can never be so
regardless of his Office, nor so careless of his Flock and tender Lambs
committed to his charge, as to suffer those cruel Wolves to prey upon them at
pleasure; and to have no pity at all for them, nor to extend his watchful
Providence over them whom once he vouchsafed to redeem with his own precious
blood. No certainly, he that waded through so many difficulties and agonies for
us, in the days of his Flesh, he that bore our griefs and carried our sorrows,
he that was wounded for our transgressions and bruised for our iniquities, that
sweat drops of blood in the Garden and was nailed to the Cross for us in
Golgotha, He cannot so easily forget those whom he has so dearly bought, nor
suffer all that power which God has invested him with for the good of his
Church to lie by him idle and unimployed.

But to the end that there might not be the least ground of Suspicion or
Distrust left in the minds of men concerning this particular, Christ after his
Ascension into Heaven thought good to give us a sensible demonstration both of
his Kingly Power and of his watchful Care and Providence over his Church, that
he would not leave them orphans and destitute of all assistence, by sending
down his Holy Spirit on the Day of Pentecost in a visible and miraculous manner
upon his Disciples. Acts 2. 32. This Jesus has God raised up, of which we are
all Witnesses: Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and having
received of the Father the Promise of the Holy Ghost, he has shed forth this
which ye now see and hear. And verily if there had been no news heard of our
Lord and Savior Christ, after he ascended above the Clouds out of his
Disciples sight, no real and visible Demonstration of his Existence, Power, and
Providence over his Church; the distrustful hearts of men would have been too
prone to suspect that the pretense of an invisible Kingdom at God's right hand
above had been no better then a mere Dream, an aerie and fantastic Notion;
and they would have been too ready to have called in question the truth of all
his other Miracles, his Resurrection and Ascension, witnessed only by his own
Disciples, and to have surmised those several Apparitions of his that we read
of after his Death had been nothing else but Specter or Phantasms, like the
vulgarly-believed Apparitions of the Ghosts of men in Aerie bodies. But the
sensible and miraculous Pouring out of the Holy Ghost upon his Disciples, after
his Ascension into Heaven, was a palpable Confirmation of all Christ's other
Miracles, of the Validity of his Meritorious Death and Passion, of the Truth of
his Resurrection and Ascension; and gives most comfortable assurance to all
Believers to the World's end, that though his Bodily presence be withdrawn from
them, yet he has not left his Church utterly forlorn and destitute of all
assistence, but that his Spirit, the Holy Comforter, continues to be present
amongst them as his Vicegerent, and to assist them for all the holy purposes of
the Gospel, to the World's end.

Now the principal Effects of Christ's holy Spirit, which are to be hoped for
and expected by every true Believer and private Christian, are comprised by the
Apostle under Three Heads here in the Text, as consisting in a Threefold
Victory over a Threefold Enemy. The sting of Death is Sin, and the strength of
Sin is the Law: But thanks be to God which gives us the Victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ.

1. A Victory over Sin, as that which is the Cause of Death.

2. A Victory over the Law, as that which aggravates the Guilt, and exasperates
the Power of Sin.

3. Lastly, A Victory over Death, the Fruit and Consequent of Sin.

FIRST therefore, There is a Victory over Sin to be obtained in and through
Christ.

Some there are that will acknowledge no other Victory over Sin, but an
External one, that whereby it was conquered for us by Christ upon the Cross
sixteen hundred years since; where he spoiled Principalities and Powers, and
made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it, Col. 2. 15. and where
he redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us, Gal. 3.
13. And doubtless this was one great end of Christ's coming into the world, to
make a Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of mankind: Not only that he might
thereby put a period to those continually-repeated and ineffectual Sacrifices
of brute Beasts, and the Offering of the blood of Bulls and Goats, that could
not take away Sin, nor propitiate the Divine Majesty; but also that he might at
once give a sensible Demonstration both of God's high Displeasure against Sin,
and of his Placableness and Reconcilableness to Sinners returning to Obedience;
and therefore, to that end that the Despair of Pardon might not hinder any from
Repentance and Amendment of Life, promulgate free Pardon and Remission of Sins
through his Blood to all that should repent and believe the Gospel.

But it is a very unsound and unwholesome Interpretation of this Salutary
Undertaking of Christ's in the Gospel, as if the ultimate End and Design of it
were to procure Remission of Sin and Exemption from Punishment only, to some
particular persons still continuing under the Power of Sin, and to save them at
last in their Sins also, that is, with a mere outward and carnal Salvation; it
being a thing utterly impossible, that those Undefiled Rewards of the Heavenly
Kingdom should be received and enjoyed by men in their Unregenerate and
unrenewed Nature.

For what is this else but to make Christ the grand Patron of the Kingdom of
Darkness, and to suppose God to be such a Being as may be bribed and corrupted
by Sacrifice and Intercession, to a partial Connivence and fond Indulgence of
men in their Sins to all Eternity? Or else to insinuate that there is no other
Evil at all in Sin, but only in respect of that outward Punishment consequent
upon it? which is to destroy the Nature and Reality of Sin, and to make it
nothing but a mere Name or Fancy; as if Good and Evil, Just and Unjust (as
some Philosophers dreamed) were not (...), but (...) and (...) only, had no
Reality in Nature, but depended only upon Arbitrary Laws enforced by Outward
Punishments, or mere Opinion, and so were only (...) (as Democritus expressed
it) mere Factitious things, or else (...) Fictitious and Imaginary. Either of
which opinions if they were true, then indeed Remission of Sin and Exemption
from Punishment would quite take away all the Evil of Sin.

But if Sin be not a mere Name or Fancy, but that which has a Real and
Intrinsecal Evil in it, greater then that of Outward Punishment; then certainly
it cannot be so transcendent a Happiness, as some men carnally conceit, to have
an Impunity in Sinning to all Eternity, that the Accomplishment thereof should
be thought the only fit Undertaking for the Son of God to engage in, and that
which would deservedly entitle him the Savior of Mankind. For that of
Socrates in Plato must then needs be true, To (...), That (in those which are
not incorrigible and incurable) it is the greatest Evil that can possibly
befall them, to continue in Wickedness unpunished; and the greatest Kindness
that they can receive, by the lesser Evil of Punishment and Castigation to be
cured of the greater Evil of Sin: For (as the same Philosopher speaks) (...),
Chastisement and Correction is the natural Remedy and Cure of Wickedness; which
our Savior confirms when he says, As many as I love I rebuke and chasten: and
sure the Remedy Revel. 3. 19.
is not worse then the Disease.

Wherefore it was so far from being the Ultimate End of Christ's undertaking
to die for Sin, that men might securely live in it, that on the contrary the
Death of Christ was particularly intended as an Engine to batter down the
Kingdom of Sin and Satan, and to bring men effectually unto God and
Righteousness, as the Scripture plainly witnesses, 1 Pet. 2. 24. His own self
bare our Sins in his Body on the Tree, that we being dead to Sin, might live to
Righteousness. The Death of Christ conducing to this great End not only as it
was Exemplary, and Hieroglyphically instructed us, that we ought to take up our
Cross likewise, and follow our crucified Lord and Savior, suffering in the
Flesh and ceasing 1 Pet. 4. 1.
from Sin: but also as it does most lively demonstrate to us God's high
Displeasure against Sin, and the malignant Nature of it, that could not
otherwise be expiated then by the Blood of that innocent and immaculate Lamb,
the onely-begotten Son of God: and lastly, as the Hope of Pardon and free
Remission of Sin in the Blood of Christ for the truly Penitent might invite and
animate men to cheerful and vigorous endeavors against Sin.

Others there are that tell us there is indeed something farther aimed at in
the Gospel besides the bare Remission of Sins, but that it is nothing else but
the Imputation of an External Righteousness or another's Inherent Holiness,
which is so completely made ours thereby to all intents and purposes, as if we
our selves had been really and perfectly righteous; and this upon no other
Condition or Qualification at all required in us, but only of mere Faith
scrupulously prescinded from all Holiness and Sanctification, or the laying
hold and apprehending only (as they use to phrase it) of this External and
Imputed Righteousness, that is, the merely believing and imagining it to be
ours: Which kind of Faith therefore is but the Imagination of an Imagination,
or of that which really is not, and, as Pindar calls Man, (...), the very Dream
of a Shadow.

For though this be pretended by some to be spoken only of Justification as
contradistinct from Sanctification, the latter of which they conceive must by
no means have any Conditional Influence upon the former; yet it is plain, that
it will unavoidably extend to the taking away of the Necessity of Inherent
Righteousness and Holiness, and all Obligation to it: upon which very account
it is so highly acceptable, because under a specious show of Modesty and
Humility it does exceedingly gratify men's Hypocrisy and Carnality. For he that
is thus completely Justified by the Imputation of a mere External
Righteousness, must needs have ipso facto a Right and Title thereby to Heaven
and Happiness without Holiness; for Romans 8. 30. Whom he justifies, them he
also glorifieth. Neither can any thing be required inherently in them, where
all Inherency is perfectly supplied by Imputation. And though it be pretended
that Sanctification will spontaneously follow after by way of Gratitude; yet
this is like to prove but a very slippery hold, where it is believed that
Gratitude it self, as well as all other Graces, is already in them by
Imputation. Neither can it be reasonably thought that true Holiness should
spring by way of Gratitude or Ingenuity from such a Principle of Carnality as
makes men so well contented with a mere Imaginary Righteousness.

But this Opinion as it makes God in Justifying to pronounce a false Sentence,
and to conceive of things otherwise then they are, and to do that which
himself has declared to be abominable, to Justify the wicked (in a Prove. 17.
15.
forensick sense,) and as it is irreconcilable to those many Scriptures that
assure us God will render to every man according to his Works; so it also takes
away the Necessity of Christ's Meritorious and Propitiatory Sacrifice for the
Remission of Sins: for where a complete Righteousness is imputed, there is no
Sin at all to be pardoned. And lastly, it vainly supposes Righteousness and
Holiness to be mere Fantastical and Imaginary things; for otherwise it were no
more possible that a Wicked man should be made Righteous by another's
Righteousness imputed, then that a Sick man should be made Whole by another's
imputed Health. If a Brother or Sister be naked and destitute of daily food,
and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be you warmed, and be you
filled; notwithstanding you give them not those things which are needful for
the body; what does it profit? James 2. 15, 16. Even so, what does it profit,
my Brethren, if a man say he has Faith (or Imputed Righteousness) and have not
Works? (that is, Real and Inherent Righteousness, or Inward Regeneration) can
such a Faith (that is, Imagination, or Imputation) save him? Certainly no more
then mere words can clothe a naked man's Back, or feed a hungry man's Belly, or
warm and thaw him whose Blood is frozen and congealed in his veins. Nay it is
no more possible for a man to be made Holy, then to be made Happy, by mere
Imputation, which latter few men would be contented withal; and, were it not
for their Hypocrisy, they would be as little contented with the former; and it
would as little please them to be Opinione tantum Justi, as Opinione tantum
Beati, to use Tully's expressions against the Epicureans. Nay, since it is most
certain that the greatest part of our Happiness consists in Righteousness and
Holiness, it will unavoidably follow, that if we have no other then an
Imputative Righteousness, we can have no other then an Imputative Happiness,
and a mere Imaginary Heaven, which will little please us when we feel our
selves to be in a true and real Hell.

But it is not our Intention here to quarrel about Words and Phrases, as if
Christ's meritorious Satisfaction might not be said to be Imputed to those that
Repent and Believe the Gospel, for Remission of Sins; much less to deny what
the Holy Scripture plainly asserts, True and Living Faith, that works by
Love, which is the very Essence of the New Creature, or Regenerate Nature,
(...), to be imputed or accounted for Righteousness, under the
Gospel Dispensation, where God will not proceed according to Legal Rigor and
Severity with his fallen Creatures, but according to that Equity and '(...)
which the Philosopher tells us is the Truest Justice. But our only design is
to caution against that Antinomian Error which is too often insinuated under
the Notion of Imputed Righteousness, as if there were no necessity of Inherent
Righteousness and a Real Victory over Sin in order to Salvation, but that an
Imputed or Imaginary one might serve the turn: Which Error, springing up very
early amongst the Gnostick-Christians, S. John gives a seasonable Antidote
against it, 1 John 3. 7. Little Children, let no man deceive you; he that does
Righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous: and in Chap. 2. v. 4. He
that says I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar, and the
Truth is not in him. To which purpose is that also in his first Chap. v. 5.
This is the Message which we have heard of him and declare to you, That God is
Light, and in him is no Darkness at all. If we say that we have Fellowship with
him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the Truth: But if we walk in the
light, as he is in the light, we have Fellowship one with another, and the
Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin. Wherefore the same
Apostle in that Epistle tells us of overcoming the Wicked one, Chap. 2. 14. and
of overcoming the World, by our Faith in Christ, Chap. 5. 4. And in the
Apocalypse he propounds from Christ himself diverse remarkable Promises to him
that overcomes: That he shall eat of the Tree of life that is in the midst of
the Paradise of God, c. 2. v. 7. That he shall not be hurt of the Second Death,
v. II. That he shall have the hidden Manna, and a white Stone with a new Name
written in it, which no man knows saving he that receives it, v. 17. That he
will give him the morning Star, v. 28. That he shall be clothed in white
Raiment, and his name shall not be blotted out of the Book of Life, c. 3. v. 5.
That he shall be a Pillar in the Temple of God, v. 12. and That he shall sit
with Christ in his Throne, as he overcame and sat down with his Father in his
Throne, v. 21. The Condition of all which Promises being Overcoming, we may
well conclude from thence, that there is a Real and not an Imaginary Victory
only to be obtained over the Power of Sin as well as the Guilt of it.

Nay it is true and very observable that those Places which are usually quoted
as the Foundation of an Imputed Righteousness in some other sense then what we
have before mentioned, are indeed no otherwise to be understood then of a Real
Inward Righteousness that is wrought or infused by the Spirit of Christ. As
that principal one, Philip. 3. v. 8. Yea doubtless, and I count all things loss
for the excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, -- that I may win
him, and be found in him, not having mine own Righteousness which is of the
Law, but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is
of God by Faith. Where Christ, whom the Apostle desires to win and to be found
in, and the Righteousness which is through the Faith of Christ, and the
Righteousness which is of God through Faith, are no External Imputed
Righteousness, but the Real Inward Righteousness of the New Creature wrought by
the Spirit of Christ, through Faith, which is opposed here to our own
Righteousness, and the Righteousness which is of the Law, that is, the
Righteousness of outward Works done by our own Natural power, according to the
Letter of the Law, in our Unregenerate state: for so the following words
explain the meaning, That I may know him, and the power of his Resurrection,
and the fellowship of his Sufferings, being made conformable unto his Death; If
by any means I might attain to the Resurrection of the dead. And this same
Inward and Real Righteousness is often elsewhere called Christ, and the New
man, that is said to be In us, and which we are exhorted to Put on, not by
Conceit or Imagination only, but by real Conformity to his Nature and
Participation of his Spirit.

And whereas the Magnifiers of Free Grace in an Antinomian sense, and the
Decriers of Inherent Righteousness, commonly conceive that the Free Grace of
God consists in nothing but either in the Pardon of Sin and Exemption from
Punishment, or the Imputation of an External Holiness, and accounting men Just
freely, without any Condition but only the mere Believing of this that they
are so accounted; and that Faith is no otherwise considered in the Gospel then
in order to the Believing of this Imputation; and that our own Works, when they
are comparatively undervalued to Grace and Faith, are to be taken for all
Inherent Righteousness and Holiness, even the New Creature it self: That all
these are Errors, as it might be abundantly proved from sundry other places of
Scripture, so it may sufficiently appear from that one, Ephesians. 2. v. 4, etc.
God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when
we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ, (by Grace ye are
saved) and has raised us up together -- That in the Ages to come he might show
the exceeding riches of his Grace, and his kindness toward us through Christ
Jesus. For by Grace are ye saved through Faith; and that not of your selves; it
is the gift of God: Not of Works, left any man should boast. For we are his
Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works. For when we are here said
to be saved by Grace, it is plain that the Apostle means by Saved, inwardly
Quickened and Sanctified: (...) (says Grotius well here) is Purgari a Vittis:
which inward Sanctification is here attributed to God's Free Grace, and denied
to our selves and to Works; the meaning whereof is, that it is not effected by
our own Works (whether of outward Morality or Legal Ceremonies) done by our
Natural power in the Unregenerate state, but by the quickening and enlivening
Spirit of Christ inwardly creating us anew. And lastly, Faith is plainly made
the Instrument of this inward Sanctification, that is not wrought by our own
Works but the Grace and Spirit of Christ. Whence we may well conclude, That the
true Object of the Christian Faith is not only the Blood of Christ shed upon
the Cross for the Remission of Sin, but also the renewing Spirit of Christ for
the inward conquering and mortifying of it, and the Quickening or Raising of us
to an Heavenly Life.

And I dare be bold to say, That the inward sense of every true and
sincere-hearted Christian in this Point speaks the same language with the
Scripture. For a true Christian, that has any thing of the Life of God in him,
cannot but earnestly desire an inward Healing of his sinful Maladies and
Distempers, and not an outward Hiding or Palliation of them only. He must
needs passionately long more and more after a new Life and Nature, and the
Divine Image to be more fully formed in him; insomuch that if he might be
secured from the pains of Hell without it, he could not be fully quieted and
satisfied therewith. It Is not the Effects and Consequents of Sin only, the
External Punishment due unto it, that he desires to be freed from, but the
Intrinsecal Evil of Sin it self, the Plague of his own Heart. As he often
meditates with comfort upon that Outward Cross to which his Savior's hands and
feet were nailed for his Sins; so he impatiently desires also to feel the
virtue of that Inward Cross of Christ, by which the World may be crucified to
him, and he unto the World; and the Power of Christ's Resurrection in him,
still to raise him farther unto newness of Life. Neither will he be more easily
persuaded to believe that his sinful Lusts, the malignity and violence whereof
he feels within himself, can be conquered without him, then that an Army here
in England can be conquered in France or Spain. He is so deeply sensible of the
Real Evil that is in Sin it self, that he cannot be contented to have it only
histrionically triumphed over. And to phansy himself covered all over with a
thin veil of mere external Imputation, will afford little satisfactory Comfort
unto him that hungers and thirsts after Righteousness, and is weary and heavy
laden with the Burden of his Sins, and does not desire to have his inward
Maladies hid and covered only, but healed and cured. Neither can he be willing
to be put off till the hour of Death for a Divorce betwixt his Soul and Sin;
nor easily persuaded that though Sin should rule and reign in him all his
Life-long, yet the last parting groan, that shall divide his Soul and Body
asunder, might have so great an Efficacy as in a moment also to separate all
Sin from his Soul.

BuT that we may not seem here either to beat the Air in Generals and
Uncertainties, or by an indiscreet zeal to countenance those conceited and
high-flown Enthusiasts of latter times, that, forgetting that example of
Modesty given us by the blessed Apostle, [Not as though I had already attained,
or Phll. 3. 12.
were already perfect -- But this one thing I do; forgetting those things
which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I
press toward the Mark] boldly arrogate to themselves such an Absolute
Perfection, as would make them not to stand in need of any Savior, nor to be
cleansed by the Blood of the Lamb, which therefore they allegorize into a
mystical sense; we must declare that we speak not here of Inherent
Righteousness and a Victory over Sin in a Legal or Pharisaical sense, but in
such an Evangelical sense as yet notwithstanding is true and real.

The First Degree whereof is a Principle of New life, infused into the Soul by
the Spirit of Christ through Faith, (which the Apostle calls Semen Dei, the
Seed of God) inclining it to 1 John 3. 9.
love God and Righteousness as a thing correspondent to its nature, and
inabling it to act freely and ingenuously in the ways of God, out of a living
Law written upon the Heart, and to eschew Sin as contrary to a vital Principle.
For the true Gospel-Righteousness, which Christ came to set up in the world,
does not consist merely in outward Works, whether Ceremonial or Moral, done by
our own Natural power in our Unregenerate state, but in an inward Life and
Spirit wrought by God. Which those very Philosophers seemed in a manner to
acknowledge, that denied (...) to be (...), that Virtue could be taught by
outward Rules and Precepts like an Art or Trade; and Aristotle himself also,
when he inclines to think that men are (...), and that their being Good depends
upon some extraordinary Divine Influence and Assistence. Which I the rather
take notice of, because some late Pretenders to Philosophy have profanely
derided this Doctrine after this manner, as if it made Good Thoughts and
Virtuous Dispositions to be POURED and BLOWN into men by God.

But there is a Second Degree of Victory over Sin, which every true Christian
ought not only to look upon as possible, but also to endeavor after, and
restlesly to pursue; which is such a measure of Strength in the Inward man, and
such a degree of Mortification or Crucifixion of our sinful Lusts, as that a
man will not knowingly and deliberately do any thing that his Conscience
plainly tells him is a Sin, though there be never so great Temptations to it.

Whether or no this be that Evangelical Perfection which was the Mark that S.
Paul pressed toward, and which he seems mystically to call the Resurrection
from the Dead, or any thing further, I leave it to others to make a Judgment
of. But doubtless, they that have attained to such a Principle of New Life and
such a measure of inward Strength, as is already mentioned, that is, to the
Perfection of unfeigned Sincerity, may, notwithstanding the Irregularities of
the first Motions, violent Assaults and Importunities of Tentations, sudden
Incursions and Obreptions, Sins of mere Ignorance and Inadvertency, (which are
all washed away in the Blood of Christ) in a true Evangelical sense be said to
have attained to a Victory over Sin.

Wherefore I demand in the next place, Why it should be thought impossible by
the Grace of the Gospel and the Faith of Christ to attain to such a Victory as
this is over Sin. For Sin owes its original to nothing else but Ignorance and
Darkness. (...), Every wicked man is ignorant. And therefore in that sense that
other Maxim of the Stoics may have some Truth also, that (...), Men sin
against their will; because if they knew that those things were indeed so
hurtful to them, they would never do them. Now we all know how easily Light
conquers Darkness, and upon its first approach makes it fly before it, and like
a guilty shade seek to hide it self from it, by running round about the Earth.
And certainly the Light of God arising in the Soul can with as much ease
scatter away the Night of sinful Ignorance before it. For Truth has a
cognation with the Soul; and Falsehood, Lies and Impostures are no more able to
make resistance against the Power of Truth breaking forth, then Darkness is
able to dispute with Light. Wherefore the Entrance in of Light upon the Soul is
half a Conquest over our Sinful Lusts.

Again, though Sin have had a long and customary Possession in the Soul, yet it
has no just Title, much less a Right of Inheritance in it. For Sin is but a
Stranger and Foreiner in the Soul, an Usurper and Intruder into the Lord's
Inheritance. Sin it is no Nature, as S. Austin and others of the Fathers often
inculcate, but an adventitious and extraneous thing; and the true and ancient
Nature of the Soul of Man suffers violence under it, and is oppressed by it. It
is nothing else but the Preternatural state of Rational Beings, and therefore
we have no reason to think it must needs be perpetual and unalterable. It is a
strange thing that a jarring Instrument by the hand of a skilful Musician
should ever be set in tune again? Doubtless, if an Instrument of Music were a
Living thing, it would be sensible of Harmony as its proper state, and abhor
Discord and Dissonancy as a thing preternatural to it. The Soul of Man was
Harmonical as God at first made it, till Sin, disordering the Strings and
Faculties, put it out of tune and marred the Music of it: but doubtless that
Great Harmostes that tunes the whole World, and makes all things keep their
Times and Measures, is able to set this lesser Instrument in Tune again. Sin is
but a Disease and Dyscrasie in the Soul, Righteousness is the Health and
natural Complexion of it; and there is a Propension in the nature of every
thing to return to its proper state, and to cast off whatever is heterogeneous
to it. And some Physicians tell us that Medicaments are but subservient to
Nature, by removing obstructions and impediments; but Nature it self and the
inward Archoeus released and set at liberty works the Cure. Bodies when they
are bent out of their Place, and violently forced out of the natural Position
of their Parts, have a Spring of their own and an inward strong Propension to
return to their own natural Posture, which produces that Motion of Restitution
that Philosophers endeavor to give a reason of. As for example, Air may be
forced into much a lesser room then it would naturally expand itself into; but
whilst it is under this Violence, it has a Spring or strong Conatus to return
to its proper state, (of which several ingenious Observations have been lately
published by a Learned hand.) Now Sin being a Violent and preternatural state,
and a Sinner's returning to God and Righteousness being Motus Restitutionis and
Liberationis, whereby the Soul is restored to its true Freedom and ancient
Nature; why should there not be such an Elater or Spring in the Soul,
(quickened and enlivened by Divine Grace) such a natural Conatus of returning
to its proper state again? Doubtless there is, and the Scripture seems
sometimes to acknowledge it and call it by the name of Spirit, when it speaks
of our free acting in God's ways from an inward Principle. For the Spirit is
not always to be taken for a Breath or Impulse from without; but also for an
inward Propension of the Soul awakened and revived in it, to return to its
proper state, as it is Intellectual, and then to act freely in it according to
its ancient Nature. For if the Spirit were a mere External Force acting upon
the Soul without the concurrence of an Innate Principle, then to be acted by
the Spirit would be a state of Violence to the Soul, which it could not delight
always to continue under; whereas the state of the Spirit is a state of
Freedom, and not of Violence, as the Apostle witnesses, when he calls it the
Freedom of the Spirit: It is the Soul's acting from an inward Spring and
Principle of its own Intellectual nature, not by a mere outward Impulse, like a
Boat that is tugged on by Oars or driven by a strong blast of Wind. Wherefore
the Soul's returning from Sin to Righteousness, which is its Primitive Nature,
must needs have great advantages, it going on Secundo flumine, according to the
genuine Current of its true Intellectual nature, and having besides the
assistence of a gentle Gale of the Divine Spirit from without to help it
forwards.

Why should it be thought so great an impossibility for men willingly to do
that which is agreeable to the Laws of Goodness, since this is the genuine
Nature of the Soul when once it is freed from mistakes and encumbrances from
that which is heterogeneous and adventitious to it, that cloggs it and
oppresses it; and every Life and Nature acts freely according to its own
Propensions? Why should it seem strange that the Superior Faculties of the
Soul should become predominant, since they are (...) of a Lordly nature and
made to rule, and the Inferior Faculties of a servile Temper and made to be
subject? Why should it seem impossible for Equity, Light and Reason to be
inthroned in the Soul of Man again, and there to command and govern those
exorbitant Affections that do so lawlesly rebel against them? For if some grave
Commanders and Generals have been able by the Majesty of their very looks to
hush and silence a disorderly and mutinous Rout of Soldiers; certainly Reason
re-enthroned in her Majestic Seat, and re-invested with her ancient Power and
Authority, which is natural and not usurped, would much more easily be able to
check and control the tumultuous Rabble of Lusts and Passions in us.

Doubtless God has no other Design upon us in Religion and the Gospel of his
Son then what is for our good, and to restore us to the Rectitude and
Perfection of our own Beings: Wherefore he seeks to redeem and call off our
Affections from the perishing Vanities of this World, which being so infinitely
below us do debase and pollute our Spirits; wherefore he would not have us to
addict ourselves wholly to the Gratifications of our lower Faculties, which are
but the Brute in us, but he would have the Best in us to be uppermost, the Man
to rule the Brute, and the (...), that that is of God in us, to rule our Manly
and Rational Faculties. He would not have us, Narcissuslike, to be always
courting our own Shadow in the Stream; for, according to the ancient
Democritical Philosophy, this whole visible World is nothing else but mere
extended Bulk, and has nothing Real in it but Atoms or Particles of a
different Magnitude, diversely placed and agitated in a continual Whirlpool.
But all the Color, Beauty and Varnish, all that which charms and bewitches us
in these Objects without us, is nothing but the Vital Sensations and Relishes
of our own Souls. This gives all the Paint and Luster to those Beauties which
we court and fall in love withal without us, which are otherwise as devoid of
Reality and as Fantastical as the Colors of the Rainbow. So that this Outward
World is not unfitly compared to an enchanted Palace, which seems indeed mighty
pleasing and ravishing to our deluded Sense, whereas all is but imaginary and a
mere prestigious Show. Those things which we are enamoured with, thinking them
to be without us, being nothing but the Vital Energies of our own Spirits. In a
word, God would have Man to be a Living Temple for himself to dwell in, and his
Faculties Instruments to be used and employed by him; which need not be thought
impossible, if that be true that Philosophy tells us, that there is Cognatio
quaedam a certain near Kindred and Alliance between the Soul and God.

Lastly, we must observe, though this inward Victory over Sin be no otherwise
to be effected then by the Spirit of Christ through Faith, and by a Divine
Operation in us, so that in a certain sense we may be said to be Passive
thereunto; yet notwithstanding we must not dream any such thing, as if our
Active Cooperation and Concurrence were not also necessarily required
thereunto. For as there is a Spirit of God in Nature which produces Vegetables
and Minerals, which humane Art and Industry could never be able to effect,
namely that Spiritus intus alens which the Poet speaks of, which yet
notwithstanding does not work Absolutely, Unconditionately and Omnipotently,
but requires certain Preparations, Conditions and Dispositions in the Matter
which it works upon; (For unless the Husbandman plow the Ground and sow the
Seed, the Spirit of God in Nature will not give any increase:) In like manner
the Scripture tells us that the Divine Spirit of Grace does not work
Absolutely, Unconditionately and Irresistibly in the Souls of men, but
requires certain Preparations, Conditions and Cooperations in us; forasmuch as
it may both be quenched, and stirred up or excited in us. And indeed unless we
plow up the Fallow-ground of our hearts and sow to our selves in Righteousness
(as the Prophet speaks) by our earnest endeavors; we cannot expect that the
Divine Spirit of Grace will shower down that Heavenly increase upon us.
Wherefore if we would attain to a Victory over Sin by the Spirit of Christ, we
must endeavor to fight a good Fight and run a good Race, and to enter in at
the straight gate, that so overcoming we may receive the Crown of Life.

And thus much shall suffice to have spoken at this time concerning the First
Particular, The Victory over Sin.

I Shall now proceed to speak something briefly to the Two other Victories that
remain, which are attainable also by Christ, over the Law and Death.

And the Law may be considered two manner of ways. First, as an outward
Covenant of Works that pronounces Death and Condemnation to all that do not
yield absolute and entire Obedience to whatever is therein commanded; and which
imposed also with the same Severity a multitude of outward Ceremonial
Observations which had no intrinsecal Goodness at all in them, but kept men in
a state of Bondage and Servility. Now the Law in this sense, as it is an
outward Letter and Covenant of Works, is already conquered externally for us by
Christ's Death upon the Cross, Galat. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the
Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us; for it is written, Cursed is every
one that hangs on a Tree; That the Blessing of Abraham might come on the
Gentiles through Jesus Christ, that we might receive the Promise of the Spirit
through Faith. And he has thereby freed us also from our Obligation to those
Commandments that were not Ezck. 20. 25.
Good, having broken down the Middle-wall of Partition that was betwixt Jew and
Gentile, abolishing in his Flesh the Enmity, even the Law of Commandments,
Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. And blotting out the handwriting of Ordinances that was
against us, which was contrary to us, and taking it out of the way, nailing it
to his Cross, Coloss. 2. 14.

Secondly, The Law is sometimes also considered in Scripture as an inward state
of Mind, wrought by the Law and Truth of God, whether written outwardly in the
Letter of the Scripture, or inwardly in the Conscience, prevailing only so
far as to beget a Conviction of men's Duty and of the Wrath of God against
Sin, but not inabling them with inward strength and power to do what is
commanded, willingly, out of a Love of it. It is such a State, when men are
only Passive to God's Law, and unwillingly subject to it (as an Enemy) for
fear of Wrath and Vengeance. And this must needs be a state of miserable
Bondage and Servility, Distraction and Perplexity of mind; when men are at
once strongly convinced of the Wrath of God against Sin, and yet under the
power of their Lusts haling and dragging of them to the commission of it. It is
that state (as I conceive) which S. Paul describes Romans 7. after this manner;
The Law is Spiritual, but I am Carnal, sold under Sin: for that which I do, I
allow not; for what I would, that do I not, but what I hate, that do I. And
again, I see another Law in my Members warring against my Mind, and bringing
me into Captivity under the Law of Sin. O wretched man that I am! who shall
deliver me from this body of death? Now from the Law in this sense, that is,
from the Bondage and Servility of the Legal state, we are not delivered, nor
made Conquerors by what Christ did outwardly upon the Cross, as some imagine;
as if he had there purchased for us an Indulgence to sin without control: but
by the inward working of his Holy Spirit, freeing us from the Power and Bondage
of Sin, and unbewitching us from the Love of it.

Wherefore there is a double Freedom from this Legal state to be taken notice
of; a True and a False Freedom; which I cannot better explain then by using
the Apostle's own Similitude in the beginning of the 7. Chap. Know ye not,
Brethren, that the Law has dominion over a man as long as he lives? (or
rather as long as It, that is, the Law, lives?) For the Woman which has an
Husband, is bound by the Law to her Husband so long as he lives; but if her
Husband be dead, she is loosed from the Law of the Husband. So then, if while
her Husband lives, she be married to another man, she shall be called an
adulteress: but if her Husband be dead, she is free from that Law; so that she
is no adulteress though she be married to another man. Where the Law is
compared to an Husband; and one that is under the Law, or in a Legal state, to
a Woman that has an Husband. And as there are two ways by which a Woman may
be freed from her Husband; The one, if she break loose from him whilst he yet
lives, contrary to the Laws of Wedlock, and marry to another man; which is an
undue and unlawful Freedom, for then she is justly styled an Adulteress;
Another, if she stay till her Husband be dead, and then, being free from the
Law of her Husband, does lawfully marry to another man: In like manner there
are two ways by which men may be freed from the Law, as it is an inward state
of Bondage and Servility. The first is, when men do illegally and unlawfully
break loose from the Law which is their Husband whilst he is yet alive and
ought to have Dominion over them, and marry themselves to another Husband;
which Husband's name is Carnal Liberty or Licentiousness, too often miscalled
in these latter Times by the name of Christian Liberty: and such as these may
well be styled in the Scripture Language Adulterers and Adulteresses. But there
is another Freedom from the Law, which is a due and just Freedom, when we do
not make our selves free before the time, violently breaking loose from it; but
when we stay till the Law, which is our Husband, is dead, and the Compulsory
power of it taken away by the Mortification of our Lusts and Affections, and so
marry another Husband, which is Christ or the Spirit of Righteousness, Romans 8.
2. The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the Law
of Sin and Death.

Wherefore there are Three general states of Men, in order to God and Religion,
that may be here taken notice of. The First is of those that are alive to Sin
and dead to the Law. This the Apostle speaks of Romans 7. 9. I was alive without
the Law once. These are those whose Consciences are not yet considerably
awakened to any Sense of their Duty, nor to the Discrimination of Good and
Evil; but sin freely without any check or control, without any disquieting
Remorse of Conscience.

The Second is, when men are at once alive both to the Law and Sin, to the
Conviction of the one, and the Power and Love of the other; both these
struggling together within the Bowels of the Soul, checking and controlling one
another. This is a broken, confounded and shattered state; and these in the
Apostles language are said to be Slain by the Law. I was alive without the Law
once; but when the Commandment came, Sin revived, and I died: And the
Commandment which was ordained to life, I found to be unto death. For Sin
taking occasion by the Commandment, deceived me, and by it Slew me. Here is no
Peace, Rest nor Comfort to be had in this state, men's Souls being distracted
and divided by an intestine and civil War, between the Law of the Mind and
the Law of the Members conflicting with one another.

Wherefore the Third state is, when men are dead both to the Law and Sin, and
alive unto God and Righteousness; the Law of the Spirit of Life freeing them
from the Law of Sin and Death. In the First of these Three states, which is the
most wretched and deplorable of all, we are Sin's Freemen, that is, free to
commit Sin without check or control. In the Second we are Bondmen to God and
Righteousness, and serve God out of a Principle of Fear and according to an
outward Rule only; Children of Hagar the Bond-maid and of the Letter. In the
Third we are God's Freemen and Sons, and serve him in the Newness of the
Spirit, out of a Love to God and Righteousness, Children of the New Testament
and of Sarah the Freewoman.

Wherefore here are Two Mistakes or Errors to be taken notice of, that defeat
and disappoint the Design of Christ in giving us Victory over the Law. The
first is of those that we have already mentioned, that seek to themselves a
Freedom from the Bondage of the Law otherwise then by Christ and the Spirit of
Righteousness, namely, in a way of Carnal Liberty and Licentiousness, whereby,
instead of being Bondmen to God and Righteousness, they become perfect
Freemen to Sin and Wickedness, which is the most deplorable Thraldom in the
World. Wherefore these men instead of going forward from the Second state unto
higher Perfection, wheel back again unto the First; just as if the Children of
Israel, after they had been brought out of Egypt and traveled awhile in the
Desert of Arabia, where the Law was given, instead of entering into Canaan
should have wheeled back into Egypt, and then enjoying the Garlic and Onions
and Fleshpots thereof, should persuade themselves that this was indeed the
true Land of Promise that flows with Milk and Honey. And there is very great
danger, lest when men have been tired out by wandering a long time in the dry
and barren Wilderness of the Law, where they cannot enjoy the Pleasure of Sin
as formerly, and yet have not arrived to the relish and love of Righteousness,
by reason of their Impatience they should at last make more haste then good
speed, being seduced by some false shows of Freedom that are very tempting to
such weary Travelers, and promise much comfort and refreshment to them,
inviting them to sit down under their shadow: Such as are a Self-chosen
Holiness, Ceremonial Righteousness, Opinionative Zeal, The Tree of Knowledge
mistaken for the Tree of Life, High-flown Enthusiasm and Seraphicism,
Epicurizing Philosophy, Antinomian Liberty, under the pretense of Free Grace
and a Gospel Spirit.

The Second Mistake that is here to be heeded is of those that would by all
means persuade themselves that there is no higher State of Christian Perfection
to be aimed at or hoped for in this Life then this Legal State; That the Good
they would do, they do not; the Evil they would not do, that they do; That
the Law of Sin in their Members still leads them Captive from the Law of their
Minds: having no other Ground at all for this but a novel Interpretation of one
Paragraph in the Epistle to the Romans, contrary to other express Places of
Scripture and the Sense of all ancient Interpreters: and yet with so much zeal,
as if it were a principal part of the Gospel-Faith to believe this, (which is
indeed arrant Infidelity) and as if it were no less then Presumption or Impiety
to expect a Living Law written upon our Hearts. But this is nothing else but,
instead of seeking Liberty out of the Bondage of the Law, to fall in love with
our Bonds and Fetters, and plainly to deny the Victory over the Law by Christ,
and to affirm that the Gospel is but the Ministration of a dead and killing
Letter, not of the Spirit that quickneth and makes alive.

I Come now in the Third and last place to the Victory over Death, expressed by
the Resurrection of the Body to Life and Immortality; which as it was
meritoriously procured for us by Christ's dying upon the Cross, (his
Resurrection afterward being an assured pledge of the same to us) so it will be
really effected at last by the same Spirit of Christ that gives us Victory over
Sin here. Romans 8. 11. If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus dwell in you,
he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal Bodies by
his Spirit that dwells in you. As if he should have said, If the Spirit of
Christ dwell in you, regenerating and renewing your Souls, the very same Spirit
hereafter shall also immortalize your very Bodies. Avicen the Mahumetan
Philosopher, in his Almahad, has a conceit, That the meaning of the
Resurrection of the Body is nothing else but this, to persuade Vulgar people,
that though they seem to perish when they die and their Bodies rot in the
Grave, yet notwithstanding they shall have a real Subsistence after Death, by
which they shall be made capable either of future Happiness or Misery: But
because the apprehensions of the Vulgar are so gross, that the Permanency or
Immortality of the Soul is too subtle a Notion for them who commonly count
their Bodies for Themselves, and cannot conceive how they should have any Being
after Death, unless their very Bodies should be raised up again; therefore by
way of Condescension to vulgar Understandings the future Permanency and
Subsistence of the Soul in Prophetical Writings is expressed under this Scheme
of the Resurrection of the Body, which yet is meant (...) only and not (...).
Which conceit how well soever it may befit a Mahumetan Philosopher, I am sure
it no way agrees with the Principles of Christianity. The Scripture here and
elsewhere assuring us that the Resurrection of the Body is to be understood
plainly and without a Figure; and that the Saints departed this life in the
Faith and Fear of Christ, shall not be mere Souls without Bodies to all
Eternity, as Avicen, Maimonides and other Philosophers dreamed, but consist of
Soul and Body united together. Which Bodies though (as the Doctrine of the
Church instructs us) they shall be both Specifically and Numerically the same
with what they were here, yet notwithstanding the Scripture tells us they shall
be so changed and altered in respect of their Qualities and Conditions, that in
that sense they shall not be the same. V. 36, 37. Thou fool, that which thou
sowest is not quickened except it die: Thou sowest not that Body that shall be,
but bare grain, it may chance of Wheat or of some other grain; but God gives
it a Body as it pleases him, and to every seed his own Body. The Apostle here
imitating the manner of the Jews, who (as appears from the Sea Gemara in
Chetuboth, cap. 13. Ein Is-rael, number. 50.
Talmud) were wont familiarly to illustrate the business of the Resurrection of
the Body by the Similitude of Seed sown into the Ground and springing up again.
Accordingly he goes on, It is sown in Corruption, it is raised in Incorruption;
sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; sown in weakness, raised in power;
sown a Natural Body, raised a Spiritual Body. Which Epithet was used also in
this case both by the Philosophers and the Jews: for Hierocles upon the Golden
Verses calls them (...) Vehicula Spiritualia, Spiritual Bodies; and R. Menachem
from the ancient Cabbalists (...) The Spiritual Clothing. Lastly, the Apostle
concludes thus; Now this I say, Brethren, that Flesh and Blood cannot inherit
the Kingdom of God, neither does Corruption inherit Incorruption. For which
cause he tells us elsewhere, that they which do not die must of necessity be
changed. And indeed if men should be restored after death to such gross, foul
and cadaverous Bodies as these are here upon Earth, which is the very Region of
Death and Mortality, without any change at all; what would this be else but, as
Plotinus the Philosopher against the Gnostics writes, (...) to be raised up to
a Second Sleep, or to be entombed again in living Sepulchers? For the
corruptible Body presses down the Soul, and the earthly Tabernacle weighs
down the Mind that (...)seth upon many things, Wisdom 9. 15. Wherefore we
must needs explode that old Jewish conceit commonly entertained amongst the
Rabbinical Writers to this day, That the future Resurrection is to be
understood of such Gross and Corruptible Bodies as these are here upon Earth,
to eat, drink, marry, and be given in marriage, and (which must needs follow)
afterward to die again. Nachmanides, in his Shaar Haggemul, is the only Jewish
Author that ventures to depart from the common rode here, and to abandon this
Popular Error of the Jews, endeavoring to prove that the Bodies of the Just
after the Resurrection shall not eat and drink, but be Glorified Bodies: but In
Nachalath Avoth, cap. 4. (...) This is the very same with the opinion of the
Christians, that hold that after the Resurrection men shall not eat, drink,
marry or be given in marriage, or die again, but continue eternally in those
Bodies resembling the Heavenly Bodies; and these they vulgarly call Glorified
Bodies.
Abravanel confutes him with no other Argument then this, That this was the
Doctrine and Opinion of the Christians.

Let us therefore now consider how abundantly God has provided for us by Jesus
Christ, both in respect of our Souls and of our Bodies: Our Souls, in freeing
us by the Spirit of Christ (if we be not wanting to our selves) from the
Slavery of Sin and the Bondage of the Law, as it is a Letter only: Our Bodies,
in that this Corruptible shall put on Incorruption, and this Mortal
Immortality, and that these Vile Bodies shall be made like to Christ's glorious
Body. In both which the complete Salvation of Man consists, the Perfection
and Happiness both of Soul and Body. For though our Salvation consist chiefly
in the former, in the Victory over Sin, and in the Renovation of the Mind; yet
without the latter, which is the Victory over Death, and the immortalizing of
our Bodies, it would be a very lame and imperfect thing. For Righteousness
alone if it should male habitare, dwell always in such inconvenient houses as
these earthly Tabernacles are, however the high-flown Stoic may bragg, it
could not render our condition otherwise then troublesome, sollicitous and
calamitous. Wherefore the Holy men in Scripture not without cause longed for
this future Change. Romans 8. 23. We groan within our selves, waiting for the
Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of our Bodies. 2 Cor. 5. 2. In this we groan
earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from Heaven. But
there is no obtaining of this future Victory over Death and Mortality, except
we first get a Victory over Sin here. For this is that Crown of Life that
Christ, the First-begotten from the dead, will set upon the Heads of none but
those that have here fought a good Fight and overcome. For as Death proceeds
only from Sin and Disobedience, so the way to conquer Death and to arrive at
Life and Immortality is by seeking after an inward Conquest over Sin. For
Righteousness is immortal, Wisd. 1. 15. and will immortalize the entertainers
of it, and, as the Chaldee Oracle speaks,

-- '(...),

(...).

HAving hitherto showed what are the great things we hope for by Christ and are
to endeavor after, namely, to procure an Inward and Real Victory over Sin by
the Spirit of Christ, that so we may hereafter attain a Victory over Death and
Mortality; We cannot but take notice, briefly, of some Errors of those, that
either pretending the Impossibility of this Inward Victory over Sin, or else
hypocritically declining the Combat, make up a certain Religion to themselves
out of other things, which are either Impertinent and nothing to the purpose,
or else Evil and noxious.

For first, Some (as was intimated before) make to themselves a mere
fantastical and imaginary Religion, conceiting that there is nothing at all
for them to do, but confidently to believe that all is already done for them,
all imputed and accounted to them; that they are dearly beloved of God without
any Conditions or Qualifications to make them lovely. But such a Faith as this
is nothing else but mere Fancy and carnal Imagination, proceeding from that
natural Self-love whereby men fondly dote upon themselves, and are apt to think
that God loves them as fondly and as partially as they love themselves, tying
his affection to their particular outward Persons, their very Flesh and Blood;
hereby making God a Being like to themselves, that is wholly acted by arbitrary
Self-will, Fondness and Partiality; and perverting the whole Nature and Design
of Religion, which is not mere Phantastry and an histrionical Show, but a real
Victory over the real Evil of Sin, without which God can neither take pleasure
in any man's Person, nor can there be a possibility of being happy, a real
turning of the Soul from Darkness unto Light, from the Power of Satan unto God.

Again, Some there are that instead of Walking in the Narrow way that Christ
commends to us, of subduing and mortifying our sinful Lusts, make to
themselves certain other Narrow ways of affected Singularity in things that
belong not to Life and Godliness, outward Strictnesses and Severities of their
own choosing and devising; and then persuade themselves that this is the
Straight gate and Narrow way of Christ that leads unto Life. Whereas these
are indeed nothing else but some particular Paths and narrow Slices cut out of
the Broad way. For though they have an outward and seeming narrowness, yet they
are so broad within that Camels with their Burdens may easily pass through
them. These, instead of taking up Christ's Cross upon them, make to themselves
certain Crosses of their own, and then laying them upon their Shoulders and
carrying them, please themselves with a conceit that they bear the Cross of
Christ; whereas in truth and reality they are many times too much strangers to
that Cross of his by which the World should be crucified to them and they unto
the World.

Some place all their Religion in endless Scrupulosities about Indifferent
things, neglecting in the mean time the (...), the more weighty things both of
Law and Gospel, and (as our Savior farther expresses it) (...), straining at
a Gnat, and swallowing a Camel, that is, being not so scrupulous as they ought
to be about the Substantials of Religion and a Good life. For as we ought not
to place the chief of our Religion in the mere Observation of outward Rites and
Ceremonies, whilst in the mean time we hypocritically neglect the Morals and
Substantials; which may deservedly be branded with the name of Superstition: So
we ought to know that it is equal Superstition to have such an abhorrence of
Indifferent things, as to make it the main of our Religion to abstain from
them: Both of these arguing equal Ignorance of the Nature of God, as if he were
some morose, humorous and captious Being; and of that Righteousness which the
Kingdom of God consists in, as if these Outward and Indifferent things could
either hallow or defile our Souls, or as if Salvation and Damnation did depend
upon the mere using or not using of them. The Apostle himself instructs us
that the Kingdom of God consists no more in (...) then in (...), no more in
Uncircumcision then in Circumcision, that is, no more in not using outward
Ceremonies and Indifferent things then in using of them. Wherefore the Negative
Superstition is equal to the Positive, and both of them alike call off men's
attention from the main things of Religion, by engaging them overmuch in Small
and Little things. But the sober Christian, that neither places all his
Religion in external observances, nor yet is superstitiously Anti-ceremonial,
as he will think himself obliged to have a due regard to the Commands of lawful
Authority in Adiaphorous things, and to prefer the Peace and Unity of the
Christian Church, and the observation of the Royal Law of Charity, before the
Satisfaction of any Private Humor or Interest; so he will be aware of that
(...) which many run into, of banishing away all the Solemnity of external
Worship, the Observation of the Lord's Day and of the Christian Sacraments,
under the Notion of Ceremonies, quite out of the World. To conclude, Unless
there be a due and timely regard had to the Commands of lawful Authority in
Indifferent things, and to Order, Peace and Unity in the Church, it may easily
be foreseen that the Reformed part of Christendom will at length be brought
first to Confusion, by crumbling into infinite Sects and Divisions, and then to
utter Ruin.

Again, Many mistake the Vices of their Natural complexion for Supernatural and
Divine Graces. Some think dull and stupid Melancholy to be Christian
Mortification. Others, that turbulent and fiery Zeal is the vigor of the
Spirit. Whereas Zeal is one of those things that Aristotle calls (...) of a
middle Nature, neither Good nor Bad in it self, but which, as it is
circumstantiated, may indifferently become either Virtue or Vice. For there is
a (...), as the Apostle calls it, a bitter Zeal, which is contrary to all
Christian Love and Charity, and is nothing else but the Vices of Acerbity,
Envy, Malice, Cruelty, tinctured and gilded over with a Religious show. And
there may be also a Turbulent and Factious Zeal, when men under a pretense of
acting for the Glory of God, violate just and lawful Authority, in order to the
advancement of their own private Self-interest. Indeed there was amongst the
Jews a certain Right called Jus Zelotarum, or the Right of Zelots, whereby
private persons acted by a Zeal for God might do immediate execution upon some
Malefactors, without expecting the Sentence of any Court of Judicature. And
some conceive that our Savior by this Right of Zelots did whip the Buyers and
Sellers out of the Temple, and overturn the Tables of Money Changers; because
he was never questioned by the Jews for it. But this was then a Legal and
Regular thing, permitted by the public Laws of that Nation in some certain
Cases, yet so as that those Zelots were afterward accountable to the Sanhedrin
for what they did. However, a little before the destruction of the Temple, as
Josephus tells us, there were a Crew of desperate Miscreants that abusing this
Right, and calling themselves by the name of Kannain, i. e. Zelots, made a
pretense from hence to commit most villainous actions. And I wish some had not
too much entertained this opinion, that Private persons might reform Public
Abuses, whether belonging to the Ecclesiastical or the Civil Polity, without
and against the consent of the Supreme Magistrate, in a Turbulent manner, Jure
Zelotarum, by the Right of Zelots; nay and that Actions that are otherwise
altogether unwarrantable in themselves, may notwithstanding be justified by
Zeal for God and good Ends. But God needs no man's Zeal to promote an Imaginary
Interest of his in the World by doing unjust things for him. Will you speak
wickedly for God, or talk deceitfully for him? will you accept his Person?
'Twas the generous Expostulation of Job with his Friends; and he tells them in
the following words, that this was nothing else but to mock God as one man
mocketh another.

True Divine Zeal is no Corybantick Fury, but a calm and regular Heat, guided
and managed by Light and Prudence, and carried out principally neither for nor
against Indifferent Rites and unnecessary Opinions, but those things that are
immutably Good and Fundamental to Christianity; always acknowledging a due
Subordination to that Authority Civil and Ecclesiastical that is over us.

Lastly, Some there are whose pretense to Religion and the Spirit is founded in
nothing else but a Faculty of Rhetoricating and extemporizing with Zeal and
Fervency, which they take to be nothing less then Divine Inspiration, and that
which the Scripture calls Praying in the Holy Ghost, an undoubted Character of
a person truly Regenerated. Which being a great delusion whereby many are
hindered from seeking after the real effects of the Divine Spirit, by idolizing
instead thereof that which is merely Natural, (if not Artificial;) I think it
not impertinent, here to speak a little of it. And certainly that which is
frequently attained to in the very height by persons grossly hypocritical and
debauched, can never be concluded to be Divine Inspiration, or to proceed from
any higher Principle then mere Natural Enthusiasm. For there is not only a
Poetical Enthusiasm, of which Plato discourses in his Ion, but, though Oratory
be a more sober thing, a Rhetorical Enthusiasm also, that makes men very
eloquent, affectionate and bewitching in their language, beyond what the power
of any bare Art and Precepts could enable them unto: insomuch that both these,
Poets and Orators, have oftentimes conceited themselves to be indeed divinely
inspired; as those known Verses testify, Est Deus in nobis, agitante calescimus
illo;
and,
Sedibus aethereis Spiritus ille venit.
And concerning Orators the like might be proved, if the time would here
permit, by sundry Testimonies: But I shall here instance only in Aristides, a
famous Orator, who not only speaks positively of himself as inspired in his
Orations, but affirms the same also concerning Rhetoric in general, when it is
extraordinary, that it comes by immediate Inspiration as Oracles and Prophecies
do, and not from Art or Nature. Wherefore it is not at all to be wondered at,
if when men are employed in Religious and Devotional Exercises, the same
Natural Enthusiasm, especially having the advantage of Religious Melancholy,
which makes men still more Enthusiastical, should so wing and inspire the
Phancies of these Religious Orators, as to make them wonderfully fluent,
eloquent and rapturous, so that they beget strange Passions in their Auditors,
and conclude themselves to be Divinely inspired. Whereas notwithstanding they
may have no more of Divine Inspiration in all this, then those Poets and
Orators before mentioned had, that is to say, be no otherwise inspired then by
a Rhetorical Hypochondriacal Enthusiasm, that is merely Natural. But it is
far from my Intention here to disparage the sincere and ardent Affections of
devout Souls, naturally and freely breathing out their earnest Desires unto God
in private, although perhaps this be not without some kind of Enthusiasm also.
For Enthusiasm, as well as Zeal, and other Natural things, may be well used,
and, being rightly circumstantiated and subservient to a better principle,
become irreprehensible. Some have observed, that no great work of the Brain,
that begot much admiration in the World, was ever achieved without some kind
of Enthusiasm; and the same may be affirmed of the most transcendently Virtuous
and Heroical Actions. But then the Goodness of these Actions is never to be
estimated merely by the Degree of Enthusiastic Heat and Ardor that is in them,
but by such other Laws and Circumstances as Moralize humane Actions. Wherefore
my meaning, as I said before, is only this, To caution against that Vulgar and
Popular Error of mistaking the Natural and Enthusiastic Fervor of men's
spirits, and the Ebulliency of their Fancy, when it is tinctured with
Religion, and idolizing of it instead of the supernatural Grace of God's Holy
Spirit; and of looking for the Effect of Religion and Demonstration of God's
Spirit principally in Words and Talk, or thinking that God is chiefly glorified
with a loud Noise and long Speeches. For the true Demonstration of God's Holy
Spirit is nowhere to be looked for but in Life and Action, or such earnest and
affectionate breathings after a farther participation of the Divine Image, as
are accompanied with real and unfeigned endeavors after the same; which is the
true Praying in the Holy Ghost, though there be no extemporaneous effusion of
words. And therefore when some Corinthians were puffed up by reason of a
Faculty which they had of Rhetoricating Religiously, S. Paul like an Apostle 1
Cor. 4. 19.
tells them, that he would come amongst them, and know, not the Speech of them
that were puffed up, but the Power. For the Kingdom of God (says he)
consists not in Word, but in Power and Life. Wherefore laying aside these and
such like childish mistakes and things that are little to the purpose, let us
seriously apply our selves to the main Work of our Religion, that is, to
mortify and vanquish our Sinful Lusts by the Assistence of God's Holy Spirit,
through Faith in Christ; that so being Dead to Sin here we may live with God
eternally hereafter.

The End.

